Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE DOMINION AND SOVEREIGNTY OF THE SEAS: BEING An
ABSTRACT of the MARINE AFFAIRS of England.

By Sir PHILIP MEDOWS, Knight.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones; and sold by Samuel Lourdes, against
Exeter Change in the Strand; and by Edward Jones, in the Savoy: 1689.

TO THE READER.
THE Dominion of the Sea, as it is most apt to be made the fair Color, and
specious Pretense, to a War, betwixt England and Holland, when the Real Causes
of such War are hidden and remote; so nothing will so effectually preserve a
lasting Union between Them, by hindering the Root of Discord from growing
again, as a true Knowledge, and right Understanding of that Matter. About
which, there are many Traditional Mistakes, and Popular Errors, too current
among Us, and such as are not of a simple and innocent Nature, but very
dangerous, and of evil Consequence. The Consideration whereof, gave the first
occasion to the following Discourse, which was Composed several Years since,
was Read and Presented to His late Majesty King Charles the Second, and well
accepted by Him; and has since remained a Manuscript in the hands of several
Persons of Quality. And though it might receive a new Turn, and Air, more
accommodate to the Present State of things; and though the Time when it was
written, the Person for whom, and the Niceness of the Subject it self, obliged
the Author to more of Caution and Reserve, than perhaps would now be needful;
yet He was not willing to make any Alterations in it, choosing rather to speak
the Language of Truth, than of Times; for what was once True, is always so,
though not always equally fit to be made Public. But surely now, if ever, it is
seasonable to remove all Obstacles and Impediments out of the way of a good
Understanding between the two Nations, when their most intimate Union and
Conjunction is not only, as at other Times, highly expedient, but absolutely
necessary.

THE PREFACE, SHOWING THE Author's Design.
THE following Discourse may possibly, upon a slight and superficial view, seem
to have some tendency toward the diminution of the Rights of England, and
consequently the enlargement of those of other Governments; but upon a serious
and deliberate Perusal, there will not appear any just Ground for such
Imputation. It Is, doubtless very commendable in a Subject, if he can with sound
Judgment, and convincing Reason, advance the Pretensions of his Sovereign
amongst Foreign Nations. If it be the part of a good Judge, Ampliare Curiam,
it is much more of a good Subject, Ampliare Coronam: For we all shine in the
Glory of the Crown that is over us, and even private persons have something of
Luster reflected on them, from the Honor and Grandeur of the Monarchy, under
which they live. Upon which account, Mr. Seldom has excellently well deserved
of the Public, by heightning the Sea-Sovereignty of the Crown of England, in
his Learned Book, entitled, Mare Clausum; a Treatise so comprehensive of what
can be said on that Argument, that he, who should now write of the same, would
certainly incur the old Censure, of writing an Iliad after Homer.

But if all the Claims and Pretensions of the Crown of England, supported by
the Authorities and Allegations produced in that Book, shall be vouched as the
proper Standard and Measure of Right and Wrong betwixt Us and other Nations; if
the Controverting thereof by Them, shall be esteemed by Us as an Invasion and
Usurpation, and consequently the just cause and foundation of a War: If what is
well written must be fought for too, not being to be gained, but by a longer
Tool than a Pen, the King of England will unavoidably be cast upon this hand
Dilemma, either of being involved in endless and dangerous Quarrels with all
his Neighbors abroad, or of having his Honor and Reputation prostituted at
home, as tamely suffering the best Jewels of his Crown to be ravished from it,
and the Regalities thereof, transmitted to him from his most noble Progenitors,
to be usurped by Foreigners. Nor does the Mischief cease here, for in case he
should at any time enter into a War, for the more vigorous asserting and
maintaining those Pretensions, and they not be included in the Terms and
Conditions of the following Peace, the Inference will be this; That he was so
far worsted in the War, as to be constrained to buy a Peace, if not by a total
abandoning of them, yet at least by a temporary Recession from those
Pretensions.

Let me add one Consideration more; If a War betwixt England, and any other
Kingdom or State, be grounded and stated upon a Sea-Dominion, by help of this
Advantage, an Enemy will gain the Weather-gage of us, and derive from it a
considerable Benefit to himself; Hoc Ithacus velit -- A Dutchman will desire
no better: For, by this means, we shall disoblige and disaffect all our
Neighbors to our Cause and Quarrel, at such a time, when we most need their
Friendship and Assistance: This will awaken Fears and Jealousies, and strongly
alarm them to an early securing of their own Navigation and Commerce, against
those who would impropriate the Seas. They will not so much regard the Justice
of our Cause, as the Consequents of our Success, and will be sure to range
themselves with Heart or Hand, or both, as occasion shall require, on that
side, to which they shall be invited by a common and complicate Interest: It
will not be a War betwixt this Prince and That, betwixt Holland and England,
but betwixt the Continent and an Island, and the Question will be briefly this,
Whether the Island shall have the Sea to her self, or whether the Continent
shall have share with her? As this is consonant and agreeable to Reason, to
suppose that it will be so, so it is verified by Experience, that in Fact it has
been so. We need look back no farther than the Year 1665. England was then in
open War with Holland, and, as previous thereto, the Parliament granted a Royal
Aid, the end whereof is publicly declared in the Preamble of the Act, An. 16
and 17 Car. II.
viz. To equip, and set out to Sea, a Royal Navy, for the Preservation of His
Majesty's ancient and undoubted Sovereignty and Dominion in the Seas. This was
exactly calculated for the Meridian of England, it served to inspire our
Captains and Officers with Honor, to animate our Seamen with Courage, to
dispose the whole Body of the People with Cheerfulness and Unanimity, to
undergo so mighty a Supply, answerable to the Greatness of the Undertaking. But
it served not to so good Effects beyond Sea, as soon appeared, for the Balance
of Success had no sooner inclined to England, by that signal Victory, obtained
under the happy Conduct of His then Royal Highness, over the Dutch Fleet, An.
1665.
commanded by Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam, but France stood over to Holland,
Denmark was following, and had the War continued, and the Series of Success not
been interrupted by the Fatalities of the Plague, Fire, and other Accidents, by
occasion whereof a Peace intervened, there had at that time been as formidable
a Confederacy and Conjunction formed against England, An. 1508.
as that at Cambray against Venice.

To remedy the said Inconveniences, and obviate the like, I thought it useful
in the following Discourse, carefully to distinguish betwixt the Question of
Right, and the Question of Fact; betwixt the Pretensions of the Crown of
England, and the Possessions of it; betwixt what it has continually Claimed and
Demanded as an ancient Right, and what it has been actually seized of, by a
long, peaceable, and uninterrupted Enjoyment, which implies a Consent and
Acknowledgment on the part of other Nations. The later of these, is the true
Touchstone of Wrong and Injury, for what has been anciently claimed, may have
been as anciently denied, and so remain Lis pendens, a Question undecided: But
what has been peaceably Enjoyed, and thereby passed into an acknowledged Right,
afterward to detain or controvert, is a manifest Injury and Usurpation. And by
this, we shall easily discern, whether the Crown of England maintains its
Ground, or whether it has lost any thing of what it formerly had, by new
Encroachments and Disseisins, such as may furnish Matter for a just Resentment
and Vindication. In the mean time, the Pretensions of the Crown stand as they
did, what they were, that they now are, no diminution of them, no derogation
from them. It Is Courage in a Nation strenuously to maintain their own, and it is
Justice rightly to distinguish their own, and the best Temper of Government,
is, neither to do a Wrong, nor take it.

I thought it needful also to examine the accustomed Salutation at Sea, by the
Flag and Topsail, and to endeavor to clear the true significancy and import of
it, and the rather, because it has been the occasion of Spilling much Blood in
Europe within these Forty Years last past, and may be of the Effusion of more,
if a timely Remedy be not applied to so growing an Evil, which is almost become
a Common Makebate betwixt the Europaean Nations. And all this, partly by
over-straining a fine Thread, and laying greater weight upon it than it will
bear; but chiefly for want of a certain and determinate Regulation, for whilst
Sea-Captains are, by the generality of their Instructions, referred only to
former Use and Custom, and what that is, not distinctly known, many
Irregularities and Indiscretions ensue, not unlike to those of some Gallants at
Land, who think it a Point of Honor to quarrel for the way, or justle for the
Wall, with all they meet; but with this difference, these do it only to the
endangering their own Persons, but the others to the engaging their Masters
many times in unnecessary Feuds and Disputes.

This is the Mark, at which the following Discourse is levelled, and by these
Measures it has been guided. And the whole Design of it tends to this, to
prevent needless Quarrels, and such as are stated to Disadvantage abroad, and
to justify our King's Reputation against Censure and Reflection at home. That
whilst He preserves the public Peace, His Honor may not be impeached, nor
yet His Honor (of which He has so quick a sense) be made use of through
mistaken Appearances to imbroil his Peace; But be left free to Steer an even
Course betwixt the tender Regards of the one, and the prudential Considerations
of the other. In order to which Design, it was necessary for me to remove some
Obstacles and Impediments, as I found them in my way. To clear the true Notion
of Dominion and Sovereignty in all the chief Branches and Dependencies of it.
To trace Matters of Fact through the National Treaties made betwixt our Kings
and other Princes. To vindicate some Passages in our Books and Rolls from
Mistakes and Misapplications. And all this without any Vanity of refuting Mr.
Seldom, (who if he has extended the Rights of the Crown of England to the wrong
of other Princes, Viderint ipsi, let them look to it, whose concern it is.) But
merely in prosecution of the Design of a Discourse, which, besides that it
Asserts the Honor of our King, by showing in Fact, as to Sea-Matters, how He
Maintains whatever his Ancestors have Enjoyed, may, as is humbly conceived, be
further serviceable for these two Ends:

First, To put a stop to some popular Errors, which prevail to the great
Inconvenience of the King, by continual Prompting and Exposing Him upon
pretended Points of Honor to a perpetual Strife with all His Neighbors, for
things not safe to be insisted on, never enjoyed, nor likely ever to be
obtained.

Secondly, To pacify and allay those Jealousies, which dispose Foreign Princes
upon all Occasions to enter into Confederacies prejudicial to the Interests of
England; For as it has been the Policy of France in this last Age, to lord
Spain with an Imputation of affecting an Universal Monarchy: So it is the
Practice of Holland, to charge England with an Affectation of a Sea-Monarchy,
to the belief of which we too unwarily contribute; And under this Covert the
Dutch advance their own Designs, as the French have done theirs under the
former.

As to the Method of this Treatise, it is divided into these Four General Heads.
I. WHat is meant by the Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas, and what the
true Notion or Idea of it is. II. What Things are incident to this Dominion,
and inseparably follow it. III. What the Salutation at Sea by the Flag and
Topsail signifies, and whether it has any relation to the Dominion of it. IV.
The whole Matter of Fact betwixt the Crown of England, and Foreign Princes and
States, in the several Incidents of Sea-Dominion, is distinctly examined, and
impartially reported.
These General Heads contain several Subdivisions, concerning the Quatuor
Maria. The Laws of Oleron. The Roll in the Tower De Superioritate Maris. The
Fishery licensed and limited, etc.

OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE Dominion and Sovereignty OF THE SEAS, etc.
IT has been learnedly argued on both sides, How Dominion was first introduced.
whether there be any just Dominion or Property in any Sea: For, in the
Primitive and Natural State of Things, antecedent to humane Fact and Consent,
Privata nulla Natura, sed aut veteri occupati^ne, aut, etc. Cic. de Offic. l. 1.
the whole Earth was common and undivided unto all Mankind; but then, as it was
common, so it was without culture, Men living upon the spontaneous Productions
of it, in an easy and innocent, but rude and simple manner. Their Dwellings
were Tents; their Drink, Water; their Bread, Roots and Nuts; their Clothing,
the Bark of Trees, or Skins of Beasts. Wherefore, to better the condition of
Humane Life, Nam propriae telluris herum Natura nec illum, nec me nec quenquam
fecit. Hor. 2. Sat. 2.
by the Encouragement of ingenious Arts and industry, Consent, either express,
or tacit, introduced Occupancy and Property, that every man might enjoy to
himself, as a Reward, the benefit of his own Skill and Labor. Then were Houses
built, Fields sown with Corn, Vineyards planted, and the manner of Living
heightened by progressive Steps and Gradations, from the plain state of simple
Necessity, to a degree of Convenience; from Convenience, to Delight; from
Delight, to Luxury. But forasmuch as the wide Sea is not capable of
Cultivation, or Improvement, by Art or Industry, it may therefore be reasonably
supposed, never to have been impropriated by consent, but left to its Primitive
and Natural Communion.

If it be objected, That sundry People and Nations have been Lords of several
Seas; as the Athenians, Carthaginians, Rhodians, and Romans: To that, will be
replied, That this was Force and Empire, without Property; an Usurpation, not a
Right; and that an armed Conqueror, by the same Rule, that he dispossesses what
is proper, may impropriate what is common; only with this difference, That it is
extensively more unjust to debar many from their common Right, than to disseize
a single person of his private Inheritance.

I shall not enter upon the Merits of the Cause, as not being to my purpose,
but as to the forementioned Argument, how plausible soever, it concludes
fallaciously; as if that, which is but Causa una, one Cause, were Causa unica,
the only Cause; whereas there may be other Reasons and Considerations, besides
that of encouraging Industry, why Communion was changed into Property, and
those equally extendible to Sea, as well as Land. Possibly, the consent of some
Nations may divest themselves of a joint Right, and invest it in one, in order
to a public Benefit. And this is the best part of that Title, which the
Venetian has to the Gulf, which being a particular and remarkable Case, it
will not be amiss briefly to touch upon it, in the following Paragraph.

The Ottoman Power extending it self into Europe, Of the Dominion of the State
of Venice in the Gulf.
to the subversion of the Eastern Empire, conquering all Greece, with Macedon
and Epirus, and penetrating to the very Banks of the Gulf, almost within sight
of Italy: The Italian, and other Neighboring Princes, to interpose the best
Skreen they could, betwixt themselves and the near approaching Danger, did, by
a concurring Interest, impatronize the Venetian in the Gulf, who, by reason of
their potency in Shipping, and the immediate Concern of their own imminent
Peril, were the most proper State to be made the Bulwark of Christendom at Sea.
Flav. Blend. Dicad. 2.^8.
Thus the Pope, by the Ceremony of a Ring, wedded their Duke every Year to the
Adriatic. And in the General Council of Lions, in the presence of the
Ambassadors of several Princes, upon Complaint made against the Venetians, for
laying Impositions upon all Ships sailing within the Gulf, Judgment was given
in favor of the Republic, upon consideration of their guarding that Sea
against the Courses of the Pirates and Saracens. And the Neighboring Princes
would not so much as send a Galley, without asking leave of the Senate, which
respect was so providently managed by that wise Council, the better to assert
their Marine Sovereignty, That sometimes they would give leave under some
Restrictions and Conditions, as in the case of the Sister of Ul^d s^^^^ King of
Naples; Joan. Palate. de Domin. Mar. l. 2. c. 6.
sometimes they denied leave, as in the case of Ma^y, Sister of Philip King of
Spain, in the year 16^0. whom the Senate would not permit to be Transported
from N^^l^^ to Trieste, in the Galleys of Spain, but in those only of the
Republic. But it is to be considered also, that the Gulf o^ Venice is not a
wide Sea or Ocean, nor a straight or narrow Sea, called in Latin Fretum, but a
Sinus, a Bay or Gulf, closed at one end; in the bottom whereof, the City of
Venice is situate, upon several small Isles or Insulets. The Seas of England
are of a different Nature and Condition, they are open both above and below,
and they are the midway-passage betwixt all the Northern and Southern Nations.
The Wares and Merchandises of Muscovy, Poland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway,
Germany, and the Netherlands, are conveyed by Shipping to France, Spain, Italy,
the Levant, etc. and so back again from the South to the North, through the
North-East Sea betwixt England and Germany, and the Western Channel betwixt
England and France, which shows, of what Influence and Import this Dominion, on
the part of England, is, to the rest of the World.

CHAP. I. What is meant by the Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas, and what
the true Notion or Idea of it is.
BEfore I proceed, it will be necessary, first, to explain the Terms, what is
meant by Dominion, what by Sovereignty, and what by the Seas; lest we lose
things in Words, and take up with Names, instead of Realities. By Dominion, is
to be understood Property, (for so is that word Dominion always taken in its
legal sense) or a Right of possessing and using any thing as ones own, and of
excluding all others from a promiscuous and equal use thereof. That is mine,
which is so mine, as it is not another, eodem modo, in the same manner as it is
mine: And this Property is twofold, either Public or Private, for Proper is
not opposed to Public, but to Common. Public Property, excludes Communion
amongst Nations; Private Property, Communion amongst Persons. For, as
particular Manors and Tenements divided by their respective Bounds and
Buttles, are the private Property of particular Persons, which they possess
privatively of other persons. So Countries and Territories, like greater
Manors, divided each from other by Limits and Borders, are the public
Property of Nations, which they possess exclusively one of another. The whole
Territory of England, is the public Property of the English Nation, and this
Property excludes Aliens, or all born out of the King of England's Liegeance,
from taking real Inheritances, or holding Lands and Tenements any where in
England. The Supreme Rule and Jurisdiction in and over this Territory, is that
which we call Sovereignty, and is the public Property of the King, in Right of
his Crown of England. He is sole Lord of this great Manor, and all the Lands
in England are holden, either mediately or immediately of him. And as he is
Head, and Chief Ruler, he bears within him the Person of the whole Nation, and
thus all England is his Territorial Property. And the Royal Demeans and
Possessions annexed to the Crown, as the public Revenue thereof, and as
distinct from the private Possessions of particular Persons, are his
Patrimonial Property. He has them in his public and politic Capacity as King,
not in his private and natural as an individual Person; for Kings, as well as
Subjects, may have Possessions in a private Right, as the King of Egypt, who
bought the Lands of his Subjects for Corn, He had not those Lands in Right of
his Crown, as King, for he was King before he had them.

I have done with those two Terms, Dominion and Sovereignty. I pass to the
third, and that is, the Sea or Seas. Whereby Sea is not to be understood, such
a collective Body of Waters, singly and solely as Waters; for the moveable
inconstant Waters, whither of Sea or River, barely as such, are not a capable
Subject of Property; but as Waters contained within a six'd and certain
boundary, and supported by a standing Bottom. In the First Sense, no Man goes
twice into the same River, in the Second, a River is the same in a Succession
of Ages. And in this later Sense, the Sea, as it is a solid Alveus, or
Receptacle of Waters, contained within a certain boundary, is as truly and as
properly Territory, as the Land. It Is Territorium a Terra, from the standing
bottom of Earth, by which the Waters of it are supported, and from the
unmovable Shoars of Earth, within which those Waters are contained.

Having sufficiently explained the Terms; if one now should ask me, What is
meant by the Dominion and Sovereignty of the British Seas, which the Kings of
England are said to have continually claimed, in Right of their Crown of
England. I would Answer, By Dominion is meant the public Property of those
Seas, as part of the Territory of their Realm of England, and consequently all
other Princes and People excluded, not from all, but from an equal use of them.
By Sovereignty is meant, that sole Supreme Rule and Jurisdiction, which the
Kings of England, Successively have over the whole Realm of England, of which
those Seas are a Part. If he should further ask me, how does this Right in the
Crown of England appear, and by what proofs is it evidenced? I would refer him
to Mr. Seldom, whose Proofs and Arguments, whether they come up to the height
of such a Dominion as I have here described, which they ought to do, or else
will fall short of the Mark, is not for me to say, I leave that to the Judgment
of his Reader, wishing they were so convincing and demonstrative, that all
other Nations as well as our own, would rest satisfied therewith. But if he
asks me of matter of Fact, whether the Kings of England have for any long time
been in the actual and peaceable Possession of such Dominion, as a Right
acknowledged by the express or implied consent of other Nations, this I shall
examine by and by.

But whereas I hinted before, that the Dominion of the Crown of England in the
British Seas, did not exclude other Princes and States from all use, but from
an equal use of those Seas, this needs a little Explication. In order to which,
it is to be considered, that as all Property first began by Humane Fact and
Consent, antecedent to which was Communion: So in this consent was implied a
Reservation and benign Exception of such use, as might be of great benefit to
others, without any considerable Damage to the Proprietor; A River, as a
Fishery, is a private Dominion, no Man may Fish there without the Owner's
leave, because it would be a diminution of his Profit; If Navigable, as a Way,
it is Public to all the Subjects of that Prince, Quid prolu^^^s aquas? (...)
communis aq tarum (...). Ovid.
who is Lord of the Territory; As it is running Water, it is common to Man and
Beast to Drink of it, and Wash with it. A Field is a private Property, but the
Market-Path over it is public, and when it was first made a Property, it was
with reservation of a Path. For Fields were not distinguished by Metes and
Bounds to their respective Owners, with design to confine every Man to his own
home, but with exception of Liberty to pass and repass in a harmless manner,
over each others Properties in pursuance of their lawful Occasions. The Sea,
say we, is the public Property of the Crown of England; but yet as it is a Way,
it is common to the peaceable Traders of all Nations. A Path over a Field is of
some damage to the Soil, though compensated with a greater utility, but a way
over the Sea is of no damage to the Water; and the Sea being a fluid Body is
all Path, where a Ship can Sail, and a common Highway from one Nation to
another. And this is so far from being a damage to any, that it is highly
beneficial to all; for as there is no Man so Self-sufficient, as not to need
the continual help of another, so neither is there any Country, which does not,
at some time or other, need the Growth and Productions of another.

Well then, since it is the Nature of Property in general, so to make a thing
mine, as it is not another, eodem modo, in the same manner as it is mine; And
the Dominion of the Sea in one Prince does not exclude another from all use of
it; It may not be unfitly demanded, what are those Proper Uses, which are so
peculiarly reserved to the Crown of England, in right of such supposed
Dominion, as that all other Nations are excluded from them? And this will lead
me to the Second General Head which I proposed, viz.

CHAP. II. What Things are incident to the Dominion of the Sea, and inseparably
follow it.
I Answer, these three Things.

1. A Right of Excluding all foreign Ships of War from passing upon any the
Seas of England without Special License for that purpose first obtained.

2. The sole Marine Jurisdiction within those Seas.

3. An appropriate Fishery.

First, All Foreigners are Excluded by virtue of such Dominion from a general
Liberty (without first asking and obtaining special License) of putting out
upon the British Seas Ships sitted and Equipped for War, when and in what
Number they please. The reason is plain, because it is the Territory of another
Prince; And to enter it without leave with an armed Force, and in such Numbers,
as may justly occasion Fear and Suspicion of Danger, is a public Hostility.
The Persians were restrained by Pact and League made with the Athenians, from
entering with armed Vessels within the Cyanean and Chelidonian Islands; Plut pi
Cim.
but had the Persians acknowledged the Territorial Property of those Seas to
have been in the People of Athens, there had been no need of such Pact, for in
the reason of the thing it self abstracted from Covenant, it had been as much
an Hostility to have entered those Seas with a Fleet of War, as to have Landed
an Army upon Attica, for both were equally the Athenian Territory.

Secondly, From the Juridical cognizance of all Causes, Civil and Criminal, for
and concerning all Matters and Things done and committed in and upon those
Seas, the Persons whom those Causes concern there abiding. The Reason is,
because Jurisdiction is an Essential and Inseparable part of the Sovereignty,
which a Prince has within his own Territory. All Foreigners, whilst in it, owe
him a local Obedience, and are triable by his Laws, and before his Judicatories
only as the sole Supreme Judge of the place. And for any to Appeal from him, is
to set a Superior over him; and to exercise Jurisdiction within his Territory,
without an Authority derived from him, is to King it in another's Kingdom, to
set up Coordinate Supremes within one Realm in Matters of the same Civil
Cognizance. Which is as much a Contradiction, as to affirm many Infinits, for
as the Infinity of one makes all others finite; so the Supremacy of one makes
all others Subordinate.

Thirdly, From a Right of Fishing within those Seas, without special License
first obtained from the Lord of the Seignory, and under such Conditions and
Considerations as he shall think fit. The reason is, because this is the
Patrimonial Property of his Crown, and the Fishery is in a manner all the
profit that his great Sea Territory yields him. The Dominion of the Sea,
without an appropriate Fishing, is as if a Vineyard should be a Property, but
the Grapes common. Or like an Estate or Possession of Land, vested in one, to
the use of another, 27. H. 8. cap. 10.
and such we had many here in England, till a good Statute executed the
Possession to the use, and so conjoined what ought not to have been divided.
Nor can it be alleged, that a promiscuous Fishing in the Sea is of no damage
to the Proprietor, for admitting the multitude of Fish to be so great, as to
suffice all Men's use, which is not always true, yet this will abate the price
of the Market for Sale, nor can the Fishery be Farmed out, if occasion be, at
so good advantage. For so we read that the Eastern Emperor let out to Farm the
Fishing in the A^gaean Sea near Byzondium, Niceph. Greg. l. 9
at the yearly Rent of Ten thousand Crowns, and sometimes more.

I am sensible, that what I have already said, and part of what follows will be
thought by some to run too much into the Niceties of Law and School, and that
it is a Thread spun too sine. But without the help of such a Thread, how sine
soever it may seem, we shall wander without end in a Labyrinth of Phrases and
sorms of Speech, we shall lose Things in the ambiguity of Words, and mistake
Shadows for Substance. He who affirms a Sea-Dominion, and by it understands any
thing less than Property, embraces a Cloud for J^^^. To ride actual Master at
Sea with a well ^quipp'd Fleet, or to have such a Plenty of Naval St^res in
constant readiness, as shall be sufficient to answer a^ Occas^ons, is not the
Dominion of the Sea; This is ^ower, not Property, though the Property and
Honor to^, especially of an Island Prince, are best secured and supported by
such ^ower Neither is the Honor of the Flag, and of requiring Foreign Ships to
lower their Sails, and do a Reverence any part of the Dominion of the Seas, nor
has any relation to it, as I shall show presently. Much less do such usual
Expressions and Words as these, the British Seas, the Sea of England, Our Seas,
import any legal Dominion, but only denote a Geographical Description, as Mare
Flandricum, Mare Nermannicum, M^re Ar^mericum, Mare Aquitanicum, and a hundred
others do. And nothing more usual, than for Seas to receive their Denominations
from the Shoars they roll upon, and Our Seas are the Seas which roll upon our
Shoars. But that which occasions the ordinary and most frequent Mistake, is the
word Dominion, it being equivocal and of a doubtful sense, as the Latin words
Impertum and Dominium likewise are. For sometimes they are taken strictly and
legally, denoting Property, and thus Imperium and Dominium are the same with
public and private Property, according to that of Seneca, Se^de Bene^. l. 8.
c. 5.
R^x emnia possidet Imperio, singuli Dominio, The King possesses all by his
Sovereignty, and yet particular Persons have their private possessions too. But
then again, sometimes they are taken loosely and Historically, denoting Power
only and Command, as Pompeio datum est Imperium maris intra Herculis columnas,
The Roman People gave Imperium Maris to Pompey, the Command of the Sea, not the
Property of it; They Commissioned him their Admiral or General at Sea, as far
as the Streights Mouth. Thus some of the Roman Emperors were entitled Terrae
Marisque Domini, Lords or Despots of Sea as well as Land, so is Vespasian
called by Josephus; And yet they were but Lords in Power, not in Property; Jure
naturali communia sunt omnium, aer, aqua profluens, and Mare. Inst. de Rer.
Div. Par. 1.
for by the very Text of the Roman Law, as it was afterward compiled by
Justinian, the Sea is accounted as common as the Air, and that by natural
Right. And thus some Men understand no more by Dominion of the Sea, than what
our usual Sea-phrase imports, to ride Master at Sea, or of the Sea. But it is
one thing to be Master of it in an Historical and Military sense, by a
Superiority of Power and Command, as the General of a Victorious Fleet is,
another thing to be Master of it in a legal sense, by a possessory Right, as
the ture Owner and Proprietor of it is. In like manner we say of a General at
Land, that he is Master of the Field; Master of it in Power, not Owner of it in
Title. Property is a fixed and permanent Right, a man may lose his Seisin, and
yet retain his Title, an Usurper is no Owner, but Power is flitting and
transitory, and so soon as the Possession is lost, the Power is gone. If we
confound Power and Property, Potestas and Proprietas, by a promiscuous use of
the one for the other, the Dominion of the Sea will be like that of our
Cornishmens Ball at one of their Hurlings, it is his who can catch it, so long
as he can keep it, till another gets it from him.

I shall add one Quotation more, out of the Roman Story, not wholly unworthy
observation: (...) An^^^. 4.
Tacitus says, Italiam utroque mari duae classes Misenum apud and Ravennam
praesidebant, Two Fleets guarded Italy on both Seas, one at Misenum, the other
at Ravenna. Sueton. Vit. (...).
And Suetonius ascribes the first Institution thereof to Augustus, Classem
Miseni and alteram Ravennae ad tutelam superi and inferi Maris collocavit. The
Fleet at Misenum was for the safety of the Upper Sea toward Gaul and Spain
Westwards, the other at Ravenna, was for the safety of the Lower Sea, toward
Epirus and Greece Eastwards. Our Kings in England have so exactly followed this
Model of Augustus, that one would think, they had copied from his Original. Has
Italy an upper and lower Sea? So has England; Our upper Sea is that Northwards
betwixt England and Germany; Our lower Sea that South Westward betwixt England
and France. Had the Roman Emperors their distinct Fleets, one for each Sea: Our
Kings had their distinct Admiralties, one for the North, and another for the
South, reckoning North and South from the mouth of the River Thames. Their
Fleets were Ad tutelam maris, says Suetonius, for the safety of the Sea. Ours
ad Custodiam, say our Records, for the Custody or safe keeping it, from being
infested by Pirates (a Trade frequent in former Ages amongst the Northern
People) and consequently for securing the Navigation and Commerce of their
Subjects and Allies. The two Fleets did praesidere Italiam, says Tacitus, guard
Italy as a Garrison Town does a Frontier. Ours were also called, Naves
Praesidiariae, Garrison-ships, to guard the open Shoars, and Landing places of
a large Island, against the Hostile insults and descent of Foreigners. They are
our moveable Garrisons, our floating Castles, fifty of which will defend an
Island better then five thousand standing ones built round the Shoars.

Besides the two Admiralties of the North and South, the Books of our municipal
Laws make frequent mention of the Quatuor Maria, the four Seas, environing
England to the East, Of the (...) Marit.
West, North, and South. For England, as distinct from Scotland, is a
Peninsula, bounded on the North by an Isthmus of Land and the Northern Sea. And
it is observable, that to be infra or intra quatuor Maria, within the four Seas,
is in construction of our Law to be within the Kingdom of England; and to be
Extra quatuor Maria, out of the four Seas, is equipollent to being out of the
Kingdom of England. And it is to be further noted, that not only he who is upon
the Land, but he also who is upon the Sea, is in our Law said to be intra Mare,
within the Sea, because he has Sea still before him, till he be arrived on the
opposite Shore, and then and not till then he is Extra Mare, out of the Sea, or
beyond it. And when an Englishman is upon the other Shore, he is then within
the Ligeance of another Prince, and therefore out of the Kingdom of England;
but whilst upon the Sea, he is within the Ligeance of his own Prince, and
therefore within the Kingdom of England. For England is not always taken
strictly for the Land of it, in which sense the Isles of Jersey, Guernsey, and
Mann are no part of England, but sometimes comprehensively for all the
Dominions of it, and in Legal Understanding, he is within the Kingdom of
England, who is within the local Ligeance of the Crown of England.

The use our Law makes of this Technical Phrase, or Artisicial form of Speech,
intra or extra quatu^r Maria, within or without the four Seas, is this; Partly
to essoin or excuse Men from Appearance in Courts upon Writs of Summons; for if
it can truly be alleged, That the Party summoned is Oultre la M^^, beyond the
Sea, this is accepted as a good E^loin, to save his Desault. But principally to
be a certain and regulated Distance, within which, our Law will admit of some
Presumptions, which, beyond that Distance, it will not. For Example, If a
Husband be within the four Seas, Cok. on Lit. Sect. 399.
and his Wi^e has Issue, the Law presumes the Issue Legitimate, and will admit
of no proof to Bastardize the Child, because, within so little a distance, Man
and Wife might clandestinely come together, and none can safely swear they did
not; but if the Husband be out of the sour Seas, the Law is otherwise. By the
Statute of 18. Edw. 1. a Fine, levied in the Common Bench, concludes him, who
is within the sour Seas, if he puts not in his Claim within a Year and a day,
because the Law presumes him near enough, to have timely notice of so solemn an
Act as a Fine is; and if he suffers himself to be foreclosed for want of an
Action or Entry, imputes it to his own neglect. By the Statute of 4. Hen. 7.
cap. 24. the sorementioned Term of a Year and a day, is enlarged to five Years:
And what in the Statute of Edw. 1. is said to be out of the four Seas, is in
this of Hen. 7. said to be out of the Realm, as equipollent Phrases, and
signifying the same thing. C. (...). Rep. (...) Case.
And it a Man be out of the Realm, what day a Fine is levied, though it be
(...) public Act, the Law supposes him not to have sufficient notice of a
thing done within the Realm, and therefore interposes an exception to the
saving of his Right. And this is all which our Law Books mean, when they say,
Co. on Litt^. Sect. 439.
The Sea of England is within the Realm of England, as in the place quoted in
the Margin. But whether the Sea be so within the Realm of England, as to be
part of the Territorial Property of it, exclusively of all other Kingdoms and
States, that they meddle not with. But to be within the sour Seas, and to be
within the Realm of England, is, as to some purposes, in construction and
intendment of our Law, one and the same thing.

Our Law Books have many other Phrases and Expressions of special use, but yet
do not reach the controverted point betwixt England and other Nations. As where
it is said, The Sea is of the Ligeance of the King, and parcel of his Crown of
England; Le Mer est del Liegeance del Rey, and parcel de son Corone
d'Engleterre. Co. 5. Rep. Sir Hen. Corstable's Case, (...). 108. Co. on Lattl.
Sect, 439.
And in another place, it is said, The Sea of England is within the Ligeance of
the King, as of his Crown of England. As to the King's Liegeance, it stands
thus in our Law; All Natives, or Natural-born Subjects, or persons born within
the King's Ligeance (for these do tantamount) wheresoever they are, whether at
Sea or Land, in England or any Foreign Country, quocunque sub Axe, they still
owe a Native, or natural and inseparable Faith and Allegiance to their
Liege-Lord the King. Whilst in England, or upon the Seas, besides their natural
Ligeance, they are within the local Ligeance of their own Sovereign, an I under
his immediate Protection and Defense. But when within the Dominions of a
Foreign Prince, though, as to persons, they still retain Faith to their natural
Sovereign; yet, as to place, they are out of his actual Obedience, and within
the protection of another, which draws Subjection along with it, and makes them
the temporary local Subjects of that other Prince. And as this is the Case of
English men abroad, so is it of Aliens here in England. A Child born at Sea in
any of the King's Ships, or other English Vessel, Navigated by English Master
and Crew, is a Native; if born upon the Land of England, in any Fort or Town
possessed by an Enemy, it is born out of the ^ing's Ligeance, and therefore an
Alien. Co. 7. Pep. (...) Case, for 6.
But whereas it is said, the Sea is within the Liegeance of the Crown of
England, this is to be understood extensively of the Ligeance of the Crown of
England, that it reaches to Sea as well as Land, not exclusively of the
Ligeance of other Crowns, as if no Crown had Ligeance at Sea, but that of
England only; or, as if no Foreigner, aboard his own Vessel within any the four
Seas, were within the Ligeance of his own natural Sovereign, for this is
manifestly repugnant to daily Fact and Experience, as we shall see anon, when I
come to the Question of Fact.

As to that other Expression of the Seas, Co. in Consta^^. Case, ut supra.
being parcel of the Crown of England, the forementioned Author, in the place
before cited, expounds his meaning to be, That it is parcel of the Inheritance
of the Crown of England. Thus Jetsam, Flotsam, and Lagan, appertain to the King
by his Prerogative. Goods thrown overboard to lighten a Ship, in distress by
Weather, are called Jetsam; Goods of a wrecked Ship floating upon the Waters,
are called Flotsam; Goods sunk, with a Cork or Buoy tied to them, to direct to
the place, are called Lagan or Ligan: All these Goods, if the Ship perishes,
and no Owner can be proved, belong to the King in right of his Crown, as
treasure trove and estrais at Land do, and all Derelicts, whose Property is
lost, the Law adjudges them to the King, as Owner paramount. Also Royal Fishes,
Co. Rep. 7. Case de Swans, f. 16.
as Whales, Sturgeons, etc. taken by the King's Subjects on the Seas of
England, appertain to the King by his Prerogative, but no mention made in any
of our Law Books, of an Appropriate Fishing, exclusive of the People and
Subjects of other Princes and States.

I have mentioned these Passages, which occur in the Books of our Municipal
Laws, because though of excellent use and undeniable verity, when fitly applied
to what they are designed and intended, yet if misapplied to the Case of the
Dominion of the 4 Seas, as it stands betwixt England and other Nations, they
may and do occasion Error and Mistake. Those Books handle Cases betwixt Subject
and Subject, and sometimes betwixt Crown and Subject, but not betwixt Crown and
Crown, I mean betwixt England and other Kingdoms. Matters of this Nature must
be looked for in the public Treaties and Transactions of State betwixt our
Kings and foreign Princes, or in a long peaceable Possession, which we call
Prescription; and these I shall examine by and by.

Thus far I have endeavored to clear the true Notion of Sea-Dominion, neither
extending it to impeach the free Navigation and Commerce of peaceable Traders
due to them of natural Right, and by the Law of Nations, notwithstanding such
Dominion. Nor yet making it a Verbal Notion only consisting in words and forms
of Speech, without any real Fruit and Effect, but have instanced in three
weighty things, as the inseparable Incidents of it. I should now proceed to the
Matter of Fact, but forasmuch as some without Examination take it for granted,
that the accustomed Salutation at Sea by the Flag and Topsail, is an Act of
Recognition and Acknowledgment of the Sovereign Dominion of the Sea inherent in
that Prince, to whom such Salutation is performed, I shall crave leave to
examine this in the first place.

CHAP. III. What the Salutation at Sea by the Flag and Topsail signifies, and
whether it has any Relation to the Dominion of it.
THE Salutation at Sea by the Flag and Topsail, was never Covenanted in any the
public Treaties, betwixt England and other Nations, but in those with the
United Netherlands only. And never in any of them till the year 1654. And I am
inclinable to believe, that there were particular Reasons, why it was then
covenanted; partly, because at that time the Royal Dignity of England was
debased and disguised under the obscurer Name of a Protectorat; and they who
had not refused it to an anciently Crowned Head, might make some scruple to do
it to a new Republic. And partly, because that War began upon a Dispute for
the Honor of the Flag. I cannot say, it was the sole Cause of the War, but it
was the first occasion of it. For whilst Blake was in Dover Road with the
English Fleet, Tromp with double the number of Ships, but not equal in
goodness, stood over from the Coast of Calice directly toward him, and came up
close with him, with his Flag alost, Jacks and P^ndants slying, and all the
Bravery he could display. May 1652.
Blake was too stout to brook the Affront, and so in plain English the two
Generals sell together by the Ears, neither of them knowing how soon he might
be called to a severe account by his Superiors, for what he had done. But they
justified themselves, by casting the blame one upon the other, and thus the
Servants Quarrel soon became the Masters, and both Nations engaged in a sierce
War: Which ended in 165^, and in the 13th Article of the Preaty of Peace then
con^luded, to prevent the like Disputes for the suture, it was Covenanted, That
the Ships of the United Provinces, as well th^se si^^ed for W^r, as others,
which hold meet in the British Seas any the (...) of War of England, should
shrike their Flag, and low^r their Tepsail, in such manner, as had been any
time practiced (...), under any former Government. But whereas some think, that
this was prejudicial to England, to take that by Covenant, which they held
before by prescrip^ion, I am not so clear in that Opinion. For what stood
before upon the soot of Courtesy, or of Custom at the best, was now confirmed
by a supervening Contrast, and passed into a National Law, founded upon mutual
Consent. And from the Treaty in 165^, it passed into that, made at Westminster
by His late Majesty in 1662; and from thence, into that made at Breda in 1667,
in which, as in the former, the Flag and Topsail are expressly covenanted for in
the British Seas. But by a later Treaty, viz. 1673. instead of the British
Seas, there is an enlargement to the Seas, betwixt Cape Finisterre, to the
middle point of the Land Van Staten in Norwey.

Here it is to be observed, that in the forementioned Treaties the Salutation by
the Flag and Topsail is no where said to be an acknowledgment of the
Sovereignty of the Crown of England in and over the British Seas, nor so much
as intimated or implied; but on the contrary, as it were on purpose to prevent
such a Construstion, it is expressly said to be a Respect. The words of the
Treaty 1673 are th^se: In acknowledgment of the King of Great Britain 's Right
to have his Flag respected, They, i. e. the Dutch shall strike their Flag, and
lower their Topsail, in the same manner, and with the same respect, as has at
any time, or in any place, been formerly practiced. It Is true, it has been
offered at, to make this Respect pass into an Acknowledgment of Sovereignty,
but it was but an Offer, and so vanished; for in the Project or Concept of 27
Articles, delivered in the year 165^. by the then English Commissioners to the
Dutch Ambassadors, in the 15th Article it was thus proposed: That the Dutch
Ships, both Men of War, and Merchants, (besides striking the Flag) should
suffer themselves to be visited, if required, and should perform all due
Offices of Honor and Acknowledgment to England, to whom the Dominion and
Sovereignty of the British Seas of right appertained. But this Article was
rejected by the Dutch, as were several other Proposals of a high nature; for it
was then urged, and for some time insisted on, that there should be a Coalition
of England, and the United Provinces, into one and the same Republic; not an
Union only, but an Adunation; not a mere Coition into a stricter Bond and
League of Friendship, but a Coalition of both into one Government. But this was
rejected too, as impracticable.

If the Question were only concerning the Antiquity of this Ceremony, how long
it has been practiced amongst these Europaean Nations, (for it had a time when
it first began, and it does not obtain universally:) We have a Record in our
Admiralty, which would be pertinent to this purpose. It is an Edict or
Proclamation, published by King John at Hastings in Sussex, in the Second Year
of his Reign, near 500 Years since, and is transcribed by Mr. Seldom out of the
Records of the Admiralty, to the following purport: Mar. Clau^. l. 2. c. 26.
That if any Ships or Vessels, laden or unladen, refused to l^wer their Sails
at the Command of the King's Lieutenant or Admiral, or of his Lieutenant, then
to be compelled to do it by fighting them, and, if taken, their Ships and Goods
to be confiscated; as may be seen more at large in the place noted in the
Margin. But the Proclamation says not, that this lowering their Sails, was to
be done, as an acknowledgment of the King's Dominion in the Western Channel, to
which Sea it especially relates; and yet none could have better required it,
than King John, for he was at that time in actual possession, both of England
and Normandy, and consequently was actual Lord of both Shores, and might have
reckoned the Channel as an Appendant and Accession to the Land, and to have
followed it as the Accessory does the Principal; as he is Lord of the
intermediate River, who is Lord of both the Banks. But as this Proclamation
expresses no such thing, so neither does the penning of it seem to incline that
way: For it mentions not Ships of War, who, as such, ought the rather to be
obliged to make such Acknowledgment, as being most likely to dispute it, but
only Ships laden or unladen, Nefs ou Vesseaulx charges ou void, referring to
Merchants and Traders, be their Ships light or freighted; and these
Merchantmen are to do it, not at the Command of every body, but, au
Commandment du Lieutenant du Roy, ou de l'Admiral du Roy, ou son Lieutenant,
at the Command of the King's Lieutenant, or the King's Admiral, or his
Lieutenant, intimating a personal Respect due to their Rank and Quality,
especially from simple Traders.

However, it is certain, that this Honorary Respect or Civility, call it what
you will, is no natural expression of a Subjection to a Sovereign; for it is not
founded in Nature, but in Institution, and is a practice peculiar to the
Western Nations; and the modes of Respect are so various in different
Countries, that what in one is a Civility, in another is a Rudeness. And as it
is no natural expression of Subjection, so neither is it a necessary one, as if
it must necessarily signify that or nothing; for lowering the Flag, or Sails,
is but like uncovering the Head, by vailing the Hat or Bonnet, which, amongst
us, It Is so called in the Journal of King Edw. 6. wrote with his own hand, the
words are these:

The Flemings Men of War would have passed our Ships without vailing Bonnet,
which they seeing, shot at them, and drove them at length to vail Bonnet. See
page 11. of K. Edw. Journal, in the 2d Part of Dr. Burnet's Hist. of Reform.


is used as a Token of Subjection to our King, of Respect to our Superiors, of
Civility to our Equals, of Courtesy to our Inferiors. Thus we see one and the
same specific Act of uncovering the Head, as it relates to persons of
different Orders and Degrees, admits of diverse Significations. Some of our
Sea-Captains, though irregularly enough, and for want of explicit Orders, have
required of the Dutch the Honor of the Flag and Topsail in the Mediterranean
and Baltic, where the Crown of England never pretended Sovereignty. And as in
the forementioned Treatise of 1673, it is particularly named a Respect, so it is
covenanted to be done, not only within the British Seas, but every where
betwixt the Capes, Finister in Spain, and Staten in Norway, beyond the Limits
of the Sea-Sovereignty of England, and consequently has no relation to it.
Besides, this Honor to the King's Flag is required from his own Subjects, but
it is needless to require from them an acknowledgment of Sovereignty, to whose
benefit it redounds, the import is, that Foreigners would acknowledge it, to
whose Profit it is opposed.

Well then, if this Ceremony does not relate to an acknowledgment of a
Sovereignty in the Sea, what is it that it relates to? And what is the true
import and signification of it? I answer, it imports these two things: 1. It Is
Cultus Superioris, it is a Reverence or Respect performed to a person of
Superior Quality and Degree. 2. It Is Symbolum Pacis and Amicitiae, it is a sign,
or symbolical expression, of Peace and Friendship. Sometimes it signifies both
these together, and sometimes but one of them, according to the different
degrees of the persons performing it; but it always signifies one of them, and
never any thing more. The Dutch, and other smaller Republics, perform it, both
as a Respect to the Crowned Head of England, and as a Salutation of Peace and
Friendship also. But Crowned Heads cannot perform it as to one of a Superior
Order, because they are in a parity and equality of Degree, but they do it upon
the later account only, as it is an expression of Peace and Amity. The Dutch and
others do not, by the Flag and Topsail, recognize the King of England, as
Sovereign of the four Seas, nor acknowledge themselves thereby his local
Subjects, and their Persons, Ships and Goods, to be under his immediate
Jurisdiction and Protection, whilst in and upon those Seas; but they
acknowledge him as Praeeminent in Order and Quality, not as Sovereign over
them, but as Superior to them in Dignity and Degree. Were I to express it in
Latin, I would do it by that old Roman Phrase of Comiter Colere, or Observare
Majestatem, They pay Honor or Respect to the Majesty of a Crowned Island. And
as to the Crowned Heads, though they cannot, as I said before, pay Respect to a
Superior, because of the parity of their Degree; yet, as to the Sea-Salutation
by the Flag and Topsail, there is a peculiarity on the part of England, even in
reference to them. A Foreign King, when Ships of War of another Nation approach
his Havens, and come within reach of his Castles, will expect, and justly may,
that the Comer should salute him first; the Guest or Stranger gives the first
Salute to the Master of the House, who thereupon Re-salutes him, and bids him
welcome. And what does this Salutation signify, be it by lowering Flag and
Topsail, or by firing Guns, but that they are come Armed before his Doors only
as Friends, and without intention of doing him hurt? But the peculiarity on the
part of England, consists in this; England is an Island, whose Frontier is the
Sea, whose Forts and Castles are the Ships of the Royal Navy, which bear
Analogy and Proportion to the Frontier Towns, and Fortified Places of Inland
Dominions; and therefore, when met within the Seas of England by the Ships of
War belonging to any other Crowned Head, these later ought not to approach the
Ships of War of England, who are in their Stations upon their Guard and Duty,
with a Flag aloft in a posture of Challenge and Desiance; but do, in their
Course and Passage call to the Guard-ships of England, to tell them, They are
Friends; and what they cannot do by Words at that distance, they do by mute
Signs, by striking their Flag or Topsail, which in effect express those words.
And when they salute those Guarders, by discharging their Guns, it is in effect
to tell them, they were not charged against them; and though they Steer their
Course along the Coasts of an open Island, yet they design no Hostility. This
is no diminution to the Majesty of any Monarch, how great soever, and were the
Salutation thus stated with Crowned Heads, it would be less controverted, and
the Crown of England lose nothing by it neither.

But if the Dutch perform this Ceremony, as a Respect to a Crowned Head,
without relation to a Sea Sovereignty, why not to France as well as England?
since they are equally Crowned Heads, and one has one Bank of the Channel, and
the other has the other: And what shall then become of the peculiar Prerogative
of the Crown of England? This peculiarity on the part of England, as an Island
whose principal defense is at Sea, I have touched already. But as to the Dutch
performing equal Respect at Sea to the Crown of France, as to that of England,
I do not doubt, but they will do it, when required thereto. And what Remedy is
there against it, unless by Contract? for though I may not be covered when I
will, yet I may put off my Hat and be uncovered when and to whom I please. The
Dutch ^eer their Course by the Pole Star of Trade, not by the Punctilio's of
Honor. And were this Construction put upon their striking their Flag to the
Flag of England, that it is a Recognition of a Sea-Sovereignty: They would do
the same to France the rather, and not as a thing imposed but upon choi^e,
thereby to dispropriate and lay common, what England would enclose as her
Property. Nor would it be a new thing for France to set up for the Honor of
the Flag and Topsail, Leo ab Ai^^. ^i^st. p. 177.
for it was expressly stipulated in the 12th Article of the League Offensive and
Defensive, made in the year 1635, betwixt Lewis the 13th, and the States
General, that upon occasion of any Conjunction of the French and Dutch Fleets,
The Dutch Admiral should first Salute the French with Flag and Topsail, and
fire his Guns, in such manner as had been practiced toward the King of Great
Britain upon the like Occasion. And Henry the Second, Lud v. (...) vin. (...)
II. Tom. (...).
and Henry the Third of France, did both of them Publish their Royal Edicts,
one in the year 1555, the other in 1580, Commanding all Foreign Ships
indefinitely (I suppose Traders) to lower their Topsails to the Ships of War of
France, upon pain of seizure and confiscation; and some Hamburgers were
forcibly taken, for not conforming to those Edicts. But may not the present
French King say, what Caesar once did, Sylla fecit, non ipse faciam? did the
two Henrys do this in the faint times of their languishing Reigns, and shall
not I do it? who can cover with Fleets of War the three Seas, which cover the
Coasts of France. I have read somewhere in the French Memoires, I think in
those of the Duke de Sully, that the whole Naval Strength of the Crown of
France in the beginning of Henry the Fourth, was about half a Dozen Ships of
War, such as they were at Breast and Rochel, and about a Score of Galleys in the
Mediterranean. But this last named great King, dressed a new Plan of the French
Monarchy, and drew out the Lines of it larger than before; And though his great
design was interrupted by at immature Death, and by the succeeding Minority of
his Son, yet the great Cardinal, I mean Richlieu, resumed it again. He first
taught France, that the French Flower-de-luces could grow at Sea, as well as
Land. He decked and adorned the losty Sterns of his new-built Ships with this
Prophetic Inscription -- Florent quoque Lilia Ponto.

Having done with the Sea Salutation, I come to the Fourth general Head, under
which,

CHAP. IV. The whole Matter of Fact between the Crown of England, and Foreign
Princes and States in the several Incidents of Sea-Dominion is distinctly
Examined and impartially Reported.
I Am now upon a Question of Fact only, how sar this Dominion and Sovereignty
in the Seas has been acknowledged, as a Right inherent in the Crown of England,
by any of the Neighboring Nations; either expressly in public Treaties and
Transactions of State, or impliedly, by an immemorial peaceable and
uninterrupted Possession, commonly called Prescription. This I call the
Question of Fact, and distinguish it from that of Right, to which it is
Subsequent. For a Right to any thing in one, is antecedent to the
acknowledgment of it by another, and though his non-acknowledgment may render
it Controverted, yet it may be a just Right and legal Claim notwithstanding.
The Right of the Crown of England to the Dominion of the Seas I meddle not
with, it stands as it did unmovable, like Terminus in the Capitol with a Cedo
Nulli, it gives place to none. But the enquiry is, whether in Fact it has been
consented to by Foreign Nations; by which Test, we shall be able to discover,
whether the Crown of England has lost any thing in matter of Sea-Sovereignty,
which it formerly possessed. In order to which, I shall distinctly handle and
examine the three great and inseparable incidents of the Sovereignty, which I
before named.

1. The Exciusion of Foreign Men of War from Passing upon any the Seas of
England, without special License for that purpose first obtained.

2. The sole Marine Jurisdiction within those Seas.

3. The appropriate Fishery.

I begin with the first, and the Enquiry is, Of the Passage of Foreign Ships
Equipped for War over the Seas of England.
Whether any Sovereign Prince or State having occasion to enter upon any the
Seas of England, with Men of War, either in entire Fleets, or as Convoys to
Merchants, have first asked leave so to do of the King of England, as the
Supreme Lord of the Territory.

I have often met with a Traditional Story, both in Discourse and in Printed
Pamphlets, that Queen Elizabeth having intelligence that Henry the 4th of
France had a design to increase the Naval Strength of his Kingdom, and to Equip
a considerable Fleet of War, not only for the Mediterranean, but for the Seas
also toward England, She sent to bid him desist from it. That the Queen might
request him not to put out upon these Seas with an unusual Fleet, as that which
might occasion Jealousy in her Subjects, and oblige her to an extraordinary
Expense in Arming proportionably, and consequently tend to weaken the Amity and
good Assurance betwixt the two Crowns; I say, that she might do this, for I do
not find that she did it, is neither morally impossible, nor wholly
disagreeable to the practice amongst Princes. But that she did pro Jure
interdict and forbid him so doing, as an Intrenchment and Invasion of her
Right, by entering with an Armed Force upon the Territories of her Crown,
without her leave; for this I shall suspend my belief till better Vouchers be
produced. It Is too common amongst Men, first, to form their Opinions, and then
to seek their Proofs, and some rather than not find them will devise them.

There is another current Story of the same alloy, That Queen Elizabeth seized
in the Bay of Cascais in Portugal, Sixty Laden Ships belonging to the Hans
Towns of Germany, and afterward consiscated both Ships and Goods; For having
presumptuously passed over her Seas, without first obtaining her Royal
Permission. In this, several Mistakes are complicated together, one in Law and
two in Fact. That in Law is this, supposing the Dominion of the Seas to have
been universally acknowledged as the Queens undoubted Right, yet ought not the
Hanseaties, who were Friends, and peaceable Traders, and pursuing their lawful
Occasions, to have been consiscated, for not a king leave of Passage over these
Seas, had there been nothing more in the case, because they needed not in Law
so to have done. No more than a Market-man needs ask leave of the Owner to pass
his Field, over which the Market Path lies. The two Mistakes in Fact are these.

1. The said Sixty Sail of Ships did not in Fact pass the Seas of England,
(...) 15.9. (...) lib. 95.
and therefore could not be consiscated upon that account. Mr. Cambden, our
faithful Annalist, says expressly, and so does Thuanus too, That they passed on
the North of Scotland, by the Occades, Hebrides, and great Western Ocean on the
backside of Ireland, a long and dangerous Passage, to avoid being intercepted
in the Channel by the Queens Ships.

2. The sole Reason why they were confiscated was this, because they carried
Goods of Contrabanda, Prohibited Goods, viz. Corn, which at that time Spain
wanted, and Naval Provisions to the relief of an Enemy, who at that time was
preparing a new Fleet for the Invasion of England, in revenge of the Disgrace
he had received the year before, viz. in 88. And this they did, contrary to the
Queens Proclamation and Monitory Letters to the Hans Towns, whereby she forbad
them to supply Spain, her declared Enemy, with such Provisions, under the
Penalty of forfeiting Ships and Goods. Thus the Dutch in the year 1652. when by
their Interest and Influence in the Court of Denmark, they had caused an
English Fleet of above Twenty Merchant men, Laden with Pitch, Tar, Flax, Hemp,
and other Naval Stores, to be Arrested in the Sound, supposing that England,
with whom they were then in War, would be Distressed for want of s^^n
Provisions, They Published a Placart forbidding all in general to Import into
England any the aforesaid Materials, upon pain of confiscation thereof, as
being a Relief to an Enemy, in things they particularly wanted for prosecuting
the War against them. I enquire not here, Quo jure, by what Right, the Dutch
did this, and whether it was not a Violation of the free Commerce of Neutral
Nations. But I only instance in the Fact, as parallel with what the Queen did:
Nay, the States did far more than what the Queen did, comes to; for they, in
the Year 1599, almost in the Infancy of their Republic, published a Placart,
forbidding all Nations any Commerce with Spain, not in this or that prohibited
Commodity, but in all Goods and Merchandises whatsoever. Grot. Host. de Rebus
Belg. lib. 8. page 372. Ed^t. Amstol.
Vetant populos quescunque ^llos commeatur resve alias in Hispaniam far. They
are the very words of Grotius, in his Belgic Annals, the eighth Book, this by
the way ^^ly.

If we consult the public Treaties, which have been betwixt England and other
Sovereigns, concerning S^^ps of War passing these Seas, we shall find the (...)
have been, as follows. The usual Covenants are, (...) have been, That the
Ships of War, of either side, may (...) come into the Roads, Havens, and
Rivers, each of other, provided they be not in such number as may occasion
suspicion; and therefore the number is ascertained, and not to be exceeded,
unless to avoid imminent Danger, and in such case, notice to be given thereof.
For Example: In the Treaty concluded at Madrid, in the Year 1630, betwixt
Charles the First of England, and Philip the Fourth of Spain, which Treaty was
but a renewal of the former made with King James, in the Year 1604, it is in
the 9th Article agreed, That it shall be lawful to have access unto each others
Ports with Ships of War, whether they shall arrive there, either by force of
Tempest, or for necessary Repairs, or for provision of Victuals; so they exceed
not eight, when they come of their own accord, nor stay longer than they shall
have cause. And when any greater Number shall have occasion of Access, they not
to enter the Port, without the privity or consent of the King. This is the form
of all the Treaties; and Articles, like to this, have been agreed betwixt
England and France, and England and Helland, but they are always reciprocal;
and as their Ships of War are restrained from access to the English Ports, so
are the English from access to theirs in equal manner. And it is to be noted,
that the Restraint is only from access to each others Ports, but never any
Restraint of Foreign Ships of War from entering, in what Number they please,
the Seas of England. Thus in the Year 1639, which was but nine Years after the
Treaty aforementioned at Madrid, a Spanish Fleet, of above sixty Sail, equipped
for War, entered the Western Channel, without leave first asked, bound for
Ostend, to supply the Spanish Netherlands with Men, Munition, and other
Necessaries, and passed the Channel to the height of Dover. And the Dutch Fleet
put out in like manner upon the North-East Sea, and fought the Spanish Fleet in
the Downs. It Is true, that Sir John Pennington, who then commanded the English
Guard, endeavored to hinder them from sighting so near the Ports, to the
disturbance of the Security and Protection of them, and troubling the Commerce
and Intercourse of the King's Lieges and Allies. But no Complaint made, either
then or afterward, of the two Fleets of War entering the Seas aforesaid,
parcel of the Dominion and Territory of the Crown of England, without a special
License first asked and obtained. And it would be Time misspent, to recount how
often, either Spaniards, French, or Dutch, have entered these Seas with armed
Fleets and Convoys, as their Occasions obliged them, freely, without leave, and
without control. I speak not here of the private Notices and Intimations,
which one Prince may in friendly manner give another, to satisfy him of the
reason of any extraordinary Military Preparations, and of the clearness of his
Intentions toward him. But of a formal previous Leave to be asked and obtained
by a Foreign Prince or State, before they put out to Sea, upon the Maritime
Territory of the Crown of England, in a Warlike Equipage.

In the year 165^, The States General gave public Noti^e by their Ambassadors
here in England, that they had Resolved to fit out to Sea an extraordinary
Fleet of One hundred and fifty Men of War, besides those in present Service,
for the Security and Preservation of their Navigation and Commerce. They did
not ask leave to do it, but first resolved upon it, and then gave Notice, and
they pretended this Notice was an Argument of their Sincerity and good Will, in
order to prevent all misunderstandings, and finister interpretations. But they
in England understood it otherwise, and resented it as a Bravado and Insult.

I Pass now to the second Incident of the Sovereignty, Of the Marine
Jurisdiction, and the Laws of Oleron. Videsis Us and Corstum^s de la Mer,
printed at Bo^^deaux 1661.
to Examine the Matter of Fact as to that, viz. The Marine Jurisdiction.

It Is commonly affirmed by English Writers, that our King Richard the First
(the French give a different account) did, in his return from the Holy Land,
make and declare certain Marine Laws, for the better Regulation of Commerce,
which from the place of their first Publication were called the Laws of Oleron.
A small Island situate in the Bay of Aquitain, and a Member of that great and
wealthy Duchy, which was in the actual Possession of King Richard, as his
maternal Inheritance, for it came to his Father Henry the Second, by Marriage
with Elianor Daughter and Heir of William Duke of Aquitain. And by the way it
may be noted, that this Duchy, either in whole or part, continued in the
Possession of the Kings of England by ten Descents, to the 32d of Henry the
Sixth, near 300 years, though that of Normandy continued but five Descents, and
ended in King John. But whether these Laws were Published as aforesaid by King
Richard, or whether about Sixty years after, as some Printed Editions would
have them, is not an Enquiry pertinent to this place. Be it admitted, those
Laws were Published by King Richard, who was actual Duke both of Aquitain and
Normandy, and in right of the latter Lord on both sides the English Channel.
The great intercourse betwixt his English and French Subjects, and those of his
Allies, required a certain Rule of Sea-Laws for the more speedy and impartial
Determination of all Controversies, which might occasionally arise. These Laws
of Oleron, as to the main of them, are but a transcript of the old Rhodian
Laws, with some new Additions and Amendments, accommodated to the practice of
that Age, and the Customs of the Western Nations; who thereupon might readily
conform to them, as to a common Standard and Measure, like a Law of Nations,
for the more equal distribution of Justice amongst the People of different
Governments. But to infer from hence an Universal Monarchy at Sea, and that
King Richard, in right of his Imperial Crown of England, and Ducal Crowns of
N^rmandy and Aquitain, did, as sole or Supreme Legislator for the Marine,
authoritatively impose Sea-Laws upon the People and Subjects o^ other Nations,
is but a strained inference. The Romans were far enough from yielding a
Sea-Sovereignty to the little Republic of Rhodes, and yet were so well
satisfied with the Equity of their Sea-Laws, that they not only conformed to
them, Lab. 11. D^^^l.
but incorporated them into the Body of their Digest. And as the Rhodian Laws
obtained in the Mediterranean, and the Laws of Oleron in the Western and
English Seas: So the Laws of Wisbuy (a Town situate upon the little Isle of
Gotland, in the Eastern part of the Baltic, formerly under Denmark, now under
the Crown of Sueden) called from thence Leges Wisbuicenses, P^^k, in (...) Tit.
Di^. and Cod. (...) p. 19^.
were received by the general consent of the Northern Traders, as a common
measure for all Nautick Assairs, to the Northwards of the Rhine, and throughout
the whole Baltic.

That the Sea is within the Jurisdiction of the King of England, is a matter
unquestionable, not at home only, but amongst all Nations. His Admiral has, and
ever had, through a long series of Ages, the Conusance of all Contracts, Pleas,
and Querrels made upon the Sea, out of the Body of any County of England. Which
Power is enlarged by the Statute of 15 R. 2. cap. 3. to Death, and Mayhem upon
great Ships in the main Stream of great Rivers. And by the Statute of 28. Hen.
8. cap. 15. a Court of Commission may be held under the great Seal Coram
Admirallo, etc. to hear and determine all Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, etc.
done or committed upon the Sea. But then it is evident and undeniable also, that
the Neighboring Kingdoms and States, who border upon the Sea, have their
distinct Admiralties likewise, and have long since had, where their Subjects
and People receive sinal Sentence in all Maritime Causes, without exception of
any Seas, or without Appeal to the Admiralty of England, as the last resort, or
as having Supreme Conusance of all things done and committed in and upon the
British Seas. If a French or Dutch Vessel take a Pirat of what Nation soever,
who has committed a Robbery upon the English Seas, they do not remit him to the
Admiralty of England, as to the sole Tribunal of the place, where the Fact was
done, to receive Sentence there; but they carry him before their own
Judicatories, and judge him as an Enemy of Mankind by the Law of Nations. If
one Foreigner does any Injury to another, be it Fraud or Violence, upon the
British Seas, the Party injured makes not his Complaint to the Admiralty of
England, as the proper Court, and as having the sole Juridical Conusance of his
Plea, but resorts to the Jurisdiction of his own Sovereign, or to that of the
Sovereign of the Wrong-doer, and there Impleads him, and prays for Justice. If
a Frenchman kill a Frenchman, one Alien another, upon the Land of England, the
Fact is committed within the local Ligeance of the King of England, and against
the Peace and Protection of his Crown, and therefore triable before his Courts;
But if two Englishmen be under the Pay and Service of the French King, and one
of them Kill the other, aboard a French Man of War, within the 4 Seas, The
French King's Judicature will have the Conusance of the Crime, as done within
his Ligeance, and against the Peace and Protection of his Crown.

Thus stands the matter of Fact, as to the Marine Jurisdiction, and thus it has
been for many Ages; but yet there is an ancient President, which seems to
impugn something that has been said, and not to take notice of it, were to
report things unfaithfully; and therefore I crave leave to examine it. It Is a
Bundle or Roli in the Tower of London, Superscribed De Superioritate Maris
Angliae and Jure Officii Admiralitatis in codem; Record, I can scarce call it,
(...) cap. 27
for it is not any Judicial Act or Monument of a Court of Record; and it may be
read, as it is transcribed at large by Lord Chief Justice Cake, and by Mr.
Seldom, who highly insists upon it.

I shall abbreviate it truly, and in short the Case was this,

A League had been concluded betwixt Edward the First of England, and Philip
the Fair of France, Of the (...).
in which it was Covenanted, that each should defend the others Rights, and
Neither relieve the other's Enemy. After this, a War ensued betwixt Philip and
the Earl of Flanders, whom Edward secretly savoured. Whereupon Reyner Grimbald,
who was General at Sea for the King of France, took several Ships both of
England, and of other Nations Trading to Flanders, and confiscated Ships and
Goods, and imprisoned Persons, as carrying Relief to an Enemy. Upon which and
other Complaints, Commissioners were appointed by both Kings, called in the
Roll, writ in Norman French, Auditors Deputez per les Roys d'Engleterre and de
France a redresser les damages faits. The Plaintiffs who were of several
Nations appear by their Procurators or Attorneys before the said Commissioners,
and join all together in one Bill or Libel, as being all involved in one Common
Cause. In the Rehearsal of the said Libel, it is alleged, that, Whereas the
Kings of England, by reason of the said Kingdom, from time to time, whereof
there is no Memory to the contrary, have been in peaceable Possession of the
Sovereign Dominion of the Sea of England, and of the Isles of the same, by
Ordaining of Laws, etc. And whereas it is Covenanted in the League lately made
betwixt the two Kings, that each should Defend the others Rights, Franchises,
and Liberties, etc. Monsieur Reyner Grimbald, Commander of the Fleet of the
King of France, who Names himself Admiral of the said Sea, being Commissioned
by that King to serve him in his W^^ against Flanders, has contrary to the
said League wrongfully assumed the Office of the Admiralty in the said Gea of
England, upon Pretense of the said Commission, taking the People and Merchants,
etc They pray, that the Persons, Ships and Goods so taken, may be delivered to
the Admiral of the King of England, to whom the Counsance of the whole Matter
of Right appertained.

He who shall read more at large, in the places before quoted, the magnificent
Attributes given to the Kings of England, of their being peaceably possessed
time immemorial of the Sovereign Dominion of the Sea of England, by ordaining
Laws and Statutes, Prohibiting Arms and Armed Vessels, taking Sureties, and
giving Safeguards, and ordaining all other things necessary to the Preservation
of Peace and Right amongst all People passing upon that Sea, etc. will at first
view be ready to cry out -- suimus Troes! fuit Ilium! We were English men!
England was! and yet perhaps no need of such Exclamation. At first reading, it
seemed to me, at some distance, like a Stone Wall athwart my way, and no
possibility of passing farther, but when I examined it more nearly, I found it
but a Silken Curtain of specious words drawn artificially before the Eye, and
easy to be put back by the hand.

1. First, it is to be noted, that all this is but a Plaidoye, a Plea or
Action, a Supplicatory Libel, or Bill of Complaint. No definitive Sentence or
Arrest, nothing that did pass in rem Judicatam. This alone, were there nothing
more, is sufficient to abate the intrinsic Value of it. The Roll makes no
mention of any decision given by the Delegates upon any the Matters contained
in the Libel, and either none was given, which seems most probable, and those
Controversies decided some other way, or the Roll is left imperfect.

2. Though the Interessents of several Nations, as Danes, Germans, Hollanders,
etc. suffered Damages by the Seisures of Grimbald, in like manner as the
English did, and therefore joined with them in the same Libel, yet the Libel
was penned by English Council, as is manifest by the Address or Direction o^
it, A vous Seigneurs Auditeurs Deputez, To you Lords Auditors deputed, Par les
Roys d'Engleterre and de France, by the Kings of England and France, where
England has the preference of Order to France, contrary to the style of Neutral
Nations of that Age.

3. The Allegation of the Kings of England, having been time immemorial in the
peaceable Possession of the Sovereignty of the Sea, was not made by the French
Delegates in the Name of the King their Master, but by English Advocats in
favor of their Clients Cause. The French King had Commissioned Grinthald to
exercise Jurisdiction at Sea, by Arresting and Confiscating Ships and Goods,
and Imprisoning Persons, for carrying Relief to the Earl of Flanders his Enemy,
by which Commission Grimbald justified himself for doing such Acts, as were
manifestly repugnant to the peaceable Possession of the said Sovereign Dominion
on the part of England. If the King of France had acknowledged the Admiral of
England, the only competent Judge of things done and committed upon the Sea of
England, why did he, together with the King of England, depute Auditors or
Delegates for determining those Matters then in Controversy?

4. The Art in penning the said Libel, is remarkable, it affirms the Marine
Jurisdiction of the Admiral of England, but it does not except against a Power
in the King of France, to constitute an Admiral with the like Jurisdiction, and
that upon the Sea toward Flanders. (...).
For it is certain, that the Crown of France had Admirals, before the time of
Philip the Fair. It Is true, that great Body of the Kingdom of France had been
cantoniz'd and divided, after the manner of the German Nations, into many
Franca F^uda, as they ^ali'd them, Free Fees, which are supreme and independent
Sovereignties, only the persons of those Sovereigns under a Personal Obligation
of Fealty to another. The respective sen^^^ry Princes were siduciary Homagers
to the Kings of France, but the Crown of France had no Regal Jurisdiction or
Authority within those Frincipalities. Thus the great Dakedoms of Aquitain and
Normandy were under the Kings of England, that of Britany was under a Duke of
its own, the Earldoms of Provence, Tolose, and ^anders, acknowledged their own
Sovereign Counts. In those days, the Crown of France had only a small Seacoast
upon Picardy, and some in the Mediterranean: But, in the time of Philip the
Fair, that Crown was in the actual possession of all Normandy; and as the other
Principalities became reincorporated into the Body of France, from whence they
had formerly been dismembered, as now they all are, excepting some part of
Flanders; that Kingdom, as it enlarged it self to the Sea, by the accession of
many new Coasts, so the Marine Jurisdiction thereof increased proportionably. I
say, the forerecited Libel does not deny a Civil Power or Capacity in the Crown
of France to create an Admiral, and to invest him with Marine Jurisdiction: But
the Exception is partly against the Person of Grimbald, and partly against his
illegal Practices and Seisures, contrary to the Alliance made betwixt the two
Kings. Now this Grimbald was a Foreigner, and a Mercenary; he was a Genoese,
whom the King of France had hired, with several Galleys of that Republic, to
serve him in his War against Flanders. The Plaintiffs, in their Libel, call
him, Maistre de la Navy du Roy de France, Master or Commander of the French
Fleet, but would not vouchsafe him the Title of an Admiral, only Que se dit
estre Admiral, that he called himself an Admiral, and craftily reclaim the
Conusance of their Cause from him, as an incompetent Judge, to the Admiral of
England, as an undoubted Authority, and before whom they were sure to gain
their Process.

I Have done with the Marine Jurisdiction, Of the Fishery.
and proceed now to the third and last Incident of the Dominion of the Sea, and
which inseparably follows it, and that is the sole Fishing; without which, it
would be a Property without Profit, a Name without a Thing. He, who has the
Soil, or Ground, has the Herbage, and other Growth of it, or else a Rent for
it; if others may freely depasture with him, it is a Common. The Enquiry is
upon the Matter of Fact, as to Fishing upon the Seas about England, in which,
our public Treaties, made betwixt our Kings and other Sovereigns, will be our
best Direction. And they stand thus: All the ancient Treaties, I could meet
with, concluded betwixt the several Kings of England, and their old
Confederates the Dukes of Britanny and Burgundy, which in those Ages were the
most powerful Neighbors they had at Sea, are of the same tenor, and run in
the same form; viz. They Covenant on both sides, that their respective Subjects
should freely, and without the let or hinderance one of another, fish every
where upon the Seas, without asking any Licenses, Pasports, or safe Conducts.
This is the General Form of them all. For Example: In the Treaty betwixt Edward
the 4th of England, and Francis Duke of Britanny, the Article in the French of
that time runs thus. That the Fishermen, both of the Kingdom of England, and
Duchy of Britanny, Purront peaceablement aller par tout sur Mer pour pescher
and gaigner leur vivre, sans impeachement, ou^ disturber de l'une party ou de
l'autre, and sans leur soit besoigne sur ceo requirir sauf Conduct. And the
same form had been used before, in the Treaty betwixt Henry the 6th, and the
then Duchess of Burgundy. Thus also in the famous Treaty, called Intercursus
magnus, made in the Year 1495, betwixt Henry the 7th of England, and Philip the
4th Archduke of Austria, and Duke of Burgundy, in the 14th Article it is agreed,
Quod Piscatores utriusque partis poterint ubique ire, Navigare per Mare, secure
piscari, absque impedimento licentia seu salvo conductu. And this form is also
kept to, in the Treaty made betwixt Henry the Eighth, and Cha^les the Fifth,
Emperor and Duke of Burgundy. In the time of Queen Elizabeth, after that seven
of the seventeen Provinces had set up distinct Sovereignties of their own, they
still enjoyed the same freedom of Fishing, as they had done before, when united
with the House of Burgundy. And in the Treaty made betwixt King James of
England, and Philip of Spain, in the Year 1604, the ancient Treaties of
Intercourse and Commerce, betwixt the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Irelan^, and the Dominions of the Dukes of Burgandy, and Princes of the
Low Countries, are revived and reconsirm'd. From whence it appears, upon the
whole Matter of Fact, That the Kings of England, in their Treaties with other
Sovereigns, not once or twice, but in a Succession of Ages, not by surprise,
but deliberately, and when the business of the Fishery came under special
consultation, did not challenge to themselves the sole Right thereof,
exclusively of all others, as being appropriated to the Crown of England: For
had they esteemed the Fishery the Property of their Crown, and all Aliens
excluded from it, they would not have admitted the Subjects of Britanny and
Burgundy, to a promiscuous Fishing with their own Subjects, without some
valuable Consideration had been given for it, or at least some License
obtained, as a beneficiary Grant derived from them, or some Acknowledgment made
by way of a Salvo Jure, a Saving, to the Right of the Crown or England. Else it
would be as unreasonable, as if a Man should throw down the Enclosures of his
own Ground, and lay that common, which before was his Property, which is too
gross a Reflection upon the Wisdom of those Ages. And this may be further
illustrated, by a samiliar Instance. Suppose here in England two great Manors,
and betwixt them a large Lake of fresh Waters, well stored with Fish, and it
can be proved, That not only Time out of Mind, the Tenants of the two Manors
have promiscuously fished therein, but that also the Lords of both Manors
have, in several Ages, contracted each with other, for a free Fishing, without
Leave or License to be first asked or obtained for their respective Tenants.
And, in the Contract, no Exception or Reservation is made of the Fishery, as
parcel of the Inheritance of one of the said Manors, nor any Words creating a
Tenure, whereby one should hold of the other; nor expressing or implying, that
it was but a Temporary Sufferance, that one of the Lords should share for a
time in the Profits of the Fishing, without any share in the Fee or Inheritance
of it: And this by the free Donation of the other, commonly called De Gratia
Speciali, or for a valuable Consideration, usually termed, Quid pro quo, or to
hold by some small Acknowledgment of Tenure, as of a P^pper-Corn Yearly. But
the Contract stands on both sides upon an equal foot, both Lords equally giving
and taking an undisturbed Liberty for their respective Tenants. This, I humbly
conceive, is good Evidence, that the Fishery lies common to both Manors.
Suppose again, this Lake to be the Sea, and the two Manors to be two Kingdoms;
and the Case will still be the same.

None of our Leagues and Treaties, made, either with the House of Burgundy, or
with the House of Austria, since the Union of those two Houses, or with the
States General, since their disunion from both, have ever reserved to the Crown
of England, any Annual Payment, Fee-Farm, or Consideration for their liberty of
Fishing in our Seas. A certain Sum was never agreed, an uncertain one could
never be demanded. And yet Sir John Boroughs, in his Book of The Sovereignty of
the British Seas, says, That Philip the Second, King of Spain, obtained of
Queen Mary, his Wise, License for his Subjects to fish upon the North Coasts of
Ireland, they paying yearly for the same One thousand Pounds Sterling; which
was accordingly paid into the Exchequer of Ireland. But instead of an
Authentic Record, he vouches only the hearsay of Sir Edward Fitton, Son to Sir
Henry Fitton, sometime Treasurer of Ireland, who, he says, had often testified
it. This may the rather be suspected of mistake, Annal. Eliz. An. 1602.
because Mr. Cambden relates, how that Queen Elizabeth having sent four
Ambassadors, whereof one was Principal Secretary of State, and not lightly to
be supposed ignorant of such an Affair, to treat at Bremen with the Ambassadors
of Denmark, upon Complaint of that King's forbidding Foreigners the freedom of
Fishing betwixt Norway and Iseland, both appertaining to the Crown of Denmark:
The Queen's Ambassadors openly affirmed, that the Kings of England had in no
time forbid the freedom of Fishing in the Irish Sea, albeit they were Lords of
both Banks.

The said Mr. Cambden, in his description of the North Riding of Yorkshire,
speaking of Scarborow-Castle, says, That the Hollanders and Zelanders take
wonderful Quantities of Herring upon this Coast, Cum veniam prius veteri
instituto ex hoc Castro impetraverint; Whereas they were wont, by ancient Use,
to ask leave first of the Castle. For, says he, the English always gave leave
to Fish, reserving that Honor to themselves, but slothfully resigning the
Profit to others. But, all this while, he quotes no Authority neither, nor
directs us to any Original Record, where we might consult the plain Truth of
the Case. Perhaps what he Historically calls, Asking Leave, was but giving
notice of their Arrival, and acquainting the Governor who they were, and what
their Business was upon the Coasts, lest, under the disguise of Fishermen,
Pirates and Enemies might privily hide themselves. And probably, he, by his
Civilities to the Fishermen, might make some Perquisits and Profits to his
Place, by permitting them, as occasion required, to dry their Nets ashore, to
fetch. Victual or fresh Water from Land, to fish within the Havens and Bays,
where commonly the best fed Fish are taken. But it is not likely, that the
Governor of Scarborow had so indefinite a Power, as to enable him to give
leave, upon bare Asking, without any further Condition or Consideration, to all
Foreigners, to fish at pleasure, within the Royalties of the Crown. However
it is too manifest, That no Prince nor State did ever pay to the Crown of
England any yearly Sum of Money, or other valuable Consideration, for the
Liberty of their Subjects Fishing upon the Seas of England; for had such Sum
been paid, it would have passed into the Account of the Exchequer, as a Branch
of the Royal Revenue, and there remain upon Record.

As for the Case of my Lord of Northumberland, in the Year 1636, that is
extraordinary, and will not pass for a President. The Dutch Busses were then
required by the English Admiral to take Licenses from him for Fishing in the
Northern Seas, and to pay moderate Rates for the obtaining those Licenses,
which they did, to redeem themselves from the forcible Molestations of a
well-appointed Fleet. So that this was the Compulsory Act of private Persons,
not the Voluntary Act of the States General, who were so far from consenting to
what was done, that they made Remonstrances and Complaints of this Proceeding
by their Ambassadors here in England.

And as it appears not by the Records of the Exchequer, That any Recompense was
given by Foreigners for Liberty of Fishing within our Seas, so neither does it
appear by any the public Treaties, That the Subjects of any Foreign Prince
should ask leave for so doing, by Stipulation and Contract, though they were
sure to have it without paying any thing, only, by the bare asking, to keep in
memory a perpetual Acknowledgment of a beneficiary Grant derived from the Crown
of England, as Supreme Lord of the Fee. On the contrary, the Treaties caution
for a Liberty of Fishing, absque licentia, without any Leave or License first
to be asked. And yet England has asked leave, and covenanted so to do, of a
foreign Crown. I would not have mentioned this, had it been a Secret, but it is
a thing public and in Print. By Treaty made and concluded in the Year 1490,
betwixt Henry the Seventh of England and John the Second King of Denmark, which
Treaty was afterward renewed betwixt our Henry the Eighth and their Christiern
the Second, Anno 1523. it was mutually covenanted, That the Liegemen, Merchants
and Fishermen of England, should Fish and Traffic upon the Northern Sea,
betwixt Norwey and Iseland, V. Cambd. Annal ad An. 16^0.
but under a Proviso of first asking leave, and renewing their Licenses from
seven Years to seven Years, de Sept^unio in Septennium, from the Kings of
Denmark and N^rwey and their Successors; they are the words of the Treaties.
But as Navigation enlarged, and England grew more op^lent in Trade, and posent
at Sea, all this is gone into utter disuse and discontinuance; and the Kings of
England may with better Right prohibit the Subjects of Denm^k from passing the
English Sea or Channel, without special License first obtained, than the Kings
of Denmark can, the Subjects of England from passing the Northern Sea betwixt
D^^^ark and Iseland.

There is a Record, (...)
which Mr. Seldom quotes out of a Parliament Role of King Richard the Second,
is very remarkable. It Is a Grant in Parliament of an Imposition, according to
certain Rates and Proportions, upon all Vessels Passing or Fishing within the
Admiralty of the North, viz. Upon the Sea Northwards from the Mouth of the
Thames. The Rates were as follow,

1. To take of every Ship, going and coming upon that Sea, Six Pence a Tun for
the Voyage.

2. To take of every Vessel Fishing for Herring, Six Pence a Tun by the Week.

3. To take of Vessels Fishing for other Fish, Six Pence a Tun for every Three
Weeks.

4. Of Ships laden at Newcastle with Coals, Six Pence a Tun for every Three
Months.

5. To take, of all other Ships passing the Sea within the said Admiralty,
laden in Prussia, Norwey, Sconen, or elsewhere in those parts, Six Pence a Last
for the Voyage.

Some Collect and Infer from hence, (I confess, I cannot) That King Richard, by
Assent in Parliament, did impose these Rates, not only upon Subjects, but
Foreigners, for Trading and Fishing within the North-East Sea, as part of the
Territorial Property of the Crown. Were it so, it would be a matter of mighty
weight and moment. But it is questionable, whether those Words of Universality,
Chescun Nief and chescun Vesseau (for the Role is wrote in Nerman French) every
Ship and every Vessel, ought not to be restrained to English Vessels only, and
not extended to those of Foreigners. And if extended to Foreigners, since the
Grant is said to be made, per l' Advis des M^rchands de Londres and des autres
M^rchands verse la North, it is worthy the considering, whether those words,
Other Merchants toward the North, are not in like manner to be extended to
Foreigners as well as Natives, that is to say, to Hanseaticks, and all other
Merchants, whether English or others, dwelling or trading toward the North;
who having often occasion to pass and repass the Northern Sea, at that time
infested with Rovers, advised the said Grant, which Word implies a Request or
Desire, somewhat more than a bare Consent. And what was this Impost for, which
they advised might be laid upon all their Ships and Vessels? The Role tells us
expressly, That it was pur la guard and tuition du Mier, etc. for the guard and
Security of the Sea and of the Coasts of the Admiralty of the North, with two
Ships, two Barges and two Ballengers, armed and arrayed for War. And it is most
probable, That not the King himself, but private Persons, Commissioned from
him, undertook, at their own Expense, to Equip and Arm the said Vessels, for
the Benefit of the Merchants, and Security of their Commerce, and by this rated
Impost to be reimbursed their Charge, and rewarded for their Service. This may
be collected from the first Article in the Role, where there is an Exception of
Ships laden with Merchandises in Flanders, bound for London, and laden with
Wool and Skins at London, or elsewhere within the Admiralty of the North, to be
unladen at Calais, of which Ships the Six Pence per Tun aforesaid was not to be
required. But then it follows, Les qu^ux Niefs les G^rdeins de la di^e Mer ne
serent tenus de les Conduire sans estre alloue^, The Guardians of the said Sea
were not obliged to give Convoy to those Ships, without an Allowance in
Consideration thereof.

So that upon the whole matter, here is nothing that relates to the Dominion of
the Sea; for the Imposition upon the Ships and Merchandises was not Jure
Cor^^e, in Right of the Crown, for passing over the Districts or Fishing within
the Royalty of it, but Ratione Oneris, in Consideration of a Charge, which some
persons sustained; and that by Contract, to preserve and defend the Freedom and
Security of Navigation and Commerce. And it was very just and reasonable, That
what was undertaken for a common Good and Benefit, should be supported and
defrayed by a common Charge and Contribution. The Role does not say, That the
Impost was granted to the King, as an additional Revenue to his Crown, but it
was for the Guarders of the Sea, to reimburse their Expense, and recompense
their Service. And the Case is parallel with this: Suppose the Hamburgers and
other Hanseaties trading to the Streights, who have very small or no Convoy of
their own, and apprehensive of the Courses of the Rovers of Africa, the Turks
and Moors, should contract with the King of France, or others Commissioned from
him, to supply them with Convoy from the Mouth of the Streights, till they are
arrived at the respective Ports whither they are bound, and in Consideration
thereof to give so much a Tun upon every Ship so Convoyed. This would have no
relation to any Sovereignty in the Crown of France in and over the
Mediterranean Sea, but would be a particular Contract only, a Quid pro Quo,
something to be done, and something to be received in Consideration of so doing.

There want not Examples in History of those, who have exacted Tribute upon all
passing certain Seas adjacent to their Territories, and yet not as proprietary
Lords of those Seas neither, but only as Protectors and Defenders of the
Navigation thereof. Plin. l. 19. and lib. 6. cap. 22.
Thus the Romans imposed a Tax upon all Ships sailing in the Erythraean or Red
Sea, toward the Maintenance of a Maritim Force, for the repression of
Piratical Excursions. Demosth. in Leptin.
And the Athenians did the same in the Hellespont. Thus the Duties in the
Sound, payable to the Kings of Denmark, began at first, not on account of any
Sovereignty over that Sea, but because those Kings were at the Charge of
maintaining continual Fires upon the Col and Annot, and sloating Tuns or Buoys
upon the Sands, as a Direction to Merchants in that dangerous Entrance into the
Baltic: For which, was anciently paid them at Cronenburg Castle, in the Sound,
no more, till new ^^^actions crept in, then a Rose-noble for an empty Ship, and
if laden, a Rose-noble more for her Lading. Nor could any resuse Payment,
pretending, that he had an able Pilot, and needed not the Direction of the
King's Fires; for it is not reasonable, that the Contumacy of one or more
particular Persons, should frustrate or evacuate a public Benefit.

In the Seventh Year of King James, An. 1609, a Proclamation was published of
high Importance, inhibiting all persons, of what Nation or Quality soever, not
being natural-born Subjects, from fishing upon any the Coasts and Seas of Great
Britain and Ireland, and the Isles adjacent, without first obtaining Licenses
from the King, or his Commissioners, authorized in that behalf, and those
Licenses to be renewed yearly. This was the first that ever I could meet with
of this nature: Not but that particular Fishermen of Diep, Calais, Bruges, etc.
have sometimes, both before and since, taken Licenses here in England for their
fishing; but then they did it, either as an abundant Caution, or to gain an
indefinite Liberty of fishing every where, close upon the English Shores, and
within the Fryths, Bays, and Havens, without fear of molestation; and they did
it ex proprio motu, without the privity and knowledge of their Sovereigns; and
paid nothing for it to the Treasury of England, only gave Fees and Gratuities
to the Secretaries, and others, for dispatch of their Licenses. But here is a
Royal Edict, or Law, by way of premonition to all the Neighboring Princes and
States, together with their Subjects, to take Licenses of the King, or his
Commissioners, for fishing upon any the Coasts and Seas of Great Britain, the
number of their Ships and Vessels, together with their Tonnage, to be
specified, in order to a rateable Composition to be paid yearly into the
Chequer of England. And King Charles the First, in the 12th Year of his Reign,
An. 1636, published another Royal Proclamation to the same Tenor also. By
which Acts, those two Kings kept up the continual Claim of the Crown of
England, to a sole and appropriate Fishery in the British Seas, and
consequently to the Sovereignty and Dominion thereof; but neither of those
public Edicts obtained, from any of our Neighbors, their due and just Effect.
Thus stands the Case of the Fishery.

And thus I have gone over all the chief Branches of the Sovereignty, The
Reasonableness of a Limited Fishing.
and have faithfully related the Matter of Fact, and how the Practice is, and
has been, betwixt us and our Neighbors, in reference to them all; not so fully
indeed, and amply, as I might, but sufficiently to my purpose, who designed not
a Volume, but an Abstract. There is still one thing behind, concerning the
Fishery, which I shall mention, and so conclude. It Is by way of Temperament or
Relaxation, and yet without renouncing any thing; it is a medium betwixt
grasping at All, and holding Nothing; it is what would greatly accommodate
England, if it can be obtained, or if a proper Season presented, for offering
at it: I say, a Season, or fit Conjuncture. For what in Natural Philosophy,
amongst Chemists, is a just degree of heat, necessary to the Production of all
great and admirable Effects, that in Politics, amongst Statesmen, is a fit
Conjuncture. The Temperament or Expedient, which I mean, is briefly this: A
Limited Fishing; not a Licensed, but a Limited one, without License. This has
both a Foundation of solid Reason to support it, and is backed also with
Presidents and Authorities, sufficient to vindicate it from the Imputation of a
new Project. The Reasonableness of it may be thus shown. The Sovereignty of any
Sea, and the Right of the sole Fishing in it, are so intimately connexed, yea,
so coessential one to the other, that he who Controverts the one, will
infallibly Dispute and Opiniastre the other; but he who acknowledges one of
them, will by a necessary consequence yield both. And yet it is a thing
undoubted, and never brought into Question by any; but that every Prince, whose
Country adjoyns to the Sea, and whose Shores are indented with Bays, Creeks,
Havens, and Rivers, has some portion of the Sea belonging to him in property,
as an accession of the Land, or appendant to it, or rather incorporated with
it, like Veins and Arteries, integral Parts of the same Body.

The forementioned King James, V^d^sis Mar. Claus. l. 2. cap. 22.
in the second Year of his Reign, An. 1604, caused a Sea-Chart to be published,
describing all the Coasts round England, by straight Lines, drawn from one
Promontory or Foreland to another, and all that was intercepted and included
within those Lines, was called the King's Chambers, and Royal Ports. And in the
Proclamation published the same time, and which refers to the said Sea-Chart,
they are called, The Places of the King's Dominion and Jurisdiction; and all
Hostilities betwixt Foreigners in War one with another, but in Amity with
England, forbidden within those Precincts. Our Law also makes a considerable
difference betwixt Havens, Rivers, Creeks, and Bays, and the Altum Mare, or
High Sea, for the first are reckoned infra Corpus Comitatus, as the Law-Phrase
is, Parts and Members of the Counties of England; and all Pleas of Contract,
and other things done there, are triable by Verdict, and determinable at Common
Law. V. Co. Jurisd. of Courts, cap. 22.
But the Court of Admiralty holds Plea and Conusance of all things done upon
the High Sea, as being out of the Body of any County, and consequently, from
whence no Jury can be returned for Trial of Issues.

If there be no certain Standard in Nature, whereby to ascertain the precise
Boundaries of that peculiar Marine Territory, I am now speaking to, which
belongs to every Prince in Right of his Land; yet, by Treaty and Agreement,
they may easily be reduced to certainty. For, as to the Judgment and Opinion of
private Persons, we cannot fetch from thence any true measure; for though they
all agree unanimously, that there is something due of Right, yet they vary in
the Quantum, or How much. Bald. ad L. de rer. Dom.
Baldus reckons One hundred Miles at Sea, as the District of the adjacent Land.
Bodin affirms it for a received Law amongst Nations, That the Prince, Bed. de
Repub. l. 1. c. 10.
whose Country abuts upon the Sea, should have sixty Miles Jurisdiction from
the Shore, and that it was so adjudged in the Case of the Duke of Savoy.
Another Doctor will tell us, That so much of the Sea appertains to the Land, as
far as a Man can see from Shore in a fair day. But this will not serve our
turn: For if a Man may see from Dover to Calais, I suppose the like may be done
from Calais to Dover, and whose shall the Sea be betwixt? Therefore, the surest
way is, to prescribe the Limits of Fishing betwixt Neighboring Nations by
Contract, and not by the less certain measure of Territory. For if no Bounds be
fixed, how many Inconveniences, and what a licentious Extravagance, may such a
Liberty run into? Why may not the Dutch, as formerly they have done, dredge for
Oysters upon the Coasts of Essex, within the Fisheries of private persons, and
within Streams and Waters appertaining to particular Manors, by Grants from
the Crown? Why may they not fish within the mouth of the Thames? Or within our
Creeks, Havens, and Rivers, as far as Salt Water flows? Or to the first Bridge,
if they will please to stop there? Is it reasonable, that there should be no
distinction, as to fishing, betwixt Native and Alien? Why then do they
challenge to themselves those smaller Seas and Inlets within the Vly and Texel,
and all other Streams, which, breaking in at a straight Neck or Isthmus of
Land, form Peninsula's of Waters, and, in the nature of standing Lakes, are
enclosed within the Banks of those Low Countries? The States there farm out the
fishing of the South Sea or Zuyder, and other Streams, to their own People and
Subjects, under the Reservation of a Yearly Rent to be paid therefore, and
consequently exclude all others from it. I hint these things, only to show the
Reasonableness of a Limited Fishing, and as to the Authorities by which it is
strengthened; I shall touch upon them also.

It was anciently Covenanted betwixt the Crown of Scotland, and the
Netherlands, that they should not Fish within Fourscore Miles from the Scottish
Shoars. My Author is Welwood, a Scotch Lawyer, in a little Tract of his, which
I have read, De Dominio Maris, in the Third Chapter; His words are, Non possum
praeterire, quod ante Saeculum hoc post cruentissimam ex occasionibus Maritimis
discordiam inter Scotos Batavosque res in hunc modum comp^sita fuit, ut Batavi
imposterum abstinerent ab oris Scoticis ad Octuaginta saltem Milliaria. Here
the distance from the Shoars of Scotland, which Foreigners were to observe in
their Fishing, is set very large, no less than Fourscore Miles.

In the Second year of King James, Commissioners were appointed and authorized
under the Great Seals of England and Scotland, to Treat and Conclude an Union
betwixt the two Kingdoms. Spetis^^^d's Hist. of Scotland, p. 483.
And in the Articles for Regulating Trade betwixt them, it was amongst other
things, mutually agreed, That the Fishing within the Fryths and Bays of
Scotland, and in the Seas within Fourteen Miles distance from the Coasts of
that Realm, where neither English nor other Strangers have used to Fish, should
be reserved and appropriated to Scotchmen only. And so reciprocally on the part
of England, Scotchmen to abstain from Fishing within the like Distances off the
Coasts of England. But if English and Scots, who, though the two Kingdoms be
sui Juris and independent one upon another, are tied together in the same
Common Bond of Allegiance to one and the same Prince, be excluded from Fishing
within Fourteen Miles from each other Coasts, how much more reasonable is it,
that Aliens and Foreigners should be obliged to keep the like Distances?

King James finding, that his forementioned Proclamation in the Seventh year of
his Reign for a licensed Fishing, was not seconded by a suitable Compliance on
the part of the Neighboring Nations, did about Nine years after, by way of
Expedient propose a limited Fishing instead thereof. For thus I find it in a
Letter from Secretary Naunton to the Lord Carlton, English Ambassador at the
Hague, bearing Date January 21th, 1618. He acquaints him, how the King had, by
him the said Secretary, desired of the Commissioners of the States, then
residing at London, that they would write to their Superiors, to Publish a
Placart, Prohibiting any their Subjects to Fish within Fourteen Miles of His
Majesty's Coasts, that Year, or any time after, until Order be taken by
Commissioners authorized on both sides, for a final settling of the main
Business. And the said Ambassador was Commanded to make the like Instance and
Declaration to the States General in the Name of his Master.

I am apt to believe this Distance of Fourteen Miles was the rather pitched
upon, as the regulated Measure, which had been agreed upon betwixt the
Commissioners of both Kingdoms in the 2d. of the King, as I said before. I have
done with the Authorities; and for the better Elucidation of what I have said,
shall briefly sum it up into a fictitious Article supposed to be made betwixt
England and Holland.

TO Maintain a due Distinction betwixt Natives and Foreigners in Fishing upon
the Coasts of their respective Sovereigns; And to prevent the manifold
Inconveniences, which occasionally arise by a promiscuous and unlimited
Fishing; It Is mutually Covenanted, Concluded, and Agreed, That the People and
Subjects of the United Netherlands, shall henceforth abstain from Fishing
within any the Rivers, Fryths, Havens or Bays of Great Britain and Ireland, or
within the Distance of (...) Leagues from any Point of Land thereof, or of any
the Isles thereto belonging; under the Penalty and Forfeiture of all the Fish,
that shall be found Aboard any Vessel doing to the contrary, and of all the
Nets, Vtensils, and other Instruments of Fishing. The like Distances, and under
the same Penalties, to be kept and observed by the Subjects of His Majesty of
Great Britain and Ireland, from any of the Coasts belonging to the United
Netherlands. But beyond those Precincts and Limits, That the People and
Subjects on both Sides be at freedom to use and exercise Fishing, where they
please, without asking or taking Licenses or safe Conducts for so doing, and
without the let, hindrance or molestation one of another. Saving always the
Ancient Rights of the Crown of England, and that nothing herein contained be
interpreted or extended to any Diminution or Impeachment thereof, But that they
remain in the same Force and Virtue, as before this Agreement.

The Article is Penned indifferently on both Sides, and so much the better,
because the equality of it is an Argument of its Equity; yet I could instance
in several benefits, which would redound to England from such an Article, were
it passed into an Agreement, but they are not proper to be mentioned in this
place; and therefore I shall here conclude with this brief Apology, That what I
have written, is for the Justice and Honor of the Government, the Conservation
of the Public Peace, the Maintenance of an inviolable Amity with our Allies,
and is most humbly submitted to better informed Judgments.

ERRATA. Page 25. Line 3. read 1599.

FINIS.

