INQUIRIES Into the General Catalogue of Diseases
SHOWING The Errors and Contradictions of that Establishment.
With a new Scheme Representing more Truly, and Essentially; the various
Diseased State of Humane Nature.
By E. M. Med. D.
IN the last Sheet (Practice of Physic duly Regulated) having there showed,
the Safety and Great Prudence of the Professors, in the management of the
Ancient Practice; being guarded by the Physicians personal labor in, and
custody of Medicines: Thereby, not only securing the Art: from Invasion by
Aliens; and Patients, from Casualties; but also Enriching the Professors, with
such a stock of most requisite Knowledge in Pharmaceutic Preparations; as
enables them to design and provide the most hopeful curing Medicines, that Art
and Experience can acquire.

Also I there set forth the vanity and hazards: attending the genteel new Mode
of prescribing to the Shops; (a late Invention) this Practice appearing
ignorant and delinquent in many respects, as proved by nine distinct Arguments;
differently pointing at several great failings; and convicting the folly of
that unreasonable Innovation; which draws a long Tail of unavoidable Injuries,
the chiefest remora to the Progress and performance of this Art.

Having thus determined upon the two Modes of Practice, Ancient and Modern; and
also upon our tripple division of Medicines relating thereto; respecting
Latitude and Adaptation: I proceed forwards to the matter of Practice; and as
the basis thereof, I shall first Examine the Catalogue of Diseases, appearing
to me overgrown, and out of due form.

It Is worth remarking, from whence, or how this Register of Diseases did
increase so greatly; when as their number (much better and truer) might have
been cast up with fewer figures; and the Practice of Physic, more easy and
intelligible; for, the number of Diseases, unnecessarily multiplied, and falsely
denominated, must needs produce diversity of ill Methods, and great variety of
injurious Medicines; which renders this Art so perplexed and difficult, as
scarcely to be comprehended by Humane Understanding, and the attempts of
Healing so often frustraneous: For this great List of Diseases being hundreds,
must require a vast number of Medicines; thousands to answer the Practice
thereof, as you manage the Matter: For Indications being various and different
in every Sick Man's Case; therefore all of them (you say) requiring different
Medicines adapt to those cases by Appropriate new mixtures: thus the number of
Medicines are become numberless, and the Practice of Physic incomprehensible;
and no man is able to be Master of this Art (in your way) if he were to live a
1000 years, but must always be devising, ghessing ex tempore, and venturing at
uncertain unproved Medicines: thus practicing fortuitously, with doubt and
hazard all the days of his life.

The Number of Diseases must needs be unnecessarily and falsely multiplied; when
Symptoms, Causes and Products, bear the names of Diseases, which ought
otherwise to be distinguished by their proper names; then failure in curing may
reasonably be expected, when the Physician aims at the wrong mark, not rightly
discerning one from the other: But if Diseases were reduced to their true
number in Scheme; they would sooner be found out in Practice, and their Cures
more safely and frequently performed: But as they stand regimented with other
preternatural effects (erroneously supposed to be Diseases, and prosecuted as
such) Hereby Diseases truly denominated are much obscured, often overseen, and
something else aimed at; tyring the Patient with improper and frustraneous
means. To illustrate and prove these Assertions, I shall give you some eminent
Examples, in their due place.

After various Opinions, controverted by the Learned of this Faculty, in
determining upon Diseases; as to the Notion, Denomination, Number, and Division
of them: I find the result thereof, by the Majority and better Judgments of the
Galenists, to rest in this Establishment following; received and approved by
the Professors of this present time: The which I shall now lay before you; and
then make my Exceptions.

The General Catalogue of Diseases, is set forth and comprised under these
three Divisions, thus distinguished: Similar, Organical, and Common.

Morbus Similaris est morbus ex inconvenienti qualitatum contemporatione
resultans. Similar Diseases are such as arise from the inconvenient
contemporation or disproportion of qualities; First, Second, or Occult. The
first qualities, are four: Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry: either of these in Excess,
make a Disease Simple: and any two of these qualities exceeding, make a Disease
Compound: so that there are four Similar Simple; and four Similar Compound
Diseases. Both these, Simple and Compound, admit of another division: In
temperature with Matter, and without Matter: and each of these divisions, (cum
and sine materia;) make four Diseases more distinct from the former. There is
yet another subdivision; equal and unequal. Intemperies qualibet, sive simplex
fuerit, sive composita; materiamque conjunctam habuerit, sive non; duplex est:
aequalis vel inaequalis; the words of one of your best Authors. From these
Qualities were Temperaments denominated, and distinguished; as also Diseases
called Distempers. The second qualities being Objects of the five External
Senses, are these: Odours, Colors, Sounds, Sapors, Tactils; when
Preternatural, these also are Similar Diseases, and they are accounted many.
Occult qualities inconveniently mixed, make Similar Diseases likewise; called
also Morbi totius substantiae. These qualities when preternatural to make a
Disease; they will have them to be seated in the Similar parts of the Body,
(therefore called Similar Diseases) as Bone, Ligament, Tendon, Nerve, Vein,
Artery, etc. contradistinct to Organical Diseases, that affect Organical and
Dissimilar Parts: as Heart, Ventricle, Muscle, Eyes, Ears, Nose, etc. Here are
Similar Diseases set forth very speciously, amply and nicely: much pains
bestowed to little purpose; all this will come to nothing in the sequel of our
Discourse.

Now Gentlemen of this Robe; I must direct some of my discourse to you; who
know this to be a short and true account of the first division of the general
Triplicity: and before I go farther, I must remark upon what has been said,
showing the Incongruities, Errors, and Contradictions thereof. When I was a
Prescriber to the Shops, (many years ago) I was a zealous observer of this
Doctrine, because I knew no better, being led by Books: and probably I was
guilty of doing hurt thereby: but I did it through ignorance (as many do now
following that Road) which mitigates the guilt a tanto. But 30 years Practice
since, in another thinking and working way, and proving of Medicines; has
informed me better things.

I perceive now, and am well satisfied; that Writers too much follow the
general current of Opinions; who take them up, and set them down again for
truth, without a strict and serious perpension: and I doubt Practisers are
drawn into the like snare, by being too credulous of Authors; when the greatest
safety in Practice, does depend upon the security and certainty of Medicines of
their own design, Manufacture, Melioration, and Probation.

The design of this Art, being to find out and subdue Diseases; if they stand
not right in the general Catalogue, there to be found, and truly distinguished;
inquiries after them, and means intended against them will be disappointed.
Setting forth Diseases in their due Classes, is the Basis of Practice: if the
first general divisions be false; the subdivisions contained under them must
needs be wrong; and such Errors runs through, and perverts the whole Practice
of this Art: as will appear when we examine the Diseases of the several Regions
of the Body; and in them the Diseases of particular Parts: Nor is it barely an
Error of denomination; but a fundamental Error; making that a Disease which is
not; and the whole Prosecution Erroneous.

Morbus Similaris! there is no such thing in Nature; nor praeter naturam: This
first division therefore of the General Catalogue, containing Similar Difeases,
I must strike quite out: as not being capable to stand amongst the number of
Diseases, being not of that Tribe; but appertaining elsewhere, and otherwise
denominated more truly: and thus one third of Diseases have injuriously been
added. But to sentence the Judgments and Approbations of former Ages, and the
concurrence of the Learned of this present time, without sufficient Reasons and
good Proof, would incur a censure.

Res praeter naturam sunt tres: Morbus, morbi causa, and Symptoma. There are
three things, preternatural, most considerable and rightly to be distinguished;
else great Errors in Practice will arise from thence, viz. The Morbific Cause,
the Disease, and the Symptom. The Morbific Cause generates a Disease; the
Disease beg ets Symptoms. All Preternaturals are comprised under these three
Heads, or reduceable thereto: Then Qualities Preternatural, must fall into one
of these Classes; but to which of them they belong to is the question in hand.

If Qualities preternatural do affurge from Morbific Causes and Diseases, as
the Effects thereof; then Qualities cannot be Diseases: But Qualities
preternatural are so produced, ergo: the Major Proposition needs no Proof; the
Minor appears plainly thus. Qualities being Accidents, have no existence of
themselves separately; but are dependant upon Substantial Causes, both in their
Natural and Preternatural State: So that Qualities act not but by the virtue
and power of their Substances on which they depend, and issue from; Therefore
when they are unduely exalted preternaturally, they are instrumental,
subsequent, and attendant upon Diseases and Morbific Causes as the product
thereof.

Secondly, That which is but a Symptom of a Disease, is no Disease: But
Qualities preternatural are Symptoms; Ergo: the Minor Proposition I prove from
the definition of a Symptom. Symptoma est Accidens praeternaturam Morbum
sequens, velut umbra Corpus. In this definition are qualities preternatural
comprised (Cui convenit definitio, ei convenit definitum) as properly belonging
to the Tribe of Symptoms; and that they are so, I shall single out one of your
Principal Similar Diseases (Intemperies calida) a hot Distemper; and show you
that this Quality in excess is plainly a Symptom assurging from, and depending
upon a Substantial cause.

Natural Heat is a signal of humane Life; and quite cold is one sign of a dead
Body: So that Heat appears, and disappears, as the Life is present, or absent;
and showing the State thereof. If that be temperate, the vital Principle (which
is the Life) is placid and quiet; but when intemperate Heat appears, the vital
governing Principle, is disturbed in its economy, aestuates and grows hot, as
offended by some Morbous cause: So that Heat rises and falls, with the state
and condition of the vital Principle; and is a Symptom and effect thereof,
signally declaring. Intemperies calida, this hot Intemperature, is not; cannot
be called a Disease; but is the Symptom dependant upon, and the Effect of a
Disease, or Morbific Cause, irritating the vital Principle which is the
Fountain of Heat; for, so soon as the life is extinct, the Heat vanishes
totally.

It Is daily obvious to those who are conversant with the Sick, that most
Diseases have Preternatural Heat attending them; and this as a Symptom, giving
notice that the Governor (Spiritus impetum faciens) and the economy or
government is disordered and disturbed by some Morbous cause, requiring the
Physicians help: which heat, not to be regarded otherwise than as signal; but
the Morbific cause to be inquired after, and the Disease planted thereby; and
to them Medicines must level at: So that Heat and Cold, Moist, and Dry, these
Symptomatical Qualities are cured of course, when the Diseases are cured, on
which they depend: But if you begin with curing these qualities, abstractly
from their dependencies; you begin at the wrong end; and such ways of curing
are like to have no end; at least not by such your endeavors. If this be not
allowed for truth; the Doctrine of Symptoms is destroyed; which is rational and
useful in Practice; and the preternatural triplicity (Morbus, morbi causa, and
Symptoma) is made void and fictitious.

To spare farther arguments in this matter; if I prove qualities preternatural
to be Symptoms, by the same Authors that before made them Similar Diseases;
then I need no farther Proof but their own contradiction: and I find it so in
that part of Pathologia called Symptomatica; where Symptoms are generally
divided into these three parts. Actio laesa, excretorum and retentorum vitium,
and qualitates mutatae. In this third Branch of the Division, I find Qualities
preternatural, and in their due place: But why Authors that made them leading
the Van amongst Similar Diseases; should now make them bring up the Rear of
Symptoms; how comes this about? Qualities are not of that Protean nature, to
appear Diseases in one place, and Symptoms in another; that cannot be;
especially without respect to some particular and extraordinary case.

I wonder this false Doctrine of Similar Diseases, should pass through so many
Centuries of years; and through the Hands and Heads of so many Learned Writers
without a reform: and why the intemperature of Qualities should be so confined
to the Similar Parts only, to make Diseases there (and thereby denominated) and
not in Dissimilar Parts also, I know no reason, and they can give none: but on
the contrary I know, that such intemperate preternatural Qualities does spread
and affect Dissimilar Organical Parts also; both the first and second
Qualities; which latter are peculiar to the Organs of Sense.

You see plainly that Similar Diseases are improperly so denominated, and to be
expunged out of the number of Diseases: and thus the first division of the
Catalogue is set aside, as injuriously put forth; which mischiefs more
evidently will appear in Practice, when I come to treat of particular Diseases,
and Symptomatical affects. As for the Occult Qualities; (also accounted Similar
Diseases) if I knew where to find them; I should put them into their right
place: But since we know not what they are, nor where they are; let them pass
at this time, until you give me a better account of them.

I must remark from hence; that whereas this first Division of the Catalogue,
containing many supposed Diseases (which are but Symptoms) appearing more
frequently in Practice, than all the rest; we may reasonanbly conclude, that
erroneous and false prosecutions, have engrossed the Major part of the business
in this Art: And then, if contrary Methods, and improper adapted Medicines will
kill; How many Thousands do you think have been sent into the other World, by
such Proceedings? I Will leave the number to your thoughts; this Account is too
great for my Arithmetic: But when I come to examine the false Doctrine of
Fevers, and the Practice thereupon; you may better compute the total of the
Slain.

I am amazed to think, and sorry to declare; that the Art of curing should so
frequently be the occasion of Killing: But much of this arises from want of
true knowledge, in distinguishing Diseases from other preternaturals: for let
us look back and see what Practisers have been doing; I find they have been
very busy in curing of Symptoms, when they should endeavor the eradicating of
Diseases; they caught at the shadow, but could not see the Body: Symptoma
sequitur Morbum, ut umbra Corpus.

It Is commonly and well said; a Disease found out is half the cure: but if the
notion of a Disease in general be not truly stated, and rightly understood; we
cannot easily imagine that the knowledge of particular Diseases can be
attained, but by this necessary introduction: For if you mistake in the general
conception and notion of a Disease, you err fundamentally, and then cures will
be performed but accidentally: and that there is a failure in the general
notion; does appear from the definition of a Disease in general, by consent of
Authors thus defined. Morbus est affectus corporis viventis praeter naturam, a
quo functio laeditur primum. The general definition should give light into the
knowledge of particular Diseases; but this is a dark Lanthorn. I should be loath
to venture my life upon the mean knowledge contained in this definition.

Morbus est affectus] that is ignotum per aeque ignotum. The first part of this
definition, distinguishes not a Disease from a Symptom; for, Symptoma est
affectus corporis viventis praeter naturam: The latter part; a quo functio
laeditur primum; this distinguishes not the Disease from the morbific Cause:
for, causae morbificae, sunt res omnes aptae corpora nostra quomodo cunque
alterando immutare, and a salubri statu deturbare. Here is something of a
disease described (a posteriori) in it is effects; but we should have it (a
priori) in its causes. This definition setting forth and stating the notion,
and ratio formalis of a Disease in general; is the Standard whereby we are to
take our measures of all Diseases in particular: and this ought to be clear
from all ambiguities; to stand distinct and separate from all other
Preternaturals. Scire est per causas cognoscere: This definition ought to show
what a Disease is, in its essential causes (non per genus and differentiam)
efficient and material: but upon this neglect and oversight supposed Diseases
have been foisted into the general Catalogue; which ought not to stand there,
but belongs to another Tribe of Preternaturals.

The misapprehension of a Disease in the notion of it; must needs make a false
Catalogue; and a false Catalogue must necessarily beget male practice; your
definition of a Disease not being true (Consequenter) then your knowledge of a
Disease is not true also: the mischiefs from thence in the designs of curing
may easily be imagined. But to pull down and not to build up, is but half the
work incumbent upon me: it remains therefore I should set forth the nature of a
Disease, in terms more intelligible and useful in Practice.

A Disease in the true notion of it, is best known by comparing it with Health;
that being a deviation from this. Sanity or Health is a perfect state of the
invisible life, or vital governing Principle; acting in a visible organized
Body, and duly constituted to perform vital Actions: Econtra; Disease
(generatim) is the pravity, deviation or Defection of the vital Principle in it
self; or impedited by unfitness of the Body to act vital functions.

From hence you may take notice, that man being composed of two parts; the one
Active, governing by vital irradiating power: The other Passive, governed by
reception of that influx: So that hereby there are Diseases arising from the
imbecility, enormity and defection of the vital Agent; as also from the
fragility, decay and ineptitude of the Passive Body: And that some Diseases do
arise from the Spirit of Life (Spiritus impetum faciens) and others by the
frailty and indisposition of the Body. But Phisicians wrongfully have charged
all the declensions and Morbous alterations, upon bodily imbecility and decay (
witness the Catalogue of Diseases) they being unacquainted with, and not
discerning the Diseases of male administration; arising merely from the
instability, perturbation, defections and irregularities of the vital governing
Power: So that in the established Catalogue, I find many Diseases more than
should be; and some left out, that ought to be in.

Our learned men have taken great pains to search the Frame and fabric of
man's Body; to anatomise and view the visible Parts: but the governing ruling
power which moves all in this Machine; that has been slighted over, and
overlooked; as if not concerned in Bodily Diseases; when as this commonly bears
the chiefest part, in all Morbous alterations. Does any part suffer as
diseased, but the Spirit of Life is concerned? either as the first irregular
mover, or else is drawn into consent, and complies to the continuance and
fixing of the Disease, by enormity thereof. Quicquid in sanis edit actiones
sanas; id ipsum in Morbis edit actiones vitiatas.

Having noted the errors and defects of the old Catalogue of Diseases, and
cashered the first general division thereof; I shall now draw out a new Scheme;
and turn that general Triplicity (of Simliar, Organical, and Common) into a
duality. Comprising all under these two Heads. Diseases are either Spirital, or
Corporal. But by this general division, I do not mean such a perfect separation
in forming Diseases, as if the one did make a Disease so distinct from the
other, as not to participate, and be unconcerned in partnership: but to show
that one side is more eminently concerned to bear the Character of Disease, and
to have the Denomination; and where the stress of the Cure does chiefly lie,
and to be aimed at.

Spirital Diseases are distinguished by their causes, from whence they arise
and are procured, and such Causes are twofold: External and Internal. Spirital
Diseases that are raised or produced (ab extra) from outward Causes, are
commonly called Passions; as Anger, Grief, Fear, Melancholy, Despair, Love,
Jealousy, Madness, Ecstasy, etc. and these I consider, not in relation to
Divinity or Morality, but as aberrations and deviations from the rectitude and
steddiness of Government in Humane Bodies: And thus in a Natural Sense, these
Passions are evil, and are Diseases of the Vital governing Spirit; and produce
bad effects, and preternatural alterations proportionate, as these Passions are
in degree more or less turbulent, violent and durable: And that these you call
Passions, are Diseases, as truly and properly, as Corporal Diseases; I might
prove from their Causes preternatural, by their Diagnostic Signs declaring them
so; and by the Symptoms that attend and follow, as the Products thereof: but I
must not enlarge now upon them.

Spirital Diseases (ab intra) are occasioned by morbific Causes, generated
within the Body; and from hence the vital Spirit suffers, is put by and forced
out of its sedateness and regularity of Government; or else spontaneously makes
a defection and deviation in Government, by Natural debility and proneness to
swerve, from lapsed Nature; the Vital Principle (Spiritus impetum faciens) not
being so strong, vigorous, and stable, in some Persons, as in others; naturally
so from their Progenitors; or by their different (vitae genus) Education and
Manner of Living.

Spirital Diseases thus caused, are such as these: Debility, Ebriety,
Aestuation, Lassation, Perturbation, Syncope, Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Palsy, Rigor,
Sopor, Algor, Agues, Procellae spiritus impetum facientis; Pains (a causa
quacunque) complaints of the Vital Principle grieved; Hysteric Fits,
Hypochondriac Melancholy, etc.

But some may say; what has a Physician to do with Passions, since there is no
Physic to cure a diseased mind? I answer; there is advice to be given for
avoiding them; and the Physician ought to know if his Patient labors and
suffers under, or by them; and there is Physic against the Impressions and
Effects wrought from thence: For what causes soever, alienates the Vital
Principle from rectitude in Government, and makes an alteration in the Body; a
Physician ought to take cognizance of them, and his measures thereby, in the
design of Curing, especially if such Causes continue in being. The Vital Spirit
also labors and suffers under the like Passions, from Molesting, Irritating,
and Seducing morbific Causes, generated within the Body, as it does by external
provoking and procuring Causes; so that the Passions are much what the same,
and produce the same ill effects, be the Causes outward or inward. Hence we may
learn and know, what it is that acts the chiefest part, in these preternatural
morbous alterations; and what is to be aimed at, for reduction to a natural
good State, Vt sanitas consist it in vita integra, ita Morbus, in ipsamet vita
oblaesa. Helmont.

Corporal Diseases are such as result from preternatural undue Conformation and
Constitution of the visible Corporeal Parts. Such Diseases are either in
Magnitude, in Figure, in Number, in Situation, in Conjunction, or Disjunction,
in Discontinuity. And these being general Heads, admit of various Subdivisions,
which I must pass by at this time: The urgency and importance of the following
Postscript, forces me to cease prosecution at present, expecting opportunity
hereafter to proceed, and explain what now seems dubious, and difficult to
admit of.

The Vital Spirit being thus variously provoked and afflicted; begets or forms
various Diseases, from the diversity of Organs used, and Functions to be
performed thereby. We may hence learn, that Diseases in their multiplicity, and
variation by denomination, from Parts affected, and Functions impedited; do not
lie so wide asunder, and differing, as the world does imagine; since the chief
moving Principle, or obstructed in motion; is one and the same in all the
Faculties, but irritated to disorder, or impedited in Vital Government: Ab
unitate Animae, defluunt variae dotes ad organa singula.

I have showed you herein some part of the Learning in this Faculty, the World
has much confided in, and ventured their Lives with; which Learning I well
know, and can stand it; and do understand it so well, that I have declined much
of it, many years ago, as unserviceable in the true Methods of Curing. I have
not troubled my self about bare empty Notions impracticable and unprofitable,
but what are necessary and advantageous in Practice: that you may see the Life
in Rectitude, Vigor and Sedateness, as also in Declension, Enormity, and
Perturbation; that knowing how Diseases are formed, what contributes to their
Generation, Efficiently and Materially; what is Active and Passive in Morbous
Alterations; we may the better level at them, with more Security and Certainty.

I should now proceed, to give you a farther Prospect, and clearer light into
this Novel Doctrine, and resolve some Questions and Doubts therein: but at this
time I am prevented by the following Matter.

LONDON, Old Southampton Buildings, over against Gray's Inn, 1691.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Treatise of the Scurvey. Another, of Consumptions. Of the Venereal Lues,
Gonorrhoea's, etc. Of Pains, Inflammations, Tumors, Apostems, Ulcers, Cancers,
Gangrens and Mortifications Internal.

The Rise and Progress of Physic. Of Health, Vigor and long Life. The
Practice of Physic duly Regulated.

All writ by EVERARD MAYNWARINGE, M. D.

It Is a crime to be silent and conceal, when Information may contribute to
Public Safety: and the Rules of Prudence and Policy; give free admittance for
examining the validity of such Offers. Great Ministers of State, sometimes
borrow Light from Inferiors of all sorts; as the Nature of the Affair requires.

Army and Navy, the Bulwarks and Defense of these Kingdoms, are primely to be
provided for; but when I consider the fatality by Sickness, to be greater than
that of the Sword (to the shame of Physic and Physicians) I cannot but reflect
upon the methods and provision of Medicines; the meanness of that help; but not
so understood: the formality thereof looked great, and the Stores answerable in
Bulk and Weight; but not in Virtue: the performance proved small, and little
good came of it. How this comes about I might set forth; and the way to obviate
the like Calamity ensuing: but it is not advisable now; it is a fit time, when
the Question is put, by whom it belongs to inquire into this matter; then I
shall give the account; which will give light to Counsel, for taking other
measures in this weighty affair.

I question not the earnest Care, and Sincerity of those Superiors, in
appointing, and charging, the most exquisite performance of that great
Undertaking; nor the plenary allowance for carrying on that important Work: but
I may well doubt of the Praevision, Pharmaceutic Skill, and Expertness of those
subordinate; to whom more immediately the designing of Medicines was committed
in trust, as their proper business; to answer comprehensively and accurately,
all the requisite intentions and commodious ends (more than imagined) to
complete such a designment: for viewing the Catalogue of Medicines, and Drugs
for the last years Expedition; wherein I expected more than ordinary
contrivance, by the time spent in Consultation, and Preparation for that grand
Work: yet it answered not my expectation in the Prospect; nor others in Effect,
whose lives depended thereon: notwithstanding I must judge it was the greatest
effort they could make in this Undertaking (else they were highly culpable) and
I measure their ability by those utmost endeavors.

I thought the Learning and Experience of this Nation, had been summoned to
that great Consultation: And I believe it was so intended, appointed, and so
thought to be: But I find by the result; there was a mistake; that there was
some Learning, some Experience, and some necessary Observations left out; that
might have seasoned all the rest, and made that Convention of Learning, more
wholesome and more healing; something they have not met with in their Books. I
believe they were sound enough at Heart; and the Hands employed good; but the
failure was in the Head.

Let it not be said therefore; that such a Medical provision for Army or Fleet;
was the best that the Learning of England could afford: I should be very sorry,
if there were not an English Physician to outdo all that; to design above it. I
had a curiosity to see; (the Mountains bring forth) what was the product of
those Learned Heads, and Expert Hands; so much Money, and so much Time spent,
about that great Work; and it was as I expected.

Fleet, Army and Hospitals; are a great charge to the Kingdom; and that which
indispensably is necessary: but if the ends for which that Money is appointed
and spent, be not answered and satisfied; much of that charge is lost; and what
is greater than that; the lives of many. The formality of Physic I hate,
separate from the reality. Fleet and Army, if they venture their lives to save
ours; we should do what can be done to save theirs: and I know there are better
Means and Methods, than hitherto practiced for their preservation: I were
guilty if I should keep silence.

It Is easy to determine what Physic is sent abroad; when I see what is used
at home: the Guinea Recipe's are but mean contrivances; what do you think then
are the Soldiers, and the Sailers Medicines? We account it an advantage to have
so many lives of the Enemy: and you may account it an equivalent, to save so
many lives of our own Men: for whether in Battle, or in Sickness; it is much
what the same; a dead Man, is a lost Man. How many brave English Spirits, have
languished and perished? not for want of Medicines, but for want of true
Medicine, and due administration. Hinc illae lachrimae -- To dye by the fury
and force of the Enemy, was what they voluntarily durst do; but to dye by the
improvidence and folly of their friends, was what they little expected. The
Marks and Mementoes of Medical insufficiency, are more and greater, than the
Wounds and Scars of the Enemy: Truth must not be shamefaced; nor Knowledge
outdar'd, by any pedantic supposed Learning, imposed upon the credulous
Popularity. How might I now upbraid the World? since I see, it is more easy,
and gainful to deceive, than truly to serve such a Master

Ten thousand pounds for Medicinal provision by Sea and Land; is a good Sum for
a years service: but to lose ten thousand Men twice told in that year by
Sickness not in Battle, is too great a loss. What is past cannot be recalled;
but for time to come, the like Calamity may be prevented. If Ears and Doors be
shut; yet Eyes and Mouths are open. I cannot wait from day to day, and spend my
time for opportunity to declare farther in this matter: I must turn this Paper
a drift, to take its chance: perhaps it may meet with some distinguishing kind
Hand (weighing the import) to give it conduct where it should arrive.

FINIS.

