Monarchia Microcosmi: THE Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period OF VITAL GOVERNMENT
IN MAN.

For a farther Discovery of Diseases, incident to Human Nature.

By Everard Maynwaringe, M. D.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's. 1692.

Monarchia Microcosmi. THE Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period of Vital Government
in MAN.
POlitical Governments, their Rise, Laws, Innovations and Revolutions,
Subjected to the Will of Men; are not my business to treat of: But the Economy
or Government established in Man; by the Laws of Nature; not liable to human
Subversion; is the great Concern of every Physician; as the Basis of his
Knowledge, and the Subject of Medical Art.

For a right understanding of this Government; we must divide Man into his two
principal Parts; the Governing, and the Governed. The governing power; is
spiritual, vital, and invisible, termed the Soul. The governed, is corporal,
organic, and instrumental, called the Body. Deficiency or failure in either of
these two principal Parts, makes a Diseased and infirm State of Man: And that
you may the better know where to charge the Defections that arise from human
Nature; these two grand Parts are duly to be inquired into: First (Separatim)
in their single and different Natures; Secondly (Conjunctim) as they are yoaked
in Partnership, which compose and denominate Man.

The Magisterial and Governing Power, being the superior and more noble Part,
ruling the Machine or Body of Man; is first to be considered: And now we must
look back into the Book of Creation, to trace the Origin of this Governing
Principle; which I find, began in Adam; whose Soul took its Rise immediately
from the Omnipotent Creator: The Manner how; the Matter what, or no matter; the
integrity and purity of that created vital Principle, are Theologick Questions,
and out of my Province, which I pass over.

But in the beginning of Time; after the Creation was finished, and the course
of Nature Established; when all things sprung by Generation, and owned a
traductive Being from the Womb of Nature; and time appointed, to prefix, and
measure out their Durations: Then I say, and now; the propagation and
production of Souls, are a Philosophical and Physical Subject; so necessary to
be inquired, and well known by a Physician; that without such Knowledge, he is
absurdly deficient, in the grand Fundamental of Human Nature; whereon mainly
rests the whole Fabric of Physic, as hereafter will appear.

The Universe being completed, and furnished with its Complement of Animals;
Creation then ceased: But for the Continuation of all these wonderful
Productions, until the Exit and Period of Time; there was a Power delegated to
Nature, by the Conditor Mundi, and Commissions given to all the Species of
Creatures for Propagation.

Crescite and multiplicamini;
Increase and multiply.
Now what is there here below, that springs not out of Nature, (immediate) as
the Product of that fertile omniferous Creature ((...)) pregnant with
innumerable kinds of Animals? (Sic tulit ordinatio divina) Since this is the
Result of divine Will, and command of Omnipotency, expressly: Nor is it
derogating from human rational Soul, to be derived by Generation, from the
first Parents; but most reasonable, as most evident; bearing always the
Characters of the Protoplast, in his lapsed nature. But the general current and
crowd of Opinions, runs very strongly against the procreation of Souls:
therefore I must not pass it by slightly, but make a farther Proof of this
grand Point.

That the first Man Adam, had his Soul by Creation; I think no Body doubts; But
his Posterity, (if we be his Posterity;) must derive from him a Rational Soul;
(omnis forma est sui multiplicativa) or else we cannot be truly said to be
descended from him; and that we are descended from his lapsed Nature, and do
participate thereof; our frailties and mortality, are Arguments convincing.

What can we claim from Adam, if the Soul be not propagated and derived from
him? The visible corporeal matter, of which human Bodies are composed, is such,
and from such matter, as we eat and drink daily. Ex iis nutrimur, ex quibus
constamus. What is Genital Spermatick Matter? but an Elaborated Succus,
extracted daily from our Food; which receiving several alterations in passing
through the Body; at last arriving at the Genetal Parts; there take a
Spermatick digestion and transmutation; and this is the (materia ex qua)
visible and only matter, of which all generated Human Bodieies are made. Now
what relation has this primigenious matter to Adam? Truly none; for this we
must own to have from the Flesh of Beasts, Fish, Fowl, and all sorts of Food.
And how is the Embryo in the Womb, nourished and improved? but with alimentary
juice, of the same extraction: And after the Birth; Augmentation is procured,
by daily additions of Aliment, to the state and full growth; which Bulk is
maintained afterward by supplies of the same kind. It Is plain and undeniable
then; that the Corporal. Substance of our Bodies, are wholly derived from, and
made up of the matter of our Food: Then it necessarily follows; we can no way
claim Kindred to Adam; but only by deriving the better, and more noble part
from him, which is the Rational Soul; by which the whole Race of Mankind, may
truly be called Adamites.

You say (homo generat hominem) Man begets Man; and so say I, the whole Man:
But you understand and mean thereby; that Man begets only a Sensitive Soul; and
and the Rational to be infused by Creation: What then is the necessary and
unavoidable Consequence? Homo non generat hominem, solummodo brutam: Man begets
a Brute only. If your Theology and Philosophy do thus interfere and clash, how
will you reconcile them?

But now you tell me of a sensitive and brutal Soul in Man; gives me occasion
to inquire, into the Doctrine, (trium Animarum) of three Souls in Man;
Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational; confirmed by a general Vogue; as also by
the Decree of renowned Philosophers and Physicians, ancient and modern. True it
is; there are three distinct and different Souls in rerum natura; but I think
not so, in humana natura; since one is sufficient to perform all Functions in
Human Nature. But to offer any Argument against such a Sanction; you will say
is a daring Attempt: Notwithstanding, I must inquire into the Verity of this
Judgment; for as much as, the Doctrine is Fundamental, and the Dependants
thereupon, are of great Consequence in Physic; since the Designs of Curing
cannot be well grounded, without a true knowledge of the Governing Power; from
whence principally and most frequently, Diseases do arise and depend.

If there be three Souls in Man, we are industriously to inquire their
Properties, Powers, and Jurisdictions; that upon failure in this or that Part
of the Body; any Function or Office not duly executed, we may then know upon
which Governing Principle to charge the Deficiency, and in what Organ the
Impediment lies. Every Soul must have its Jurisdiction, and where any failure
is found, we may then know under what Governing Power, that Function and Part
of the Body is Subjected: whether a Failure in Vegetation, Sensation, or
Intellection: In all which, rightly distinguishing the Deficiency of the Vital
Powers; from the decays of the Instrumental Parts. And here by the way; you may
take notice, how Diseases do arise; either by the declension or swerving of the
Vital Governing Principle; or from the impediments and incapacity of the
instrumental Organs for Action: And by this Knowledge or Prospect, the Designs
of Curing are radically instituted and performed; otherwise, all Endeavors for
reducing of Diseases, are but casual Adventures, and groaping in the dark.

The three denominating, distinguishing, and regent Principles, or Powers;
Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational, make the three grand generical Divisions
of Animate Creatures; which last, being the highest step in the Scale of Nature
(comprising Virtualiter the two inferior) denominates and constitutes Man;
whereby he is elevated to the degree of Perfection and Dignity, above all
Creatures in the lower World. But if there be a Vegetant, and Sensient Soul in
Man, as distinct and separate Principles; then I quaere what sort of Government
this is in the Microcosm, under three principal Rulers; Whether each of them
exercises Domination independently, and has their Territories so distinct;
not accountable to the other, and are as three Monarchs? or whether the two
inferior in Dignity, do act subordinately by Deputation as Vice Roys or
Provincials? Ruling Powers, are real Powers; else you give Titles and Names to
things without a Being. Or thirdly; Whether these Ruling Powers are Coordinate
and Coequal, and do make a State Government? But I shall not prosecute upon
these Questions; they having no foundation in Human Nature, which I shall
endeavor to prove. And now I am forced to search the Records of Sacred Writ,
for we can have no account but from thence; else I am unwilling to be an
Interpreter of Scripture, save only for my own satisfaction; wherein I had
rather follow, than lead.

If there be three Souls in Man; they were all created in Adam; or some of them
procreated afterward in his Posterity. Not created in him; for the Greek Text
says; (...). The Latin thus; Et factus est homo in Animam Viventem: The English
Translation; And Man became a living Soul: All run in the singular number, a
Soul: And to add any other to his Nature of an inferior rank, a sensitive,
brutal, and mortal Soul; is to change that Integrity, Purity, and Immortality,
in which he was created.

Nor do we read (in Sacred Writ) of any addition to his created Nature, after
the Fall; but of diminution, depravation, and loss of what he had; but no new
Principle superadded, no sensitive brutal Soul.

Formavit Dominus Deus hominem de limo terrae, and inspiravit in faciem ejus
spiraculum vitae, -- Genesis cap. 2. v. 7. The stupendous Machin of Man's Body,
with all its variety of Organs, was first framed before the Breath of Life was
infused; which Breath, was the last act to constitute and complete the first
Man: but as for the manner how; expressed by Breathing in; or the matter what;
or no matter; is not my business to inquire after; only the Simplicity, Unity,
and Singularity, of that created Vital Principle, is here sought for, and set
forth: And that all vital Operations in the Body, might be performed by one
active vital Principle; a wonderful Agent, inspired, by the omnipotent worker
of wonders; is as intelligible, probable, and more rational; than that they
should proceed from 3 or 2 distinct Principles of Vitality: Therefore a trinity
or duality of Souls, in created Human Nature, is not reconcilable with Reason;
since we do not find it so expressed, in the History of the Creation, nor any
necessity to allow it. Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate. Tell me
what this sensitive or brutal Soul is; when, and how introduced into Human
Body; created or generated; Et eris mihi magnus Apollo.

But Philosophers and Physicians cannot agree, what this Anima sensitiva is.
Dr. Willis will have the Animal Spirits to be the sensitive Soul. Profecto
(quicquid alii senserint) Spiritus Animales revera existere, ipsiusque Animae
corporeae hypostasin constituere; -- in Praefat. Pathol. cerebri: But although
this Author, lays such a stress upon Antmal Spirits, as to make them such a
considerable Principle; yet some doubt, whether there be Animal Spirits
distinct from the Vital; others flatly deny them: Men very eminent in this
Faculty.

The learned Dr. Charlton so dubitats upon Animal Spirits, as to my thinking,
insinuates a Negation. (6th Praelection of Human Nature:) The famous Harvey (de
generat. Animal. exercit. 70.) plainly denis their existence. Also, Sir George
Ent Antidiatrib. p. 141.) likewise Scaliger, ( exercit. 339. Sect. 2.) And most
of the Peripateticks, are of the same opinion. Notwithstanding upon this
imaginary Foundation of Animal Spirits, that Doctor raises his Anima
Sensitiva; and his Doctrine of Convulsive Motions, and Epileptick Insults, is
planted thereupon. Dr. Willis, de Morbis Convulsivis. But admitting the
existence of Animal Spirits, yet they being but mere Instruments; how is it
rational they should constitute an independent Principle, and be the Author of
such great Actions, as are attributed to a sensitive Soul.

From the first Man created; we will step over to his Posterity generated; and
see if we can find a plurality of Souls, in Human procreated Nature. Adam begat
a Son in his own likeness, after his image, and called his name Seth, Genesis 5.
v. 3. not a likeness in Shape and Figure only; but a likeness in his specific
Human Nature, compounded of Soul and Body; a Man. And if Seth was Adam's
likeness; he must have but one Soul, as his Father had no more: else the
dissimilitude between Father and Son, would be great and monstrous; and
contrary to the general Rule: Quicquid est in effectu, praeexistit in causa.

Now Seth being the firstborn; in him began the course of Human Nature by
Propagation; answering the general Institution by Divine Will, declared to all
Animate Creatures; Increase and replenish the Earth: Man not excepted in this
general Command: An Argument sufficient to silence all reasoning, and farther
disquisition.

But the adverse Party, holding the daily creation of Souls; and yet to derive
the Generations after Adam, from his humane nature; have framed this Invention;
that the Seed of Parents contains a Plastic or formative Power, as an
Instrument endowed with Virtue from the Generants, to form and organize the
Foetus in the Womb; which Body being completed; the Rational Soul is then
infused by Creation after this manner: Creatur infundendo; creando infunditur.
Thus supposing the traductive generating Power of Parents is maintained in
Semine, by an Instrument of the generating Principle, to perform in its stead,
and absence. All which in my reason is very absurd; Tum daretur accidens sine
substantia and subjecto.

True it is, there is a ((...)) forming Power, or formative Faculty in Semine;
but this always presupposes a formative Principle, from whence this Virtue
does issue, and is dependent upon; never acting in its absence. (Actio fieri
non potest ab instrumentis, sine opifice) This Plastic Power being inseparable
from the Plastic Principle, Anima: Can you separate Light from the Sun, or Heat
from Fire; or Humidity from Water? no more can you imagine, (rationally and
really) a Plastic emaning Virtue, without a Plastic Principle. Accidens non
migrat, de subjecto in subjectum. For, Semen inanimatum est in faecundum
omnino. Can any natural Agent contrive and fabricate a Mansion so apposite and
fit in all its Organs, as the Soul it self; whereby to exert all its various
Endowments, and to perform all its different Offices; carrying the Idea of it
self, for the production of its specific Likeness; which no vicarious
Instrument or Substitute, can perform in his absence. Look through the
Universe, among all the Species of Creatures, and you will not find any
formative and productive Power, delegated to perform the Office of the
specific generating Principle. And why in the formation of Man, the informing
Soul, should be denied and debarred the formative Power acting presentially; is
to my thinking, no way consonant with Reason, as being against the Rules of
Philosophy; which do not run counter to Theology; both being rightly
understood; as proceeding from Divine will and appointment.

Anima ex traduce, is not my single Opinion; but some eminent Divines and
Philosophers have asserted the same; and therefore I am not a leader, but a
follower herein: only set forth something differently to give light to some
Truths of great moment in Physic. But continued Creation is obstinately
defended, to support the immortality of Human Soul, and therefore they cannot
admit of its Generation by mortal Man: And according to the Axiom in
Philosophy; Quod est generabile est etiam corruptibile; which seems to infringe
and thwart an Article of our Faith: Yet rightly understood, it does not; but
consonant with the Analogy of Faith, and Tenor of Divine Oracles; that This
corruptible (Body) shall put on incorruption: and This mortal (Soul) shall put
on immortality: not in this Life, but in that which is to come; when mortal
Life is ended. ( Anima quae peccaverit, ipsa morietur. So that notwithstanding,
Mortality follows Generation; Resurrection and future Immortality, are as
certain as sacred Writ has made them; and no alteration, or injury offered to
our Creed. Much more there is to be said; but I forbear, as unwilling to be an
interpreter of Scripture: But the Subject of our Discourse, unavoidably engaged
me herein: I only offer so much, to show the innocence of this Opinion; no way
favoring of Heresy, or Fanaticism: Salva fide Christiana.

Anima vivicans, the Vital Principle, and forma informans: This is the Spiritus
Architectonicus; here is this vis plastica; the formative Power emerging from
the formative Principle: This is the (...), calidum innatum; (much talked of;
but not understood) the Fountain of all Vital Heat: This is Anima Vegetativa;
the Author of all acts of Vegetation in Human Bodies: And this is the Anima
Sensitiva; the Spring of Sensation, and loco motion. All these Faculties
emaning from one and the same Principle of Life; and are not several and
different Principles in themselves. Vnicus tantum est vitae moderator, nec
plures. Human Soul having a triple Specific Entelechia, comprised in one
Entity, as the Epitome of all Animat Creatures; and governs the little World of
Man, by a Monarchical Power: Ruling the upper, middle, and lower Regions
thereof, with their Confines: And to admit of any other Animat Principle, as
sharing in this Government; were a diminution of the Royalty, and a lessning of
the Prerogative.

I must here infert the words of a learned Author, pertinent to the purpose;
which wraps up our matter into one bundle: Anima dum Vivificat corpus, Anima
est; dum Vult, Anionus; dum Scit Men's; dum Recolit, Memoria; dum rectum
Judicat, Ratio; dum spirat, Spiritus; dum aliquid Sentit, Sensus est. Isidorus.
So that all these different Appellations, which have amused the World; do
signify and distinguish various Operations only; proceeding from one, and the
same Principle, performing diverse Offices belonging to Human Nature: Anima
quippe officia cuncta partibus distribuit, eaque per vitam moderatur.

But some may say; cui bono? What signifies all this to Physician and Patient,
whose Concern is Bodily Curing; that of Souls belongs to Divines only. To which
I answer; you are under a great mistake: Cadaver non capax est Morborum: The
Body abstractly considered, is not capable of Diseases; but Corpus vivens; nor
is the Body capable of Curing, but by the Power of the Vital Principle, Animae:
for as Helmont says; Natura est Morborum Medicatrix: By Nature is understood
the Life, or Principle of Life, which you call the Soul. What is a Disease, but
a disorder or impediment in Vital Government; And this arises from Enormity or
Defection of the Vital Principle; or decay and alteration of the corporeal
instrumental Parts: and in this Case also, the Life is much concerned; for, if
any Organ be out of order, it must be reduced by the Vital Principle, Anima:
That Plastic Power which made all the Organic Parts; that only must mend them,
with the help of Medicines promoting and assisting.

All the Designs of Curing, are in assisting the Governing Principle, to
restore this or that Part defective; and in this Work, all Medicines operate
first upon the Life. No Chirurgical Cure is rightly designed; no Application
made to any Part; but it must operate upon the Life in that Part; else no
healing, no strengthening, no discussing, etc. And if the Means be not proper
and agreeable; Nature which is the Life, refusing such Helps, and not complying
therewith; then no good Effect, can be expected from such Endeavors: Invita
Natura, irrita sunt omnia. The Body is but passive, inferior, and instrumental;
The Vital Principle, is Dominus fac totum; commanding and governing this Body,
subjected to its Will and Power; who formed all the Parts thereof; supports and
maintains them in their Order and Offices; that moves all, and acts all ad
nutum; at least ad posse: The Carcass is but the Cortex or Shell; the Life is
the Kernel. This is the Healing Principle, that cures and restores the Body, by
the help of good Medicines. (Deus creavit medicinam; qui nihil frustra fecit.)
A true knowledge of the Vital Principle in its governing power; with that of
Medicines; are the two prime Acquirements to be sought for by a Physician; to
enable him in the Office of Curing.

It Is this Vital Principle, that distinguishes Bodies, by various
Temperaments; Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry: And distributeth to each Part, its
proper and requisite Temperature in their Formation; maintaining that due Tone
afterward; until changed by Age, vita genus, and Accidents: And this is
performed, first upon the primigenious Spermatick Matter in the Womb;
afterward by transmuting and modefying. Alimentary Supplies, in the whole
course of Life: And as this Vital Principle (Senescit.) declines in Vigor and
Vitallity; the temper of the whole, and every particular Part do change also.

The Temperament of the Body, changes eminently; as the Vital Principle alters
in the Three remarkable Stadiums of Human Life: (...); Childhood, Manhood, and
old Age; the Vigor of Vitality, ascending and descending; which does not fall
out so by Accident; but by the constant course of Human Nature: And how can
this proceed? but from the mutability of the Principle of Life.

Temperaments do not result (Ex mutua action and passione contrariarum
qualitatum elementorum.) from Qualities of Elementary Matter; (according to
common Doctrine) but from the various state and condition of the Vital
Principle, which predominates over Corporal Matter, and Elementary Mixtures:
(subjugated under the Specific Form.) That Principle which formed all the
Organs; giving to each their due Temperament (ad justitium) having Semenal
Matter under its Plastic Power, to dispose of and modefy at will: Now also, and
through the race of Man's Life, rules and supports the same; maintains such
Temperaments, as suitable to its own designs and service in Vital Actions. The
Temperaments of visible Organic Parts, shows the temper and distemper of the
invisible Life. And here by the way, you may take notice; that Febrile
intemperate Heat, is but the Aestuation of the Vital Principle, offended and
disturbed by Morbific Causes; and not otherwise, as is set forth by Authors:
But of this elsewhere more at large. Ignota Febris, etc.

But I have met with an Antithesis which stands in my way; opposing this
Doctrine of Temperaments diametrically: That the Crasis of the Soul, follows
the Temperament of the Body. (Cujus contrarium verum est) which is as much as
to fay; The Cart draws the Horse. I might take Exceptions at the word Crasis;
but 'ile pass that by; and only examine the Import of the Sentence. This
Assertion dethrones and devests the Governing Principle, of its Regality and
Ruling. Power: And to say; the passive Body presides over, leads, or alters the
active Spirit; is contradictio in terminis: directly opposite to the Nature and
Conditions of Agent and Patient. Omne Agens est actu; Patiens vero potestate,
Ax.

True it is; the Body, or Parts thereof, do not always yield obedience, to the
Commands and Power of the Governing Vital Principle; as sometimes by reason of
their incapacity, and instrumental unfitness, to perform their Offices: But
they do not influence, or have any enticing, biassing, or coercive Power in
their natural State; to dispose or change the Vital Agent, to whom they are
Vassals; and readily obey; save only their noncompliance in Duty with its
ruling Energy, by their preternatural incapacity. As when the Organs are
vitiated, unserviceable and unfit for Action; the Life grieves, pines, and is
sick more or less, as the Parts are in Office principal or inferior; and the
Ability of the Vital Principle more or less capable to retrieve the Injury: And
this may be observed in all Diseases; how the Strength, Briskness, Complexion
or Color, Temperament or Habit of Body, etc. are changed more or less, as the
Corporal Impediments are greater or less; But all these Alterations proceeding
from male Affectedness, Condolence and Anguish of the Vital Principle, provoked
thereto, and interrupted in regular Government, by such particular Impediments;
and not otherwise seduced, by following the Temperament of the Body; which is
mutable at the pleasure, and displeasure of the Supreme Ruling Power; as being
subjected under that Domination and Soveraignity.

Having showed the Origin of Human Life by Generation; the Progress by
Instability and Variation: I come now to inquire into the Causes of its
Duration and Termination. And here you may take notice, that every Species of
Animat Creatures have their several Durations of Life, allotted for their
natural Course, longer or shorter, according to, and from the different
specific distinguishing Principles of their Life. Quod dat esse; dat breve,
vel longam esse: The measure and extent of Human Life, is taken from the
Essence of the Principle of Life, in the specific Nature: But the Duration of
Individuals, and their Term of Life; is not so certain and adequate with the
Specific; as being liable to various Accidents, and preternatural Causes of
Abreviation: Notwithstanding, by Nature's appointment; Duration is reposited in
the Vital Principle.

But there is an Opinion, concerning Humidum radicale; a Principle grounded in
the Learned, both Philosophers and Physicians; from whom it is become popular,
and generally received: That there is a Radical oleaginous moisture in human
Bodies; and this feeds the Life, as Oil maintains Fire in the Lamp: which Oil
being consumed, the Flame extinguisheth: Semblably the Life expires, when
Radical moisture is wasted. This Analogy thus intended; does not carry any
Proportion or Resemblance, and will not hold true: Either in comparing the
Efficients or Agents; nor in their Matter upon which they work; nor their
Manner of Action; nor in their Ends, to which they tend: But in all these they
differ much, and are not analogous. The two Agents, Fire and Human Vital
Principle; are very dissimilar in their Natures: The one a Depraedator, that
acts by consuming; the other a Reparator, that works by repairing and
restoring. Secondly, they differ in the Matter upon which they operate: The
first requiring oleaginous, fluid, and a peculiar sulphurous Matter: the
other, Terrene, Aqueous, Saline, or sulphurous mixed Substances, humid or dry
of all sorts, such as our Food is, of various kinds, Meat and Drink. Thirdly,
They differ and are dissimilar in their manner of Action; the one violently
preying upon, and devouring the (Pabulum) oily matter: The other operating upon
its Object, deliberately and gently by Retexture; transmuting and transmitting;
separating (utile ab in utili) and distributing, to various Parts, for
necessary and particular Uses. Fourthly, They differ in their Ends; the one
terminates in wasting and consuming: The other in replenishing, repairing and
restoring Human Bodies; for noble ends and purposes; Health, Strength, and
prolongation of Life. Thus we see; the Similitude (so intended) answers not in
any Respect; does not illustrate the Life of Man; but misrepresents, darkens
it, is frustraneous and injurious; and no such thing as, flamma Biolychnii; nor
the Resemblance.

This learned Fiction, if I may so call it; (against the Judgment of so many
Sages) and I can give it no better Title; because it has no Foundation, nor
Being in Human Nature. I grant there is a Humidum primigenium; an original
Moisture in that Seminal Matter, of which the Embryo is delineated and formed;
but this Succus is soon changed, exhausted and spent; being transformed by the
Architectonic Spirit into different kinds of Spermatick Parts; Bones,
Cartilages, Ligaments, etc. the which, and afterward all sanguineous Parts
also; are maintained by adventitious Supplies from Nutriment, not by a Radical
Stock. And this advenient nutritious Juice daily extracted from Food, is
transmuted and fitted continually for every Part; by the Occonomic Governing
Principle, which was the Formative Principle: So that there is no need of
Radical Moisture; the Stomach is the Conduit from whence all Parts, adjacent
and remote, are irrigated and supplied with convenient Moisture: And since
there is no Radical antique Primigeneous Moisture; so there is no want thereof;
Nature having provided a fresh Spring, more refreshing and enlivening, than any
stale Liquor of ancient standing. The Vital Principle, so long as it continues
vigorous in the Ventricle; will not let the Body want a Supplement of proper
and laudable Moisture, from this Fountain that feeds all the Vital Streams.

Thus you may plainly see; the Notion of humidum radicale, to be a false
Conception; in that sense, and for such use, as the world is made to believe;
that the Life extinguisheth by the exhaustion of Radical Moisture.

Multa alia problemata and paradoxa ((...)) ex praecessis tractanda, liquido
surgunt: sed quo plura hic afferam; eo etiam plura afferenda se offerent;
quapropter, (impresentiarum) alio calamum divertere lubet.

Now to reduce all our Discourse, and make it serviceable in Practice; and to
let you know these are not empty Notions and unprofitable; but of great moment
in Physic: Here you may learn Apollo's Oracular Admonition; (...); to know the
more noble and better Part of Man.

It Is this Vital Luminary (Sol Microcesmi) that vivifies the Earthen lump of
Human Body; and makes it a living Automaton: And by whose irradiating influence
through the Regions and Parts of this Orb; all the various Motions, Mutations
and Cessations (efficienter aut privative) do mostly depend.

This Plastic Principle inspired (derivative) from that Divine Inspiration into
the Protoplast; draws the first Lineaments of Human Fabric; forms and
finisheth all the interior Parts thereof; for Magnitude, Figure, Position,
Texture, Connection, and Communication; most requisite to exert and display, all
the various Faculties of Human Nature.

But here by the way, I must take notice; that some melancholy Phansies (and to
correspond with the Opinion of Souls daily created Origin) have rhetorically,
but unsutably; termed the Body a Prison; a toyling Workhouse; and the Grave of
the Soul: But I must think otherwise; not a Prison, but a Palace; excelling
Royal Fabrics ( Galen's (...)) for Magnificence, Use, Convenience, and
Delight, most accommodate, and connatural with the Principle of Life. Not an
Ergastulum; but a Chariot of Pleasure. Not Sepulcrum, but a living Monument;
the Mirror of the Terrestrial Globe; e luto sinctum: And therefore what
happens to discompose this August Pavilion to interrupt the Complacency, and
Felicity therein; is accidental and preternatural; admonishing us the
mutability of Human State. And if this opifice be fo admirable; the opifex much
more: propter quod unumquodque est tale; illud est magis tale.

This dextrous Limner, draws not the Effigies and Resemblance; but makes the
living Man: Delineates, Shapes, and Sizeth all Bodies with peculiar imparity of
Dimensions; and joins therewith by Coextension: Puts a distinguishing Figure
upon every Face: Prepares and tempers Elemental Matter into various
Complexions: Presents Man in all the different Aspects; Smiling, Lowering, Bold,
Drooping, Fierce, Affable, etc.

This Ruling Principle acts all the unruly Passions; of Fear, Love, Hatred,
Anger, etc. And by its Ubiquitary Vital Presence in Human. Body; does determine
upon all sensible Objects, with Complacence, or Displacence. Also diversifies
individual Natures: by peculiar Proprieties, Temperaments, Inclinations,
Aversations, etc.

This Rational Principle, keeps the Stores of Intellectual Endowments; and puts
a distinguishing Character upon Man, from all his fellow Creatures: And also
makes a particular distinction amongst Men; by a different proportion and
measure, of Ingeny, Subtility, Sagacity, Judgment, and Memory.

It Is this Regent Principle that governs all the Members of the Body; moves,
directs, supports, enables them in their Duties; and keeps them in the due
order of their subordinate Offices: this is the internal, efficient Agent, and
supreme Moderator of all Human Actions; Natural, Vital, and Animal, so
distinguished.

This Microcosmical Luminary orient; makes the blooming Spring of Youth: from
thence arriving to the Meridian Height; the Strength and State of Manhood: And
from thence declining; the withering Autumn; and then the unpleasant Winter of
old Age.

This Vital Luminary serene in Government; makes the cheerful State of Health:
This clouded and impedited, in its Regent Astral Influx, by discomposure and
defection of the Members in this Government; then arises the sad gloomy State
of Sickness.

From hence the Apoplectic Eclipses. The Paralitic desertions of Vital Influx.
Convulsive Struglings of the Life. Hysteric Suffocating Damps. Febrile
Scorchings of the incensed Vital Spirit. Humoral Fermenting Floods; and
Consumptive Ebbs. Hydropic Inundations. Stormy Aguish Concussions of the
Microcosme. The Flatulent Rumblings, and Cavernous Belchings. Exhausting
Transpirations. The impetuous Fluxes, of the expelling Vital Agent, etc.
Thus acting all the Comic and Tragic Vicissitudes in Human Nature: And what
not, acted or committed in the little World of Man; that this Vital Principle,
is not the principal Actor therein; or chiefest Sufferer thereby? Causes
material and occasianal, provoking the Life to enormous Motions; or impediting
Vital Influence; are various, and too many here be enumerated.

As this Vital Principle acts the Chiefest Part in all Diseafes: So likewise it
performs principally and efficiently, the Cures of all Diseases; and otherwise
the Body cannot be Cured. Natura corroborata est Morborum meditacrix. Helmont.

As this is the Curing Principle; this also is the Principle first to be Cured:
Comforted and Refreshed in the times of weakness; alleviated, when oppressed;
allayed and eased from Pains: reduced out of Frets and Passions; caused by
Organic Impediments disordering the Oeconony; or from external Injuries: And
they that design Curing otherwise, aim not aright; but prosecute by false
steps, and their Endeavors Frustraneous.

It Is this Vital Principle, that must first be strengthened; and the Body can
receive no Strength, but from thence. In this Vital Power, lies the Strength of
Human Nature; and in this same, lies the Infirmities and weakness of Nature:
This sets Man up; and this lets him fall down.

It Is this Principle, that receives the first Refreshment and Assistance by
Food; then communicates, and fits it for the Body: After the same manner it
does with Physic. This Healing Principle, distinguishes and closes amicably
with proper good Medicines; directs and transmits their Virtue to this or that
Diseased Part, wanting Relief. All the designs of Curing centers here; in
disposing and assisting of the Life, to repair decaying and defective Organs.

This Vital Principle the Organ maker, and Organist; must be the Organ mender;
and otherwise not to be done: Medicines are the Instruments to work with,
managed by the Life; which if proper, innocuous, powerful, and duly exhibited,
they give Aid, and produce good Effects: But if otherwise; they prove
ineffectual at best; more often injurious; sometimes mortal. And how
efficacious good Medicines are to be designed, suting with, and establishing
the Economy; I have elsewhere declared: (The Practice of Physic duly
Regulated) to promote such Operations, as Nature (the Life) is defective in,
and wants assistance to perform: which Intentions being prosecuted with well
tried Medicines completely adapted thereto; do answer every Indication, in all
Diseases, and Individual Cases.

But as for ex tempore prescribed Recipe's, pro re nata; excogitated new
untried Compositions, committed to Shop preparation; I can never be reconciled
to that Mode of Practice, and Novel Invention; until I shall loose half my
Reason, and some of my Senses: And how the World came to be trapan'd out of
their Judgments; deeming it a learned and safe Contrivance; is to me a great
wonder; there being neither true Learning, nor Safety therein to Patients or
Professors; as evidently appears in that Sheet named (not yet answered Ne Gry
Quidem) and bids defiance to the Vanity of Prescribing; which absurd departure
from the laudable and learned Industry of the Ancients; has filled the World
with thousands of frivolous, and mean Medicines; and has raised a multiplying
Generation of Quacks, to Practice therewith: which caused a learned Author to
complain: Sed hoc saltem silentio non transmittendum existimamus; pessime illos
de bono publico meritos, qui primi hanc sum arduam arma medica conficiendi
disciplinam, a medicina avulserunt; and servis suis unice Commiserunt: mera
ignavia, and male Suada Animi elatione, etc. so he goes on sharply Reproving.
Chr. Langius. Curios. Medic. p. 146.

I challenge any learned Man, and all the Prescribers in this Mode; to make out
this Practice Rational, Learned, Safe, and Hopeful: On the contrary part, (if
not yet fully performed) I will farther prove this Prescribing Invention, an
ignorant Formality; a blind hazardous Adventure; a Remora to the Progress and
Advancement of Physic; wherein the Lives of Patients, and Reputation of
Physicians are unsafe; but Ease and Gain smothers all the Injuries at present;
the Professors not seeing, or not regarding the impending Ruin.

And here I might Remark at large; How easy it is to impose upon, and blind
the credulous World; with the erroneous Seductions, and biassed Interests, of
learned Men: But of this ((...)) I have said enough; perhaps too much; Veritas
odium parit.

From the preceding Discourse; you may take notice, and not think it strange
Doctrine; that I have made the general division of Diseases, into Spirital and
Corporal (in the Tract following) much different from the common received
Learning; of Similar, Organical, and Common; which for good Reasons rejected;
as you may see hereafter; (Inquiries into the general Catalogue of Diseases)
where by Spirital Diseases, not meaning Diseases of the Animal or Vital
Spirits; but of the Vital Principle, or Governing Spirit; which is the chief
Agent, and Sufferer in all Sickness. And as I shall have time to prosecute
thereupon; you will have a much different account of particular Diseases, than
as yet set forth.

The Body (Animae domicilium) is a mere passive Principle; as void of sense or
motion, as a House, abstractly considered from the Life, or vital internal
Agent: and although Corporal Organic Knowledge by Anatomy, is good and
requisite; yet a true account of the Economy; the Government and Governing
Principle; the manner of dispensing its Vital Power toward the subjected
Members; is more sublime; and necessary to be traced, so far as the light of
Reason, by true Observations will conduct us. But after all the continued
Anatomic Disquisitions, the Vital Economy has been but deficiently and
obscurely set forth; as the Notion of Diseases in general; and the account of
Diseases in particular, by their Causes erroneously assigned, do evidence in
many, or most of them; which mistakes have happened from a deficient Knowledge
in the Vital Governing Power.

This Vital Principle, being the principal Actor in all the Scenes of Human
Life; is first and principally to be sought and traced; since the Dependants
from thence are so many and great in Human Nature; both in the State of Health,
as also in Sickness; in regular Government, and also in preternatural Motions.

This is the chief and main Pillar that supports Humanity.

From whose Stability and Instability; Firmness and Infirmity; Integrity, and
warping from Rectitude, mostly depends the various Vicissitudes and Alterations
in Vital Government; whose Vigor and Durability, maintains the strength and
duration of Man's Body in the whole Course of Life.

This is the Restoring and Healing Principle of Bodily decays and corrupt
wasting: And this is the Principle to be restored and roborated, in weakness
and a declining State.

This is the maintaining Principle of Health; and this is the sensible
suffering Principle in Sickness, and a dying state; from hence the sighs, the
groans, and pangs: upon Vitality, hangs Mortality; the Principle of Life, the
Object and Aim of Death.

This is the Vital Principle that receives Assistance, Refreshment and
Roboration (primario) from Food and Physic; from glad Tidings, and good
Company; from wholesome Air, and pleasant Prospects; from Exercise and Rest;
Sleep and Waking: And from the the same Principle (Secundario and
participative) Bodily Refection, Convalescence, and Thriving is communicated.

Herein lies the Knowledge of Human Nature; this Governing Principle disposing,
moving and enabling all Bodily Members, to perform in all the Actions
appertaining to Human Life: whatever is acted or done in the Body, or by the
Body outward; is performed (efficienter) by the Virtue and Power of this Vital
Principle: It is then very rational to accuse, and charge this Sovereign Agent
with deficiency, irregularity and inability sometimes; being liable to
alterations and decay, from lapsed, mortal Nature. But the common Doctrine and
generally received Learning, runs upon another Bias; and ascribes all the
Defects and Diseases of Human Nature to the passive governed Principle; and
makes all the Morbous Alterations and Decays, to arise from Humoral and Organic
Impediments: which Doctrine must needs be unsound; if our preceding Discourse
be true; and profound Helmont, much out of the way, where he asserts; in puncto
vita subjectum inhaesionis morborum.

From the preceding Doctrine there arises these following Aphorisms. Theorical
and Practical, as the result of this Work.

That the vital Principle is the Spring from whence flows all the various
Actions of Man's Life, both internal and external; which Fountain contains the
knowledge of Humane Nature.

It much behooves every Physician, to have a true perception of this ruling
comprehensive Principle: To know its Rise, Race, and Period: The Architectonick
power, and Monarchical Domination in the Microcosm.

To distinguish the regular, placid and serene state of this governing
Principle; from the enormous, irregular, and preternatural motions.

To discern the vigorous assentions, and drooping declensions of this vital
power, in the course of Humane Life.

To understand the Central Residence, and Royal Seat of Dispencing Government.

To know the irradiatating vital Influence; and Ecliptic Interpositions.

To discern the Signals of Individual Stability, Instability, and Durability of
this Regal Power; by vital Actions, and distinguishing corporal Fabric.

All Diseases tend to the Alteration and Subversion of Vital Government: And
all the designs of Curing, are rightly directed and guided by the method and
course of this Government: For reducing the Ruling Power, when Enormous; in
assisting when defective or disabled; also where, and how impedited by disorder
of the subjected Members.

Diseases take their Rise more often from a defection and instability of the
Vital Governing Principle; than from the decays of the Body, by Age or
Accidents.

Organic and Humoral Impediments, provoke the Vital Principle to Passion and
Enormity; thereby raising the Storms and Tempests of acute and sharp Diseases,
disordering the whole economy.

All scorching Inflammations, and preternatural febrile Heats; arise from the
fiery Passions, and aestuating Perturbation of the Vital Principle.

All stony Concretions in Human Bodies, proceed from a depraved petrefying
disposition of the Vital Transmuting Power, not from any Humoral Elementary
Matter.

Impressions of Cold are first made upon the Life; afterward producing Bodily
Effects: Hoarfness, Phlegm, Coughing, Rheums, stiffness of Limbs, etc. these are
signals of the Life assaulted and male-affected.

Pains in any part of the Body, Heart Sickness, Fainting, Nauseating and
Loathing of Food; are the sufferings and complaints of the Vital Principle
oppressed and grieved.

All Contusions and Wounds made in the Body, are assaults and breakings in upon
the Life: which the Vital Principle (efficienter) must repair and restore; by
the help and assistance of Art, if remediable.

Corporal Excrescences, Wens, Warts, Pustuls, Tumors, etc. are the effects of
depraved Transmutations of Alimentary succus in one, or more of the digestive
Offices; the Vital Principle unstable and swerving from rectitude; or unable to
withstand and overcome the Injuries offered, by an evil Dietetick Regimen; and
laboring under such ill circumstances of some of the six Non-naturals; so
termed by Physicians.

All Corporal Decays and Weakness, arising by Age or common due wearing and
usage; are the deficiency and gradual declensions of the Vital Principle,
abating and withering in Vigor and Vitality; tending to, and portending the
period of Vital Government.

FINIS.
Page 27. read (...).


