Sanctification by Faith VINDICATED: IN A DISCOURSE ON THE Seventh Chapter of
the Epistle OF St. PAUL to the ROMANS, Compared with the Sixth and Eighth
Chapters of the same Epistle.

Written by ZACHARY MAIN, M.A.

To which is prefixed a Preface by Mr. Rob. Burscough.

(...). S. Chrysostom de Apostolo Paulo. Peccata Populi Ennumer at Persona sua,
Quod and Apostolum in Epistola ad Romanos facere legimus. S. Hieronymus in
Daniel. (...). Acts 15.9. Licensed, Sept. 11th, 1693.

LONDON: Printed by W. O. for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange. MDCXCIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Christians of the first Ages were such Ornaments of their Profession, and
such Examples of Piety and Zeal, of Humility and Patience, and all other
Virtues, that the World beheld them with astonishment. Many of their Enemies
concluded, that so heavenly a Conversation proceeded from a Principle that is
more than Human, and were thereby induced to embrace the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But it must be acknowledged, that there were many that assumed
the Name of Christians, who, by their various Heresies and detestable
Practices, caused the Way of Truth to be blasphemed. Yet Vid. Iren. advers.
Haeres, lib. 1. cap. 1. page 26, 28. and cap. 9. page 73. Clem. Alex. Paedag.
lib. 1. cap. 6. page 107. Tertul. de Praescript. Haeret. cap. 41. p. 217.
did they style themselves, The elected Seed, and boasted of an extraordinary
Perfection. They pretended, that they understood more than Paul or Peter or any
other Mortal; and that they were no more polluted with the Sins they committed
than Gold was diminished in its Substance or corrupted with Dirt.

I know not whether any amongst us be arrived to such Arrogance and Folly: But
it is too evident, and it is sad to consider, that as there is no small number
of debauched and profligate Wretches, even in these Times of so much Light, who
set their Mouths against Heaven, and, like the profane Antiochus, speak
mavelous things against the God of Gods: So there are many others, that
profess to know God, but in Works deny him, and to have a special interest in
the favor of Christ, but hate to be reformed by him. They flatter themselves
into a belief, that they have made an exchange with him of their Sins, which
nevertheless they resolve not to part with for his Righteousness, which they
are willing he should keep to himself. They are not concerned about it, nor are
they solicitous to know, whether the advantageous Bargain, with which they are
so much affected, have any other ground but in their own imagination: Because a
just Enquiry into this Matter would frustrate their great Design, which is, to
live wickedly and as comfortably as they can, and to reconcile their Vices with
the hopes of Salvation.

This disposes them to advance or defend such Doctrines as are most suitable to
their corrupt Inclinations: and from hence it is, that instead of bringing
their Actions to the Rule, they warp the Rule into a compliance with their
Actions: Or, as St. Basil speaks (...). Basil. in Hex. Homil. 2. p. 17.
of those that adulterate the Truth, They do not accommodate their Mind to the
Scripture, but pervert the Scripture to their own Will. And thus they seek to
cover their shame under the shadow of a Divine Authority, as Seneca tells us --
Vitiis dediti luxuriam suam in Philosophiae sinu abscondunt. Senec. de Vit.
Beat. c. 12.
, the Epicureans hid their Luxury in the Bosom of Philosophy.

Amongst all the parts of the Holy Scripture that have been thus perverted, I
think none have suffered more than St. Paul's Epistles; in which, as another
Apostle assures us, there are some things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
And such are the things which Men of corrupt minds are wont to set upon the
Rack (...). Hesych.
that they may extort a Confession from them in favor of Immorality. The plain
and necessary Rules and Precepts of Religion they neglect; and from obscure
Passages they wrest those Conclusions that are only fit to support a false
Peace in the way to destruction.

For this purpose, they serve themselves of the seventh Chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans, and they seem to me to argue more plausibly from thence, in
vindication of Impiety, than from any other part of the Apostle's Writings:
Which may show, what care we ought to take to inform ourselves of his meaning,
that we may avoid their Mistakes, of which both the Causes and Effects are very
deplorable; and be able to defend Christianity from their Assaults and the
Reproaches that they would cast upon it. You see, says St. Chrysostom (...).
Christ. t. 3. p. 100. Ed. Savil.
speaking of this place, that unless with due fear or circumspection we
consider his Words, and have an eye to his Scope, there will follow infinite
Absurdities. And of this Admonition, I think there is sufficient reason.

Indeed, if St. Paul speaks of himself in the state of Sanctification, where he
says, that he is Carnal and sold under Sin, with other things of the like
nature, a Man may then at once be engaged in the Service of God and Mammon, and
be in Communion both with Christ and Belial. He may reconcile things that are
most inconsistent, and be at the same time a Child of Light and of Darkness. He
need but say, The Evil I do, I allow not; and therefore it is no more I that do
it, but Sin that dwells in me; and this would justify the greatest
Enormities. To know his Master's Will, and not to do it; to confess it to be
holy, just and good, and to be under convictions from it, and yet to neglect
it, would secure him from future stripes for his disobedience to it. And to
bite the Chain that holds him fast, and to fr^^ at the wretched Slavery he
endures, would be an Argument of a Glorious Liberty. To violate the Laws of God
with reluctance and against the dictates of his own Conscience, would be a mark
of Sanctification: and of this Consolation he could never be deprived, unless
he lost all sense of good and evil, and, being past feeling, rushed furiously
into Sin, without any consideration or apprehension of Divine Vengeance.

If these be just and natural Inferences from the Interpretation which I have
mentioned, as I think they are, this is cause enough to reject it. For they
that are skilled in the Art of Reasoning lay this down as a Maxim Docent nos
Dialectici, si ea quae rem aliquam sequantur falsa sint, falsam illam ipsam
esse quam sequantur. Cicer. de Fin. Bon. and Mal. lib. 4. sect. 19.
and it is generally received as an evident Truth, That if the things are false
which follow from certain Premises, these Premises are also false. And our
blessed Savior tells us Luke 6.44.
That the Tree is known by its own Fruit: A Rule that is very applicable to our
present Case, and may show, that it cannot be a good Exposition that brings
forth Consequences which are evil and pernicious; but ought to be condemned, as
contrary to the Purity of God, the Design of Christ, the Work of Grace and the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

Nevertheless, I deny not, that some learned and good Men have been of opinion,
that St. Paul here discourses of himself after conversion. But then they tell
us, that the Evil, he complains of, was only the motion of concupiscence, to
which he did not consent, much less did he reduce it to practice. Or else, they
say, he meant it not of great or wilful Sins, but only of smaller Offenses or
Infirmities, which in this Life are incident to the Regenerate. And it is true,
that (if they have a right notion of Infirmities) by softning the
Interpretation in this manner, they have avoided the Consequences on which I
have already reflected. But through unwariness or inadvertency, they have done
violence to the words of the Apostle by that Exposition. For from his words it
is plain, that whosoever was here spoken of, his Condition was very miserable.
Not only an inclination to Sin, but actual and known Sin, had taken possession
of him and dwelt in him, which intimates to us, that it was become habitual,
and governed Vid. Praestant. vi^. Epist. p. 399. Ed. Amstel. 1684.
him as his Lord. It had effectually wrought in him, and prevailing against
him, had brought him into Captivity, Verse. 23. It had put him under its own
Power and Law, and so deeply engaged him in Slavery, that he could do no more
than wish for Freedom. To will was present with him, but how to perform that
which was good he knew not, Verse. 18. A thing that cannot well be imagined of
that excellent Person who invited the Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.1.
to be Followers of him as he was of Christ; and who professed Phil. 4.13.
that he was able to do all things through Christ that strengthened him.

I think we had much better be ignorant of his Meaning, than deprave it by an
Interpretation that is injurious to Him, and destructive of Holiness: But
neither is that necessary, as will appear in the following Discourse. By the
way, it may be noted in general, that there are several Difficulties in this
Apostle's Writings that we should not find insuperable, if, with a due
application of mind, we would enquire into their Nature and Original. For
example, It may be considered, that some of these Difficulties proceed from his
Language; for however that be Greek, and therefore may be thought, on that
account, not less intelligible than any other part of the New Testament: Yet
sometimes he uses words in such a way or signification as differs from the
construction which they commonly receive in the Books of other Writers. And, if
we may believe a great Judge in such things, he retains something in his style
of the genius of a Cilician, and of an Hebrew of Hebrews, and Scholar of
Gamaliel Nec miremur in Apostelo, si utatur ejus linguae consuetudine in qua
natus est and nu^ritus. Hieron. Ep. ad Algasiam, qu. 10. vid. pl. ibid.
And this may suggest to us at least thus much, that, to gain an acquaintance
with his Phrase, on which our understanding of his sense depends, we ought with
great care to peruse his Epistles and compare them together: Which may be of
more use to us, for that purpose, than a rigorous examination of his
Expressions by the modes of speaking that have obtained amongst other Authors
that are purely Greek

Other Difficulties proceed from hence, that, as St. Irenaeus long since
observed Hyperba^is frequenter utitur Apostolus. ^ren. advers. Hae^es, l. 3. c.
7. p. 248.
the Apostle has many Hyperbata. His great depth of Thought, his abundance of
Matter and vehemence in expressing it, his vigor and vivacity of Spirit, and
the quickness of his Conceptions, occasioned sometimes large Digressions, and
sometimes sudden and unusual Transitions. And if we pass by these things
without notice or regard, we shall often be left in the dark, and take that to
be a continued Discourse about the same Subject, which relates to different
Matters.

But what is most to my purpose, is, that the Apostle sometimes transfers
things by a Figure 1 Cor. ^.6.
from their proper Subjects. For instance, as he tells us 2 Cor. ^2.2.
he knew a man in the body that was caught up to the third heaven, and seems to
speak of another what was meant of himself; so he sometimes seems to speak of
himself what is meant of another, particularly where he says Romans 3.7.
If the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory, why yet
am I also judged as a sinner? In which words he represents either a Jew or
Heathen making that exception; imitating herein the example of the Prophets, of
whom Clemens Alexandrinus observes -- (...). Clem. A^x. Strom. l. 3. p. 442.
, that amongst the Revelations, which they received from God, they relate the
popular Talk against them, and propose it by way of Question. And I may add,
that unless we distinguish what they thus propose from the Answers which they
give it, instead of penetrating into their sense we shall confound it. Yet must
we not expect to meet with Objections and Solutions in their Writings, produced
with such formality as they are by the Schoolmen. To find them in some places,
requires a diligent and an attentive Reader: but his Pains will be recompensed
by the Light, which a nice and critical observation of them gives to the Holy
Scripture.

Having this Key to the Apostle's meaning, it remains, that we consider in the
next place, Who is the wretched Man he speaks of, that was Sold under Sin and
led Captive by it, etc. And upon a due enquiry, I doubt not but we may discover
him, from those Marks and Lineaments by which he is described. For as our Lord
determined, whose the Coin was, which was showed him, and to whom it should be
rendered, from its Image and Superscription: Thus, from the Character itself
which is before us, we may gather, to whom it ought to be assigned. It may not
be attributed to St. Paul himself, as I have showed already, and it will be
more manifest in in the ensuing Treatise: Nor to any Sincere Christian, for he
that is so, is Dead to Sin and a Servant of Righteousness Romans 6.2, 18.
It belongs therefore to the unregenerate Man laboring under Convictions,
whose person the Apostle here sustains.

Otherwise, I know not how to reconcile those Passages which are laid together
by Origin Origin. in Ep. ad Romans c. 7.
for the confirmation of this Exposition. For, not to mention them all, this
Expression of St. Paul Romans 7.18
In me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, seems inconsistent with
those places where he says Gal. 2.20.
, I live (...) yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and where he informs us,
that the Spirit of God dwells Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 3.16.
in the Faithful, and that their Bodies were the Temples 1 Cor. 6.19
of the Holy Ghost. And I do not see what Solution can be given of this
Difficulty, unless it be, that, as Origin Meris est Scripturae Divinae, and
personas latenter, and res and causas, de quibus dicere videtur, and nomina
commutare, into potius eisdem nominibus in aliis atque aliis rebus uti. Orig.
ubi supra.
tells us, It is the manner of the Holy Scripture tacitly to change the Persons
and Things and Causes and Names, of which it seems to speak, or rather to use
the same Names in representing different Matters. An Observation which, being
rightly understood, may be of great and frequent use; but it requires great
caution and judgment in the application of it.

With Origin many others, both Ancient and Modern Writers of great eminence,
concur in this Interpretation: And, amongst the last, some of our own Nation
especially have done excellently on this Subject. But the Learned Author of
this Treatise has handled it more copiously than any that I have seen: and as
he has, in my opinion, managed it with great strength of Reason, so he has
carried on the whole Work with that Spirit of Piety and Charity for the good of
Souls, that I hope it may contribute something toward the Reformation of a
degerate Age, which abounds both with Hypocrisy and Profaneness, and calls
for the helping Hands of those that are in a capacity to stem the Torrent of
Iniquity.

This is what I thought fit to say by way of Preface, and I add no more but my
hearty Prayers, That the Almighty, who is of purer eyes than to behold sin,
would bless those Endeavors that are employed against it, and in the
vindication of Holiness: and that he would so dispose the Hearts of all Men,
that the Disobedient may be turned to the Wisdom of the Just, and that the Just
may be justified (...). Rev. 22.11.
still: that they that are in Error may be brought into the Light of Truth, and
they that have received the Light may walk worthy of it and give diligence to
make their Calling and Election sure.

April 20. 1693. Robert Burscough.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IN my first Address to thee I make a solemn Profession, That I serve no Party
of Men; neither can I see any worldly Interest that I can promote in the
Writing of this Treatise, but rather the contrary; and if I had not hoped it
might be of some use to the Public, I should not have troubled my self in the
Composing, nor thee in the Perusing of it; and having said thus much, I shall
show thee first the Occasion, and then the Reasons of my Undertaking.

The Occasion was this: I have for these Thirty Years and more kept my Thoughts
suspended in the Controversy of Election and Reprobation, and the Liberty of
Man's Will, not without making Enquiry by Reading, Discoursing and Meditating,
with all which I have joined serious Prayer: But I was very loath to determine
my Thoughts without a clearness and evidence. At last, observing the Clashing
that there was in Books, and in the Pulpit by one against the other, the
Animosities and Feuds raised in the Parties, the Intricacy of the Knots, and
the Abstruseness of the Discourses upon this Subject, as they lie in
Controversal Writers, I thought the safest, quietest and surest way was to
endeavor to find out the Truth as it lay in the Scripture alone, and by it
self; and to this end I taskt my self to commit to my Memory all the first
Eleven Chapters of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans in Greek, for in the ninth
and eleventh Chapters of that Epistle is the chief Seat of this Controversy;
and I was willing to learn all the Chapters before, that so I might observe as
warily and curiously as I could (begging God's assistance) how the Apostle made
his Approaches to that great Mystery of Election and Reprobation (which
(especially in the ninth Chapter) has been made the Rise and Occasion of
dreadful Disputes) for that I did not question but this wise Master Builder did
raise this high and lofty Superstructure of his ninth and eleventh Chapters
upon a sure Basis; and though I know that an Epistle may contain distinct
Subjects, that may have no great (if any) connection and dependence; yet it is
very obvious to any Observer, that the most disputative and argumentative part
of the ninth Chapter has a clear relation to and connection with the third and
fourth Chapters foregoing, wherein the Apostle is proving Justification by
Faith, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which
followed not after Righteousness, have attained to Righteousness, even the
Righteousness which is of Faith: But Israel, which followed after the Law of
Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore?
Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law.
And this was the reason of their reprobation: So that the Election of the
Gentiles, and some few Jews, was really grounded upon their cleaving to the way
of the Promise and Faith, whereas the reprobation of the Jews, was, as I have
said, from the contrary reason. And accordingly Dr. Hammond concludes his
Paraphrase upon the ninth Chapter with these words: The Sum then of this whole
Chapter will be reduced to these five Heads, 1. The Privileges of the Jews,
and among them especially Christ's being born of that stock. 2. That those of
them which resisted and believed not in Christ, were delivered up to obduration
by God, and the Gentiles taken in their stead. 3. That 'twas most just with God
to deal thus with them. 4. That some of the Jews at that time believed in
Christ. 5. That the cause that the rest believed not was, that after a
Pharisaical manner, they sought Justification by the Works of the Law,
Circumcision, etc. despising the Faith and Doctrine of Christ, and that
Evangelical way of Justification, and so stumbling at the Christian Doctrine,
which they should have believed, were the worse for him, and the preaching of
the Apostles, by whom they should have been so much the better.

And I bless God, in about half a Year's time, I picked up so many spare Hours
as in which I obtained what I designed, the getting by heart those eleven
Chapters, and have repeated them often exactly; and in the getting of them, and
at last my ninth and eleventh, I have attained a very comfortable Satisfaction
in the Controversy about Election and Reprobation, and do not at all repent
any Hour's time spent in the endeavor with relation to that. But that which I
have now to acquaint thee with is, That while I was making my Progress in
getting and repeating the several Chapters, there did a considerable light
arise to me concerning the true and genuine sense of the seventh Chapter, which
I had been often puzzelled about heretofore. And this I thought worthy a new
Labor to acquaint thee with, so here I have given thee the occasion of my
writing upon it.

Now for my Reasons moving me so to do, take as follows:

First then, Romans are the common shelter of many profligate Persons, who
would fain pass in their own apprehensions, and in the judgment of others, for
good Men, though if they would make any serious Reflections, they must needs
see themselves in a very evil state. When I would do good, say they, evil is
present with me; the good that I would I do not, and the evil that I would not
do that I do; so then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
With my mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of Sin:
And so lick themselves whole presently after every the foulest Commission, With
an, O wretched Man that I am! and all because it is allowed by some, that St.
Paul used these Expressions as speaking in his own person after conversion. Now
this Scripture is to be wrested out of their hands, by showing them, that St.
Paul speaks this in the person of an unregenerate Man, and therefore it is a
Plaster that will not cover, much less heal their Sore. Again,

Secondly, I fear, that even good People, or at least People well inclined,
When I would do good evil is present with me, and I find a Law in my Members
warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law
of Sin: When they ought to take refuge only in a sound Repentance, and the
Blood of Christ, after having humbled themselves, and returned to their Duty as
they ought. And they need not be dispoiled of the Comfort that is ready at hand
for them after ordinary failings and sins of infirmity; for which I doubt not
but there is a Pardon of course for them, upon their Confession to God: So that
these Failings need not make any terrible disorder in their Peace and Comfort,
and they may have as much relief in Gal. 5.17. as they can justly pretend to
have out of the seventh to the Romans: Gal. 5.17. you have these words, The
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these
two are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would. There is as much comfort in these words, as a sound Christian can seek
for out of the seventh to the Romans in cases of infirmity: And I know no
Divine that hinders them of the relief of this Scripture; for the Flesh not
being perfectly subdued by, and to the Spirit, may hinder and clog them so as
they may fail often, and may not come to be so good as they fain would be, or
do all the good that they fain would do. And yet they are not forced to
acknowledge, that they are sold under sin, as the Expression in that seventh to
the Romans, by which they put a Sword into all wicked persons hands to kill
themselves withal, and to bear themselves out in their vilest Enormities.

Thirdly, Romans be but allowed to be spoken of St. Paul in and of his own
person after conversion, and I know not what you can say by way of conviction
to the wickedest Man in the World. He will tell you, when you charge him, That
he was drunk such a time, and filthy such a time, and can prove it of him, That
it is true, it was so; but he hates it, 'twas not he that did it, but
indwelling Sin; with his Mind he himself serves the Law of God, but with his
Flesh the Law of Sin. How can you confute him? how know you but it is so as be
says? and then upon what pretense can you excommunicate him? or censure him,
if he declares his hatred of what he has done? how do you know but he may be a
Saint like Saint Paul, whenas the Church of God in all Ages has and does and
ought to proceed in its Censures against Men according to External Actions: 1
John 3.7, 8. He that does righteousness, is righteousness, even as he is
righteous. He that commits sin, is of the devil. Verse 6. Whosoever abides
in him, sins not: whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him.
St. John's Epistle 3d. 11. He that does good, is of God; he that does evil,
has not seen God.

Fourthly, Romans in the sense above mentioned, casts a great disparagement on
St. Paul. Methinks those two Expressions in the fourteenth Verse of that
Chapter, can never agree to St. Paul, The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under sin. What was St. Paul carnal after his conversion? The highest
Christian that can bear that Name, St. Paul tells us, is but a Babe, 1 Cor.
3.1, 2, 3. And I, brethren, could not write unto you as unto spiritual, but as
unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not
with meat, etc. Verse 3. For ye are yet carnal: and whereas there is among you
envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? What
was St. Paul a Babe after he had written all that Epistle to the seventh
Chapter? But the next Expression is a thousand times worse, if St. Paul speaks
in his own person as of himself after conversion, He is not only carnal, but
sold under sin, a very vile Captive under the slavery of sin. I remember such
an Expression no where but in Ahab's case, who it is said sold himself to work
Wickedness: And if St. Paul was sold under sin, he either sold himself, or was
sold by another to this slavery: And who could sell him after he was become
God's, but the Holy God, which is Blasphemy to affirm? or he himself, which is
to make him another Ahab? Then in Verse 15. he explains how it appears that he
was sold under sin, by the causal Particle For, For what I do, I allow not; for
what I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that I do: And this is a clear
Description of Slavery. So Verse 23. the Law in his Members brought him into
captivity to the Law of Sin, made him a Slave.

Fifthly, Paul speaks of himself in other places of his Epistles, 2 Timothy 4.7,
8. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. What he
fight a good fight, that could not lift up an hand? Whenever he would do good,
evil was present with him? The good that he would do, he did not, and the evil
he would not do, that he did? A stout Soldier! He fight a good fight, that was
taken prisoner, and carried captive to the Law of Sin! He finish his course,
that could not move a step, nor stand upon his Legs! How to perform that which
is good, I find not. Is this he that did preach, warn and teach every Man in
all Wisdom, and labor so hard at his Work? striving according to the working
that works in me mightily, 1 Col. last. And so Ephesians. 3.7. Whereof I was made
a minister according to the gift of the grace given unto me, according to the
effectual working of his power, or his powerful working; the same with that in
the Colossians; and so in Ephesians. 1.19. That you may know what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward who believe according to the working of his
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places.

Sixthly, This seventh to the Romans, They that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts. How shall we hope to be able to say with
good Hezekiah upon a Deathbed, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight, Isa. 38.2, 3.

And Lastly, The taking the seventh to the Romans, that is to say, Paul, as
concerning himself after conversion, casts a disparagement upon the whole
Gospel, dispirits and enervates the Power and Efficacy of it, which yet is
styled the Ministration of the Spirit. We all know the Gospel to be the last of
the Revelations of God to the World, even by the Son himself and his Apostles,
endued with the Holy Ghost in a visible and admirable manner. The Gospel is
called the Kingdom of Heaven, because in it Heaven is brought down upon Earth,
as well as we directed by it to get to Heaven. We are come in the Gospel to
mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things than the
blood of Abel, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. The Church of God in the Gospel, is compared
to an Heir at Age come to the Possession of his Estate. The Church before, to
an Heir in his Nonage, Gal. 4. Now in the Days of the Gospel it is promised,
that the feeble shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as
the Angel of the Lord before them, Zach. 12.6. What shall St. Paul then, the
chiefest of the Apostles, be as a Babe, as Carnal? sold under Sin? shall St.
Paul pray for his Colossians, that they might be strengthened with all might,
according to the glorious power of God, Col. 1.11. and for his Ephesians, that
God would grant according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
mighty by his spirit in the inner man, and have no strength himself? Ephesians.
3.16. and not be able to find how to perform that which is good? He can do all
manner of evil which he would not, but the good which he would fain do he
cannot do; and the reason is, because the Spiritual Apostle is grown Carnal,
sold under Sin, and led away into Captivity to the Law of Sin and Death!
Methinks it is impossible, that ever these words should be spoken of St. Paul,
as of himself; for there was never (as I conceive) a more vigorous, active,
successful Person, or engaged in higher Work and Service. Therefore I shall
here break off my Epistle to the Reader; and, after having given him a short
Analysis of the foregoing part of the Epistle, with that of the sixth, seventh
and eighth Chapter, shall betake my self to the Work which I have undertaken;
that is, to show by Paraphrasing the sixth, seventh and eighth Chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans, That this cannot be the meaning of the seventh Chapter,
which is by many thought to be so; the sixth and eighth rightly expounded, will
cast a great light upon the seventh, enclosed betwixt them, according to that
Maxim, Opposita Juxta se posita magis elucescunt. The sixth and eighth Chapters
seem to me like two Guardians or Watchers, set to defend us from the dangerous
misunderstanding of the seventh; or, to give thee another Comparison which has
fallen upon my fancy, they seem to be like two hot Baths, and the seventh like
a cold Well fed from another Spring, and the Source it self of it is in the
same Chapter fully accounted for.

The ANALYSIS.
I Find then, after the Apostle has made a most stately Address, consisting of
fifteen Verses, to that learned and faithful Church, he spends the other
seventeen Verses of the first Chapter in convincing the Gentiles of their
sinfulness.

The whole second Chapter in convincing the Jews of theirs.

In the third he shows, That the Jews, though they had many Privileges above
the Gentiles, yet were indeed no better than they, (...), Cap. 3.9. Verse 20.
He shows, That neither of them can be justified by the Law, and that they
both must be justified by Faith, Ver. 30.

In the fourth Chapter he proves Justification by Faith, by Abraham's Example,
and David's Description of the Blessedness of a Man, any Man.

In the fifth Chapter he institutes a Comparison betwixt the hurt done to
Mankind by the first Adam, and the benefit to Mankind by the second Adam, and
heighthens the benefit unspeakably beyond the loss, That as sin has reigned
unto death, so grace reigns by righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: And so concludes the Discourse of Justification by Faith.

In the sixth Chapter the Apostle comes to a new Subject, which takes up that
and the seventh and a good part of the eighth Chapter, viz. that of
Sanctification, and shows, that that is as necessarily dependant and consequent
upon Faith and Grace, as Justification it self is.

In the seventh Chapter, after the Apostle had settled the matter of
Sanctification in the sixth, as indispensibly necessary and naturally flowing
from the Doctrine of Grace and Justification by Faith, he is pleased, according
to the Wisdom given to him, to bring in an Instance of an Ineffectual Attempt
toward Sanctification, by a Man under Convictions from the Law, as he had
before shown at large, the folly of the Jews and Judaizing Christians, in
seeking Justification by the Law; and indeed he words the matter in a way of
personation in his own person: whereupon several have mistaken the Apostle's
design, thinking that he spoke all those things of himself after he was
converted, and in an estate of Regeneration, whereas it is very clear to me,
and indeed I find to many learned and godly Men, that the Apostle is only in
his own Person personating a Man that is not truly converted, but struggling
with his Corruptions in his own strength, being terrified by the Law, which
only convinces of Sin, and is a ministration of Condemnation; and so no wonder
that he is so overcome and brought into Bondage, as he acknowledges himself to
be in that Chapter. But this I speak here but precariously, till I shall
afterward have made it to appear.

In the eighth Chapter, the Apostle, after he had set forth the convinced
Person in such a struggle with his Corruptions in his own Strength, (the Law
affording him neither Strength nor Hope) after he had set him forth as overcome
and captivated, and brought into desperation, he gives him a glimpse of Christ,
gives him a Plank after his Shipwreck, and in the very latter end of the
seventh and beginning of the eighth Chapter, brings him off clear from those
Rocks and Shelves upon which he had been in utmost danger of perishing. Which
is all I shall say by way of Introduction and Analysis.

Sanctification by Faith VINDICATED: IN A DISCOURSE ON THE Seventh Chapter of
the Epistle OF St. PAVL to the ROMANS, etc.
ROMANS, Chap. VI.
WHat shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God
forbid. Adam, by whom Sin came into the World, yet, through the Grace of God,
the World, that is, especially those of it that receive the abundance of grace
and of the gift of righteousness, Verse 17. receive far more advantage by the
second Adam, than ever they had lost by the first. Verse 18. Therefore as by
the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of one, the free-gift came upon all men unto justification of
life. Verse 20. Moreover, the law entered, that the offense might abound; but
where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. Verse 21. That as sin has
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness, unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord: And with these words, in triumph,
concludes his Discourse of Justification by Faith and Grace. Upon which the
Apostle starts a thought, that might enter into the heart of a foolish person,
What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? This
the Apostle answers with a (...), Romans 6.2.
God forbid. We have three such Questions together, within the compass of six
Verses, in the third Chapter of this Epistle, which the Apostle rejects with an
abhorrency, Romans 3.3. What if some did not believe, shall their unbelief make
the faith (or faithfulness) of God without effect? God forbid. Verse 5. If our
unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say then? Is
God unrighteous who takes vengeance? God forbid. Verse 7. If the truth of God
has more abounded through my lie unto his glory, why yet am I also judged as a
sinner? A foolish way of freeing himself from judgment: Nay, it seems the
People were so used in the Apostle's days to these Paralogisms and foolish
Ratiocinations, that they presumed to affix them even upon the Apostles
themselves, Verse 8. And not as we be slanderously reported, and as some
affirm, that we say, Let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is
just. To return therefore to our sixth Chapter, What shall we say then? shall
we continue in sin, that grace may abound? Since God has made Grace to abound
much more than Sin, (wherever Sin has abounded) shall we resolve to continue
in Sin, that so God may continue to make his G^^^e to abound toward us? God
forbid, says the Apostle. God may for once, having made Man a free Agent,
though holy (as nothing else could come out of God's hand) after his voluntary
Defection and wicked Rebellion, give him a Savior, and send us a second Adam,
the Lord from Heaven, that should do us infinitely more good, than ever the
first earthly Adam d d us hurt; but if we abuse his Grace, and turn it into
Wantonness, the Grace will cease, and only prove a greater aggravation of our
Sin and Judgment. But let us follow the Apostle's argumentation:

How shall we, This second Question strikes the first Question dead, and is a
full Answer to it; How can Men that are dead to any thing, live any longer in
it, or unto that to which they are dead? It is a perfect contradiction to their
being dead to it, to live in it. This is a Paraphrase and Comment enough for
the second Verse.

Know ye not, (or are) baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death? This is a full Argument again, by way of Question, for the proof of the
Assertion, uttered by way of Question in the second Verse, viz. That all Saints
(as such) are dead to sin; for that when they were baptized into Christ, they
were baptized into his Death, and so are by profession dead to Sin. This is
more fully expressed in the next Verse.

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, Here i^ a plain
Allusion made to the ancient way of Baptizing, which was by dipping under
Water, called here burying, and rising or being raised up. I shall give this
Explication in the Words of Dr. Hammond upon the Text, the third and fourth
Verses:

It Is a thing, says he, that every Christian knows, that the Innersion in
Baptism, refers to the Death of Christ; the putting the Person baptized into
the Water, denotes and proclaims the Death and Burial of Christ, and signifies
our undertaking in Baptism, that we will give over all the Sins of our former
Lives, (which is our being buried together with Christ, or baptized to his
Death) that so we may live that regenerate new Life (answerable to Christ's
Resurrection) which consists in a Course of all Sanctity, a constant Christian
Walk all our days. This is enough for Explication.

Now the Argumentation of the Apostle seems to lie here: A Christian, by his
Profession, is not only dead to Sin, but he is buried too, and risen to a new
Life; and therefore it is absurd and monstrous to see him live in any Sin, as
terrible, monstrous, absurd and intolerable, as it were for us that have buried
our Friends with all proper Solemnities, to see them again come to our Houses,
and haunt us from Room to Room, and appear to us wherever we go or abide; this
were enough to frighten us out of our Life: Even so monstrous and horrible a
thing would it seem to us, if we had the sense of spiritual things, as we have
of natural, to see any Man, that professes himself a Christian, to live in any
known Sin. But what an Age do we live in, and how absurd (I had almost said) is
this Doctrine now! How strangely sounding in our Ears! Where the Professor,
that endeavoars to live as one dead and buried unto Sin, looks rather like a
Spectre or Ghost, than a Man that proclaims his Sin as Sodom! But let us leave
the Age, and return to the Apostle and to the Rule.

For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, Excellent
Reason still, and well recommended to our very fincy! where the Apostle drop:
another Nemplior in his Allegorical Argumentation. We have not only been buried
in, and raised our of the Water of Baptism, which is a transiend way of being
conformed to the death of Christ, but we have been planted together with him in
the likeness of his death, which insinuates a permanent way of estating us in
this Mortification and Vivification, wherein we are to simbolize with, or be
made like unto Christ, in a death unto Sin and a life unto Righteousness; and
under these Figures the reason of the thing is still illustrated and con^inued,
that it is our Duty, by our Christian Profession, to become utter strangers to
all sin, and very conversant in all the parts and exercises of an holy Life;
for it would be a strange thing, that we should be only dead and buried with
Christ, and not live with him, for so our Christian Religion and Profession
would bring us to nothing, we should only become dead and not live, and then
Religion does nothing for us. Therefore if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the I keness of his Besurrection,
which he brings in with as (...), which is more empha^ical than the word also,
(and yet that is all that is put for it in the Translation) (...) alone
signifies also, but (...), being a Discretive, places more weight in that part
of the sentence with which it is conjoined, and is much of kin (with the
Expletive (...) and the Copulative (...)) to a (...); so that it is much as if
it had been thus said, For if we have been planted together with Christ in the
likeness of his Death, we shall then most certainly, or much rather be in the
likeness of his Resurrection. But the Apostle has not yet done with the
Allegory, but bestows new, fresh and fragrant Flowers upon our crucified Lord,
Verse 6.

Knowing this, that our old man is, or was (...), crucified with him, This is a
matter of knowledge, if we know any thing of the mystery and meaning of the
Gospel, that when Christ was crucified, and died for our sins, he did not only
die as a sacrifice for sin, which was one principal end of his death, but he
did then seal the truth of the Gospel with his Blood, the New Testament came to
bear by the death of the Testator, and there is this signification eminently in
his death, That whosoever should afterward pretend to a benefit by his death,
(which was chiefly for the expiation of sin) should count himself indispensibly
obliged never to indulge or allow himself in any sin, which was the death of
his Savior, as all sin was. Let him that names the Name of Christ depart from
iniquity, 2 Cor. 5.14, 1^. For the love of Christ constrains us because we
thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. They must reckon
themselves as dying with Christ to sin, when he died for sin. Verse 15. And
that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. Which is a plain
parallel Scripture to that before us. In this Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our
old man was crucified with him, I connot conceive how this our ( our old man,
that is, out corrupt nature, or humane nature as corrupt) can be said properly
to be crucified with Christ when he died any otherwise than by signification,
except it be by way of influence, as his death confirmed the Gospel, and the
Gospel persuades and assists us to holiness, as I have explained it. Our old
man, that is, those corrupt Affections and Inclinations, which we had in us
before conversion, were crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed; which is much the same with with our old Man's being crucified, for
our old Man was consistent of a Body, with all its Limbs and Members that
belong to a Body, and this must now be destroyed, to the intent that we should
not henceforth serve sin.

For he that is dead is freed from sin.

Now if we be dead with Christ, because we are also planted with him in the
likeness of his Resurrection.

Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, So if you be raised with
Christ, as you are representatively or significatively in Baptisin; therefore
as you have died unto sin, so you must die no more, for the next death would be
a death unto righteousness, unto which you were raised, and this death must
never be. So it follows,

For in that he died, The word is (...), semel duntaxat, only once, or once for
all, he dies no more, but in that he lives, or whatsoever he lives ((...))
he lives unto God; his whole life is consecrated to God, and so must yours be;
and you are no further Christians than you thus do. So it follows,

Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, I know no
difficulty in the words, but that they may easily be understood by what has
been spoken before, only I observe in the words, Likewise reckon your selves,
(...); that the great thing that we have to do, is to keep the account clear,
to consider what is the consequence of our Christian Profession; if we be wise
and pertinent and serious therein, we must count it our indispensible Duty, to
show a true conformity to the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Christ, by our
being as crucified, dead and buried to all sin, and alive unto God in all that
we live. I shall only give a parallel place both for matter and form unto the
tenth Verse, with this difference, that one place speaks of our Savior, the
other of St. Paul; but each express a Crucifixion, Death and Resurrection, or
living unto God, and so pass to the twelfth Verse: In the tenth Verse of this
Chapter it is thus expressed in the Greek, (...). The parallel place is Gal.
2.20. (...). I am crucified with Christ, yet I live; no longer I, but Christ
lives in me, and the life that I now live, or what I live in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the Son of God. The other is, Christ died to sin once, but now
what he lives, he lives unto God.

Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body. Shall we continue in sin,
that grace may abound? from our professed state of Death to Sin, declared in
Baptism, and from our necessary conformity to Christ, comes in this Verse, as
partly in the eleventh, to make the Application, by way of Exhortation,
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves. And here, let not sin therefore reign in
your mortal body. Here I take the word body not to be the same with the word
body in the sixth Verse: Our old man was crucified with Christ, that the body
of sin might be destroyed; for there body is called the body of sin, but in
this Verse sin and body are distinguished one from the other as two different
things, and separable one from the other, whereas in that phrase, the body of
sin, sin cannot be separated from the body, for take away sin from the body of
sin, and there will be no body left, for the body of sin is made up of sin in
all its variety; but we may at least in conception separate sin from our mortal
body, for the same body in Adam, that after he had sinned became mortal, was
actually without sin before he had sinned, therefore it may (at least) be
conceived without sin, whereas the body of sin cannot be conceived without sin.
But this Criticism will more visibly appear, if you observe the words of the
Text in the Greek, (...). Which is, being exactly interpreted, to be read thus,
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should obey sin (it
(...)) in the lusts of the body ((...)). An English Reader cannot make the
distinction which is very apparent in the Greek. For he is apt to take it thus,
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it (that
is sin) in the lusts thereof, that is, in the lusts of sin; but it is not so,
but quite otherwise in the Greek, in the lusts thereof, that is, of the body. I
shall endeavor to explain the matter thus, for it is not a mere Nicety, but
the Observation or Criticism carries a great deal of useful sense in it; We are
all of us here in this World in a mortal body (Whether in the body, or out of
the body, I cannot tell, God knows, says St. Poul, 2 Cor. 12.2. I say, we
are all in a mortal body; and this body of ours has several appetites or
designs, as eating and drinking, etc. these designs are called lustings or
lusts, according to the old English. Now the Apostle's advice is, that sin
reign not in our mortal bodies. In the body of sin, (which is to be destroyed
and crucified with Christ) there is nothing else but sin, reigning sin; this
therefore must be destroyed: but it is no duty, but a great sin, for us to
destroy and kill our mortal body; we must nourish it and cherish it in a
moderate way, only we must have a care that sin reign not in these mortal
bodies, so as to obey sin, in gratifying to excess the innocent lustings or
desires of our body. The thirteenth Verse illustrates and strengthens this
sense that I have given of the twelfth.

Neither yield ye your members, (that is, the limbs of your mortal body,
Instruments (Margin, Arms or Weapons) of unrighteousness unto sin. In this
Verse are two Captains, Kings, Generals, or Masters, God, and Sin. You must not
yield your members, or limbs, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: If by
the members here, were meant the members of the body of sin, it were no good
sense to say, yield not your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin; for how can it be that the members of the body should not yield to the use
and service of the body, which is only unrighteousness in the body of sin? But
by our members here, is understood the limbs and members of our natural or
mortal body. Now I shall recite the whole Verse.

Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but
yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, that is from
death in sin, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God, Use
your bodies and every limb and faculty of them to the glory of God, whose you
are, and whom you ought to glorify with your bodies and spirits, which are his.

For sin shall not have dominion over you. Above, Verse twelve, Let not sin
therefore reign in your mortal body. Here he either promises, or at least
foretells them, that it shall not reign (for (...) and (...) are much the
same). What need of so much caution and exhortation to avoid a thing that shall
never come to pass? Why, truly, because though you may certainly avoid and
escape the dominion and reigning power of sin by care and diligence,
watchfulness, and holy activity, still praying for, depending upon, and making
use of the Grace of God, yet if you be not thus employed, however you may seem
to your selves and others, to have clean escaped those that live in error, 2
Pet. 2.18. and to have escaped the pollutions that are in the world, through
lust, the evil spirit will return and take with him seven other spirits worse
than ever he was, and will take possession of his swept and garnished old
mansion, and sin will again have dominion and reign over you. To recite the
whole Verse:

For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but
under grace. Jesus Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. So the Apostle has well confuted
that Paralogism in the first Verse, Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? by turning it into a Violentum. He takes the Enemies Cannon and turns
them upon themselves, therefore you must not continue in sin because grace has
abounded and does abound, For sin shall not have dominion over you, because ye
are under grace.

I shall need here to say something to make it appear how the Dominion of Sin
is destroyed by Grace, and not by the Law, though I know I shall have much more
occasion several times to speak to this in the seventh Chapter, which indeed
cannot be made intelligible without the unfolding of this Mystery: And first
for the explication of it I shall give a parallel place, it is Gal. 5.16, 18.
Verse 16. This I say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. Verse 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the
law. The Apostle had before been exhorting them to love one another, because
Love was the fulfilling of the Law, and tells them further, in Verse 15. If
they did bite and devour one another, there was a great danger they would be
consumed one of another. Now, for prevention hereof, the Apostle adds, Verse
16. This I say then, walk in spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; that is, that lust of envy and bitterness. Verse 17. For the flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are
contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.
Even in good Men there is a remainder of flesh, as it is taken in an ill sense,
which hinders them from doing much of that good which they would fain do, when
they are more themselves: But then the Apostle minds them of what he had said
before in the sixteenth Verse, (as the Apostle loves to inculcate and repeat)
If you be led by the spirit, (or walk in the spirit, which I take to be all
one) if ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the law. Which I take to be
all one with the other part of the sixteenth Verse, Ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh: And accordingly he reckons up the lusts of the flesh,
which, when brought into act, are the works of the flesh. In the next, Verse
19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, etc. But the parallel I seem to my
self to find in these words of the Epistle to the Galatians, compared with
those in Romans 6.14. appears thus, in Ep. to Gal. it is, If ye be led by the
spirit, ye are not under the law; or ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; to be under the law, and to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, are
consequent one upon another, and therefore used as synonimous or equivalent
Expressions; and if so, they fully answer the words that I am now upon, Romans
6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but
under grace. Now if not to be under the law, and not to fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, be all one, then to be under the law, and to fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, are all one; for, Contrariorum contrariae sunt rations; and if to be
under the law, and to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, are all one, that is in
the way of inferring one another, as, Posita causa ponitur effectus, being
under the law is the cause, fulfilling the lusts of the flesh is the effect: I
say, if these are all one, or rather if they do, mutuo se ponere and tollere,
then the Apostle's is a good Argument in the Text before us, Romans 6.14. Sin
shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law, but under
grace. But I shall leave the Argument from a parallel which serves only to
prove the (...), that so it is, that he that is under the Law (as his way of
justification) will certainly fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and that sin shall
not have dominion over him, that is, not under the law, and come to the (...),
or the reason why it is so, which evermore proves the (...) that it is so. Now
the reason why it is so, that he that is under the law, will always and cannot
but fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and that he that walks in the spirit, is led
by the spirit, or under the conduct of grace, and the promise for justification
and sanctification, will not and cannot, whilst such, yield himself a slave to
his lusts, and suffer sin to have dominion over him; is this because a sinner
(as we are all sinners) that is under the law, and betakes himself to the law
for justification, and goes no farther, (is not well schooled under the law, so
as to betake himself to Christ and Grace for a righteousness, (as the law is
only a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we may be justified by faith,
Gal. 3.24.) he finds the law commands him to be holy, persectly holy, and
threatens every sin with death, and gives him no strength nor hope without
perfect unerring obedience, (besides all the wrath that the law is charged with
against him for his past sins). And here, the poor Man finding it his duty to
abstain from all evil, and do all that is good, and having no strength and no
hope, but in the way of perfect unerring obedience, (besides the making amends
and giving satisfaction for his past sins) he grows sad and mad and desperate,
and falls to sinning more than ever; whereas the Man that (having been stung
with the law, terrified in his conscience with the thunderings and lightnings
of Mount Sinai) has heard of Christ, and grace, mercy and pardon on him; and
rich assistance from him to do all that is wellpleasing to God, and has
thereupon fled to Christ and put himself under the conduct of grace, to be led
by the spirit, and to walk in the spirit, he is not under the dominion of sin;
he sees no reason to commit iniquity, but infinite reason to the contrary; he
feels the influence of all the Apostle's arguments; he is dead to sin; he has
been buried in baptism, and risen with Christ in that ordinance; he looks upon
his old Man as crucified with Christ; he would have the body of sin utterly
destroyed; he will serve sin no longer, but as Christ ever lives to God, so
would he; he resolves, in the strength of God, sin shall not reign in his
mortal body, but he will yield up all his limbs and members, and senses, and
faculties of body and soul unto God: Sin shall not have dominion over you, for
ye are not under the law, but under grace.

I think I have spoken, or written, that which may suffice for this Subject in
this place; if I should enlarge further upon it here, I shall prevent my self
in what I am to speak again in the seventh Chapter.

What then? shall we continue in sin, because we are not under the law, but
under grace? Here we may refresh our selves a little, to observe the folly of
Men in their foolish arguings, they will draw poison out of an antidote; that
which is the greatest enemy in the world to sin, shall be made the patron of
sin, even the grace of God; they will turn the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and receive not only the grace of God in vain, but to wicked
purposes; this the Apostle therefore rejects with a great abhorrence, God
forbid, and though he had in the first Verse treated the same persons after his
(...), with a train of Insinuations, and gentle, yet powerful Arguments, which
I have largely paraphrased on; yet now, when he meets with the same perverse
humor the second time, he corrects it with a severe and tart check, and
threatening withal,

Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, As much as if
he had said, If all the Arguments I have used hitherto will not prevail with
you to become holy, then take only this one more, He to whom ye yield your
obedience, his servants ye are, and he will pay you your wages. If ye yield
your obedience to sin, ye are the servants of sin, and the wages of sin is
death, whether (the servants) of sin unto death, or (the servants) of obedience
unto righteousness. The Apostle would not dandle them any longer, nor dally (as
it were) with pleasing insinuations, but tell them whereto they must trust, if
they would not follow the conduct of the Spirit, and go the way that grace led
them. But yet in the next Verse, as if this tender Father, that was always so
full of bowels, had been a little too sharp and severe in his Reprimand, Verse
16. in 17. he falls to comforting them again with a God be thanked on their
behalf:

But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, That is, God be thanked
that though ye were the servants of sin once, yet now ye have obeyed, etc. For
it is no matter of thanksgiving to God by it self, that they were the servants
of sin; but the supply of the Ellipsis is very obvious, Though they had been
so, yet now they had obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine. This is the
proper matter of thanksgiving, that they had obeyed from the heart, ( supple
(...)) (...), they had submitted so entirely, and from the heart, to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, as if they had suffered themselves to be melted down by
it, and cast into the form or mould of the Doctrine of the Gospel, as so much
Lead or Gold cast into a Mould: Metaphora est a Typis, vel Auri-fabrorum, vel
Typographorum, says Pool in Loc.

Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness. etc.
being then made free from sin by dying to it, For he that is dead, is freed
from sin. Verse 7. Ye became the servants of righteousness. Every Man in the
World, is in the Apostle's language and sense either free from sin and the
servant of righteousness, or free from righteousness (as the Phrase is, Verse
20.) and the servant of sin.

I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh, The
Apostle in this Verse doubles and trebles what he had said, that so they might
be sure, and not fail to take it in, and by such Metaphors of Service and
Liberty as were easy to be understood; these were such things as they might
understand, and that practically and experimentally too in their own Hearts and
Practice. A good Argument is never too often urged, till it be answered or
admitted; a good Lesson is never too often repeated, till it be learnt; and
indeed the Apostle seems to be willing to sum up what he had said throughout
the Chapter, because he was to take leave of the Subject, As ye have therefore
yielded your members (Instruments it was, Ver. 13. (...), now (...)) servants
to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, so now yield your members
servants to righteousness unto holiness. What is the difference here betwixt to
and unto, to iniquity unto iniquity, to righteousness unto holiness? Why the
Apostle is very nice and curious and critical many times in his Expressions.
And the Holy Ghost is pleased often to condescend in the Scripture to observe
the Rules of Elegancy and Exactness which Men delight in; I could give in my
little Observation many Inslances of this, the (...), Romans 12.3. not to be made
appear in our Translation, may be one. Another may be that of the Order
observed in the 22 Parts of the 119th Psalm, that every Octonary shall begin
with the same Letter, and every Part begin with the Letter of the Alphabet next
succeeding, in order to that which went before: The like is to be observed in
the third Chapter of the Lamentations; so here in this Verse, Romans 6.19. to and
unto twice applied; Iniquity and Righteousness are to be conceived as two
Queen-Regents, to one of which every Man and Woman in the World is a Subject,
and all their Limbs, Senses and Faculties of their Bodies and Souls are made
Servants to do their Work. Now the Work which Uncleanness or Iniquity enjoins
is Iniquity; the Work which Righteousness enjoins is Holiness. Therefore, says
the Apostle with great accuracy, as you have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity, the Queen (or Tyrant rather) unto iniquity, the
Work, or rather Drudgery of Uncleanness and Iniquity; even so now yield your
members servants to righteousness, the Queen-Regent in and of your Souls, unto
holiness, the Work of Righteousness. This is all I can observe in the
difference of to and unto.

For when ye were the servants of sin, or free to righteousness: That is,
Righteousness had no command over you.

What fruit had ye then of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? What fruit
had ye then of these things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of these
things is death. That is of those things or services which ye performed or
perpetrated to that tyrant sin.

But now being made free from sin,

For the wages of sin is death, In this Verse the Apostle makes a manifest
distinction betwixt the reward of Sin, and the reward of Righteousness and
Holiness. The reward of Sin is in the nature of a due Debt, as a Soldier's
Wages are a due Debt; Death Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, are the bitter
Fruit and due Merit of Sin; but Eternal Life, though it be due to Saints by
promise, yet not by any desert of theirs, it is the free gracious gift of God,
he gave us a Savior to redeem us, he gave us the Doctrine of the Gospel; Faith
and Repentance are the gifts of God; and every Grace in us, is not only gratum
faciens, but gratis data, that which makes us acceptable, but freely given us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And now, having gone through the Chapter, I think fit to re-capitulate a
little, and make a few Reflections upon what has been said, and so come to the
main Chapter.

And now, that we have seen the Doctrine of Universal Holiness so recommended
unto us by our very Profession of being Christians, that by our Baptism and
necessary conformity to Christ in his Death and Burial and Resurection, we are
perfectly obliged to become dead to every Sin, and alive to every Holy Action
and Opportunity of bringing Glory to God; when we are exhorted to reckon our
selves dead unto Sin, and alive unto God; when we are charged, that Sin must
not reign in our mortal Body, and assured that it shall not for this very
reason, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace; and at last told in
plain terms, that if it be eventually otherwise with us, that if we do obey
Sin, we are the Servants of Sin, and that unto Death; besides all the rest that
follows, wherein we are particularly directed not only how to employ our Minds
and Affections, but every Member of our Bodies in the Service of God, being
again and again said to be (...), made Freemen from Sin, and entered entirely
into the Service of Righteousness: If, I say, after all this, it may be truly
said of the same persons, that they are sold under Sin, and carnal persons;
that they do (in a general way) things that they hate, (which Slaves indeed do)
and cannot do otherwise; that they cannot find the way, or obtain so much of
themselves, after all the change of state which they have past under, as to
perform that which is good, I despair of understanding the meaning of any words
that I shall ever hereafter meet with. But yet I do not doubt to make it appear
to any unprejudiced Reader, in explaining the next Chapter, that these
Expressions are not spoken of the same Persons that are spoken to in this fixth
Chapter, which I here dismiss.

ROMANS, Chap. VII.
KNow ye not, Brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law) how that the
law has dominion over a man so long as he lives? or so long as he lives;
that is, the Law lives; Hammond says, the Law of Man has power or force as
long as he lives.

For the woman which has an husband, is bound by the law to her husband,

So then if while her husband lives, she be married to another man,

In these three Verses you have the common Case stated betwixt an Husband and
Wife, to which the Apostle, by and by, by way of similitude, does accommodate
the State and and Case of every true converted Christian; the Wife is to keep
herself entirely for her husband so long as he lives, but if her Husband be
dead, she is free to marry whom she pleases.

Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law. That is, Hammond
upon the place, (at the first Verse) (...), You are put to death to the Law,
must be interpreted as a figurative Speech, the Law is put to death to you.

The Soul of every Christian is the Wife, the Law was her first Husband, Christ
is the second Husband. While the Law was alive, it had the power over the Soul
as over a Wife; but the Law being put to death, that is, in its Condemning
Power, by the Suffering of Christ, and the Satisfaction that he made to it, by
enduring the Penalty of it for every Believer, every Man is free from the Power
of the Law, that chooses to betake himself to Christ as an Husband, and to take
him for his Lord and Savior. The Verse at large is thus:

Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ, The Apostle would not say the Law is dead to you, for that had been an
invidious Expression amongst the Jews at Rome, to say that the Law was dead;
and therefore he seems to turn his Speech into a figurative Expression, as I
have noted above out of Doctor Hammond, and chooses rather to say, Ye are
become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ crucified; for else there would
have been no similitude in this Case, for the Matter to which the Apostle does
assimulate the Case of every true Christian, was to that of a Wife, who was
once bound to an Husband, but by the death of her Husband became free to be
married to another; the word ye therefore answers to the Wife: therefore when
he says, ye are dead to the Law, the meaning is, the Law is dead to you; for
else he would not speak of the death of the Husband, but of the death of the
Wife: And accordingly the Apostle continues the Allegory in the next two Verses.

For when we were in the flesh,

But now we are delivered from the law. Hammond, the Law is cancelled to us,
that being dead wherein we were held, that is, the Law (which was our first
Husband) being dead wherein we were held, (or to which we were obliged, as a
Wife to a Husband, during his life) that we should serve in newness of spirit;
that is, according to a free, ingenious, Gospel-Principle of Love, and not in
the oldness of the Letter, that is, according to the severity and rigor of the
Law, written in Tables of Stone, which was our old and first Husband. So that
in this Antapodosis or Reddition which is here made by way of Similitude, to
the Case of an Husband and Wife, I take it we have these several Propositions
clearly expressed or strongly inferrible:

1. The Law is a Man's first Husband.

2. The Law is every Man's Husband, that is, his Soul's Husband (till he betake
himself to Christ by Faith, for there is no middle State, every Man is either
under the Law, or under Grace.

3. The Law is a rigid and severe Husband, (...), Verse 6. Wherein we were
held, Gal. 3.23, 24. Before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, (...). The
Law had set a guard upon us; shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be
revealed; shut up, as it were, in Prison, in Salva Custodia, Verse 24.
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ; and a severe
Schoolmaster.

4. That whilst we are under the Law, and before we betake ourselves to Christ
by Faith, we can do nothing but Sin. Verse 5. For when we were in the flesh,
the motions of sin which were by the law, did work in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death. Whilst we are under the Law we are in the Flesh wholly
carnal, and then the motions of Sin did work and nothing but they, and did
bring forth Fruit unto Death. This is the Issue of our Wedlock, whilst we
sinners have no other Husband but only the Law.

5. That the Law was in very good earnest since killed, as to the condemning
power of it, for all Mankind by the Body of Christ crucified.

6. That every Man in the World, where the Gospel is preached, is declared to
be free from the condemnation of the Law, upon condition, that he betake
himself to Christ as an Husband, and a Lord. And this I take to be the greatest
thing in the Gospel.

7. That till a Man repent and believe this Gospel, and be joined to the Lord
Christ, as one Spirit with him, he can never bring forth fruit unto God. Verse
4. Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law (or rather the
Law is dead to you) by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to
another, even to him that is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth
fruit unto God. This is the Fruit of the New Wedlock, and without this change
of State, there can be no such Fruit.

All these severally I take to be included in the Apostle's Similitude; and so
I come to the seventh Verse, wherein the Apostle answers a terrible Objection,
which seems to arise rationally against what he had said.

What shall we say then? The Objection rises naturally thus: You have said
above, That when we were in the Flesh, the Motions of Sin which were by the
Law, did so work as to bring forth Fruit unto Death, and that we need to be
delivered from the Law, even by the death of it as an Husband, that so we may
serve God with a new Spirit, and bring forth Fruit to God, Why what a strange
kind of thing do you make the Law to be? Quod efficit tale est magis tale. That
which is the cause of any thing and brings it forth into being, is much more
such a thing as that is, which is produced and effected by it. What shall we
say then? is the Law Sin or a sinful thing, or the direct cause of Sin? This
Question or Objection the Apostle answers with an abhorrence, God forbid; and
then gives a very substantial reason for it, Nay, I had not known sin, but by
the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not
covet. So that it is as much as if the Apostle had said, it is true, if this
bringing forth Fruit unto Death, had been the natural and kindly Effect of the
Law as a Cause, it would be so, it could no be freed from this aspersion of
being a very sinful thing, nay Sin itself in the abstract: If innocent Man and
the Law meeting together, the natural product of the Law should be Sin, the Law
would indeed deserve the name of sinful, and of sin; but it is not the
univocal, natural, kindly Product of the Law upon a Man, but the accidental
Effect of the Law upon a Sinner: But sin taking occasion by the commandment,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. The Law is so far from deserving the
name of sin or sinful, says the Apostle, that I had not known sin, but by the
law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet.
The natural Effect of the Law is first to forbid Sin, and to command all that
is holy, just and good; and, in the next place, to discover Sin, to convince
and condemn the sinner; which is quite contrary to the promoting, encouraging
and producing Sin.

Well then, having removed Sin far enough away from being the natural Effect of
the Law, he comes to show how the Law did occasionally and accidentally produce
Sin.

But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, or is dead; there is neither of them no Verb substantive in the
Original.

And here I think it a very fit occasion to set forth this Mystery, How the
Law, through the corruption of our Nature, is accidentally a great provoker to
and stirrer up of Sin, which I express thus:

When any Man goes on in his natural Course, and lives the common Life of Men
in his worldly Occasions and worldly Delights, he may go on very smoothly, and
be all alive (I was alive without the law once) and well pleased with his
Condition, especially if the World smiles upon him, before he begins to think
of another Life, and another World, and a Day of Judgment, when he shall be
called to account for all the Irregularities, and for all his Talents of Parts
and Strength and Wealth and Opportunities of Glorifying God in the World. But
when he begins seriously to think and consider, that he is a sinner; that he is
under a Law to God in every thing that he does and speaks and thinks; that he
must give an Account for every thing that he enjoys, or has the use of; and
begins to be sensible, that he is guilty of many Sins, by way of omission and
commission; and that every Sin deserves Hell, lays him under Wrath and an
Eternal Curse, then here comes the Law in its Convictions, charge him with
Guilt in one Action and another, and, above all, with a Corrupt Nature, that is
the Scource and Fountain of every Irregularity and Transgression, and bids him
observe well and do all things that are written and recorded as his Duty; and
tells him he is damned if he do not; and tells him he is under a Sentence of
Condemnation for every Sin he has committed; for this is the proper Office of
the Law to every sinner; for it is not to be avoided, but that it should be the
Duty of every rational Creature, Man or Angel, to do his Creator's Will, and to
avoid the doing of every thing that is contrary thereunto, and when he has
offended he falls under his Maker's displeasure: But this Men do not think
upon, till Conscience begins to work. And this I take to be the Law's coming to
a Man. When the commandment came, says the Apostle, sin revived and I died. I
was alive without the law once, but when -- First, a Man finds himself, lost,
undone, condemned, and the Law, (strictly as a Law) having no Pardon, nor
Mercy, nor Hope in it, for a poor sinner, occasions all his Lusts, for which it
condemns him to rise up in rebellion against that Law which only forbids and
condemns Sin, but shows no way to get from under the guilt or power of it. A
Coward, they say, when made desperate, grows many times very valiant. And this
is all the way I can conceive of, how that the Law, that is holy, and just and
good, can work in a Man all manner of Concupiscence. It first discovers these
to be in the Soul, condemns the Soul for them, makes him desperate under the
Conviction, and by occasion enrageth Lust; and indeed the word (...); I say,
the word (...), translated occasion, signifies impetus, and aggressio, and
materia, occasio, opportunitas, and (...), signifies proficiscor cum impeta
quodam, an impetuous, violent Attempt, which is here made by a sinner, upon
occasion of the Conviction which the Law (as doing its proper Office) works
upon the Conscience. So that you see how the Law, as an Husband, certainly
produces Sin in a sinful Man, not directly, but accidentally it works all
manner of Concupiscence, (...), it does it effectually, though accidentally and
occasionally, for without the Law, says the Apostle, Sin is dead, but the Law
quickens it not only in its appearing Guilt, but in its filthy Life-vigour and
Predominancy. I was alive without the Law once, but as soon as ever the Law
came, Sin revived, and I died, I was not only dead in Law, but alive in Sin.
Then it follows, Verse 10.

And the commandment which was ordained to life, The words are in the Greek
thus: (...), And the Commandment unto Life, the same was found to me, or by me,
to death. The Holy Law of God, which was our Natural Husband in an Estate of
Innocence, and would have conducted us in all good ways, to the pleasing of
God, and perhaps after some time of probation, (which the good Angels had)
would have fixed us in a state of Eternal Life and Blessedness, as they are now
fixed, without any need of pardon. This Commandment, which in the Ordination of
God was intended unto Life, and could be intended by him to no other purpose;
(and therefore our Translators add these words, was ordained, in a smaller
Character) this Commandment ordained unto Life, I found to be unto Death; that
Law which would have saved innocent Adam, killed me a sinful Son of Adam. It
killed me two several ways, it discovered me to be under a Sentence of Death
already, and it enraged my Lusts and wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence:
and now every Lust enlivened was a new Death, so that the Law killed me a
thousand times over. Verse 11. The Apostle repeating much the same words that
he had spoken in Verse 8. as it is his usual course in all his Argumentations to
inculcate, For sin taking occasion by t^^ commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me.

What greater deceit could there possibly be put upon a Man, than to bring
Death upon him by that which was professedly, by the great God of Heaven,
ordained to be put unto Life? What greater deceit, than to make a Man a
thousand times more a sinner than ever he would have been else, by that which
is holy, just and good, and the very transcript of the Holiness of God? And yet
this cheat Sin puts upon every Man by the Law; when a Man struggles with the
Law alone, being under conviction of ^in from it, it must needs be a killing
deceit that Sin puts upon a Man in such a case, and the Law deservedly called a
Killing Letter, and a Ministration of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9.

Wherefore the Law is holy, See here the accuteness of the Apostle Paul, and
his great curiosity and niceness and subtilty in distinguishing (If I may so
express my self concerning an Author, which I acknowledge with all sincerity to
be divinely inspired). But yet there is so much of the Man appears (innocently)
in his Writings, as it may be truly said, his Writings do redolere, or sapere
genium scribentis. And perhaps it may be said so of diverse of the Penmen of
Holy Writ: Isaiah the Courtier, Amos the Herdsman, and Daniel the Statesman,
etc. without any dishonor offered to the Divine Spirit that yet held the Pen
of the Amanuenses; I say, observe here our Doctor, subtilis, in his
distinguishing: He had said Verse 10. The commandment which was (ordained) to
life, I found to be unto death. Now here, Verse 13. he utterly avoids, with a
(...), that that which was good (that is, without all doubt, the same
Commandment which he says, Verse 12. was holy and just and good) was made death
to him: The words in the Greek are, (...). Upon these two the Apostle
distinguishes with a God forbid, that they should be the same. Therefore we
had need you see to be very curious in observing the words of Scripture. But
the meaning of the distinction, or that which the Apostle designs to assert,
and what to avoid, I take to be this: The Law was, by the perverseness of our
sinful Nature, (abusing an Holy Law) an occasion of Death: But the Apostle
abhors to say; that that good law is, or was death, 'twas (...), but not (...),
but not (...), 'twas found to be so in event by accident, but was not so in
itself, for (...) is a Verb Substantive, and not a Verb Passive; the Verb
Substantive predicates in esse, the Verb Passive in fieri ab extra. So much for
the niceness of the Distinction. Let us now go on with the 13th Verse, which
will further confirm what I have written:

Was that then which is good made death to me, or became it death to me? God
forbid. But sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is
good, became, or was made death to me. This ugly thing called Sin, was made, or
became death. The good Law was not made death to me, But sin, that it might
appear sin working death in me by that which is good, That sin by the
commandment might become out of measure sinful. Prosopopaeia, by which he gives
Sin (which we all know) in the true Philosophical account of it, is nothing but
a disorderly Action, or omission of a Duty, or an irregular Affection,) yet, I
say, he gives Sin a person, as if it were a subtle mischievous contriving
thing; for so the words run: It was not the good. Law that was made death, but
Sin was made death, or became death: Sin, I say, that it might appear Sin; that
is, that it might appear to be what it was, that it might indeed look like it
self, a most mischievous thing indeed. How does that appear? Why, it works
death in me by that which is good. To bring good out of evil is the work of
God, but to bring evil, and the greatest evil out of the greatest good, is the
work of the Devil, or rather the work of Sin, that mischievous thing that first
made Devils, and then made Hell. Sin, that it might appear Sin, the Apostle
has no worse word, or name to call Sin by, or else it should have had some
other dreadful Epithet. Now, that the Apostle was in such an holy rage against
it, then it follows with a new Invective in the end of the 13th Verse, That sin
by the commandment might become out of measure sinful, (...), Sin
hyperbolically sinful, (...), so that you see all that the Apostle is angry
with, is only Sin, but withal, it is as apparent that Sin shows all this
mischievousness, and maliciousness, and destructiveness, (...), by occasion of
the Law or Commandment, which, if it had not come to the Man's conscience that
is here spoken of, (whosoever he be) this Lion Sin had lain couchant, and as it
were, dormant, that is fast asleep in comparison, if the rage and superlative
hyperbolical roaring Madness that the Laws put it into. I come now to the 14th
Verse,

For we know that the law is spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under sin. That
the Gentiles that have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the
law; that is, by the dictates of Nature, approve of the Law as a holy Rule,
which they are obliged to obey; which shows the work of the law written in
their hearts, Ver. 14, 15 of that Chapter. For we know that the Law is
spiritual, (...), it is spiritual in its Original, dictated by the Spirit of
God, spiritual in its Conduct; it guides the Spirit of a Man to the prosecution
of all worthy, heavenly and spiritual things, that suit the Spirit of a Man,
feeds it, nourishes it, strengthens it, comforts it, as much as sensible, and
fleshly things do the Body and Senses of a Man, The law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin; and that is the reason that the Law and I can no better
agree; but as sinful hyperbolically sinful sin is enraged at the presence and
convictions and condemnations of the Law, so I, to be sure, that am the sinner
sold under sin, that am a carnal person, and in the flesh, (Ver. 6. When we
were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the law did work in our
members, to bring forth fruit unto death,) must needs be mightily discomposed,
inflamed, and desperate in sinning at the coming of the Law, with its commands
without giving strength to obey, with its charges and threatenings without any
hope of pardon. For what the Apostle had figuratively (and as it were
poetically) affixed to Sin, giving it a Person, does properly fall upon the
Sinner, if Sin be said by the Apostle to become (...), out of measure sinful by
the Law; How much more true is it of the Sinner, and shall this Sinner be St.
Paul? and that after Conversion? God forbid. What? carnal, and sold under sin,
and out of measure sinful? When the very Heathens are by the same Apostle
affirmed by Nature, to do the things contained in the Law; no doubt, by some
special assistances of the Spirit keeping them from these mischievous (though
accidental) effects of the Law, whereby it is said in this Chapter to enrage
Lust.

For that which I do, A goodly description of the Apostle Paul, who says, Happy
is that man which condemns not himself in the thing which he allows, and as
it might be said in the thing which he allows not. I know it is spoken in
another case, viz. in the matter of indifferent things, making an ill use of
his liberty, Romans 14.20. But how unhappy was St. Paul himself then in this
seventh of Romans, that did not only what he allowed not, but what he hated?
and could not do what he did allow? and highly approve? but the quite contrary?
He certainly did not only condemn himself, but was worthy to be condemned by
all that observed it, and heard or read him, to make such a Description of
himself. But, to speak more closely to the words, this is a plain Description
of a Man, if not maliciously wicked, yet at least impotently so, and the very
Character which Medea the Witch gives of herself in the Poet, Video meliora
proboque deteriora sequor. I see better things and approve of them, but I
follow worse things. Dolus an Virtus quis in host requirat. What odds is there
if an Enemy does us a mischief by Stratagem, or by Valor? So what odds is it
whether a Man does wickedness of choice, or because he cannot well or easily
help it, whilst the Devil himself cannot force us to sin? of whatsoever a Man
is overcome, of the same is he brought under bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. If a Man
does the thing that is wicked frequently, and omits the good that he should do
frequently and usually, let him pretend necessity, or that he could not help
it, or indeed let him say what he will in his excuse, if he does (...), all the
words that can be used to express the doing of a thing, and declares he can do
no otherwise, but omit good, and do that which is evil, he is a sinner, a
carnal person, a fleshly person, or (what can be more expressive?) sold under
sin.

If then I do that which I would not, And what if he do consent unto the Law,
that it is good? Will this make amends for the constant breach of it? Is it not
an high aggravation of such a one's wickedness?

Now then, If this should be spoken as an Excuse for the Sin committed, that it
is not the Sinner's Action, but Sin's Action, it would be the most absurd
Excuse that ever was offered; For what is Sin in any Man? is it a Person, or
Agent, or rather a vicious Quality of the Person? The latter no doubt. See if
any one will be content with this Excuse in a matter of Theft, or Slander, or
Wounds; to say, It Is not I that stole, but my thievish Temper; it is not I that
struck you, but my angry Passion; 'twas not I that railed at you, or spoke evil
falsely of you, but my intemperate and malicious Tongue; this is a Tale to tell
a Child, but not to be believed by a Man, or admitted for an Excuse in a Court
of Justice. It is thy angry Person that strikes; it is thy lustful Heart that
commits lewdness; it is thy covetous Heart that steals and defrauds; it is thy
profane Heart that blasphemes: It will be imputed to thy whole Man, what thou
do with thy Hand or Tongue, or any Member of thy Body; Sin will not be called
to account as a Person, but the Person for the Sin. And therefore, to make a
little sense of the Excuse here, it can only be this, That a Man under
conviction of Sin may say indeed, that he does not sin with all his heart; that
he has a Conscience within him that checks him in and for what he does. But
yet if Conscience cannot restrain him from doing evil, nor command him to do
the good that he should, that renitency of Conscience will not excuse him
before God, but he shall be condemned as a Criminal at last for all his
Commissions and Omissions, if he does not get beyond this state of Conviction
to a state of Conversion; and the renitency and reluctance of his Conscience
will be so far from excusing him, that it will be the highest aggravation
toward his condemnation.

For I know, Here is another poor Excuse, that the Man under legal convictions,
and not St. Paul converted, makes use of to quiet his Conscience, or to plead
for him with the World, whilst he lives in the practice of Sin, and in the
omission of his Duty: I know, that in me, (that is, in my flesh) dwells no
good thing: I am fleshly, and in the flesh, and alas in my flesh there dwells
no good thing, and how can I do otherwise than sin? the Flesh and the Body is
not properly the seat of Religion, though after a Man is regenerate it is
influenced by religious Principles, and brought into good order, and into the
service of the Spirit, as I shall have occasion to show in the Exposition of
the next Chapter, but in a state of unregeneracy, (which I take to be the state
of the Man in this Chapter) it runs a Man headlong into all impiety and
wickedness, for it has not on its Bridle. And accordingly he confesses further
in the end of the Verse, For to will is present with me, but to perform that
which is good I find not. this will can only be accounted a Velleity, as the
Schools speak, a wishing and a woulding; he would fain do this good, and avoid
that evil, but is perfectly impotent, as to the matter of practice; and what is
this will good for, which can bring nothing to effect?

For the good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that do
I. This is no more than what was said before, and it is an usual way with the
Apostle to repeat, to keep things fresh in memory that had been discoursed, and
an illustration of what had been said in the 18th Verse.

I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. I find
then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

For I delight in the law of God, after the inward man, but I see another law
in my members. And bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my
members. The two Laws indeed did both war, but the Law of Sin was the
conqueror: And of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought under
bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. And then, being captivated, no wonder he cries out in the
24th Verse, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? or this Body of Death. Now when the Law has perfectly left him for
dead, (in a spiritual sense) a condemned Wretch struggling for life by the help
of the Holy Law, which yet could afford him no comfort nor help, here we must
imagine (as I conceive) that God, in wonderful Mercy, made a discovery of
Christ and Grace to him; the Law was his Schoolmaster to bring him to Christ.
Now Christ is precious to him (as the only Savior) that was before utterly
lost and undone in himself, and as to all hopes from the Law.

Now, I suppose, this Verse is that which has misled all those Interpreters
and good Christians that mistook this Chapter, as if St. Paul had spoken it of
himself after conversion. The Expression indeed is admirable, and truly
Evangelical; but I take it (as I said before) as a new discovery made to him
under his Bondage and Captivity under Sin, by which he might attain unto true
deliverance from the guilt and power of Sin.

I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. This I take to be added in the
close of this Chapter as the summa totalis, or the Epitome of all the foregoing
Discourse. But yet even in it though there is one little word added (...), I my
self, (because the Mind is indeed more principally a Man's self, than his Flesh
or Body is) yet it is to me very insignificant to prove what Men would have;
for as long as the Law of the Members prevails against the Law of the Mind, and
brings the Man into captivity to the Law of Sin. What is that Service of God
with his Mind worth? It Is the predominant Party in the Man that denominates him
spiritual or carnal; and indeed he allows the Denomination (quae sumitur a
Majori) in the fourteenth Verse, I am carnal, and I am a person sold under sin.

And so I dismiss the seventh Chapter, and hasten out of this cold shivering
Water, as I called it above, into the other hot Bath of the eighth Chapter,
which will more evidently and demonstratively clear the sense and importance of
the seventh, and was given us, as I said above, as another surety for the
seventh, that the seeming ill sense of that might have no evil influence upon
us, nor give any disparagement to our noble Gospel-Religion. But I shall take
along with me, as Ariadnes thread, that Expression which was put into the dying
and otherwise despairing Man's mouth, in the 23th Verse of the seventh Chapter,
when he had said gaspingly, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And from
that Expression I take my rise to begin to explain the first Verse of the
eighth Chapter.

ROMANS, Chap. VIII.
THere is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Ay, they are the Men indeed,
and none but they free from condemnation. The Man in the seventh Chapter was
(...) carnal, (...) in the flesh, Verse 5. and therefore was followed with
condemnation; but they that are in Christ Jesus, walk after the Spirit, their
state is altered, and therefore no wonder they are freed from their
Desperations. But the second Verse makes all clear.

For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, There are several things
very observable in this Verse:

1. Here is the personation continued in the first person, I, and me, has set
me free; as much as to say, I, that before was a captive to Sin under the Law
of Sin and Death, am set free.

2. Here is a quite different Law, never before mentioned, viz. The Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus.

3. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, sets the person free that
was captive under the Law of Sin and Death. Now let it be allowed, (Disputandi
Causa) that the word or person (I) all along the seventh Chapter was St. Paul,
yet sure they will not deny that (me,) which is but the Accusative Case of I,
is St. Paul also. Let all then depend upon this word: And then it will plainly
appear, that Ego, non sum Ego. The I in the seventh Chapter, though spoken of
the same person, is not spoken of the same person in the same state here. In
the seventh Chapter he is led into Captivity to the Law of Sin and Death. In
this Chapter the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has set him free
from the Law of Sin and Death. Therefore the Man in the seventh Chapter, that
was led into captivity to the Law of Sin, Verse 23. needed the Gospel (which is
here called the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus) to set him at
liberty from this Law of Sin. Therefore he was before only a miserable Man
under the convictions and condemnations of the Law, and not converted, which
was the thing to be proved. But yet the Apostle goes on, and gives a more full
account of this matter, which leaves the thing without all pretense of doubt,
as I conceive, Ver. 3, 4.

For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, ((...),
did) i.e. and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. The Explication of this Verse
alone clears the whole matter, as I judge: (...), supple (...), etc. What was
the impossible thing which the Law could not do? Why, to justify or sanctify
a sinner. How came it impossible to the Law, to effect either of these? Why,
not from any weakness in itself; it would have justified innocent Man with good
authority. But it cannot justify a sinner, that is impossible, for then the
Law of God would cease to be holy; it would have sanctified innocent Man, that
is, have led him on from one kind of holy action to another, and made him
conversant in, and ready at doing the whole Will of God. But when it meets with
a sinner, through the sin which reigns in his flesh, it not only condemns him,
but irritates and provokes Lust, till Sin by the Commandment appear in its
colors, appear Sin, and become out of measure sinful, as we have at large
discoursed this matter in the foregoing Chapter. This argues no weakness in the
Law, that it cannot justify or sanctify a sinner; for it is weak only through
the flesh. So that any Man that does not betake himself to Christ and the
Gospel, but is only under Convictions from the Law, must needs be in such a
condition as the seventh Chapter describes. But now God, in infinite Mercy,
(since the Law, under which Man was created, was utterly disabled from
justifying, much more from sanctifying fallen Man) sent his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh; and by so sending him, did that for us which the Law
could not do; and for sin, or as it is in the Margin, by a Sin-offering
condemned sin in the flesh, that is, expiated our sins, and showed us a way,
how we might effectually subdue our lusts; or to give you the Paraphrase of the
Verse in Dr. Hammond's own words they are these:

For when through the fleshly desires of Men carrying them headlong into all
Sin, in despite of the Prohibitions of the Law, Chap. 7.14. the Law of Moses
was by this means weak, and unable to reform and amend Men's Lives, then most
seasonably God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, that is, in a
mortal body, which was like sinful flesh, (and differed nothing from it, save
only in innocence) and that on purpose that he might be a Sacrifice for Sin;
and by laying our Sins on him, showed a great Example of his Wrath against all
carnal Sins, by punishing Sin in his flesh, that so Men might be persuaded by
Love, or wrought on by Terrors, to forsake their sinful Courses.

By this means Sin itself is condemned in our flesh, that is, destroyed as to
its guilt and power, which before by the Law had condemned us.

That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, By this means, namely, the sending Christ to die, and giving us the
Gospel, which discovers to us his Death and Resurrection, and the ends of them,
we are persuaded (the Spirit working together with it in the Preaching of it)
to betake ourselves to Christ for Pardon and Salvation, and for Strength
against every Lust of the Flesh; and being truly converted by and to the Faith
of the Gospel, the Righteousness of the Law comes to be fulfilled in us, and we
are enabled, through the Grace of God, to do the substance of all that which
the Moral Law requires; and our Failings are hid by the Intercessions of
Christ, and we are truly said to walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

And now see if there be not a vast alteration of states from the Man in the
seventh of the Romans, and the same I in the eighth; the one is legal and under
the Power of Sin, led captive by the Law of Sin, the other is set at liberty by
the Gospel from the Law of Sin and Death, that is, that Sin which necessarily
ends in Death, For the wages of sin is death; and this is done by the Law of
the Spirit of Life, which is only in Christ Jesus, and conveyed by his Gospel
into the minds of Men. It Is the new Law, the Law of the Spirit; so the Gospel
is called: We are Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit; for the Letter, that is, the Law, kills; but the Spirit, that is, the
Gospel, gives Life, 2 Cor. 3.6. The words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit and they are life, John 6.^^. T^erefore the Gospel coming in power, is
called the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus; and it is also called the
Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8.

I have now done with the argumentative Part, as hoping that the Cause is won,
which yet whether it be or no, I must leave to the serious and candid Reader to
determine for himself, only I shall desire of any that is unsatisfied, to give
as fair an Account of his contrary Opinion and Persuasion as I have here done
by insisting upon the several Verses of the 7th Chaper especially, and let him
see if he can make sense of every thing, as I have done, and not only argue
against the whole together, by some little Arguments that he may imagine to
himself to have some strength in them. I have not, that I know, balked or avoid
d any thing in the whole Chapter that looks like an Argument for the Opinion
which I contradict: And, that I may not be alone is this Discourse, I thought
it convenient to subjoyn, out of Dr. Hammond's Commentary, what were his
Sentiments upon the Subject debated; which after I have transcribed, I shall
willingly follow the Apostle's Discourse, throughout the whole eighth Chapter.
For that therein (as I humbly conceive) the Apostle pursues the Mystery of the
Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, till he makes it evident,
that this new Law, otherwise truly called Gospel and the Ministration of the
Spirit, carries a Man on not only to a freedom from the Law of Sin and Death,
or the bondage and power of Corruption, but carries him through the whole
course of mortification of Sin, and vivification even of our natural Flesh,
bringing it on to the service of the Spirit, the Spirit of our Mind, or the Law
of the Mind, and indeed into a rejoicing in the Conduct of the Spirit of God;
it brings us on to a Spirit of Adoption, praying to God with holy Boldness, as
a Father. It carries us on through the heaviest Sufferings, and teaches us not
only to call them, but account them light; it teaches us to live by Faith and
Hope; it teaches us, lastly, fully to acquiesce in the holy Will, good Will
and Favor of God, as unconquerable and invulnerable, and makes us to triumph
in God, and in our Lord Jesus, as inseparable from his Love by all that can
befall us here; and so makes us the glory of Christ here, by bearing and doing
all for him, which must needs end in being glorified with him in the Heavens.

The Words which I thought fit to transcribe out of Dr. Hammond's Commentary,
upon this Subject, you may find at the Letter d, on the seventh Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans.

I had not known sin.] Dr. Hammond, Romans 7.7.
It is an ordinary figure (says the Doctor) to speak of other Men in the first
Person, but most frequently in blaming or noting any fault in others; for then
by the putting it in this disguise, fastening it on one's own person, it is more
likely to be well taken by them to whom it belongs. So says St. Chrysostom of
this Apostle, (...), when he mentions things that are any way grievous, or
likely to be ill taken, he does it in his own person: And St. Hierem on Daniel,
Peccata populi enumerat Persona sua quod and Apostolum in Epistola ad Romano^
facere legimus. Confessing the Sins of the People, be does it in his own
person, which we read practiced by the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans;
that is most probably in this place. Thus the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.12. All
things are lawful to me, but all things are not expedient; that is, those
things which are by you looked on as indifferent, if they be yielded to may be
very hurtful in you: And 1 Cor. 13.2. If I have all Faith, and have not
Charity; that is, if you want Charity to your other Gifts. So Gal. 2.18. If
what I have destroyed, I build the same again, I make myself a transgressor;
that is, whosever does so, or whenever ye do so, it must needs be a fault in
you. Thus, Romans 3.7. If the truth of God has more abounded by my lie unto his
glory, why am I also judged as a sinner? Which words are certainly the
personating of an impious Objector, which speaks or disputes thus; not of the
Apostle himself. And the same Scheme, or Fashion of Speech or Writing, is very
frequent among all Authors. Secondly, By the severals affirmed in this Chapter,
which cannot belong to St. Paul, it appears, that St. Paul did not speak these
things of himself. For that Paul was at the writing of this, a reformed
regenerate person, there is no doubt; but if we compare the severals which are
here mentioned, with the parts of a regenerate Man's Character given by the
same Apostle in other places, we shall find them quite contrary: Here, in the
eighth Verse, he says, That sin had wrought in him all manner of
concupiscence, whereas of the regenerate Man it is affirmed, Gal. 5.24. they
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
Here, in the ninth Verse, it is said, sin revived and I died; whereas of the
regenerate Man it is said, Chap. 6.2. How shall we, that are dead to sin live
any longer therein? Here, in the fourteenth Verse, it is said, I am carnal;
whereas of the regenerate Man it is affirmed, Chap. 8.1. that he walks not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Here again, in that fourteenth Verse,
it is said, I am sold under sin; whereas of the regenerate it is affirmed, Chap.
6.18. that be becomes free from sin, and becomes the se vant of righteousness.
Here, Verse 20. Sin dwells in me, and, (...), accomplisheth, works that
which I will not, like not with my mind and conscience. And so it is said, Ver.
23, 24. That the law of the members carries him into captivity to the law of
sin, and who shall deliver him from this body of death? And so that he is under
the power of the law of sin and death, that he obeys the law of sin, Ver. 25.
Whereas, Chap. 8.2. of the regenerate it is affirmed, That the law of the spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, has made him free from the law of sin and death.
Nothing can be more contrary and irreconcilable to a regenerate state in these
so many particulars, than what is here affirmed of the (...). I he person here
represented. And indeed, unless sinning against Conscience be the only way of
alleviating and not aggravating sin, it is impossible, that the doing that ill
he would not, the not doing the good he would, Ver. 19, 20. can be deemed a fit
Ingredient in the Character of a regenerate Man. It Is certain this was in the
Person of Me^ea, made by the Heathens the highest pitch of Villainy, to see and
like that which was good, and to do the direct contrary; and therefore cannot
in any reason be thought to be the Apostle's description of a regenerate Man, a
good Christian. I add, much less of himself.

And now methinks these Lines that I have quoted and transcribed out of Dr.
Hammond, are so grave, learned and wise, that I look upon what I have written
as trifli^g, in comparison with them, which in two or three Pages contain in a
manner the substance of all that I have written. Yet I am not utterly
discouraged from making it public, because that may please and convince one,
that may not have the same influence on another. And what I have written, I
hope I have done in the fear of God, and with true zeal for the good of Souls,
and there is certainly an Use of various ways of Expressing and Arguing for the
Information of various Capacities.

I come now therefore to my promised Work, of going through the several Verses
of the eighth Chapter, for that in that Chapter, what follows in several
Verses, is a mighty confirmation of what has been delivered, and a great
improvement of the Discourse by several gradations, showing how the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus sers a Man still more and more at liberty from
the Law of Sin and Death, and leads him up to his high places, as Habakkuk's
phrase is, Hab. 3.9. The Lord God is my strength, and be will make my feet like
hind's feet, and he will make me to walk upon my high places. Proverbs 15.24.
The way of life is above to the wise, to deliver from hell beneath And indeed
till a Man be enlightened in the Gospel, and lifted up by the Spirit of God, as
it were, to walk over other Men's heads, he is as nothing in the World, 1 Cor.
2.19. The spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.

For they that are after the flesh, Romans 8.5.
do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the spirit, the
things of the spirit. The Apostle having (as I have above declared) settled the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and ended the Discourse in triumph at the
end of the fifth Chapter, and proceeded in the sixth Chapter to show at large
how Holiness and Sanctification also necessarily and effectually follows, upon
the hearty embracing the Doctrine of the Gospel (thereby they are baptized into
the Death of Christ, and profess themselves dead to Sin, and are actually set
free from Sin, and become the Servants of Righteousness, and yield themselves
unto God, and their Members Instruments of Righteousness unto God, Ver. 13, 14.
and have their Fruit unto Holiness, Verse 22.) He (as in a Parenthesis) in the
seventh Chapter, gives you a Parable of a Man endeavoring to be holy by the
Law, but is utterly defeated of his design, and instead of attaining Holiness
thereby, loses all his comfort and hope, and is plunged into a far worse
condition (as to Holiness) than he was in before; and being brought into a
state of desperation thereby, betakes himself to Christ; then, in the very nick
of time revealed to him, and by betaking himself to Christ, is set at liberty
from Condemnation and Desperation, and also from the Law of Sin and Death,
which he acknowledged himself before to be led into captivity unto after a
fierce Battle, betwixt the Law of the Members, and the Law of the Mind, and so
finds by blessed experience, that he is one of them in whom the Righteousness
of the Law is now fulfilled, which Righteousness (by the Law) could never have
been effected, accomplished and fulfilled. The Righteousness of the Law can
never be fulfilled in any mortal Man, but by the Grace of the Gospel received;
that is, a Man can never become holy but by Faith. Acts 15.9. Purifying their
Hearts by Faith. Gal. 5.6.6.15. Faith working by Love, to the keeping the
Commandments of God, is the new Creature. Compare those two places in Gal. Such
Men as have this Faith, they walk not after the Flesh any longer, but after the
Spirit.

For they that are after the flesh, -- This Particle for, is a causal Particle,
and shows the Reason of the Assertion going before: The Assertion before in the
fourth Verse is this, The righteousness of the law is (or that it might be)
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Now this
is proved to be so, because they that are after the Flesh do ^ind the things of
the Flesh, and they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit:
Therefore they who are after the Spirit, do truly attain unto the Holiness and
Righteousness of the Law, which is a Spiritual and an Holy Law, because their
whole Mind is set upon spiritual things, or the things of the Spirit; but for
carnal Men, or Men that are after the flesh, their whole mind is upon fleshly
or carnal things; and accordingly as Men's minds are set, (if they have
undertaken a feasible thing) such will their seize be. They that are
after the Flesh, (as all those are, that are under the Law: Romans 7.5. When we
were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the law did work) do mind
the things of the Flesh Cogitant desiderant curant sapiunt.
; they savor and relish, and give their mind to nothing, but Carnalia, bona
mundana honores opes, etc. Corpores Voluptates, vel opera Carnis ad quae
Concupiscencia Carnalis inclinat ut peccata omnia.
fleshly things; they cannot freely lift up their Heart to God, and heavenly or
spiritual things; but true Saints of God, that have received the Spirit of Life
which is in Christ Jesus, (have embraced Gospel-Principles with a Spirit of
Faith and Love, and so walk after the Spirit) their mind is wholly, or at least
chiefly ser upon the things of the Spirit, which I take in other words to
signify Matters of Religion. And therefore since their minds are wholly set
upon them, no wonder they make great seize in them, so as to have the
righteousness of the Law fulfilled in them.

For to be carnally minded is death, For a Man to be carnally minded, (...) the
carnal mind or carnal mindedness, or to be wholly set upon carnal things is a
stare of Spiritual Death, and will end (if continued in) in Eternal Death.
There can be no life in Religion where the mind is carnal, and his tendency is
altogether toward, and his relish is only of, carnal things. But to be
spiritually minded, (...), the whole tendency of a Man, endued with the Spirit,
(and that has heartily embraced Gospel-Principles) is toward heavenly life,
and living unto God; and as he has a lively activity for God, so his comforts
accordingly grow upon him; to be spiritually minded, is not only full of life
and activity for God, but full of peace and comfort ordinarily: Great peace
have they that keep thy law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm 119.165.

Because the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the
law of God, It is no wonder that the carnal mind should have no activity for
God, and so consequently no peace whilst it is enmity against God; yea,
neither is subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Why, what is this
carnal mind? Here I must make a grand Enquiry, that we may find out (if it so
please God) what this carnal mind is; for if we know not the Subject spoken of,
we can never well understand what that is which is predicated, or affirmed, and
asserted of it; at least not the manner how it is affirmed of it: For, non
entis nulla sunt attributa, and non esse, and non apparere idem est. What then
is meant by the (...); nay, what is meant by (...), of which (...) is but an
accident or attrioute? We may know what (...) is, best by knowing what (...)
is. Now, in Verse 27 of this Chapter, it is said, God, that searches the
Hearts. knows (...), what is the Mind of the Spirit, when it makes
Intercessions for us within us; and doubtless there the meaning is what the
Spirit would have. So here, (...), is what the Flesh would have, the relish,
savor or tendency of the Flesh. What is this that is here called Flesh, which
has in it such a (...), such a tendency, such a relish, such a savor, as
neither is nor can be subject to the Law of God? Till this Question be well
answered, till this Enquiry be prudently and satisfactorily made, I despair of
ever giving a right Paraphrase or Interpretation of this Verse, or any of the
like nature. Caro, says Vorstius, est Vitiositas nativa seu peccatum Originis,
a quo nihil boni cogitari and praestari potest; and this Mr. Pole in his
Synopsis leaves for the meaning of it. Now this I cannot acquiesce in as a full
description of the Subject Flesh, here spoken of, there is something of the
truth in it, but it is not satisfactory. That it cannot be meant of sinful
flesh, or a principle or root in us, that unavoidably carries sin in it, or
produces sin, seems apparent to me, from the Expression of the Apostle in the
latter end of this Verse, The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. The Apostle makes a great
assertion, That the carnal mind is enmity against God; then he gives a reason,
Because it is not subject to the Law of God: and then follows this reason, with
an high proof or aggravation, which makes the reason very full and evident,
That it is not only actually not subject, but incapable of becoming subject,
(...), neither indeed can be. Now, to me, it would be no wonder, no high
discovery at all, to say, That a sinful nature cannot be subject to the holy
Law; for every body knows, that that which has sin necessarily in it, cannot
be subject to that which is holy; for there is a perfect contradiction in one
to the other. But now if there be such a thing which by nature is indifferent
to sin or not to sin, but by accidental circumstances becomes sinful, and
whilst it is under those accidents and circumstances cannot but be a sinning
Principle and productive of variety of sins; to assert concerning his, that
whilst under these circumstances, it cannot be subject to the Law of God. This
may be a great discovery, and worth our best and strictest notice and
observation. Now such a thing I take the flesh, and the (...), to be in this
Discourse of the Apostle's. We know, that (...) and (...), flesh and spirit,
are the two contradistinct and constituent parts of Man: Tee spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41. Sometimes there are three parts made of a
Man, Body, Soul, and Spirit, Corpus, Arima, (which make Animals) and Spirit,
which make a Man; which is the (...). 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Now there was a time when Flesh and Spirit did sweetly agree in the Service of
God, and the Flesh was without sin: But since Adam fell, there was a sad
divorce made between the Flesh and the Spirit of a Man, and every sinner and
unregenerate person adheres to his fleshly part, with the neglect of the Soul
and Spirit, or Mind and Conscience, and is led by the inclinations and
tendencies of the Flesh; and so the Flesh in them is deserted of its Guide, the
(...), it has lost its Bridle, and now the Flesh gives the denomination to a
carnal Man. Nay, the Flesh (that is, as destitute of its Guide, which ought to
be the Spirit of a Man, enlightened and assisted by the Spirit of God) is called
by the name of a sinning Principle, and partly in the Saints themselves, for
that none of them is perfect: So you have it, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these two are
contrary the one to another, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Now
Men, that are wholly unregenerate, are wholly under the command of their
fleshly inclinations, and they follow the (...), that which the Flesh dictates
and commands, and this is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be;
that is, whilst they remain carnal: till they have received the Gospel, they
are in the flesh, and walk after the flesh. Nay, there is a further piece of
mystery in this matter, that whereas the Flesh (according to the order of
Nature, and institution of God in our first Creation) ought to be influenced
and guided and ruled by the Spirit; in carnal Men, the Flesh influenceth and
infecteth their very Mind and Conscience, which is the only Fort and Garrison
that God holds in a wicked Man: Therefore we hear of a fleshly Mind, Col.
2.18. And there even their Minds and Consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15. So
that the sense of this seventh Verse seems now somewhat clear to me, wherein
the Apostle proves what he had asserted in the sixth, That to be carnally
minded is death; namely, because it is enmity against God, and is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. And therefore what wonder is it, that
it brings on a spiritual Death; whereas, on the contrary, to be spiritually
minded, (...), is Life and Peace. When a Man has entertained the Gospel, and
therewithal received the Spirit of God into his Heart, he is alive to God, and
full of Peace and Joy.

I might add one thing more, which may possibly elucidate this matter, and that
is this: The (...), the tendency and strong bent of the Flesh, or the Flesh
itself deserted of the Spirit of a Man and of God, is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be; because the Flesh is not the immediate Subject of
Religion any more than a Brute is; the brute Animals are not under any Rule of
Religion; the Body is but the Soul's Jumentum, its inferior Associate, it is
not capable of seeing any Beauty or goodness in Religion; but when the Mind is
convinced and brought over to God, the Flesh may and will join with the Soul,
its ancient Friend and Guide, even in all its faculties and appetites, so long
as it is well watched and guided and prudently provided for; accordingly the
Apostle advises his good, holy, sanctified Believers, Romans 6.12. Let not sin
therefore reign in your mortal body, (or flesh) that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, (...), that ye should obey it, that is, Sin in the lusts or
desires of it, that is, the mortal Body, as I have discoursed at large in the
sixth Chapter.

The Paraphrase therefore of this Verse is this: The carnal Mind, (or rather
the tendency and humor or mind of the Flesh) deserted of the conduct of the
Spirit, has set up an interest against God, Thence we have it in Greek, Latin
and English, (...), Virtutem aspernantes, and unbridled Lusts, Effraenes
cupiditates.
and is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Rebus sic
stantibus, till the Bridle, Fraenum, that it has lost, be super-induced. It is
like a mad Horse snuffing up the Wind, and taking its Course whither it
pleases and lusts.

So then, No wonder then, that they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
This Inference will be easily admitted: They that are in the flesh, that is,
wholly addicted to and commanded by the lusts or desires of their flesh, I take
it to be all one with that Expression, (...), they that are after the flesh,
only there may be this little difference, that (...), signifies the state, and
(...), signifies conversation, as walking after the flesh, or according to the
motions and dictates of it, (...). Piscator and Beza say, (...) is put for
(...), so then, or therefore; but others sav, (...) is never taken for (...);
and then it must be translated, Now they that are in the flesh, cannot please
God; and therefore the righteousness of the Law is not fulfilled in them. This
I take to be the most genuine Interpretation: And this Verse is confessed to be
the Conclusion of the whole Argumentation of the Verses foregoing.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be the spirit of God
dwell in you. Now the Apostle has done with the Argumentation beginning from
the first Verse, which Argumentation I take to be directed against the state of
the Man under convictions in the seventh Chapter. And so speaks to his
converted Romans, Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, with this
caution, If so be that the spirit of God dwell in you: For every Man that has
received the Gospel sincerely, and betaken himself to Christ and his
Righteousness, from the Condemnations and accidental Irritations of the Law,
has the Spirit of God dwelling in him; for the Gospel is the Ministration of
the Spirit, which the Law is not: Gal. 3.2. This only would I learn of you,
Received ye the spirit, by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

And if Christ be in you, (that is, by his Spirit) the body is dead because of
sin: I fancy or apprehend this to be the meaning of these dark Expressions, for
which I shall seriously consult Expositors, Dr. Hammond, Pole, and Marlorate,
and give any thing that I find in them, which I think considerable: But I
presume first here, to give my own thoughts, for which I beg the Reader's
pardon. If Christ be in you, by his Spirit, the body is dead, because of sin;
that is, your Flesh and Body, by which you were heretofore strongly impelled,
and as it were forced on to the commission of all sorts of sin, is dead
Piscator (...), Quod ad pecc^tion, scuratione peccati, ne scilicet possit
amplius nos impellere ad petulanter peccandum.
, as to sin, (...), because of sin, propter or secundum, where I imagine (...)
to have the force of (...). And this I am sure is less straining, than to use
(...) for (...), which Piscator and Beza do, and our English Translators in the
eighth Verse, So then they, etc. Though Pole tells us, from another Author,
Tolet, that (...), as I take it, is never so used. But to make good this
Exposition, see how the sense seems to force it, If Christ be in you, the body
is dead, because of, or, as to sin: That is, the Flesh in its Lusts is
mortified. I am sure this is true Divinity, But the spirit is life, (in the
abstract) or alive in the concrete, that it may answer to (...), dead, in the
Antithesis in the words: that is, Whereas, when you were without the Spirit of
Christ, the Flesh and the Body was alive and regnant, and the Law of the
Members warred against the Law of the Mind or Spirit, and had the better of it,
and brought you into captivity to the Law of Sin, which Law of Sin was in the
Members in the Flesh and Body. Now this Body, this rampant Flesh, unbridled
Lust, which had cast off the Bridle of the Spirit, and the Law of the Mind and
Conscience, which ought to have ruled the Flesh; this Body is dead, not simply,
but (...), that is (...), or (...), the Body is dead in the matter of Sin, so
that you need not obey Sin in the lustings of the Body; though the Body has
its desires still of eating and drinking, etc. yet it has not those strong,
impetuous, irregular desires that it had, but is dead in a great measure,
because of Sin, or as to Sin: But the Significat spiritum hominis tum ob
Antithesin Corporis and Spiritus tum extollat. v. seq. Animam five rationalem
partem gratia Christi renovatam. Estius ex Oecumen. and Cass.
spirit is life, or greatly alive, because of righteousness, or as to the
matter of Righteousness. Now the Law of the Mind prevails over the Law of the
Members, you are alive to God and Righteousness and Holiness.

But if the spirit of him, that is, God the Father, that raised up Christ from
the dead, Here I confess I have a peculiar Notion, which I have been hammering
at these thirty Years, but I will assure thee, Reader that it is honest, and
will lead thee into no dangerous Error, and therefore consider it. If the
spirit of him, that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit
that dwells in you. That is, in your mortal Body, in which the Apostle
forbids, that Sin should reign, Romans 6.12. I say this mortal Body shall not
only be dead, as to the matter of Sin, which is affirmed in the 10th Verse, and
is a great attainment by the Spirit of Christ's dwelling in us. The World is
well altered with such a Man, that whereas his Flesh did rule and lead him
captive to the Law of Sin, now this Flesh and this mortal Body of his should be
dead as to the matter of Sin; this I say, is a great attainment and a blessed
alteration from his former state: But this is not all, no, the chiefest thing
is yet behind, the Flesh shall not only not be a clog to the Spirit, but it
shall be a meet-help, it shall not only be dead as to Sin, but it shall be
quickened up into the Service of the Spirit; the Flesh of the Saints in their
mortal Body, before they have died and past through the Grave, shall be brought
by the indwelling of the Spirit to an usefulness in the Service of God.
Piscator in Polc. Certurn est hic non agi de Resurrectione Corpor^m, Calvin.
Non de ultima Resurrectione hic loquitur, sed de continua Spiritus Operatione,
qua Reliquias Carnis paulatim mortificans Coelestem Vitam in whis instaurat,
ibid.
He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal body;
while it is mortal, it may die, and must die: By the spirit that dwells in
you, which I take to be an Expression signifying our present State here, after
Conversion; and not a Glorified Estate in Heaven; for though the Saints in
Heaven shall not be void of the Spirit of God there, as we may conceive, yet I
take it, this Phrase, by his spirit which dwells in you, signifies the State
of this Life, and that whilst we live here, and have the Spirit of God and of
Christ dwelling in us. Our mortal Bodies which are yet only wortalia and not
Mortua, (...), and not (...), shall be quickened into the service of our Spirit,
which was the design of God in his Creating Man, before the rebellion of the
Flesh happened, and our Spirits led by the Spirit of God. So then we shall Eat
and Drink to the Glory of God, we shall Marry in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.
Servants shall serve their Master, as serving the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24. And
so I might instance in all the particular actions relating to the Body, and the
Animal Life. If they are Musical, they will not endure wanton Songs; their very
Music shall be Innocent, which is now so much devoted to the Devil, to
Bacchus, and Veaus, and Mars, the Heathen Deities.

Therefore brethren we are debtors. we are debtors; You see we are all obliged,
and that greatly, we are not our own Men, all Men are Debrors engaged one way
or another. not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live.

The Spirit of God and of Christ dwells in every Saint, and we are to make use
of the Assistances of the Spirit dwelling in us, to mortify the Deeds and
Affections of the Body so far as the Body was engaged in Sin, and captivated ^o
the Law of Sin. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts; and therefore no Doubt also in his deeds, Col.
3.9.

For as many as are led by the spirit of God, The Apostle still grows in his
Sense, as the Rule is in Oratory, Cres^at Oration. The Apostle had before
affirmed, that if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; and
then he tells us, That where the Spirit of Christ is, the Body is dead because
of Sin, or as to the matter of Sin, and the Spirit is alive as to the matter of
Righteousness, and that the very mortal Body shall be quickened (as I take it)
in this Life to the Service of the Spirit, that is of our natural Spirit and
Conscience, not excluding, but highly including the Spirit of God. And now that
we shall find our whole selves Debtors, or owing ourselves not to the flesh any
longer, than it must be to the Spirit: and in this 14 Verse, That we are led by
the Spirit, go ten under the conduct of it; that we are safe indeed, unless we
wickedly depart from such a Guide. And now he takes one step further, that by
that time we are come thus far, we are gotten under a Spirit of Adoption.

And here I take it, the Apostle has much done with the Discourse of Holiness
and Sanctification, as brought about by the Gospel, and so proceeds to other
privileges which a Saint enjoys and arrives at, which I am willing to
prosecute to the end of this Chapter, for it is a rich Mine and a most luscious
Discourse. The Lord grant that I may beable to proceed in it more than
Notionally and Speculatively, that I may have the true enjoyment of these
Discourses, by being able to apply every thing to my own Soul for my comfort
and elevation of Heart in the ways of God, as having a particular Interest and
Concern in these Mysteries.

But before I go any further on in the following Verses I must endeavor to
perform my Promise, of giving what I find in Hammend, Pole, and Marlorat,
considerable and different from my apprehensions here signified upon the 10 and
11 Verses.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; if so be the Spirit of God
dwell in you. Paraphrase:

But ye Christians under the Gospel, if ye have any of that Spiritual Divine
Temper, Dr. Hammond upon the 9 Ver. has these words.
which Christ came to infuse by his Doctrine and Example, are thereby engaged
to all manner of sincere inward Purity to mortify the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts; and if you do not so, you live not according to the
Gospel; and if not so, ye may know that you are not Christians, Christ will not
own you for his, however ye have received the Faith, and are admitted into the
Number.

And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin, but the spirit is
life, Paraphrase:

But if ye be Christians indeed, translated and raised above the pretensions of
the Jew, to the purity of the Gospel of Christ, and your Lives be answerable
thereto, then, though being Sinners, the punishment of Sin, that is Death,
befall you, and so your bodies dye and return to Dust, which is the punishment
of Sin; yet your Souls shall live for ever an happy and a blessed Life, as the
reward of your return to Christ, in the sincerity of a new and righteous Life,
to which the Evangelical Justification belongs.

But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you,
Paraphrase:

And then even for your dead Bodies they shall not finally perish neither; they
shall be sure to be raised again, for the Spirit of God, by which ye are to be
guided and led, is that Divine Omnipotent Spirit, that raised Christ's dead
body out of the Grave; and if ye be guided by that, animated and quickened by
that, live a pious and holy life, there is no doubt but God will raise your
mortal Bodies out of the Graves also, by the power of the same Spirit that
raised Christ's.

As for Pole's Synopsis, I have read over all that he says upon these Verses,
and you see what I have gotten out of him from Piscator, Calvin, Estius, and
others, toward my sense, and as he has all the senses of diverse Authors, so
in it you have this of Dr. Hammond.

Now for Marlorat, I find the same Quotation out of Calvin that Pole has upon
these words, Vivificabit and Mortalia Corpora vestra: He shall also quicken
your mortal Bodies, Mortalia Corpora vocat, quiequid adbuc restat in nobis
Morti obuoxium, ut mos est illi usitatus crassiorem nostri partem hoc nomine
appellare, ut jam saepe dictum est: Vnde colligimus, non de ultima
Resurrectione, quae momento fiet, haberi Sermonem, sed de continua Spiritus
operatione, qua, reliquias Carnis paulatim mortificans, coelestem Vitam in
nobis instaurat. In English thus: St. Paul calls that our mortal Bodies,
whatsoever yet remains in us liable to death, as it is an usual Custom with
him, to call our grosser part by that name, as I have often already said:
Whence we gather, that he does not here speak of the last Resurrection, which
shall be done in a moment, (by the Spirit of Christ and of God) but of the
continual Operation of the Spirit in us, whereby mortifying by little and
little the relics and remainders of the Flesh, he does renew and establish an
heavenly Life in us. And so I have done with the 10, 11, 12, 13 Verses.

For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. he is
led by the spirit of God; and so, secondly, is one of the Sons of God. I shall
hasten now with as much brevity as I can to the end of this Chapter. And such a
one is not only a Son, but is in a very fair way to understand, and to have the
boldness of a Son in the presence of God.

For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again to fear. Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. to
the end of the 7th Verse. Gal. 3.22, 23, 24. Ye have received the spirit of
adoption, by which we cry, Abba, Father. Ye Romans have received the Spirit, by
which same Spirit we Christians of all Nations cry, Abba, Father; for the
Saints drink all into one Spirit, according to that Article of our Creed, the
Communion of Saints.

The spirit itself bears witness with our spirits, There are two Spirits
spoken of in one Verse; the Spirit itself, that is, the Spirit of God, b^areth
witness with our Spirits, that is with our Consciences, (being enlightened by
the Spirit of God, and renewed thereby, and restored to its empire over the
Flesh, by which renovation we are made the Children of God) that we are the
Children of God. First, we must be the Children of God, and then the Spirit of
God can and will bear witness to this Truth, that so it is; unless our
Consciences can bear this Testimony, the Spirit will not, cannot bear such a
Testimony, because it is a Spirit of Truth.

And if children, See how the Privilege rises, all Children among Men are not
Heirs, but all God's Children are Heirs; heirs of God, and joynt-heirs, or
Coheirs, with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together. See what little reason we have to be asraid of Suffering,
if we suffer for a good Cause and with a good Conscience, Phil. 1.29. For unto
you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but to
suffer for his name: It is an additional Gift to that of Faith, to suffer for
the Name of Christ, to bear the Cross, is the way to the Crown, but we are apt
to have dastardly and cowardly Thoughts, and Spirits; St. Paul was quite of
another mind, as he shows in the next Verse.

For I reckon, This is the third Privilege that a Sanctified Man has, viz.
Courage in the midst of all sorts of suffering for Christ, and that upon this
account, namely, the inconceiveable Glory which he is to receive, which will be
so great when it comes, that the whole groaning World waits with earnest
expectation to see the blessed Time, when the Saints shall receive this Glory,
and what Comfort should the Saints themselves then take in the Expectation of
it, and what Patience should they exercise in the mean time.

For the earnest expectation of the creature, this with the 20, 21, 22, I shall
not meddle with as containing no doubt a great Mystery, which good and learned
Men are divided about, and which I confess I do not understand; but thus much
is evident, that there is a wonderful Glory to come for the Saints, and that
this life is a suffering life, but so ordered for the Saints, that they have
great cause of Patience, nay, Joy and Glorying in all their Tribulations,
seeing the whole suffering and groaning World is contented under their
sufferings, merely with the Expectation they have, and Participation that they
shall have of the Saints Glory; for it is said Verse 21. That the creature
itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the children of God.

This is a groaning time: There are three sorts of Groans, 1st, That of the
whole Creation. 2dly, That of the Saints Verse 23. 3dly, The Spirit of God also
makes Intercession for us with Groanings which cannot be uttered.

The First sort of Groans I have passed over with a Confession of my Ignorance,
only that we see the sad effects of sin in which the brute Creatures suffer.

The Second sort of Groans we may and ought to understand.

And not only they, Hammand) but ourselves also which have the first fruits of
the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption,
to wit, the redemption of our bodies. I shall not pretend here to give an
Account of every particular word, but shall content myself with the general
fence, as hastening to the end of the Chapter, only observing the Temper and
good Qualities of the sanctified Man, till he comes to the top of his
Seize. And here I find a 4th Privilege or excellent Quality of this
person that wa^keth not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, which is this:

Though he bear the heaviest Afflictions as light, and thinks them not worthy
to he compared with the Glory to come, yet he groans mightily within himself,
not for the pressure of the Afflictions, but for the presence of that which he
longs Gemimus propter faturum quod deest.
after. He has received the First Fruits in earnest, but longs after and
groans for that of which he has received the earnest: waiting for the
adoption, viz. The redemption of our bodies. This Scripture seems to be much of
the same import with 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. For we that are in this tabernacle,
do groan, being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, they do not
desire to die, to be freed of the burden of affliction, but that they might be
clothed upon with their house from heaven, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life. So here they did groan, waiting for the Adoption, viz. The
Redemption of our Body. Corporis nostri, id est, Corporum nostrorum a
corruptione, mortalitate, concupiscentia, aliisque vitae miseriis quae in
resurrectione demum nobis continget, adoptionem expectantes, id est,
redemptionem vel liberationem. Appositio redemptionis filiationem declarat.
Adoptio hic metonymice sumitur vel pro patefactione adoptionis vel pro
adoptionis fruitione. Adoptio ergo sicut and redemptio hic intelligitur quoad
effectum qui in resurrectione perfectus erit, etc. Vide Polum.

By Adoption and Redemption, is here meant, the declaring our Adoption and
Redemption, and the full enjoyment of both; and this all Saints (when
themselves) do groan after. For it is certainly an essential part of the new
Creature, to have at times, if not frequently, a desire to be dissolved, that
they may be with Christ; for seeing God has made that their happiness, and
they have made it their own choice; when they act like themselves, they must
needs, with St. Paul, have a desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: and
the only reason of a Saint's desiring to live here, should be, that he may
glorify God; for by Faith he has made a discovery of a far better state than
that of this Life can be: and this he must needs desire far more than to live
here, or he is absurd.

For we are saved by hope. All the salvation that we have here, (excepting the
First Fruits, As I hope to be saved, say they: True Saints hope to be saved.
And this is the chief salvation they are possessed of.

For hope that is seen, is not hope: for what a man sees, why does he yet hope
for?

But if we hope for what we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.

Likewise also the spirit helps our infirmities:

And he that searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the spirit, This
I take to be a fifth Privilege of the sanctified person, that walks not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit, That he has the Spirit of God helping his
infirmities, and teaching him to pray both for what he ought, and as he ought;
for these are both specified in the 26th Verse, For we know not what to pray
for as we ought; but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, (...), with
unexpressible groans, groans of that force, urgency and fervency which cannot
be expressed, that is, what the force of them is. All true Saints have the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication; they are enabled some way to pray for what
they ought, and as they ought; and they have Groans that follow their
Petitions, that have a meaning in them, that God only knows; no Man can
conceive of the workings of their Hearts and Affections, so as God the searcher
of the Heart understands them: For thither it is ultimately reserred by the
Apostle, He that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the spirit,
(...). We have spoken somewhat to that Phrase in the 5th, 6th and 7th Verses of
this Chapter, Whether it be the Mind of our Spirit in its groanings, which
comes not forth into words, or rather, what is the Mind of his own Spirit,
because it makes Intercessions for the Saints according to the Will of God.
The Mind and Meaning of the Spirit answers to the Will of God, and therefore is
so acceptable to him. But whose shall be the Groaning? Will any one ascribe
these to the Spirit, as groaning? I question the Divinity of such an
Ascription. Therefore the Groanings are made in the Saints, and actually
exerted or groaned by the Saints, only guided and effected by the Spirit it
self dwelling in them: If so, then the Intercession that is made for us with
these Groanings, is not only made for us in Heaven, but in us on Earth;
therefore we are taught what to pray for, and how to pray by the Spirit, which
makes these Intercessions for us within us, of which God, who searches the
Hearts, judges according to what of the Spirit is in them. I cannot here
descend to speak to the Controversy of Praying by Forms, or without Forms; I
think we may pray in the Holy Ghost (as the Phrase is, Ephesians. 6.18.) with a
Form; and I question not at all, but many good Ministers and private Christians
pray in the Holy Ghost without a Form: And that is all I have to say at
present, Only both ways you see that the sanctified person in this Chapter has
this fifth Privilege to be assisted by the Holy Ghost; in offering his Prayers
and Supplications to God, he does not only groan within himself for the glory
to come, for the hope which yet he does not see, but the Spirit it self helps
him in his Groanings, and to his groanings, (...); the Spirit helps with us and
over against us at the other end of the burden under which we groan, because of
our Infirmities, which else would cause that the burden would be too heavy for
us: Onus attollit ex altera part ne sub eo fatiscamus. Cum multa potuisset
opera Spiritus Sancti proferre, quibus ab ipso juvamur, hoc solum exponit, eum
adjuvare nos in orando, Tol. Therefore it is not his praying for us in Heaven.
Spiritus Sanctus hic ut in praeced. membro intelligitur, E. Tol. Be. Qui
interpellare dicitur non quod apud Patrem aut filium (ut perverse dicebant
Arriani) sit Mediator, sed quod efficaci sua in nobis operatione nos orare
faciat and doceat, Menochius ex Estio, Pole in loc. Quia nos ad preces
instigat, Beza. Quia preces ad Deum nobis dictat, Grotius, Beza. Postulat
Spiritus non in se, sed in nobis and per nos tanquam per instrumenta rationalia
and libera: quod autem per instrumentum fit, ipsi moventi causae primae
tribuitur, Tolet. And that fancy of Grotius, (as I presume to call it, begging
pardon of that great Name) that in Ecclesia Diaconus imaginem quodammodo gerit
Spiritus Sancti. In the Church the Deacon (in reading the Prayers) bears after
a sort the resemblance of the Holy Ghost, strengthens this Interpretation, that
as the Reader goes before the Assembly, in suggesting or rehearsing what they
are to pray for, so the Holy Ghost is the great Guide and Leader of every Saint
in his private and secret Prayer, at least (not to mention others) in showing
them what they are to pray for. There are many rare things in Pole's
Quotations, which are too long to be here inserted and translated: I shall add
a few more, and then translate them, because this is an important Matter. They
are called Groans which cannot be uttered, for several reasons: One, Quia
Spiritus ea desideria and vota nobis saepe inspirat, quae nec ante cogitata,
nec obvia fuerant, nec scitur unde veniant and quo tendant, Tolet. Ver. 27. He
that searches the hearts, knows the mind of the spirit. Gemitus illi surt
nobis non Deo inenarrabiles, scit Deus quo cor ipsum sertur a Spiritu S. motwn
quid Spiritus intendit and per nos postulat, Tolet. Because it makes
intercession for us according to the Will of God. Interpellat, intercedit,
postulat, orat, n^mpe per ipsos sanctos, qui ipsius instrumenta sunt, quorum
Corda movet, excitat and regit. Novit quid studeat spiritus, nempe sanctorum
preces dirigere secundum Deum, suggerendo eis illa precari quae Deo serviant,
Grotius. Ex Polo ioidem. The English of some of those Latin Quotations above is
this: Whereas he might have mentioned many Works of the Spirit, by which we are
helped of it, he only insists upon this, That he helped us in Praying. It is
the Holy Spirit himself who is here to be understood, who is said to make
intercession; not that he is a Mediator with the Father or the Son, (as the
Arrians falsely said) but that by his effectual operation in us he makes and
teaches us to pray, Menochius out of Estius. Because he urges to pray, Beza.
Because he dictates to us Prayers which we are to offer to God, Grotius and
Beza The Spirit makes Intercessions not in himself, but in us and by us as
rational and free Instruments. Now that which is done by an Instrument, is
attributed to the first moving Cause, T^l^t. They are called Groanings, which
cannot be uttered for several Reasons: One, Because the Spirit does often
Inspire into us those Desires and Petitions which neither were thought on
before, nor were any way obvious, or at hand for us to think upon; neither do
we know whence they come, and whither they tend, Tolet. But for this last
Passage, I must needs say, I know not with what Authority or Allowance we can
utter such Passages in Prayer, as we know not whither they tend, unless we
should act purely as inspired, and know that we are inspired. I am much taken
with that Heathen Sentence, Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia; I know not
that we may act in any thing toward Man, much less in our Addresses to God,
beyond what we understand. Once more those Groanings are unutterable to us, not
to God; God knows whither the heart is carried, being moved by the Holy
Ghost, what the Spirit intends or means and asks by us, Tolet. The Spirit
intercedes, asks, prays, viz. by the Saints who are his Instruments, whose
hearts he moves, excites, and governs: God knows what the Spirit means, viz. to
direct the Prayers of the Saints according to God, by suggesting to them those
things to be prayed for, which may serve for the glory of God. Grotius in
Pole's Synopsis.

I have insisted the larger upon this Text and Matter, because I find a strange
Interpretation of the words in a Learned and Reverend Author; wherein, he
carries all this Assistance in Prayer, to the Spirit of Christ's interceding
and praying for us, at the Right Hand of his Father, where he always makes
Intercession for us: So that when we Pray, but know not ourselves what is best,
nor consequently what we ought to pray for, particularly, Health, Wealth, or
Honor; then Christ joins his helping Hand to ours, joins his All-wise and
Divine Prayers (for that which he knows we most want) to our Prayers, and so
helps to relieve us in all our Distresses. And he that searches the hearts,
etc. Paraphrase, and then God that knows our wants, exactly understands also
the desire and intention of the Spirit of Christ. -- This Interpretation you
see is contrary to the current of Expositors both Popish and Protestant,
Grotius and Beza, and turns these two Verses which carry so much matter of
Support and Consolation in them, only upon the Intercession, of Christ in
Heaven, which indeed is a most Comfortable Article of our Faith: but why should
we be robbed and despoiled of the Comfort of the Advocate on Earth, which our
Lord has sent us to supply his absence from us, by making Intercession within
us, as he does without us most effectually at his Father's Right Hand? I meet
with one that says upon this Paraphrase these words: Those that say that by the
spirit that helps our infirmities Ver. 26. is meant Christ by his Spirit
praying for us in Heaven, can neither make it agree with the Context, nor prove
that the Spirit groaneth in Heaven,] or is called our Intercessor there, but
within us. And so I pass to the 28 Verse.

And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God,

After the Apostle had reckoned up, and insisted upon these five several
Privileges, which the sanctified Person is invested with, he seems to come in
a general way to conclude, that not only all these things mentioned, but all
other things whatsoever do work together for good, to them that love God. The
whole Creation groans for their Deliverance, they Groan within themselves for
their glorious State, and the Spirit helps them in their Groanings, and to
further Groanings in Prayer beyond all Words and Expressions, even to meanings
which God knows, and God alone; and they shall all be answered in full Returns,
not a Sigh or a Groan lost, sent out from them that love God, from them that
are effectually called according to his purpose. For I question not but all
things are done according to purpose, which lies hid (as I may humbly say) in
the breast of God. According to the purpose of Eternal Ages, as the Phrase is,
Ephesians. 3.11. Which he made or purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. Then it follows,
as it were, occasionally from this Expression, called, according to his
purpose, Ver. 29.

For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the
image of his son,

Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whem he called,
The Purpose of God is so strongly made that it goes thorough and thorough with
the whole train of Successive glorious Effects; and this demonstrates a
Wonderful Cooperation for good to those that love God, to those that are
called according to his Purpose. Only I must here honestly offer my
Apprehensions in this most profound-Matter, for I would deal honestly with all
the World, and especially with the Church of God: And my chief Observation upon
this Golden Chain, (as it is well called) is this: That the first Link of the
Chain which is fastened to the Mercy-seat (and all the World can never loose it
thence) is foreknowledge, whom he did foreknow, which I humbly conceive is
meant of God's foresight, Quos praescivit nempe tales per ductum Gratiae suae
and consensum liberae Voluntatis futuros been victuros vel Gratiae oblatae
assensuros vel credituros, and in fide perseveraturos. Sic exponunt Chrysostom.
Theodoret. and Hieronymus, etc. Pole in loc. The English is this: Whom he did
foreknow, viz. that they would be such, through the conduct of Grace and the
consent of their own Free Will, as would live well, assent to Grace offered,
would believe and persevere in Faith.
what Men would do, placed under such and such circumstances, and thereupon did
predestinate, call, justify and glorify in his eternal and irrefragable
Purpose.

And so I dismiss the great Subject of these two Verses, only I shall remark
upon the 29th Verse: Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst many
brethren. That though Men have a true liberty of will in their choice of, and
adhering unto Christ, yet God did not leave the whole issue and success of
things to the liberty of Men; but foreseeing what Men would do, purposed and
decreed to do more for them infinitely than they could themselves do in
carrying on the work of Grace in them; so that Christ should not be an Head
without a Body, and a Firstborn without Brethren, but the Firstborn amongst
many Brethren: And this foreknowledge of God, what Men would do in believing
and returning to God, is as easy for us to conceive of, as it is how God
should foresee that Adam would certainly fall, when it was in his power to have
stood; and yet this certain foreknowledge of God must be allowed in a matter
perfectly free, (for ought that we know) or else the purpose of sending Christ
as a Savior, which was the (...), could never have been made by the All-wise
Jehovah.

What shall we say then, As much as to say, The whole matter of our salvation
is a certain well-laid inexpugnable thing, if we are but once brought over to
God; if we are once well convinced of sin by the Law, and see our need of
Christ; if Christ become precious to us, and our only deliverer; if we are by
him freed from the Curse and Condemnation of the Law, and have the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, setting us free from the Law of Sin and Death;
if we have the impossible thing of the Law, (...), wrought in us; that is, if
we are enabled to walk after the Spirit, and no longer after the Flesh; if we
have been taught to mortify the Deeds of the Body, and so come to be led by
the Spirit, to call God Father by a Spirit of Adoption; are content to suffer
with Christ; to long for his presence, and groan after it, we need not question
but all things shall work together for our good; we shall find ourselves
effectually called, and therefore elected, Make your calling and election sure,
2 Pet. 1.10. We have no other way to know our Election, but by our Calling, and
then, and not till then, can we take comfort in the Doctrine of Election,
namely, when we may have ground to hope that the golden Chain has fastened
upon us; and if so, what can harm us, if God be for us, who can be against us?
unless they can be too hard for God. Now from hence the Apostle runs on with a
clear and triumphant Argumentation, Verse 32.

He that spared not his own Son, This is the clearest Argument in the World, we
have no reason to doubt of the good will of God for our final salvation, and
therefore present happiness; for he that gives us the greatest gift he could
give, will never deny us the small matters of the World, if they be good for
us. This Argument is like that of our Savior's, He that gave us Life will give
us Food, he that gave us Body will give us Raiment, a majori ad minus.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that
justifies.

Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, and so took off our
condemnation, yea rather that is risen again, who is ever at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us. The Spirit in us and for us here on
Earth, and Christ for us in Heaven, What abundant Consolation is here? He that
died for us on Earth, to free us from Death and Hell, is ascended to Heaven,
and there makes intercession for us. Could ever things be made more sure and
firm, for the strong consolation of those that love God?

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Who shall make Christ cease to
love us, Shall tribulation or distress, etc. No, Christ will rather love us the
better for all these. Or who shall make us cease to love Christ? Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? Yes, a wicked Will may; an evil Heart of Unbelief may make us to depart
from the living God, for these things, Heb. 3.12. But there is no reason why
they should; Trust in God, and they shall not; thou may walk upon the Waves,
as upon a smooth Pavement of firm Ground, if thou give not way to thy
Diffidence; if thou do, every puff of Wind shall lay thee upon thy Back, and
thou shall sink to the bottom, unless thou cry out, Lord, help me, or I perish:
A Sigh, a Groan, shall be heard. Though any one of all those things may look
dreadsully upon thee, Famine, Nakedness, Sword: For these things, few follow
Christ. We must look for one or all sometime or other, and be prepared in our
Mind for them, or we cannot be Christ's Disciples. Verse 36.

As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, This is the
fair account a Saint should take of his state and circumstances as a Christian,
and by the grace of God not shrink at the appearance. But what follows upon the
views of Faith, (in the face of all these appearances, ghastly enough to the
flesh)?

Nay in all these things we are more than conquerors, through him that loved
us. Romans 5.3. But then it is through him that has loved us.

For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers,

Nor height, nor depth, nor anyother creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, These two Verses are only a most admirable enumeration of
all kinds of things, that can have any efficacy upon us, toward breaking the
relation of a Saint to God and his interest in his favor, which is foreign to
my design of brevity to insist upon, there being no matter of difficulty or
obscurity in them.

And so here I make an end of my Explication of these three Chapters, and after
I have made some useful Reflections upon what I have said, I shall take my
leave of the Reader.

The first Use that I shall make of this foregoing Explication of these three
Chapters is this, That here we may see the Excellency of the Christian
Religion, Of Information.
what an holy and comfortable Institution it is; it is no way satisfied with
any Professor of it, till it brings him to sincere and universal Piety; he must
walk after the Spirit, and be led by the Spirit, or he is no sincere Professor
of the Christian Religion; he either does not understand the Christian
Religion, or is very false and hypocritical, that does not, by the Spirit
dwelling in him, make it his business to mortify all the deeds of the Body,
Romans 8.13. nor is he in the way to Life. And then for the Comforts of Religion,
though I doubt not but many well inclined and (I hope) truly religious People,
have their doubts and fears of their good Estate to Godward, yet I think, that
ordinarily the sadness of truly religious People, proceeds chiefly from their
own neglect of their watch, and for that they are to little acquainted with
themselves and their state; for a truly godly Man nath abundant matter of Joy
lying fairly before him, to take comfort and rejoice in, and therefore it is
made a great Duty by the Apostle to rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. 4.4. And
Christians live far below themselves, when they live a drooping and a sad life;
indeed no other person in the World has any true cause of joy, which yet every
Saint has; and in this Chapter is expressed the greatest Assurance and richest
Joy that you can find in all the Writings in the World; it far exceeds the
Stoick's Apathy, and the Epicure's Tranquillity, and arises to a Joy
unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. and that upon a good ground and bottom;
no less than that of being utterly divorced from all evil, and united in
affection and practice to all that is good; upon the firm promise of acceptance
with God at present, through the Death and Intercessions of his only begotten
Son, and of Assistance from Heaven to do the whole Will of God acceptably, and
of Eternal Life after Death: And this ground of Comfort and Establishment every
good Man and Woman has, though they do, not as they might and ought, make the
discovery of it to themselves.

My second Use of the foregoing Discourse, Exhortation.
shall be by way of humble Address to the Preachers and Ministers of the Word,
That in their Sermons and particular Dealings or Treating with Persons whose
Consciences are somewhat awakened to a sense of Sin and Guilt, and to take some
care of their Souls, they be very wary how they send Men to the Law, by bidding
and charging them only to reform their Lives, and amend their Ways, and leave
their wicked Courses. It Is very true, it is their duty so to do; but you see in
the seventh of the Romans throughout, what an ill effect this Advice or this
Undertaking alone, without Christ, had upon the sinner; it only killed him so
much the more, and set all his Lusts a raging, and in an uproar, Fain he would
do good, but evil was present with him: And wicked sin, deceitful sin, wrought
death in him, by that which was holy, just and good, which made sin appear to
be malignant to an Hyperbole. And while he was making his greatest Struggle and
War against Sin, only by virtue of the Law's prohibition of Sin, the Law of the
Members made a more brisk resistance, and conquered him and brought him into
captivity to the Law of Sin. The Holiness and Threatenings of the Law, may be of
excellent use to terrify them, but the Holiness of the Law alone will never
teach them and persuade them to be holy. I humbly advise all the faithful
Ministers of Christ, that design the salvation of Souls, that they do not only
charge Men that come to them for advice, to leave their wickedness, and to be
good and religious; though this be good and necessary advice; much less, as the
foolish Papists do, to impose such and such Penances, which is the high way to
provoke their Lusts, as soon as ever their Penances are over: but that they
take all the care they can, when they see them in earnest in Religion, to
instruct them in the Doctrine of the Gospel; That though they are great
sinners, and have so and so transgressed the Commands of God, (and a very
particular Confession of Sin enjoined them, if not to their Spiritual Guide,
(as was done to John the Baptist) yet at least to their God, is very useful,
and I think necessary; as searching the Wound is in order to a Cure; and
especially a sense of the sinfulness of their corrupt Nature, and there may be
many particular Directions necessary for many particular Cases) yet, I say,
they are to be instructed, That though they have so and so transgressed the
Commands of God, yet they must not think they can make amends to God for what
they have done amiss, or come to do the Will of God in their own strength, or
ever come up to a full perfect unerring Obedience in this Life: But that they
must seriously consider the Redemption that Christ has wrought for them, by
the sacrifice of himself, and that their only course is to believe the
satisfaction of Christ for sinners; and so to give up themselves to Christ, to
be his servants; and pray to Christ, and to God in Christ, for his Spirit, to
enable them to leave off all Sin, and exercise themselves unto Godliness in all
the parts and instances thereof: And that whilst they do faithfully endeavor
to leave every Sin, and to get every good habit and disposition of Honesty,
Sobriety, Purity, Justice, Charity and Godliness in the Strength of God, they
are accepted of God, through the Death and Intercessions of Christ. This Spirit
of Faith and Love, which are in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 6.23. 2 Timothy 1.13. can
only set them free from the Law of Sin and Death.

It is worthy of an excellent Pen, to express these things more at large; but,
I hope, I have in some satisfactory manner, signified the Necessity of this
Course to be taken with Men, since the Apostle makes so much of it in his
seventh Chapter to the Romans, what ill effect the Law has upon convicted
sinners, when they seek a Remedy from it only under their Convictions.

And that the Discourse of the Apostle, Romans 7. When the law came, etc. is
plainly meant of the Moral Law, which is perpetual and everlasting, binding the
Conscience of every Man and Woman in the World, and not only the Ceremonial Law
(which (I acknowledge) the Jews much boasted in, and sought Justification by
the observation of) were very easy to be demonstrated. So far I had written,
as the end of this Use, when a worthy Friend of mine, to whom I communicated my
Papers for his censure of them, advised me to evidence this Assertion, That the
Discourse of the Apostle, in Romans 7. When the law came, etc. is plainly meant
of the Moral Law, which I am loath here to fall upon the proof of, because I
would not willingly interrupt my proceeding to the Uses which I am yet to make
of the foregoing Discourse, and therefore shall cast it into an Appendix at the
Conclusion.

In the third place, I address my self to the Deists of the Age we live in. By
way of Conviction.
We have indeed a great many Atheists, and more perhaps than ever were in any
Age, the Lord be merciful to us: But there are a sort of better natured and
more civil Persons, that abhor Atheism, as contrary to the Light of Nature, and
the Interest of all Government and Civil Society itself. For that there can be
no trust in any Man, where there is no obligation upon Conscience, but every
Man is left to act as he judges it convenient to his present interest; I say,
there is a sort of Men, that acknowledge a God and Providence, and the reality
of Moral Good and Evil, Just and Unjust; but they suspend their Belief of the
Gospel, and they are apt to applaud themselves and think themselves in a very
good condition, if they live honestly and virtuously, and depend upon God's
Providence for protection in the way of Virtue; and conclude it shall all go
well with them hereafter. But how far are these removed from the strict
observation of the workings of their own Hearts, which we find in this 7th and
8th Chapters to the Romans? They ought not only to acknowledge the Law of
Nature, which no question they find (some of them at least) written in their
Hearts, according to what the Apostle Paul writes in Romans 2.14, 15. But they
ought to find how hard it is to keep the Law; how this Law convinces them of
Sin; and then, when they think to amend their ways, and to do good, how they
are plunged by it into more Sin; and the more strict they are upon themselves,
and the more rigidly they deal with themselves toward mortification of any
Extravagancy, the more they shall find their Lusts enraged, or perhaps fall
into another extreme Vice. For I question not but it might be demonstrated by
an able Pen, That all seeking to mortify Lusts by the Law, only commanding and
condemning, will in the end make the better side the worse; and though Men may
be as it were alive without the Law, and enjoy themselves very pleasantly, yes
when they come strictly to call themselves to account for their Actions,
Intentions, Rules, Conduct and Management of themselves, as under the Law of
God, and seek in earnest to reform themselves by the Law, they shall raise such
a Confusion, Combustion, and Fermentation, as shall make them almost distracted
and desperate. The Law ^s the most rigid Schoolmaster that ever the World had;
it lasheth Men with Scorpions; it kills them with a thousand Deaths; it makes
them weary of their Lives: No wonder then at the Exclamation, Romans 7.24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! And after
this close Press they have been in, which will make them swear even drops of
Blood, they shall never attain to any true rest, till they come to say, I thank
God, through Jesus Christ my Lord. I pity much these ingenious, civil and
half-vertuous Gentlemen, that think they have made great Seize in
Religion, by coming to acknowledge, That there is a God, and, Athenian-like,
are still inquiring after some innocent new Discoveries in Nature or the
Politics, etc. But they little think of their rumbling into Hell, for want of
going further on in Religion. For if Christ came from Heaven to satisfy the
Law, and to make a new and living Way to God in his own Blood, he will not
suffer himself to be so neglected by the Gentile secure Deist, as not to be so
much as inquired after, how and which way he is to be a Savior; that they must
see they have offended the Law, and are condemned by the Law, and have no
Refuge but in him, who answered the Law, and that they must change their old
Husband and Master, and get their Mind quiet and at rest only by believing in
him, loving him, going to him for strength to fulfill the Law, that the
Righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled in them, walking not after the Flesh,
but-after the Spirit. These alery unconcerned speculative Gentlemen have a
great work to do, which they are not aware of; for I dare boldly advance this
Proposition, (though amongst Divines it is no bold Assertion, but amongst
Gentlemen it may be thought so,) That whosoever under the clear preaching of
the Gospel, as now it is in our Land, does not esteem Jesus Christ more
precious than his Life, and all his Worldly Interests, yea, of greater benefit
to him by his Death and Intercession, than all his Moral Excellencies, shall be
condemned at last to Hell, for slighting the Gift of God, in giving his Son to
be the only Savior. Such persons may be excellent Commonwealths Men, good
Subjects to any Sovereign; good, that is, in some sense good Friends and
Neighbors, but they will be never admitted for Saints into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and therefore let them look to themselves in time: As for these mine
enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
slay them before me; says our Savior in the Parable, meaning it of himself,
Luke 19.27.

By way of Address to the Philosophers of the Age, which are not a few, and
withal as penetrating, Athens, Chaldea and Egypt not excepted: You take great
delight in the search of Wisdom, and indeed it is worthy of Men so to do, far
more worthy than to heap up Riches, or to enlarge Empire and Dominion, though
by fair means; yet I am much of Socrates's mind, of whom I have several times
read, that he was chiefly for Moral Philosophy, how a Man should guide his
Actions and his Thoughts. Now in my mind this discourse of the Apostle
concerning the advance of true Holiness, which I verily believe the honest
Philosophers aimed at, under the name of Virtue, is as acute and profound, as
practical and experimental, as any Discourse that ever was framed by Man, and
it has this advantage of all other Philosophical Discourses, That though (as I
humbly conceive) it was managed really with the Apostle's Reason and with his
humane Understanding; yet was his Pen guided all along by the holy Spirit; and
the three conjoined Chapters of 6, 7, and 8, to the Romans is a Complete System
of Moral Philosophy.

By Moral, all the Learned (as I take it) understand that which concerns
Manners, and is of perpetual and everlasting Obligation. As the Moral Law is
opposed to the Ceremonial and Judicial, as being but positive and temporary,
and whereas I call it Philosophy, we know that the first Word or Name for that
which we now call Philosophy, was (...), Wisdom, (...). Now this is truly
(...). 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom,
We speak Wisdom, says the Apostle, amongst those that are perfect; that is,
Men of any strength and growth in Religion. And I humbly conceive this was the
meaning of the Apostle, We speak that which has a good consonancy and harmony
and agreement in itself, with all the true reason of a Man. And indeed, though
I have been formerly, when I was a Child in Years, and a very Novice in
Knowledge, (though now I do not pretend to any great strength, yet perhaps,
through the Grace of God I may know a little) but though, when I was a mere
beginner, I was affrightned by many from using Reason in Religion; yet for more
than Thirty Years I have made bold in my small reading and Speculation to use
my Reason, which I do heartily acknowledge to be very small: And though I am
not of the Socinian Principle, (as it is generally said of them, that it is
theirs) that we are not to believe any thing that our Reason cannot comprehend;
yet I am not for believing any thing, but what we have reason o believe: But
then I think it reason enough to believe any thing to be true, if I have reason
to believe, that it is revealed by God. And I think it is the greatest honor
we can do to God, to use our utmost reason in understanding what he has
revealed, and, as far as we may, to endeavor to perceive the (...), or reason
of things revealed, but to acquie^ce in the (...) or, that it is so, if we can
see no further, and to bless God for it, and to practice universally according
to our Information.

Now as I conceive, in this Subject which I have treated of, and offer to your
Consideration, as Philosophers, you have the whole of Moral Philosophy, or
rather Theosophy, set forth in the most comprehensive Generals; you have the
End which we ought to aim at, complete Happiness hereafter, and a wonderful
Foretast of it in this Life. The means of attaining it is virtuous or holy
practice; now the means again of attaining to this ability of virtuous
Practice, the Stoickssay, is the cutting off, or mortifying the passions or
affections, which some have truly said is the cutting off the legs or wings
which we should go or fly upon, and turning a Man into a Stock; the
Peripateticks say, with more reason, the moderating of the passions is the
better way. But alas! all the Question lies here: How shall we come to moderate
the passions? The Apostle tells you, with a great deal of truth, That if you go
to the Law, which is the Rule of Duty to all the World, and try to get any
affection mortified (says the Stoic), regulated (says the Peripatetick), it
will enrage all your evil inclinations, and make them more rampant and mad than
ever they were before. You might remain alive, and be pretty quiet, and have a
good Opinion of yourself, and obtain a good esteem with others, if you would
not come too near the unalterable Rule of Holiness and true Virtue; but if once
you come strictly near that, and compare yourself with it, and observe your
aberrations from it, and then try to reform by it that you may answer the
Pattern of it, you shall only still find that it will convince you and condemn
you, and at last make you weary, and make you mad, and fill you with despair.
You may chance find the Citadel of Conscience, and the mind hold out for the
Law and for God, that is, in its bare Vote, but the City and Country round, the
Affections and Body, every limb and every faculty shall revolt and desert, and
do what they please, and yield no obedience; you shall find at length no more
conformity to the Rule, than the raging which Medea had by her Video meliora
proboque deteriora sequor; She flies from one Country to another with her
Familiars and Enchantments, and exercises such mad passions, as, I confess, I
cannot bear the Description of in reading them, without a great discomposure of
thoughts: And where is then the Stoic or Peripatetick with their two distinct
ways?

But now when we come to Christ who has satisfied the Law, and leave our old
Schoolmaster, our old Husband, as being dead in all its Condemnation by the
Body of Christ crucified, and do not so much as pretend to exact Obedience to
the Law, but yet honestly endeavor to give all due Conformity to its Precepts,
yet without the fear of being cast into Hell for every Failure, serve Christ
and God in him, as an honest Son serves his Father, or an honest Servant his
Master, allowing ourselves no idle haunts, no extravagant ou^lets of any kind,
enjoy the good things of this Life as other Men do, but in moderation; do the
work of our Callings, Trades, Occupations, Studies, but without carking cares,
as being assured that if we be diligent, God will provide, and will let us want
for nothing: Here all is quiet, we have, or may and ought to have a sweet Calm,
nothing disturbs us. If we walk according to this Rule, To do all to the Glory
of God, and in dependence upon him, giving Thanks for so great a Savior, peace
shall be upon us, as upon the whole Israel of God. If we are guilty of
Negligence, we must presently go to God by Prayer, confess our sins, charge
ourselves honestly, severely, bitterly, according to the neglect; but we must
not despond, but endeavor to double our Diligence and Watchfulness. In this
way God has the true Glory of an hearty Obedience; the Law of God is no whit
dishonored; for we bid not the least defiance, deny no Duty of Conformity to
it, but we are free from the danger of its Condemnation, being secured by a
Surety and Advocate. Thus the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And whilst we remain faithful
to our God in this way of fincere constant uniform Obedience, we have free
Access to God as a Father. If we presume to Sin wickedly against our God, we
must expect to be dealt with as Deserters and Apostates, and though even some
of those may possibly be renewed again unto, and by repentance, yet it is an
evil and bitter state indeed, and God alone knows when they shall recover their
boldness and liberty of Access to God by a Spirit of Adoption. And in this
plain Account I hope is contained the true Moral Philosophy, or rather
Theosophy, which we need all to learn and practice by.

And here I hope I may, with very good pretense, make an humble Address to the
Reverend Heads of Colleges and learned Tutors in the Universities, which I
would do with the most submiss Deference, to entreat them, That in preparing
Instructers of the People for the next Generation, they would teach them the
Truth, as it is in Jesus; and I would bespeak them in the words of the Apostle
Paul, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. (...). Where the Apostle is speaking of the evil state
and conversation of the Gentiles. But ye have not so learned Christ: By
learning Christ, I doubt not, is meant their learning the Doctrine of and
concerning Christ, as Scholars and Students learn Authors and study
Philosophers. Ver. 21. If so be that ye have heard him. The Ephesians never
heard Christ in person, but they heard him preached: And been taught by him, or
in him. How could they be taught by Christ? Only by his Word and by his Spirit.
And what were they taught by him? The Answer follows, As the truth is in Jesus.
This is the greatest thing that you Scholars are to learn, and you are to
teach: I say not, that it is the only thing; But this is the true Philosophy,
without which all that they can learn is perfect folly, Romans 1.22. speaking
professedly of the Philosophers. I do not pretend to teach you, but only humbly
to mind you of that which you cannot but know. I humbly beg you, for God's
sake, for the Honor of our Lord Jesus, and for the Interest of so many Souls,
as all Yourselves and present Pupils may be concerned with and for, in
Preaching and in the Press, that you make a most accurate distinction betwixt
Law and Gospel, that Moses may not sit in our Savior's Seat. You see how the
Law-Preachers among the Galatians blended the Law and Gospel together, and
thereby transferred their Auditors from him that had called them unto the Grace
of Christ, or in the Grace of Christ to another Gospel, Gal. 1.6. (...). Ver.
7. (...). Which is not another (...), but not (...), diversum non aliud. There
was but one Gospel, and could be but one; yet this might be so diversified by
legal mixtures, as to be called another Gospel: And. I shall give no further
proof of this at present, than the foregoing Discourse, which I have thought
necessary, or at least convenient to make; in which, I hope, I have made it
appear, That the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, is not to be
understood of St. Paul, as in his regenerate Estate, but as under legal
Convictions; or rather, of a third person, personated in the first, which is so
far from being rightly understood, that perhaps the greater half of Divines
understand it of St. Paul himself: So subtle an evil is that of Legality, or
seeking to be justified by the Law, that it cannot easily be understood in the
clearest Gospel Light: But, Qui been distinguit been docet; and if any Monopoly
be fit to be claimed by an Academy, I humbly conceive it is that of
Distinctions. Your Students are taught learned and polite Ethics: but if they
be not taught how to avoid the Condemning Power of the Law by the Grace of the
Gospel, the Law will condemn them. If they be not well warned of the enraging
irritating force of the Law (occasionally) upon all their Lusts, when they seek
to be reformed by it alone, that which was ordained unto Life will be found
Death unto them; and Sin taking occasion from the Commandment, will work in
them all manner of Concupiscence and Sin, that it may appear Sin, working Death
in them by that which is good, will by the Commandment become out of measure
sinful, Romans 7.10.8.13.

Here I have a very fair and just occasion to speak to those that I doubt will
have little mind to hear or read what they should, There is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked, Isai. 48.22. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord:
Holiness is the true end of all Religion; we must attain unto Holiness, or we
can never please God, in any Religion that we profess: Cease to do evil, learn
to do well, put away the evil of your doings. Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Esai.
1.16, 17, 18. There is no communion with God, no Fellowship or Converse with or
Approach unto God (for all these I take to be understood by Reasoning
together,) without washing and cleansing ourselves. Before this in the 11, 12,
13, 14, 15 Verses, God renounceth all Acceptance of any thing they did in
Religion: To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? etc.
says the Lord. Men may use some kind of honest Endeavors after Holiness, and
fail of attaining what they seek after. Thus the Apostle witnesses of the Jews,
Romans 9.31. But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. Verse 32. Wherefore? because they sought
it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. Now for these the
Aposile had a great deal of Pity and Commiseration, as you may see Romans 9.1,
2, 3. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in
my heart, For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren my kinsmen, according to the flesh, who are Israelites, etc. And so
Romans 10.1, 2, 3. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they might be saved. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God,
but not according to the knowledge. For they being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. Now I have made these two
last Quotations, to prove, That Men may in some sort and way have a great Zeal
and Endeavor to please God, and to be the Favorites of Heaven, and yet lose
their labor. What shall become then of those that take no pains in Religion at
all? and indeed, do not truly endeavor to become universally Holy? but please
themselves with some poor low ends in their Profession, short of this only
worthy design. I shall conclude this Application with those words of the
Apostle, in Romans 6.21, 22. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye
are now ashamed? What real Profit, or what real Comfort had ye in those sinful
Pleasures and wicked Courses wherein once (in the State of Unregeneracy) ye
indulged yourselves? Wicked Men of the World take a great deal of pains to get
Profits, and Pleasures, and Honors, and what does it afford them? What comfort
have they of it at the very time, upon a sober Review and Consideration? The
Answer is, None at all; and besides, now ye are ashamed of what ye then did;
then it was no matter of Comfort, and now it is a matter of Shame. But what
follows, Ver. 22. But now being made free from sin. -- (Who is free from sin?
Answer, Every Saint of God is free from Sin in the Apostle's sense, not in the
sense of a quarrelsome Scholastic.) and become servants to God, you have your
fruit unto holiness, -- That is a present rich Fruit indeed, that by turning to
God, and exercising ourselves unto Righteousness, we attain unto an Holy Frame,
and Temper, and Readiness to every good Work. -- And the end everlasting Life.
The Law teaches Holiness, and the Gospel effects it; and though some may lose
their labor, that are at some pains in Religion, for want of diligent Enquiry
after the right way, as the Jews did, and all that seek to be justified and
sanctified by the Law will do, yet they that are at no pains at all in
Religion, are sure to tumble into Hell: Strive to enter in at the strait gate,
sait our Savior, for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, but shall
not be able. Luke 13.21. If seeking will not do, but we must also strive to
enter, what will become of those that do not so much as seek?

And now I would end this Subject, Of Consolation.
which is grown under my hand to double the largeness that I intended it, with
a Use of Consolation to all the true Saints of God. Are there any (as I hope
there are many) that have been duly convinced of Sin, how great an Evil it is;
how it has dishonored God, and defiled and debased their Nature, and Noble
Soul, which is God's Offspring, and endangered their sinking under the Divine
Displeasure to Eternity, and especially of the great Sin of not believing in
Christ, but rather seeking to be justified by the Works of the Law; have they
at last found themselves killed by the Law with a Thousand Deaths, and been
driven to flee from the Wrath that is certainly to come, unto the Hope that is
set before them in the Gospel? Have they been couvinced of Righteousness,
because Christ is gone to the Father, and we are to see him no more, till his
second coming, and from hence conclude, that he has brought about Everlasting
Righteousness by his Death? for else how could he, upon whom his Father laid
the Iniquities of us all, and did, while he was punishing him upon the Cross,
(as it were) forsake him, be admitted again into his Father's presence as an
Advocate for us? Have they been convinced of Judgment, as knowing that because
Christ has died, and is again gone to the Father, that therefore the Prince of
this World (the Devil) is judged and condemned, and shall be cast out of his
Tyranny over Men all Men that betake themselves to Christ, the Captain of their
Salvation, who by Death destroyed him that had the power of Death, that is, the
Devil, that he might deliver them, who, through fear of death, are all their
lifetime subject to bondage? Heb. 2.14, 15. And so have they betaken
themselves to Christ, as their Head and Husband and only Savior, that he may
be made of God unto them Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption?
Why, unto you is the Word of this Salvation sent: You are the blessed of the
Lord, and ye shall be blessed, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against you: You are called to resist the Devil, to fight against
Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and
against Spiritual Wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12. And for this
end you have a Suit of Spiritual Armor, the Armor of God on the Right Hand
and on the left, from Head to Foot; and ye shall be made more than Conquerors,
through him that has loved you to the Death of the Cross. Rejoice in the Lord
always; and again, I say, rejoice. Read the eighth Chapter to the Romans, and
take Courage and Everlasting Consolation. All things are made sure for your
good and interest. Be but faithful to God, and never fear his Grace to you.
Sing your Triumphant Songs, the Song of Moses and the Lamb; both Law and Gospel
shall comfort you. If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? We are the circumcision that worship God in the
spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil.
3.3.

I will lead you to one rich Walk, where you may expatiate and deliciate your
holy Souls: For I speak here to none but those that are sanctified and
effectually called: It is Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, to the 7th inclusive, Now I say, that
the heir, as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant, though he
be lord of all, but is under tutors and governors, until the time appointed of
the father; even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the
elements of the world: but when the fullness of the time was come, God sent
forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. Under the times and
dispensations of the Old Testament, till the coming of Christ in the flesh, the
People of God, even the true Saints of God, were like Children, though great
Heirs, kept at School, bred up at a distance from their Father's House in a
state of darkness, fear and bondage, knew little of their Privileges and
Inheritance; though they were saved by Faith, and had the Gospel preached to them
in an obscure way, yet it looked all like Law, till Christ, the Eternal Son of
God, was made of a Woman, and made under the Law, they also were (as it were)
under the Law: But now, in the days of the Gospel, especially since the
Ascension of Christ, and his Mission of the Spirit, the Dispensation is quite
altered, and they are, like Heirs, called home to the possession of their
Inheritance, to live like those that are Lords of all. Now they are endued with
a Spirit of Adoption, by which they come to know themselves Sons and Daughters
unto God Almighty, Verse 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Abba, Syriack, (...),
Greek for Father. That is, Father in all Languages, to Saints of all Nations,
Verse 8. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an
heir of God through Christ. In the days of the Gospel, heavenly things are
brought down to us in the greatest plainness, so that a truly holy Soul may
converse and treat with them with great freedom. Ephesians. 2.5, 6. In two Verses
you have three of the greatest Privileges expressed, that the mind of Man can
possibly conceive: We are said there to be quickened together with Christ, to be
raised up together, and made sit together in heavenly places with him. Can
there be a nearer approach of an Heir to his heavenly Inheritance? Col. 2.20.
If therefore ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as
though living in the world are ye subject to ordinances. Col. 3.1. If ye be
therefore risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God. Verse 3. For ye are dead, and your life is
hid with Christ in God. We must live as those that live in Heaven with Christ,
Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in heaven. 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal
and walk as men? Saints should not live like other Men; no, not like Men: You
are Sons and Heirs, and have liberty to call God Father. Our Lord has taught
us to begin our Prayers to God with this rich and high Appellation of, Our
Father. Endeavor therefore but to live like Children of God, and you may with
holy boldness call God Father; and if you can look up to God as your Father,
you highly dishonor him, and disparage yourselves, to doubt or fear of what
may betide you from Men or Devils all your life long. Therefore I say it to all
the Saints of God, and I humbly beg of God, that I may ever attend the
Exhortation, Endeavor to walk worthy of God, unto all pleasing, keep your
Watch strictly over your Hearts and Ways, and go on your Way rejoicing, through
Thick and Thin, through Fire and Water, through Troops and Armies of Men and
Devils; the World is conquered for you; Devils and Principalities are triumphed
over; your own innate and inbred Lusts shall not be too strong for you, if you
still, by the Spirit, faithfully endeavor to mortify the Deeds of the Body.
Heaven stands open to you; Mansions are prepared; Angels are ready for your
safe Convoy. Die you must; but Death has lost its Sting; and there is no
greater Friend than Death itself, next to a Holy Life; for Death is also Yours,
and that is the Porter that lets you into your Resting Place. The Law cannot
condemn you, and the Gospel will save you.

AN APPENDIX.
THat the assertion of the Apostle, in Romans 7.9. When the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died, is plainly meant of the Moral Law, I shall now endeavor
to make appear.

For this I reckon, there are several proofs in this 7th Chapter to the Romans:
First, if we consider to whom this Epistle was written, it was to the Romans,
who were certainly as much Gentiles as Jews, and more, Romans 11.13. The Apostle
tells them, I speak to you Gentiles; forasmuch as I am the Apostle of the
Gentiles, I magnify mine office. Now to these he says, Romans 7.4. Wherefore my
brethren, ye also are become dead to the law, by the body of Christ, that ye
should be married to another, even to him that is raised from the dead, etc.
How could they become dead to the Law, that were never alive to it? or to whom
the Law was never alive? For the Law was never alive to them, except the Moral
Law written in the Heart. They were never under the Ceremonial Law, but under
the Moral Law they were born, Romans 2.14. For the Gentiles which have not the
law, do by nature the things contained in the law: these having not the law,
are a law unto themselves: Verse 15. Which show the work of the law written in
their hearts, etc. The Ceremonial Law was not written in the Heart of Man.
Therefore, here by Law, viz. in the 2d. Chapter, must be meant the Moral Law;
and this was all they could ever be alive, or become dead to. It Is true, the
Jews might be said to become dead to the Ceremonial Law too, by the Body of
Christ crucified: But this was as nothing to the Romans, or mecr Gentiles.

To leave then this Argument from the persons to whom he wrote, (being
Gentiles) and to speak only to the nature of the thing, in Romans 7.5. It is
said, For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins which were by the law,
did work, etc. What motions of sins can we suppose to be wrought by the
Ceremonial, or Judicial Law, more than, as they commanded Duties but gave no
strength to perform, which is the cause why the Moral Law wrought the same
Effect? Does there appear any peculiar reason for this Effect, from either of
these Laws, which is not found in the Moral Law? Or, if there do, how does this
affect the Romans, that were never under them?

Again, Verse 7. What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid: nay, I had
not known sin but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not covet. What Law says this? Why it is the Tenth
Commandment of the Moral Law. Therefore, it is the Moral Law that is the first
Husband spoken of. Again, Verse 8. But sin taking occasion by the commandment,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence: For without the law sin is dead. Can
all this be colourably said of the Ceremonial Law, and not rather of the Moral
Law? As it forbids all Sin, and commands all Duty, and gives neither Strength
nor Pardon? Whereas the Ceremonial Law does not command so much, and yet gives
some intimations of Pardon, by the Sacrifices which it enjoys. Verse 12.
Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good. I
question whether this can be Scripturally, and Theologically spoken of the
Ceremonial Law, which (in a Sense) is said not to be good, Ezekiel. 20.25.
Wherefore I gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they
should not live, Dedi eis praecepta non bona, id est Praecepta Ceremonialia,
says Pole in Loc.

Verse 14. For we know that the law is spiritual. This is truly said of the
Moral Law; but it said of the Ceremonial Law, that it was a carnal commandment,
Heb. 7.16. and Heb. 9 10. It is called carnal ordinances, Rites or Ceremonies.
Again, Verse 9. of Romans 7. For I was alive without the law once. Let us
suppose, for the present, that the Apostle speaks properly in his own Name.
When was ever the Apostle alive without the Ceremonial, or Moral Law, who was
bred up at the strictest rate under them both as a Pharisee? The meaning
therefore is, he was alive without the Law, that is, before the Law came with
its pressing Convictions; and what shall we imagine that these Convictions
were? What? That the Ceremonial Law came with its Convictions? That he had
neglected so many Washings and Sacrifices, etc. Who ever understood it so? Is
it not rather understood by all, that the Moral Law came in upon his
Conscience, as a spiritual and Holy Law, and the very Transcript of the
Holiness of God, and charged him with that, as Sin, which he never understood
to be Sin before, as he instanceth in Lust and Coveting, and so made him appear
guilty before the Holy God, so as he could never hope to be accepted with God,
without Pardon and a Savior? And what other Law could this be, which should be
said to come thus, but the Moral Law? That which was ordained to be Life to
Adam, he found to be Death to him, being once (indeed) and so often broken by
his first Parents and by himself.

So by all these Texts out of the chief Chapter which I have (in the foregoing
Discourse) been explaining, I apprehend it is evident, That the Apostle speaks
chiefly, if not only, of the Moral Law. Therefore the Moral Law was their
Husband which (...) sake, and to be married to another, even Christ, in order
to Justification: (...) we and all Men in the World, for there is, par ratio, a
like and (...) us.

If any shall doubt of the Evidence here given, I que^^^^^ (...) by those
several other places where the Apostle mannages the (...) the Subject of
Justification by Faith.

A Second APPENDIX.
ANother of my worthy Friends, to whom I communicated my Manuscript for his
judgment of it, questioned whether it could be made to appear, that the Law did
so much as accidentally enrage Lust, and occasion greater sinning in those that
seek to be justified by the Law, and was inclined to think, that the Law did
only aggravate the guilt of any Sin, and so wound the Conscience; and that this
should be all the meaning of those words, When the commandment came, sin
revived and I died; and the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to
be unto death, Romans 7.9, 10. But I am still of opinion, that there is and must
needs be a farther sense in the words, and that when a Man seeks to be
justified by the Law, (which is a Distemper very incident to Humane Nature,
under diverse shapes and forms, and the most subtle and unaccountable Disease
of Mankind) the Law, instead of justifying, (which it can by no means effect)
does not only aggravate Sin, and kill a Man, as a Ministration of Condemnation,
but does (though accidentally, yet certainly) work in us all manner of
Concupiscence, and does bring forth new Fruit unto Death, as well as discover
the old; for which I think there are several very considerable Proofs in this
seventh Chapter to the Romans, and I shall take them as they lie in order:

Verse 5. When we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the law,
did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. When we were in the
flesh, that is in a state of Unregeneracy, and so under the Law had not betaken
ourselves to Christ for an Husband, the motions of sin did work. This methinks
cannot be understood of Past-sins, that we were then convinced of them by the
Law, but they are Motions or Inclinations toward sinning; so the Expression is
continued, they did work, in ordine ad, to bring forth fruit unto death. That
is, toward new Commissions; and these Motions of Sin are said to be by the
Law. How can this be interpreted of laying on guilt, or charging us with guilt
for Sins already committed? So accordingly the Antithesis in the next Verse
seems to carry it.

Verse 6. But now we are delivered from the law, that did thus produce (and not
only discover) Sin, that being dead wherein we were held, (that is the Law)
that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the
letter; or as it is in Verse 4. That we should bring forth fruit unto God. This
part of the Antithesis speaks clearly of doing good Actions, therefore the
other part of the Antithesis must speak of doing ill Actions, by bringing forth
Fruit unto Death; for, Contrariorum Contrariae sunt Rations.

Again, Verse 8. Sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence; it is one thing to work it, and another to discover it;
so it follows, for without the law, sin is dead; that is, (or seems to be) dead
as to energy, not as to discovery or being made to appear, or becoming alive in
its guilt only, (...).

But let this 8th Verse, and the 9th and 10th following, be taken in this
sense: For making the guilt of sin to revive: Yet what shall we say to the 11th
Verse, For sin taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me? First, this
Phrase, taking occasion by the commandment, Arrepta occasion inflammandi (per
legen vetantem) concupiscentiam, Vatablus in Pol. Versu 8vo. Multi interpretes
(...) exponunt occasionem putantque idem dici quod vulgari proverbio intimur in
Vetitum, Grotius in Pol. So that this taking occasion by the Commandment, is by
these Interpreters understood of taking an advantage toward new Commissions.
2. Again, Deceived me: How can sin, (that is, indwelling sin, or sinful
Inclinations) be said to deceive, but as it had a kind of malicious Design (by
a Prosopopaeia here) to draw the sinning person farther into actual
Commissions, by which also it slew him, not only by charging the Guilts that
had past, for that is the work of the Law to kill that way, by way of charge;
and not the work of sin or sinful Inclination called Concupiscence; sin does
not charge home sin upon the Conscience, but Concupiscence here called sin
promotes further Commisions, seduxit me, i. e. in suas parts me dolose traxit,
ab errare me fecit, longius me abduxit a via justitiae; ad peccandum me
pellexit, etc. Menochius, Estius, Beza, in Pol. But methinks the 13 Verse,
plainly makes it appear, that sin takes a great advantage toward strengthening
and promoting itself in the Sinner, or sinful Person, by the Law, according to
the Prosipopaea, wherein the Apostle makes sin an Agent, and as it were a
Person. Was that then which is good (that is the Law) made death to me? God
forbid. But sin that it might appear sin, and show itself in its Colors,
working death in me, by that which is good, that sin itself by the commandment
might become out of measure sinful. I would fain know what tolerable sense can
be made of these words, but that they must afford a plain proof of what I have
been contending for? It Is true, it is sense to say, that sin by the Commandment
appears to be sin, because it is forbidden by the Commandment, and (...), 1
John 3.4. Every sin is a transgression of the law. And it is sense to say, that
sin brings us to death by that which is good, that is the Law forbidding it;
but how will this plain honest sense bear all the height and heat and
smartness of the Apostle's arguing in this Verse, But sin, that it might appear
sin working death in me by that which is good, that sin by the commandment
might become out of measure sinful? Sin appears to be sin by the Commandment,
but how does it appear out of measure sinful? How does this But come in? But
sin that it might appear sin, namely for this Reason, for that it works death
in me by that which is good. I say, how does this But come in? 'Twill not bear
a Discretive, to say only, that the Law threatens with Death a Man, that does
such and such things, and he sinning or transgressing falls under this penalty;
this is no wonder at all. How does sin appear out of measure sinful, by this?
How does sin show such extraordinary Venom in this? That it lays a Man under
the penalty of the plain Law? But now if sin that is indwelling-sin or
Concupiscence has such a mischevious devilish nature in it, that it does not
only lay us under the penalty of Death, but will therefore sin because sin is
forbidden, and will therefore break the Law because it forbids sin, and take
its very rise and occasion to all manner of Wickedness, and work in us all
manner of Concupiscence, from that which is holy, just and good, this shows
sin, and that by the Commandment to be a thing out of measure sinful, this sets
forth sin in its true Colors and shows it to be sin indeed; a thing that
cannot be decyphered by any worse Name than it has already, Sin that it might
appear sin, etc. and out of measure sinful.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun in Cornhil.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. By William Bates, D. D. The
Changeableness of this World, with respect to Nations, Families, and particular
Persons: With a practical Application thereof to the various Conditions of this
Mortal Life. By Timothy Rogers, M. A. A Mirror for Atheists; being some
Passages of the Life and Death of the Right Honorable John Earl of Rochester;
written by his own Direction on his Deathbed. By Gilbert Burnet, Lord Bishop
of Sarum. An End of Doctrinal Controversies which have lately troubled the
Churches. By Richard Baxter. The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, fully
evinced by unquestionable Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Voices,
etc. proving the Immortality of Souls. By Richard Baxter. The Protestant
Religion truly stated and justified. By the late Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter;
prepared some time before his Death. Whereunto is added some Account of the
learned Author: By Mr. Daniel William, and Mr. Matthew Sylvester. The
Christian's Converse with God, or the Insufficiency of Humane Friendship, and
the Improvements of Solitude in Converse with God; with some of the Author's
Breathings after him. By Richard Baxter. Recommended to the Reader's serious
Thoughts, when at the House of Mourning, and in Retirement. By Mr. Matthew
Sylvester. The Mourner's Memorial, in two Sermons on the Death of the truly
pious Mrs. Susanna Soame: With some account of her Life and Death. By Timothy
Wright and Robert Fleming. The whole Works of Isaac Ambrose. Fol.

