A PRESENT FOR SERVANTS, From their Ministers, Masters, OR Other Friends,
Especially in Country Parishes.

1 Cor. vii. 24. Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide
with God. Licensed, Jan. 20. 1692.

LONDON, Printed by T. Warren, for Nath. Ranew at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

TO All Masters of Families in the Parish of Great Kimbel, in the County of
Bucks.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Dearly Beloved,
HAving designed to write something for the use of your Servants, I could not
do better than to put the little Book into your Hands, to whom God has
committed the Charge of them; and I have herein the highest Example, even of
God himself, who gives first his Commands to Masters of Families, to be by them
handed down to all in their Houses: as, for instance, in the great Commandment
about the Sabbath, he does not speak to Servants immediately, but makes their
Masters the trustees of his Will, saying, thou shall do no manner of work,
neither thou -- nor thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, implying that they
must cause them to observe the Commandment; and indeed for this cause were
Families, as well as all other lawful Societies, or dain'd, that the Salvation,
even of the lowest members thereof, may be the better furthered under the
Government therein. But alas, how little do men think, when they take on them
the Government of Families, that God has committed to them a Charge of Souls?
if they did, how durst they take a Charge that they are not able to perform, by
reason of their Ignorance, or never mind, by reason of their willfulness? if
you did believe, that every Servant you take into your House, will add to the
dreadfulness of your account, if he perishes through your fault and
negligence, could you then be so indifferent in your choice of them, as too
many be? I remember, David says, His eyes were upon the faithful in the land,
that they might serve him, Psalm. 101.6. but we have Masters that choose Servants
as they do their Horses, if they be strong and able for their work, they mind
no more, though you would not bring in a scabbed Sheep into your Flock: yet are
there not that bring in drunken, swearing Servants, with the plague of
profaneness upon them into their Houses, and lay the infected Wretches with
their dear Children and other Servants? Can you as easily perform your duty
toward obstinate stubborn Servants, as toward those which are good, or at
least pliable and willing to be instructed and admonished? Is not so great a
Blessing or Curse, as a good or bad Servant will prove to your Family, enough
to make you pour out one Prayer for God to direct you in the choice? It is hard
that you cannot enquire into the Education that they have formerly had, or at
least into their present inclinations to good or evil. Do not lightly take into
your Families a Companion of Fools, whose customs and habits of sin have been
visible in their former Conversations, unless you have good evidence or ground
for hope of their reformation. But the misery again of it is, when Masters are
as bad as the Servants: He cannot enquire after the Godly disposition of
Servants, that is about to bring them into a cold Prayerless Family; nor can He
ask them whether they are willing to be instructed, who is himself so ignorant
that He cannot, or so careless that He never intends to instruct them. But I am
persuaded better things of some of you, and things that accompany Salvation.
And He that is devoted to God himself will engage for his Family too, as
Joshua, Chapter 24.15. As for me and my house, I will serve the Lord. God himself
gives testimony of Abraham, I know him that He will command his -- Household
after him. Christian Families are frequently called Churches for the worship of
God performed therein. Every Master is a Priest in his own Family, and I have
often thought his obligation to teach and govern his Servants, is much greater
than that of a Minister to any particular Family in his Charge. You have an
opportunity to know their tempers and temptations, that we have not, and by
your nearness to them, can take every Servant by himself, and deal with him as
his case requires: by your constant continuance with them: and having the power
of rewards and punishments in your hands, you may more easily perform your duty
toward them, if you have hearts to it. I know you are counted Good Masters in
the places where you dwell; and I cannot say the contrary as to outward things,
for ought I know, the most of you (if not all) give unto your Servants that
which is just and equal, in necessary provision, both in health and sickness,
in faithful discharge of your Contracts in their Wages or Salary, in prudent
ordering of their work and business. And it is not the hard labor of Servants
that I pity them for, so that they are not unnecessarily exposed to cold or
wet, that may endanger their health; or so tired with the World as to be unfit
for Family, or secret Prayer, or other duties. For indeed, it is for the
Servants Souls that I am pleading with you. There is not any poor Boy or Girl
that you keep, but has a Soul as precious as Lords and Ladies, and cost as dear
a price. What have you done for the Souls of them that are under your Roof? Let
Conscience speak, if you should give your Servants no meat and drink, all the
Country would cry shame on you; but is it not a worse shame and greater Cruelty
to starve their Souls? Do you keep Servants with rational Souls, only like your
Horses, to eat, and to drink, and to work? If any of you are not able to
instruct them, be deeply humbled presently, and get others to instruct them.
Ought you not to have required their attendances on public Catechizing, and
their submission thereunto? I am sure the Church lays no less a penalty than
Excommunication upon you if you refuse; and is not your instructing them the
way to increase in knowledge your selves? What if the poor ignorant Servants,
that you made part of your Household, should follow you from place to place,
from House to Field, and cry after you to instruct them? What if they should
tell you with many tears, that they are likely to die without knowledge, and
that they are convinced, that Christ is coming in flaming fire to take
vengeance on them that know not God -- Would you not instruct them? And if you
say, but my Servants have no such sense, no such desire: Why then, are they not
the more miserable? Have they not the greater need? And does not their case cry
as loud for pity, as their voice can do? Have you no bowels of compassion, on
perishing Souls? If not, at least have pity on your own, and let not their
blood be on your heads. Family Duties, and Instruction (if carefully minded)
would have prevented much of that disorder that is in almost all Parishes,
which now is not so easily cured; but it requires all your care and diligence
to restrain that wickedness, which ignorance has caused. What says the Law?
Deuteronomy. 22.8. When thou buildest a new house, thou shall make a Battlement upon
the roof, that thou bring not blood upon thy house, if any fall from thence.
Family Duties, Prayer, Reading, singing Psalms, repetition of Sermons,
Catechizing of Servants, etc. are like so many Fences, or Battlements on one
side; Commands, Reproofs, Corrections, and Restraints from sin, are Rayls, or
Battlements on the other; and if you set not these Battlements on your Roof,
woe be to you, if any fall from thence; and if you say, I do not push them
down, I do not force them, or require them to take such courses, I would not
have them fall. Nay, but this is not enough, you must set Battlements, to
prevent their ruining themselves: If you say further, but if I do set
Battlements, they may climb over them, and do what I can, will run on to their
destruction; why then, their blood will be on their own heads, and you have
delivered your house from the guilt thereof. By all this you may see to how
little purpose your complaint of wicked Servants has been. When your own Purse
is touched by unfaithful Servants, you feel it: You might have known it before,
when you saw how averse they were to knowledge, etc. that they that were not
faithful to God, were not like to be faithful to you; that if you suffered them
to haunt evil Company, and break the Sabbath, and to live in riotous Courses;
that these Extravagancies would call for Money, and where should they have it
but by defrauding you: And if your grief be indeed for the sin of your Servants
against God, I beseech you look inward; it may be, your selves were Servants
once, and you lived in carelessness toward God, and unfaithfulness toward your
Masters, and now God is visiting your sin upon you: And what comfort can you
hope for in your Families, till that guilt be removed? And if you are in
earnest, why are you as indifferent about the Servants you choose, since you
have had this experience of their wickedness, as you were before? Nay, why
after trial of their obstinacy, do you not rid your hands of them? You know
David's resolution, Psalm. 101.7. He that works deceit shall not dwell in my
house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. But if any keep a
debauched person, a Drunkard, profane Swearer, obstinate against God, and
Goodness, for a second Year, because it may be, he is strong and able to do his
work, I note that Man (as there are noted Families in the Apostles sense, 2
These. 3.14.) and assuredly your sin will find you out. But if you will be
zealous for God, and against sin in your Families, how much may some of you do
toward the promoting Religion in the Country, and what a Colony of young.
persons may from time to time go out of your houses, to bear up the Name of
Christ in the places where they dwell? What a blessing of the Lord will be
within your Tabernacle? What comfort in your Relations? What joy in
Afflictions, and even Death it self? Your House shall be built by Wisdom, and
established by Understanding, Prove. 24.3. that this little Book may something
promote this main design of Family-Godliness, is the Prayer of

Your Unworthy Minister, and Servant for Jesus Christ, Richard Mayo.

THE CONTENTS.
PREFACE. MAsters of Families have a Charge of Souls. Their Care in choosing
Servants, to instruct them, and restrain them from sin. Blessing upon Godly
Families. CHAP. I. The Kind of Servants treated of. The Providence of God in
appointing the Servant's Calling; the Usefulness of it, not against Christian
Liberty. CHAP. II. The Slavery of Souls by Nature. Of the Servants entering into
the Service of Christ by solemn covenanting with him; their Carriage in that
Service. Advantage of a Time of Youth, the Dreadfulness of the neglect of that
Season: Sins of Youth. Deathbed Repentance. What Families Servants should
choose. Of doing what they do unto the Lord. CHAP. III. The Servant's Reverence
to their Masters. Of Fidelity to them, Of Eye-Service, Of cheating and
defrauding. Of Obedience in harsh and unpleasant things. Of doing what they do
heartily. Not answering again. CHAP. IV. Of Servants tempting each other to
sin. Sinful Familiarity of Servants of different Sexes. Of reproving and
warning the unruly. Of Holy Conference. Of Servants helping each other, in
their Work, and in Soul-Affairs. CHAP. V. The careless Ignorance of some
Servants, and danger of it. Of Catechizing, and Servants submitting thereunto,
and how. Of fervent Prayer for Knowledge. Of Knowing Christ. CHAP. VI. The
Hardships of Servants. Danger and Cure of Discontent. The Privileges of
Servants. The miserable Condition of Slaves in other Parts. Of the Temptations
of Servants of State in Great Places. Inconveniences of the Condition of poor
Housekeepers, the worst Slavery of all. The Freedom of Godly Servants. The
Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. CHAP. VII. Servants Want of Time. How
Godly Servants gain Time. How Wicked Servants waste their Time. Danger of it.
Of the Lord's Day, and how Servants must improve it.
A PRESENT FOR SERVANTS.
CHAP. I. Of the Kinds of Servants, and of the lawfulness of the Servants
Calling.
THERE is scarce any general Name of a Calling, that contains under it, such
different kinds of Persons, as this of a Servant. Some Service being so high
and honorable, that there is no Subject so great, but that glories in being
Entitled the King's Servant, in the various Offices of his Household; and some
Service is so vile and miserable, that the poorest Person in a Free Land is
happy in being delivered from it. There are three sorts of Servants that I
shall name, though it be only for the last of them that I have intended this
Discourse.

1. There are Servants of State, that make up the Retinue of Great Men and
Nobles, who living in Ease, Pleasure, and Worldly Delicacies, have no agreement
with those that I am concerned with, save in the bare Name.

2. There are Slaves and Vassals, sunk in the lowest state of misery in the
World, being under the sole disposal of the uncontrouled Wills [and Lusts] of
their [often barbarous] Owners. And these are so either justly, being condemned
for some Capital Crimes, and in Mercy Reprieved, and spared as to Life, but
deprived of their Liberty, and many Comforts of Life; or else unjustly, by a
violent Captivity, or by unrighteous Sales and Contracts. But I leave these
(under God) to those who are acquainted with their Circumstances, and
Temptations, and have opportunity to help them in the way to Heaven. And shall
apply my self to,

3. A Third sort of Servants, in a state of Life between the two former, and
which are most usual amongst us, as making up a part of every Family; and they
are such as by reason of Poverty, or a meaner condition in the World, have
voluntarily submitted themselves, by Contract, for a certain time, to the
disposal of others, according to the Word of God, and Laws of the Realm: And
this Calling is founded upon the Will and Providence of God in these two things,

1. In establishing Property, and thereby a seemingly unequal distribution of
the good things of this Life. Without this the Relation of Master and Servant
could not stand. Prove. 12.7. The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is
Servant to the Lender. This inequality is not by chance, but by the Sovereign
Disposer of the Lord of all, 1 Samuel 2.7. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich.
Perhaps in Innocence (if that state had continued) all things might have been
in common; the Corn and Trees as free to all, as the Light and Air are now. But
to suppose it so with us, is to make a perpetual War, many quarrelling about
the same thing; as when one Bone is cast amongst several Dogs. And therefore
that Community of Goods, which we read of, Acts 4.34. was extraordinary, and
lasted but a very little while: so that now all have a right to the things that
they do lawfully possess, whether by Inheritance, Donation, or as gotten by
honest labor and industry; and as all Laws of Justice and Charity depend upon
this, so does this Relation of which we are speaking.

2. His Will and Providence is further seen in rendering all persons in this
inequality of their Conditions mutually helpful to each other, yea necessary to
one another in this lapsed state; and the beauty and order of God's Government
of the World is much to be observed, that each shall stand in need of his
Brother's help toward his own convenient subsistence in the World; that as it
is in the natural (and, as the Apostle says, in the mystical) so it is in the
political Body, 1 Cor. 12.21, 22. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no
need of thee; nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you; nay much
more those members of the body which seem to be more feeble, are necessary. The
Rich cannot say to the Poor, We have no need of you. For whence then will they
have their Servants? And how can they miss the help which they daily receive by
them? As the Hands need the Head for Guidance and Direction, so does the Head
need the Hands for Work and Service. And indeed by this means, the seeming
inequality in the distribution of worldly things is made up. That as it is in
matters of Charity, as the Apostle does establish it, in an equality, that your
abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance may also be a
supply for your want, that there may be equality. As it is written, he that
gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack, 2 Cor.
8.14, 15. Even just thus it is in matter of justice; in an equality, that your
Money, Wages, and Provision may be a supply for their indigency, and their Work
and Service a supply for your inability to discharge your business without
them; and so all things are set right, one has nothing over, and the other has
no lack. And perhaps amongst the variety of places, no Servants are more
necessary than those in Country-Villages; others wear finer Liveries, feed
higher, and lie easier: But the labor of the Country Servant is of most
excellent and general use: The profit of the Earth is for all, the King himself
is served of the field, says Solomon, Eccles. 5.9. and though he must rub
through many hardships, yet he may comfort himself in this, that the most
drudging part of his Service is of necessity to the Commonwealth: and when
many other Callings are apparently unlawful, and not a few exceeding doubtful;
The Servant's Calling, if not abused, is unquestionably lawful. It is true,
there is a Text that seems to oppose the Servants Calling, and the lawfulness
thereof; it is, 1 Cor. 7.23. You are bought with the price, be ye not the
Servants of Men. With which agree our Lord's Word, Call no Man Master upon
Earth; and possible it is, that in the Apostles Days, some hearing of the
liberty purchased by Christ; might begin to cast off their Service, especially
to unbelieving Masters: and therefore we find the Apostles Paul, Peter, and
John, so frequently calling Servants to their duty, and instructing them better
in it. And though we are told, that Believers are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3, 28. Yet it must be understood of the soul, or inner man, and of the means of
grace, in order to the Salvation thereof; for as to the outward Man, they are
still bond and free, and abide Master, and Servant still. And so when he bids
them to be no more Servants of Men, he has respect to the inner Man, or
Conscience, which none can Command but God. And tho our Lord has purchased a
liberty for our Bodies, as well as for our Souls; yet we attain but to the
first fruits of it now: There remains a Rest to be enjoyed after Death, then
the weary are at rest -- says Job, and the Servant is free from his Master.
But we are not now freed from all Molestations, Troubles and Inconveniences in
any state, and so not from that of Service, when called thereunto. I shall
therefore endeavor to set down, 1. The Duties of Servants, and how they may be
best performed. And then, 2. The Temptations, and Inconveniences of their
Calling, and how they may best be prevented, or remedied by them.


CHAP. II. The Duty of Servants [1] toward GOD.
THERE is such a comprehensive fullness in Scripture, in which the Commandments
are exceeding broad, that there is no Case, Condition, or Relation, in which
the People of God can be or stand, but there is something in the word that is
suited thereunto. There are none so high, but the Word is above them; and none
so low, but the Word condescends to them, and speaks to their state and case.
Servants may be overlooked by the World, but they are directed by the Word: And
from that Word I shall endeavor to speak to the Duty of Servants, under these
three Heads.

1. Their Duty toward God. 2. Their Duty toward their Masters. 3. Their Duty
toward their Fellow Servants, in the Family and Neighborhood.
As to the former; their Duty toward God, must first be minded, as the
foundation of their Duty toward Men. I have no hopes to do you good, unless, I
can prevail with you in these matters of the highest concern.

(1.) That you would engage your selves in the Service of God, and be his
Servants in the first place. You are already his Servants at large, and by
outward profession: You have taken his Earnest, and worn his Livery, upon your
being Baptized. It has been no strange thing in the Church of God, to have
Infants owned by God to be his Servants, viz. by an external Relation and
Profession: They are called so, Levit. 25.41, 42. and since this you have born
his Name, and Lived in his House, and eat of his Bread, and pretended to his
Wages, you have a Work to do, and shall at last be called to a Reckoning, when
the Great Master comes; but alas, alas! How many are there, that are the
Servants of Christ in Name, but really the Servants of Sin all the time? For
know you not, His Servants you are whom you obey, Romans 6.16. Jesus says unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that commits sin, is the Servant of
sin, Job 8.34. You your selves were sometimes foolish -- serving diverse Lusts
and Pleasures, Tit. 3.3. Romans 6.17, 20. 2 Pet. 2.19. You are by nature Slaves,
in your noblest part, to the vilest of Creatures, in the basest drudgery. How
has the Devil made you serve blindfold, in Bonds and Chains? If you are once
made sensible of your case, you would sigh and groan to be set at liberty, you
would be very inquisitive to find out a better place, you would long to be
directed to some better Service. And if so, I come to give you notice to my
Master; who though he wants not you, nor any Servant that he has, is very willing
to entertain you in his Service. It is an honorable Service, and a profitable
Service, there is no such Master, no such Wages to be had any where else. Our
Lord Jesus Christ offers to stand in many near relations to you, and you that
know what it is to go to Service, should know upon what terms you may become
the Servants of Christ. See then,

1. That you give up your selves to God and our Lord Jesus Christ by a solemn
Covenant and Contract. It is by Contract that you are Servants in the places
where you live, you knew what you did when you were hired, upon what terms you
took the Earnest: Now, Why stand you all the day idle? Why are your Souls so
long out of the Service of so great, so good a Master? Say not, No Man has
hired us: I this Day call and invite you into the Family of God, the Household
of Faith. Will you accept of his terms, and consent to the Covenant? He stands
not with you upon the rigorous terms of the Covenant of Works; He has admitted
a Surety, who has satisfied the Demands of Justice, and purchased most
excellent terms of Grace for you: And now what does the Lord thy God require of
thee? He expects that you renounce your former Masters. He will have all his
Servants be for him, and not for another; no Man can serve two Masters. He
expects that you should reverence his Son, that being ransomed from your
Slavery, and bought with the price, you should depend on his Merits, and submit
to his Will; and serve him in your Souls and Bodies which are his. Now who is
He that engages his heart to approach to God? Have you considered his terms,
You must for sake your Father's House, and your own People: The diverse Lusts
and Pleasures which you formerly served, must be entirely and eternally
abandoned: you must renounce your vain Confidences, and submit to his
righteousness, you must deny your own Wills, and stoop to his Word; you must
give up your Selves, Souls, and Bodies to be ruled by him, as ever you hope to
be saved by him. Do you now like his terms? If you say, No, as the Lord lives,
He will come down no lower: Wherefore yield your selves unto the Lord, as you
have yielded your members Servants of iniquity unto iniquity; so now, yield
your members Servants of righteousness, unto holiness. I know it must be the
Finger of God that must turn about your Hearts, and make you willing to his
Contract: And who knows but it may be the day of his power to some poor Souls?
Wherefore ponder upon your state by nature, till you are deeply affected with
your former slavery; let the making of this Contract be looked upon, as the
most solemn transaction of your Lives: Get into a corner and count the cost. He
sees you as he did Nathanael, as some think, about the same work under the
Fig Tree. Reckon upon bearing the burden and heat of the day, upon storms and
many a cold blast in your Faces; beg as for your Lives, the assistance of his
Spirit, and let each of you take to himself words, and say, Other Lords have
had Dominion over me, but I am thy Servant, truly I am thy Servant -- I put my
self under the wings of the God of Israel, I will never be the World's again;
nor Sin's, nor Satan's any more: I am thine, and thou art mine. Amen, And the
Lord God of Israel say so too. Being thus hired, you must see then,

2. That you diligently apply your selves to know and do the will of your
Master. Being bound you must obey, having opened your mouths unto the Lord, you
cannot go back. You are in for your Lives, yea for ever and ever: You must have
your ear bored to the Posts of the Door, and say, I love my Master, and will
never depart from him: You must chiefly delight in the inward part of your
work, but baulk no duty for any difficulty or danger that you may meet with
therein: You must not be quarreling with your Fellow Servants, when you should
be at work; but do all you do as approving your selves to the eye of your
Master: You must depend on the strength of Christ in all the Service you
perform: and when you have done all, must count your selves unprofitable
Servants, and look only to his Grace and Merits for Pardon and Acceptance. Nor
shall you ever say, that He is a hard Master, reaping where he did not sow, and
gathering where he did not strew: You shall have no occasion to liken him to
the Egyptian Taskmasters, that required Brick, but gave no Straw: He is
neither Tyrannical in his Commands, nor niggardly in his Encouragements: He is
not difficult to be pleased, nor will he always chide: He stands not upon legal
perfection, but admits of Repentance and Sincerity: He offers his assistance,
that you may do all through Christ strengthening you: He allows you to look to
the recompense of reward, that you may go the more cheerfully on, as those that
know that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

(2.) The next Duty of Servants is to improve the time of youth and strength.
The usual time of going to Service, is in the younger years; in that Age only
are they thought fit for the Service of Men: Oh let not the main work then be
neglected in it!

To this purpose I commend to Servants these two Considerations.

1. How advantageous a time the youthful Age is, and what pity it is so free a
time should be lost, an Age in which God usually lays hold on the hearts of
those, whom he brings home to himself, and in which Conversion is much easier,
like the bending of a tender Twig, than when some old knotty Root is to be
cleav'd, which must have many a Blow; and indeed as every thing is beautiful in
its season, so how lovely is early Piety? when the Young Man in the Gospel had
but some good Inclinations, it is said, Jesus loved him. How strong are such
like to be and grow in Grace, when like a Plant early set, it has time to take
Root? How fruitful will they prove, when they shall still bring forth fruit
even to old Age? What useful, experimental Christians do such prove, who have
had a long time to taste the sweetness of the ways of Christ, that they early
chose? None ever repented at last that they came in to Christ too soon: on the
contrary, the Comforts of the Holy Ghost soon convince them, that they have not
lost their Pleasures, but changed them; left sensual Transitory Delights for
such as are Spiritual and Eternal.

2. On the other side, How dreadful the neglect of the time of youth will
prove: how woeful the hazard, and how certain the damage. Unconverted Youth is
as full of sin, as Job's Body was of sores. We read of youthful lusts, the
iniquities of our youth, which corrupt Nature in that Age is strongly inclined
to. How long a Vacation is there usually from God and Duty! What foolish
talking and jesting, which is not convenient? Is there not (if not Oaths and
Execrations, yet) abominable lying in the Tongue? How sad is it to see, the
Pride and Vanity, Disobedience to Parents, Contempt of Advice, vilifying of the
Ministers and Servants of Christ, and above all, the prevailing Love of
Pleasures, unlawful Pleasures, or at least of ill Report, reigning amongst
Youth at this day! if through Grace they be awakened in their elder Years
(which is the best that can be thought of) yet how bitter will these youthful
Sins be to the Conscience, when they are made to possess the iniquities of
their youth? they will quickly receive of the Lord double for all their sins,
i.e. doubly, and triply more of horror, than ever they found of sweetness in
them. But alas, it is very seldom so well with them who have lost their Youth
in Sin. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spot? etc. How
impossible almost to reclaim them, especially if they spent their Youth in
Vanity under the Gospel! Life is uncertain, and you have no assurance to live a
day, and if you live till Age, alas, how soon will it come? the time in which
you will say, We have no pleasure in it. How little is the Sinner, that has
missed his time, and grown gray in sin, acquainted with the Importance of the
work, which he has so foolishly delayed! Do you think in your Consciences, That
all which you have so frequently heard of Conversion and Regeneration, all
about a Life of Self-denial, Meekness, Humility, and Contempt of this World, is
no more than to say, Lord, have mercy upon me, when you are sick, or to send
for the Minister to pray by you? Can the Work that requires the best
Instruction, the greatest Strength and Composedness of mind, and Retiredness
from the World, be performed at last, when you have spent your Youth and
Strength in Ignorance and Obstinacy, and come to be full of Pains of Body, and
Agonies of Mind, and tired with Company in Sickness, and the over-officious
Love of Friends as careless as your selves? I know the Instance of the Thief
upon the Cross is urged for a putting off Repentance to the last. But suppose
it were granted, That there was no Work begun on his Soul, before those last
hours, yet how many thousands have miscarried by such Delays, to one single
Instance of a Man that escapd! Is not one to so many thousands bgreat Odds, and
he brought in at such an extraordinary season, as never was before, nor ever
will be again? It was in a time when all things were carried in a miraculous
way; the Sun was darkened, the Rocks split, the Temple-veil rent, the Earth
shook, and the Graves opened, and a Sinner converted at the last. Our Lord was
spoiling Principalities and Powers, and as Captains snatch a Standard from the
Enemy, as a token of Victory; so did our Lord rescue this Soul out of the hands
of Satan, as a Standard gained to make a Show of it openly, triumphing thereby
over Satan in his Cross. And how easily may this Instance be retorted on the
careless Wasters of their Youth, that the Thief on the Cross came in at the
first Call, and, for ought appears to us, had never one Gospel-Invitation
before? Did he ever despise the offers of Grace from Year to Year as you have
done? What a difference does this make, that you have had duving your time of
Youth and Vanity, Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, and have grieved,
quenched, tempted, vexed, resisted, and even done despite to the spirit of
Grace? And do you think to command the free influences of the Spirit, when you
have missed your time, and he says, He will laugh at your Calamity, and mock
when your fear comes?

(3.) The last thing I shall name in the Servants Duty toward God, is to do
what they do in their places, as to the Lord, and not unto Men, Col. 3.23.
Whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, as
eyeing the Image of his Authority in those that God has set over you, for you
serve the Lord Christ. In order to this,

1. See that in the entrance into Service, or any new Place, you mind chiefly,
where you may have the greatest advantages for your Souls. Let not the easiest
work, or most wages, be the main thing in your Eye, in the places where you go.
Do not run into an infected place for some little outward advantage: Do not
choose to live in a Parish where there is no preaching Ministry, nor in a Family
where there is no worship of God; especially if the Governor or Members of the
Family be notoriously profane, shun such a House as you would one in which the
plague were broke out. And if God has cast your Lot into a Godly Family, esteem
it as a special favor, and remember to improve the price put into your hands.
It was a startling Speech of a holy Minister to a Maid Servant, and proved of
great use to her, Machin in vit.
when observing how God had placed her in a Religious Family, He told her, That
if she went to Hell out of that Family, she would have a deep place there.

2. That in doing the work of your Earthly Masters, you seek the strength, and
aim at the glory of your heavenly Master. Not to mention the Lord's Day as yet,
you must every day conscientiously beg a blessing upon your work, and commit
your Souls, Bodies, Relations, and lawful undertakings into the hands of God by
Faith and Prayer: you partake of the Mercies of the Family, and therefore you
must pray down a Blessing upon it. You remember Good Eleazar, Genesis 24.12. O
Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and
show kindness to my Master Abraham, etc. Prayer is the means to know your duty
in your Service, and to be able to perform it; by this means you may have the
testimony of your Masters, and of the truth it self, which Jacob had of his
Master Laban, Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience, that the Lord has
blessed me for thy sake. And this leads me to the second Part of the Servants
Duty.

CHAP. III. The Servants Duty [2.] toward their Masters.
HE is the good Christian that is good in the place and relation wherein God
has set him, and that is the Religious Servant, who out of a Principle of love
to God, and in obedience to his Command, does perform his duty to them to whom
God has subjected him.

Your Duty therefore toward your Masters consists, 1. In the reverend
subjection of mind, and respectful honor that your place requires. Let as
many Servants as are under the Yoke, count their Masters worthy of all honor,
that the name of Christ, and his Doctrine, be not blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.
this command of the Apostle is the more remarkable, because it is spoken to
them that had Infidel Masters: and if yours be Unbelievers, wicked Persons,
without so much as a profession, your Duty is more difficult; it is hard to
honor a Fool, or reverence one that you frequently see in his Vomit of
Drunkenness, or venom of Malice and Passion. But yet their Authority they have
from God, and you must reverence the Image of God's Dominion in them, lest you
cause the name of Christ to be blasphemed, and lest you give occasion to the
wicked Man to reproach Religion, and to say, These are your Professors, your
Religious Servants, ay, they are all alike. And if so be that God has subjected
you to those that are serious and Godly, you must honor them the more. So
says the same Apostle, ver. 3. and they that have believing masters let them
not despise them, because they are Brethren, but rather do them service because
they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. Be not you like those
insolent Youths that set light by their Masters, either before their faces or
behind their backs. God has not set you as Companions with your Masters, nor
does he allow of a saucy Carriage in their presence, nor to talk
disrespectfully of them, or of their Imperfections in their absence. The more
careful they are to instruct, reprove, and restrain you from sin and vanity,
the more do you prize them, and bless God for them. Be as ready (or more) to be
catechized, examined and directed about your Souls, as about any business that
you are employed about.

2. Your Duty lies in a Religious faithfulness, and constant fidelity, in all
that you undertake. When you hired your selves, you sold your time and labor
to your Masters, all but what God and nature more immediately requires to be
reserved: and besides the sin against God in idleness, you defraud your Master,
if you idle away an hour, that should be employed in his business. And to delay
his Messages, put off his work to others; to slubber over his work, or leave it
half undone, is to rob your Master of the Wages that is due for the work, which
you should have done accordingly, but did not. This is the Eye-Service, which
the Apostle condemns, Col. 3.22. when Hypocritically you seem earnest in his
work when his Eye is upon you, but loyter away your time when he has turned his
back. They that are unfaithful in their Master's work, will not ('it is to be
feared) make much Conscience of defrauding him in his Estate. How quickly does
the Devil teach an ungodly Servant to make bold with his Master's Money, in
buying or selling, and to excuse it by the secrecy, or smalness of the matter;
till they who made nothing to trample on God's Law for a Penny, came afterward
to Pounds and higher Robberies. And here let me beg of Servants to take heed of
Alehouses, Gaming-Houses, places of Drunkenness or Uncleanness, of loving
Cards and Dice, or sitting up to unseasonable hours at such Vanities: such will
need much Money to play away and riot away, and then how strong is the
temptation to keep back, or convey away part of the Money, that you sold the
Goods for! if you have any of these Devices, know, It is a downright Theft, and
if it be but a Penny, you know not where it will stop. They that take a little,
when the Temptation is strong will venture upon a great deal; and they that rob
their Master to day, will rob others to morrow. And how sad and bitter a Case
must this prove, when the best that can be hoped for, is a Confession of your
Theft, full of sorrow and shame, and the restitution of every farthing, to the
utmost of your power; without which there can be no Repentance, and so no
Salvation. And if this be not done, your Thefts in your Service will be like
Moths in your Goods, when you come to get something of your own: of your own
did I say? Yea, till you have made restitution, you do not eat your own bread;
and it is not your giving part of your ill-gotten Money to the poor, that will
prevent the horror of Conscience at last. God hates robbery for
burnt-offering. I Will add but one Instance more under this Head, which is the
Perfidiousness of Servants in any Trust committed to them. Like the unjust
Steward, that when there was owing his Master an hundred measures of wheat,
ordered them to take their bill and write fourscore. And if you should say, but
did not the Lord commend the unjust steward? Yes, for his wisdom, not for his
cheating his Master. It is a Parable, and we must mind the scope of it, which
is to show us a pattern of foresight; how we should secure a better habitation,
when these Tabernacles fail, as this wicked Servant looked about him what
should become of him, when his Master turned him out. Another manner of Servant
was Jacob, who had a hard Service in the Summers Heat, and Winters Frosts for
twenty Years, yet could say, Genesis 30.33. My righteousness shall answer for me
-- and if it be said, Did not Jacob play fast and loose with his Master, in
laying the Rods in the watering Troughs? I suppose not; the effect being not
natural, but by a Special Providence, and therefore we find the fact not by his
own invention, but by God's appointment in a Dream, Genesis 31.10. who thus gave
away what was Laban's to Jacob. But beyond all Examples is that plain Command,
Tit. 2.10. -- Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may
adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

3. Your Duty lies further in a willing Obedience, and conscientious harkening
to your Master's Commands. And though you must not perform your Service as
Men-pleasers, Col. 3.22. i. e. as merely such, you must please God chiefly, as
the one thing necessary, yet in, and under him, the same Apostle tells you,
That your Obedience to your Masters, lies in doing their pleasure in all that
they set you about, Tit. 2.9. Exhort Servants to be obedient to their Masters,
and to please them well in all things. Indeed we read of a pleasing Men, that
will not stand with our being the Servants of Christ: You therefore still
remember, God is their Master and yours. And if your earthly Master command any
thing contrary to God's Word; as to Lie, or Cheat for his gain, or the like, as
you love your Souls, obey God rather than Men. But now as to all lawful things,
the Command stands good, Col. 3.22. Servants, obey in all things, your Masters,
according to the flesh -- So that if the things be mean or low, and, as you
think, below you, you must not nicely stand upon your Honor, but set about
your work; yea though the Command be harsh and unpleasant, you must bring down
your high Stomach, and submit. So you will read, 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants, be
subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward. If your Master be froward, hasty, difficult to be pleased,
and it may be ready to injure you (this is his sin, and a very great one) yet
you must perform your Duty to God and him. But you will say, Is there no Remedy
for a poor Servant oppressed by a Churlish Nabal, no way to avoid his Rigor,
and unjust Severity? Why Yes, He may for the present withdraw himself prudently
to avoid his Master's rage; and though in case of the utmost extremity the
Servant may obtain the help of the Magistrate against an unreasonable Master,
yet usually the Apostle's Caution is sufficient, for the Servants to forbear
all muttering returns, which he calls, Tit. 2.9. -- not answering again. Which
is not meant that they must refuse a respectful Answer to Questions, when they
are asked. That is as great a fault on the other side (as the Wise Man says)
when they understand, not to answer, Prove. 29.19. But that they should not
thwart and contradict, or by rugged and unmannerly words provoke their Master's
Indignation against them. On the contrary, there is required a willing
Obedience, called a doing what they do heartily, or from the heart, Col. 3.23.
and if in harsh and unpleasant things you must obey, how are they to blame,
that refuse their Masters Orders, in the most gentle and necessary things? That
will tell their Masters they were not hired to be catechized, or the like.
Which is not only an affront to God in the contemning of his Ordinances for
your Souls, but a disobedience to them whom God has set over you. For when you
become Servants, it is not only in this or that work that suits your humor, as
if you were to set your Conceits and Wills against their Commands; but in all
lawful things belonging to your place, whereby you may testify your Obedience
to them.

CHAP. IV. The Duty of Servants [3.] toward their Fellow Servants in the
Family and Neighborhood.
THey that are of the same Calling or state of life in the World, are wont to
be counted Brethren: and especially when they live near to each other, should
most entirely love as such. Society is the great Comfort of Life, and Equality
of Condition much adds to the sweetness of it, where there be other higher
Qualifications. Indeed there is hardly any word so much abused as that of
Good-Fellowship. Men mistake the Order of it, making it chiefly to respect the
Body, which is to be minded in subordination to the Soul: and no less, the
Matter of it. Good-Fellowship with them is to be amongst their Cups, at best in
idle Chat and Vanity. And Servants and Youth hear it told by some grown gray in
carelessness, What love and good neighborhood there was, when they had not so
much Preaching, nor such ado about Religion. But the Christian Servant has not
so learned Christ. There are more noble Ends of Society, than careless Servants
know; such as,

1. Mutual Watchfulness, especially over the Souls of each other. It is true,
That here Charity must begin at home, in a cautious fear of danger to your own
Souls, especially if your Companions in the Family be none of the best. Take
heed you be not Tempters of others, nor your selves tempted by them. Remember
the Exhortation that speaks unto you as unto Children. Prove. 1.10. My Son, if
Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. And undue Familiarity between Servants
of different Sexes in a Family, has had fatal and tragical Effects. How often
has Opportunity and Privacy exposed Men and Maids that live together to the
Devil's Temptations. And in houses, where the Masters have set battlements on
the roof, they have leaped over into the ditch, (for a Whore is a deep ditch,
and he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein, Prove. 22.14.) How much
more are Servants in danger, where they have no warnings, but wicked Examples;
how soon do filthy Words, and wanton Dalliances betray them? He that fears
the Lord shall escape the snare, but the sinner shall be taken in it, Eccles.
7.26. And if they be of the same Sex, there is no small danger in a converse
with those that have infectious diseases, and running sores of profaneness
upon them. If they be only in the Neighborhood, that are thus infected, it is
more easy to avoid them. 2 These. 3.6. Now we command you, That you withdraw
your selves from every brother that walks disorderly -- Who touches pitch
and is not defiled? Can any take coals in his bosom and not be burnt? But if
the Plague be in the House where you are, and your Fellow Servants Drunkards,
profane Swearers, Scoffers at Religion, your Case is the more dangerous. How
came you into this Hell on Earth, where these things are suffered? Ought you
not to be deeply humbled, That you made no better choice? And upon what terms
do you stay longer there? You had need have a clear Call, to dwell in a
Pesthouse. Nevertheless while you stay in that place, Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart, but shall in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon
him, Lev. 19.17. It seems without this, you can neither testify your hatred of
their sins, nor free your selves from the imputation of hatred of their Souls.
You must do it in faithfulness to your own Souls, and you know not but you may
thereby gain theirs. You must watch the best Opportunity that your nearness to
them will afford you, to tell them their fault between them and you alone; and
with plainness lay open their sin before them, this open rebuke is better than
secret love. And continue your Duty, if they go on to sin, unless, by scoffing
Malignity, and Fury, they show themselves to be the dogs and swine that you
must not throw your pearls before, lest they turn again and rent you. And then
you can do no more, unless by getting others to rebuke them, who by their
Authority, may be more likely to prevail, as Joseph brought to his Father his
son's evil report. And if Providence has cast your lot amongst such as are
civil and towardly, your Duty will be more easy. They will willingly be warned
by you, and thankfully take your cautions for their Souls good: you will not be
tempted so much to use the words of the first Murderer, Am I my Brother's
keeper? but if (not only civil, but) Godly Servants meet in the same House or
Neighborhood, they will agree together to watch over and mutually to admonish
one another. Two are better than one -- for if they fall, the one will lift up
his fellow, but woe bo to him that is alone when He falls, for He has not
another to help him up -- and if one prevail against him, two shall withstand
him, and a threefold cord is not quickly broken, Eccl. 4.10. etc. By this
watchfulness over each other they will be combined against the Devil's
Temptation, and fortified against the flouts of those that will think it
strange, that they run not with them in the same excess of riot. Especially if
they conscientiously observe the Second Duty, which is,

2. Christian Conference, the Servants discoursing together about the things of
God. Besides your vacant Hours in Winter Evenings, and when your Work is done,
many parts of your Work afford leisure for Discourse, yea, and matter for
spiritual improvement, if your Hearts will serve you. Some of you have more
knowledge than others, and some more tender affections, and how well would
these Gifts be employed, if like those that feared the Lord, Malac. 3.16. You
spoke often one to another about Soul-Affairs. Good Affections in Discourse do
even naturally kindle the like in those you are talking with: as Metal put into
a Furnace is never melted so soon, as when added to some of the same Metal,
melted before. As Iron sharpens Iron, so does the Countenance of a Man, his
Friend. How easily may two or three well-disposed Servants carry away a whole
Sermon in their Memories, when they shall repeat over the Heads to each other
as they go along, or when they come home. This would make your hearts burn
within you, and prepare you for examination of your Masters in the
Family Worship. But there are none so sitted for Christian Conference, as they
that can Communicate to each other, what God has done for their Souls. The
Schoolmen say, Angels of an Inferior Order cannot enlighten those of a
Superior. Sure I am the meanest Servant, that is truly Gracious, though of weak
Parts and Gifts, may enlighten and warm by their humble Converse those that
have greater Natural Endowments.

3. The other Duty is their ready helpfulness of each other, in all things
wherein their assistance may be useful. Take each others concerns as your own,
not as Busybodies, but as helpers of them in their Work, when your Master's
Service may be the better carried on. Let there be no fallings out amongst your
selves, no more than grumbling at your Masters, that other Servants have lesser
work, or better usage than you. Be as desirous of their good as your own, and
as ready to help them in any Sicknesses or Straits, that your Fellow Servants
may be in, as you would be to be helped your selves in the like case. And
especially rejoice if you may be any ways helpful for their Souls. Some of them
cannot Read, and you may teach them, and many ways further them in knowledge,
or encourage any good Inclinations. When other Servants provoke one another to
wrath, you must provoke your Fellow Servants to love and good works. One
Servant easily brings another to Instruction, by Counsel and Example, and makes
every Duty delightful by Company in it. And how sweet is it for Servants to get
into a Corner, and Pray together? What a Blessing will they be to one another,
and to the Family and Neighborhood where they Live?

CHAP. V. Of the Temptations and Hindrances of the Servants Calling. [1.] By
being bred in Ignorance.
THE Duties of Servants are of such Importance, that the Devil and a corrupt
Heart will be sure to lay in the way, or at least to pretend many hindrances.
Indeed all Places and Callings have their Inconveniences, and the Devil suits
his Baits not only to the inward Constitutions, but to their outward
Conditions. He has one Wile for the Rich, and another for the Poor, one for the
Master and another for the Servant. And as every one should be acquainted with
his Special Duty, so with the particular Temptations to which his place does
expose him, and what Remedies the Word does prescribe. I shall name three
Hindrances of Servants more comprehensive than the rest.

1. The First is Ignorance, the common snare of Country Servants. Many of
which, by the Poverty, and Carelessness of their Parents, and Friends, cannot
so much as Read, and though some would Charitably have paid for their Schooling
in their Childhood, they could not be spared from their Work. Many of them are
of such a rough Disposition, and rugged temper, that they are as a wild Asses
Colt, Job 11.12. and indeed this is the dreadfulness of their case, that they
are not only ignorant, but (as they grew up) are affectedly and willingly so.
Nay so far are some besotted, that they make their ignorance their excuse or
pretense to cast off all duty, and to oppose those that would help them in it:
they think it enough to say they are not Book-learn'd, or are no Scholars: and
though they were created with faculties capable of understanding and remembering
the things of God, and in other things are wise for their age and breeding, yet
the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but my people do not
know. -- Isa. 1.2. Great is the compassion and condescension of God in
revealing the mysteries of Religion to us. He has not dealt so with other
Nations. He might have spoken his mind in lofty strains, above the capacity of
Creatures to conceive, but the necessary things are so plainly revealed, and
easily remembered, that even Children have attained to great understanding
therein, and yet they are truths of so great moment, that the learned Apostle
despised all the wisdom of this World in comparison of the knowledge of Christ,
nay, these things the Angels themselves desire to pry into. How frequently has
this general ignorance been bewailed, and the danger of it discovered to our
careless Servants? How often has the cry of wisdom been heard, How long you
simple ones will you love simplicity, and ye fools hate knowledge? if you had
had no means of Grace, nor Gospel light, the case had been lamentable, Pro.
29.18. where there is no Vision, the people perish; but this is the
condemnation that light is come into the World, and men love darkness rather
than light, Joh. 3.19. if the word of Christ had not been spoken to you, you
had not had sin, in comparison of what you have now, for now you have no cloak
for your sin, your conceitedness and obstinacy. Joh. 9.39, 41. your ignorance
is no less than direct enmity, and saying to God, Depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. and how just will be the Sentence, for
God to say to you, Depart from me, I know you not. Thus my people perish for
lack of knowledge, Hos. 6.4. and have that dreadful Curse mentioned, Job 36.12.
to dye without knowledge; and being a people of no understanding, He that made
them will not have mercy upon them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor, Isa. 27.11. And when Christ shall be revealed in flaming fire to take
vengeance on them that know not God, how will the Men of Niniveh, of Tire, of
India, rise up in judgment against those that perish in ignorance, from under
Gospellight, and Calls of Grace therein?

To remedy this sore hindrance of all good, I exhort Servants,

1. Diligently to attend on the means of knowledge, and carefully to improve
them. You do (at least feemingly) attend on the preaching of the Word in the
Public Assemblies, but alas! To how little purpose, you easily perceive, when
you cannot give the least account of what you have heard, nor of the scope or
drift of the plainest Sermons; and except in some few whose Affections being
drawn out by a Sermon, do afterward seek after knowledge, we find by
Experience, that Preaching, to those that are ignorant of the first Principles,
is like building without any Foundation laid. God has appointed Catechizing as
the ordinary means of Instruction in his Church, which you are called to submit
unto. And perhaps your Submission to the Ministry in this Ordinance, is the
only possible way that knowledge is to be had for some of you. Are there not of
you that live with Masters as careless as your selves, from whom you shall not
hear a serious word about God or Christ, from one end of the Week to the other?
Which way can you expect to learn, if you refuse our help? Think not that
Catechizing is only for Children, when your selves are Children in
understanding, and being grown in Years, have need to make the more have to
learn. If you stay a little longer, it will be too late to teach you, nothing
almost being more untractable than ignorant and ungodly Old Age. Will you defer
being instructed till you have Families of your own, and have others to teach
and instruct? Oh, do not multiply the number of Prayerless, Careless Families.
I know the usual Plea is, That you are ashamed to answer, especially before the
Congregation. Indeed ignorance is matter of shame, but it is every where
represented in Scripture as a lovely thing, to see young persons forward in
coming to Christ, and a great honor it is to be examples to others in seeking
after instruction. It is a sad thing that the Ordinances should be accused as a
matter of shame, and how then can you think of appearing before the greatest
Assembly at last? And what dreadful shame and confusion of Face, will
Christless Souls be covered with then, when all your secret sins shall be made
manifest, and all your foolish hopes dashed, and God himself shall pour
contempt upon you? It is true, it is better to come and learn privately, as
Nicodemus by Night, than not at all; but a little use and experience of the
good of it, will make Public Catechizing delightful to you. For indeed you
must do what you do with a willing cheerfulness: Let a Man account of us as
Stewards, etc. Now the Family run willingly to the Steward for their Food. And
they that know what the Scripture means by digging for knowledge, will attend
upon the means with constancy. For then shall you know if you follow on to know
the Lord, Hos. 6.3. Supposing also that you practice what you know, for a good
understanding have all they that do his Commandments, Ps. 111.10.

2. The other remedy is to cry and pray hard for knowledge, and as Solomon
says, to lift up your voice for understanding. Pray, and get others to pray
for you -- that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9. that God would open your understandings,
and then give light and knowledge thereunto, that the father of glory would
give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, The
eyes of your understandings being enlightened, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. that you may not
only be taught of men, but, as it is written in the Prophets, may be taught of
God. That you may not only have some Conceptions of Christ in your Minds, of
his Person, his Nature, his Perfections, his Offices, and States of Humiliation
and Exaltation; but that you may comprehend with all Saints what is the
height, and length, and breadth, and depth of the love of Christ, and to know
it, though it passes knowledge; that you may know him in his Beauty, his
Fullness, his Willingness, his Presence and Power of his love in your Souls;
that you may so know him, as by Faith to come to him, receive and embrace him.
These are the things which he has promised to bestow in the Covenant of Grace,
and gives forth in a way of Prayer. Go to him as the Father of lights, who
gives liberally, and will not upbraid, nor twit you with the ignorance in which
you were bred, nor the carelessness in which you lived so long.

CHAP. VI. The hindrances of Servants calling [2.] by discontent and repining
at their condition.
THey that know little of God, have understanding sufficient for their business
in the World, but for want of saving Knowledge and Grace, how many poor
Servants go on uncomfortably in it? they look upon themselves as hardly dealt
with, and are apt to fret and fume at the narrow Portion allotted to them by
Providence, to be laid in some cold out-House, or meanest Loft, of a poor
Cottage, to have the leavings of the course fare there; hard work, cold blasts
abroad, and, perhaps, hard words and unkind usage at home: this grates upon the
Spirit, and makes them think their Life more miserable than any others; and
they that know not God, will talk like Heathens, and rail at luck or Fortune,
for placing them in such mean circumstances. This makes them go heavily on, and
their wrigling makes their Yoke to gaul them, and every part of the work uneasy
that they go about: they are apt to grudge at any one that goes finer, and (as
they think) fares better, and that every one does them wrong, that does not
sweat as much as they; and if God be provoked by their fretting, they mind it
not. He sends them troubles and crosses, which meeting with a proud unbroken
Spirit, do cause them to tumultuate and murmr the more. Nor is discontent the
sin only of Servants, but of their Masters and others; for it is not in the
condition, but in the temper of their Spirits, till the heart be changed and
cured. But I shall mention such remedies, as do particularly respect the
persons to whom I am speaking. It concerns All that lie under this temptation,
to consider the Sovereignty of God, and his Wisdom in appointing their lot,
that Nature is contented with a little, and Grace with less; considering that
the lowest condition out of Hell, is mercy to poor lost Sinners, how easily God
can change their lot, if he sees it good, and how sweet the lowest state may be
made to them by Quietness, and Contentment. But there are two special
Considerations that I commend to Servants, in order to the removing this
hindrance of their Duty, that from henceforth they may bear the Inconveniences
of their Callings, with a more composed mind, that they may not be weary of
their condition, or irksomely long for alterations of it; but may wait God s
leisure, and be kindly affected toward others that are in a higher condition
in the World than they.

1. And the First Consideration is, The happiness of the condition of Servants,
in comparison of that of many others. For not to compare you with the Miserable
Vagrants, that eat the Bread out of the Mouths of the true Poor; touching which
disorderly Persons, we have the Apostle's Command, That if they will not work,
they must not eat. I rather speak of the Condition of such as you never knew,
or considered in your Discontent. How far then, has God set you above Servants
in other Times and Places, which have been, and are compelled to Slavery, and
forced Subjection to the Lusts of Men. Of this sort were many of those Servants
to whom the Apostles wrote; and if they were to do their work heartily without
grudging, how much more should you? And in our Age have you never heard of the
Slaves in the Plantations, and how they are used (especially with respect to
their Souls) by some more Savages than the Negro's that they call so? And what
Servant in England dares repine at their state, that has ever known the
Condition of their own Contrymen, when Slaves in Algiers, and other places:
For not only are they enslaved in a strange Country, whereas the Smoke of ones
own Country, is sweeter than the clearest Air in a strange Land: but the
Miseries they suffer under Barbarous Masters, calls for your pity toward them,
and contentment with your merciful Lot. For being bereft unjustly of all their
Goods, they are constantly compelled to the hardest Labor, without any rest,
scarce to drink a little Water, and eat their decayed Barley, and Broth of
Camels, worn out with Work, like themselves; and this with the only
intermission of four Days in the Year, upon the slightest Faults cruelly
beaten, that they often die of their pain. Indeed their Lives are no further
valued, than for their Service, or Slavery, and their Souls in greater danger,
by continual Temptations to escape all these Hardships, by a dreadful
Apostasy. And to leave these to consider some others, that seem to have a Life
as full of Pleasure, as these that I have mentioned have of Misery; I mean the
Servants of State, whose Life you so much envy for their Ease, and Fine Cloths.
Did you but consider their Temptations to Idleness, and thereby to almost all
other sins, you would see that God has delivered you from many snares, to which
they are daily exposed. By appointing you a moderate Labor (which is for the
Health of your Bodies, and the good of the Public) your Souls are not in
danger of flattering the Great, or ministering to the Pride and Lusts of those,
that think their Riches privilege them to live a Life of Sloth and Sensuality.
Not that it is thus in all great Houses, God forbid; but that it is very
difficult for a Camel to get through the Eye of a Needle. And how general is
the Debauchery, and Ruin of those Servants, that at first you grudged at? But
to come nearer home, how free is the Servants Life, and void of those Troubles,
to which even your own Masters, and others that live round you, are frequently
exposed? They have great Rents to pay, and the Money hardly got to pay them
with; they have Meat and Drink to provide for you, and Wages at the Years end;
one trespasses on their Fields, and another defrauds them of their Debts. They
hardly bear their own wants, and more hardly the wants of Wives and Children:
They have Losses to be made up abroad, and Houses to be repaired at home: And
you see all this, but feel it not. You have no care (next to the pleasing God)
but to do your work in the Day, and sleep quietly in the Night. Are not these
burdens on their Minds, greater than any you bear on your Shoulders? And to
name but one thing more under this Head, Is there not a worse service, or
slavery, than that I speak of, in Algiers? Are there not Covenant-Slaves of
Satan, that have sold themselves to work wickedness, and made a kind of League
with Hell? All that worse than Egyptian Service, wherewith they are made to
serve, Is it not with rigor? And though they are Lords and Ladies, and have
long Trains of Servants, yet if they are Unconverted, Are they not Servants?
Yea, Bondslaves to Sin, Satan, Mammon, and the fear of Death? Let not thy
heart envy sinners. But this last Comparison does respect the Godly Servants
only, and so brings me to the second Consideration to cure this Discontent, viz.

2. The much more happiness of the Servants of God, though in the lowest and
meannest services amongst Men. As He that is called being free is the Lord's
Servant: so He that is called, being a Servant, is the Lord's Freeman, 1 Corinthians. 7.22. Though he tied fast your Yoke by his Word, in all due Obedience
to your Masters; yet, having broke the Yoke of Sin, He has made you freer than
Princes that continue under it. Whom the Son makes free they are free indeed,
John 8.36. His Service is perfect Freedom, though your Service to Men should be
heavy to a Bondage. How precious a Liberty has Christ bought for you, and
bestowed by his Spirit upon you, if you belong to him, though the meanest
Servant here in the lowest Cottage! He has given you the external Liberty of
his House, admitted you to feast at his Table, given you free leave to partake
of his Provision, and appointed his Stewards to dispense it accordingly, and
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, all are yours. He has sweetened this with a
Liberty of Conscience, and of a Judgment rightly informed: for though he has
not delivered you from a subjection to Magistrates any more than to your
Masters; yet so free has he made you, That nothing shall bind your Conscience
but his own Word, and all your Obedience to the Commands of Men, shall be for
Conscience sake toward God, requiring that subjection. But, above all, where
the Spirit of the Lord is there is Liberty of Heart and Will in the work of
your Master. Not a Liberty to live in sin, which is an Abuse of the word, and a
Liberty that is not in Heaven it self; the Perfections of God are an Eternal
Law to himself, that he cannot lie, or deny himself; but an holy exemption from
the Servility of Sin, and a free propension to whatsoever is good; that whereas
before you could not pray, you were bound up and fettered, He has now brought
you out of Prison, that you may praise his Name. That under any temptation to
discontent in the Service of Men, your Souls should be raised in Praise of your
Great Master, who has already entered you into the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God, and will at last set you at liberty from the burden of this flesh, and
the Body it self, at the last day, from the hand of the Grave, and will make
all his Servants Kings and Priests to God and our Father. Oh, blessed are thy
Servants that shall dwell in thy house, for they will be still praising thee.
And blessed be his glorious Name, who took upon him the form of a Servant, and
was himself bound to a Pillar, That he might set us free. Who has proclaimed
Liberty by his Gospel, and the opening of the Prison doors to them that are
bound, who has given us of his free Spirit. and made us willing in the day of
his power, and here we offer up our selves, our Souls and Bodies as our most
reasonable Service. We thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name. But who am I,
or what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this
sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14. And let none repine at being Servants, who through Grace,
have such a Liberty, and Freedom as this.

CHAP. VII. The Hindrances of the Servants Calling [3.] Want of Time, real or
pretended.
TO every Work there is an appcinted Time, and every Duty has the special
Season for it; but here lies the Servants difficulty, their Time is their
Master's, and his Work fills it up, that they have not the leisure for Duties
and Exercises of Religion that others have. Others can read and pray as long as
they will, but Servants are called up early about their Work, and tired with it
all day, and what time then have they for Prayer, Meditation, or Covenanting
with God? Truly, by the way, to whom much is given, of them God requires the
more. And they that have Estates, and less necessary Business in the World,
must find more Time for the immediate Service and Worship of God, than the poor
Servant can. But still one thing is necessary, and they that have most Business
in the World, have Souls to mind as well as others. Some, indeed, have Masters
that do purposely allow them time, and see that they spend it in Reading, and
other Duties; and some, whose Hearts God has inclined by Grace, can find time
to have their Hearts with God, when their Hands are in the World; and what
sweet and Heavenly Meditations does their Plowing, Sowing, Reaping, and other
parts of their Work, afford them? Though they cannot be long at Prayer, they
endeavor to be the more fervent in it; they go the more unwillingly from it,
and come to it the more cheerfully again. When they go into the Fields to their
Work, or come back, they have as free a time, as if entered into a Closet, and
the door shut about them. But it is not thus with all; some have rough and
careless Masters, that hurry them to bed, that they may rise the sooner about
their Work, and think all time lost when that is not in hand, and the slothful
Heart is glad of the Excuse, to silence Conscience, which else would check
them, for living without Prayer, and other Duties that they have heard pressed
upon them: offer them a Catechism, they have no time to learn it; others go to
an Opportunity for Instruction, but they cannot be spared to go with them. Like
Faelix, they put it off to a more convenient time, which yet never comes.

To remedy this sore Inconvenience, there are these Two plain Directions.

1. That they carefully avoid all those things, that unnecessarily and sinfully
take up their time, and then they will quickly sind, That want of Time is more
a pretended than real Hinderance of the Servant's Duty. To speak plainly to
you, How did such and such (whom you know, and perhaps have laughed at, as too
precise) get their knowledge of the things of God? How do they get time for
Prayer, and Reading, and Examination of their Hearts? Have not they as hard
Places as you, and as much Work on their hands, and better done? Is it not that
they redeem and improve the time, that you trifie and squander away? Is it not
known of some of you, That some merry Meetings (as they call them) and drunken
Bouts, have first stolen away your Hearts, and then steal away your Time? And
because you did not, it may be, come reeling home, you think it nothing, that
you have wasted the good Creatures of God, and the Time, which he lent you for
higher Ends. Oh, how will this bite like an Adder when time shall be gone
indeed, and the Angel shall lift up his hand, and swear by him that lives for
ever and ever, that time shall be no more, and thou mourn at last, when thy
flesh and thy body are consumed, and say, How have I hated Instruction? -- and
have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me? Prove. 5.11, 12, 13. Do you think, That this Plea will hold at
last, when all the Tribes of the Earth shall be gathered before their Judge,
and you stand trembling amongst the rest? Shall it suffice to say, I heard
indeed the Calls of Grace, but, Lord, I was a Servant, and had but little time?
Will He not say, Out of thine own mouth I condemn thee, thou wicked Servant.
Thou knew that thou had but a little time, why then did thou squander it
away amongst thy idle Companions? Why then did thou sit up to such
unseasonable hours at thy Cards and other Sports? If thou do indeed want
time, leave off thy Chat, thy idle Stories, that fill up the long Winter
Evenings, and other vacant hours, and thou would have it. Yea, better that
thou should work the harder, and sleep the less, that thou may get time for
thy Soul, before Sickness and Death overtake thee, and thou cry in vain, Call
time back again, Oh, call time back again, when it is too late, and thou art
lanching into the Ocean of Eternity.

2. That Servants that want time all the Week, do the more dearly prize the
Lord's Day, and improve the Seasons of Grace therein. When by God's Consent you
contracted with your Masters for your Time, this Day He reserved for his own
special Service. And that Masters might know, That the Commandment about the
Sabbath was for their Servants as well as themselves, He adds this to the Law
in one place -- That thy Manservant and thy Maidservant may rest as well as
thou, Deuteronomy. 5.14. This is now the Laborers rest, and see you lose not a minute
of so precious a time. Dispatch your Business the sooner the Night before,
shake off your Worldly Thoughts, and go seasonably to rest, that you may not
lie abed longer on the Lord's Day Morning than at other times. Oh, think not
(when you say, you want time) to keep a Sabbath in an outward slothful rest, as
your Horses, and other Beasts do. Meddle with no worldly Business on this Holy
Day, but what is of Necessity; and count nothing of necessity that hinders the
Work of the Day, and may be put off till another time. If you have Masters that
know the Worth of a Sabbath, they will take care of you especially on this day,
not only to keep you from all Business that is not suited to the Day, but to
put you upon all Holy Exercises therein; and how sweet is it, to see Masters
come to the Public Assemblies furnished with their Train, not suffering a
Servant that can be spared, to stay at home, or lagg behind! And if you have
careless Masters, that would have you make your visits, or go journies on this
Day, because they cannot spare you on another, rather deny your selves the
Liberty offered you, than be deprived of the Dearer Liberty of the House of
God: Above all, avoid the profane Feasts that yet are kept up in some places
on the Lord's Day. Let no Business of your own hinder you (where it may be)
from attending Forenoon and Afternoon on the Public Worship, and that with
Seriousness and Reverence, as those that know into whose Presence you are come:
and beg earnestly for the Power of the Spirit to accompany the Word to your
Souls. Do not think the Sabbath is ended when the Sermon is done. Let no wicked
Companions persuade, That you may find your own pleasures on this Holy Day,
Isa. 58.13. Remember what an Inlet Sabbath-breaking has been into all
Wickedness; how many wicked Servants, from cheating their Masters, have been
drawn to other Crimes, and on the Gallows confessed, That neglecting and
profaning the Sabbath was the sin that exposed them to those Temptations which
brought them thither. Be you a Companion of them that fear the Lord, and if you
have none such to confer with about what you have heard, as you go home or when
you come there, be the more by your selves: double all the Spiritual Duties
now, that you have less time for on other days. Be ready to give an account of
your profiting, if you are so happy, as to have Masters that will examine you;
and count not the Day, or the Duties therein, a Weariness, but call the Sabbath
a Delight. Admire the Kindness of God to poor Servants, in appointing a Day on
purpose for that, which else you could hardly have found time for. Look upon it
as the Great Thanksgiving-Day, Praise him for all his wondrous Works;
especially, for your Redemption by our Lord Jesus Christ, who, when He had
finished his Suffering-work, did rise again from the Dead on the First Day of
the Week, and set his own Name on that Day; That they that are tired with their
Labors all the Week, may rest upon it; That the meanest of his People may
rejoice therein, in hopes of an Everlasting Sabbath above; where these Earthly
Relations will cease, and there will be no more Distinction of Master and
Servant; but all swallowed up in one Spiritual Relation, to Him, of whom the
whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, and in one Holy Service of Praise
and Thanksgiving, to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever
and ever.

FINIS.

