THE PASTORS VALEDICTION. OR, A Farewell Sermon, PREACHED AT SEPULCHERS, LONDON.

By Mr. MATTHEW MEADE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Shall not need to use any Epistolary Commendations of the Author, if ever
any Preacher had both Urim and Thummim, the one in his Word, the other in his
Example, unreprovable in his Doctrine, and unblamable in his Life, then this
Excellent Divine Mr. Matthew. Meade is the man, whose ensuing Notes being this
Preachers last Valediction to his Congregation, a little before his Civil,
though Voluntary Death, are here presented to thy view.

But it may be God withdraws his excellent Servants from his People, to admit
them nearer to himself, that they may have none in Heaven but himself, and none
in Earth beside him.

The ensuing Sermon was taken by the careful hand of a ready Writer, and a
very good Friend of the Reverend Authors, to prevent Abuse by Imperfect Copies,
which we hear are coming forth and made Public; We shall not mention the vast
Difference betwixt Hearing and Reading, or the Power lost in Printing, which
words had in Delivering, neither how neatly they might have been Clothed by the
Author. All that we shall say is, thou have them in such a dress as they were
clad with in their first delivery, and be they Read with as good Affection as
they were Preached and Heard, and through the Spirits Assistance, will not
prove a dead Letter.

Farewell. N. D.

The Pastors Valediction. BEING The Farewell Sermon of Mr. Matthew Meade, late
of Sepulchers, LONDON.
1 COR. 1.3. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.


YOu will wonder, possibly, that I should pitch on the Apostles Salutation for
my Valediction, and make that the Conclusion of my Preaching, which he made the
Beginning of his Writing, and therefore I have made a double Plea for it. I
find that this was a form of Blessing peculiar to this Apostle both in the
beginning and end of this Epistle; for as there is scarcely one Epistle but
begins with it, so many end with it like wise: as in Ephesians. 6. ver. ult. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. So in the 2d of the
Thessalonians, the last verse of the last Chapter, The grace of our Lord Christ
be with you all: So that I finding the Apostle to use it frequently at the
beginning and ending of his Writing, I thought as I made it the matter of my
prayer for you in the beginning, so I might make it my farewell to you in the
ending; and therefore Grace be unto you and Peace from God our Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Besides this, as Jacob said to his Benjamin concerning his venison, when his
Father asked him, How he found it so quickly? he Answered, because the Lord thy
God brought it to me: The same I may say of this Scripture, for Considering of
what subject I should speak in my last Labors here among you, this Scipture
came to my thoughts, and opening the Book, came immediately to my sight; and
therefore I may say God brought it to me: Which I no sooner looked upon, but
methinks I saw the Apostle on Mount Gerisim, and his mouth filled with
blessing; for what greater blessing can a man wish, then that which comprehends
all blessings, and that is, Grace, and Peace. Being therefore now to part, I
thought to go to the top of the Mount, and leave with you Grace, and Peace from
God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. In which words there are two
generals. 1. A double Blessing desired, 2. A double Spring discovered.


1. A double Blessing desired: and that is, Grace and Peace. Grace is of all
Blessings the richest, Peace is of all Comforts the sweetest: both these the
Apostle beggs for the Corinthians, and so do I for You. Beloved, Grace be unto
you, and Peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Here is a double fountain discovered: and that is the Father and the Son,
God and Christ. The Father is called the God of Grace; the Son is called the
Prince of Peace, not that Grace is from the Father without Peace, nor Peace
from the Son without Grace, but both Grace and Peace are from God the Father
through the Lord Christ.

The Order of the words is worth noting, Grace be to you and Peace: First
Grace, then Peace, for there can be no Peace without Grace, nor Grace but there
will be Peace, but there can be no true Peace but from God, nor from God but as
he is a Father, not from God as a Father, but as our Father, and he cannot be
said to be our Father, but through our Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore he
says, Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father through our Lord Jesus
Christ: both are manifest as a Golden Chain linked together, not Grace without
Peace, nor Peace without Grace, but both conjoined together, to cram the
Believers Soul with Grace and Peace. Now from the Order of the words we might
raise several Observations. 1. That Peace is the fruit of Grace. 2. That Grace
and Peace are both from God. 3. That Love which is the spring of Grace and
Peace, is from God as a Father. 4. That we share not in this Love, but only as
he is our Father: All is from propriety,


First, Our Father, then Grace and Peace from God our Father.

5. That God is our Father only through Christ.

But before we draw any thing from the Text by way of Observation, we will
speak to the terms by way of Explication. Grace be to you: What is here meant
by Grace? This is a sweet word, it perfumes the Breath, it cherishes the
Conscience, it warms the Heart, it ravishes the Soul, as the Spouse was
ravished with the rays of Christ's glory, so Christ revives the Soul with one
of his gracious rays discovered to the Heart; Grace is the life of the Soul,
thou art dead till Grace quickens thee, thou art lost till Grace finds thee,
undone till Grace saves thee; Grace is the Manna of Angels, the spiritual Bread
which those that are holy in being are nourished with, and subsist by; Angels
live on Grace, and stand by Grace; Man that shares in the Grace of God, is made
fellow Communiors with Angels, eats Angels food, and share in Angels blessings;
Grace is the substance of the Scripture, the end of the Law, the fullness of
the Gospel, Gregory calls it, the Heart and Soul of God; I am sure Grace is the
Heart and Soul of the Word; its a little word, but if comprehends all good;
here is more then Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, its the Epitome of all the good
in Heaven and Earth; name any word that signifies good to the Soul here or
hereafter, but if it is found in the Index in this little word Grace; Grace
comprehends Gods love to us, and our love to God; and as Gods love to us is the
sum of all Mercy, so our love to God is the sum of all Duty; Grace is the new
birth of the Soul, whereby it takes up another Nature, a new Nature, a
spiritual God-like Nature; as Christ was born, and thereby took on him the
Nature of man, and was made flesh, so man is born by Grace, and thereby takes
upon him the Nature of God, and is made Spirit; and here you have at once the
great mystery of Grace in the lowest debacement of a Savior, and the highest
advancement of a Sinner; for the Lord Christ could not be more debaced then to
be born, it was nothing so great an abatement for Christ to dye, as for him to
be born, for being once made man, it is no wonder for to dye, but being the
great God, its a wonder that ever he should be made man. Lo here is the
debacement of Christ: Yet if he had been born to a Crown, to Honor, it had
been something, but he was born to shame, to sorrow and death, but man by Grace
is born to a Crown, to a Kingdom, he has a title to all the glory and
blessedness of Heaven, from the first moment of his new birth: So it is in the
Text, Grace be unto you, and Peace.

Peace in Scripture, is a very comprehensive terms, it carries in it all
happiness. It was the common greeting of the Jews, Peace be unto you; Thus
David by his Proxy salutes Nabal, Peace be to thee and thy house, and the
Apostle here alludes to this form of salutation, that he might mix new
Testament mercy, to old Testament manners; he first styles grace before peace;
as Jacob did with his Venison, he made it a savoury meat, such as Isaac loved.
Peace is the glory of Heaven, in the Bosom of God, and brought into the world
in the Arms of Angels; The first peace you read of in the Gospel, was peace by
the administration of Angels. Luke 2.13, 14. And suddenly there was with the
Angels, a multitude of Heavenly host, praising and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on Earth peace, good will toward men. And when our Lord Christ
first sent out his Disciples, this was the Doctrine that he bid them preach,
Math. 10.12, 13. When you come into a house, salute it, and if it be worthy,
let grace, peace come upon it. Mark here by the way, our Lord Jesus Christ is
no enemy to good manners, He would not have Christians to be Clowns: which is
the use of some among us, who would have their Religion quarrel with good
manners: No, but in whatsoever City or Town you enter, salute it, and let
grace, peace come upon it: that is, wish peace to them, saying, the peace of
God be upon this place, upon the heads and hearts of all in it: So that Peace
is both a Gospel-salutation when Ministers and people meet, and it is also a
Gospel-valediction when the Minister and the people parts. So did the Apostle,
and so do I now, Grace be with you and peace.

I observe in Matthew. 10.13, 14. our Lord bids his Disciples when they enter
into a house, if the house be worthy, to let their peace come upon it, but if
they be not worthy, let grace, peace return to you. In stead of leaving peace
with them, to shake off the dust of their feet against them: that is, to show
that God will shake them off as dust, and tread them under feet as fuel. My
Brethren, your diligent attendance on the Word at this place, has comfortably
prevented the part of my charge, to shake off the dust of my feet; for, how
beautiful have the feet of a poor worm been to you, being shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Christ? And therefore seeing our Lord Christ
says, if they be worthy of their peace abide with them, on this account I wish
to you Grace and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. But
what is this peace? It Is the beauty of Union, the harmony of the Creation, the
pleasure of Life, the feast of a good Conscience; its that which makes Life
sweet, and Death easy: Peace sweetens all our possessions, and all our
afflictions; without this, the fulness of the World is a burden; with this,
poverty and emptiness is a pleasant companion; without this, our bread is
gravelled with sowrenesse, and our water mingled with bitterness; with this,
green herbs become a Feast, and our Water is turned into Wine: Peace, its the
most beautiful Creature in the world, and therefore its beloved of all,
courted of all, many seek her, but few there be that enjoy her, they do not go
the right way to find her: for, in the ways of righteousness is peace. Peace
is the seminary of all blessings Temporal, as Grace is of all blessings
Spiritual: in Grace you have employed all holiness, in Peace all happiness;
in grace all inward, in peace all outward blessings: grace and peace are the
Alpha and Omega of all Blessings, as God is of all Beings, no blessing comes
before Grace, and no blessing lasts longer: Then see in this phrase of speech
the Apostle wishes upon them, as I do upon you, all the blessings both of Time
and Eternity, and yet he wished no more to them then God promised to give them,
1 Timothy 4.8. For godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to
come, Grace be unto you and peace, etc. not one without the other: though a man
may have grace without peace, as in a time of disertion or temptation, and a
man may have peace without grace, as in a secure and unregenerate condition;
grace without peace is often found in a troubled conscience, and peace without
grace is often found in a seared conscience: as grace without peace is very
uncomfortable, so peace without grace is very unprofitable: like Rachel,
beautiful, but barren; therefore the Apostle desires ye should have both grace
and peace: and we say, the Sun and Salt are the most useful Creatures in the
world; the one for shining, the other for seasoning. (My Brethren) Grace and
Peace are the Christians Sun and Salt, Grace is the light of their souls, and
Peace is the savor of their comforts; Grace shines through all their
faculties, and Peace seasons all their mercies. The blessings of God are become
as twins, as Christ said of the Spouse, Cant. 4.2. She is like a flock of sheep
that are even shorn, which came up from the washing, whereof every one bear
twins, and none is barren among them: Grace and peace here are knit together by
the Spirit of God in a sacred knot not to be untied: As Castor and Pollux when
seen together portend happiness to the Mariner: so when grace and peace are
found in a Soul together, they portend the highest security and blessing to the
Believer: they are said in Scripture to be bound together; where God gives the
one, he never denies the other. If he gives you the Upper Spring of grace, he
will give you the Other Spring of peace, for they go both together. If he gives
you the dew of heaven, you need not question the fatness of the earth. If his
right hand be full of mercy, his left hand shall not be empty: Therefore Grace
and Peace be with you from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Grace has a double sense, either for the grace of God to us, that justifies
us, or the grace of God in us, that sanctifies us: Now there is a distant peace
flowing from each of these, but still its grace and peace.

First, justifying grace has a peace attending that, Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God. So far as we have confidence in justifying
grace, there remains no conscience of condemning sin: As there can be no
bitterer War, then between conscience and the cure, so there can be no sweeter
peace, then when mercy and peace meet together, and when conscience and peace
kisseth each other: The former is the taste of Heaven, the latter is the
perambulation of Heaven, both which the Believer shares in upon his
Justification by Faith. If Christ had peace who was made our sin, needs must
the Believer have peace, who is made the righteousness of God in him.

Secondly, Sanctifying grace has a peace attending it, and this peace differs
from the former, as the root from the fruit. The peace of Justification is a
radical peace, the root of peace; but the peace of Sanctification is the bud,
the blossom of the tree: the former flows from the blood of Christ sprinkled
on the Conscience; the latter from the conformity that is between the Word and
the will, between the commands and the Conscience; As many as walk according to
this rule, grace be unto them and peace, Gal. 6.16. So that peace is the fruit
of Sanctifying grace. Now as the blood of the Pascal Lamb (which was a token of
peace) was not to be struck on the posts of the Egyptians, but upon the posts
of the Israelites, so neither is the blood of sprinkling, which brings perfect
peace, to be struck on the posts of the carnal sinner, but on the post of the
true Believer, an Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile; no grace, no
peace, that is Gods Law. How can a sinner have pence in a state of sin, when
God and Conscience, when Word and Conscience, when Law and Conscience, and all
the Attributes of God are against the sinner? No peace says my God, to the
wicked. Pray mark that Chapter, it begins with the peace, and ends in no peace.
In ver. 2. its said, He shall enter into peace, that is, the righteous: In the
last verse, There is no peace to the wicked. Its the state of grace that is the
only hate of peace. And thus I pass from the double grace desired, grace and
peace, to the double Fountain discovered, God our Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.

But here is a Question to be answered: If Grace and Peace be from God the
Father, then how is it said to be from Christ? and if from Christ, how then
from God the Father?

Answer. Its a known rule that the transient, external works of God are
Attributed to all the 3. Persons in the Trinity, the same works that are
Attributed to the Father, are also attributed to the Son; and the same works
attributed to the Son, is ascribed also to the Father, so grace and peace are
here ascribed both to God the Father, and to our Lord Jesus Christ; that is,
they are both from mercy, and from merit.

From mercy on Gods part to us, from merits on Christ's part for us; they are
from God the Father, because he wills them to us, from God the Son, because he
works them in us; they are from God to Christ, from Christ to Us; they are from
God the Father originally, and from Christ derivatively, and to us actually;
God the Father is the fountain of all grace and peace, Christ as Mediator is
the Conduit of all grace and peace, Man in Union to Christ, is the Cistern into
which these streams of grace and peace runs; God wills grace and peace to us,
and Christ works them in us; God gives grace and peace to be applied to the
Creature, this is from the love of the Father, but the Application of this
peace to the Soul, is from the merit of Christ the Redeemer: Thus you see
there is a double spring of this double blessing, Time will not serve me
further: the only Observation is,

That all the grace and peace which believers share in, is derived from God the
Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ: these three things opened, will clear
this: First, that grace and peace are the Believers privilege: Secondly, that
the fountain of this grace and peace is from God the Father: Thirdly, that it
is not given out from God the Father, but through Christ.

First, that grace and peace are the Saints privilege; If grace is, then peace
is; But grace is the privilege of every Believer, and that whether you look
upon it as taken from the Love and Favor of God to us: This is the Believers
privilege, God can as well forget Christ at his right hand, as cease his love
and favor to the Soul of a Believer; The Believers title to all their
blessings, arises out of this never-failing Love of God: Or if you take grace
for the fruit of Gods love to the soul, still it falls to the Believers
privilege; Vocation, Justification, Adoption, prudence of Sin, purging from
Sins, strength against Sin, Holiness, Love, Faith, Obedience, Perseverence,
all these are the privileges of every Believer, nay a man cannot be a Believer
without any one of them, they are as essential to the being of a Christian, as
reason to the being of a man.

Secondly, as grace, so peace is the Believers privilege; There is peace
External, peace Supernal, peace Internal, and peace Eternal: There is peace
External, this is peace with men; there is peace Supernal, that is peace with
God; there is peace Internal, that is peace with Conscience: All these three
are to be had upon Earth, and then there is peace Eternal, and that is only to
be had in Heaven. The Apostle here does not exclude the former, but chiefly
intends the latter: peace with man is a good thing to be desired, but peace
with God, and Conscience, is much more to be desired. Peace with God is the
spring of all things both within and without, both below and above, both in
time and eternity: so says Job, If he gives peace, who then can make trouble?
Now this peace is the Saints privilege. It is a Legacy left to every Believer
by the last Will and Testament of a dying Redeemer. Will you see a copy of his
Will, then look in John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you: not as the world gives give I unto you. There is it seems a peace in the
worlds power to give, and there is a peace of Christ's bestowing. Now Christ
would have us here not to mistake the world's peace for his, for the difference
is very great; for first, the worlds peace is a false peace, it is a
counterfeit coin, it han't the current stamp of Heaven on it; but the peace
that Christ gives to a Believer, is true peace, and perfect peace; Thou will
keep in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee.

Secondly, the Worlds peace is an outward peace. It is but skin deep, it wets
the mouth, it cannot wash the heart: Prove. 14.13. In laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of the mirth is heaviness. The worlds peace in but the
shell of peace, their Conscience lowers when their Conscience laughs; But the
peace that Christ gives is an inward and spiritual peace, Psalm. 4.7. Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn and their wine
increased; [ Thou have put gladness in my heart; Peace is that gladness,
other peace smothes the brow, but this fills the breast: as the Sinner has
trouble within, in the midst of all his Peace without, so a Believer has Peace
within, in the midst of all his troubles without: In the world you shall have
trouble, but in me you shall have Peace.

Thirdly, the Worlds peace has only a nether Spring arising out of the
Creature, out of worldly comforts, therefore it must needs be unclean, for an
unclean Fountain cannot bring forth clean water: But the peace of Christians
has an upper Spring, it flows from the manifestation of the love of God in
Christ, its from the sprinkling of Christ's Blood on the Conscience, it flows
upon the workings of Christ's Spirit upon the Soul, which is first a Councellor,
then a Comforter: Oh how pure must this peace be in a Believes Soul, that flows
from so pure a Spring?

Fourthly, the Worlds peace is a peace given to Sinners, it is a peace in sin,
and its a peace with sin, as the Prophet Isaiah tells us, Its a Covenant with
Hell, and an Agreement with Death, (God deliver us from that peace.) Again,
Christ's peace is given to none but Believers, its their privilege only, a
Stranger don't intermeddle with this Joy, Prove. 14.10. The heart knows his own
bitterness, but a Stranger does not intermeddle with this Joy.

Fifthly, the Worlds peace is a fading, dying, transitory thing, it withers in
the Sand, The triumphing of the Wicked is but short, and the Joy of the
Hypocrite is but for a moment, Job 20.5. Solomon does elegantly liken it to the
crackling of Thorns under a Pot, which is but a blaze and is gone, Ecces. 7.6.
So is the Sinners peace, it is for a Spurt, and is soon gone, but the peace
that Christ gives to Believers, is a durable and abiding peace: Your Joy no man
shall take from you, it appears in Life, in Death, and after Death: First, its
our peace in Life, grace brings forth present peace. Its said of the Primitive
Christians, They walked in the Fear of the Lord, and in the Comforts of the
Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. Its a remarkable expression, Psalm. 19.11. In keeping
thy commands there is great reward, He don't say, for keeping them, which
respects the end of the Work, but in keeping of them which look at the Work it
self; (My Brethren) Every duty done in sincerity, reflects a peace in
conscience, as every flower carries its own sweetness; Its possible, I grant a
Believer may not always find and feel this peace, few do, some seldom find
it, few find it so always; the remains of corruption breaking forth to
interrupt, or temptations to hinder: And Gods disertion may darken and hide it,
and a Believer may seem to be totally lost, yet in this condition, which is the
worst a Child of God can be in, he has a double peace. First, a peace in the
promises in this very Condition, and what you have in Bonds and Bills, you
account as good as money in your Pockets. Secondly, he has it in the seed,
Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm.
97.11. Grace is the seed of Peace, which Christ has soon in the furrows of the
Soul, and therefore peace shall Spring out of the furrows of the Soul; indeed
this seed springs up sooner in some, then in others, yet every Saint shall have
a reaping time sooner or later, Psalm. 126.6. He that goes forth and weepeth,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him: If he stays long for the fruit, he shall have a greater crop
at last, if he reaps not now, he shall be sure to reap hereafter; Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.
Secondly, by this peace which is the peace of a Child of God, its a peace at
Death; Grace will minister to us then, and that ministration shall be in peace:
The Sinners peace leaves him when he comes to the Grave; though in Life it
fills him, yet in Death it leaves him. A Believer has a two fold spring of
Peace, the first is from above him, the other is from within him: That spring
that runs with peace above him, is from the blood of Christ, sprinkled on his
Conscience; The other that is from within him, is from the sincerity of his
heart, in the ways of obedience. My Brethren, when we lie on our Death beds,
and can reflect on our sincerity in all Gods ways, this will be peace at last,
so it was in Hezekiah, Isaiah 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which was good in thy fight. There Is nothing makes a Death bed so hard, and so
uneasy, as a life spent in the service of sin and lust; and nothing makes a
Death bed so pleasant, as a life spent in the service of Christ. Grace will
bring forth Peace, if not in this life, yet; Thirdly, it will to be sure after
Death; if Time brings not this fruit to ripeness, yet Eternity shall; Grace in
Time, will be Glory in Eternity; Holiness now, will be Happiness then;
whatever it is a man sows in this world, that he reaps in the next world: Be
not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap: He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption;
but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting,
Gal. 6.7, 8. When Sin shall end in sorrow and misery, Grace shall end in peace,
in joy, in glory; well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter into the joy
of thy Master, Mat. 15.21. Whoever shares in the grace of Christ in this world,
shall be sure to share with the joy of Christ in the next world, and that joy
is joy unspeakable, and full of glory. I will wind up all in a threefold
Application, by way of Exhortation to three sorts of persons. First, To such as
have this Grace and Peace. Secondly, To such as have this Grace and no Peace.
Thirdly, To such as have neither Grace nor Peace.


First, To such as have both Grace and Peace; I Will speak to them in two or
three things. First, Admire thankfully the Father and the Son, the Fathers
Grace, and the Sons Love, for both had a hand in this, therefore bless both
the Father for willing it to us, and the Son for working it in us: Grace and
Peace are the fruits of Gods Eternal Election, for this blessing the Father
gives but the Application of it, to us is the fruit of Christ's Redemption and
Intercession: How can you think of Hell and damnation, and see your self freed
from it? And how can you think of the dreadful fury and vengeance of God, your
self not under it? How can you look on your state changed, your hearts renewed,
grace ratified and reconciled, and your Conscience quietted? How can you think
of these things, but must admire the love of the Father in giving this to you,
and the love of the Son in purchasing this for you? All the grace and mercy
that is given to us, is by Christ purchased for us: Grace and Peace are the
fruits of the redeeming blood of Christ purchased.

Secondly, Do not envy the conditions or possessions of the men of the world;
they have Riches and Honors, Profits and Pleasures, but they neither have
Grace nor Peace, therefore do not envy their happiness. There is a story of a
Roman that was condemned by the Court Martial to dye for breaking his rank to
steal a bunch a grapes; and as he was going to his Execution, his fellow
Soldiers laughed at him, and others envyed at him, that he should have grapes
and they none: Now, (says he) do not envy me for my bunch of grapes, for you
would be loath to have them at the rate I must pay for them. (My Brethren) You
that are the Children of grace and peace, don't envy at the men of the world, at
their Riches, their Comforts, their Pleasures, for I am sure you would be loath
to have them at the price they pay for them, for the end of these things are
Death.

Thirdly, Don't complain of the worst condition that the providence of God
shall cast you into; in this world it may be you shall suffer hard things, but
remember, so long as thy soul is secure, never complain of hard things. (My
Brethren) As God your Father brought you into a state of grace and peace, and
thereby secured his love to your souls in Christ, can you complain of hard
things? So let the joy of the Lord be your strength; Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

The second Use is to such as have neither Grace nor Peace: May I not say, I
speak to many such? I would I might not; Are not there many that are without
Grace, and therefore must needs be without Peace? They may have the worlds
Peace, but they have none of this Peace; let me beg of you to get out of this
graceless condition; if you love your Souls don't live one day, nor one hour,
nor one moment longer in a graceless state. Oh that you would believe the
words of a dying man, for so I am to you, and such words use to be remembered.
Oh remember this as a testimony I leave with you, that the love of Sin, and
lack of Grace will run and destroy every Soul at last: But you will say, How
shall I get a share in this Grace and Peace?

I Answer, First, Break off all your false peace, you can never have true peace
with God, when we content our selves with false peace; you will never seek that
peace which Christ has purchased for you, while you content your selves with
that cursed peace which the Old Man has wrought in you: Oh therefore break off
all false peace, which is not the fruit of grace.

Secondly, Labor to see and be convinced of the miserable, and of the naked
condition your Souls be in for want of the righteousness of Christ for a
covering, without this Soul thou art miserable, wretched, poor and naked; be
convinced also what a miserable thing it is to have God our Enemy; God is the
Sinners Enemy; its a featfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God:
Oh be convinced of thy nakedness, without Christ's righteousness, and thy
emptiness without his fulness.

Thirdly, Labor to go out of your selves to Christ, for grace and peace,
surely in the Lord shall one say, I have righteousness and strength, I there
its to be found. Labor for a thirsty frame of Soul, for the promises run far
to such, that he will fill the hungry with good things. Go to Christ soul,
beg, pray, never leave God till he has given thee an interest in Christ, for
none can come to me except the father draw him; there is no pardon for the
least sin our of Christ, but there is a pardon for the greatest sin in Christ,
one sin will damn the soul out of Christ, but no sin can hurt the soul in
Christ. Oh go to Christ soul, never give rest to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy
lidds, till thou have made peace with God in the blood of Christ, one sting of
the fiery Serpent was mortal, without looking upon the brazen Serpent. So one
sin will damn a soul out of Christ, but no sin can damn a soul in Christ.

Thirdly, To such as have grace, but no sense of peace, this is the counsel I
would leave with all such, Be much in the exercise of grace, frame much,
believe much, use grace much, for the exercise and improving of grace will
produce peace: There are ten duties which are to be the sphere of grace in
activity* and in performing of them, we shall have peace; First, make Religion
your business, the main design of your lives, be Christians to purpose, be not
only Christians by the bye, but let your conversations be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. Phil. 1.27.

Secondly, Put forth renewed Acts of Faith on Christ every day, and remember
its as much your duty to believe in Christ to day, as if you had never believed
before. Oh live by Faith every day, and this will bring peace to you.

Thirdly, Maintain a constant communion with God daily, this communion with God
is man's chief good; the happiness of a Child is in communion with his Father,
and the happiness of a Wife is in communion with her Husband, and this is the
happiness of a Believers soul, communion with God the Father, through Christ
our Head and Husband: The seed of peace, its true, it is sown in the Soul in
Union, but then if takes root downward, and brings forth fruit upward:
Spiritual peace will never be obtained, if communion with God be not
maintained; that gives comfort in the midst of all sorrows, and satifies all
doubts, and recompenses all wants. Lo this is the fruit of communion with God.

Fourthly, Be good at all times, but of all be best in bad times; many
Christians lose their peace, by remitting of their grace, and let loose their
reins of Religion, to avoid the censures of a crooked generation. A Christians
zeal should be like the Winter fire, that burns the hottest when the Air is
coolest; or like the Lilly, that looks beautiful though among Thorns, so
should a Child of God though among Sinners.

Fifthly, In all conditions, choose Suffering rather then Sinning; If ever you
would have Peace, chose Suffering rather then Sinning; he that values Peace
with God, or Peace with Conscience, he must make this his choice: thus Daniel
rather chosed to be cast to Lions, then to lose the Peace of his Conscience;
the three Children chose rather to burn in the Furnace, then to bow to the
Image: One said, He would rather go to Hell free from sin, then to live in
Heaven with guilt on his Conscience. (My Brethren) let me a little enlarge,
because suffering may overtake us, for Persecution is the genius of the Gospel,
therefore let me leave four short Rules with you concerning sufferings.

See that your Cause be good, your Call be clear your Spirit meek, and your End
right. Suffering cannot bring out peace without either of them, but with them
all our sufferings shall be peace.

First, Let your cause be good, its not the blood, but the Cause that makes a
Martyr; its not for every cause a Christian should engage to suffer: every
cause will no more bear suffering, then every little stream will bear a ship;
nor will Christ let go sweetness to every suffering, 1 Pet. 4.15. Let none of
you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil doer, or as a busy body
in other men's matters. To suffer this is neither Christian-like, nor
comfortable. Some suffer rather as Malefactors, then as Christ's Martyrs.

Secondly, Let your call be clear; its not amiss to have a good cause without
a call: Some may suffer for the cause of God, and yet sin in suffering, for
want of a call. Christ calls not all to suffer: to some it is given, to others
it is not. If thy call be clear, thy peace will be sweet, though thy sufferings
be never so great. But you will say, How shall I know when I am called to
suffer?

I Answer First, when Truth suffers by our silence, then are we called to
suffer.

Secondly, when our lives will be the denial of Christ, then are we called to
deny our lives for Christ.

Thirdly, when sin and suffering surrounds us that we cannot get out, but we
must either run through sin or sufferings, then I may safely conclude that
Christ calls me to suffer, and in this cause we may expect the peace and
sweetness of his presence.

Thirdly, the third Direction for suffering is this: our Spirit must be meek,
so was Christ, he went as a Lamb to the slaughter.

Its possible a man may be right in his cause, and yet sinful in his carriage;
and if so, no wonder if Christ be not sweet to us. To be fierce, and raging,
and reviling in suffering, its not becoming humanity, and therefore much less
like Christianity. A Christian should be like Christ, Acts 5.41. And they
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were connted
worthy to suffer shame for his name. It becomes those that are found in the
Spirit, to give blessing for cursing; the more of Christ's spirit is in us in
our sufferings, the more comfort and joy we shall receive from our sufferings.

Fourthly, See that your end in suffering be right, if it be self, or singular,
or schism, then Christ cannot be sweet to thee. Some have died that their ends
live. Socrates died in the defense of the truth, and to prove that there is but
one God, but whether he died for honor, applause, or for Gods sake, I think it
is no hard thing to determine. But let thy cause be good, thy Call clear, thy
Spirit meek, and thy end right, and then you shall have peace in all your
sufferings, that is the 5th thing. Choose suffering rather then sinning.

Sixthly, If you would have peace, be much in studying of the Scriptures: for
as God is the God of peace, and Christ is the Prince of peace, so the Gospel is
the Gospel of peace, which God has given thee to lead thee into the ways of
peace. Great peace have they that love thy laws.

Seventhly, Take heed of Apostasy, either in doctrine or principles. Though a
believer is freed from Apostasy in the state of grace, yet he is not freed from
Apostasy in the degrees of grace. He may fall sinfully, though he cannot fall
finally. Demas fell by one, St. Peter by the other. Pray with David, Psalm
17.5. Hold up my goings in thy path, that my footsteps slip not.

Eighthly, Make the word of God your rule in all things, be sure you have a
Scripture warrant for all your practices. But especially keep close to
Scripture in matters of Gods worship.

There are endless discourses about the Mode of Gods Worship; I have no
disputing time. It is good in difficult cases, all ways to take the surest
side, (for instance) if I follow the Traditions of man, for the worship of God,
I may sin, but if I keep close to die directions of God in the Scripture, I am
sure I cannot sin, for this is the sure word of Prophecy, to which you do well
to take heed, therefore in such a doubtful case, Gods will is, that we take
the surest side; go to the Law and to the Testament; Labor to be fruitful and
grounded Christians.

Ninthly, Keep up the power of godliness, do not let Religion down into a
lifelesse formality: The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree: He shall
grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, those that be planted in the house of the Lord,
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, Psalm. 92.12, 13. My Brethren, it is as
much a duty in them that have grace, to improve it, as for them that have no
grace, for to get it. If you fit under the daily means, the daily waterings of
God, and do not grow; do you think this will be peace in the latter end, surely
no (my Brethren) your fruitfullness under the Gospel is of very great
concernment. It is unfruitfullness that makes God lay his Vineyard waste. Its
unfruitfullness that procures the forwarding your account in the day of grace.

Tenthly, observe that excellent rule of the Apostle in Phil 4.8. Finally,
brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are houest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be
any praise, think on these things. And now, my Brethren, I commend you to God,
and to the Word of God, that is infinitely able to make you wise to salvation,
with this Benediction, which I shall make my Valediction, Grace be unto you,
and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The God People, among whom the Name of this Excellent man is deservedly
precious, may take notice, that his last Sermon upon the five a Clock Lecture
at Sepulchers, will suddenly be Published for their Use: Who hold the words of
Gods Patience in the Hour of Temptation, that is come upon the whole Earth.


