Ignota Febris. FEVERS Mistaken in Notion and Practice. SHOWING The frequent
Fatal Consequents thereof. HEREIN Traversing the dissenting New Hypotheses of
some late Writers: And Erroneous Opinions, of Antique Authors. WITH Remarks
upon Bleeding, Blistering, Juleps, and the Jesuits Powder, in Fevers.

By Everard Maynwaringe, Med. D.

Plurimi qui de Febribus scripserunt; magno conatu nihil egerunt. LONDON,
Printed by I. Dawks, and are to be Sold by D. Brown at the Black Swan without
Temple Bar. School.

INDEX OF THE HEADS, and Principal MATTER.
Sect. 1. OF Fevers in General Page 1 Sect. 2. The Definition of Fevers
Examined Page 5 Sect. 3. The Difference of Fevers; And their Division into
Classes Page 32 Sect. 4. Of Putrid Fevers Page 39 Sect. 5. Of Fevers Continual,
and Intermittent Page 52 Sect. 6. Of Fevers Malignant, so called: Measels,
Smallpox, and Pestilential Page 54 Sect. 7. The Operations and Effects of
Cortex Peruvianus, the Jesuits Powder Page 64 Sect. 8. Remarks upon the Jesuits
Powder, used in Clysters Page 84 Sect. 9. The Practice upon Fevers Perniciously
mistaken Page 89 Sect. 10. Blood- Letting in Fevers Examined Page 97 Sect. 11.
Epispastics, for Blistering in Fevers; Condemned as Injurious Page 111 Sect.
12. Of Juleps, and Coolers in Fevers Page 123 Sect. 13. The Author' s
Compendious Method, and Medicines for Curing Fevers; compared with the Common
Practice Page 140 Appendix Page 153
Page 153. Lin. 6. for praesentibus, read praesentes.

SECT. I. Of Fevers in General.
IN the former attempt upon this Subject, I cursorily, immethodically, and
briefly, touched upon some errors in the Notion and Practice of Fevers: But
since considering the great importance thereof; the mortal events daily
depending thereon, excites me to a farther inquiry, and methodical digestion,
for future caution in this perilous matter. Nunquam satis dicitur, quod non
satis discitur.

For many lives have been cast away upon this Rock, both of the Wise and the
Wealthy, the Good and the Great, Princes, and People of all sorts, have had
their Fate, by great mistakes herein, and evil conduct of the undertakers for
their preservation.

After the many Volumes that have been writ, and so much Paper wasted upon this
subject of Fevers: After so much experience from the living, that have evaded
this sickness, and the Millions of People, that have died with Fevers, or in a
febrile state: I find Writers and Practisers in this Art, to have wandered from
the right way, in their designs and methods of curing, not truly discerning
what a Fever is, though daily talked on, and practiced upon.

Nothing more frequently presents to Physicians in Practice than a Fever:
(Comes omnium morborum est. Hippoc. (...).) And nothing more perniciously
mistaken (to the loss of innumerable Lives) than that which is called a Fever;
supposed to be a Disease, but is none: which error is as old, as the Rise of
Physic, yet received for truth at this day; not only by Professors of the
lower Class, but also by Physicians of the first Rank, (trusting to tradition)
who frequently blunder in prosecuting a Symptomatic depending Fever, and
oversee the Disease.

This is manifest from their Methods, and Medicines in the designs and
intentions of curing; aiming at, and endeavoring to extinguish Fevers, by
cooling Apozems, Juleps, Ptisans, Emulsions, Phlebotomy: And a strange
invention, to draw out the Fever with (Epispastic) blistering Plasters.

All which projects, and proceedings in Practice, are irrational and erroneous;
absurdly wide from the true Notion of Fevers, as hereafter does appear.

It Is commonly said (and from the Physicians mouth) this and that Person is
sick of a Fever; and such a one died of a Fever; both which are great mistakes.

True it is, few are sick, and very few, or none die, without a Fever; that is
a febrile heat attending their sickness, or Death: But this preternatural Heat,
is not their Disease; no more than Thirst is their Disease, or cold chilness,
or loathing of meat, or weakness and weariness, watching, or Pain, etc.

But if you will have all these preternatural and symptomatical affects, to be
Diseases, and like so many Dogs worrying of a Man; you have not a right
understanding thereof: And designing of cures to this, or that Symptom, under
the notion of a Disease, your proceedings are ill grounded, and the success
from thence not hopeful.

I wonder Physicians should be so short sighted, as not to fee beyond the
Fever: That they should take a symptom for a Disease, is a great mistake; and
which too often has proved a mortal error: For, if the Fever (as sometimes)
be the symptom of a dangerous Disease, it is probable the Patient dies by male
Practice, the Physician directing his cure against the Fever, neglecting and
not discerning, from whence, or what Disease, the Fever does depend on.

For Fevers (occasionally procured) are almost as many, as there are Diseases:
Colic Fevers, Apoplectic Fevers, Soporiferous, Pleurific, Malignant,
Apostematic, Vlcerous, Traumatic, Verminous, etc. hundreds: All the Acute
Diseases, and most of the Chronit, have Fevers attending, or depending on them.

In a late Tract (Inquiries into the general Catalogue of Diseases) showing the
errors of that draught; as to the Number, Divisions and Denominations thereof:
For sufficient reasons, I struck out the first Division (called Similar
Diseases) of that Catalogue, because the supposed Diseases contained therein,
(upon the Inquest) were found to be no Diseases, but Symptoms only, and
properly belonging to that Tribe, wherein Fevers are also contained.

For, in the number of Symptoms (by your own Authors) I find Qualities
preternatural: And amongst them (intemperies calida) a hot distemper or febrile
Heat, necessarily included: Now Heat being an eminent Quality in Human Nature,
and frequently is changed from its moderate natural state, in most Morbous
alterations; then this Quality thus gradually exalted (idem specie) is that
which you call a Fever.

Thus changing its denomination; this Quality preternaturally graduated, then
passes for a Disease, (they not knowing, from what Principle it assurgeth) and
a formidable invader of the Life, requiring all endeavors to oppose, and
reduce it by the use of contraries, being so taught by a false Canon:
Contrariorum contraria sunt remedia.

That this is so in your Sense, and the Practice formed against it, (which is
no sense) I shall prove from the Definition of a Fever; and also from the
curative means adapted thereto, in their due places.

SECT. II. The Definition of Fevers Examined.
A Fever is thus defined, by consent of most Hippocratic, and Galenic Writers:
Febris est calor praeter naturam in Cord accensus; and ex eo in totum corpus
diffusus. By this definition, Heat is the ratio formalis, or Essence of a
Fever; the Heart is the focus, place and seat thereof. Now let us examine how
much truth there is in this established Doctrine, or whether there be any.

Fever is a preternatural Heat.]

If so, then I observe, first, that a Fever is but a Symptom, and not a
Disease; (by your own doctrine) for they that gave this definition, do also
determine Qualities preternatural to be Symptoms; and Heat, being one of the
tactil Qualities of the first rank (by the same Authors) can be but a symptom.

Now preternatural febrile Heat, being only a Symptom, and none of the urgent
Symptoms; there is, (at least there ought) no cure belonging to it; but to that
Disease, on which the febrile Heat is dependant; and those Diseases are many,
and various: For, methods, and medicines are indicated from the Disease, not
from the Symptom; and their adaptation proper and peculiar, only to the
Disease, not to the Symptom; to causes, not to consequents, and dependants.

Since it is so, why do you create such fears in the Sick, and make so much
bustle at the Shops, about this febrile Heat? designing multiplicity of
Medicines against it (and those very injurious) since this feverish Heat, being
only Symptomatical, gives warning, and is a signal only of some latent Disease,
the which being found out, curing lies there, and there only; the depending
Fever is included therein, and falls of course with it.

In Cord accensus.] In the Heart (you say) a Fever is kindled, as the place of
its rise: But I rather think cujus contrarium, that a Fever is communicated or
transmitted to the Heart from all Parts of the Body, at several times, by
several Diseases: For, if preternatural Heat (Febris) be the general, and most
common Symptom of Diseases, caused thereby, and depending thereon, rising and
falling with those various Diseases, seated in diverse Parts of the Body; then
all their Symptomatical Fevers, must have their rise and seat in the several
diseased Parts; and the Heart only by consent, and transmission (per vasa)
through the vessels of communication.

The vital Principle or Spirit of Life, that presides over, and is planted in
every Part of the Body, to govern each member; raises a Fever, upon any
morbific matter there offending; and the Heart being a principle Part in
office, is soon made sensible, and raises the Pulse, as a signal of
condolence, if any disturbance be in the Body: And sometimes the Head also is
affected thereby, and drawn into consent.

If the Foot be greatly pained by Gout, or otherwise; the Heart is grieved, and
frebile Heat is kindled; but this Fever first rises in, and is communicated
from the diseased Parts (the Foot) primarily affected; and the Heart disturbed
and heated only (secundario) by consent: And the Fever thus raised, requires
curing, not in the Heart so affected, but in the Foot diseased, having its rise
there, and dependence there, not in the Heart.

Therefore Cardiac medicines, are not curative in the case, nor conducing; but
such means as are proper for the diseased Part first complaining; and the cure
of this Gout-fever lies there only; which being rightly applied to, the
Symptomatic febrile Heat abates and vanishes, as the Disease is tamed and
subdued. The like may be said, and holds true in all other Fevers, arising from
several Parts of the Body diseased.

But a late famed Author, Dr. Willis in his Book of Fevers, though he agrees
with these Writers, that the Heart is the Fireplace, where Fevers are kindled,
yet he differs from them in the manner how, and the combustible matter what.
Sin vero sanguis ob sulphuris evecti copiam, aut effluvia cohibita, aut victum
calfacientem, nimis luxurians and turgescere aptus evadat; ejus in cord, sive
accensio, sive fermentatio, plurimum intenditur, ita ut exinde calor febrilis:
and effervescentiae solito majores in toto concitentur. p. 114.

He makes preternatural fermentation to be the ratio formalis of Fevers, and
prosecutes upon that notion, through the several sorts of Fevers, and gives
this description: Febris est motus inordinatus sanguinis, ejusque nimia
effervescentia, cum calore. -- p. 117. using effervescence and fermentation as
synonumous and univocal, all along.

True it is; febrile Heat sometimes does follow preternatural fermentation
(from thence occasionally procured) yet not always arising out of fermentation,
as the proper and only effect thereof; but issuing from the governing vital
Principle, or Spirit of Life (fons caloris) disturbed and aestuating.

In like manner preternatural fermentation (motus inordinatus sanguinis) is
caused by febrile aestuation. They follow one another, and often meet together
in sickness, yet are distinct, and different from each other.

Fever and Fermentation, differ in Predicament: fermentatio est motus; calor
febrilis est qualitas.

Vomiting and Fever meet sometimes, and are complicated.

Also Fluxes of the Belly, with Fevers.

And preternatural fermentation with Fevers: But they are all different
symptoms, and may exist separately.

So that preternatural fermentation, is not inseparable from Fevers; and cannot
be so essential thereto, that posito uno, ponitur and alterum; but an adjunct,
that may, or may not be, and a Fever in Being rightly denominated so.

For Fever (ex vi vocis) from the etymon of the word importing heat, denotes
the nature thereof: febris a ferveo vel ferbeo, to be hot; and (...) graece, a
(...) ignis, showing Heat to be the great distinguishing character of a Fever.

A Sulphur accenso and deflagrato.] Febrile Heat (says that great Author) is
kindled from Sulphurous inflaming matter. Sin ultra crasin naturalem, sanguinis
pars sulphurea seu oleosa incalescat, statim effera and cum caeteris
improportionata evadit, ita ut fere tota, a cordis fermento velut in flammam
acta, sanguinis massam immodice effervescere and ebullire cogat. Dr. Willis.
Lib. de Febribus. p. 158.

Several other places, I might recite in that Book; setting forth the
combustible matter of Fevers, and how kindled; which for Brevity sake I omit,
and having enough to discourse on.

But my Reason informs me otherwise, and determines: First, that natural Heat
and preternatural, is the same (in specie) in kind, arising from one and the
same Principle or Fountain, and differ (gradu tantum) only in moderation and
gradual state: Quicquid in sanis edit actiones sanas; id ipsum in morbis edit
actiones vitiatas. Axiom.

Therefore that vital Spirit, which heats Man naturally in a State of Health:
The same does preternaturally aestuate, and burn in Fevers, being disturbed at
hostile morbous matter.

Secondly, Febrile Heat does not arise, (a materia sulphurea, oleaginosa,
combustibili) from any sulphurous, oleaginous, combustible matter kindled (as
that Author asserts) but from any offending matter (that is the fomes Morbi, the
fuel of Fevers) that provokes and stirs up the vital governing Spirit to
kindle, aestuate and become fiery; laboring and endeavoring (nisu quodam
irato) thereby to exterminate and expel it. Fevers are not kindled, nor
continued, a materia flammante; but a materia peccunte quacunque: A stone in
the Kidney, without the help of Oleagenous, Sulphurous combustible matter,
will readily procure a Fever.

Thirdly, Febrile matter remains after the Patient is dead; but febrile Heat is
then gone; and why then? Because the vital spirit is extinct: which plainly
does show, that preternatural febrile Heat (efficienter) is seated in the Life:
And that peccant febrile matter (non fervet ex se) contains no such heat in it
self, but produces (excitative) by irritating the vital Heat (spiritus impetum
faciens) beyond moderation, and its natural temper.

Fourthly, A wound received, and pain arising thence, begets a Fever; though a
great effusion of blood does happen therewith. Now letting out the sulphur (if
such there were) with the blood, was more likely to prevent a Fever, than to
cause it, (if that Doctrine were true;) but I find the contrary, that pain
continuing, the Fever continues also.

Fifthly, Persons that are heated by great labor, violent exercise, or heat of
weather, if they drink a glass of Sack, or other spirituous hot liquor, it
reduces them safely to good temper, and prevents a Fever: But if they drink
much small Beer, after such heats, thinking to cool themselves sooner, that
cold liquor commonly makes them sick, and raises a Fever thereby.

Now observe, that Sack and not spirits, are more likely to kindle Sulphurous
inflamable matter, and a Fever from thence; as small Beer and cool liquors,
most likely to prevent Fevers (by that Doctrine.) But the contrary hereof does
prove, that inflamed sulphur is not the material cause of Fevers, but any other
offending matter.

Sixthly, Wet, and cold taking, are oftentimes the causes of sickness, and a
Fever: But such causes are so far from kindling Sulphur, that they are more
likely to damp, and extinguish Sulphur kindled, if any such inflaming matter
were in Human Bodies: All which does plainly show, that Fevers have not their
Rise, or any dependence from sulphur kindled in the Heart; and that Doctrine
erroneous, founded upon false Principles.

I must now make this observation: not to follow an Author by the cry of the
People. nor the Vogue of the learned Party, who commonly are caught with a fine
dress of good latin, not suspecting, or not discerning the substance, and
matter thereof.

Since my writing, I lately met with another Piece de Febribus, much differing
from the former Author, who derived all the causes of Fevers, from Sulphur of
the Blood; this, only and wholly from a venomous Ferment, infesting the Animal
Spirits. Dr. Morton, Puretologia.

This novel Doctrine coming in my way, I cannot pass it by without regard, but
must inquire into the verity thereof. The common received learning, that
asserts Humors and Qualities, this Author rejects, as fictitious and useless,
to set forth and explain, the causes of Diseases, and their Symptoms. Hoping to
give a better account thereof, by this new Hypothesis: For setting forth and
explaining of which, he premiseth ( postulata quaedam, Page 6.) some precarious
concessions; promising to prove them afterward, which are these following.

1. Dari revera Spiritus animales.

This Assertion of Animal Spirits, was the common received Opinion in former
Ages; and does yet keep up as a Truth not to be questioned, (in the Judgment of
most) for that they perform such necescessary offices in the Body, as without
their help many Functions (they think) must cease: And in giving an Account of
many Diseases; especially such as are attributed to the Brain and Nerves, they
can give no probable Reasons, without alleging and accusing the Animal
Spirits; setting forth their exorbitant Motions, or preternatural cessations,
their interruptions, or impetuous Influx, their sluggish, dull, and torpid
Fixations: And scarce any Passion is named, but the Spirits are Actors, and by
them, All that is done, or should have been, is imputed to the Spirits.

And Dr. Morton gives a greater Prerogative, and ascribes more Power to Animal
Spirits in the Government of the Body, than others have; ( primum Principium
activum totius Machinae. p. 6.) and bottoms his new Hypothesis upon Animal
Spirits, ( quasi fermentum universale totius corporis. p. 12.) making them
universal in the causes of Diseases, and as generally necessary in a State of
Health, to perform all vital Actions. If this be so, it is very fit we should
all know, and assent to it.

Notwithstanding it is so undoubtedly asserted; I question whether there be any
such distinct Beings in Human Nature, as Animal Spirits; or only the Fancies of
Men's Invention: And my Reason persuades me to deny their Existence.

First, Because their Matter and Manner of Generation; their Ways and Motions,
are so uncertainly, and contradictorily set forth by disagreeing Judgments.

Secondly, For that all human Actions, internal and external; may be performed
without their help; and a rational and full Account of all Diseases, may be
given without them.

Entia non sunt multiplicanda, sine Necessitate.

I shall therefore divide Human Nature, into these two grand Principles.

An Invisible Spirit.

And a visible organized Body; with canals containing liquid alimentary Juices,
to feed and supply this wonderful Machine.

The first, a Vital, Active, Regent Principle. The latter altogether Passive
and Instrumental, under the Power and Domination of the former, which is the
Life.

More than these two comprehensive Principles, I know none; nor can admit of,
as necessary, or useful in the composition, or economy of Human Nature: No
Subordinate, nor Coordinate Agents; such as, Archeus Helmontii, or Anima
Sensitiva of the Ancients: Nor as Dr. Willis understands and holds, the Animal
Spirits to be the Sensitive Soul.

That Plastic, or formative vital Principle (termed Anima) that delineated, and
fabricated the Body in the Womb; does also govern, and is the sole Efficient
cause of vital Actions, in the state of Health; and also in Sickness: Vnicus
tantum est vitae Moderator, nec plures. From hence Vegetation, Sensation, and
Loco-Motion; without a Duplicity, or Triplicity of Souls, which elsewhere, is
set forth and proved, (Monarchia Microcosmi) that I shall not repeat here.

True it is; that the contained current liquors in the Body, are various in
color, consistence, use, and gradual Perfection: Some elaborated as finer, and
more spirituous; in the common Sense and Acceptance, of artificial rectified
Spirits: Yet when all this is done, by Defaecation and refining; they are but
liquors still; of one continued, cohaerent, visible, expanded Body; and not
separate Atomical Beings, to act (conjunctim aut divisim) as diverse Agents, in
combination or separation, upon Occasions so requiring; as the Notion of Animal
Spirits does insinuate; and are so alleged and taken in that Sense.

Now if what we have said be true, and the Reasons cogent; then Animal Spirits
have no Residence nor Office in Human Nature; and the Basis of that Author's
new Hypothesis is annihilated; and all the derived Doctrine, and depending
Practice thereupon, comes to nothing or to naught.

But in casting off so antique, and beloved Opinion; so frequently made use on,
to set forth the causes of many Diseases; and that Book de Morbis universal.
acutis, brings in Animal Spirits envenomed, almost into all Diseases, as
principal Causes: That I may not be thought singular, and absurd in denying the
Existence of these Animal Spirits, so positively asserted, so much noted, and
often quoted: I shall therefore call in some other Men, eminently learned in
this Science, and justly so reputed; to give their sentiments upon this matter
controverted; which perhaps may be more persuasive, and definitive, than what
has been said by me.

Dr. Charlton, in his Enquiries into Human Nature; there treating of Motion
voluntary, and how performed by Animal Spirits, according to the Opinion of the
Ancients: He says, Page 495. But in this our more illuminate Age, Fate has
brought forth some Physicians of this Nation and College, of most profound
Learning, and admirable Sagacity of Spirit; who laying aside that so antique
Hypothesis of Animal Spirits; as both improbable and unnecessary: hold it to be
sufficient to solve all the Phenomenon of voluntary Motion, if it be supposed,
That the dictates of the Soul are transmitted from the Brain, to the Nerve and
Muscle to be used, not by emission of any Substance whatsoever, but by a mere
contraction of such fibers of the Brain, as are continued to that Nerve.

And Page 501. he says deridingly: We Physicians indeed speak magnifickly of
Spirits Animal, as of the plenipotent, and immediate Instrument of the Soul, in
all her Operations upon the Body: -- Yea more, in a preternatural State also,
we make them only not omnipotent. For, what Disease of the Brain can ye Name,
which has not been referred to their Vices.

Afterward, Page 503. And yet notwithstanding, after all our specious
Discourses of these Emissaries of the Soul, Animal Spirits; we are distracted
by various Opinions concerning them: still anxiously inquiring, of what Matter,
in what Place, and how they are generated; what are their Qualities, Motions,
Ways, and Manner of acting; and in fine, uncertain whether they be real
Creatures of Nature; or only the Idols of human Imagination.

And Page 515. he adds: Perhaps then we are equally uncertain, whether there be
in rerum Natura any such things as Animal Spirits, of distinct Species from the
vital Spirits, or not. Truly my Opinion is, that we are so: And no less Man
than Dr. Harvey expressly denied their existence; De generat. Animal, exercit.
70. Nihil sane in corpore animalium, Sanguine prius aut praestantius reperitur;
neque Spiritus, quos a Sanguine distinguunt, uspiam ab illo separati
inveniuntur.

So do all the Peripatetics hold against Galen; Vnum esse duntaxat spiritum,
vitalem, singulis partium omnium officiis deservientem. Joan. Imperial. de
Ingen. human. Page 52.

And Sir G. Ent ( Antidiatribae. page 141.) Ego, praeter unum sanguinis
calorem, nullos in animali spiritus agnosco; sed in partibus singulis privum
hospitari sensum, qui ad Animae imperium excitetur.

You see now the concurrent Opinions of these great Philosophers and Physicians
against Animal Spirits; and that they have, no Being, but only in the Fancies
of some Men. Then Dr. Morton's whole Doctrine of various kinds of Fevers, is
fictitious, null and void; and the Indications from thence in Practice, must
needs be false Guides, extravagantly leading out of the right way of Curing.
And now, I must make use of this Author's own words, as levelling against
himself. An enim fas est, ut ii qui falsas and fictas tantum Morborum causas
contemplantur, veram eorundem and vivam Ideam ratiocinando unquam formarent,
eventum certum denunciarent, vel justas Indicationes, at que aequam Medendi
Methodum Stabilirent? Praefat. ad Lectorem, Page 11.

To establish the verity of Animal Spirits, and to persuade a belief thereof:
This learned Author tells us; that the Existence of Animal Spirits, may be
proved with as much Demonstration, and a like Reason, as the Soul it self:
Because they are both known, only by their effects, and not a priori. Hoc modo
existentia Spiritus Animalis atque Animae ipsius aequaliter demonstrari potest,
adeo ut utriusque existentia pari ratione vel agnoscenda vel neganda sit. Page
7.

I beg his pardon, and must deny that equality of Proof, for Reasons following.

First, There is a Necessity of allowing and owning the Architectonic Spirit,
the vital Principle Anima, that formed the Machine of Human Body; and is
Supreme Moderator in the Government. The Specific Form is not to be questioned,
or doubted, in every Creature, but that there is such, which gives the Being,
and the Distinction from others; only the quiddity and quality thereof, may be
doubted, and controverted.

Secondly, None have denied, nor so much as doubted of the Souls Existence, the
Heathen Philosophers not excepted; but they have denied Animal Spirits, from
the difficulty of Admittance.

Thirdly, There is a great Disproportion, and Inequality of Proof; between a
Thing that must be, and can by no Reason be denied, but assented to by All; And
a Thing dubious that may not be; that by many is denied to be from valid
Reasons: where there is no Necessity for the use of it; and where is great
Difficulty and Discord of Opinions in proving the Reality and Certainty thereof.

Fourthly, The Effects of the one, are so manifest, as altogether undeniable:
But the reputed and supposed Effects of the other; are so dubitable,
disputable, and improbable; that many learned Men of the highest Rank, do not
own such Effects, to proceed from Animal Spirits; but have assigned other
causes to produce those Effects. Wherefore, Equality of Proof, does not, and
cannot possibly so appear.

Here we might end; as not expecting to gain Information of Fevers, by farther
Disquisition herein; since this first Position, being the Basis of the whole
work; is but an imaginary, and erroneous Supposition: Yet for Discourse sake,
and to observe the Novelties dependant upon these Supposed Animal Spirits, we
will proceed a little farther, and take notice of some remarkables.

Spiritus Animales esse, (...), seu primum Principium activum, and quasi
fermentum universale totius Corporis, a quo Sanguis and humores vary agitantur
and immutantur non dubito. Dr. Morton de Puretolog. Page 12.

This is a Note above Ela, that passes my understanding: This Sounds
Metaphysically, appertaining to non Entities (such as Animal Spirits) and above
the lower Region of Notions in Physic.

If this Report be true; there is a strange Revolution in the Monarchy of the
Microcosm: The Supreme regent Principle Anima, is dethroned; and Animal Spirits
have usurped the Government. Anima which was Forma informans; and always
Principium Regens; must now truckle under the Power of Animal Spirits,
according to this new Doctrine.

I never met with any that ascribed such a Domination; that gave away the
Priority and Supremacy to Animal Spirits: That is an Assertion against the
Prerogative of the Regent vital Spirit Anima, which is (...), the first active
Principle; and the last acting ad terminum vitae; and the only acting Principle
potestate propria, in Human Nature. This is the Spring movent; and all the rest
are moved.

Animal Spirits were never allowed but a delegated Power to act
instrumentaliter, (not as primum Principium activum) and always supported by
the Energy and Emanations of the vital Principle, the Life. Instrumentum non
movet, nisi motum. Ax. For when the Life cease to act; where then, and what
becomes of your Animal Spirits? They are inactive, and cease from motion;
showing their Dependancy, (if any such were) and actuated; not primum
Principium activum. I cannot therefore imagine with Reason; how Animal Spirits
should be the first, or chief active Principle, since they are generated daily
(as commonly said) of the arterial Blood; then there must be a Principium
generans, preceding that which is generated; and much superior.

But how will you reconcile these two repugnant Antitheses. Page 6. affirms,
Spiritus esse primum principium activum totius Machinae. And Page 7. he says,
Animal Spirits are Animae Organon.

Here is contradictio in terminis, and in rebus: or else, Animal Spirits must
be of a Protean Nature; both active and passive, Agents and Instruments. They
cannot be termed an active Principle; because they can have no Power but what
is derivative from their generant Principle Anima; and are only Instruments,
acted and used by the (...), the vital Principle: So that Animal Spirits (when
allowed) at most, are but (...); and of a latter production.

Cerebrum esse officinam and quasi Cisternam communem Spirituum, ex illius
fabrica peculiari patet. Page 11. Puretolog.

This Author tells us; the Brain is the office appointed for elaborating Animal
Spirits. To which I shall give no other Answer at this Time; but recite the
Sentiment of a most judicious Physician upon this Point.

If any Man shall seriously, and without Prejudice consider the great bulk,
cold Temperament, various Parts, Fabric and Texture of the Brain; he will at
length find but little Reason to believe, that Nature has framed it chiefly
for a Laboraty of Spirits. They tell us, that these Spirits are made of the
most subtle, most refined, and volatilized parts of the arteriose Blood, by
way of Sublimation: But can a Part so dense, so cold, so clammy, and so like a
Bogg, as the Brain seems to be; be thought an Instrument fit for Sublimation or
Rectification of a Spirituous Substance? -- Dr. Charleton. Of Human Nature. 6th
Praelect. Page 515.

Promanare vero hos Spiritus a Cerebro, uti radios a Sole, in totum Systema
corporis influere, -- Dr. Morton Puretolog. Page 10.

He compares the Motion of Animal Spirits with the Rays of the Sun,
imperceptible for swiftness: And in Page the 9th. to Lightning, for their
instantaneous motions, darting through the Body of Man. All which, is very much
doubted by some; and flatly denied by others.

The learned Dr. Charleton finding so many Difficulties, and Dissension of
Opinions concerning the Matter, Generation, and Qualities of Animal Spirits,
says: Equally uncertain it is, by what kind of Motion these invisible
Emissaries are transmitted from the Brain through the Nerves; whether they fly
swiftly, or creep along slowly. For some there are, who fond of the Chimaera's
of their own Imagination, and carried away by Affectation of Glory from the
Invention of I know not what new Theories in Physic; (as if Philosophers were
like young Ladies, best pleased with Novels;) have confidently taught, that
these Spirits are not only moved, most rapidly in the Brain and Nerves, as
Lightning is darted through the Air; but as it were Shot out, at the command of
the Fancy into the Nerves; and recalled again by the same ways in an Instant,
according to the exigence of these Actions to be performed by them. And yet
neither of these motions seem consonant to right Reason. And goes on to prove
-- Page 505, 506.

In the next Page, he brings in another Dissenter herein; whom he admires and
applauds for his Sagacity and profound Judgment. No wonder then if Dr. Glisson,
plainly discerning the Incongruity, of this most rapid and recriprocal Motion,
attributed to the Animal Spirits; not only wholly rejected it, but excogitated
another plainly contrary thereto. For he concludes, that the Spirits lodged in
the Succus nutritious, are carried from the Brain through the Nerves, by a
Motion not impetuous, or rapid; but gentle, slow, and placid, -- As the Juice
of Plants is believed to creep up from the Roots, along by their Fibers --

The Notion that Dr. Glisson, and Dr. Charleton had of Animal Spirits; is far
different from what our Author of Puretologia affirms them to be: For they do
not allow of Subtility, Volatility, and Velocity of Animal Spirits, for many
persuasive Reasons; showing the Inconvenience, and Improbability thereof. And
therefore in Page 504. Dr. Charleton says.

But these and other Reasons, induced our most excellent Dr. Glisson ( de
Ventric. and Intestin. cap. 8. number. 7.) to form his Animal Spirits of a
constitution exempt from all these inconvenient Qualities. He describes them to
be mild, placid, sedate, fixed, sweet, nutritive, corroborating, and apt to
consolidate; and in all these respects, exactly like the Spirits contrived in
the white of an Egg. -- Concluding, that the select part is changed into Animal
Spirits, not by Sublimation, or Meteorization (as all others held before) but
by mitigation, Refrigeration, and whitening. So that in fine; if their Nature
agree with this character; I do not see by what right they can be called
Spirits, according to the common Notion Men have, of all things known by that
Name.

Having given you the Sense of these two great Philosophers, and expert
Anatomists upon this Point; I need add nothing more, until Answer be given
thereto.

And thus much briefly, by way of Dubitation, and Improbability, to the
Preliminary, and positive Assertions in Puretologia; whereby that Author
endeavors to establish his new Hypothesis. Upon the Review, of what has been
said concerning Animal Spirits, you may plainly see, how uncertainly and weakly
they are bottomed; as unfit to lay the whole Practice of Physic thereupon.

I proceed now, to enquire nearer into the Doctrine of Fevers; where this
Definition first presents.

Febris acuta in genere est calor preternaturalis, in Sanguine accensus a
Spiritu animali; miasmate quodam deleterio contaminato, and ex accidenti quodam
irritato, atque inde insolito more praeter Naturam suum expanso. Dr. Morton
Puretolog. P. 50.

Febris est calor preternaturalis. So far I agree; from the etymon of the word,
Febris a ferbee vel ferveo. But I cannot assent to what immediately follows.

"In Sanguine accensus a Spiritu animali. This begets a Dissertation; and I
cannot allow febrile Heat to arise from the Animal Spirits. For; first you must
prove, the Animal Spirits to be (fons caloris) the Origin of Heat in Human
Nature. Or Secondly; you must prove febrile Heat, to be so distinct, and
differing from natural Heat; as arising from two several different Principles.

The first is not probable, or rational: Because Chylification and
Sanguification, precedes, and is performed before the Production of Animal
Spirits (by the Assertors of animal Spirits) and those Operations are not
performed without vital Heat, issuing from the vital Principle; and there can
be no other rationally assigned.

The Second, as improbable and difficult to be proved: For, the Heat of animal
Spirits, is but mutuatitious (at best) borrowed, dependant, and supported by
vital Heat; and not arising from an independent Principle. This preternatural
Heat, ascribed to animal Spirit; is the same in Specie, with natural Heat; and
they differ only in gradu; Febrile Heat assuring from the same Principle, as
natural Heat.

But why in Sanguine accensus, and no where else?

As if the Blood were the first, and the only Place, where Fevers do begin, and
have their Residence: which Doctrine I cannot comply with, and must assert
otherwise.

That Fevers, being only the preternatural Heat of the Life incensed, and
Symptomatical only: what ever the Morbifick cause be; and wheresoever it be, in
any Part of the Body; there the Fever begins, and from thence it is continued,
until the Morbous Matter be removed, or much abated. For, no Part of the Body
is injured, but the Life (being ubiquitary in the Microcosm) is first sensible
of the Hurt, and is disturbed thereby; grows angry, hot and fiery; (nisu quodam
irato) endeavoring thereby, to extricate and free her self from the mischief.

Miasmate quodam deleterio contaminate, and ex accidenti quodam irritato, --

Here it is said; the Animal Spirit is contaminated with some Venom, and
irritated thereby, -- This being the Definition of acute Fever in general, then
all sorts of acute Fevers, must arise after this manner, and from such a cause;
as venomous Matter. Quicquid praedicatur de genere, praedicatur etiam de
Specie. Ax.

Let us know first, what this learned Author means by venomous miasm; of which
we have no better Account than this, from himself. Hujus miasmatis heterogenei
descriptionem nemo sane a nobis requirat, quandoquidem omnes nostros sensus
plane Superat. Pa. 50.

Here is an imaginary venom; seizing and affecting imagined, and supposed
animal Spirits; and upon the Result, or conjunction of these two dubious and
difficult conceptions to be proved: The Doctrine of Fevers is founded; and a
general Practice conform to these Notions, is regulated thereby. But I should
be loath to venture my Life, or the Lives of others, upon such Uncertainties and
Improbabilities, for the Rule of Curing. To show therefore the
incomprehensiveness, and unfitness thereof, to govern and direct the general
Practice of Fevers; I shall propose some cases of acute Fevers, that we may see
how these Positions do prompt and indicate proper Means, and suitable Methods of
Cure: And from thence we may rationally conclude, the Verity, or Error thereof.

A Person that has eat and drank too much; the night following, is very
restless; next morning complains of fullness, and loathing of any Food; is very
Fevorish, hot and burning.

A Fever now presents plainly; but what is to be done in the case for Remedy?
By the Doctrine aforesaid, the animal Spirits are invenomed, and the Patient
must be Cured with Alexipharmacal Antidotes, to expel the Poison, that causes
this Fever: Such as the Jesuits Powder, that has no manifest operation; but an
occult virtue to resist venomous Matter. And this is the Febrifuge so much
magnified, and used by Dr. Morton, as excelling all others.

But my Judgment leads me another way in this case: Here is an oppression from
Meat and Drink loading the Stomach, not being digested and duly sent away. Now
what does this case indicate? but only a discharge of the matter offending,
either upwards, or downwards, by Medicine of Such Operation.

The Fever is plainly perceived; and the cause as easily understood: But where
the venom afflicting the animal Spirits in this Fever will be found, I know
not; nor do I think there is any such.

Another is afflicted with the Colic, by great Torsions and Pain from
Obstruction, or acrid lancinating humoral Matter in the Colon: These Pains
being violent and continued; prevents sleep, and unavoidably raises a Fever.
The vital Regent Principle being molested and provoked hereby; then aestuats
with Inquietude, and grows hot with Indignation, being disturbed in Government.

Now what manner of Cure is here required for this Fever? But only some good
Aperitive, and Abstersive Medicine, to open, cleanse and free the Guts, from
all degenerate, obstructing, flatulent Matter, that causes these Pains; Which
being well performed by a true Purgative (and not of the common virulent sort)
the Pains cease; and the Fever is gone; because the Life is then pacified, at
Ease and Rest, cool and temperate; the offending Cause being removed.

What Occasion, or what need was here for a Febrifuge? But only what was
Curative as aforesaid; for removing the Cause aforesaid. The Jesuits Powder
would contribute nothing to this Cure, (so much admired and used by some) I
rather think it might do Hurt in this Fever; as the medicine by its nature does
Suggest, which we shall enquire into anon. No Venom I can discover in this
case, requiring such an Antidote.

Pains of the Gout, or from the Stone, raises a Fever, (for the Reasons
aforesaid) being the common Symptom attendant upon all dolorous Diseases, that
disquiet and incense the Life. Here is no need of a Febrifuge in these Fevers;
but only such proper Means, as these Diseases require. The febrile Heat goes
off, or abates; as the Diseases yield to the Power of Medicine. Symptoms come
and go with their Diseases, on which they depend; and febrile Heat is only
Symptomatical, as before proved.

Here we might enumerate, and run over many depending Fevers; where no such
Poison is to be found: But these may suffice to inform; that acute Fevers are
not so venomous in their nature generally, as the Definition of Fevers recited,
would have us to believe. Genus praedicatur de omnibus Speciebus sub se
contentis. Ax.

But now let us understand (if it can be understood) what this Venom is, that
our Author assigns to be the material Cause of Fevers, and of most other
Diseases; that is so frequent and common; and requires Curing by
Alexipharmacals. The Inventor and Assertor of this Novel; probably can give us
the best Account, who defines Poison thus.

Venenum seu toxicum est quid deleterium, atque vitae principio, seu spiritibus
animalibus inimicum, unde facultas little expansiva penitus obruitur, and flamma
vitalis necessary extinguitur. p. 147.

We must consider this Definition in its several Parts distinctly; whereby we
may the better apprehend the Result and Comprehension of the whole. This is the
Standard set; to examine and know febrile venomous Ferments by; and to show the
manner of their acting destructively: For by this Definition of Poison in
general; he would have us to understand analogically, the Nature of that Poison
which causes Fevers; as he intimates in the same Page.

Venenum seu Toxicum est quid Deleterium, -- This is idem per idem, or ignotum
per atque ignotum. We must proceed on for better Information atque vitae
Principio, seu Spiritibus animalibus inimicum, Here the Life, and animal
Spirits are made one and the same; or equal at least in vitality; for so I must
conclude: First, From the Particle seu, connecting those words as Synonimous:
And likewise He uses seu equivalently, and for that purpose in the front of
the Definition; Venenum seu Toxicum, signifying the same Poison by two words.

Secondly, From the words immediately following.

Vnde facultas eorum expansiva penitus obruitur and flamma vitalis necessario
extinguitur.

The which do declare; Febrile Venom to have Antipathy against animal Spirits,
as to the Principle of Life: That the Stress of Poison aims at, and lies upon
animal Spirits, as upon the Life. That the fatal stroke is given there; and the
ratio formalis of Dying represented, by Contracting and Stifling the Expansion
of animal Spirits; which puts a Period to Vitality: And that animal Spirits are
the Biolicknium, the Lamp of Life. What more or greater can be said of Anima,
the plastic and the Regent Principle; than now is attributed to animal Spirits?

This is Strange Philosophy to me, such as I never knew before, deeper than my
Reason can fathom; and above my Faith to believe: That animal Spirits, so much
questioned and doubted, whether they have any Being in Humane Nature (though so
unnecessary and improbable) should now be exalted as Supreme or made coequal at
least, in dispensing and managing vital Operations. Credat qui volet.

Let animal Spirits be first proved ((...)) convincingly; that there are such,
from the necessity of their use; we may then more likely be induced to believe,
the new Hypothesis founded thereon.

SECT. III. The Difference of Fevers; And their Division into Classes.
AVthors concurring in common Doctrine; have made this Difference, and Division
of Fevers; (a subjecto in quo calor febrilis insidet) from their place of
Residence; in the Spirits, Humors, and solid Parts: which makes this tripple
Division of Fevers.

Ephemeral, Humoral, and Hectic.

Famosa and Vulgatissima est Febris essentialis differentia; qua Febris in
Ephimeram, Humoralem, and Hecticam, dividitur: quae tota a subjecto Febrium
petitur, Troph. Serrier Pyretolog. p. 13.

Ephemeral Fever, is an effervescence of the Spirits only; and continues but a
day, or two.

Humoral, is the esservescence of putrid humors; and continues a longer time.

Hectic, is a preternatural Heat in the Solid parts; and is most durable, and
fixed.

All these Fevers must take their rise in the Heart, (by the common definition)
that is the Center; and Seat thereof. You have brought all Fevers into a little
compass (the Heart) where we may soon find them, if they were there to be
found: And if all this were true; what advantage, and what use can we make of
it? What cunning ways will you invent, to make your Practice answer this
Doctrine? and how will you make this Doctrine serviceable in Practice?

This Celebrious Division is essential, general and comprehensive: But (quid
inde boni?) what shall we learn thereby?

If you come to a Patient, whose Fever is beginning; and the Fever is one of
these three Sorts, comprised in the general Division: you have no help by this
Doctrine (if it were true) no information to determine what; or prosecute with
what.

You cannot ask the Patient, how are the Spirits of your Heart? How the Humors?
And how the Flesh? but you must look off the Heart, and cast about somewhere
else; inquiring here, and there: How is your Stomach? have you good Appetite,
and digest well? are you Costive? how is your Head? do you urine freely? have
you pain any where? and so forth --

After all these and such like necessary Questions; it is very probable, you may
find out the place where the Fever is bred, and what is the Cause thereof: If
so, as true it is; what then have we to do with the Heart; but only to examine
by the Pulse; how affected, or afflicted in the case; what consent from thence,
or condolence; what vital Signals by that Pulsation; not what Sort of Fever.

Now after all the subtle and nice distinction of Ephemeral, Humoral, and
Hectic; we must examine most Parts of the Body (the principle at least) to find
out the Rise and Seat of the Fever; and then it will appear to be; not in Cord
primo accensa, (as you say) but in Cord per consensum; and that some other
Part, is the original cause of the Fever, where the Cure is to be directed.

If there must be a place, or places in the Body, assigned for Fevers, as the
Rise and Seat thereof: And since they are all Symptomatical and dependant upon
various Diseases in diverse Parts of the Body, as their causes occasional;
(Seeds Morbi, est Seeds Febris) then where the Disease is, there is the Seat of
Fevers; So that the difference of Fevers from thence, will not be triplex,
(according to this antique approved Division) but multiplex.

I wish you good Success with your Doctrine of Fevers; but I should be loath to
be a Patient under it; least the first trial of your Skill upon me, should be
the last Scene of my Life.

There is another received distinction of Fevers; into Essential, and
Symptomatical.

And this I must take notice of; because it byasseth Practisers from the right
Notion of Fevers; and causes error in the designs of Curing. For this
Distinction may well be set aside; when as there is no Fever essential
(therefore no Disease) but all are Symptomatical; arising from and dependant
upon some Disease, morbific Miasm or Seminary, and a Symptom thereof.

And this appears from the Definition of Fevers; (Febris est calor preter
naturam --) preternatural Heat being the genus; comprising all Fevers under it:
And this Heat, (by your Doctrine) a Symptomatical Quality only: The distinction
then of Essential and Symptomatical Fevers, is void; unless you will hold a
contradiction, in your own learning.

But why some Essential, others Symptomatical? Riverius gives this account:
essentiales dicuntur; quando putredo in venis communibus, and extra parts
privatas accenditur. Symptomaticae vero, quando in part peculiari inflammata,
putredo aut suppuratio fit: a qua ob vasorum communionem vapor putridus cordi
continuo communicari potest; -- lib. de febr. p. 373.

They that will take this for good Reason, may be so satisfied; and probably
they may not see the Definition of Fever therein contradicted: (Calor in Cord
accensus, and ex eo --) and the Doctrine discordant in it self.

Another Distinction of Fevers there is; which divides them into Continual and
Intermitting.

This difference is apparent to vulgar understandings; but the manner how; the
matter what; the place where generated; causes occasioning and promoting: These
are not so well known; which has produced diversity of opinions among the
learned: and these I shall take notice of in their due places.

Continual Fevers are distinguished into Putrid, and Imputrid.

Intermitting Fevers, are all adjudged Putrid.

Some have made this general Division of Fevers; into Simple, Putrid, and
Pestilential.

There are also Distinctions of Fevers, termed accidental differences; and
these Fevers are called by their Names: (which serves only to confound young
Practisers and amuse the people) thereby making Fevers more perplexed, and
difficult to be understood, by additional cognominations, from complication of
Symptoms.

As Epiala, Lipiria, Causus, Syncopalis, Soporiferae, Assodes, Elodes,
Tiphodes, Phlegmonodes, etc.

Fever by Denomination; and different Fevers by Cognomination is strange
Doctrine: Thus compounding of Symptoms, is the confounding of Reason in
Practice.

Since all Fevers, or febrile intemperature, is only the aestuation, and
disturbance of the vital governing Spirit; by provocation from some Disease, or
Morbific Cause; producing various Symptoms in several Parts of the Body:
Tacking such Symptoms together by Cognomination; that have no dependence upon
each other in causation, or existence; is no good fashion, nor good reason.

At this rate of diversifying and denominating of Fevers, by coupling them with
Symptoms, and Diseases; you may make five hundred sorts more of Fevers, and
draw all the practice of Physic upon Fevers: Plurisie fevers, Stone fevers,
Colic fevers, etc. All the Acute, and most of the Chronic Diseases, have Fevers
adjoined.

The Practice of Fevers after this manner; may be as large, as the Practice of
Physic: And by this variation of Fevers in Masquerade; from Complication with
other Symptoms, and Diseases; the Doctrine of Fevers will stretch in infinitum;
not to be comprehended by human understanding.

They might have put in Camp Fevers, and Fleet Fevers for variety, among the
rest: But if you understand Fevers no better, than what your Books and
Tradition does inform; Princes are like to have but a melancholy return of
their brave Soldiers and Seamen; as too often it falls out so.

And here I might give you a sad Account of Men, and Money lost after this
manner; by the formality of Physic, and deficiency of the Professors: But I
troubled my self once before in this matter; and I shall trouble my self no
more; But this obiter.

If all other Symptoms and Diseases, were to have various names affixed to
them, from the diversity of Symptoms happening contemporary; from Complication
with other Diseases: They might also be varied abundantly, (to no purpose) by
differing adjunct Titles, as properly as Fevers are thus multifariously
distinguished and denominated; wherein there is no reason, nor advantage for
Curing.

Symptoms supervening and complicating with Fevers are such as these: Horror,
Rigor, Pandiculation, Oscitation, Vomiting, Fluxes, Watchings, Deliriums,
Hamorrhages, etc.

Hereby showing the various deportments, Passions; Agonies, and strivings of
the vital governing Spirit; (Spiritus impetum faciens) preternaturally affected
and provoked; according to the diversity of Morbous irritating causes; And also
showing the different Parts infested therewith; laboring under the impulsions,
and expulsions of incensed vital power; endeavoring by such extraordinary
motions, to expel and cast out what is offensive and hostile to sedate vital
government.

But Writers have given themselves much trouble to find out, and set forth the
Causes of such Symptoms; assigning them, as particular Characters to
distinguish Fevers by: Herein showing their Ingenuity, Nicity, and Exactness,
in giving a full Account of all things appertaining to Fevers; (as they would
have the World believe) But the Insufficiency of the Reasons, and
unprofitableness of those Endeavors are such; that I shall not trouble the
Reader with the Inquiry, and Examination of the Validity thereof.

SECT. IV. Of Putrid Fevers.
BEfore I set down the difference and distinctions of putrid Fevers, delivered
to us by Authors, Ancient and Modern; I think it necessary, first to inquire
into the word Putrid: that we may know what is meant by Putrefaction, and
putrefying in their sense; that first taught; and those who now support the
Doctrine of putrid Fevers: whether they be all of a mind; and what confidence
we may have in this learning, upon their dissent; or to whom we may adhere.

In determining of putrefaction, I find there are variety of opinions, and from
thence several Definitions.

Galen's definition seems to agree with Aristotle's: And (for brevity sake) I
shall only give you the explanation and sense of both these great Men; well
done by another Author in these words. Putrefactio nihil aliud est, quam
corruption caloris nativi, in humido radicali existentis alicuius mixti
corporis, facta ab externo and peregrino calore. Kercherus.

Herein external peregrine Heat, is made the agressor, and invader of the Life
of every mixed Body: That natural Heat is set upon and destroyed, and
consequently radical moisture is consumed.

This is the sense and meaning of the celebrated Definitions of Aristotle and
Galen; wherein there are these great mistakes.

1. Calor innatus and Humidum radicale are supposed and made substantial
Principles in nature; when (revera) they are but Qualities assurging from their
Principles.

2. They are made the support of every Animal; and to these they have
attributed too great a share in mixed Bodies; as if the Being thereof depended
essentially thereupon.

3. That innate Heat, is seated in radical moisture; where putrefaction and
corruption begins; and that the Life of an Animal consists in these two: That
they are Animae domicilium; the which failing, Life departs.

4. Hence it is that Putrefaction is defined, by the alteration, and perdition
of these two Principles in Nature, which Galen often calls, totam rei
substantiam.

The Doctrine of Physic fails much from these grand errors; which biasseth
Practisers in the Cure of many Diseases.

For Putrefaction is caused, not only by external ambient Heat; but also by
external Cold: And particularly in the case of putrid Fevers; cohibited
transpiration by cold occluding the Pores; is one chief cause assigned by most,
if not all Writers. And likewise we find that other Animals, and also Plants,
are mortified by extreme cold, which their natures could not bear; and from
thence you need not doubt but Putrefaction follows.

Putredo, Putrefaction is not rightly defined by alteration of Qualities, Heat
and Moisture; that may, or may not be; and are accidents, not essential to
Putrefaction: For Dry, and Cold Bodies are subject to putrify; as Bones,
Straw, Wood, etc. wherein is no sensible Heat or Moisture; and do putrify into
dry powder.

Heat and Cold; and I may add the other two first Qualities also, Wet and Dry;
though they may be causes of putrefaction sometimes; and sometimes the effects
thereof; yet they are not sufficient, to set forth and illustrate Putrefaction,
as the ratio formalis thereof; and a result differing from all other
preternatural alterations and transmutations. Nor does this Definition, make
distinction between putrefaction, and combustion (a calore externo): nor
sufficiently extinguisheth putrefaction from fermentation.

And thus much concerning putrefaction in general, from the two celebrated
Definitions of Aristotle and Galen: if you be satisfied therein, I am not, They
sound great in the Greek; but signify little in English.

I might write the Definitions of many others; Zeigler, Capivactius, Kyperus,
etc. The examining and comparing whereof, would give more trouble than
satisfaction: And therefore to draw homewards, and come to the business
intended; putrefaction in Fevers particularly; wherein also we shall find
Authors much dissenting.

Riverius a noted French Author, much consulted with, and followed in his
methods; because abounding with variety of Medicines; taken up upon trust from
other Writers. We will inquire into his Praxis of Fevers, and see what he
grounds himself upon, in designing the Cures of Putrid Fevers.

He makes all putrid Fevers to arise, and have their difference from the four
Humors in the Mass of Blood; according to the old Galenic doctrine. The more
temperate part, called Blood specially and particularly: The hotter part,
Choler: The crude and colder part, Phlegm; The grosser and more faeculent,
Melancholy.

When any of these four parts of the Blood do abound and putrify; then a
putrid Fever arises and particularly denominated; as Sanguinious, Bilious,
etc. putrid Fever.

And if these Humors putrify (in majoribus vasis) in the great Veins and
Arteries; then putrid Fevers Continual are generated: But if (in prima corporis
Regione) in the first Region; then Intermitting Fevers (in English, Agues) are
produced.

The putrid Continual, are distinguished by their exacerbations; into
Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan: And putrid Intermitting Fevers, Quotidian,
Tertian, and Quartan; by their paroxisms.

I might give you some more distinctions; but here is enough: For they all refer
to, and rest upon the word putrefaction, of which we have only a bare name; but
the sense and true meaning thereof, is yet obscure and dubious: And after so
much nice distinguishing, and dividing of putrid Fevers, by putrefaction of
different humors; and by difference of place or seat thereof; yet put refaction
in the true notion of it, is not set forth; (by this Author) and distinguished
from other degenerate alterations.

After all this formality, distinctions, and divisions of putrid Fevers; they
rest upon an imaginary foundation, which wants good proof to secure and
establish the Doctrine.

For First; The Mass of Blood supposed to be compounded of four different
Humors, Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy; is an antiquated opinion, now
exploded by the best Modern Writers; that I need not trouble the Reader with
more Arguments against it.

Cruoris massa ex opinione veterum, quatuor humoribus, nimirum Sanguine,
Pituita, Bile, and Melancholia constare perhibetur -- Haec sententia, licet a
Galeni usque temporibus medicorum Scholis increbuerit; nostro tamen seculo; cui
sanguinis motus circularis, ejusque aliae affectiones, prius incognitae,
innotuerunt, aliquantulum suspecta esse caepit, nec ita passim pro solvendis
Morborum phaenominis usurpart: quippe ejusmodi humores sanguinem minime
constituunt, verum qui sit appellantur (excepto sanguine) sunt tantum cruoris
recrementa, quae deben^ ab ipso continuo secerni: est enim sanguis revera humor
unicus -- D. Willis lib. de Febr. p. 99.

Secondly; The forenamed Author though he proceeds so nicely and positively,
upon the diversity of putrid Fevers; yet has not set down putrefaction in
fevers, how it is performed; nor in facto esse, what it is in the result: But
depends upon Galens definition of putredo in general; which declares it to be
caused, (a calore alieno ambiente) from external Heat; and this is contradicted
in the chief cause assigned for producing putrid Fevers, by this, and most
Writers: viz. that they arise (a calore non expirante) from transpiration
restrained; the which frequently is impeded a frigore externo.

Notwithstanding all this discourse of putrid Fevers; speciously set forth:
Febres putridae, aedhuc sunt febres igno^ae: Then the followers of this
Doctrine in their Practice, do prosecute they know not what: And thus the
Blind, leads the Blind; the Patient then is in a hopeful condition!

I must inquire farther for satisfaction in this matter; and consult another
Author, elaborately treating upon this subject, but otherwise bottomed in his
learning.

Dr. Willis setting forth the Anatomy of the Blood; thereby showing what parts
it is composed; he makes the analysis thereof into these five principles:
Spirit, Water, Salt, Sulphur, and Earth.

Insunt igitur sanguine, veluti liquoribus quibuscunque ad fermentecendum
aptis; plurimum Aquae and Spiritus, modicum salis and sulphuris, and
aliquantulum terrae. D. Willis, lib. de Febr. p. 100.

Upon these principles his Doctrine of Fevers is founded; making all febrile
alterations, and effervescency of the Blood, to depend upon the different
exaltations, depressions, and combinations of these Principles.

As touching the matter now in hand; and showing how putrid Fevers do arise, he
says: Cum pars sanguinis oleosa sive sulphurea, nimis excalefacta, supra modum
turgescit, ac veluti in flammam adigitur; ideoque a similitudine qua humida
putrescentia fervorem concipiunt, hujusmodi sanguinis ebullitio, quia calorem
immodicum inducit, Febris putrida appellatur. p. 164.

That these five parts (called principles) may be produced out of Blood by a
Chemical Analysis, I doubt not: But that all these were pre-existing in the
Blood, and distinct in form, to exercise their power, for producing various
febrile mutations, by their exaltations, and domination over each other by
turns; is a Doctrine that I must deny.

For it is questioned, and not yet proved; whether the fire be a true divider
and separator of the parts of mixed Bodies; since all the transmutations that
are made by fire upon Bodies; and the diversity of separated parts from thence,
are not the natural constituent parts of the mixed, but products of the fire.

To wave the prosecution of these Principles, as they are asserted the Elements
of all natural things, (which would be long and tedious) and to bring them down
to our present purpose; examining how far they do declare the nature of Fevers,
and particularly now that of putrid Fevers.

Here are two things to be inquired: First, Whether there be such an Oleaginous
inflammable Sulphur in the blood, as this Author affirms: And whether the Heat
and Ebullition of the Blood, does arise from this Sulphur inflamed, causing a
putrid Fever.

Upon the opening of a Vein, and the Blood standing a while; there may be
sometimes (not often) a greasy Scum, or Oiliness floating a top, separated from
the other parts, and appearing uppermost: But granting this, what does it
prove? Nothing to the kindling of Fevers.

For this Sulphurous oleaginous matter, that now separates; (the blood being
out of the Veins, cold and putrefying) was not so; in conjunction and
commixture with the rest; (when hot in the Veins, its proper place) making one
Homogeneous liquor, being then under subjection to vital power.

And I answer this Author in his own words; resuting the Galenic doctrine of
the four humors of the Blood: est enim sanguis revera humor unicus. And
presently after he adds these words. Sed liquor in vasis effervescens solummodo
sanguis and ubicunque loci per singulas corporis parts defertur, usque idem
est, and sui similis. D. Willis. de febr. p. 99.

If the Blood then be in such a state (as this Author even now said) perfectly
mixed and homogeneous in the vessels: I see no cause why; and cannot understand
how this sulphurous part thereof (if such there be) in living Blood; that it
should be apt and ready to take fire, and produce the effervescency and
ebullition of putrid Fevers.

Nor can I reconcile this learned Man to himself; where in another place,
setting forth putrid Fevers; he says: Cum vero cruoris materies sulphurea
excandescens supra modum effervet, mixtionis vinculum maxima ex part solvitur,
ut principia ejus a fermento cordis fere in totum distrahantur, and particulae
activae (meaning spirit and sulphur) a misto solutae velut in flammam erumpant.
Ibidem. p. 164.

In one place he affirms the Blood to be a liquor united in its principles,
woven together into one uniform nature: and in another place he says; the parts
of the Blood are loosed, and in a state of separation.

Now when the Blood is thus dissolved; the Sulphur does not abide to take fire,
but takes flight; Substantia Sulphuris nusquam sincera cernitur, imo seorsim ab
aliis non consistit, quin tenues evanescit in auras: D. Willis lib. de ferment.
p. 7.

Observe from hence: The Blood in its compage and texture, is not capable of
firing and deflagration; in its retexture and dissolution, the inflammable
Sulphur abides not for a combustion, but disperseth and vanishes; and haec
tota Doctrina in flammam abit: Sic transit gloria ficti.

Notwithstanding these incongruities; He proceeds to make out the deflagration
of the Blood in putrid Fevers: That the principles of the Blood are separated
by the ferment of the Heart; and being there rarefied and kindled; from thence
with a most swift motion, (motu rapidissimo) is carried through the vessels,
and in the deflagration disperseth many effiuviums of Heat. Ibidem, p. 164.

This is soon said, but not so easily proved. And in answer to all this; I will
give you the sentiment, and determination of a late Physician of great repute,
reasoning and denying all this, as irrational.

Verum nec in sanguine talem ebullitionem excitari; nec in cord hujusmodi
fermentum adesse, facile erit ostendere: quanquam enim inter corpora quae ex
salibus contraria prorsus indole praeditis constant, ubi commiscentur, magna
effervescentia atque lucta exoritur, multaque effluvia discedant; dissimilis
tamen omnino and magis benignae naturae Sanguinis liquor existit, quam ut in
cord aut vasis suis, tam aestuose and subito effervescat: quippe novimus, quam
mitis ejus liquor, quam benigno plerumque succo perfusus, quam lenis and
placidus ejus in venis versus cor refluxus; -- D. Lower, de cord. p. 57.

And farther, to null this fiction of abounding sulphur, and effervescency from
thence in putrid Fevers: Take the testimony of a learned Chemical Physician,
demonstrating by fact.

The pretended sanguine sulphur, or Cacochymy of any in a high Fever, does
afford more salt, water, and Earth, each of them, than sulphur. I have taken
that Diseased Blood termed Corrupt; which might seem to some, to abound with
sulphur: And being cleanly conveyed into a Retort with a Receiver joined
thereto, I have by a gradual fire regulated very strictly, brought over what
possibly I could. In the upshot upon the separation of the several parts, I
have found very little of sulphur, in comparison of each of the other. Dr.
Thompson. Aimatiasis, chap. 6. p. 51.

Then he gives you another experiment: I procured (says He) the purest Blood I
could get from a healthful person, putting it to the same igneous trial, as the
former degenerate, of equal proportion to it: Then after sequestration of the
parts, I could not perceive any considerable difference, in the quantity, or
quality of the several parts of the Sound, and that seeming Corrupt; which
gives testimony that a Fever does not principally arise from an excess of
Sulphur, Idem, Ibidem.

Much more might be alleged against this improbable opinion: But I think there
is enough said to dispel the fiction of inflammable Sulphur in the Blood; which
is made the rise of putrid Fevers, causing effervescency, ebullition, and
deflagration.

And now I cannot but admire, that the learned of this Nation, should receive
this phantasm with such applause; and what advantage it brought to the
Inventor: But the handsome latin Dress that this was presented in; so
captivated their understandings, that they could not perceive the error and
vanity of the Doctrine; that set it off; and so it passed without suspicion.

And frequently since, we have had other Physic works come abroad; which
affords me more matter, and Men to oppose; but little to inform, and be a
gainer by: yet if it be latin, then it is learned with many: But I do not judge
of learning, nor of men learned, after that manner: I am not to be snared with
any language, when I expect something else that I seek for, Truth, is truth in
any language; error is so likewise: It Is the matter in writing, not the Style
of writing, that is useful, and praise worthy in Physic. But this by the way.

Now after all this labor, and ingenuity of invention by learned Men, setting
forth how putrid Fevers are generated; I find Helmont that great Philosopher
and Physician, denying there are any such common Fevers.

Sciant igitur Scholae, cruorem in venis putrefieri nunquam, quin simul ipsamet
vena putreat, ut in Gangrena and mortificationibus. Helm. lib. de Febr. cap. 2.

He acknowledges the putredinous excrements in veins; not the Blood to
putrify: And he subjoins this reason; quippe qui juxta Sacra; est Seeds, and
thesaurus vitae. -- si vitanon servet a putridine sanguinem in quo gliscit,
quomodo preservabuntur ossa. Ibidem.

The meaning of all this I judge; is to take away the frequency of putrid
Fevers; that they are not so common as Authors and Practisers do make them:
That the putrid matter of Fevers Salutary, is not putrefaction of the Blood:
For when the Blood is putrified, the case is mortal. A Corrupto sive privato,
non datur regressus ad vitam.

If the mass of Blood comes to be corrupt in the great streams of the Veins and
Arteries, there is no hopes of reducing it; but death soon follows.

Now you must understand the difference, and distinguish between putrefying,
and putrifyed: putrefactio incipiens, infieri; and putrefaction in facto esse,
finished: The first is curable, the latter incurable. But after all this
Dissension and Contention in and about putrid Fevers; what certain knowledge
have we in this Disease so called, but a Name? Since the material Cause, or
Matter offending (giving the Denomination) is not adjudged and agreed upon: And
how then shall a proper Method, with effectual true Medicines be adapted for
their Cures?

I must confess; had I no Knowledge, nor Guide to direct me herein, but Books;
I should be at a stand, and much puzzled what Course to steer; and with what
Means to do the Business required or aimed at, when such Fevers present.

But how pernicious are the Methods and Medicines for the Cure hereof, as
appointed by Authors; we shall see anon, when I come to set forth the Practice.

SECT. V. Of Fevers Continual, and Intermittent.
ACcording to Method and Custom: I have not omitted this Difference and
Distinction of Fevers; but shall say no more in this Place, than what
distinguishes one from the other.

Continual Fevers are such as have no perfect Intermission; but only sometimes
they have Intensions and Remissions: And from the difference of their
exacerbations in Distance; whether every Day, or every third, or fourth Day;
they are called Continual Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan. But the consideration
hereof, is not of such Moment in Practice, as to require various Methods of
Curing; and therefore I shall not trouble you with the Niceties and
Distinctions of Authors, reasoning thereupon.

Intermitting Fevers are such, as in the English are called Agues: And these
are Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan; from their Cessations and Intermissions,
coming and going on such Days.

In assigning Causes for the periodic Returns of these Fevers on Certain and
Several Days; and for their Duplication, and Triplication; Authors do so much
differ in their Opinions; that an Account of their Conjectures, Reasonings, and
Probabilities; would give us more Trouble, than Profit: I shall therefore wave
those Disputes, that we may sooner come to the Curative Part, which is more
Satisfactory and Useful; that proves more certainly, what is true, or false.

SECT. VI. Of Fevers Malignant, so called: Measels, Smallpox, and Pestilential.
HERE we make Malignant as the Genus, comprising several Species under that
general Denomination. I shall first examine the Import of the word, what is
meant thereby; and then inquire into the particular differences of Malignant
Diseases: For if we have not a true knowledge of the Sense and Import of the
generical word; we cannot have a distinct intelligible Account of the Species
or kinds thereof.

I hear great talk of Malignant Fevers sometimes; and I Consult Authors upon
that Subject: But I am not satisfied what they mean; and so far as I can gather
by the Discourses, they do not well know what they mean themselves; at least,
not how to set it forth: For they have labored to explicate the Intention and
Scope of the word Malignant; and rank it with intellible Doctrine: But in fine,
the Result terminates in occult Qualities.

And this is acknowledged by a late famous Author, treating of malignant and
pestilential Fevers. Ignotam ducunt originem, ut earum Causae, and essentia
sine recursu ad occultas qualitates raro explicentur. Dr. Willis de Febr.

How comes this word Malignant, to be tackt, as an Adjunct belonging to Fevers?
Malignant Fevers so much, and often treated; I know none such. For, all febrile
Heat (in gradu Summo, and remisso) is but the same Heat in specie, issuing from
the same vital Principle, and only differing gradually.

Furthermore, those Fevers which are called Malignant; are observed by the best
Judgments, to have their Heat more mild and moderate, than other Fevers that
are accounted, and termed benign: Therefore malignant affixed to Fevers, as a
distinguishing Character; is an improper Compounding, and Confounding of words
together; making the Sense and Meaning thereof intricate and perplexed; which
breeds confusion, and mistakes in Practice.

Clarioris Doctrinae gratia, nec non verioris; we must first understand, what
that thing is, which truly may be called Malignant. Then Secondly; to what,
this Malignant Thing bears Enmity or evil against, which it would hurt. These
two Points being rightly stated; illustrates and clears the Doctrine from
Obscurity, Ambiguity and Intanglement.

Malignant by the Import of the word, signifies Evil, Malicious, and Hurtful:
And it is used by Physicians to set forth that which is very Evil, Pernicious
and Dangerous, more than ordinary. And therefore Diseases arising from such
malignant Causes are accounted worse than others.

That which denominates and makes Diseases Malignant; is either some inbred
Matter in Human Bodies, highly and variously degenerated into a malignant
venomous state; as producing Cancers, Gangrens, Leprosy, Smallpox, etc.

And this variously depraved malignant Matter; is capable of no other
Description and Distinction; than what the Symptomatical Products and Effects
thereof, does manifest the Heterogenity of such causes in Human Bodies.
Pertinent to our Purpose Van Helmont Speaks, though about to prove something
else: Excrement^m venenosum in Febribus, praecordis, includi, producens
sopores, deliria, etc. ergo virus anodinum est, and amens. In caducis paritur
esse venenum insensitivum and amens, pro spatio affligens, in praecordiis
stabulatum. In Amentiis hypochondriacis, venenum fur^osum, vel cum joco
delirans. In vertigine, virus rotans. In apoplexia, tollens sensum and motum,
-- p. 268.

Hence you may understand; that great variety of venomous malignant matter, is
sometimes generated in Human Body, producing many different, and dangerous
Effects, afflicting variously.

Or else Secondly; Malignant Diseases are caused and received from without: As
when the Air (that surrounds and enters the Body) is infected with noxious
exhalations, and vaporous malignant effluviums, arising out of the Earth; from
carrion or dead Bodies; expirations of venomous Creatures; or by Influx of the
Stars; producing epidemical Malignant Diseases: As the Pestilence; or
Pestilential, and malignant in a lower Degree. Or by the Bite of some venomous
Creature; or by depraved Corrupt Food, or virulent Physic.

And this malignant matter, whether inbred; or imperceptible Miasms from
without: they do show their Pravity, Taint and Infection, by the direful
destructive Symptoms, that attend their Operations, and Alterations made in
Human Body variously. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur per modum recipientis.

Some malignant Matter being more acute deleterious, does destroy sooner:
Others not so fierce and active, do take more Time in killing; yet are more
difficult and obstinate in yielding to means, than other Diseases that are not
malignant.

All which does prove; that Diseases are rightly called malignant, from the
material Cause only, of which they are bred.

Secondly; We must discern to what more immediately and directly, this
malignant matter is opposite to, and where it makes the first Attack, and
Impression; where the Stress of Malignity aims first, and lies most upon.

Not to, and upon animal Spirits; because the Enmity and Contrariety, is not
founded between them as Antagonists: For, granting there were no animal Spirits
in Human Nature; the Repugnancy, Discordance, and Hostility by malignant venom
would be the same; and the symptomatical Effects in like manner the same.

And it is but rational so to determine: Because Sympathy and Antipathy, Amity
and Opposition in the nature of Creatures; issue immediately from the Life of
one, and points directly at the Life of the other. Inclinations and Aversations
arise from thence, and the first Impressions are made there, for mutual
Complacency, or Resistance.

That which is venomous and destructive to one creature; is not hurtful to
another; and serves for Food to some: The Dog and other Animals, eats Carrion;
and it is good Food for them; The which would be destructive to Man, as Poison.
What can make this difference of good and evil among the Creatures, but the
Specific Formative Principle, that fabricated those Bodies, and from whence all
the distinguishing Properties do flow?

And not only Creatures of a different Species; but also Individuals of the
same Species, do differ much in their Appetitions and Aversations: according to
the Proverb; one Man's Meat, is another Man's Poison. And this Peculiarity and
Individual Propriety, does arise from the Life, and not otherwise from animal
Spirits; The Discordancy and Reluctance, is not founded there.

The vital Principle, the Life or Form; is that which distinguishes all the
Creatures essentially in their Being: And also gives them their different
Inclinations and Dispositions, Properties and Qualities.

From hence we may understand; that the first Assault and Injuries offered,
either from without, or within the Body, is made upon the Life: That what
agrees or disagrees, is by Approbation, or Rejection and Displicency of the
Life.

The animal Spirits (if such there be) do not receive the first Assault of
Malignant and Venomous matter; they are not primely concerned therein: But (ex
falsis suppositis) they can only feel the mischief, secundario and
consequenter, from the conflict and struglings, the irregular and disturbed
Impulses of the Life: They being supported, and ill governed thereby, in the
execution of their Functions.

I must not believe, the first Commotion and Disturbance to make a Disease, is
begun among the animal Spirits; or any thing else so inferior in Human Nature,
that is Subservient, and instrumental: Nor can I think the continuation of
Diseases to depend upon them. The Life or vital Principle, being ubiquitary in
its Dominions; always guarding and upon the Defense; is first sensible of
injury offered; forthwith endeavors Repulsion and Expulsion, and that is the
Disease begun.

If Helmont says true (as I am apt to believe;) morbem omnem in vita
Consistere. P. 444. Then doubtless Diseases must there first begin; nor does it
end, until the Life be clear, and quit thereof; by the Assistance of good Means
when greatly assaulted and seized. And he confirms this in another place: ut
Sanitas consistit in vita integra, ita morbus, in ipsamet vitaoblasa. p. 442.

All which does suggest and prove; that animal Spirits (if such there were) are
not primely concerned and affected, with any discordant malignant Matter that
is fomes Morborum; but collaterally or consequentionally, from the Irritations
and Discomposure of the Life; by whom they are supported, managed, and act
instrumentally.

If so as most probably appearing; then the new Hypothesis, setting forth the
Rise, and Continuation of Diseases by animal Spirits principally affected; is
not rightly bottomed and stated; but founded upon unsound Principles; and the
Practice formed hereby, erroneous and unsafe.

Now I have showed what malignant Matter is, that causes such a Disease; And
to what this Matter aims, or where it primely affects and seizes, to produce a
Disease called Malignant. We are next to inquire how properly, or improperly
and injuriously, Fevers are denominated Malignant.

Fevers upon due examination, unfitly are called malignant.

First, Because malignant denotes only, and specifies Matter, properly
distinguishes it from other Matter and Morbifick Causes: And Fever imports only
febrile prenatural Heat, arising from the Life or vital Principle incensed,
from any disturbing cause whatsoever. Malignant can give no distinguishing
Character to Fever; for febrile Heat in all cases is (idem specie) the same in
kind; and only differing in Degree, as being more, or less. Febrile Heat
therefore cannot be Malignant, because the Spring or Principle of that Heat is
the Life.

Secondly; They dissent by Indications in Curing: Malignant requiring
Alexipharmacal, and Bezoardic Medicines: And Fever or febrile Heat, indicates
refrigerating or Cooling means, according to the common Practice and Galenic
Canon: Contraria contrariis Curantur. But I say, Febrile preternatural Heat
being only Symptomatical and dependant upon the Life; requires no Curing means
directly and peculiarly thereto; but is allayed and reduced of course; by
various Means, such as is proper only for that Disease, which causes the Life
to aestuate, and be discomposed.

Thirdly; They differ widely, and are incongruously yoaked; because (as
coupled) they do not thereby illustrate and direct; but darken and amuse a
Practicer, in determining the quid agendum, and quibus auxiliis. You must
therefore divide, and separate Fever from malignant; considering them apart in
their single distinct Natures, as proceeding from much different Principles;
that you may rightly level at, and oppose the evil; and not stifle the innocent.

Fourthly; Malignant is improperly affixed to Fever; for that which makes the
Fever efficienter, and from whence febrile Heat does issue; is (fons caloris)
the very Life it self: Therefore Fever is not malignant, but the Disease may
fitly be called malignant; from the morbifick malignant matter, which is the
constituent cause thereof. From whence we may understand; that many and various
Diseases, going under the Name of Fevers; are very indirectly dealt with, by a
wrong Information, as being falsely denominated and mistaken.

Fifthly; Malignant is injuriously added to Fever, as an appellative and
distinguishing character; because Fever is no Disease, but a Symptom; or
(signum commune) a signal only that the Life is male affected: But how, or with
what, febrile Heat makes no Discovery; nor requires any curative Consideration:
But malignant denominates a Disease properly; distinguishes the Morbific cause
from other Matter, and thereby indicates the Curing means: Therefore Malignant
having no Relation to Fever, but remotely and occasionally; is no
distinguishing Title for Fever; and joining them together; does not inform, but
amuse by contraindication.

Sixthly; Symptoms arising from morbific Matter; as Vomiting, Fluxes,
immoderate Sweating, and such like; may receive a distinguishing Denomination,
peculiar and apposite, as showing the Nature thereof; and if urgent may require
Means for Palliation and Mitigation: But febrile Heat, a common Symptom of the
Life male affected; is not capable of Distinction by any Addition; because it
proceeds always from one and the same Principle, though the procuring or
occasional Causes be ever so different and various: And requires no Means
peculiar thereto, but such as is proper and Curative for the Disease only, that
occasioned the aestuation.

By the common Doctrine, we are hitherto at a loss in the Notion of Fevers;
being no Disease, and requiring no Curing means adapt thereto; giving little
Information, and is no true Guide in the cure of any Disease that is Couched
under that Denomination: But they being entitled Fevers, has caused great
mistakes, and dictated injurious Methods and Medicines; deceiving many
Practisers, with the Ruin of many Patients: The appearance of a Fever, has so
long detained them unnecessarily and perniciously, in applying to damp and
extinguish the febrile vital Heat, (thereby suppressing the fortitude of
Nature) and giving Time to the morbifie Cause for prevailing.

Having gained little satisfaction in the doctrinal Part of Fevers; we will now
pass on to the next Stage, the Curative Practice. We shall then see whether
Curing comes by Chance, and sometimes only; or is the Effect of certain true
Design, and right adapted Means, as the most frequent Event.

SECT. VII. The Operations and Effects of Cortex Peruvianus, the Jesuits Powder.
BEfore I give my Sentiment of this famed Remedy, so much used against Fevers;
I shall first recite the Opinions of some Authors thereupon: And then comparing
Judgments, with the matters of Fact, you may easily know, who comes nearest the
Truth; in determining the virtue, or Vitiosity of this Medicine.

Dr. Willis in his Book de Febribus, put forth in the Year 1660; makes mention
of this Cortex, which he had often used, and was then reputed a certain
Febrifuge: But he does not say it was a Remedy adapt to his Doctrine of Fevers;
but only an empyrical Medicine, and pretends not to know the (...); why, and
how this should Cure Fevers. p. 154.

And in another Place he says: That sometimes it did prevent the next Fit to
come, but if not, then the second, or third Fit was thereby prevented, and the
Fever Cured: Yet this Cure lasted for a while only; for within twenty or thirty
Days (saepissime redire solet) most often it returned again. P. 152. Then the
Powder was to be given again; and that would make another Cessation. And after
this manner (says He) I have known many afflicted with a quartan, a whole
Autumn, and the Winter following, to be thus handled: The Fever kept off for a
Time, and returning again, until the Spring came: Then by the Help of Physic,
and the Change of the Season, the ill Disposition of Blood was altered, and the
Fever by Degrees vanished. P. 152.

What great Cause is here to boast of, and proclaim the Jesuits Powder, for an
excellent Febrifuge? many of the common Medicines have done as much.

And in the Page following; He advises this Medicine to be given (urgente
Necessitate) When the Patient is worn down by continuance of Fits; this
Febrifuge makes a Ceslation for a Time, that Strength may be recovered, to be
able to contend with the Disease. And if you would have a long Truce, you must
take larger quantities of the Powder; by that means you will be longer free
from your Ague. P. 153.

Thus he commends it for a Palliative only; not a complete Curative Medicine.
This Physician of great Name, and a vast Practice; had more opportunities to
try the worth of this Bark, than any Man in the Kingdom: And by his writings
you may see, that he had made various Trials thereof; whose Judgment in the use
of it; and the Verity in matters of Fact, I do depend upon: And therefore shall
esteem of it, no more, than what He says of it. Dubitandum non est, quin alia
in rerum natura extent Medicamina, quae sunt aeque febrifuga. P. 156.

For my Part; I never had such an Opinion of it, as to put me upon many
Experiments in the use of it: Because I had another Medicine, which proved more
certain, in Stopping any Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan Ague; and also for
removing the Morbific Matter out of the Body, to prevent any Return: And
without such Security, the Patient is not safe, and in a hopeful condition.

Dr. Morton in his Pyretologia is of another mind; and extols this Powder above
all things ( efficaciae mirabilis sane ac Stupendae. p. 242.) and as a
universal Remedy, appoints it in Fevers and most Diseases: This being chosen as
adapt, to support the new Hypothesis of animal Spirits male affected in all
cases; by venom in the most, requiring Alexipharmacals. And this Aetiology of
Diseases (against the ancient Doctrine of Humors) he espouseth, and labors to
maintain; by proving the methods of Curing, to be governed hereby; and the
Jesuits Powder as the chiefest Remedy.

I am not so much a Humorist, as to assert the quaternary of the Galenists;
deriving all Diseases from thence; distinguishing them thereby, and adapting
peculiar Medicines thereto: But in all Diseases (as the Cause, or the Product)
there is degenerate Matter so various in diverse Persons, as not to be reduced
to four Heads; and we may rationally judge the depravedness thereof, by the
symptoms arising from thence; more or less dangerous as the Faculties are
disordered or hurt; and Curing results from bridling and discharging such
offensive Matter. To discourse this farther, would draw us more out of the way
of our present Purpose; therefore I wave it, and return to the Peruvian Bark.

To have a true aestimate of this Remedy; we must examine it, by the manifest
Qualities it is endowed with; By the manner of its Operation: And from the
Effects or Success, that usually attends it. These are the only ways to
discover the genuine Nature, and Virtues of this Cortex.

Herein I shall not be guided, or biased by the Accusations, and Invectives of
some foreign Writers (Men of Note) against this Cortex: I shall wave their
Arguments, and the Faults they object; that I may not be accounted an Enemy to
this Medicine, by joining with the great opposers of it; though I cannot say, I
am so much a Friend, as to promote and encourage the use of it. But I ground my
Judgment of this Remedy, from those that are the great Applauders of it; who
give all the Advantages they can, in setting it forth by Argument and Fact:
From their Expressions and Confessions, I shall raise some Doubts; and make
some Exceptions against the validity and worth of this famous Febrifuge.

The manifest Qualities attributed to it, and declared, are these: Hot, and
Dry, Bitter, and Stiptic or restrictive. But these do not perform the great
work of a Counter-Poyson; That is effected by an occult Quality, they say: And
I will grant your occult Quality, wherein you place the Efficacy of this
Antidote: But with this proviso; that you make it out clearly, and prove it by
the Effects: For, if you cannot make it appear a pricri, in the (...); you must
make it manifest in the (...); else we must believe against all Reason and
Sense.

The Hypothesis occult (as not fairly proved) and the Remedy occult, in its
chief reputed virtue: I wish the good effects and success, may not be occult
also; or only to found, inter rar^ Comingentia.

The three foremost Qualities named, I like well, and the fourth, I do not
dislike in some Cases: But when Nature is upon the Expulsion, and makes an
Effort, to send off the Morbific Matter by Vomit, or Stool: Then the Astriction
may be injurious, and checks Nature in freeing her self from that which is
hostile: And though it may be said, the restringent virtue is moderate; that
seems to mitigate a tanto: Notwithstanding this Febrifuge not being indicated
in the Case; may be blamed, and be the occasion or cause of much mischief; in
keeping out another Medicine which ought to come in use, as more proper and fit
at such a time.

The Cortex Cinnamomum is much more grateful and Stomachical, than this
Peruvian Drug: But to give that innocent and wholesome restringent Cardiac, to
check a Flux Diarrhaea, or Lienteria; is not according to the Rules of Art; But
an abstersive true Purgative, is in Reason, and by Practice confirmed, most
safe and successful.

I grant you; when Malignity and venomous Matter is the Stimulating Cause: As
in the Small Pox, Spotted Fevers, or Pestilence; the best Alexipharmacals, and
Diaphoretics, are then the greatest and securest Help. (But whether the Jesuits
Powder be the supreme Antidote, and most to be confided, in such cases; we
shall inquire anon) But Fluxes per Alvum most commonly are not so malign, and
the Ferment not venenate; and do then require only a true gentle Purgative:
This most Practisers will freely assent to.

I do not accuse the Medicine of Evil in the Nature of it; but the evil use of
it; and therein the best of things may do hurt; and so may this, when used,
more often than necessary; under the Pretense of animal Spirits envenomed in
Fevers, and most Diseases; according to the new, and false Hypothesis.

For the Manner of Operation; those that confide most in this Medicine, cannot
show how it operates; but tells us negatively: Not by Salivation, Vomit, Stool,
Urine, or Sweat; as Dr. Morton says; Pyretol. p. 142. And for my Part; I
should not esteem the Medicine worse or less, for the insensible Operation;
always provided, it did perform the work intended, and give sufficient Proof
thereof.

But when I see a Failure in the Performance, or a seeming and fallacious
Performance, pro tempore only, or commonly so: (as Dr. Willis observes) Then my
Faith staggers, and begins to fail; that I cannot hope, or trust any longer, in
secret and insensible Operation: For, the morbifio cause being laid asleep
only, and a Cessation made for a Time; yet it will, and frequently does resurge
again; showing its Pravity in acting as before: This Experience does confirm,
from Authors of Credit; and by common Fame.

If the Jesuits Powder thus deceive us; in the only, or chiefest cases, wherein
we wanted extraordinary Help; as, for Intermitting Fevers; especially the
Quartans: Then where is the excellency of that Febrifuge? For other occasions
there are Medicines enough; and for those Agues (for ought I yet see) there are
as good; and some that are better.

But notwithstanding the Operation is said to be so secret and charming; yet
sometimes it plays Tricks openly and unexpectedly: By Vomit, by Fluxes
downward, and profuse Sweats. And this is acknowledged by a great admirer of
this Powder; who tells us that such Evacutions are Symptomatical, from the
Irritation of the Medicine. (Dr. Morton Pyretol. p. 142.) So that it is not so
calm, still, and ineffensive to all People; but sometimes it gives Disturbance,
with such unprofitable evacuations; as He accounts them so in the same Page:
And truly I should be angry with any Medicine; that should give me so much
Trouble, without any Benefit.

From whence I remark; that this Author will not own any Evacuation to be
proficuous, and conducing to these Cures; least the Doctrine of Humors, should
gain Advantage thereby; and the new Hypothesis infringed. But in this case; it
is not reasonable to expect, Advantage from such symptomatic Evacuations,
occasioned and arising merely from disgust, and Disagreement of the Medicine (
Hoc Pharmacum sua Natura non admodum gratum. P. 173.) else, Evacuations
otherwise procured, by good Medicine kindly operating; have been beneficial and
Curative.

My Reason does not persuade, nor Experience urge me to believe; that secret
and insensible Operation, by an occult Quality; is so prevalent and wonderful
in Curing, especially in various cases and causes; as to denominate this
single, and simple Powder, a Polychreston, Pharmacum hoc divinum, and in
pluribus alus morbis, aeque ac in Febre intermittente proficuum, P. 136. as he
says.

Some Specifics, are said to operate after a secret manner; and there is no
Reason given why, or how they do perform such effects: But these are limited
and restrained, to particular Purposes and Diseases; and they are the Secrets
of Nature, which as yet are not revealed to us.

But the Jesuits Powder, goes beyond all those in Latitude and Comprehension;
for few cases present, that are not within the Virge of its Power, as some
would have us believe: And it must be a Polychrest, of large extent in Virtue;
that makes such Pretensions of Curing all Fevers; because Fevers are adjoined,
and dependant upon most Diseases.

When Causes are manifestly various; also situate variously in the Body; and
the Operations or Functions of Nature are manifest, and different; to discharge
and free her self from such superfluous, excrementitious, and useless Matter;
both in her daily course of Preservation; as also in extraordinary Cases and
Exigencies: And since curing is but in Imitation of Nature; to give Help, and
assist her in her own Methods, and by the ways of her own Institution. Natura
est Morborum medicatrix.

These being considered; I cannot then understand, this new way of Conjuring
Nature into good Order; and restoring her insensibly, and occultly into a State
of Sanity; from various Diseases and Sickness. But we will argue no farther
about the Qualities, and Manner of Operation now; that we may come to the
decisive and undeniable Proof; by Matters of Fact, the effects in Practice;
which determines all the Doubts, and Difficulties in Controversy.

To confirm the new Hypothesis, and prove the Excellency of Curing by the
Jesuits Powder; Dr. Morton gives us an Account, of several Cures that He has
done by this Febrifuge; and sets down the Names of the Patients, and Places of
their Abode.

The historical verity, I question not; but how that Practice, does answer the
Hypothesis of animal Spirits envenomed; and proves the wonderful Alexipharmal
power of the Peruvian Antidote; as yet is not apparent to my dull
understanding: wherefore give me leave to doubt, and to enquire farther. If
those Cures had been performed by the Antidote only; or chiefly, and with a
little Help of another Medicine, pro re nata: I should have as good Opinion of
the Powder, and extol it as much as He does; and perhaps thereby might become a
Proselite to the new Doctrine.

But when I see Bleeding, and Blistering, Pericarpia, and Suppedanea, Juleps,
Apozems, Purges, Vomits, Opiats, etc. (as other Physicians use) appointed in
the Methods of his Cures. And if we must believe; those several Means to act
their Part, and nothing appointed but what was necessary, and by Indication:
Who can tell now, upon which the stress of those Cures did lie? When those
Partners in Curing, have each their due share of Praise allotted; How much, or
rather How little Glory, will be left for the Jesuits Powder? For we must
suppose, that such various means was necessarily contributing, (which I shall
not dispute now) How then does the Super-Excellency of this Febrifuge appear,
to deserve the high Titles of Pharmacum divinum, in Sanitate in Gentium, ex
arbore vitae, etc. And how does this Practice, differ from other Physicians,
that conform to the Doctrine of Humors and Qualities?

We do know; at least every Practiser ought to know; that one morbific cause,
perambulating and irritating, or protruded from Part to Part, or by consent of
Parts; does raise various symptoms, afflicting several Faculties, and
perverting their Functions. If we apply several Medicines, to such various
symptomatical Appearances; and endeavor to help the Sick after that Manner, by
a Method and Series of Medicines: Then we cannot boast, of any particular
Medicine as a Catholicon or Polychreston; and extol it as an extraordinary
Curing Remedy, and Salutiferous above all other. Besides, if true Medicine be
rightly exhibited against the morbific cause; there is no farther need of
Application, to symptomatical dependants.

For my Part; I am for promoting a general and generous Medicine, extensive and
comprehensive; that is applicable and efficacious in various Cases and Persons:
To ease the People (especially some sort) from variety and multiplicity of
Medicines, that are both irksom, and chargeable: And herein I am abundantly
satisfied, that such Help there is.

But no Medicine can be so generally useful, and successful; if it has not a
Manifest Operation, by which to discharge impure morbific Matter, for cleansing
and purifying the Body. And no Operation so advantageous and comprehensive,
against many and the most of Diseases, as true Purgative Operation; and also is
the best preventive Means: Not performed by the common virulent reputed
Purgatives (that have defamed this Operation) But by Medicine composed of such
wholesome Ingredients, to do that most necessary work, as it ought to be done.

When the People are sensible of this, and can procure such Medicine; they will
be the better provided to maintain, and to regain lost Health; this I am
assured of. And then they need not have such Recourse to the Waters; whereof
some do complain afterward, and not a few; by pouring in such large hazardous
Quantities, to force a Passage. Mundus vult decipi, and decipiatur. Information
and Caution signifies little; Custom, and Example of others, prevails much
more; and they choose rather to suffer, and Dye with the Multitude, than go out
of the Road they have been used to.

As for such Medicine whose prime Quality is occult, and operateth occultly; I
cannot believe it to be so generally useful, and so certain in Curing, as a
Medicine working Manifestly: Moreover, if a Medicine be set up, as an insignal
Polychrest, and to outdo all other: Let us see it act its Part singly and
alone; then we shall plainly see what it is: But if the Peruvian Powder, be
introduced with a crowd of other Medicines; and by much struggling with one and
the other, a cure at last is gained? Who then can say, which of those many did
the Cure; since all bore a Part; and it may be hard to tell, which did most, or
best; the occult, or the manifest Qualities.

I always thought, and do think so still; that an Antidote against any venom
(worthy of that Name) was a certain and speedy Remedy to kill the Poison; and
needs no more to do; at least very little: And this Powder so magnified, for a
stupendous Febrifuge, and an expester of febrile venom; I expected some
wonderful Performances, by its occult virtue; but either I cannot see those
rare effects; or they are invisible Facts, hid in the crowd; and matter of
Faith only.

If the new Hypothesis be true Doctrine; That there is a venenous Ferment,
seizing the animal Spirits; thereby producing various Symptoms in diverse Parts
of the Body: Fevers, Fluxes, Spasms, Vomitings, Rigors, Erratic Pains, etc. And
also if it is as true; that the Jesuits Powder is a certain Antidote against
this venomous Matter or Miasm: Then it necessarily follows; that all those
Symptomatical and dependant Affects, must cease and vanish, by the use of that
Medicine which subdues the morbific cause. Sublata Causa, tollitur effactus.

But if Curing be not the Result hereof; then we may conclude; that either the
Cause is mistaken; or the Medicine is not of such force and virtue, as to
master and reduce this Venom. Failure in Curing we have found, and that often;
as attested by many: Therefore the Doctrine, or the Medicine, or both; may be
questioned as deficient and faulty.

This venomous Doctrine, I doubt is apt to intoxicate the Brain; Seduce Reason,
and lead out of the way, in delirant Contemplation. And therefore by comparing,
I have a more firm opinion of the Doctrine of Humors and Qualities (rightly
stated) to fix the Aetiology of Diseases upon; than upon animal Spirits
envenomed. And although that Author has pronounced Damnation against the
Doctrine of Humors (exulet, per me in aternum exulet Philosophia ista, and
Scientia falso sic dicta. Pyretol. ad Lectorem) yet I hope the Execution of
that severe sentence, may be suspended, as long as I shall live, and for future
Ages.

But waving the Doctrine; let us enquire a little farther into the Medicine,
about the Dose and Manner of use; from the same Author that most often uses it,
as the chiefest in Practice.

The usual Dose for Man or Woman, was two drams: But that which is sold in the
Shops now being counterfeit, decayed, musty or stinking; two ounces is but
sufficient, says our Author: Cortex officinarum adulterinus, etc. p. 169. The
Patient that knows nothing of the Matter, is finely brought to Bed! when he
must take two ounces of bad; instead of two drams of good. Here is Quantity,
and Quality offensive; where is the Encouragement, to venture upon this Remedy?

And I must remark; that since there is so great Abuse in this Drug, simply
used and alone; what security have you, for all the compound Medicines, where
Fraud cannot be detected? does it not behove every Physician, to take upon him
the Charge and Care of Medicines? when Physicians who rely upon the Care and
Honesty of Apothecaries, do thus confess, and proclaim.

Yet some People are so far out of their Wits, or Bewitched in their
Understanding; that think a Physician who takes upon him the Preparation of
Medicines (according to the Custom of the Ancients) to be a Degree lower, than
him that prescribes to the Shops; not discerning the Elder, from the Younger
Brother: And do think a Fee is scarce due to him; at least not so much (cujus
contrarium, verum est) such sort of Fools deserve the Cheat, that are so ready
to deceive themselves: I am sure they are paid off for their Folly. But this by
the way.

The same Author appoints the Peruvian Bark, to be reduced (in alcool) into the
most minute or finest Powder (quo facilius per habitum corporis trajiciatur. p.
179.) that it may the more readily pass through the habit of the Body. But if I
were to use this Powder, I should choose rather to have it grossly beaten; that
the virtue may be extracted only, and conveyed where and how nature pleases:
But the Substance more fitly to be carried downwards, to be voided with
Excrement. For, I cannot think it safe; that so much Powder, of a ligneous
indissoluble Substance, should commix with the Blood, and be imported into the
smaller vessels; but by incrassating that stream, it must cause obstructions of
very ill consequence, though the Powder be genuine und true.

But since it is so much adulterated and abused, as this Author tells us; and
the Dose therefore to be augmented double, or treble: I cannot think otherwise,
but it must then make ill work in the Body; and that there will be need of
another Antidote, or a Course of Physic, against the mischief of this famous
Febrifuge: And this medicine making no manifest Operation; we may fear, that
both the Dregs of the Disease, and the Dregs of the Medicine, do remain in the
Body.

Therefore I am apt to believe, it was not for nothing, or no cause; that
Vopiscus Plempius a learned Physician of Note, did charge this American Bark,
and condemned it as guilty of many misdemeanors, and Homicide. His words are
these: Plures tertio vel quarto reciderunt: plurique cachectici facti, nonnulli
mortui. Item Magnates hujus Aulae nominare possem, qui ab usu Pulveris,
extenuati sunt, and ad Phthisin pracipites facti, in usu longo lactis Asinini
restituti fuissent.

I do not think it necessary; that this Powder, or any Medicine of that
substance; should be conveyed Materialiter, into every Part of the Body, to
discharge its virtue: Nature does not operate after that manner with Medicinal
Help; is not bound to transport by Canals for her Relief; but transmits
virtualiter and influentially; penetrating tatam Partium Compaginem.
Diaphoretics operate after the same manner. Nor do I think it necessary or
convenient; the best and richest Cordial Powder, should be introduced into the
Habit of the Body. But let that pass.

The Jesuits Powder was cried up, and promoted in Italy, by Sebastian Badus a
Physician of Genoa: And there were others, that as much decried it; as not
being steady and constant in good effects; or doing no Hurt; but oftentimes as
being the cause of much ill; and thereby went under an ill Name. Which Party we
are to credit in this matter, I leave every one to Judge.

This we well know; that the Duke of Savoy, by several Accounts received, about
two years since; was in a valetudinary State for a long Time; caused by an
Ague: which for many Months continued in going, and coming again. Very probably
this Febrifuge was the chiefest Remedy, which put by the Fits for a Time: But
the minera Morbi, the morbific cause not being discharged, and sent forth; the
Fits returned again several Times. But Supposing his Physicians did not advise
the use of this Medicine; or did not continue the use of it: we may conclude,
it was under some disgrace, or not in such Repute there, as formerly. But let
us go on.

The Powder is appointed to be taken in the Intermissions of Ague Fits, every
fourth Hour: And when there is such a Cessation of the intermitting Fever or
Ague, as seemingly Cured; yet that is no security; but you must Continue the
use of the Powder, thrice a Day for three Weeks, or a Month, intervallo octo
vel december Dierum, as our Author appoints. P. 132.

I find hereby, that this famous Bark, makes but an uncertain, and a tedious
Cure; for when it will be perfected, who can tell? Our Author gives us the
Reason thereof in another Place. P. 76, and 77. to this purpose. That the
febrile venom has a fixed and determined Time of Duration; either for weeks,
months, and sometimes years: That although it be subdued and seemingly cured
for a Time; yet it will revive again, until the venomous fomes (metam suam
ultimam attigerit) has run its Course, and spent it self. P. 76, and 77.

If it be so; how does the virtue and great Power of the Antidote appear? This
is small Hopes for the Patient and little Encouragement to use Means; since
there is such a determinate Time of Cure; and before which it cannot be: But to
make us Amends for this great Impediment; And to keep up the Reputation of the
Febrifuge.

He says; We may be glad, that we have such a Remedy; as can relieve Nature
oppressed and worn down, when we please by this Febrifuge; and prevent the
fatal event. P. 77, 78. So that, we are hereby secured from Death; but when we
may be rid from the Fever or Ague; that is uncertain, though we use this great
Antidote, famed so potent against the febrile venom.

If this be all, that can be expected from this Powder; then I shall not trust,
to the occult Quality of this Medicine; and which makes only an occult
Operation in the Patient; least the good effects prove occult also. But I am
for a Medicine that works manifestly; and therein more probably, to effect a
cure more certainly; by Operations that we know how, and which way a Disease
goes off.

And such is the Catholic Extract; that makes a manifest Operation, but very
gentle; which is much more pleasant, and easy to take, than the Peruvian Bark:
And we have more Reason, to hope and expect the desired effects, from this
Catholic Purifier; because it carries off, and frees the Body from offensive,
depraved, impure Matter, the minera morborum (termed venom by this Author)
thereby it does perform a radical Cure of Agues; (not a fallacious Cessation)
and we shall not fear a Relaps or Return. (And so much I dare promise, upon a
Forfeit.) By such certainty, properly and only; we may call Curing.

This Catholic Extract, being of my own Elaboration, perfected by diverse
Alterations and gradual Improvements; I can presume upon (from many Proofs) to
do more, and better service in Fevers; (therefore in various Diseases whereon
they depend) than any single Medicine, that I can know of, Extant in the World:
And I have examined the best Authors, and Pharmacopoeia's for that Purpose. As
for Prescripts, the sudden Inventions pro re nata; and suddenly to be made at
the Shops: I do not inquire for any extraordinary piece of Art in that way, nor
in Reason can we expect it there.

I shall not here Discourse, the Latitude and Comprehension of this Medicine:
The excelling Properties in Operation and Performance; its Commodiousness for
use, Durability, and Portage, for emergent occasions abroad. For my own Part,
and particular private use; I had rather be destitute, of all other Medicines,
than to want this; For, I am more beholden to this Extract, in eminent Dangers;
and for common support of my Life since; than all other Medicines I have
designed, and proved in Forty Years Practice.

For a farther Account of the Catholic Medicine, I refer to these Tracts: The
Mystery of Curing Comprehensively, etc. Or The Efficacy and Extent of true
Purgation. Where you have more Satisfaction.

But above all Reading and Reasoning; try the two Medicines in like Cases: And
observe well the Symptoms and Circumstances attending the one, and the other:
in fine, tell me then which did best; the manifest, or the occult Operation:
Then give the Preference to the most deserving; that performed cito, tuto,
jucunde.

The Jesuits Powder, is not the Jesuits Secret; nor an extraordinary piece of
Art, that any Man may claim as his own: But merely the Product of Nature, (Casu
and Experientia) by Trials found to do something, but no such great Matters.
And therefore no Man is lessened, if that be lowered in Aestimation. Yet if any
one, can see farther into it, than another; and discover more virtue, than what
common Fame has done, per me licet: Every Man has a Freedom herein, to say
what he knows by Fact; or by rational Probability, for or against: And no man
ought to think himself affronted, or injured by contradictions; if it be done
without Animosity, and personal Reflection.

SECT. VIII. Remarks upon the Jesuits Powder, used in Clyster.
HElvetius a French Doctor (well esteemed at the Court of France) setting forth
the Nature of the Jesuits Powder; gives this Account thereof: After taking it;
one Complains of an intolerable weight, and Pain in his Stomach. Another, that
there is a disturbance in his Breast: A third, that he feels an extraordinary
Heat: Another, that he is scorcht up by it. In fine, we see some every Day, tho
Cured by its means; yet resolve never to make use of it any more.

I mention not the Complaints generally made by the Sick; nor the
Inconveniences most known; besides these particular ones which I am going to
speak of: viz. the illness of Taste; the Nauseousness and Bitterness which
always attend it, if taken by the Mouth, vary how you can in the manner of
giving it. That which is so much the greater Pain and Trouble to the Patient,
(notwithstanding the greatest Aversion after the first taking it) is the
absolute Necessity of repeating it every Day; sometimes for the Space of six
Weeks, or more: And after all, in Case of Relapse; the Vexation of being forced
to begin all again. Helvet, Method of Curing Fevers. P. 3, 4, 5. 2d Impression.

By this Account of his; it plainly appears that this Medicine is not so
innocent, and rare, as some, have extolled it to be: But on the contrary, it
looks like a very ugly, unwholesome thing; very offensive to the Stomach, and
much ungrateful to the Palate: And upon this Consideration, Dr. Helvet did
Judge it not fit to be taken at the Mouth; but to be given only at the
Posteriors, by Clyster; that it might do no Mischief, to the more noble Parts.

This way of using it by Clyster, I own is not so bad; and if no better Remedy
can be had, you must be contented to take it so: But when I consider the
Trouble that attends this way of receiving it; and the irksome Repetitions
thereof; with the uncertainty, of effecting the Purpose intended; I cannot
applaud the Medicine, nor encourage the use of it so given. For this Author
thus tells us.

The Clyster (in Fevers intermitting) ought to be given just after the Fit; and
to be repeated three times a Day, till the Patient is thoroughly well. P. 6.

In Continual Fevers give the Clyster every fourth hour, till the Patient has
lost his Fever. P. 8.

A Child eighteen Months old, had a Fever, and recovered by twelve Clysters. P.
42.

One of eight years of Age: Another twelve years old, each of them took
twenty-five, or thirty Clysters, and were Cured. P. 42, and 43.

One of eighteen Months old, another of six months old, recovered from tertian
Fevers; by twenty Clysters each. P. 44.

One of eight years old in a Fever, with Colic Pains and Looseness; took
eighteen Clysters and was well. Another seven years of Age in a malignant
Fever, by the means of fifty Clysters was perfectly Cured. P. 45.

One aged seven years, and in a Fever, was Cured with thirty Clysters. P. 48.

One five years old, was Cured with forty Clysters. Pa. 49.

This is a very troublesome way of Curing, if it succeeds well at the long run;
after so many Times poking in the Breech. But to have all this trouble, and
wait so long, and not be Cured hereby, is too bad; and, it proves too often so.
Yet this is not all the Trouble, and Charge, that attends this way of Curing;
for you must make use of other Medicines also, as this Author appoints.

But I advise in the Time of taking their Clysters, that they neglect not the
use of Emeticks and Catharticks. p. 18.

This is very Cunningly advised; to hook in Vomits, and Parges, that they may
be Assistants in Curing; but the Bark must have all the Reputation, when a Cure
is thus effected by joint Agents: And without the Help of other Medicines, it
will not do. He therefore appoints several Cordiuls to be used, as the
Accidents that attend the Ague do require; as you may see them set down in Page
18, 19, 20. of that second Impression.

Thus the Bark is magnified for a wonderful Febrifuge by Clyster; when other
Medicines are introduced to bear their Part, and form a Method: who can tell
when a Cure is effected, which of them did most, or best? But with all the
Assistance they can give with the Jesuits Powder, they prove but deceitful and
uncertain Remedies; for which we have two notorious Examples; one of the Duke
of Savoy, not long since: And very lately, the several Accounts we have had, of
the King of Spain, long lingering, and often relapsing under an Intermitting
Fever.

If such great Men are thus handled ignorantly, with deceitful frivolous
Medicines; you may readily think, how meanly the middle, and lower Rank of
People are provided for in Sickness. Doubtless their Physicians tried the Bark
to the utmost of their Skill; but how ineffectually, and shamefully, the Events
did manifest. The Minera Morbi was remaining; which the Jesuits Powder could
not remove; and from hence new Insults of the Disease did arise, until Nature
by length of Time, was able to spend, and overcome it.

By what has been here said; and what was done; and what was undone, that the
Peruvian Bark could not do: It plainly appears, this is not a true Febrifuge,
and undeserving that Name; use it which way you will, by the Mouth, or at the
Fundament.

And now I must not conceal, what is much better, and a more certain Remedy for
intermitting Fevers, (called Agues) Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan: And that is
the Catholic Extract; more easily managed, more pleasant in the use of it; and
more efficacious in performance of the desired effects. This Medicine will do
true service, and deserves to be made known; and is much esteemed by those that
have used it, in these, and many other cases; of which more at large else where.

SECT. IX. The Practice upon Fevers Perniciously mistaken.
PRactice grounded upon false Doctrine, cannot be hopeful, or Safe: But there
are some, and not a few; who mistaking Fevers in the true Notion thereof; have
a common Method of Cure, by Bleeding, Blistering, Juleping, and other ways of
Cooling; to damp and suppress preternatural Heat: not knowing what this Heat
is; from whence it proceeds, and the Principle thereof.

There is nothing duly administered in Practice, without Indication to direct;
what is properly required to be done. Fever quatenus Fever, barely and solely
considered, as preternatural Heat, and only a Symptom of the Life so affected;
requires no Remedy adapt thereto; but only to that Disease, or morbific Matter,
which is the occasional Cause, provoking the Life, or vital Principle to
aestuate.

If so; as true it is, by the Discourse and Reasons preceding; then the
Practice, is governed, by every such Disease particularly; and Fever not to be
regarded in Curing, otherwise than as signal; showing the Life to be disturbed,
and in a preternatural state: But how, and with what, is not thereby appearing;
but to be sought for, and inquired elsewhere, among the Causes; and you have no
more to do with Fever.

The Curative means are to be appointed, as every Disease does require: Then
the Practice upon Fevers is out of Doors; and nothing to be done there; the
Fears, and the bustle about Fevers is vain, or rather pernicious. How absurd it
is, for any Man to say, He is Curing of a Fever; when he is Curing something
else; he is busy to no Purpose; or rather, he is doing of mischief: For he is
doing in the dark, and what can you expect from thence?

To institute a Practice for allaying of Fevers; to adapt rightly, safely, and
hopefully therein; is to appoint, and go through, almost the whole Practice of
Physic: For most Diseases have Fevers attending, and following after them; yet
as dependants-remotely related thereto; and arising immediately from the
Principle of Life. But if you will fix your Eye upon Fevers chiefly, and
Characterize them with the Denomination, in all those cases; as deeming Fever
of greatest Importance, and the Disease principally to be Cured: Then the
Practice upon Fevers is very erroneous, and dangerous: But the Practice which
ought to be in Fevers; is as various, as the Infirmities of Human Nature, are
different from each other; and by their Cures, Fevers are cured (consequenter)
of course.

Contrary to all this; I find a late Writer, who tells us of the Protean Nature
of Fevers disguised; Sub larva Algoris funesti, vomitionis indefinentis,
Diarrheae torminosae, Colicae Ventriculi, Hemicraniae periodicae, Apoplexiae,
Syncopes, Rheumatismi, Spasmi, universalis, Pluritidis, Peripneumoniae, vel
alterius morbi secure delitescens, -- Dr. Morton Puretolog. p. 189.

He would have Fever, to act all these tragic Parts, and many more; as being
variously disguised and hid, under such several Appearances; and their Cures to
be included, in Curing the Fever. Cujus contrarium -- He draws all the Practice
upon Fevers; and I take all the Practice off from Fevers, and apply it
elsewhere.

Here I demand the Reason, why Fever or febrile Heat, which is but a Symptom;
should be exalted above the rest of its fellow Symptoms, as most dangerous; and
be (Dux gregis) the Master symptom; or rather, as this Author would have it; to
be Genitor Symptomatum; the Father of a numerous offspring, and the first, and
chiefest to be aimed at in Curing.

The contrary whereof does appear; for as much as febrile Heat is the
consequent, occasioned by such various Disorders, and preternatural Affects;
not the Producer, or Leader of them. And therefore, they are of greater
Importance, and threaten with more Danger, than Fever does: Because they are
descended from, and do participate of Morbific causes, Matter or Miasm in their
Nature: But febrile Heat, is vital Heat; nearly allied to Human Nature, a
Symptom of the Life; only exceeding natural Temper, provoked thereto by such
morbific Causes.

Now tell me where, and to what Curing is to level at; when those various
Phenomena present? The same Author has given an Answer; and directs our Aim at
febrile Venom, or fermentum febrile.

But why fermentum febrile, and not fermentum emeticum, apoplecticum,
Catharticum, Spasmodicum, dolorificum, etc? When the fermenting Matter or
Miasm, produces such Operations and Effects apparently; why should they not
bear that Denomination, which is most significant, and showing the nature of
the ferment, the Tendency, or motion thereof?

If the fermenting Matter must have a Name; give it a proper Name, a
distinguishing Name, that does indicate: But febrile, gives no information of
the Matter, of what condition it is; therefore an improper and useless Title,
as making no distinction. At this rate, a Stone in the Kidney may be called
fermentum febrile, because it occasions a Fever; but how fitly, let every one
Judge: And all the Morbifick causes in Aetiologia, may as unfitly be termed
febrile Ferments.

If causes that have been set forth so various, can be reduced under this one
Head, Fermentum febrile; (few excepted) then the Practice of Physic, will be
very concise and easy, now the Jesuits Powder, is so effectual against febrile
venom, as some will have it to be. But I do not find the virtue of this
Febrifuge so great; but will require much Assistance from other Means, in the
performing of Cures: And we will go no farther for Proof hereof; than the
Examplars set forth in Pyretologia of the same Author last named.

After a long Harangue upon Fevers; showing the Diversity, Difficulty, and
Dangers thereof: when we come to the Curing Part; there is nothing to be Cured,
that properly and truly is called Fever; but something else. They lay all the
load upon Fever; charging the mischief and Ruin, of Sickness and Diseases upon
Fever; and that is the least Part of the Sickness.

Then put the Saddle upon the right Horse: The variety of Fevers, is the
Diversity of Diseases; under false Denominations, and the Umbrage of Fever. But
by false Accusations; Fever is a horrid and terrible Disease; being made the
Epitome of Diseases. Fever bears the Blame for all, but is wrongfully charged.

Insons febris; Innocent Fever, a general signal of complaint; to let you know;
that the Life or vital Principle, is uneasy, injured or in Danger, and calls
for Help; being impeded in Government, and attacked by Morbific Causes:
Requiring such Assistance, as requisite for the case; which may be as Various,
as Diseases are numerous and different.

Then let every such Cause and Case, bear its proper Name; and not be Shrouded
and masked, with a false Denomination of Fever; under a Pretense of the Protean
Nature thereof: which if allowed; the Practice upon Fevers, will deceitfully be
extended; and engross the greatest Part of the Practice of Physic: The
consequents whereof, must prove fatal.

Observe what great Helmont says: Infebribus universis, est unica Archei
accensio sive indignatio; unde and in essentia, and nomine febrili convenient:
Solum autem per causam occasionalem distinctae. De febr. cap. 13.

When the Life aestuates and complains; it is not without a cause; and you must
find that cause out, and apply proper means there: Then you are in the right
way of Curing; and there is no other safe, and hopeful way, to allay febrile
Heat: Farther you need not trouble your self about Fever.

What Indication have you from Fever or febrile Heat? by the Galenic Rule of
contraries, you will say, Cooling is indicated; but that is the ready way for
killing in some Fevers; and in all other, frustraneously and injuriously used:
Because Indication for Cure in all febrile cases, is taken for Diseases and
their Causes; not from febrile Heat, a symptom of the Life. Fever therefore
does but amuse the World, and leads the unwary, and herein unknowing, out of
the way for Curing.

When a Person is wounded, fractur'd, or dislocated; a Fever commonly arises,
as the consequent of Pain: But this Fever makes no Curative Indication; gives
no Direction for Curing the Wound, Fracture, or Dislocation; and forbids
nothing that such cases does require. The Chirurgical Means are indicated by
those several cases; and the Surgeon is not to regard the Fever, but proceed by
the true Indications according to Art. So likewise in all other Diseases, and
Causes: Because febrile preternatural Heat, is but a Symptom of the Life hurt;
not a Symptom of the Disease, or morbific Cause, immediate.

Whereas I have in this Discourse, asserted Fever to be a Symptom, dependant
upon Diseases; my meaning is; a dependant remotely concerned, and occasionally
procured: But properly, approximatly and intimately; preternatural Heat arises
from, and is dependant upon the Life, as its Principle, and an Emanation
thereof.

Omnis Morbus indicat Remedium.
Febris non indicat.
Ergo, non est Morbus.
The Major Proposition, is the Doctrine of the Methodus Medendi, generally
received, nemine contradicente: The Minor appears true, and fully proved, from
the preceding Reasons, and needs not Repetition.

Since Fever (being no Disease, nor morbific Cause) does not indicate a Remedy;
and is not to be regarded, as requiring Curative Means, directly pointing, and
aiming thereto: Then why so much noise, and so much to do about Fevers? It Is
all a great mistake, and blustering in the dark; giving false Names to
Sickness; and adapting Curatives, where none are indicated, or required.

Thus much in general, of male Practice upon Fevers: In the next Place, we will
examine more particularly the Methods, and Means Chirurgical and Pharmaceutic,
commonly appointed and used; as Bleeding, Blistering, Juleping, etc. how they
do properly answer their Intentions, as truly indicated by Fevers: Or rather,
how erroneous and wide, from what they ought to aim at.

SECT. X. Blood- Letting in Fevers Examined.
UPON the Doctrine delivered, we are now to Inquire, how fitly Phlebotomy does
answer, as a proper and suitable Remedy, in the Cures of Fevers; being so
generally used, and most commonly appointed in the first place, as of right, to
begin the Method of Curing.

The Blood may well be accounted the Treasury of Nature; for as this
Storehouse is full or empty, with good or bad; the Person is chiefly adjudged
to be in a good, or bad State; ut Signum and Causa. The dependants from hence
are so many, and so great; that much Caution and Circumspection is to be used
in the Diminution of it; not prodigally to be wasted upon slight, and seeming
occasions; but upon very urgent and necessitous Cases.

Some there are that appoint Bleeding; not considering so much an Indication
for it, as the Custom and present Fashion of Physicians so to do: Thinking
their Method of Cure not complete, unless this come in course.

Causes in Sickness are always to be principally regarded, and sought for;
where the Seat of the Disease is, and from whence it arises.

If the cause of febrile Heat, does not lie in the Blood; as many Times, and
more often it does not: Then Bleeding is vain, and gives no Relief in such
cases; but rather Hurt, by debilitating Nature.

Diseases take their Rise, more frequently from the Stomach, than any other
Part of the Body. This being the first, and chiefest office of Elaboration for
supplying the whole Body: And being the Seat of the Life more eminently, where
the Power of Government is distributed, and does virtually or influentially
preside over the rest: There you may expect to find the Origin of Diseases
mostly, or more often.

The Defects and Insufficient Performance of that Office, lays the Foundation
of most complaints; either by Transmission of ill matter; by Consent; or
Debility of Influx, to enable the several Parts governed, for acting their
Duties.

Curing must begin, where Diseases have their Beginning. What advantage then
will Bleeding afford, when the Stomach requires rectifying, and corroborating?
no Benefit, but much harm thereby.

All Remedies are, or ought to be; adapted to Diseases and their Causes: Fever
is no Disease, (as before proved) but a dependant upon Diseases; therefore
bleeding in Fevers, for Fevers sake only; is erroneously instituted.

Inquire into some of the Diseases that commonly have Fevers attending them. As
when a Fever presents from a Surfeit and over-charge of the Stomach, from too
much received; or something disagreeing, and not digesting, but oppressing.
Such cases are very frequent; for most Sick People complain at the Stomach; of
Nauseousness, Fullness, or Heaviness and Oppression. Now what can Bleeding do in
such like Complaints? How shall the Stomach receive any Benefit thereby?
Bleeding empties the Veins, but it does not discharge the Stomach of peccant
Matter: does not cleanse and roborate that principal Part: Therefore is no
Curing Means in such Cases.

A Fit of the Stone produces a Fever. And likewise the Gout with continued
Pain, has a Fever attending.

The Colic also will procure febrile Heat.

Obstructions of the Spleen, causing Pain in that Part, raises a Fever: And
all other Pains of the Bowels continuing, begets a Fever.

Now inquire rightly into the true Causes of all these Pains; you will not find
the Blood so much concerned, as the Cause thereof, for to let it out.

You are to distinguish a Fever, arising from the vitiosity of the Blood, as
the continent Cause of Stagnation in the smaller venal Pipes, which is rare:
And a febrile Distemper Communicated to the Blood, which is frequent;
occasioned from some remote Cause, disturbing the vital Stream by
Superfermentation.

When the cause of Fever is in the Blood Vessels, you have then some pretense
to appoint Phlebotomy: But when the cause of Fever is extraneous, and not in
those Tubes of conveyance; the Blood affected by Consent only, from the
disturbance elsewhere: in all such cases, and which do commonly present; there
is no occasion to use the Lancet.

In all Sickness, and Diseases whatever; the Fortitude or Strength of Nature,
is to be kept up: Then it is a Crime to waste it prodigally, when no Benefit
does accrue thereby.

It is denoted to us in Sacred Writ; That in the Blood, is the Life. Then it
necessarily follows; so much Blood let out by opening a Vein; so much of the
Life is gone; and so much Strength abated. For the Blood may well be accounted
the Treasure of Human Nature; and as this Treasury is full, or empty; good, or
bad: The Man is adjudged to be in a good, or bad State; vigorous, or declining,
ut signum and causa: The Dependences from hence are so many, and so great; that
much caution and great circumspection is to be had, before the Diminution of
it; and not to be done, but upon very urgent occasions; of which I do account
Fever, quatenus Fever, to be none.

Galen was much for Bleeding in Fevers, as a chief Remedy, 11. Meth. Med. cap.
15. And for a continual Fever not putrid, He advises to take away Blood, (ad
Animi usque deliquium) until the Patient falls into a Swoon, 9. Meth. Med. cap.
4. Physicians that are his Admirers, and followers of this great Master, do
imitate him in Practice, and are guided thereby: wherefore the French,
Spaniards, and Italians are profuse in letting out the Blood; not so much at
once, but by Repetitions: And most of our English Practisers are little less
guilty herein.

But Galen does admonish in another Place, Cavendum ne dum febrem jugulare
conamur, aegrum simul jugulemus: quod tribus Medicis evenisse narrat; quibus
non opinantibus, pro Animi deliquio mors obrepsit. Lib. de cur. rat. per venae
sect. cap. 12. what happened to those three Physicians, more eminently and
evidently on a sudden: does frequently fall out amongst us here; but not so
plainly appearing, because it is done gradually; killing by little and little;
letting out some of the Life now; more another Time, and other Times: That when
the Patient expires his last; you shall not know, that bleeding killed him; or
brought him so soon to his end: He died secundum Artem: so artificially, that
you cannot charge the Patient's Death, upon the good Physician.

Phlebotomy is a deceitful Remedy; because it offers some palliating Advantage
by the first Administration; giving an Allay, and Mitigation of the febrile
Heat; Not considering, no real true Benefit hereby, but an Injury: For, the
Abatement of the Fever by Bleeding, is only a Cessation of Nature to contend;
as being then less vigorous, and unabled to struggle with the Morbific Matter.

This is Curing the febrile Symptom, and rendering the Disease worse: by
disabling Nature, and leaving the Morbific Cause behind; which will appear
again in the same shape, or some other, as bad or worse. Curing is not
performed by debilitating; but by supporting, and assisting Nature, she being
Morborum Medicatrix.

To this Purpose, Van Helmont that great Philosopher, delivers his sentiment.
Satis sit Medico quod Aeger alioquin inexcusabili debilitate labascat, per
Morbum, inedias, inappetentias, inquietudines, dolores, anxietates, vigilias,
sudores, etc. Neque idcirco fidus Auxiliator debet debilitatem addere
debilitatibus: Fraudulent um est levamen, quod venae sectio adfert; ejusque tam
incertum est Remedium, quod nemo medentum hactenus, ausit polliceri sanationem
inde futurum. Tract. de Febr.

And in another place the same Author says: Vtcunque rem verteris, ignorantiae
plenum est, procurata debilitate sanare velle. However you order the Matter,
it is great Ignorance to attempt healing, by reducing into a weak state.

He is in the right, my Reason tells me so: And it argues a great deficiency of
efficatious good Medicines; else, the Physician need not have Recourse to this
Palliative Remedy, of ill consequence. He that Bleeds, and Bleeds in a
Sickness; is more beholding to special Providence for his Recovery, than to his
Physician. And farther; those that escape the danger of Fovers, being managed
after this manner by repeated Bleeding; they commonly fall into the Scurvey,
Dropsy, or Consumption, some such ill effects, will be the consequents of
impoverishing the vital Stream.

The Fever does exsiccate and waste the Blood so much, and too much by its
fervor; that we shall not need to diminish it, by opening the Veins to let it
run out. For Joan. Argenterius, in Galen. lib. de Febr. tells us, That upon
Dissection of the Body, of one who died of a Fever; there was no Blood left in
the Veins. And another to this Purpose relates: In quodam Febre extincto, venas
majores circa Hepar, sanguine vacuas repertas fuisse. Andr. Spigelius de
Semitert. lib. 1. cap. 15.

Many there are that make Phlebotomy their grand Remedy in Fevers; and repeat
it so often, as any febrile Heat does manifest: Nature being thus spent, and
her Strength exhausted, does Succumbere, leaves off contending, lies prostrate
and quiet. And now such Practisers do think, and make others believe, they have
conquered the Fever: But more truly it may be said, they conquered Nature, and
laid her flat: For, though the Heat be abated, the morbific Matter is not
lessened by Bleeding: That Spirit of Life, which warms and preserves natural
Heat in Health; is the same that aestuates and grows hotter in Sickness. So
that aiming only, or chiefly to allay febrile Heat, after this manner; is
endeavoring to suppress Nature, the Life; not the Disease: For, causa peccans
in febri, non calet ex se; sed tantum excitative and occasionaliter; provoking
the Life to aestuate, and insurge against an inbred enemy.

In shunning Charybdis, they dash upon Scylla, fearing so much the seeming and
supposed danger of the Fever; they precipitate the Patient into a contumacious
Scurvy, and lingering Consumption, or some mischief bearing another Name. It Is
a long Time before Persons so cured of Fevers, recover their Strength, and
Integrity of their Faculties, if they wade through that Sickness, called a
Fever.

A late famed Author in his Tract of Fevers, makes this observation. Quod
crebra sanguinis missio, homines Febri aptiores reddat. D. Willis. Those who
use often to bleed, are more apt to fall into Fevers. If this be true, that
Phlebotomy is one procuring cause of a Fever: Then I may rationally conclude;
it cannot be a good curing Remedy against a Fever. Idipsum mem^^^isse debebat,
ne ipse in Febribus sanguinem mitteret, says a good Author.

Galenic Phlebotomists are religious expecters of a Crisis in Fevers: but their
much bleeding makes the Crisis long in coming; if ever it does come; for Death
is often procured thereby, and prevents the Crisis. A good critical Evacuation
is a sign of Victory; that Nature has prevailed over the Disease, by expelling
and casting out the morbific Matter: And according to her Power, she is
continually striving to effect this for her Relief. Then we may reasonably
think; the more vigorous and strong Nature is; the better will be the Event.
But bleeding debilitates, and exhausts the strength which should contend with
the Disease: how can you then expect a good Crisis, when Nature is enfeebled,
and checked in her encounters; for by the Strength of Nature, the Crisis is
procured sooner or latter, as she is strong or weak.

Natura Corroborata est Morborum Medicatrix: If this Truth were rightly
considered in the Practice of Physic; there would not be such frequent
recourse to enervating Phlebotomy.

To encourage and countenance Bleeding as a laudable Remedy; and to captivate
the Understandings of People: They endeavor to prove the good effects thereof,
by ocular Demonstration; exhibiting to the view of the Sick, and by- Standers,
the Pravity of the Blood taken away; as appearing variously discolored, and
different in consistence, if compared with others.

The Blood (after it has stood some time) thus presenting to the Eye so
depraved; they straitway undoubtingly conclude; it was discreetly and happily
taken away for the Patient's good: Thinking hereby, so much matter of the
Disease is abated, and let out. And since they find the Blood thus faulty, they
charge all the mischief, or mostly; to lie in the vitiousity of the Blood. Quid
planius? This incourageth to proceed on in the same way; and to repeat this
Operation, to draw out some more of the morbific Matter, as the most ready way
to free the Patient from the Complaints.

But all this while they are not aware of the Errors they are under, in this
Prosecution: For they do not consider the different State of the Blood, under
the Power and Protection of the Life, in its proper native Place, the Veins and
Arteries; and how apt it is to change, and variously to degenerate, when
extravasated and exposed to the Air; The Blood is not the same now it is
exhibited to the View, as it was in the Vessels of conservation.

The Life was in the Blood before; but now in the Porringer, it is dead Blood.
Between the Dead and the Living, there must needs be great disparity, so that
the Judgment passed upon the dead Blood; does not affect, or represent the live
Blood; for it is not, what it was. Though it is now ill colored, coagulate; or
in a state of separation, and abounding with Serosity: Before it was more ruby,
florid, Balsamic and more entire, when running in the Veins and Arteries, which
have a conservative Power.

I do not deny the Blood of several Persons, to differ in Purity and Goodness;
and the difference thereof in the same Persons; as they are in a good, or bad
state of Health: But I do not approve of the severe rash Judgment pronounced
upon the Blood extramitted, from the dead Aspect thereof: concluding from
thence, it was fit for no other use but to be thrown away; and better to be
out, than in the Body.

True it is, there are some Diseases, that the Blood is much in fault, as the
Cause of such Maladies; yet notwithstanding, that is not a sufficient Cause to
let it out: since there are efficacious purifying Remedies, to reduce the Blood
into a better Condition; and not prodigally to waste that vital Stream, so
necessarily useful, and serviceable to the whole Body. For, the Mass of Blood
is not depraved and amended by Phlebotomy, let out as much as you will; equal
Parts of good and bad, will remain behind, from this promiscuous evacuation.

Besides; A degenerate bad Blood, does arise mostly from the insufficiency and
depravedness, of the previous alimental Juice, of which Blood is made: And then
the fault to be remedied, is not in the Blood, or office of sanguification; but
in the preparatory offices, and those Parts defective, upon which Bleeding has
no Influence, nor possibility to rectify.

And as for Fevers, which arise more often from other Causes, than from the
Blood; there is no Pretense for Bleeding in such Cases, if you will be governed
by Indications, and not go on blindfold. Nidus Febrium in primis est officinis:
extenditur scilicet a Pyloro per Duodenum, and vasa ibidem multiplicia,
Intestina item, Venas Mesenterii, Lienem usque ad Hepar. Helm. de Febr.

According to this great Author, the Seat of Fevers, both Continual and
Intermitting, is not in the Veins, or Arteries; but in the first Region of the
Body, from whence they take their Rise: Then what signifies Bleeding in such
cases, but to add more mischief. Their Cures are performed by Abstersives, and
Depuratives; to cleanse where such morbific matter is bred: And those are the
true Antifebrific Remedies. And not only such; but they are also universal
Medicines, required as necessary in all other Cures.

I do allow of Bleeding, upon some sudden great Inflammation, that threatens
the Life; and when efficacious discussing Means are wanted, to prevent
Apostomation: But otherwise, if it come o^ gradually and slowly, giving
warning; and good Medicine ready for use at Hand; then bleeding is not
required, and better to forbear the Lancet.

Some are so bold at Bleeding, that they forbear not in the highest Malignant
Fevers, Small Pox, etc. But if the Sick recover, it is wonderful Providence that
saves them; but more often Death is procured thereby. In the expectance of the
Small Pox, they will Bleed, under Pretense of abating the corrupt Matter that
breaks forth; thinking thereby, the Patient may not be so much disfigured with
Pustles: and may be a Help to preserve the Face from Deformity, which before
was beautiful.

The end proposed was good; but the Medium they go by, is very dangerous, and
unlikely to succeed well: For saving a Face, to hazard the Life, is no good
designing. They begin at the wrong end of such malignant Distempers; for by
Bleeding, they aim at, and apply only to the Effects, the producted Matter; and
neglect the producing Cause, the Venomous Miasm, or fermenting Leven, that
corrupts the whole Mass of Blood.

To prevent Impurity, and Corruption of the Blood, is much better, than to
lessen and abate the Quantity of the Blood, after it is corrupted. The main
design in such cases; is first how to expel the putrefying venom, before it
spreads and taints the whole; at least so to fortify Nature, that she may be
able to Master it, and defend her self.

The Indications for Cure are these; to assist and strengthen the Life, that
she may be able to resist the Venom: And to Mortify the malign Ferment, by
proper Alexipharmacals; thereby to preserve the vital streams from mortal
Putrefaction, or Coagulation. But bleeding is quite contrary to this Method,
and Intentions for Cure; and is the ready way for killing.

That which makes a promiscuous evacuation of good and bad together; is no true
Remedy for Curing: Phlebotomy does not distinguish the better Part of the
Blood, from the worse; but lets both out together; the remainder in the
Vessels, is not amended thereby; but equal Proportions continue behind of good
and bad.

Therefore abating the Quantity of naughty Blood, in any case by bleeding, is
an indirect way to amend it: and consequently an unprofitable attempt for
Curing: But in Fevers Malignant, a most dangerous Practice, to weaken Nature by
letting out the Balsam of Life; and thereby retracting inwards, what should be
protruded outward, to the universal covering Membrane; and from thence to be
sent away by Transpiration.

The chiefest Pretense for bleeding is Plenitude; if you can be assured, that
the Blood Vessels are full to distention, and over-loading Nature; as when some
Customary Evacuation is stopped, that ought to be free; and the Body does
superabound with Blood, Being convinced thereof by evident Signs; it may
lawfully then be diminished by the Lancet; if no Contraindication at that time
forbids; determined at the Discretion of a Judicious Physician, in such dubious
Cases.

SECT. XI. Epispastics, for blistering in Fevers: Condemned as Injurious.
IN the Cure of Fevers, it is now become a great Mode amongst Physicians, even
those reputed of the first Rank; to appoint Vesicatory Plasters, as a necessary
Help to allay Fevers. This Invention is most frequently used, as urgently
required in their Methods of Curing. What Benefit may arise hereby; or rather
what Hurt from thence procured, we shall now strictly inquire into that
Practice.

For the better managing whereof; more clearly, satisfactorily, and to avoid
Repetitions; I shall examine this Matter upon different Heads distinctly;
inquiring particularly as follows.

First; Into the Nature of the Ingredients, of which Vesicatories, or
blistering Plasters are composed.

Secondly; After what Manner they perform their Operations.

Thirdly; For what Intentions they are used.

Fourthly; Whether they do attract Morbific Matter; or make ill Matter, where
none was.

Fifthly; Whether their Operations be auxiliary, and pleasing to Nature; or
otherwise, disturbing and crossing her endeavors to help her self.

For Satisfaction to the first Head or Division; you must know, that in the
Distribution of Simples which have some Affinity, and ranked under proper
Classes; there are a sort termed Pyrotics; so denominated from their Nature,
being hot and fiery as the word imports.

Of these Pyrotics there is a gradual difference; and therefore they have
several Names: Vesicatories, Catharetics, Septics, and Caustics. All of them,
more or less; blistering, burning potentially, putrefying, corroding,
exulcerating and consuming: some whereof are very malign, and enemies to the
Life. In appointing and making of Vesicatories, Practisers do differ by
electing and compounding variously this and that together: But every such
Composition, that performs the Intention of Blistering, must have some of the
forenamed Pyrotics.

2. Then it appears from hence, how they produce such Effects; viz. by Quality
extreme, in the third and fourth Degree; and by malign venomous Properties,
tota substantia, hurtful and destructive to Human Bodies: As also inimical and
hostile to Human Nature, the Life; they acting as venoms. This Account is given
(by good Authors) of the simple Ingredients of such external Medicines, and
they operate per se, as such.

3. The Purposes for which Vesicatories, Blistering Plasters are used so
frequently in Practice; and the Benefits expected, or prefended from them, are
these. To qualify and allay the Heat of Fevers; to make Revulsion, or
Derivation of Humors inconveniently lodged, infesting and paining some noble,
or tender Part: By casting off, and giving a remove of ill matter; and to
discharge it outwardly by the Skin.

These Intentions are advantageous, and very good; but the Mediums they go by
to arrive thither; the Means used to effect such designs; I doubt, are not
suitable and probable to answer; as will appear following.

4. We are now to inquire; whether Vesicatories do draw the Morbific Matter
from Parts remote, illaffected therewith: or do make ill Matter, in sound
Places; whereto such Plasters are applied: And here also we shall examine the
Probability, or Possibility of that Invention, to abate and draw out the Heat
of Fevers.

Pain being a Common Cause of Fevers; always raising, or continuing a Fever, if
the Pain be great: Then Blistering Plasters, that add more Pain to the Patient
Sufferer; are very unlikely means to allay a Fever; but on the contrary more
like to aggravate, and augment the febrile Heat: For, the Ingredients of such
Vesicatories, are very hot in their Nature and Operations; and so hot, as to
blister the Skin, as if burned, or scalded. Thus here is adding Heat, to Heat.

And consider; that febrile Heat, is vital Heat; you are to esteem it so, and
treat it as such; fairly to reduce it into Moderation, and Natural Temper; by
subducting the irritating Causes, that provokes the Life to aestuate, and be
disquiet. But by applying venomous, scorching, blistering plasters; they rather
give a disturbance, than Pacify; and the Life is more uneasy, and incensed
thereby.

From hence it does appear, that Vesicatories applied, to assuage Fevers is a
vain attempt; and rather Fomenters, than Mitigators of febrile Heat; which is
vital Heat preternaturally graduated.

Furthermore, you will find as much Improbability, of operating upon the
occasional causing Matter; as upon the producted Heat: For, those vesicatory
Plasters, if I grant, they have an attraction of humoral Matter; it is
promiscuous only, not elective and peculiar, of this or that Morbific Humor, at
your pleasure and appointment.

What probable good Reason can you give, for dragging of Morbous Matter, or
Miasm, from central remote Parts, to the cutany Circumference, by unknown
difficult ways (if it could so be) when more likely, ready and convenient
Passages there are; to convey and discharge, by known Ductures, fabricated by
Nature for that Purpose?

True it is; that a good Diuphoretic Medicine, does send forth (expulsive) from
the Center to the Circumference directly, and linealy, with much Benefit, in
cases so requiring; such as Fevers, especially the Malign, that mostly stand in
need of that Operation, and Help. And this is frequently, and freely performed,
because Nature is prompt and complying therewith; (this being an Operation of
her own Institution) opening upon such Occasions, all her Secret invisible
porous Passages for a free transmission and curess, on all sides. Totum Gorpus
est perspirabile.

This work Nature does willingly perform, with the Assistance, and Provocation
by good internal Medicine* But to virulent blistering, painful Plasters; Nature
is not so obedient, and complying therewith; does not dilate and open her
imperceptible vents of Communication, Transmission, and Perspiration, to such
irksom, injurious, and improper Applications.

From what has been said, I rationally conclude: That such Humor discharged by
the Blisters, is no far-fetcht Matter; not from the Diseased Part primarily
affected, the Seat of the Disease far off, causing a Fever: But it is only a
putrid Water, from a colliquation of the Flesh; and a depraved Alteration of
the nutricious Juices, of the Part applied to, so converted by the virulent
corrosive Nature of the Vesicatory Plaster.

And yet notwithstanding; those Physicians have believed (at least they would
have Patients to believe) that it is morbisic febrile Matter, attracted thither
to the Skin (e longinquo) by virtue of the Topical Medicine; (credat qui volet)
which is against all Reason: For; this blistering Plaster, shall make the same
ichorous Water issue from the sound and healthful; as from the sick feverish
Person: So that I am well satisfied; this Water thus extracted, was not
morbific pre-existing; but factitious Matter, transmuted by the external
Medicine; and so vented by blistering.

Medicines are to aim, and level at Diseases, where they are seated; and to
discharge their Power there, as well and truly designed: If so, then these
Vesicatories must draw away the febrile Matter from the Heart; (seeds Morbi,
according to their Definition of Fever). But if those corrosive Plasters, shall
send their virulent virtue to the Heart; the Patient then, must be very
Heart-sick with that Operation. And grant it should extend thither; (quod non
est supponendum) How shall the peccant Matter find the way out, from the Center
to the Circumference; this being an obscure impassable way; at least, not to be
found, unless by the extraordinary secret conduct of Nature; who (as I said
before) is not pleased, nor complying with this irksom blistering Invention.
(Invita Natura, irrita sunt omnia. Ax.) Wherefore, no good can be expected from
them, in Curing Fevers.

In Sickness when Nature does protrude, and send forth any ill Matter to the
extern Parts, appearing upon the Skin; it is a good sign she will be
victorious, having dislodged Morbific Matter from within, and safely brought it
to the confines of the Body; as in the eruption of the Smallpox. And also,
when Nature does show any tendency that way, by breathing Sweat; it behooves the
Physician to promote, and help forward with wholesome internal Medicine, for
that Purpose.

But if you think by blistering, to prompt, or put Nature upon expulsion that
way; you rather distract, and disturb her good Inclination, than put forward
that beneficial Operation, for the Reasons aforesaid.

It Is a great Error; so formally and constantly, to appoint Vesicatories; as
necessary to complete the Methods for Curing Fevers: As if Nature had not
sufficiently provided other ways, to discharge Morbific Matter; and this were
the principal way invented, and not to be neglected.

When a Person is Sick, oppressed at the Stomach; a Fever commonly arises from
such complaints: And this sort of Sickness, from Fullness or Foulness; is most
frequent. What have you to do with blistering in such Cases? Can you draw this
oppressing undigested, or depraved Matter, out of the Stomach by Vesicatories:
Or if they had such a power of Attraction, as to bring it forth to the Skin; is
it not very unfit and unreasonable; to draw such foul Matter, and often very
gross Matter, directly through the Habit of the Body, and leaving Dregs in the
Passage; when other patent ways, are ready to transmit it, upwards or
downwards, by Natures Design and Appointment.

To avoid this Censure in part; perhaps they will, say; we intend to carry off
the vicious Matter, by Purging, or Vomiting; the Vesicatories are to draw out
the Fever, and keep that under.

I don't like your Policy; for this erroneous Practice of blistering, is but
blustering in the dark; and proceeds from gross Ignorance; having a false
Notion of Fever; what febrile Heat is, and from whence it does arise. Take away
the Morbific Matter by unloading the Stomach; set that right by cleansing, and
roborating with good internal Medicine; and then the whole work is done; that
you need not trouble your self, or the Patient, about the Fever; that abates
and goes away of course, as you discharge the Stomach from the offending Cause.

So likewise; a Fit of the Colic, or Stone, raises a Fever; and this Fever not
to be regarded: But proper Medicines to be used, only respecting the Stone, or
Colic.

An hundred other Diseases and Cases we might name; wherewith Fevers are
attended; but not to be considered otherwise, than as signal; showing that the
Life is disturbed, and incensed by some Morbific Matter, or Cause in this, or
that part of the Body: Find that Cause out; what, and where the offending
Matter is; and prosecute there only with good Means: The Fever needs no other
Cure; than the Cure of that Disease, which caused the Life to be unquiet, to
aestuate and grow hot.

Upon the Appearance of a Fever, Physicians are much, and over much concerned;
straightway fall on upon the Fever with bleeding, blistering, and Juleps, to
suppress and keep that under; to secure that Bugbear in the first place; as
chiefly threatening the Life of the Patient. The Sick and their Relations being
very apprehensive of the Danger; how many have died by Fevers, (as commonly;
but falsely said) resign up freely to the Doctor's great Skill; and Care herein;
submitting to the Risk of all the male Practice, in bleeding, blistering, etc.
the ready way to Destruction.

After this manner, slight and trivial Sickness, becomes long, and sometimes
hazardous Sickness; many times mortal. And I do account it a special
Providence, that delivers out of such perilous Practice.

In Sickness we are always to observe the Inclination and Tendency of Nature;
which way she thinks best, and most expeditely to discharge Morbific Matter,
according to the Precept of Hippocrates, Quo Natura vergit, conducere oportet.
And that is sometimes by the Intestines, by Urine, by Expectoration, by
eruption of Blood at the Nose, per Vterum, and by the Skin: Not to thwart and
cross her endeavors; except she be forced into a wrong course by stimulating
Matter, and thereby becomes apparently extravagant therein: As when a
Symptomatical Flux per Alvum is extreme, then to mitigate and allay it, by good
internal Means; but not by Vesicatories, to attract injuriously, a contrary way.

If the cause of Fever be (in primis viis) in the first Region of the Body; as
most frequently it is; then it is great Imprudence, to attempt drawing outward
by Vesicatories, when other Ways, and convenient Ductures are open to transmit
it. When Nature inclines, and shows a disposition to free her self by the Guts;
it is very injurious to divert her Intentions, by attracting outward, and
endeavoring to vent by the Skin; drawing a contrary way.

Si Materia turgeat, says Hippocrates: If the Morbific Matter ferments and
swells for vent; let it go that way most expedite, and inclinable thereto: by
Stool, by Urine, bleeding at the Nose, etc. Sometimes Nature has a Tendency,
and is prompt for evacuation by the Skin; which is advantageous, and to be
promoted by good Means. But I do not account blistering in the Number of good
Means to promote that Operation; except some Matter be collectied in a
particular Place under the Skin, and wants some Help to bring it forth: Then a
Vesicatory applied, or Cupping, is rational and good.

But when Nature makes a critical effort, by the Skin generally (per
Diaphoresin) breathes out eff^uviums on every side: Then Vesicatories, are
useless; and not only so, but hurtful; by troubling that Operation.

To apply Vesicatories in the beginning of Fevers; is to compel Nature to
discharge that way, which perhaps she has no Intention to do; and no occasion
for it, but rather another way. But if there be an Inclination, and good
occasion to operate that way; it is more safe and better, to assist and promote
with internal Means, that certainly roborates and expels (a Centro undique)
every way outward to the extreme Parts: Much rather, than trust to dubious
attracting external Means (in puncto circumferentiae) upon a narrow Spot, that
gives no Ability to send forth; but painfully and doggedly coerceth, nolens
volens: and that is the best of it, if attractive power be granted.

It Is agreed by all, that Medicines are to level at Diseases where they are
seated: And if so then these Vesicatori^, must draw away the febril^ Matter
from the Heart, (according to the in de^i^iction of Feven.) But if the
corrosive Plasters shall send: their (...) attractives Virtue to the Hear^ the
Patient then must be very Heart sick, (...) Operation.

And if granted, this topical Medicine does extend its power thither; how shall
the peccant Matter find the way out, from the Center to the Circumference?
Being an obscure impassable way, not to be found, without the extraordinary
secret conduct of Nature; who (as I said before) is not pleased nor complying
with this blistering Invention. Invita Natura, irrita sunt omnia.

Some Years since, being called to two Children, sick (as commonly said) of a
Fever; with whom the Apothecaries were concerned, as Practisers, or
Undertakers: And being informed of their Intentions, to apply Vesicatory
Plasters; I cautioned the Relations not to suffer it: But when I was gone, they
were over-perswaded by the Apothecaries; and blistering Plasters were applied
with great Diligence, until both the Patients were dead. Some time after,
meeting with the Relations, who related to me what was done; I blamed them for
not following my Advice; who answered; that the Apothecary said, it was the
Practice of the great Doctors of the Town; therefore it might safely be done.
From thence I might remark at large, upon Apothecaries Practice, in Imitation
of their Doctors; and the shameful Prestitution of this Art. But upon this
Subject, something has been said elsewhere; therefore I pass it over. And
although Blistering and Juleping, be the modish Practice of the Town; yet being
instituted upon false Notions of Fever, and apparently injurious; I shall not
follow that Fashion.

SECT. XII. Of Juleps, and Coolers in Fevers.
FAlse Notion of a Disease, begets an erroneous Practice, both in Method and
Medicines. Fever not being rightly understood; judging it to be, what it is
not; the Prosecution against it is ineffectual; and not only so, but also
injurious and hazardous to the Patient.

Fever supposed to be the Disease (not known but by its Name) and is only a
general Symptom, of all fierce Distempers and dolorous Diseases; being apparent
to the standers by, and confirmed by Sentence of the Physician; takes up most
of their Thoughts, in designing how to Master, and Secure this common Enemy,
that stands foremost in view: And as their Eyes are most, and chiefly upon the
Fever; so their Fears are from thence, and their Endeavors are bent, to abate
and suppress the febrile Heat, at the first Appearance thereof: But when this
preternatural Aestuation is raised to a Degree; all Helps are then thought of,
to damp and extingush this kindling Flame, as great and threatening Danger from
thence; which byasseth the Physician from his right Aim, at the morbific Cause
of all this Disturbance.

From hence arises all the Inventions of Cooling, so frequently used in
Fevers: Juleps, Emulsions, Ptisans, cooling Apozems, Embrocations, etc. which
make a great clutter of Gallipots, and Glasses about the Sick; and nothing more
advantageous, to Physician and Apothecany; than trifling away the Time, with
such insignificant, and ineffectual Medicines.

But loss of Time, and unnecessary Charge, is not all the Prejudice: For if we
consider the Rise, and State of those Diseases, which raises Fevers; and
whereon Fevers do depend: we cannot but be sensible of the Injury; and
oftentimes great Hazards, by Juleping, and other cooling Practice.

There are two Causes, generally and principally assigned, for the Production,
and Continuance of Diseases; viz. depraved noxious Humors, and Obstructions.
And to these Causes, Physicians do always aim at in Curing; though the Diseases
be distinguished by various Names: Then the stress of Curing lies here only;
for opening Obstructions; and cleansing away all foul degenerate Matter.

The design for Cure therefore, in all Cases when a Fever appears; is to find
out where; and what the Matter is, that disquiets and provokes the Life to be
hot, and exceed its natural Temper: And to such Causes the Physician should
bend his Endeavors; and the Medicines to level against the Disturbers of the
Life. Not regarding febrile Heat, otherwise than as signal, and which requires
no means directed thither, but to the Disease only, that causes the Life to
aestuate.

What Advantage can you expect from Juleps, or other Coolers in any Case of a
Fever? Since they Cure no Disease, nor do they seem as likely means. Will a
Julep Cure the Gout, Stone, Pleurisy, Colic, Spleen, etc. any other Disease,
upon which Fevers do depend? And if not; then vain are the use of these Cooling
Inventions, and frustraneous.

But the doing of no good; that is not all the loss by Juleps; for they do much
mischief: As when the vital Spirit, the Life, heats and strives to expel
morbific Causes; thereby showing the endeavors, and vigor of vital strength:
Juleps may then damp this vital Heat, and disable Nature; but they remove no
peccant Matter: They check and oppress the Stomach, that is too flat and dull
in Fevers; and requires then, something to whet and sharpen the Ferment
thereof: But instead of such an assisting Remedy; they ply the Sick with
injurious Coolers, that act against the Fortitude and Endeavors of Nature; and
giving no Satisfaction to the languishing Patient, desirous of other Drink.

How many thirsty Sick Persons, have longed, and earnestly begged for a Draught
of Beer? But was denied to them, because the Doctors forbad it, and appointed
Julep, Barley water and such Stuff. After this manner Thousands, or I may say,
Millions have been killed, by the Ignorance of their Undertakers for Curing.
The faint sick Man cannot eat; and his Physician will not let him Drink, what
he likes, and is most likely to do him good: We may rationally judge, that Sick
People cannot live long under such Circumstances.

But this is not all the mischief yet: For, the Hazards of this Juleping, and
Cooling Practice, will further appear; if we consider the Frequency, Latency,
and Danger of this Series and Transition; of Pains, to Inflammations, Tumors,
Apostems, Ulcers, Gangrens, and Mortifications, internal: The common Stages and
Progress of mortal Sickness; but disguised, and couched under some other
Disease, more apparent, or more known by some Vulgar Name.

This latent dangerous Train, more frequently lurking, than discovered; not
suspecting, or sought for; has brought more to the Grave, than any
commutation, or complication of Diseases whatever. For though there be a great
Number of Diseases (multiplied by Names) whereunto Human Nature is liable; and
many of them do come, and go off again in the course of Life, facile curabiles;
yet most, if not all the Contumacious, are therein concerned; and such as
become Mortal; do terminate in this Series, as the Catastrophe and last Scene.

Mortal Diseases I said; because, when this common Train of Diseases, is stopped
in its Progress, and has not its full course, but taken off, and prevented by
effectual good Means, or great Providence; and then Pain may exercise its Power
singly, and alone for a Time, by Intervals: Or Pain may contract and associate
a Tumor; sometimes an Inflammation; and yet all this may end well; these may go
off again, or be sent off by Medicine, and proceed no further; the Patient may
recover, and return to a good state of Health.

But too often it proves otherwise; by neglect and Delay, in the use of good
Means; by improper Methods, and evil Medicines; by Juleping and Blistering,
such male Practice; the frequent Train of Diseases, goes on gradually to the
last; and ends with Death.

How many Fevers depend upon Obstructions; by depraved Matter lodged, and
stopping some Canal, or Ductare, that ought to be free and open for
Transmission? Very many; and very often, this is the generating Cause and this
is the continuing Cause: You may then give Julep, after Julep, from Day to Day;
and never Cure such Fevers after that manner.

Obstructions most commonly cause Pain; this Pain raises a Fever; and
sometimes an Inflammation, in the Part pained: This Inflammation forms a Tumor;
internal and not perceived, or suspected. This Tumor sometimes Apostemates; or
becomes Schirrous and indurate: Or Gangrens, and soon kills the Patient; not
coming to any Suppuration: And then the Patient is said to Die of a Fever; they
could not quench this Fever: I readily believe that; it was not like to be
done, by Juleping, Blistering, etc. such nonsensical Practice.

After this manner, so many Thousands have died of Fevers, or rather in Fevers;
by the Ignorance and great Mistakes, of the Pretenders to Cure Fevers, which
they understand not.

Such Cases of internal Tumors, and Inflammations; come oftener into the
Physicians Practice, than taken notice of; and Thousands have died upon this
Account; when the true state of the Case was not discerned: But the Patient
died of a Fever; the Fever was apparent and aimed at; the rest was latent, and
therefore proved mortal.

The obscurity of this lurking satal Train; thus commuting, and making Progress
unseen and unsought for by Physicians: The neglect and oversight thereof; does
proceed chiefly, from the (...) general Catalogue of Diseases; ranking them all
under these three Divisions Similar, Organical, and Common: Which first
Division I cashiered; (for sufficient Reasons, in another Tract) as not being
Diseases; but Symptoms only. And this first Division of supposed Diseases; has
made more Bustle, (whereof febrile Distemper the chief) and so engrossed the
Practice of Physic, that most endeavors have vainly been spent thereupon;
much Time and Opportunities lost; the considerable and most important Diseases
overseen; and the frequent Progress of this dangerous Train, so seldom under
Consideration, in Consultation; being Masked and Covered; with the external
Appearance, and outside Garb of a Symptomatical Fever; which mistake and
oversight, has lost Myriads of Lives.

The Proceeding and Advance of this dangerous Commutation, being frequent, and
disguised under Fevers; the cooling Inventions of Juleps, Barlywater, etc.
against febrile Heat, are very pernicious upon the Account of this latent
Series of Diseases, always to be suspected: But at best, and in other Fevorish
Cases; those Coolers are a great delay in Curing of any Fever: yet after all
this trifling, and Hazard; if the Patient escapes, (by good Providence only)
the Doctor is applauded for bringing them out of a tedious and dangerous
Sickness; though long and hazardous of his own making, by a refrigerating Mode of
Practice.

And although the Patient escapes the Fever, and wades through that Sickness;
yet by such male Practice, they fall into Dropsies, Scurvey, Jaundice,
Cachectic. Habits of Body; an obstructed tumefied Spleen, Liver, Mesentery,
etc. or it breaks out upon the Skin afterward; or settles in a Limb, and
disables the Part.

And it is but rational to expect such Effects, from such injurious ways of
Curing: For; the morbific Matter which caused the Fever, being fixed and
retained, by checking and cooling the febrile Fermentation; and not observing
the Aphorism, quo Natura vergit, this Morbous Impurity must precipitate, and
settle in some Part: Then an after-game is to be played; and probably more
difficult, than that of the Fever.

But oftentimes, the Event, and Effect of this Cooling Practice, proves fatal;
and a Discovery, with Conviction of such erroneous and dangerous Proceedings;
is by Dissection after Death, and plain Demonstration to the Eye: As when the
Physician dubiously, giving in an Account of the Sickness; and the Relations
are not therewith satisfied, concerning the Death of the Patient: Dissection
then is appointed; which lays open (when too late) and presents to view; an
Apostem, Ulcer, or putrid decay of some internal Part, Gangrened or Mortified;
which makes evident, what before was little thought of.

But upon this Discovery of Miscarriage; by great Mistakes in the gradual
Progress of the Sickness; and improper Designing of Medicines, aiming only, or
chiefly at the Fever: Indemnification is thus contrived and framed, with a
salvo judicio: When the Corpse bears any of these Characters; the Account is
given; that the Patient was in such a desperate Condition; as it was impossible
to retrieve and recover.

After this manner, by such Inventions, the Blemish is wiped off the Physician;
and he passes nevertheless, for an able judicious Practiser as before: When
indeed this funeral Conclusion was brought about, for want of a true Notion,
and due Consideration of this latent, and frequent Progress of Diseases; which
might have been prevented; or timely stopped in their course of Transition and
Commutation; if the Design of Cure had looked that way, to obviate the Danger
secretly coming on.

But the Fever; this ignis fatuus leads all out of the right way of Curing: Oh,
the Fever is very high, (Sulphur accensum in Cord) this Bugbear scares them
all, not knowing what evil Thing it is; ( and deflagratum, says Dr. Willis) the
Sick Patient is set on Fire: Then to quenching and cooling as fast as they can;
for there is no ensuring Office to make good the Damage. Now here is Subject
enough for Satyr, or Ridicule; but I shall not prosecute in such Manner.

The Practice upon Fevers cannot be hopeful and helpful; for as much as, the
Methods and Medicines for Curing, are designed by a false Canon, of healing by
contraries, (Contrariorum contraria sunt remedia) which is the quite contrary
way for Curing; then the whole proceeding is an Accumulation of Errors.

Let us examine the Practice in Fevers by that Rule: Fevers are hot, therefore
(you say) they are to be Cured by Coolers, which are contraries; as the Canon
appoints: herein I differ from other Practisers; they endeavor to Cool with
Contraries; I Cool and Cure with Similars. They go about to Cool Fevers with
Juleps, Ptisans, Emulsions, etc. and they go a great way about. I Cool and Cure
with hot Liquors and Spirits; which is the ready way.

But here is the Mistake which causes the Difference: They suppose Heat to be
the Disease in Fevers; and I look upon Heat as a Symptom, and Signal only. They
apply to Symptoms depending; I level at Diseases producing, and continuing
them; valuing not the Heat of Fevers; but am very solicitous to find out, and
have a careful Eye, upon the Disease that causes the Fever: Curing lies there,
and there only; the depending Fever is included therein, and falls of course.

Since febrile Heat, does not arise from any Sulphurous Matter, (as
before-proved) but from various other Material Causes, not inflammable; but
provoking the vital Spirit the Life, to aestuate and become hot
preternaturally; which Heat rises and falls, as morbous Causes are intended
and remitted.

What are now the Curative Intentions, to be aimed at in all Fevers? but only
to remove those several Diseases, which incense the governing vital Principle,
to exceed its bounds of natural Temper and Moderation: Level at, and overcome
the Disease; the Fever then is gone also. Sublata causa^, tollitur effectus.

But what Probability, or Reason is there, for such Coolers to Cure any
Disease, that produce Fevers? for whether it be Obstruction in any Part; or
oppression at the Stomach, by undigested, degenerate, or discordant matter; or
by Wind and Flatulency; by any exotic generation, as Worms, Stones, etc. any
Tumor or Apostem breeding; Inflammation, or Ulcer planted, etc. These cooling
and cold Inventions, touch not the Disease (except to exasperate, and do
mischief) and remove no morbific Cause: For the nature of these Causes and
Diseases, requires Cathartics, Aperitives, Abstersives, Discussives,
Dissolvents, Sarcotics, etc. some such Medicaments of these Operations.

But those Coolers, stand in Opposition, and act repugnant to such Medicinal
Properties; and consequently to the Cures of those Infirmities: By obstructing
of Ductures, and the Pores; incrassating what should be attenuated; coagulating
what should be kept fluid; condensing what ought to be rarefied and discussed;
fixing and retaining, what should be moved and sent away; impeding
Transpiration, and promoting Putrefaction: generally, they check and damp the
Power of Nature, endeavoring to extricate and quit her self, from those
Encumbrances, and growing Evils, that assault and oppress her.

In what Case soever; a Fever or vehement Heat shall arise, with ebullition and
preternatural Fermentation of the Blood; Cooling Medicines are very
prejudicial, in many Cases mortal; for whether it be a malign miasm, seminary,
or taint; or other Impurity and Feculency of the Blood, that Nature intends by
this febrile disturbance and general Aestuation, to separate and throw off;
which Nature sometimes, without any Medicinal Help does perform, and makes a
good Crisis: But these Coolers act counter to such Intentions, and prevents
Natures intended good work; checking the Fermentation, and thereby hindering
the separation of any depraved or noxious Admixture.

And the Reason of these ill Consequents from Cooling Medicines, does chiefly
lie here: Since the Stomach does preside over, and has great Influence upon
the subsequent Digestions, and all other Faculties, whose vigorous and true
performance depend much thereon; so that whatever subverts the Tone of the
Stomach, and flats the acuteness of this principal Part, and prime office of
Digestion (as Juleps, etc. do) injures, allays and abates the energy of the
rest; impedes the Fermentation of the Blood, for Depuration in such Cases; as
also for conservation and supply in the constant daily work.

It may be objected and said; that Lemons and Oranges are used in Fevers with
good effects from their cooling: I answer, that Lemons, Oranges, Barberries,
and such like, are allowable in Fevers as proper and fit to be used; but what
Benefit arises from them, is not to be ascribed to their cooling virtue (if
any such per se) but only to their Acidity, which acuates and sharpens the
Ferment of the Stomach; by whose reinforcement, and strength regained by this
means; the whole Body is refreshed, fares the better, and some allay; at least
more Ability to bear the febrile Heat, and to contend with the Disease, that
occasions the Fever.

Wherefore such fruits, and such liquors are to be granted the Patient for
Refreshment and Support, as are most agreeable to the Stomach, and desired by
the Sick: And the Dictates, or Appetitions of Nature in these Cases, are to be
regarded; who oftentimes prompts for her own Help and Satisfaction.

And generally it is observed, the Drinks so desired by them, are fermented
Liquors (no Juleps, etc.) Beer, Ale, Cider, or Wine: And commonly such are most
agreeable to the Stomach in Sickness, as was most acceptable in Health; which
being discreetly used, are no Promoters nor Continuers of the Fever; though they
be spirituous and brisk upon the Palate; yet beneficial and great Relief to the
Sick: But always to impose medical Drinks, upon weak sick People, as if they
were to be nourished, and live by Physic only; is very irrational and absurd.

And I must tell you, wherein I differ from other Physicians, when I allow
Patients cooling Drinks; as Whey, Buttermilk, Cider, Mead, when desired in
Fevers, or hot Bodies: They lay a stress upon Coolers, as Curative and
principal Means against Fevers, and hot Bodies, thereby to reduce the
Distemper: I allow them, not as Physic against the Disease; but as Refreshment
to Nature, being coveted and pleased therewith: So that I do not impose as of
Necessity; because they Cure not the Disease whereon the Fever depends; but
observing the Propriety of some Bodies, being delighted and comforted with such
liquors, I readily grant them, unless there be a contraindication that forbids.

A laboring Man that toils and heats himself, must have drink to quench his
thirst and refresh him; and requires more Drink than another Person: even so it
is with a Man in a Fever; he labors under a Disease to remove it; and he is
then more thirsty, requiring more Drink than at another Time: And it must be
such as delights him, that Nature does desire; not Barley Water, Juleps of
Stilled Waters and Syrups; such slops that the Patient is averse to, and gives
no satisfaction.

Keep a laboring Man with Julep, and Barley Water; and see how long he will
keep his Stomach, and keep his Strength, to be able for work: He will not hold
it out long, in good condition, and ability for Service. Observe then; if these
Drinks shall make a well Man, and a strong Man decline; if they pluck him down;
you cannot in Reason expect, they can be helpful to raise up a weak sick Man,
to Health and Strength.

All this considered it plainly appears; that from what Cause soever a Fever
does arise; this Juleping and Cooling Mode of Practice, is dangerous more or
less, as the Disease is in its self; whereon the Fever does depend: But in no
Case advantageous; making acute Diseases to Commute, and terminate in chronic;
and lingering chronic Diseases, to hold on their Course, and become more
Contumacious.

Febrile Heat is much safer, and sooner allayed with hot things, than with
cold; for Coolers only, are but like the sprinkling of Water upon Fire, which
burns the fiercer for it afterward: Coolers cast a damp for the present; makes
a short suppression of Heat, and it soon bursts out again: But hot Medicines
that have Spirit and Life in them, do assist Nature in ejecting of the peccant
Matter, which being cast out, Nature then returns to her sedate moderate
temper: Therefore one good Sudorific Medicine, checks a Fever; better than ten
Juleps.

Here I shall make some Observations useful in Practice: First, from the
Denominations of Fever and Inflammation; what affinity there is, and near
relation they have to each other; for from the Etymon of the words, they seem
to import a Parity, as denoting only an extraordinary Heat: (...) febris, from
(...) ignis; (...) inflammatio, from (...) uro.

But the difference lies here: Fevers are known, and defined by preternatural
Heat and effervescency through the whole Body. Inflammation is a preternatural
Heat of a particular Part. Hence we remark; that Fevers are general and dilated
Inflammations; Inflammations particular Fevers of a Member: Thus they differ in
Latitude and Extent: But withal observe the order of Causation; Inflammation
commonly precedes and lays the Foundation in this or that Part; there is the
fomes and minera Morbi: A Fever follows upon the whole Body, caused by consent
from thence, and condolency.

Here you may take notice, that Fevers are erroneously defined by Authors; a
calore praeter Naturam in Cord accenso; assigning the Heart to be the focus,
where febrile Heat is first kindled, and from whence it is maintained; when
almost in any other Part of the Body, if an Inflammation happen there; a Fever
will follow, taking its Rise from thence, not from the Heart: So that the
Heart, then suffers Sympathically by consent; not idiopathically and primarily
as Seeds Morbi.

Since most Inflammations cause Fevers, and Inflammations so frequent, as being
the certain Consequents of great Pain; then two things are to be noted: First,
that upon the appearance of a high Fever, you may suspect an Inflammation
couched under it; from whence as the Spring, this Fever does arise.

Secondly, that the Cure of many Fevers ought so to be designed and managed, as
respecting and aiming chiefly at a particular Inflammation of some Part, upon
which the Fever does depend: And when a Fever arises upon this bottom (as
often it does) then little regard is to be had to the general Fever; but the
stress of Cure, lies upon removing the occasional and material Causes of Pain
and Inflammation in the particular Part, the Foundation of all the rest; which
being removed, the depending Fever falls of Course.

Thus all our endeavors tend, to make a true Discovery of Causes; that when
preternatural Heat does arise in the Body, and begets a Fever; you may know,
not only what to call it, but also what to do; by levelling at the right Mark.

And I must tell you also, how a Fever sometimes does arise, and not from
Inflammation of a pained Part: That is, when some depraved discordant Matter,
or some malign venenate Miasm, is mingled or got into the Blood; Nature which
is the Life, raises a preternatural Fermentation, and febrile effervescency in
the Mass of Blood, for a Purification and Separation of this exotic Mixture;
and admits of no sedation or rest, until that work be finished.

From hence you may be warned of the dangerous common Practice in Fevers, by
Juleps, Barley-Water, and other such like Coolers to allay the Heat; from a
great Mistake of Fevers, and from whence that Heat does assurge: For, whether
the Fever does depend upon a particular inflamed Part; or a general
Fermentation of the Blood for Purification; in both Cases of Fevers, such
Cooling Medicines are pernicious, and have killed thousands: For by insisting
so much upon them, and aiming to suppress the Fever by Coolers (not possible to
be done that way) thus mischievously spending Time, the opportunity of Curing
is lost, and the Disease prevails.

The Error of those Cooling Medicines is apparent, from the insuccess thereof;
for never was the Thirst of a sick Person satisfied by Juleps; but a Draught of
good Drink, such as the Patient's Stomach affects; that is refreshing and
relieving.

Julops are but Cold Comfort, or rather no Comfort to a Fevorish sick Man; for
those Cold Medicines imposed upon the sick, are no Coolers in effect; and are
so far from assisting Nature to do the work she is struggling about; that they
nauseate and flat the Stomach, which should vigorate and enforce the other
Faculties; they damp and check the Power of Nature contending with the Disease;
and leave her languishing for Refreshment, coveted in her natural common Drink:
Thus cheating the Patient of that desired assistance by Drink, which would be
Comfortable.

And thus much may suffice, to show the Vanity and Insufficiency of Juleps, and
other Cooling Inventions, to allay the Heat of Fevers.

Having now gone through the Common Practice upon Fevers; showing the Errors
and Dangers thereof, in their Designs for Curing: All which arises from their
Mistakes in the true Notion of Fevers, not knowing what they are, and from what
Principle they proceed. It remains now, that I set forth the direct Ways, and
due Means for effecting their Cures; which will appear more plainly and
probably Succesful, being compared with the common irrational Practice,
grounded upon false Notions of Fevers, wholly mistaken.

SECT. XIII. The Author 's Compendious Method, and Medicines for Curing Fevers;
compared with the Common Practice.
IN the first place, I shall set before you the Common Prctaice upon Fevers;
and take the Account thereof from Riverius a French Author of great Repute;
much consulted with, and followed by most Practisers: He having Collected from
the best Writers, what is most remarkable, and thought most useful for Curing;
so that in his Praxis you have the Methods, and chief Matter of all the rest.
And his Book being furnished with variety of Medicines, many that are
inquisitive after Physic do peruse and esteem that Book.

I shall here only take notice, and cursorily view the great Magazine of
Medicines, disposed under the several Divisions of Fevers; as properly and
necessarily assigned, to answer all the Indications of those different Fevers,
variously. denominated, and distinguished; as Diseases requiring different
Methods, and various Remedies.

But how unnecessary, improper, and injurious, most of that trouble and charge
of Medicines will appear, upon inquiry into the Nature and Vanity of them: As
also by comparing with our Design of Curing; which is performed with very
little.

In putrid Continual Fevers, (so called) he proceeds thus: Bleeding is
appointed two or three Times most commonly. If good Blood first appears; you
must continue to take away, until the putrid bad Blood comes; and then diminish
that: But if bad corrupt Blood comes forth first; you must continue letting
out, until it appears good. All which is so absurd and ridiculous; that I shall
not spend Time to expose the folly, but refer you to what has been said.

And if Bleeding be not thought fit; then Cupping with Scarification, is to
supply that Place. This is like the rest.

His Pharmaceutic Remedies, are all comprised under these two Heads:
Evacuating, and Alteratives. Under the first, are comprehended Purges, Vomits,
Sweating Medicines, and provokers of Urine.

His Purgatives are Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Catholic Electuary, Lenitive
Electuary, Electuary Diaprunes, Syrup of Roses, Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb,
etc. and these are variously compounded, and made into Potions, with Stilled
Waters, or Decoctions: Or else given in the form of Bolus, by adding some
Pouders to them.

They that know no better, do appoint such as these are; and the Sick must
submit thereto: And these I did use in the beginning of my Practice, when I was
a Prescriber, (Forty Years ago) and guessed at Medicines, as others now do,
that Prescribe to the Shops; any thing will serve for a Recipe, because you are
to have Variety of them, and a long Course. But I have given sufficient
Information elsewhere, concerning this Matter; that I shall not repeat here.

Clysters this Author appoints to be given often; every Day, or every other
Day; made of Decoction of Emollients and Coolers: Barley, Prunes, Mallows,
Violet leaves, Lettice, Endive, Housleek, etc. And dissolve in the Decoction
Electuary Catholicum, Diaprunum, Cassia, Oil of Water Lillies, or Violets.

The Cordials many and various; which I shall not recite; a Glass of good true
Wine, better than all that; and less to do. But to make Sickness chargeable and
hazardous; to invent much Business for the Shops, and occasion the Physician to
visit often, to know the event thereof; many things are devised, unnecessary,
frivolous, or injurious.

And he that does not promote the Trade of Physic after this manner; shall be
defamed and vilified, with the Title of Quack; and the Silly People are
wheedled into a Belief, that he is no better: Though he be a legal Physician, and
his knowledge much beyond the Prescribing Practice. Now whether such blinded,
trapt sort of Folk, are to be pitied; or derided and scorned, when they Suffer
in Sickness: I leave it for others to give Judgment in the Case.

There are also Medicated Broths appointed, of Roots and Herbs, boiled with
Chicken, Hen, or Capon: So that you must neither Eat, nor Drink, but what is
Physick'd.

In the same Chapter, he distinguishes Fevers into Phlegmatic, Choleric, and
Melancholic; and appoints particularly, and differently for each. And as for
Spurious Fevers (so termed by him) arising from the mixture of various Humors,
the forenamed Medicines are to be Compounded, with regard to the predominant
Humor; that the greater Quantity be appropriated to the luxuriant prevailing
Humor.

All this is to make the World believe; what nice and exact Distinctions are
framed; and Medicines formed adaptly thereto; for Curing Fevers by the best and
most certain Rules of Art. But how vainly, and fallaciously (though speciously
offered) all this will appear; when I come to set forth, what is necessary in
Curing all the pretended Sorts of Fevers; and with how little it may be
performed; and not load a weak sick Person, with a multitude of trifling
ill-designed Medicines; under the Pretense of adapting to various kinds of
Fevers, injuriously so feigned.

Besides all these internal Medicines (and I named but some of them) there are
various external Applications appointed, to allay the heat of putrid Fevers:
some are applied to the Heart; others to the Region of the Liver, the
Testicles, Hands and Feet.

To the Heart there are both Liquids and Solids to be applied: To the other
Parts, Stilled Waters, Juices of Herbs, Unguents, and Liniments, amply set
forth in that Chapter, where you may see them, if you think they are worth
seeing.

All which unnecessary, troublesome, and ineffectual Inventions, do proceed from
want of the true Knowledge of Fevers; not discerning what febrile Heat is, and
from what Principle it does arise.

After all this much to do upon putrid Fevers; with so many internal, and
external Medicines; there remains, as much Business with the Symptoms of putrid
Fevers; and there are yet more variety of Medicines appointed for them: But I
shall not trouble you, nor my self, to give the Account of them.

I always thought, and do think so still; that true curative radical Medicines
against any Disease; are the surest Allayers, and safest Curers of Symptoms
that depend upon that Disease: so that no peculiar Provision of Medicines need
to be appropriated to Dependants.

But now all this is said; we have not run through a third Part, of the
Practice upon Fevers; nor named a quarter of the Medicines: But (waving the
Practice upon all the other Sorts of Fevers) here is enough to let you
understand what the Practice of the Learned is, and has been; this Author
having gathered from the rest, and disposed it into his own Method.

You that like it, may make Trial thereof, when you are Sick; and then tell
what it is to your Cost, and Hazard. This was the Practice of an Eminent Doctor
to the Court of France: And the Practice in other Courts of Princes, is
much-what like this. The Prescripts from Consultations are no better; and some
are worse.

The King of Spain has been treated no better by his Physicians; else he had
not lingered so long, nor relapsed so often into his Fevorish Distemper: but
endeavoring to Cure they know not what; it may in Time perchance be done: but
none can say when; probably and rationally from such Doings.

This Great Prince, has great Physicians about him, for He made them so: But if
they were as good, as great; they would have done better for Him.

Having showed you the Common Practice of others upon Fevers; now I must give
you an Account of my own, and then you may compare them.

There are three principal Evacuations appointed by Nature, to send off, and
free the Body, from all superfluous unserviceable Matter, the Relicts after
Digestion: And this useless or offensive Matter, goes out by three several and
different ways; by the Guts downwards, by the Vrinary Ductures, and by the
Pores outward to the Circumference.

When there is a Failure, or insufficient Performance of these daily
Operations, by the Debility of Nature; or by Food received unfitly in Quantity,
or Quality; or other Impediments that may obstruct, or pervert these necessary
grand Operations, from cleansing and carrying away all excrementitious,
depraved, injurious Matter, which ought to be sent forth: The remainders lodged
here, or there, infesting any Part of the Body; does breed all the Diseases,
which produce several Fevers.

This premised as certain and true: The Curing of all Fevers lie fair and open
before you; for they are performed by promoting the three grand Evacuations
named: viz. by Stool, by Urine, and by Transpiration; whereby the Body is
cleansed and discharged, from all indigested and degenerate Humoral Matter, or
Miasm; that breed those Diseases, upon which Symptomatical Fevers do depend.

The Curing of all Diseases after this Manner; is also the Curing of all
Fevers, which are only Dependants thereon: And there is no other and true way;
but by the Operations aforesaid.

It remains now, that I assign the Means, to perform truly and effectually,
those necessary Curative Operations: And they are only these two Comprehensive
Medicines, universal in their Classes. A Catholic purifying Extract; and a
Sudorific.

The purifying Extract operates by Stool, and Urine; sending forth by these
Canals of Emission; all morbific vicious Matter, that must pass those ways,
opens Obstructions of the Spleen, Liver, Pancreas, Mesentery, Kidneys, etc. of
which more at large, in a peculiar Tract upon this great Medicine. The Mystery
of Curing Comprehensively, etc.

The Sudorific Medicine opens all the Pores, to breathe out Impurities that
infest the Habit of Body, and external Parts: Clears and takes away all Cutany
Defoedations, Spots, Scurf, Scabs, Pustules, Tettars, Itch, etc.

In all malignant, contagious and pestilential Fevers; as Smallpox, Measels,
Plague, Spotted Fevers, and the like; I account this Medicine most Necessary
and Powerful.

These are the safe and surest ways of Curing; being the ways of Nature's
Institution. Let the morbific Matter be as various, and different in several
Persons, as you can find out, or form a peculiar Name for: Let it be lodged and
fixed here, and there, in any Part of the Body; or if it be moving and erratic,
troubling many Parts, at Times: one of these two Medicines, or both by Turns in
a Method and Order; will send forth the offending Matter, and clear the Body,
whether the Fever be continual or intermitting, malignant, etc. of what sort
soever.

I have heard of intermitting Fevers (called Agues) of a Year, or two Years
continuance under the use of Means; but I never yet was so baffled with any
Ague.

I will engage to Cure more Fevers with these two Medicines only; than any of
you shall with the two hundred Medicines appointed by Riverius, in his Practice
upon Fevers: And you shall have the Liberty, to use as many more, picked out of
other Authors.

Mine are no Book Medicines recommended by Authors, and taken up upon Trust (as
they do from one another) I like 'em not: But I depend upon my own Labor and
Experience; what I have formed, reformed, and proved often.

Most People are pleased with a Book stuffed full of Medicines; for this, and for
that, and for hundreds of Diseases: And they rove amongst them uncertainly;
venture upon them unsafely; and most commonly unsuccessfully. Very probable it
should be so; for they promise very little, to Him that understands the
designing and forming of true Serviceable and Safe Medicines.

Now Judge you; if two Extraordinary Medicines thus designed, and proved to
work through all Parts of the Body, by Cleansing and Purifying both the Organs,
and nutritious Juices; are not more hopeful, less troublesome, or chargeable;
than two hundred ill-composed, uncertain Medicines.

The two Medicines Proposed (Catholic in their Classes) Cure manifestly; that
is, by known ways and out-lets; such as Nature has framed, for ordinary daily
use; and for extraordinary occasions, in Sickness and Diseases.

I cannot believe a Disease is gone; except I see, or know, which way, and how
it went. There are Medicines to Charm Agues, and other Diseases; such as
Jesuits Powder, and many more of that kind; but I cannot confide in such Cures.

I call it Charming; when a Medicine stops the Course of a Disease, suppresseth
the Insults or Fits; and you know not which way, or how the morbific Matter
went; but you may rather suppose it remains: For, the Medicine made no manifest
Discharge, or Evacuation this way, or that way; so that the Disease is only
laid asleep for a Time, and will wake again, and appear in its former Shape; or
be transformed into some other Disease, that may prove as troublesome a Guest,
or worse than the Ague.

For, morbous Matter, the longer it continues in the Body, it grows worse, and
not better. Examples of this Nature we frequently meet with; of changing one
Disease for another: They were Cured of their Ague; but the Scurvey, Dropsy,
Tumor in the Bowels, or tumified Legs, etc. was the consequent and the proper
effect of a fallacious bad way of Curing.

The Curing of Fevers, is the Curing of all Diseases, upon which Fevers do
depend; for they are only Symptoms thereof: And no Disease of what Denomination
soever; but requires such Operations for Cure, as these two Medicines do
perform; either of the one, or of both.

You regard the Names of Diseases, and they deceive the World: I consider only
the Nature of Diseases in their material Causes, and from whence they arise. If
you multiply Diseases Circumstantially by various Names, and make a Thousand
more than now are; yet in Curing you are confined to the same Operations.

Whatever the Matter of Diseases is, though various by Name, or Nature; the
manner of sending it away is not so different a Way; but by the Common known
ways of Nature's Institution, and they are very few, as before named.

Purifying is a Catholic Operation, required in the Cure of all Diseases, by
what various Names soever Circumstantially denominated and distinguished: And
if that necessary Work will be done by one, or two Medicines extraordinarily
performing: better it is, than by two Hundred of the Common Medicines, of mean
Performance; if possible to be effected by such.

From hence you may understand, that the Thousands of Medicines invented and
dispersed abroad in the World; do keep the People Doing; and sometimes to their
undoing; venturing upon they know not what; proved by they know not whom.

Curing lies in a little compass, if it can be done; and by a little of radical
true Medicine, more likely to be done; than by many ill-contrived, operating
uncertainly at Random: wherefore doubting and mistrusting the Ability of a few;
they muster up many, to supply their Insufficiency. (Si non juvet unum, alterum
juvaturum sperant.) If some miss the Disease; the other they hope may arrive
thither.

In all Diseases and Sickness, the surest and safest Design is; to aim and
level, at the common and general Cause; impure, depraved, and unserviceable
Matter, that perverts the Faculties, infests diverse Parts, and lay the
Foundation of various Infirmities: which being removed and sent forth (by the
ways aforesaid) the great Work of Curing, is much-what performed. The remainder
to be done, is only roborating and confirming the Faculties, for due
performance of their Functions afterward; to prevent relapsing into the former
ill State.

If all Medicines had been designed, by the Operations that Nature performs in
Human Bodies; and not formed by and to the Names of Diseases: The whole
Practice of Physic, had not been a quarter so much enlarged, as now it is; nor
a tenth Part of the Medicines, so extravagantly invented.

By what has been said; you may see where the stress of Curing does lie; and
with how little it is to be done, if you go rightly about it: And thereby also
you may understand; how unnecessary and vain, the Multiplicity of Medicines
are, in the Practice of Fevers; or other Diseases, where no Fevers are
depending.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 35. read a qua. P. 41. distinguishes. P. 44. debent. Ibid. ignotae. P.
114. expulsive.

APPENDIX.
THE Author hereof, conforming to the Primitive Practice above Thirty Years
past; (for Reasons elsewhere given) and having often found ill usage, and
Detractions by some Men of the Physick-Trade; has therefore caused the
following Testimonials to be made Public; to stifle, and null the Defamations,
and Lies that have been spread abroad, to his Prejudice, and Loss to many
others; that else might have received the Benefit of his great Labor; beyond
what the Shops do afford.

OLIVERUS St. JOHN, Summus Communium Placitorum Dominus, Justiciarius, ac Almae
Vniversitatis Cantabrigiensis Cancellarius, Magistri and Scholares ejusdem.
Omnibus Christi Fidelibus Presentibus has Literas inspecturis, visuris vel
audituris, Salutem in Domino Sempiternam. Quia discretus Vir Everard
Maynwaringe Alumnus noster, Literas nostras Testimonales Gradus sui a nobis
petierit: Nos Conditiones and Merita Virorum affectu sincero perpendentes, eos
solos Testimonio nostro ornandos esse arbitramur, quos summos promeritos ut
istud beneficii a nobis consequantur. Quamobrem Vestrae Pietati per has Literas
significamus, praefatum Everard Maynwaringe ad Gradum Baccalauriatus in
Medicina, primo Die Mensis Julii Anno Domini Millesimo Sexcentesimo
Quinquagesimo Secundo admissum fuisse: Eique omnes Dignitates, Jura and
Privilegia quae ad illum Gradum and Ordinem spectant concessimus. Proinde omnes
Christi fideles, and Literarum Studiosos, Academiae nostrae nomine oratos esse
Volumus; ut qui illius Gradui, Doctrinae and Morum probitati Honos debetur; eum
huic Alumno nostro praestare non graventur. In Cujus rei Testimonium, Sigillum
nostrum commune presentibus apponi fecimus. Dat. Cantabrigiae in Senatu nostro,
tertio Die Mensis Julii Anno Domini Millesimo Sexcentesimo Quinquagesimo
Secundo.

Some Years after, the Author traveling into Ireland; and being in Dublin, at
the Time of a Public Commencement: upon producing this Diploma from Cambridge;
and performing such Exercises, as the Statutes of the University required: He
proceeded Doctor.

OMNIBUS CHRISTI FIDELIBUS, Ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem in
Domino. Cum non minimum sit intra Pietatis officia, cognitae veritati
Testimonium perhibere: Nos itaque Praepositus and Socii Seniores Collegii
Sacrosanctae and individuae Trinitatis juxta Dublin, Testamur venerabilem Virum
Everardum Maynwaringe, Virum in curandis Morbis feliciter and cum fructu
Aegrotantium diu versatum; in solemni Academicorum Conventu, Decimo Septimo
Augusti Anno Domini Millesimo Sexcentesimo Quinquagesimo quinto, Publicis
omnium Suffragiis Gradum Doctoratus in Medicina obtinuisse. Ac ut praemissa
omnibus quorum interest before innotescant, nostrum de praedicto Everardo
Testimonium, Subscriptis singulorum Nominibus, and publico Collegii Sigillo quo
in his utimur, confirmandum curavimus. Vicesimo secundo Augusti, Anno Domini
Millesimo Sexcentesimo Quinquagesimo Quinto.

Sam. Winter, Praep. Nath. Hoyle, Miles Symner, Johannes Stern, C. Williamson,
Adam Cusake.
NOS UNIVERSITATIS DUBLINIENSIS Vicecancellarius and Procurator, nec non in
eadem Medicinae Publicus Professor; Testamur Everardum Maynwaringe decimo
septimo Die Mensis Augusti Anno Dom. 1655, in pleno Conventu praedictae
Vniversitatis in Sacello Collegii Sacro-sanctae and individuae Trinitatis juxta
Dublin habito, Gradum Doctoratus in Medicina obtinuisse. Quod nostrum de eo
Testimonium subscriptis nominibus confirmandum curavimus. Quinto Die Mensis
Septembris, Anno Dom. 1655.

Hen. Jones, Pro-Cancel. Johannes Stern, Med. Profess. Pub. C. Williamson,
Proc.
These are Transcripts from the Originals, with the University Seals affixed;
now in the Author's Custody.

Advertisements.
THE Efficacy and Extent of true Purgation. Showing, what that Operation is;
not as Vulgarly understood. How performed in Human Bodies. By what Means fitly
to be done. When; How often; and in what Cases to be used, etc.

The Mystery of Curing Comprehensively; explained and proved Argumentatively,
and Practically, in Three Parts, etc.

Monarchia Microcosmi. The Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period, of Vital
Government in Man, etc.

Enquiries into the general Catalogue of Diseases, etc.

The Practice of Physic Reformed, etc.

A Treatise of the Scurvey. Another of Consumptions.

The History and Mystery of the Venereal Lues, or Pox.

The dangerous Transition of Pains, to Inflammations, Tumors, Apostems, ulcers,
etc.

The Ancient and Modern Practice of Physic, examined and compared.

The Complete Physician, etc.

The Method and Means, of enjoying Health, Vigor and long Life.

All Writ by the AUTHOR hereof.


