A NARRATIVE OF THE PRINCIPAL ACTIONS Occurring in the WARS BETWIXT Sueden and
Denmark.

Before and after the ROSCHILD TREATY: WITH The Counsels and Measures by which
those Actions were directed: Together With A View of the Suedish and other
Affairs, as they stood in Germany in the year 1675. with Relation to England.

Occasionally communicated by the Author to the Right Honorable George late
Earl of Bristol, and since his decease found among his Papers.

LONDON: Printed by A.C. for H. Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. M.
D.C. LXXVII.

FOR The Right Honorable THE EARL of BRISTOL.
MY LORD,
I Esteem it as a singular favor and honor that your Lordship thinks me
capable of giving you any information concerning the Northern Affairs; the
Scene of your Lordships many eminent Employments and Actions having been laid
nearer the warm Sun. The Draught I have here sent was made several years since,
and only communicated in private with some friends: In the composing whereof I
was not a little advantaged by being a spectator of the Actions, and privy to
some of the Counsels of both Kings. But how far I have answered those
advantages in the ensuing Narrative I submit to your Lordship's Censure, and
remain

MY LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S Most humble and Obedient Servant, Philip Meadowe.
Parham in Suff. Sep. 24. 1675.
A NARRATIVE OF THE PRINCIPAL ACTIONS Occurring in the WARS BETWIXT SUEDEN and
DENMARK. Before and after the ROSCHILD TREATY. With the Counsels and measures
by which those Actions were directed.
THE ancient Emulation and jealousies betwixt the two Crowns of Sueden and
Denmark, occasioned by their near Neighborhood and frequent Wars, have been
still heightened and promoted by the late Conquests the Crown of Sueden has made
in Germany. By which the Suede enlarging his Dominion beyond the Baltic to
those goodly possessions of Pomeren and Bremen, has betwixt his ancient
Patrimony on one side, and his new acquisitions on the other, as it were
enclosed and beleaguered Denmark. The fatal effects of a Suedish Power
established on this side the Baltic, the Dane experimented in the year 1643. in
the Reign of Christiern the fourth, when upon occasion of some differences
arising betwixt the two Crowns in relation to the commerce and navigation of
each others subjects, and the new impositions exacted by the Dane in the Sound,
Queen Christina without any previous denunciation of War sent secret Orders to
General Torstenson, who at that time commanded the Suedish Army in Germany, to
invade therewith the Danish Dominions, which that wise General performed with
such secrecy and diligence, that the first intelligence of his attempt was
brought to Copenhagen by the ordinary post, advertising how the Suede was
entered Holstein with an Hostile Army. In that war the Dane lost Halland,
Jempterland, Gothland and the Oesel. For though Halland by the Treaty at
Broomsborow was not formally alienated from the Crown of Denmark, as it was in
the succeeding Roschild Treaty, but only mortgaged or leased to Sueden for
thirty years; lest the reputation of Denmark should seem too much prostituted
by the utter abscission and dismembring of so considerable a Province from that
Crown; yet was it such a mortgage as in truth did amount to an absolute cession
or alienation; For the term of years when expired was made renewable from
thirty to thirty, till the Suede should receive an equivalent for Halland to
his own liking and satisfaction.

A Peace being thus reestablished in the year 1644. by the Treaty made at
Broomsborow upon the Frontier of both Kingdoms, things continued quiet betwixt
the two Crowns for some years, till the late Charles Gustavus King of Sueden in
the year 1655. imbarquing himself in a war against Poland, transported thither
the choicest of the Suedish soldiery to serve in that expedition; where that
martial King carried all before him, but grasped at more than he could well
enclose, and conquered more than he could reasonably hope to keep, till at
length old Zarnetsky makes head against him with a powerful body of horse, and
by his example the newly submitted Provinces revolt as quickly from their new
Lord, insomuch that the Suede was embarass'd on all sides, and his affairs in
great decadency.

This conjuncture gratified the Dane, who thought his turn was now come to
retaliate upon the Suede, and hoped by the favor of this opportunity to regain
what he had lost in the former surprises. And to give the better color of
justice to his Arms, lest it should be thought he was rather invited thereto by
the advantage of the occasion, then constrained by the cause of any new
provocations or injuries, open war is solemnly proclaimed against Sueden by the
antiquated formalities of a Herald. Besides public letters and manifests are
sent abroad to satisfy foreign Princes and States, and to vindicate the Right of
his undertaking.

The truth is, the Party was not ill concerted, for the Brandenburger was
already drawn off from the Suedish Alliance, and upon good assurance given him
from the Polish Court, that the Soverainty of the Ducal Prussia should be
conferred upon him (which he accordingly now enjoys) He confederated himself
with the Pole and Dane against Sueden. The Hollander also was of the party,
though as yet but covertly, and great sums of money were advanced by Amsterdam
and the trading Companies (for they would not have it seem the Act of the
States but of private persons) by way of loan to the King of Denmark upon
securities of the Customs in the Sound and Norway.

The Dane raised a considerable Army of about fifteen or sixteen thousand men
well appointed, rendesvous'd them in Holstein, from thence passed the Elb,
besieged and took Bremerford a Town belonging to the Suede in the Bishopric of
Bremen. But here some military men took the freedom to blame the Danish
Conduct. For had he carried the war on the other side of the Baltic, entered
Sueden it self, at that time disfurnished of her principal Officers and
Soldiers, her King being absent in a remore Country, reported to be dead, the
very terror of an invading Army might have wrought such consternation in the
minds of the people, as probably to have given the Dane an opportunity of
advancing the war as high as Stockholm. But he on the contrary attacks the
Suedish Dominions in Germany, thereby alarming friends as well as enemies: For
the Princes of the nether Saxon Circle entering into a combination declare this
invasion of the Bishopric to be a breach of the Peace of the Empire, and a
violation of the Instrumentum Pacis concluded at Munster, for the observation
whereof they stood reciprocally Engaged.

Thus, not waging war in good earnest, the Dane by middle Counsels lost his
opportunity, for whilst his Army stood at a gaze not well knowing which way to
take, the King of Sueden marches with all imaginable speed from Poland, and
laying all in ashes behind him to secure his rear from the infal of the Polish
horse, and leaving strong Garrisons in Thorren, Marienburg, Elbing and some
other Towns in Prussia, passes through Pomeren and marches directly for
Holstein and Jutland. It was generally conceived that now, if ever, the Dane
would have fought him harassed and tired as he was with a tedious march. But
the new Levies durst not adventure the shock with veteran Troops, used to fight
and used to conquer. The Danish Army plies and yields ground before the Suede
without fighting, who pursues his point and increases in numbers as he does in
fame, all things favoring the victorious. The Danes diminishing as fast gave
back till they came to Fredericsode in Jutland, where they sheltred the
remainder of their Infantry, having left Garrisons behind them in Gluckstad,
Cremp and Rensburg. The Horse were transported into Funen an Island opposite to
Fredericsode, so that the Suede was left absolute Master of the Campaign, and
possessed of the convenient quarters of Holstein and Jutland. Some of the
Inhabitants conveyed the richest part of their goods to Wensussel an Island on
the North of Jutland, and to Samsoe, another near adjoining Isle, both which
became soon after prize to the Victors.

Fredericfode was now besieged by General Wrangel, a new Town endowed with a
large Charter of Privileges to invite dwellers and Trade, fortified according
to the modern way with Bastions, false bray, and ditch, but the. works not
fully finished. The Circumvallations describe a bow or semicircle, and the
little Belt running by it, the chord.

To the Belt-side it was not fortified at all, no more than by the water and
channel, only the two bastions upon the two extremities of the semicircle were
set as far into the bed of the River as conveniently they could be, and then
from the corner of each bastion a strong palisade was run into the River as far
as deep water. Wrangel so far profited of the security of his Enemy, or the
treachery of some correspondents, that he found means in a dark night to cut
asunder those Palisades, and making two false attacks in two other places to
amuse and distract them within, and rushing on at the same time with a prepared
body of Horse and Foot up to the saddle-skirts in water, wheeled about the
Bastion and entered the Fort. Had there been but an ordinary work along the bank
of the River from one Bastion to another, or a body of men drawn up in Battalia
to receive the Enemy upon the file, he must of necessity have taken the water
again; But there was neither of these. The Governor was a Grave Senator of
the Kingdom, but no experienced soldier, only justified his fidelity to the
King his Master by dying upon the place, and was accompanied by about four
thousand more, who were either slain or taken prisoners. Some time after, a
Lieutenant and a Corporal who had served in Fredricsode, and were afterward
surprised by the Dane in the Suedish Quarters, were publicly executed at
Copenhagen, as those who had traitorously betrayed the place. But whether their
Crime was really such, or that they otherways criminal were made use of as a
sacrifice to appease the angry Citizens enraged at the loss of Fredericsode, is
uncertain.

Thus we have posted the Suede in that important Fortress, which bearing the
name of the then King of Denmark, and thus unhappily taken, might seem as it
were to presage by an inauspicious omen the succeeding misfortunes which
involved that King: We will leave him there a while Master of the Continent,
and the Dane retreated to his Islands: And having thus far drawn down the
general scheme of the military affairs, let us step back a little to take a
short survey of the civil transactions contemporary with the former.

England had too great an Interest in the Baltic, (the Mediterranean of the
North) to sit still without making reflection upon those commotions in the
Northern Kingdoms. For besides the general concerns of a free Trade, which of
necessity must have suffered interruption by the continuance of this War,
England being at that time Engaged in a War with one branch of the Austrian
family, viz. with Spain, would rather the Suedish Arms had been at liberty to
give check to the other branch in Germany as occasion might offer, then to be
diverted therefrom by a war with Denmark. Two Gentlemen are sent over to
endeavor a reconciliation betwixt both Kings, Mr. Meadowe who was dispatched
to the Danish Court, arrived there in September, 1657. much about the time the
Suede entered Jutland. His business was to remonstrate how unwelcome it was to
them in England to understand of a Rupture betwixt the two Crowns, albeit they
esteemed the communication there of by the Letters and Manifest of that King as
an expression of friendship. That besides the effusion of Christian blood
betwixt two Nations linked together by the common bonds of Nature and Religion,
and both of them leagued in Amity with England, the continuation of that War
might in so perilous a juncture considerably endanger the whole Protestant
Cause and Interest; and nothing could have happened more advantageous to Spain,
with whom England was in open Hostility. Besides his Majesty o^ Denmark could
not but be sensible how much the freedom o^ Navigation and Commerce in the
Baltic would be impeached thereby, to the prejudice of the Neighboring
Nations, but o^ none more than England, as continually fetching Naval Store
from those Countries. He was therefore sent on the part of England to that King
to offer the best and most friendly offices for accommoding all differences be
twixt the two Crowns, and putting a stop to so unhappy a War, and to assure him
that they would employ their utmost Interest with the King of Sueden to dispose
him thereto, and to that purpose had already sent a Gentleman to Him. And that
if this their tendered Mediation were accepted, they would in the management
thereof deal impartially, and endeavor that the Peace once reestablished might
for the future be inviolably observed.

To this Proposal the King of Denmark returned Answer in writing under his Seal
and Signature, bearing date September the twenty fifth, 1657. Declaring that
the care of England for the tranquillity of his Kingdoms, the freedom of public
commerce, and quieting all differences, was gratefully accepted by him. And
that he was ready to enter upon a Treaty of a sure and Honorable Peace under
the mediation of England. And so soon as the King of Sueden should testify a
suitable concurrence on his part, he would further declare himself as to time,
place and other the Preliminaries to an ensuing Treaty.

This Declaration was transmitted to the King of Sueden with all possible
diligence, and drew from him a Reply dated at Wismar, October the nineteenth,
1657 In which after many Expostulations how injuriously he had been dealt with
by the Dane, intermixed with some language which the Dane resented as
reproachful, he declares likewise his consent to enter upon a Treaty under the
mediation of France and England. And that the Preliminaries as to place of
Treating, number of Commissioners, safe Conducts, etc. should be adjusted
according to the transaction betwixt the two Crowns in the year 1644. Provided
that safe conducts in due form be without delay delivered to the Mediators, and
a reasonable time prefixed by the King of Denmark for meeting of the
Commissioners.

This Reply of the Suede being communicated to the King of Denmark, produced
from him another Declaration of the third of November, 1657. That he also
consents to the Transactions in forty four, only as to the place of the future
Treaty he conceives Lubec or some other Town in that Neighborhood to be most
commodious. That the Treaty commence under the mediation of England, and of the
States General of the United Provinces. And so soon as France should Offer him
their mediation, he would accept thereof. And that the designed Peace be not
restrained to the two Crowns of Denmark and Sueden, but the King of Poland and
Elector of Brandenburg be comprehended in the same. These things being first
accorded by His Majesty of Sueden, that he was ready to deliver his safe
conducts into the hands of the Mediators.

It was easy to foresee how this comprehension of the Pole insisted on by the
Dane would trouble the whole scene of Affairs, which consideration put the
English Mediator upon excepting against it as a new proposal foreign to the
present question. How that the mediation of England was offered only betwixt
the two Crowns, and so accepted by his Majesty of Denmark without any mention
of Poland. How that this would render the so much desired Peace tedious and
difficult, if not impossible, for that the differences betwixt Sueden and
Denmark were a sudden distemper easily cured if taken in time, but those
betwixt Sueden and Poland were in the nature of an inveterate malady, harder by
much to be eradicated. That the Great Seal of Poland by which the Ministers of
that Crown must be Commissionated as Plenipotentiaries for a Treaty, was
engraven with the Arms of Sueden, which that King would never admit of.

However this second Declaration of the King of Denmark of the third of
November was sent to the King of Sueden, and begat another from him of the
seventh of December dated at Wismar, wherein he declares himself not satisfied
with the nomination of Lubec for the place of Treaty, as being a recession from
the Customs anciently practiced betwixt the two Kingdoms, and the regulation
agreed on in the year 1644. that when occasional differences arose betwixt the
two Crowns, the Commissioners of both sides should meet upon the Frontiers for
adjusting thereof with the more speed. Moreover He takes notice of the
conquisite delays and difficulties made by the Dane in intermixing other
controversies with his own, and which have no reference to the Danish War. Yet
notwithstanding he was willing to grant safe conducts to such Confederates of
the Dane, as should testify a desire of being present at a Treaty in any place
of the confines. And as for the States General, after their ratification of the
Treaty made by their own Ambassadors at Elbing, whereby the friendship betwixt
Sueden and them is renewed; He would so declare himself on their behalf, in
case they offer him their mediation for composing this War, as should
sufficiently prevent any just occasion of complaint.

To this the King of Denmark rejoined another Answer of the twenty seventh of
December. 1657. insisting upon the immediate admission of the States General to
the mediation, without suspending it upon the previous Act of first ratifying
the Elbing Treaty, a point which had been depending twelve months, and was like
to be longer. Adheres to the place formerly nominated by him for assembling the
Commissioners. And that the Pole and Brandenburger should not only have a bare
license of being present at the Treaty, but that the respective Treaties to be
had with them as Confederates and Principals with the Dane in the same War,
should proceed by the same gradations and measures as that with Denmark.

The truth is, in the reasoning and debate concerning the place of meeting
there was a secret drift on both sides, unexpressed by either. The Dane would
have it at Lubec or any other neutral place in Germany, convenient for the Pole
and Brandenburger to be there present as parties with him, whereby to have the
opportunity of strengthening each the others hand by a communication of
Councils, and concerting of Affairs to the promoting of a common Interest. On
the other hand the Suede would have it on the frontiers over the Baltic,
whither the Pole and Brandenburger could not with any reasonable convenience
come, designing thereby to disunite the Confederates by the jealousy of a
separate Treaty. And perhaps might at the same time have treated openly with
the Dane, and underhand with the Pole, and they two striving to prevent each
other in the Peace, for fear of being deserted each by other in the War, where
he found most advantageous conditions granted him, there conclude Peace and
prosecute the War against the other.

To prevent this the English Mediator endeavored to draw from the King of
Sueden a previous intimation on what terms and conditions he would rest
satisfied, in case the King of Denmark would condescend to a separate Treaty;
That so when the Commissioners came to meet they might have nothing more to do
then to digest the several Articles into form to be signed and sealed, and so
the business effected before the rumor of a Treaty divulged; And likewise
partly to facilitate the way of an Agreement, and partly to foretaste the
temper of Affairs, some Conditions were insinuated of the following nature.

A general Amnesty of what was past. Restitution of places taken each upon
other. A solemn Renewal under good Garranties of the Treaty in 1644. A redress
of Grievances relating to Trade. And a way ascertained for better prevention of
all defraudations in the Sound, the pretended cause of the War on the Danish
part.

And to incline the King of Denmark to disjoin his Interests from Poland, it
was represented by the Mediator, what a broken reed Poland had hitherto proved
to him. Sometimes making proffer to pass their forces over the Oder, then
presently retreating upon pretense of joining the Austrian foot, not so much as
entering Pomeren all this while to give the Suedish Army a diversion, who lay
securely quartered in Holstein and Jutland. That the Conditions of the Alliance
were mutual and reciprocal, which not being performed on the Polish part, His
Majesty of Denmark was no longer obliged. That Confederacies were for mutual
safety, and not intended to oblige Princes to their Ruin, either singly or in
company with others. That he had the fresh Example of his Heroic Father of
happy memory, who though he had entered into an Alliance with the Protestant
Princes of Germany, yet the necessity of his Affairs to recover what was lost,
and secure what was left, constrained him to make a Peace with the Emperor in
the year 1629. exclusive of his Allies.

But neither did these Reasons prevail with the King of Denmark to depart from
his Alliance with the Pole, till a more cogent necessity extorted afterward
from him a separate Treaty. Nor was the King of Sueden willing to anticipate
the business of his Commissioners by precedaneous intimations of his Demands.
Nor to content himself as to the terms and conditions of the Peace with less
then an honorable amends for the wrong done him. But in his jolly way of
expression, since the Dane had led him so long a dance from Poland to Jutland,
he was resolved, at least to make him pay the fiddlers.

Thus the War of the Cabinet was managed by missives and memorials, but that of
the field was carried on in a smarter manner. The extraordinary violent frost
was by this time increased to such a degree, that the little Belt which divides
Jutland from the Isle of Funen was so intensely frozen, as suggested to the
Suedish King an Enterprise (full of hazard but not disagreeable to a fearless
mind edged with Ambition) of marching over the ice into Funen, with horse, foot
and Cannon. Some little skirmishings there were upon the shore of the Island,
if it may be called a shore where there was no longer Sea, and the Dane had in
the most commodious landing places made large cuts in the Ice, which were soon
congeled again though with a softer crust. Into one of these a small division
of about forty Suedish Horse with a Cornet unwarily fell, and were there
swallowed up. Major General Henderson a Scotch man was posted at Middlefar with
a Body of men, but upon the Suedes approach deserted his station, for which he
was after in great danger of a Council of War, had not the English Minister
seasonably interposed for his rescue. The Dane had about three or four thousand
foot and two thousand Horse upon the Isle, who were all of them defeated and
taken: and some of them being Germans took party with the Suede invited by the
hopes of good booty the plunder of a fertile and well peopled Island. The Suede
marched directly to Odensea the capital Town, spacious and well built, which
they entered without resistance. For as well Funen as the other Danish Isles are
all open and unfortified, and have no defensible places except Copenhagen and
Cronenburg, both upon the Isle of Zeland, having been ever esteemed
sufficiently fortified by being Islands, and the Kings of Denmark having been
always Masters of a considerable Naval strength. But now being no longer
considered as such, but as contiguous and fastened with the continent, they were
exposed an easy prey to an adventurous and forward Enemy.

It Is observable that this miraculous march over a breadth of the Sea of more
than twenty English miles, for such is the distance betwixt Funen and Zeland
the way the Army marched, was the resolve of the King himself contrary to the
sense of Wrangel and the principal Officers of his Army, and it is but just he
should have the glory of the success, who had he miscarried could not have
avoided the imputation of temerity.

The News of the loss of Funen being arrived at Copenhagen brought the more
terror with it, because besides the loss of so important an Isle, it awakened
the apprehension that the same Bridge which had let the Suede over the little
Belt into Funen, might do the like over the great Belt into Zeland. Whereupon
the King of Denmark sends in haste to the English mediator, desiring him to
renew with all diligence the former proposal of a separate Treaty which had
been for some time interrupted, and to set it on foot with all possible
Expedition. The Mediator being assured of the reality of the King's Intentions,
dispatches forthwith an Express to the King of Sueden with a Letter, the
Contents whereof I shall insert, as being that upon which the following
business turned. It acquainted him that the King of Denmark had already
nominated and authorized the Lords Joachin Gersdorf Rix Hofmaster, and
Christian Scheel, both Senators of the Kingdom, his Commissioners and
Plenipotentiaries to meet, treat and conclude with like Commissioners from him
at such time and place as he his Majesty of Sueden should please to appoint. It
requested him on the part and at the Instance of England, to depute in like
manner his Commissioners, to prefix a time and place for meeting, to send safe
Conducts for him the Mediator and the Danish Commissioners. Adding moreover,
that his Majesty of Sueden being as it were in possession, or at least in
assurance of an Honorable Peace, if he would Please henceforward to suspend
Hostility, testifying thereby the moderation and temper wherewith he Governed
his Prosperity and success, he would perform a work worthy the greatness of his
Name, gratify the neighboring Princes and States, and more especially oblige
England by doing it in favor of a particular request.

This Letter bore date from Copenhagen February the third, 1657. To which the
King returned Answer by the same messenger from Newberg in Funen, February the
fifth, so quick was the dispatch at a distance of fourscore miles English. The
King's Answer was as follows; To thank him the Mediator for his diligence in
promoting the concerns of a Peace, which the Dane had hitherto so obstinately
opposed: That he was willing to enter immediately upon a Treaty with Denmark
under the respective mediations of France and England. And since it was left to
him to appoint the place and time, he gave the King of Denmark the choice
either of the Isle of Sproo or of Rudkoping in Langland for the Commissioners
sufficiently Authorized on both sides to meet at, within eight days after the
date of this his Letter. That together with this Letter he had sent safe
Conducts in due form for him the said English Mediator and for the Danish
Commissioners, to come stay and return at pleasure. That the business required
the greater haste because he could promise himself no security in a suspension
of Arms.

This Answer was a full concession of the desired Treaty, but the King would
not be complimented out of his advantages into a cessation of Arms, well
knowing the powerful effects of panic fears from the suddenness of a successful
Invasion, and that the only way to profit by them is to give no respit for
recollecting. The Suedish King contiues his march with all possible diligence:
His nearest way to Zeland had been over the great Belt from Neuburg to Corsure
about sixteen miles English, but he chooses rather the way of Langland so to
Laland and Falster, which though the farther was the safer, because the traject
from Island to Island was no where so broad as it was in the Channel of the
Belt betwixt Neuburg and Corsure.

The forementioned dispatch with the safe Conducts from the King of Sueden
being arrived at Copenhagen, the Danish Commissioners accompanied with the
English Mediator, put themselves without delay upon their journey toward
Rudcoping in the Isle of Langland, the place appointed for the Treaty. They had
travailed little more than sixty miles English, when not far from Wardinburg
the first Town from the Sea upon Zealand, they met with the avant-curriers and
scouts of the Suedish Army, by whom they were advertised the King was newly
entered upon Zeland, and not far behind. This incredible diligence was an
astonishing surprise to the Danish Commissioners, whom in their journey from
Copenhagen to Rudcoping the King met at half way. Passing by the Scouts
unmolested under the security of the safe conducts, they soon after met the
King himself riding in a slide (after the manner of the Northern Countries when
the Snows are deep) at the head of about two hundred Finnish Horse. All
alighting to salute the King, and he the same to resalute them, he willed them
to pass on to the neighboring Town, where he would speedily be with them, for
that he was going only to view a ground where conveniently he might draw up his
Army in Battalia.

To Wardinburg they went and there made the first entry upon the Treaty, and
met there the Chevalier Terlon Ambassador of France, who came out of Germany in
Company with the Suedish King. The Commissioners for the Treaty on the part of
Sueden were Count Ulefeldt, who though a Dane, yet having received great
disobligations from his native Country after many services, turned
malecontent, and had for some time refug'd himself with the Suede. He being a
person of Excellent endowments and withal of a haughty and vindicative nature,
was made use of as a fit Instrument upon this occasion against the Danish
Court. The English Mediator at the instance of the Dane had privately moved the
Suedish King to change him for some more grateful person, but it would not be
granted. The other Commissioner was the Baron Steno Bielk a Senator of Sueden.
But Monsieur Coyet and Secretary Ernstein though neither of them Commissioners,
because not being Senators of the Kingdom, their Character was inferior to that
of the Danes, yet being persons of mature knowledge in affairs of State were
made use of as principal Instruments in the negotiating part.

The Suedish King staid no longer at Wardinburg then was necessary for drawing
over his Army from the Isle of Falster, and then ranging them in Battalia with
a large extended front, in view of the Danish Commissioners and their retinue,
to oftentate their numbers and make them greater in appearance than they were
in truth, at length filed into a march the direct way to Copenhagen. There was
little comfort in Treating whilst the King was marching, and the Mediators and
Danish Commissioners whose persons might in so dangerous a crisis be needful
nearer their own King, not being satisfied to be left behind the Army,
adjourned the Treaty and breaking up from Wardinburg overtook the Suedish King
at a Town called Keug four leagues from Copenhagen. The next morning he drew up
in Battalia again, and then fell off as before into an orderly march after a
division of Polish Horse upon the forlorn. His number about seven or eight
thousand men well disciplined and enured to hardships, whereof one half were
Horse, and a small train of Artillery of eight or ten fieldpieces. Some were
left behind to guard the conquered places besides the garrison of Fredericsode.
That night he took up his head quarters at a village within a league and half
of Copenhagen, and within sight of it, of which he would sportingly say she was
a fair Lady and deserved dancing for. And he had reason to say so, for had he
won her as he wood her, she had brought him for her dower all Denmark and
Norway, and then without the tedious enumeration of all his particular
Principalities, he might have shortened his Imperial Style and Title into that
of King of the North.

The Mediators and Commissioners went to Torstrup a near adjoining village
there to draw up the concept or minutes of a Treaty, which when mutually agreed
on, all Hostilities were immediately to cease, though it would require longer
time to deduce those minutes into a larger form fit for the ratification of
both Kings. Let us leave them a while at their work and take a short view of
the posture and condition of those in Copenhagen.

The Portifications of the City were much decayed, partly through long security
not having, seen an Enemy for many Ages, partly through parsimony, to avoid an
expense supposed needless. Besides great Trading Towns are not willing to be
fettered up with walls and bastions, and perhaps in this case the Danish
Nobility were as little willing as the Citizens, fearing the strength of the
Town might make the Burgers heady: The Walls being only of earth and not
revested or faced with brick or stone, were much crumbled down with the frost,
and easy to be climbed without the help of scaling ladders; and the earth so
petrified that spade or mattock could not be made use of for present repair.
The spring waters began to fail, and some being long frozen were corrupted for
want of air and motion. There was not one piece of Cannon upon the Walls when
the Commissioners parted thence, but by this time good store were hastily drawn
from the Arsenal and ships in the Harbor, and mounted upon ship-carriages.
There was no provision of food or fuel for a siege, no garrison more than the
Burgers, only upon this Alarm a body of five or six hundred horse and some few
foot were drawn from Sconen, and passed over the Sound upon the Ice into the
City. But the horse would soon have wanted forage, and being most of them
Germans, the least disorder might not improbably have seduced them over to
others of their Countrymen in the Suedish Army, in hopes to have shared in the
promised harvest of rich plunder. Besides the Dane quitting the field in
Sconen, the Suedish Feldtheer Steinboch was ready on that side with five or six
thousand men to have passed the Ice and joined his Master in Zeland. But
nothing so much dismayed the Dane as the consideration how none of his
Confederates was in possible capacity of relieving him in this utmost
extremity. The Pole and Brandenburger were remote as in another world, and
seemed glad that the storm had passed over their heads and fallen in another
quarter. The Ice which was a bridge to the Suede, was a bar to the Hollander.
And so wonderful was that year, the Seas were not open for above three months
after. On the first of May following, a ship at an Anchor in the Road before
Copenhagen had her Cable of sixteen Inches circumference cut by a shoal of Ice.
Add to this the temper of the people, some murmuring (as is usual in such
occasions) against the conduct of their Governors, others exclaiming they were
betrayed, all affrighted and looking on their condition as desperate. As a
Testimony whereof let me add this one instance, the English Mediator returning
upon some occasions from the Camp into the City, found his house well fraught
with rich goods, which the best of the Inhabitants had conveyed thither as to a
sanctuary against the plundering Suede. And yet this testimony is due to the
person of the Danish King, that he comported himself with a magnanimous
constancy and firmness amidst all these misfortunes.

It Is not irrational to suppose that if the King of Sueden had been truly
informed of the state of the Town, he would not have slipped the most
advantageous opportunity he ever had of taking Copenhagen. But though he knew
all was not well with the Dane, yet he did not know the worst, and being
already laden with a heap of prosperities crowded beyond expectation upon him,
esteemed it more prudential to lay hold on those eminent and securer advantages
offered him by Treaty, than to depend upon the issues of War subject to
vicissitudes. Yea it is not irrational to believe that some of the wiser heads
in the Suedish Court did not heartily desire to see their King Master of
Copenhagen, lest the commodiousness of the situation preferable to that of
Stockholm should invite either him or his Successor to make that the capital
seat of the Monarchy, whereby Sueden should in process of time have insensibly
degenerated from a Kingdom to a Province.

The minutes of the Treaty were in few days concluded at Torstrup, upon which a
cessation of Arms immediately followed: And from thence the Mediators and
Commissioners removed to Roschild, to digest more at leisure those summary
Articles into the body of a Treaty. Ten days were spent upon that Affair, till
the whole was fully perfected and finished. And then the respective Instruments
were in solemn form signed and sealed by the Mediators and Commissioners on
both sides, and interchangeably delivered each to other. Which from the place
where it was finally concluded, though begun at Wardinburg, agreed at Torstrup,
yet finished here, was denominated the Roschild Treaty.

By this Treaty the King of Denmark was a great loser if we consider what he
quitted, but it may as well be said he was a great saver if we consider what he
kept. For he who had lost all in the field could not reasonably expect to
regain it in the cabinet; And though some of his principal branches were lopt
off, which in time might grow again, yet the root was preserved which else had
been lost without resource. So that it was but an expression of tenderness to
his King and Country what the Danish Rix Hofmaster (a right worthy person)
whisperd into the ear of the English Mediator, Utinam nescirem literas. The
lands and Territories which by this Treaty were alienated and transferred from
Denmark to the Crown of Sueden, were the Provinces of Sconen and Bleking (as
for Halland I reckon the Suede had that before) likewise the Isle of Bornholm
and the two Governments of Bahuys and Drontheim in Norway.

The English Mediator had two parts to act in this Scene; one was to moderate
the Demands as far as he could in favor of the Sufferer, without disobliging
the Suede by a too notorious partiality. The other was to watch lest any thing
be stipulated betwixt the two Kings prejudicial to the Interests of England. It
was moved that the whole Kingdom of Norway should be rent off from Denmark and
united to Sueden, with which it lay contiguous: This entrenched upon England as
giving the Suede the sole and entire possession of the chief materials, as
Masts, Deals, Pitch, Tar, Copper, Iron, etc. needful for the apparel and
equipage of our ships, too great a Treasure to be entrusted in one hand. The
Mediator in avoidance of this was the first who insinuated the Proposal of
rendering Sconen and Bleking to the Suede, which would cut off that unnecessary
charge both Crowns sustained in garrisoning a Frontier each against other, by
enlarging the Suedish Dominions to the bank of the Sound, the ancient and
natural boundary of Sueden. This though uneasy to the Dane because of the
vicinity of those Provinces to Copenhagen the Metropolis, yet was safe for
England, because by this means the Suede is become Master of one Bank of the
Sound as the Dane is of the other, though the accustomed Duty of passage, (the
best flower in the Danish Garland) was by this Treaty reserved wholly to the
Dane. Thus the Power over that narrow entry into the Baltic being balanced
betwixt two emulous Crowns, will be an effectual preventive of any new
exactions or usurpations in the Sound, which occasioned a fierce War betwixt
them in the year 1643. In which the States General judged themselves so nearly
concerned ( England being at that time most unhappily embroild with Intestine
Commotions, and not in condition to look after her concerns abroad) that they
sent a considerable Fleet of War to the assistance of the Suede, by help
whereof the Dane was beaten and forced to a dishonorable Treaty at
Broomsborow, as was before mentioned. And the Duties payable in the Sound were
from that time regulated as they now stand at this day.

An Article had been framed obliging both Kings to hinder the passage of any
foreign Fleet of War into the Baltic, which though directly and immediately
levelled against Holland, yet obliquely and remotely reflected upon England,
with which the English Mediator not being satisfied, caused the word inimica to
be inserted, and then the sense was this, that both Kings to their power should
endeavor to impede the passage of any foreign Fleet of War Enemy of both
Crowns. By which the edge of the Article was rebated, and the King of Sueden
displeased thereat, after acquiesced.

This Roschild Treaty thus concluded bears date, February the twenty sixth,
1658. or as we in England write 1657. and was ratified by both Kings under
their Royal Seals and signatures, together with the seals and subscriptions of
the Senators of both Kingdoms, according to the time and manner prescribed by
the Articles. The next thing which in order followed, was the solemn interview
betwixt the two Kings at Frederiosburg, a Palace of the King of Denmark about
four leagues from Copenhagen, the most magnificent of any in the North. Thither
both of them went and which is remarqueable, without any previous stipulations
concerning Guards or number of Followers usually practiced betwixt doubtful
Friends, but with a frank and Northern simplicity, without any seeming distrust
each of other: Yet the King of Denmark had at least five hundred horse with
him, being those who were formerly drawn out of Schonen besides his ordinary
Foot-Guards in Livery, and the several Gentlemen and Officers of his Court; The
King of Sueden had not above four hundred and those not so well mounted or
armed as the other.

The Danish King set forwards from his House about two English miles or more to
meet the Suede upon his way from Poschild. Both Kings at a competent distance
alighted at the same time out of their Coaches and saluted by joining their
right hands, then both entered the Danish Coach, the Suede going first, then the
Dane, accompanied by the English Mediator and Duke Ernest Gunther of Holstein
Sunderburg. The French Ambassador was not present at this Entertainment: The
same Order was afterward observed, only at the Table, the Queen of Denmark sat
at the end, on the Queens right hand the King of Sueden, next below him on the
same side the King of Denmark. On the Queens left hand the Duchess of Holstein
and the Mediator; at some distance the Senators of both Kingdoms and principal
Officers of the Army. Let it suffice to say the Entertainment was magnificent
and such as became so unusual a Solemnity, for two Kings but now in War, to go
together from the Field to the Table. The Solemnity continued from Thursday to
Saturday, both Kings for two Nights lodging under the same Roof. At parting
they exchanged Horses and other friendly Presents, and those Officers of the
Danish Court who were appointed to attend the Person of the Suedish King were
Nobly regaled by him. On Saturday he took his leave and went to Elsinore, the
King of Denmark accompanying him part of the way, from thence he crossed the
Sound to take possession of his new Conquests in Sconen, the two Castles of
Cronenbnrg and Elsenburg (the latter now his own) thundering out their
Salutations during his passage. From thence he went to Gottenburg where his
Queen met him, the first time she had seen him since his first enterprise upon
Poland, and there an assembly of the States of his Kingdom was celebrated.

The Mediators went to Copenhagen to meet the Commissioners newly arrived from
the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, Father in law to the King of Sueden, for
adjusting the satisfaction due to that Duke, who had been a great sufferer by
the War, in pursuance of the twenty second Article of the Roschild Treaty. The
English Mediator received several Letters from the Duke requesting him to
expedite that affair, which by the said Article was to be terminated by the
second of May. Besides the King of Sueden though he had already quitted Zeland,
yet he was resolved not to dislodge his Troops from the rest of the Danish
Dominions till his Father-in-law had received an equitable satisfaction. This
Business met with more difficulties than was expected, and grew so high, that
the Danish Commissioners entered a solemn Protestation in writing into the hands
of the Mediators, protesting that the impediment was not on their part, if all
things were not accorded betwixt the Royal and Ducal Houses before the
Expiration of the time prefixed, they having already condescended to all
equitable Demands. At last this Affair was ended also by Grant of the Bailywick
of Suabsted and Release of the Vassallage of the Duchy of Slesvic a sief-of
the Crown of Denmark, and the concept of Articles was signed and sealed by the
Mediators and respective Commissioners, and afterward ratified by the King and
Duke.

As to the Duchy of Slesvic it is to be noted, that the Dukes thereof ow Fealty
to the Crown of Denmark, and consequently are liable to the forfeiture of their
Fee in case of disloyalty. But the King of Denmark is likewise Duke of Slesvic
and moreover, Hereditary in Slesvic and but Elective in Denmark, so that by
Release of the Vassallage the Crown of Denmark was a loser, the King of Denmark
a gainer. The Royal House of Denmark and the Ducal House of Gottorp are
extracted from two brothers, whose descendants are equally and in common
sovereign Dukes of Holstein and Slesvic. All Contributions, Imposts and public
Revenues are put into a common Coffer to be equally divided betwixt both, and
all charges and expenses of the Government to be ratably allowed out of the
public Stock. And yet they have their Bailywicks, Lands and Possessions apart.
But the Prelates, Nobility and Towns of both Dutchies remain undivided and do
Fealty to both Princes, who govern alternatively and change turns every year.
It had been urged on the part of the Duke that there should be an abolition of
this alternative communion, whereby the Government and public Justice within
both Dutchies is one year in the King and another in the Duke. But the States
of Holstein would not consent to this, and so 'twas laid aside, because those
Holsteiners who upon the Division of the Government should have fallen under
the repartition and share of the Duke, should have been no longer subjects to
the King of Denmark, to the great hindrance and prejudice of those Noblemen who
find better preferments in the Court at Copenhagen than can be expected from
that at Gottorp. Besides having two Masters successively, when Justice is
delaied them by one, they can have recourse to the other, as the Government
comes to his turn, which they of Holstein esteem a privilege.

Thus I have continued the Series of the principal affairs Military and Civil
down to the Pacification of Roschild, and should have ended here, but that the
War breaking out again and the new-made Peace soon after violated, oblige me,
though unwilling, to proceed.

Two Ambassadors were sent from Sueden to the Danish Court, the Baron Bielk and
Monsieur Coyet, partly to Negotiate such things as appertained to the execution
of the Roschild Treaty partly to make the Overture of a strict and intimate
Alliance betwixt the two Crowns, by a League mutually Defensive. For it greatly
imported the Suedish King, having many Enemies still before him, to double
bolt, and by all possible means secure the backdoor of Denmark. At leastwise
not to leave Denmark like a smoking torch, though the flame of War was
extinguished, ready to take fire again upon every agitation. But things fell
out quite otherwise. The Dane was more intent how to free his Country from the
burdensome company of the Suede, than desirous to entertain with him any
stricter alliance of Amity. And the Suede found it true that Treaties extorted
by necessity upon unequal and disproportionate conditions are no longer durable
than that force continues which first made them.

After the Suedish Army had quitted Zeland and the relenting Ice was no longer
repassable, some in the Danish Court whose Zeal and Affection to their King and
Country was otherwise commendable, were too free and open in Censuring the
Roschild Treaty, as if their Affaits had not been reduced to such extremity as
to constrain them to so dishonorable conditions. Thus when the danger is
passed and the confternation over, all will seek to appear valiant and wise,
and he who in a wrack thinks himself happy in a plank to save his life, is no
sooner ashore, but grows dissatisfied with himself for not securing his goods.
Van Beuning the Dutch Ambassador at Copenhagen was busy with Intrigues amongst
the great persons of the Danish Court, and suspected by the jealous and
watchful Suede. A great debate fell out betwixt the Suedish Ambassadors and
Danish Commissioners concerning the property of the Isle of Hueen, which not
being expressly transferred to Sueden in the Roschild Treaty, the Suede to
salve that omission challenged it as an appendix and accessory of Sconen, but
the Dane reclaimed it as an appurtenance of Zeland. The truth is, the Isle of
it self without any relative consideration was of little or no value, but had
it remained in Danish hands they might have built a Fort upon it to command the
entry of Landscroon, by which the only or most considerable Port which the
Suede had in Sconen would have been rendered useless. And therefore they were
resolved at any rate to have it, and if by no other right, at least by that new
devised one which we in old English have no word for, but the French call it Le
Droit de bienseance. Other Controversies arose of the like nature, which the
Suede though seemingly offended at, yet profited upon, making them the pretense
for continuing their forces in Funen, Jutland, and other the Danish Dominions,
which by the sixteenth Article of the Treaty they were to have quitted by the
first of May.

1658. Summer was now approaching and yet the King of Sueden was still at
Gottenburg, ordering the affairs of his Kingdom, settling himself in his new
acquired Estates, and attending the Issue of his Ambassadors Negotiation at
Copenhagen. In June he parted thence and arrived at Fredericsode, stopped some
time at Flensburg, and from thence went to his Father-in-law at Gottorp. Four
Ambassadors met him from the Electoral College, for there was at that time a
vacancy in the Empire, and the Electors were assembled at Francfort upon choice
of a new Emperor. The business of the Ambassadors was to proffer all friendly
offices for composing the War betwixt him and Poland, and accommoding all
differences betwixt him and the King of Hungary, soon after chosen King of the
Romans and Emperor. As also to desire and forewarn him to abstain from
marching with his Army upon the Territories of the Empire. The Ambassadors had
an unwelcome reception, the King reproaching them with their Masters
nonperformance of the Garrantie of the Munster Treaty upon the Danish Invasion
of the Bishopric of Bremen. Two Ministers came to him in particular from the
Elector of Brandenburg, but were not admitted to Audience, the King requiring a
previous satisfaction from that Elector for deserting his Alliance and
confederating himself with his declared Enemy the Pole. The Brandenburg
Ministers were treated the more roughly, the better to disguise a following
design, and to induce a general belief that the Dominions of their Master were
forthwith to be invaded. The English Mediator had been recalled from the Court
of Denmark as supposing all quiet there, and placed in that of Sueden, and was
now in Germany setting on foot a new mediation betwixt that King, the Pole and
Brandenburger. The Armies of which two last subsisted all this while at the
charge of their own Countries, but that of Sueden made good cheer at the cost
of Denmark, whiles the Suedish Ambassadors and Danish Commissioners were
debating at Copenhagen. The truth is, the Suede was glad of a pretext for
continuing in his old quarters contrary to the Treaty, being at at a loss what
to do with his Army. To disband was not reasonable, because he had the Pole
with the Brandenburger his new Allie, Enemies before him, and not well assured
of the Dane behind. To have removed his Quarters into Pomeren in the
Neighborhood of Brandenburg, had been to eat up his own Country, and which was
more, would certainly have drawn together a confederacy in the Empire against
him as a disturber of the Peace thereof.

The Suede thinking it now time to begin his Campaign, which the Dane had long
expected, hoping to be rid of his troublesome Guests, Ordered the Rendesvouz of
his Army at Kiel a Maritim Town in Holstein, with a Fleet of about sixty sail
to be ready in the Harbor, most of them vessels of burden, the rest good men
of War. From Kiel he marched at the head of some selected Troops to Wismar,
making semblance as if the gross of his Army should follow. But the Cabinet at
Gottenburg had otherwise determined it, for there I persuade my self the design
was first hatched and cherished with all imaginable secrecy. It was thought not
advisable for the Suede to stir in Germany, not being assisted by any powerful
Allie. France at that time faced toward a marriage and consequently a Peace
with Spain. England was a Chaos of confusion and disorder. A War with Poland
was remote and unprofitable, and had already consumed him to no purpose, one
nearer home would be of more safety and advantage. The Dane would never want a
will so long as he wanted not a power to hurt Sueden; It was judged easier to
conquer him than reconcile him.

The King staid but a little time at Wismar with his Queen, and then privately
imbarqued himself upon a Dutch Boyer in the River, and arrived at Kiel. All
hands were now busy in putting the Army, Horse and Foot aboard, which done,
the King went also aboard a man of War: The French Ambassador went with him,
the English Minister though invited refused to go, not being satisfied whether
the design was upon Prussia or Denmark, however would in neither case put
himself as party in Company of an Enemy, whose office had been and was still to
be a Mediator. The Fleet set sail with a fair wind and not many hours after
arrived at Corsure upon the Isle of Zeland, this was in August, and the Peace
had been concluded but in February before. No longer time was spent at Corsure
then what was necessary for landing the Army, which consisting of near four
thousand Horse, besides several Regiments of Foot to be transported from Funen
and joined with those already brought from Kiel, would unavoidably require some
time to disembark, which together with a march of about sixty miles English
from Corsure to Copenhagen, was all the warning the Dauc had to prepare an
Entertainment for their unexpected Guest. The King had prepared no Manifest to
declare the grounds and reasons of this enterprise, because he doubted not to
carry all before him by the suddenness of the surprise, and the success had
been the best argument for justification of his Arms. The Danish King sent to
know of him the Reasons of this sudden Invasion after a Peace so lately
concluded, and so dearly bought, and by what just ways and means he might allay
and pacify any conceived displeasure. But all was now too late, the great Belt
was behind him and Copenhagen before him; he was over Rubicon and would to Rome.

The two defensible places upon Zeland being Copenhagen and Cronenburg, the
Suedish Army divided, part under General Wrangel besieged Cronenburg, whilst
the King with the greater part invested Copenhagen. It would neither be
profitable nor delightful minutely to recount the particulars of a long siege,
but it was soon made evident that the same prosperous direction which had
guided the Suedish Arms in the former War did not accompany them in this, as
indeed the state of the case was much varied, and the justice of the quarrel
more questionable, it being clear that in the first War the Dane had been the
Aggressor. Cronenburg made but a faint resistance, and cowardly yielded after
about three weeks siege, which supplied the Suede with a mighty store of
ammunition of all sorts, besides several brass Guns of an immense weight
purposely cast and planted there to command the passage of the Sound. At
Copenhagen it was quite otherwise, there was a considerable Garrison of
Soldiers in it with good Officers, besides several Companies of stour and well
resolved Burgers. The Danish King considering the Town no longer as seated in
the Heart of his Dominions, but become Frontier by the loss of Sconen within
view of Copenhagen, had employed many hands during the Summer in fortifying and
repairing the works, regular enough before, but much decayed. The waters being
all open, the Marshes, Lakes and false grounds about the Town had rendered it
in great part inaccessible. These in the former War were all frozen, and as if
communicating with the rigor of the Season, the blood and spirits of the
Inhabitants were congealed also. But now all flowed again, Anger and
Indignation against the Perfidie, as they deemed it, and insatiate Avarice of
the Suede, inspired the Dane with Courage. But nothing held up their spirits
more than the infallible assurance Monsieur Beuning the Dutch Ambassador gave
them, (who upon the first Intelligence of the Suedes landing posted home to
advertise his Superiors thereof) that the States General would in few weeks
send them Relief, Neither could they have weathered out so outrageous a storm
had the Sheat-Anchor of Holland failed them.

The Suede finding the Town in too good a condition to be carried by Assault,
was constrained to a formal siege by way of approach. The Fleet had blocked up
the Harbor, as the Army had on Zeland side begirt the Town, but it was still
open to the Ammak; which I cannot call an omission, because to have planted a
Leaguer on that side would have required another Army. For this little Isle
though united to Copenhagen by a long bridge, is disjoined from the rest of
Zeland by broad flats covered with water and a deep Channel in the midst, so
that a Leaguer on the Ammak could have had no communication with that on
Zeland. In the Winter ensuing when the waters upon the flats were frozen, the
the Suede by the benefit of the Ice often visited that Quarter, where a Party
of Danes being abroad and the Prince of Homberg advancing with a Squadron of
Cavalry to repel them, but pressing too forward upon the Danish Rear had his
Leg struck off with a Cannon shot. To be short, the Danes defended themselves
with great Gallantry and Loyalty, their King animating them with his presence,
and pitching his Tent upon the Rampart bid his fellow soldiers Caesar-like, not
Go but Come. The Cannon, of which they had some hundreds upon the walls, played
freely upon the besiegers, not without considerable execution. But not content
with this, they made several brisk sallies into the Suedish Trenches with such
success, that they began at length to despise that Enemy whom so lately they
had feared. The Suede lost many good Officers and Soldiers, amongst whom Count
Jacob de la Gardie, Lieutetenant of the Infantry was slain by a Granade.

During this time the Elector of Brandenburg was entered Holstein and Jutland
with a gallant Army, of which the Elector was Generalissimo for the Emperor as
King of Hungary, but the Imperial Troops were Commanded by Montecuculi, and a
great Body of Polish Horse by old Zarnetsky. Prince Palatine Sultsbach who
Commanded in those parts for the Suede, being too weak to appear before so
potent an Enemy retired first into the fastness of Ditmarsh, afterward into
Fredericsode: Which the Suede soon after demolished as requiring greater
numbers of men than he could well spare, thence transporting himself into
Funen, lay entrenched in those Islands whither the Confederates for want of
shipping could not follow him. The Elector summoned and took the Castle at
Gottorp, the Mansion and Residence of the Duke of Holstein, who though he
Honored his. Family by matching his excellent and most deserving Daughter to a
great King, yet his active Son in Law involved the good old Duke in many
troubles unwelcome to his age and humor. He himself was retired to Tonning a
strong Town of his own, and not long after died.

One thing I had almost forgot, the more considerable because both Kings were
personally engaged in the Action. The Suede observing that the Dane daily
fetched provisions from the aforementioned Isle the Ammak, which contained four
or five villages, and was about so many English miles in length, was resolved
to make a descent in order to burn the Villages and destroy whatever might
afford sustenance or relief to the besieged. For which purpose he put aboard
about twelve hundred foot and four hundred horse, and the King himself would
needs be of the party, thinking nothing so well done as where he was present,
as well as naturally ambitious of sharing personally in the Glory of every
brave Action, Coming to the height of the Draker he forced his landing upon the
point of the Isle, and constrained them upon the Guard to abandon their Post.
He marches up the Isle and destroys all before him, and the Dane fearing he
came to fortify some Post on that side, set fire to the Village next adjacent
to the Town, as the Suede had done to the rest. Having done his Work, the Suede
retreats to his boats too securely, some scattered from the Body, others
encombred with plunder; mean while the Danish King sallies out in person with
three hundred horse and two hundred dragoons, besides some few commanded foot
mounted behind, falls in upon the Suedish Rear, slew several of them and put
the rest in disorder. The Suedish King mounted upon an unruly Horse bounding
and curvetting with him ran great hazard of falling that day into Danish hands.
But the Dane either not knowing all his advantages, or not willing to be drawn
too far from his Town by an over-eager pressing upon an Enemy who out numbered
him, sounded a seasonable Retreat. The same King not long before narrowly
escaped another danger, passing in a small boat a head of a Galliot under sail
in a strong Current, the Galliot overset the boat, the Steers-man was drowned,
but the King saved upon the Galliot.

It was now October, 1658, when the much expected Dutch Fleet began to appear,
consisting of thirty eight men of War, six Fireships, about three score
Fluits, Galliots and other Vessels, with betwixt three and four thousand
Auxiliary Foot, and all sorts of Provisions for the relief of Copenhagen. The
Fleet was Commanded by General Opdam, who came to an Anchor off the Lapsand
about half a League below Cronenburg. The Suedish Fleet was forty two sail;
some of them stout Ships, Commanded by General Wrangel who was High Admiral of
Sueden, and posted in four Squadrons a little above Cronenburg, both Fleets
within a League each of other. Some were of Opinion that the Suedish Fleet
ought to Encounter the other in the Lap whiles the Winds were contrary from
Copenhagen, and so the Dutch Fleet unbefriended of a Port, whereas the Suede
was Master of both Shoars, and had several Ports near at hand. This in some
respects was the better, and that King inclinable to it: But he deferring to
his Council in so weighty a Concern, most of them opined otherwise. That they
had too many Enemies already to make themselves Aggressors in a new War. That
this would heighten and exasperate things betwixt them and the Dutch beyond
hopes of a reconciliation. That Holland in case of any disaster could furnish
one Fleet after another, but Sueden adventured their All. That it would be more
justifiable to Foreign Princes and States in Amity with them, if putting
themselves upon the defensive, they did only endeavor to impede the passage of
those who would relieve a besieged Enemy. Such considerations prevailed, whiles
both Fleets lay for some days at an Anchor.

At length the Wind coming fair at North-west with a fresh Gale, the Dutch
Fleet weighed and set sail for the Sound. Both the Castles of Cronenburg and
Elsinburg fired at them as they passed the narrow, some of the Cannon carrying
fifty and sixty pound ball, but to no other effect than to show that those
Castles are but bugbears to affright Merchantmen, and that nothing less than a
Fleet can command the Passage of the Sound. Both Fleets were Engaged so close
together by reason of the Straight, but a League over, that most of the shot
took place and made great slaughter on both sides, Vice Admiral Wit-Wittensen
had the Van of the Dutch, who coming up with the Suedish Admiral cut off his
steerage and made him lie by to mend, but the Vice Admiral himself was slain by
a small shot. He had been brave and bold but ill seconded; his Ship called the
Brederode (the same that old Tromp was slain upon in the English Wars) was
broken in pieces, and running a ground fell on one side like a wrack. She was
mounted with fifty six good brass Cannon, some of which a Scotchman afterward
weighed up by the Invention of a Diving-Bell. Opdam fought well, though some of
his Squadron acted remisly. Peter Floriz the Rear-Admiral was slain. The Suede
lost four Ships, two whereof were carried to Copenhagen, the Dutch lost two,
their Fireships spent themselves in vain. The destruction of men was greater
then of ships, the fight being smart and close for the time it lasted, which
was not long, for the Dutch never tacked but only fought their direct way to
convoy their supply to Copenhagen, and this they effected to the great joy of
the City.

The fight was no sooner ended, but Orders were islued out to the Suedish Fleet
to put immediately into the Port of Land scroon; which was providently done,
for the next morning the Dane having joined twelve good ships which lay ready
in Harbor, though detained from the fight by contrary winds, with the ablest
ships of the Dutch sailed toward the Sound to reingage the Suede. But he was
burrow'd in Port all but one ship, which being disabled in the fight could not
make so much have as the rest, and upon the approach of the Enemy was fired by
her own men. Whereupon the Dane and Dutch turn their design against Landscroon,
the mouth of whose channel was so narrow, that but one ship could enter at a
time, and was guarded by four Suedish ships placed at convenient distances and
by an old Block-house. They durst not adventure up the Channel but sailed in a
Line athwart it, and so every ship poured in her Broadside with huge noise but
little or no Execution. Under the Covert of the smoke they sunk old Ships of
great Tunnage charged with stones and other materials to choke the mouth of the
River, but this was frustrated by the depth of water and strength of the
Current. Whereupon, this course taking no effect, they made Trial with
fireships and entered the Channel therewith, intending to grapple what they
could; or at least to turn their fireships adrift toward the Suedish Fleet.
But the vigilance of the Suede prevented this, who manned all his boats with
Mariners and Soldiers, the King himself as his manner was, putting himself upon
a boat to encourage and direct his men. So soon as a fire-ship was coming up
the boats rowed down by the sides of the Channel with intention to get beyond
her and cut off her Longboat from her Stern. The fire-ship men apprehending
the loss of their boat as their life, besides the danger of being boarded, set
fire to their train and made away. Then the Suedish Mariners and Soldiers with
Iron Hooks and Chains towed the fireships till they had turned them a-ground,
and there let them burn at pleasure. Winter coming on the Dane returned also to
Port.

The State of things being thus altered, the Suede changed his measures
accordingly. For Copenhagen being relieved with a considerable renfort of well
commanded men, the Port open, the Dane and Dutch Masters at Sea, Winter already
begun, it was judged most advisable to raise the siege and convert it into a
blocade. To this purpose a Camp was fortified upon a convenient ground about
half a League distance from the Town, which though Numerous enough in Foot to
have attacked the Camp it self, yet wanted Cavalry wherewith the Suede
abounded, and there was a fair level and valley betwixt the Camp and City, so
that little of Action passed for a good time. Till at length the Suede
considering that whatever attempt could be made against Copenhagen ought to be
done that Winter, because the Hollander would certainly be upon him in the
Spring of the year with another Fleet; that it was evident no good could be
done against the Town by the tedious forms of a siege; that long and lingering
services in Camps and Trenches usually consumed more men then brisk and sudden
Actions; that the rigor of the Winter when the Earth was covered with snow and
the waters with Ice had been always most propitious to his greatest
undertakings, and might also favor him in a general and vigorous Assault of
Copenhagen; that the Enterprise was dangerous and so were all great ones, but
if achieved, would both quit the Cost and reward the Service. It was then
resolved to Storm the Town, for which purpose great Recruits of Foot were drawn
from Sueden, and a better body of Infantry mustered upon this occasion, than
ever the Suede had seen before in Zeland, and many hands were busied in making
all fitting Instruments such as ladders of all sorts, spurs to pass the Ice
with, boats covered with Hurdles and Galleries, and sundry other Engines of War.

Three Nights together the Suede marched from his Camp toward the Town, partly
to amuse the Enemy, but principally to handsel and discipline his men to their
several tasks and services, that being practiced to the handling and carrying
of their Engines they might be the less embarassd thereby when they had occasion
to use them in good earnest. The first and second Night nothing was done, but
as they marched out of the Camp they returned orderly again, the Dane either
not perceiving or making Febr. 165;
show not to do so. The third Night the Suede drew out as before, but with full
resolution to make the Attack. Several Troops of dismounted Cavalry were
intermixed with the Foot, and a good Body of Horse to sustain them, and if need
were, secure a Retreat. The King commanded in Person, and put himself under the
Covert of an old bank, little more than musket shot from the Town, ready to
give Orders as occasion required. The Cannon of the Town was all pointed low to
flank and rake the Ditches and Counterscarps, and the Dane never fired till the
Enemy was under the Works and ready for their Attack. But then plied them so
furiously with great and small shot, Cartridges, Handgranades, Bombs from
Mortarpieces, besides others rould down from the Walls, that the Suede was
repulsed with great slaughter, the rest of his men disordered, the Engines
broken, and the whole Enterprise confounded; Which the King perceiving
commanded a Retreat, and sent at the same to Sir William Vavasor to forbear the
Attack on the other side, but the Orders coming too late found him dead upon
the place, with many of his followers. The Suede lost in this Action Erick
Steinbock General of the Artillery, with many brave and old experienced
Officers, both Germans and Suedes. According to the King's List taken from the
Muster-Roll, there were slain five hundred thirty four, and eight hundred ninty
five Wounded, the Dane reports them more, perhaps the poor innocent Boors whom
the Suede too cruelly enforced to help carry down their Engines and Utensils,
might increase the number of the slain.

The Suedish Arms were some time after more prosperous in reducing the Isles of
Langland, Laland, Falster and Moenen, to the great enlargement of their
Quarters, and Accommodation of their numerous Horse, who in some places began
to be straightened for want of Forage.

In the Spring of the year the English Fleet arrived in the Sound under General
1659.
Mountague, not with any intention as some vainly suggested to assist Sueden in
the Conquest of Denmark; That had been impolitic and irrational, for it is
evident the conservation of Denmark is the common Interest as well of England
as of Holland, neither was there at that time the least fear or danger of any
such supposed Conquest. The Elector had an Army in Jutland of near thirty
thousand men, Brandenburgers, Poles and Austrians, and could have been as many
more if either the Country could have supported their numbers, or the service
required them. De Ruyter having joined Opdam with another Fleet of forty sail,
the Dutch besides the Dane were near fourscore men of War in those Seas. De
Ruyter had brought upon his Fleet forty Companies more, besides the thirty
eight Companies formerly brought by Opdam. Had the War been managed in good
earnest, and not by Confederates who have different Aims and Interests, and had
the Army in Copenhagen, for so I may now call it, joined with that of
Brandenburg, a thing easy to have been effected by such Fleets, and all this
mighty force united under one Head, it had been sufficient not only to have
beat the Suede out of the Danish Isles and Dominions, but out of Sueden it
self. Besides the Suede was at that time involved in a War against the
Emperor, Pole, Brandenburger, Muscovite, Dane and Hollander. Add to this that
the weak side of Sueden is toward Denmark, and the Suedish King has sometimes
told-one in private, that were he King of Denmark he could conquer Sueden in
two years. Which though it may seem to have something of the Rodomontade in it,
may yet to a Statesman be of some Instruction.

England though sorry for this second repture with Denmark, thought it not
their Interest to see Sueden overset and sinking under the mighty weight of so
powerful a Confederacy, but to buoy it up out of those quicksands it was fallen
into, as being the most proper and necessary counterpoise which England had at
Sea against the combined Naval strength of Holland and Denmark. Without which
Counterpoise England in every War with Holland (her emulous and Rival State,
and that which stands in the eye and aim of all her Greatness and Glory in
point of Trade and Sea-Dominion) would run a great risque of being excluded
from the Baltic, and by that means shut out from the Market of all her Naval
Stores. The old King of Denmark, Christiern the fourth, was too stomachful to
truckle under the Dutch Lee, he fought them in Person when weakened with old
Age, and being wounded by a splinter of his Ship to the loss of one of his
Eyes, his clothes besmeared with blood are preserved as a Relic to this day.
But in the Reign of his Son and Successor the now Frederic the third, the Dane
considering the Suede, his ancient and hereditary Enemy, had by his new
Conquests in Pomeren and Liefland, invested himself in so many considerable
Ports of the Baltic, he twisted his Interest too weak, of it self to hold
against the Suede, with that of Holland; who having a concentric Interest with
that of the Dane in regard of their East-land Trade, both States drawing
together by a mutual Cooperation, tied the fast knot of a strict Alliance. And
from that time forward the Danish Court, which in the old Kings time was used
to lofty Danish, spoke nothing now but Low Dutch; Yea so prevalent were the
Dutch Councils at Copenhagen, that it is most certain the first War against
Sueden was declared and denounced by the Dane at the instigation of the Dutch,
to the end that by this revolution they might better open and secure their
Trade with Dantzick and the Prussian Ports, obstructed and endangered by that
formidable Impression the Suede had made upon Poland. How well the Dane was
rewarded for this Service, the sequel of this Narrative will declare.

The Design of the English Fleet was to advance, and if need were to enforce a
Peace upon the dissenting King, on the terms and conditions of the Roschild
Treaty, pursuant to what the English Mediator (who upon occasion of this second
War followed the Suede out of Germany into Denmark again) had by repeated
instances urged upon both Kings. Which, as things then stood, was conceived the
most proper medium for accommoding present differences, and preventing future
inconveniences; the Business requiring the greater haft, for fear the War
continuing and the Confederates vigorously pursuing their point, the Suede
should either totally be ruined, or the Dutch profiting upon his desperate
condition, should capitulate from him particular advantages to themselves
prejudicial to the Interest of England. Therefore in case of an obstinate
repugnancy to the Peace on the Danish part upon the terms aforesaid, to assist
the Suede in a defensive way under certain cautions and restrictions. In which
case of Assistance, for in War many things may be supposed and provided against
which never come to pass, the Suede was to give real gages and pledges for the
Garrantie of his Faith. To which end the English Mediator had often and closely
remonstrated to him that 'twas not reasonable to put a sword into another hand
without a previous aslurance of its not being made use of against ones self.
And used it also as an Argument to dispose the otherwise unwilling Suede to a
Peace with the Dane (for a War with Denmark was of all Wars the most commodious
for him) because he was not to expect an Assistance from England which should
cost him nothing. And to foretast the temper of Affairs, proceeded so far as to
nominate Stade upon the Elb, and Landscroon in the Sound, to be put in case of
such assistance into English hands; which taking vent afterward gave occasion
to that frivolous report how that England and Sueden had agreed together to
share Denmark betwixt them.

The English Fleet lay all the Summer in the Sound and Bell only as Spectators,
to see fair play, and the year declining returned home without doing any thing,
contrary to the sense of the Commissioners, who some time before, viz. in July,
1659. arrived from England, and would have had the Fleet continued out longer
to countenance their new begun Mediation. Which new Mediation upon change of
the Government in England, was begun and managed by new measures taken from
Holland. For whereas a Treaty had but lately been concluded at the Hague, viz.
the eleventh of May, 1659. betwixt France, England, and Holland, for reducing
the two Northern Kings to an acquiescence in the Roschild Treaty, they in
England upon the change aforesaid, to gratify the Dutch and ingratiate
themselves, conclude another Treaty with them at the Hague of the fourth of
July following, containing a recession from some material points and Articles
in the said Roschild Treaty. And moreover oblige themselves to obtain from the
Suede, and that forcibly if need be, in favor of the Dutch the ratification of
the Treaty made at Elbing betwixt Sueden and the States General, with the
Elucidations thereof made at Thoren. The truth is they made no great scruple,
at least for that one time, to come under the Stern of their Neighboring
Commonwealth, thereby to have better leisure to recollect and refit the
scattered planks and pieces of their own broken Republic.

The Dutch and Dane riding Masters at Sea, the English Fleet returned home, and
the Suede so disproportionably out-numbred as not to dare to peep out of his
Ports, the next Action of Importance was the descent which the Confederates
made upon the Isle of Funen. The strength of the Suede had hitherto consisted
in being lodged securely within the Danish Isles, where the Elector of
Brandenburg with the Army of the Confederates could not reach him. But what
before was his strength becomes now his weakness, for the Suedish Troops lay
disjoined upon the several Islands, and the Enemies Fleets intercepted all
Communication betwixt them of passing to each others assistance as occasion
required. Besides that no Island which has open landing places is defensive but
by a Fleet, and such a one as is able to keep the Sea. And lest any should
imagine, that in this case the Suede ought to have drawn together all the
divided members of his Army, and to have kept them united in one Body upon the
principal Isle, which was Zeland, it ought to be considered that the Country
had been harassed by a long War, and one Island could not surnish a subsistence
to all the Troops, but the greater part must necessarily have perished for want
of Forage.

The Suede had upon this Isle of Funen about fifteen hundred Foot, with some
few Companies of Dragoons, and about twenty five hundred of his best Horse.
Prince Palatine Sultsbach commanded in Chief, assisted by Field-Marshal
Steinboch. Part of De Ruyter's Pleet transports General Ebersteyn with a good
Body of Horse and Foot from the Confederate Army in Jutland, over the little
Belt into this Island of Funen. Whiles at the same time Field-Marshal Schack,
by the help of the other part of the Fleet commanded in Person by De Ruyter,
lands upon the other side of the Isle by the way of the great Belt. Either of
these Bodies was sufficient to have fought the Prince with his whole united
Force, but divided as he was and his men posted in several the most suspected
places to prevent landing, he was much too weak. One would think the proper
time to have fought the Enemy had been at landing, or if that could not be,
because the Cannon favored his descent, yet at leastwise before both Bodies
had joined, which was not till after a leisurely march of some days. And yet he
did neither, and which is more, gave afterward so satisfactory an Account to
the King that he incurred no displeasure. It seems all he could do was to
reunite the scattered parts of his little Army, and posting himself in the most
advantageous ground he could make choice of, there attend the Enemy, and fight
it out for Safety, if not for Victory. This was done at Newburg a small Town
upon the extremities of Funen opposite to Corsure in Zeland, in which last the
King of Sueden was, almost near enough to be the Spectator of the distress and
calamity of his Troops, and yet too far to help them; For De Ruyter lay with
his Fleet betwixt the two Towns. The Suede fought it valiantly having also the
advantage of the ground, till the small Infantry overlaid by numbers was driven
from it. For the Confederates had not less than six thousand Foot, the Suede
not more than sixteen hundred. As for Horse the greatest odds was in Courage
and Discipline, the numbers near equal. I would not upon this occasion conceal
the honor of our Countrymen, I mean the English Regiment commanded by Sir
William Killigrew, who together with the other Auxiliary Foot brought from
Holland keeping firm and unshaken, gave opportunity to the routed Troops to
rally behind them, by which good Order and Resolution, they in great measure
turned the sometime wavering fortune of the day. The Suede at last was broken,
and lost Horse, Foot, and Cannon, all were slain or prisoners, none escaping
but the Prince and Steinboch, who by the favor of the Night and the skill and
labor of a few rowers passed by the Dutch Fleet in a Fisherboat, and landing
at Corsure brought unwelcome tidings to their Master.

This was the greatest foil that King had ever received and he did Nov. 1659.
not long survive it, and yet it is not easy to say what impression it made
upon him, more, than that 'twas little or well dissembled. No part of those
many dispatches which were sent upon this occasion could be read in his
Countenance, having besides his natural Courage, the Art of concealing all
inward emotions and disturbances under a free and masculine appearance, and by
seeming to fear nothing deserved to be feared. Not but that in conversation he
would often testify a tender resentment for the loss of so many brave men, who
he thought deserved a better destiny.

The Prince was so far from being disgraced, that the King during his absence
made him Commander in Chief of all his Forces in Zeland. For the Winter coming
on, and the Dutch Fleet sailing toward Lubec to Victual, and soon after
putting into Port, and the Enemy at Land breaking up their Campaign, gave the
King leisure to pass over into Sconen and so to Gottenburg, where he held a
Convention of the States of his Kingdom, for the better facilitating of such
new Levies of men, and other Contributions which were thought necessary for
carrying on his many Wars to some desirable conclusion. And as his leisure
permitted he intended to make an Excursion to Stockholm, that City much
desiring to see their King after four years absence. But his incessant Labors,
Dec. 1659.
Care and Watchings brought him to a sharp defluxion; that, a Fever; and that,
his end.

He was cut off in the strength of his days, not forty years of Age, a Prince
of undoubted Courage and unwearied Industry, low of stature but of aspiring
thoughts, of a gross and heavy body, of a quick and active mind. No man of wit
or courage could want Employment in his Court, and he had the singular
advantage of a happy judgment in discerning men, and suiting them to such
Affairs to which they were best adapted, either by the secret dispositions of
Nature, or by acquired knowledge. His War with Poland covered him with Laurels
which bore him nothing but gaudy and unprofitable appearances, but the Olive of
the Roschild Treaty yielded him nourishing and strengthening fruit. His first
War with Denmark presented him the fair side of Fortunes medal, in the second
she turned to him the Reverse. He had early been bred a Soldier under General
Torstenson in Germany, whom he usually called his Master, and never named but
with great marks of Veneration. He passed through the gradations of the Art
Military, from a Captain of a Troop of Horse to Captain General of as good an
Army perhaps as this Age has seen. For at the time of the conclusion of the
Peace in Germany by the Treaties of Munster and Osnabrug, he had under his
Command of everal Nations, fifty three thoufand Foot, and twenty four thoufand
Horse in Field and Garrison; Besides the Confederate Armies of Marshal Turene
and the Landgrave of Hess, who acted by concert with him and were at least
thirty thousand more. He kept to his dying day the Muster-Rols of every
Regiment with the names of the Officers, some of whom when disbanded upon the
Peace, he retained by Pensions at his own charge, being then but Prince,
obliging them thereby to his service, and foreseeing the use he might one day
have of them. And has been heard to say, that he thought himself a greater man
when Captain General in Germany than he was now when King of Sueden. He would
bewail the loss of so many good places which Sueden demolisht or surrendered,
and for doing whereof he as Captain General was also constitued Plenipotentiary
at the Treaty at Osnabrug, amounting to above two hundred Towns, Castles and
Forts. By which it was easy to perceive that he sided in opinion with
Chancellor Oxenstiern, who when the Spanish Cabal carried all before them at
Stockholm, having received peremptory Commands from that Court to conclude the
Peace in Germany, he did it in obedience to the commands of his Superiors, but
with such regret that he could not forbear to utter those words, Anima mea non
intravit in secretum eorum. He was the son of the Sister of the great Gustaphus
Adolphus so famous in the German Story, and upon the resignation of his Cousin
Christiana, was admitted to the Crown of Sueden by the general consent of all
the Estates.

This King thus removed by the stroke of death, all things resolved into a
disposition to a general Peace. His Son and Successor was a Minor of five or
six years of Age. His Queen was left Regent during the minority of her Son, a
mild and gentle Lady, deriving from the blood of her Ancestors of the House of
Holstein=Gottorp and Saxe, a natural candor and benignity. She was assisted by
the great Officers of the Crown, who were willing with peace and quietness to
enjoy their share in the Government which the Laws and Constitutions of Sueden
allowed them in the minority of their King. The Suedes themselves had been
harassd and tired out by long Wars, and that Martial Nation almost rode off
their metal by a more Martial King. So that all things conspired on that side
to Peace and Settlement. On the other side the Queen of Poland a French Lady,
who had the ascendant in all the affairs of that Kingdom, was wrought over by
the means of France to a ready Concurrence in a Peace with Sueden. Besides that
the Pole was of himself readily disposed thereto, partly in consideration of
the many convulsions and distractions of that Kingdom, occasioned by the
contrary motions of disagreeing factions, and partly in regard of the
unprofitableness of a War with Sueden, by which much might be lost nothing
could be got. A Peace is therefore concluded betwixt both Crowns of Poland and
Sueden, under the mediation of France at a place called Oliva, and the Emperor
and Brandenburger who were but accessories in the Polish War, were easily
comprehended in the Peace.

The only difficulty was for Denmark; the late Suedish King had made great
scruple of admitting the States General of the United Provinces, as Mediators
for composing the War betwixt him and the Dane, alleging and declaring that
they were parties with the Dane and Enemies to him, and that they ought to make
their own Peace first before they could be in capacity to interpose for others.
But the now Suedish Court soon surmounts this difficulty, and the four Dutch
Deputies Extraordinary who arrived in the summer and went two of them to the
Suede and two to the Dane; attended with a splendid Retinue, I mean with De
Ruyter and forty men of War, were now accepted by the Suede, notwithstanding
all former hostilities and provocations, as Mediators in the ensuing Treaty.
This rub being removed, the next was the adjusting the terms and conditions of
the Peace. For the Dane expected his Confederates should have assisted him to
the obtaining of such a Peace as might in the conditions thereof have born some
proportion to the benefits which they had received by the War, and to the loss
and hazard which he had sustained. For this War of Denmark had drawn the Suede
out of the bowels of Poland, had delivered the Brandenburger from the imminent
danger of having his Country made the seat of a War. It was begun by the
Council and instigation of the States, to secure their Dantzick trade, and was
continued and prosecuted under the prospect and assurance of relief from them.
Many of the Danish Court, notwithstanding the calamities they suffered by this
second War, were not heartily sorry for it, because it gave them an opportunity
of bettering by the help of their Allies, those grievous conditions which
necessity had extorted from them at such a time when no friend could help them.

The States General indeed sent them Relief, but such as served their own turn,
not that of the Danes. The Dane expected no less than to be reinvested in all
those Dominions and Possessions which the former War had wrested from him. And
moreover in compensation and satisfaction for the spoil and ravage of the whole
Kingdom of Denmark, by the violation of a Peace so solemnly and lately
established, to be reinstated into some or all those Lands and Territories
which the Broomsborow Treaty had transferred to the Suede, assisted in that War
by the Hollander, that so both Crowns might return again to their former limits
and boundaries. They who cut off the flower of the Suedish Cavalry in Funen,
what hindered but that they might have landed in Zeland. Winter came not on so
fast, but the Fleet might have sailed four Leagues, and it was no more to
Zeland though more to Lubec. If they wanted Foot, Copenhagen could have spared
them five thousand, and they might have had ten thousand more for fetching from
the Confederate Army in Holstein and Jutland. But this needed not, the Suede
had not five thousand Foot upon Zeland, nor so good a Body of Horse as he had
left upon Funen, besides the Horse of the Confederates was better then before,
having received an increase of strength from the spoils of their Enemy.

But unhappy that Prince who wages a War against a stronger than himself, not
by his own strength, but by that of his Confederates; and still more unhappy
when those Confederates are jealous and distrustful of his future growth and
greatness. The Alliances of States are Convenience not Friendship, Interest not
Affection, a reason of the head not a passion of the heart. The poor exhausted
Dane, after all his former and later sufferings, must stoop again under the
heavy yoke of the despised Roschild Treaty. The dividing of the Banks of the
Sound betwixt the two Crowns accommodated Holland as well as England. That
necessity which first cast the Dane upon the Dutch Alliance, if removed, might
make him recoil from it; to keep him poor was to keep him humble and so
dependent. And yet that the States- General might seem to do something more
than the bare relief of Copenhagen, or which is all one, more then the bare
securing of their own Trade in the Baltic, They urge and obtain that the
Government of Drontheim in Norway be restored again to the Dane, to the intent
those barren mountains might make some satisfaction and amends for the plunder
and spoil of a fertile Kingdom, much more exhausted and more cruelly harassd by
this second War then it had been by the former. And yet it is worthy considering
whether in this also the Dutch did not as well gratify themselves as the Dane,
partly because Drontheim better accommodated their Norway-Trade whiles in the
hand of the Dane then when in that of the Suede, partly in regard of the Levies
of men which the Dutch usually make amongst the Norwegian Mariners, by the
favor of the Court of Denmark in times of War, and partly for better recovery
of those moneys which some particular Companies of Amsterdam had advanced to
the King of Denmark upon the Gage and Pledge of the dependencies of Drontheim.
The controverted Isle of Hueen is adjudged to the Suede. The Isle of Bornholm
which during this last War had voluntarily returned to the obedience of her
former Master, must be restored again to the Suede after the expiration of one
year, or else exchanged for an equivalent. In all the other material points,
excepting that of Drontheim, the Roschild Treaty is renewed and reconfirmed,
and remains to this day the standard and measure betwixt these two Northern
Crowns.

There is one thing more observable with which I shall conclude. The only
benefit and advantage which Denmark has received by this last War amidst many
losses and sufferances was occasional and accidental, and for which the Dane
has no obligation to any of his Confederates, because it sprang merely from the
contingencies of the War; It was this. The Crown of Denmark had been Elective
for above two hundred years in the present Oldenburg Family. The chief Power of
Electing being in the Nobility, gave them the means and opportunity of
capitulating advantages to themselves, as previous conditions to the Election,
with every succeeding King, to the despoiling and debilitating of the Crown,
and to the prejudice of the other Orders of the Kingdom. None but a Nobleman
could buy or possess in his own right any Seignory or Manor. A Citizen or
Burgher was not capable of purchasing more than a House, and it may be a Garden
and Orchard, or such like slender curtilage. The Lands and Revenues of the
Crown were let to Noblemen it may be not to the third, sometimes not to the
fourth part of what they were really worth, and yet the King must not Enhance
the old Rents, though in the mean time the Nobles rackt the poor under-Tenants
to the utmost. The Pesants upon the Danish Isles were Villains regardant to the
Manors of Noblemen, such as the Civilians call ascriptitii glebae. All public
Offices and preferments were appropriated to the Nobility, there was no room
left for a single and unendowed Desert. Birth had precluded Merit, and the
privileges of Blood had forestalled the rewards of Virtue. By which
constitution, Denmark, from an anciently glorious and most renowned Monarchy,
had in a succession of some Ages dwindled and degenerated to that State and
condition which to avoid offense I sorbear to name. But upon occasion of this
second War, the better to encourage the Burgers of Copenhagen to stand
courageously for the Defense of their King and Country, lest the hope and
expectancy of bettering their condition under a new Master should prompt them
to desert their old, great privileges were proposed and conferred upon them.
Such as these: An equal admission to Offices and Honors, as they and their
Children should render themselves capable and deserving. A power of purchasing
Lands and Lordships with the same rights as Nobles. The City to be one of the
Estates of the Kingdom, and to have a suffrage in all public Councils and
Resolves. And the Crown is also delivered out of the Guardianship of the
Nobility, being changed from Elective to Hereditary. So that now in Denmark
there is a more healthful and better proportioned distribution of strength and
nourishment to all parts of the Body of that Governwhereby the whole is become
more vigorous and able to withstand for the future such rude Attacks and
Assaults from without, as had in the late Wars endangered the Life thereof.

A VIEW OF THE SUEDISH AND Other Affairs, as they now stand IN GERMANY This
present Year, 1675. WITH Relation to ENGLAND.

Composed in the Year 1675. when the Suede was declared Enemy of the Empire.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for H. Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard.
M. DC. LXXVII.

A VIEW OF THE SUEDISH AND Other Affairs, as they now stand IN GERMANY.
HE who duly reflects upon the State and Condition of Germany at the time of
the Munster and Osnabrug Treaties concluded in the year 1648. How the Empire
wearied by a tedious War with earnest longings breathed after a settlement; How
the Suede at that time powerful in Arms, was courted to a Peace by the proposal
of such advantageous conditions, as wanted nothing but the name of a Conquest;
may justly wonder, that so wise a Council as that of Sueden, should submit all
their great Acquisitions, of which for many years they have been in the quiet
and legal possession, to the uncertain hazard of a new War.

The Osnabrug Treaty is the Magna Charta of Germany, and was enacted a
perpetual fundamental Law, and pragmatic Sanction of the Empire. But the Suede,
upon his late Invasion of the Marquisate of Brandenburg, having in full Diet
been declared Enemy of the Empire, all the concessions in that Treaty
respecting that Crown, are become like the old Charters or Donations of
Charlemagne, sealed with the Pommel of a Sword to be warranted by the Blade.

The Risque the Suede now runs is further heightened upon this following
consideration. Sueden has enlarged her Border upon all the neighboring
Princes. Upon the Pole and Moscovite by Liefland, Esthen and Ingermanland. Upon
the German Empire by the Dukedom of Pomeren, Principality of Rugen, Bishoprics
of Bremen and Verden Erected upon this occasion into Dutchies, and by the
Lordship of the City and Port of Wismar. Upon the Dane by the several Provinces
of Halland, Sconen, Bleking, etc. Some or all of which Princes do but wait a
favorable conjuncture, wherein to attempt the reinstating themselves into
those Possessions, which the Accidents of War and other fatalities have
extorted from them.

It may also be noted upon this occasion, that by virtue of the aforementioned
Osnabrug Treaty, some of the then Friends or Allies of the Crown of Sueden were
divested of part of their Patrimony, the better to accommodate the Suede in
laying his new acquired Possessions more close and contiguous. Thus the Elector
of Brandenburg quitted Stetin and other Rights which he had in both the
Pomerens. The Duke of Mecklenburg resigned Wismar. It Is true both these Princes
received a compensatory Exchange or Equivalent, such as the necessity of the
Public Peace constrained them to acquiesce in; the first by the Bishopric of
Halberstad, the latter by that of Ratzenburg, but it must be granted too that
the Rents and Revenues of Inland Dominions are not so improveable as those
arising upon Seaports.

Now if we impartially compare the circumstances of Affairs in this present
year 1675. with those in the year 1648. it will be the easier to make an
estimate, whether Sueden could rationally hope to better the conditions of the
Osnabrug Treaty, or whether their future expectancies can in any just
proportion countervail their present hazard.

In the former German War, it was no small advantage to Sueden to be esteemed
the Head of the Protestant Cause and Interest in Germany; this brought them
many Allies and Adherents; and made their thin and tattered Regiments swell
into numerous and well appointed Armies. But in the present War there is
nothing of Religion so much as pretended in the Case. Nay the more immediate
quarrel that Sueden now has, is with the Brandenburger, the Dane and Hollander,
who though of different persuasions, are clasped together with the Suede in the
same general concerns of Religion. Before the Osnabrug Treaty, Germany was
crumbled into many Factions and Interests, both Religious and Civil. Now the
whole Body of the Empire is consolidated and united together against strangers,
and some in Germany esteem the Suede no other. In the year 1648. before the
Peace, the Suede had more than two hundred Garrisons in Germany, and an Army in
Field and Garrison of near fourscore thousand men, the far greater number of
them foreiners, but all Veterans exactly disciplined, and commanded by a
Martial Prince extracted from the Palatine family of the Rhine (the now King of
Sueden's Father) who upon that account was the more acceptable to the German
Nation. Now their Army is small and consists of new Levies, their Garrisons
few, and by occasion of a long Peace neither so well fortified nor otherwise
provided. The Suede had then many Allies and Confederates within the very
bowels of the Empire. The Landgrave of Hess had a considerable Army in the
Field, which to the very last acted in concert with Sueden; besides the Army of
France under Marshal Turenne in Alsace. Now the Suede has no other visible
Confederate but France, so remote, that if the French Armies should by the
Chance of War be put upon the Defensive, the Suede may be lost before France
can help him. The Dane who then stood Neutral, has now declared against Sueden.
The States General then in War with Spain, now confederated with Spain and the
Empire against France, and consequently against Sueden. I need add no more to
increase the wonder I before mentioned, the difficulty would rather be to salve
and allay it, were it any thing to my purpose, who pretend not to have the Key
of the Cabinet, or to be able to penetrate the secret of the Suedish Councils;
only this is obvious, if a lesser Crown condescends to become the Pensioner of
another more great and opulent than its self, it will be exposed to temptations
of being sometimes warped from her proper measures. Besides the influence of
the Example, for if the Crown receives gifts the Ministers will be less modest
in refusing them, when tendered.

Add moreover, the inlets into a War are so many and so easy, but the outlets
so few and difficult, that a wise Prince and Council obliged upon remoter
considerations to a show and appearance of Arms, may insensibly and
unexpectedly be involved in a War, which they never in good earnest intended.
And he who proposed to himself to advance his Arms to such a Point and no
further, may to his grief find the unruly beast of War so ungovernable, as not
to be managed to certain stops and bounds, but to transgress them all, and
sometimes throw the Rider.

And as a Prince may gradually and insensibly be engaged in a War which at
first he intended not, and afterward be further engaged in it, than he either
proposed or desired; So it is ordinary for the consequents and effects of such
War to redound to the prejudice of other Princes, who had no participation
either in the beginning or the progress thereof. Thus if the Suede (for I
suppose it is no offense to put such a Case, because what is laid at stake no man
can call his own) I say, if the Suede should lose all in Germany, and be turned
back again over the Baltic; This would redound greatly to the mischief of
France, whose Interest it is to maintain the Suede in Germany as a check and
counterpoise upon the House of Austria, the hereditary Enemy of France. But
this consideration reaches not England, because that House has in this last Age
been under so sensible a decadency, that it gives no longer any just ombrage or
jealousy as formerly, of any affectation of an Universal Monarchy.

But yet it may greatly concern England into what hands the Chance of War may
throw those places the Suede now possesses. Should the Elector of Brandenburg
invest himself in the Ports of Pomeren, and by that means erect a third power
upon the Baltic: Nay should the Duke of Curland, whose little Duchy is a Fief
of the Crown of Poland, and who of later years has affected to put in for a
share in the Baltic under the Title of Admiral of that Crown, though his design
always suppressed by the early jealousies of those greater Powers of Denmark
and Sueden; should he I say by help of the favor and consanguinity he has with
Brandenburg (for that House married a Sister of that Elector) added to the
countenance and assistance of Poland, establish a fourth Power upon the Baltic:
All this would not sensibly touch England, for a Reason intimated in that
Answer, which a Duke of Burgundy once made, when it was objected to him how he
was no Lover of the Kings of France, his Reply was, on the contrary he was so
great a Lover of them, that whereas there was one King of France he wished
there were many.

But if the Dane should seize the Ports of Pomeren, or possess himself of Stade
and Boxtehude in the Duchy of Bremen; or should he so far profit upon the
present Conjuncture, as to reinstate himself in the opposite Bank of the Sound,
which was taken from him in the year 1658. every of these will alter the Case
in reference to England; For it is evident that the dividing the Banks of the
Sound betwixt the two emulous Crowns, as it was done by the Roschild Treaty, is
greatly to the security and benefit of England. To our security in time of War,
for in case of a War betwixt England and Holland, if Denmark incline to Holland
(which is not unreasonable to be supposed) England, in friendship with Sueden
whilst possessed of one Bank of the Sound, will in despite of the other two
Confederates maintain the Trade into the Baltie, and fetch from thence those
materials which are necessary for the apparel and equippage of her Shipping. To
our benefit in time of Peace, and that in reference to Trade and Commerce. For
it is a Gain to the Dane to enhance the duties of the Sound, but it is the
Interest, of Sueden to oppose it, because Stockholm and all the Ports of
Sueden, except Gottenburg, being within the Baltic, whatever Duties are imposed
upon foreign Ships in their passage through the Sound, are a burden upon the
Trade of Sueden. The same Reason holds for the Elb, where the Dane has Gluestad
upon the one Bank, the Suede Stade and Boxtehude upon the other. If both Banks
should come into Danish hands, this would more immediately concern Hamburgh;
and so much the rather because of the old pretensions the Kings of Denmark as
Dukes of Holstein have upon that City. But it will remotely concern England,
for it will be in the power of the Dane to exclude us from the Trade of the Elb
whenever he pleases. Which perhaps he will not do. But the Assurances of
Princes are not to be founded upon the Will not, but upon the Cannot.

Add to all this, that as it is the Interest of France to maintain Sueden as a
balance upon the House of Austria, so it is the Interest of England to preserve
Sueden as her proper counterpoise against the Confederate Naval Strength of
Holland and Denmark.

The case thus standing, and Sueden having changed the figure it lately made,
when the Mediation of that Crown was proposed in concert with England, by
entering into the War and becoming Party; There is no Prince in Europe to whom
it can so properly appertain to advance the great work of a Mediation, as to
his Majesty of England. The Pope not so fit to interpose in these German
Controversies, as upon other considerations, so particularly upon this, because
by the Munster and Osnabrug Treaties, which are the Basis of the Peace of
Germany, many of the Lands of the Church and other Ecclesiastical Rights, were
Alienated and made Secular. Which the Nuncio at that time was so far from
consenting to, that he entered a public Protest against it, and Innocent the
tenth declared all the Articles relating to Religion to be null and void. The
Venetian State remote, and though admitted Mediator in the Munster Treaty
betwixt the Empire and France, yet was not so in the Osnabrug Treaty betwixt
the Empire and Sueden. Besides the Councils of that Republic face most to the
Levant, neither does she intermeddle in the Affairs of the Western Princes so
much as in former Ages.

Whilst the King of England besides his Power, Interest and Authority, seems
to be selected by a coincidence of several Providential circumstances to
undertake this Work, not only Pious, but Safe, Honorable and Profitable. Safe,
because all the Interessed Princes court the Friendship of the Mediator;
Honorable because the mediating Prince becomes the Arbiter of others
Controversies; Profitable because his Ministers being upon the place, and privy
to the secrets of the contending Parties, have the opportunity of espying
advantages for securing and promoting their Master's Interests.

But as in Naturals so in Civils, it is Time ripens all things: And it is the
Wisdom of the Head which directs the diligence of the Hand to gather the fruit
in its proper season. The last War of Germany was of thirty years continuance,
and the Peace was seven years in treating, reckoning from the Preliminaries
agreed at Hamburgh, to the conclusion of the Peace at Munster and Osnabrug.
This according to humane conjectures seems not of that duration. But mediating
Princes are most welcome and successful, when the Parties are wearied with the
War, as those Physicians are most happy who come in the declension of a Disease.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 117. for revolution read revulsion. p. 124. for defensive read
defensible. p. 143. for left read lost. p. 151. for Govern read Government.


