Cardinal Mazarin's LETTERS TO LEWIS XIV. The present King of FRANCE, On his
Love To the Cardinal's Niece.

Together With his Secret Negotiation with Don LEWIS D' HARO, Chief Minister to
the King of Spain.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1691.

THE PUBLISHER To The READER.
THE Design of this Preface is not to Commend these Letters, being sufficiently
recommended by his Name who wrote them; and Cardinal Mazarine is so well known,
that 'twould be needless to undertake the giving any account of him; so that we
have only to say what they Contain, and how they are Published.

A Man need only to cast his Eyes on them, to see they are not Supposititious;
the Tour, the Style, the Matter it self, all is Natural, and savor of the
Original. Had they indeed been Printed as we found them, they would have been
unintelligible to most Readers; whether the fault comes from the Copyest or the
Cardinal, who has more than once acknowledged he was but a bad Writer of
French, and there is reason to believe he never spoke truer.

It is easily seen we have altered nothing, but only endeavored to make every
thing intelligible; and to this end, inserted in the Margent what was thought
needful for the explaining several difficult Passages of the Text.

As to the Subject of these Letters, we expect the Reader should think himself
obliged for the Publishing them. It is only pity there are no more of them: Yet
these are important enough to show they are not the least; They fully discover
to us he Cardinal's Genius, and his way of mannaging Intreagues. The circuits
he took to bring Don Lewis de Haro to his Ends, are not the least curious
places in the Book. But in my Opinion, nothing excels the Letters he wrote to
the King, on the Affection his Majesty showed at that time to the Cardinal's
Niece, married some time after to the Constable Colonna: Especially the Twenty
Third appears to me admirable. I could never have believed the Cardinal so
honest a Man, and however Politic he is supposed to be in this Affair, yet we
must admire his Generosity; and let People say what they will, I do not doubt
but he was able enough to undertake this Affair, and Powerful enough to support
himself in it, and romove all Obstacles which might be thrown in his way.(...)

LETTER I.
Of the King's passion for the Cardinal's Niece. Of his Family.

To the Queen at Chateauneuf. July the 10th. 1659.
Madam,
I Have sent the Footman who brought me your Letter of the 7th Instant, to
deliver to the Person whom you know that which the Confident The King.
directed to me; believing that she was still with me; and I answer you by Hers
whom I dispatch to you, that I cannot sufficiently express my displeasure,
observing the earnestness of the Confident, and that instead of practicing the
Remedies, which may moderate his passion, he omits nothing which may augment
it. And if you connive at what he does, as you send me word, after the example
of the Person which belongs to him, he will be always glad to do as he does,
seeing he has in a manner your approbation, and will hereby be exposed to
greater inconveniences than you imagine. As for my part I will never give over
the doing my duty, and if I see that this avails nothing, I know whereunto my
Fidelity and Zeal and Tenderness, which I have for the service and reputation
of the Confident will oblige me; which is to say, that I shall dye with the
despair of having been so wretched, that any thing which relates to me could be
the cause of soiling his glory, which I have endeavored to raise up to the
highest point, employing for this end all my study and care, and I may say,
without vanity, not without success.

Seeing you desire to come forward, you will not be displeased to see what I
write hereupon to the Confident, and you will do me the justice to be
persuaded, that though the state of Affairs permits me to deal thus, I lessen
in nothing the desire I have to see my self near the Persons I most esteem. And
seeing you testify that you are well pleased, when I declared to you the
satisfaction which I have from Angels, I will tell you it is above what I can
express, seeing the manner after which they write to me, and remembering what
you have had the goodness to tell me on a certain point, which has always given
a great deal of trouble to the Mother. I protest to you that nothing has touched
me equally to what you have been pleased to tell me hereupon, and with so
obliging a tenderness, that nothing is capable to efface it ever out of my
mind, which has for you all the sentiments which the Angels themselves can
desire.

I wrote to Madam de Venelle, to let Mariana know the honor you do her, and I
doubt not, but she will write to you in Verse with as much vigor as she has
done in Prose.

I render my humble thanks to Monsieur for his remembrance of his humble
Servant. And I am sorry, you were not pleased to denote to me the things he
said, and his demands, seeing I take a great pleasure in executing his orders,
being persuaded he has more Friendship for me than I deserve.

I believe that you and the Confident ought to adjust the affair of the
Palatine before parting, making her know that by the News you have received
from Spain, you are obliged to withdraw the charge o^ Superintendant of the
future Queen, for which it seems to me she should be given 150000 Livers, and
to be assured that she shall effectually receive them. The Abbot 'Montaign' may
be employed in this Negotiation, but he should be instructed to speak in such a
manner, that she should acknowledge that the business ought to be indispensibly
thus executed, and that moreover the Confident and you have for her all the
esteem she can desire.

LETTER II.
To the King. He entreats him to break off all Commerce with his Niece, and
alleges the Reasons.

To the King at Montlieu. July the 12th. 1659.
Sir,
YOu will find hereunto joined a Packet, which was directed to me from a place
near Rochelle, and you will permit me to tell you, with the respect and
submission I owe you, that though my Complaisance for the things which you have
desired, has been ever to the utmost bounds, when I believed I could render it
you without prejudicing your Service and Honor, and that I would willingly do
the same in this rencounter: Yet the matter concerning my Reputation, and that
of a Person whom you honor with your good will, I conjure you to break off the
commerce you hold with such great deal of notice from abroad, inasmuch as you
cannot continue it without doing me an irreparable injury. Though you be the most
just and most reasonable of all men, and that I need not doubt, but by this
only motive you will grant me this favor; yet I will receive it as the
greatest recompense you can bestow on me for my small services; and I dare to
say you owe it your self in the present conjuncture, when you are on the point
of setting forth, to execute a thing which does not at all agree with this
commerce, which does you more injury, than if the Person in question was at
Court.

Did you know how it is talked of at Fontainbleau, and among Persons who
accompany me, you would not need my entreaties.

I keep by me likewise several intelligences from Flanders, and diverse other
places, which speak with great freedom of all this, which has surprised me; and
as I desire your honor more than any thing that concerns me, I cannot
therefore forbear hinting to you these particulars, to the end that reflecting
thereon, you may take up the Resolution of doing what I humbly propose to you.
I beg your pardon, if I urge you to a thing which perhaps you cannot well
relish; however, I entreat you to believe, that I would willingly part with my
life, to have the happiness of never proposing any thing to you, but what you
like, and what is suitable to your glory and interest. I humbly beseech you to
confer on this matter with the Confident, The Queen Mother.
and to believe me the most devoted of all your Servants.

LETTER III. To the Queen. July the 12th. 1659.
On the occasion of his Journey; and the deputation of Bourdeaux.

Madam,
I have entreated the Confident to communicate to you the Letter which I wrote
to him on a subject which touches me very nearly, seeing it concerns any
reputation, and that of Persons who are related to me, and especially his own
in the present conjuncture, as I have signified to him. I conjure you to assist
me in this, that he may take the resolution to which I humbly exhort him. I
have not as yet had your answer to the Letter which I wrote to you from
Poictiers on the return of the Currier from Spain, and I continue my Voyage in
good health, and with a great desire that Don Lewis may answer the sincerity
with which I go to confer with him, conformably to the orders which the
Confident and you have given me. I am greatly apprehensive of the Engagements
with the Prince for the future, and you may believe I will omit nothing to
discover that matter. As to what remains, I think only of the time, in which I
shall have the honor to see you, and the Confident, and I protest I have never
more passionately desired it. You will easily believe it, knowing all the
reasons obliging me hereto. It Is already past Midnight, and I must part at two
a Clock. I will end then in telling you, that the Members of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, being informed that I did not intend to pass through their Town,
have sent me a Deputation, which I shall meet with to morrow at Libourn,
although they have never done this before. I could have well dispensed with
this Complement: Do not believe that this extraordinary civility does much
elevate me, seeing that the rude manner they used toward me heretofore at
Bourdeaux, in not visiting me, did not much depress me. These are men of
Conscience, seeing they will now restore to me with interest, what they then
thought not fit to pay me. I am entirely yours, and more the Confidents, and I
entreat you to permit me, that I may assure Monsieur of my most humble respects.

LETTER. IV.
To the King. On his affection for his Niece. Queen's discontent. Arrival of
Don Lewis de Haro. Order to pay Money.

To the King. At Libourn the 14th of July, 1659.
Sir,
MAgalotti has delivered me your Letter of the first of this Month; and I have
not been surpised at what you write me touching the Person, of whom I wrote to
the Confident; for I am sensible that you know her, and that you are not
capable of giving your affection to persons who do not deserve it. Neither have
I so much as once imagined this could be; but I believed this would be bragged
of, which is most true; and it concerned your reputation that this report
should not have been, and that every one should be undeceived. Yet I am much
obliged to you for the manner after which you write to me in this occasion,
assuring you that I am affected as I ought to be with all your favors toward
me.

The Confident has signified to me by her Letter of the 1st Instant, that she
had not reason to be satisfied with you, in a certain occasion, and refers me
to what she wrote at large the day before. Yet I have not received this Letter,
and I am in the greatest pain in the world on this account, and greatly
troubled at the displeasure which the Confident believes she has received;
though I cannot imagine the thing is of that importance. For if this were, when
I should even die in the way, I would take Post to come where you are; but I
cannot comprehend what this is, you having not done me the honor to inform me.
I shall pass my time ill, till I am satisfied in this point.

As to what concerns the Gold and Silver, I have explained my self sufficiently
thereon; but it has happened that you have not understood my Letter; for it is
another thing to permit the working on Gold and Silver, and the suffering all
the world to wear it, one having nothing common with the other. Here every body
would be agreed, that the King and Monsieur should wear it, and not others; yet
you may do as you think fitting, and declare your will when you judge most
proper.

Pimentel parted this morning to meet Don Lewis. I would have delivered to him
your Presents, which were very fine and rich, but he entreated me to keep them,
till he has received Don Lewis. I have given him a Coach and Horses, together
with a Chariot and Horses for his Servants; and have ordered the Governor of
Gault to attend him, and defray his Charges till he comes to the Frontiers,
having thought this requisite for your honor and service. I entreat you to let
the Confident know this.

I send you a Bill to order Colbert to pay at Mouin a thousand Pistols, or
eleven thousand Livres. He will find this Sum, and greater, if your occasions
require; and be pleased to believe that having nothing but what is yours, you
may dispose of my poor Credit and Estate, and you cannot do me a greater
pleasure; all my happiness consisting in giving you content, and gaining your
good will.

LETTER V.
To the King. Queen's discontent. Assiduity of the King in writing to the
Cardinal's Niece. Duty of Kings. Reasons to destroy the King's Passion.
Cardinal's resolution.

To the King. From Cadillac. July 16. 1659.
I Have received your Letter of the second, and that of the Confident of the
same date, touching which in my last I signified to you that I was in trouble;
but they being come by the Ordinary, it was impossible I should receive them
sooner.

Should you not have commanded me so strictly as you have done, to speak to you
with the greatest liberty, when the Matter concerns your service, yet I must
have done it in this occasion, lest I should have endangered the loss of your
favor.

I have read what the Confident wrote me touching your Chagrin, and the manner
how you have dealt with her; but knowing, as I do, that the love which she has
for you is beyond all bounds, and that your good nature, as well as your duty,
make you restless, as soon as you know you have displeased her; and that you
immediately return to the testifying to her the greatest tenderness; on this
account I am not greatly disquieted; but I must tell you, that I am not a
little afflicted to hear from all hands, how the world talks of you; in a time,
when you were pleased to declare to me, that you were resolved to apply your
self with all possible earnestness to business, and to leave nothing undone
whereby you might become the greatest Prince on Earth.

The Letters of Paris, Flanders, and other parts say, that you cannot be known
to be the same Person since my departure, and not because of me, but on
occasion of some one that belongs to me; that you are in engagements which will
hinder you from giving Peace to Christendom, and to make your State and
Subjects happy by your marriage; and that if to avoid so great a prejudice, you
pass on to make it, the Person whom you espouse will be very miserable, without
being culpable.

It Is said, and it is confirmed by Letters from the Court, writ to persons of
my Attendance, which you may one day know, as well as other Advices, when I
shall have the happiness to be near your Person.

It Is said then, that you are always shut up to write to the Person you love,
and that you spend therein more time, than you did in conversing with her
whilst she was at Court. It Is farther added, that I agree with you herein, and
connive at this, to satisfy my Ambition, and hinder the Peace.

It Is said, that you are at odds with the Queen, and those who write in softest
terms say, that you shun seeing her as much as you can. I find moreover, that
the complaisance I have had for you, when you were urgent with me to send
sometimes News of you to this Person, and receive hers, ends in a continual
commerce of long Letters; which is to say, to write to her every day, and to
receive an answer; so that the Currier is always charged with as many Letters
as there are days; which cannot be without scandal, nor even without blemishing
the reputation of the Person and mine.

And that which is worse, is, that I am informed by the answers which the same
Person has sent me, when I would have advised her for her good, and by the
advises which I have continually from Rochelle, that you omit nothing to engage
her more and more, by assuring her that your intentions are to do for her such
things, which you know ought not to be, and which for several reasons are
impossible. Would to God that without wounding your reputation, you could
discover your thoughts to others, and hear their answers, which from the
highest to the lowest in your Kingdom would so condemn them, as to cover you
with great shame; and then I should not find my self in that sad condition
wherein I have lain, being not able to sleep a wink, and knowing not what I do,
my mind being so oppressed with sorrow, that I cannot give you so good an account
of your affairs, as I have done heretofore.

God has established Kings (after what respects Religion, for the maintenance of
which they ought to do all things) for to watch for the good ease and
preservation of their Subjects, and not to sacrifice them to their particular
Passions; and when such unhappy Princes have appeared, they have been commonly
abandoned by the Divine Providence, and Histories are full of the Revolutions
and Miseries which they have drawn down on their Persons and States.

And therefore I boldly admonish you not to hesitate any longer; and though you
be the Master in a certain sense to do what you please, yet you must give an
account to God of your actions for saving your soul; and to the World for the
saving your credit and reputation. For whatever you do they will judge of it as
you give ^^em occasion.

And though you have the goodness to write to me that you are (...) to do
whatever is requisite for your good and reputation; yet you must permit me to
tell you, that writing in other terms to Rochelle, I know not what your
intentions are: and in this doubtfulness I must represent to you, that the
matter here concerns not only your honor and glory; (...) raising States often
one has means to raise up both one and the other, when by misfortune it has
happed that they have received an till storke. But in this case, should your
Subjects be so unhappy by your not taking the resolution you ought; nothing in
the World can hinder them from falling into greater miseries than ever, and all
Christendom with them.

And I can assure you, of my own knowledge, that the Prince of Conde, and many
others, are on the Watch, waiting for the event of this, hoping, if things fall
out according to their minds, to make good advantage of the plausible pretense
which you may give them; in which case this dangerous Prince will not fail to
have the Parliament, the Grandees, and the Nobility of the Kingdom, and all the
People favorable to him. Besides that it would not be forgotten loudly to be
proclaimed, that I have been the adviser and upholder of the Conduct you have
hitherto held.

I am farther obliged to tell you wi^^ the same freedom, that if you do not
speedily surmount the passion which blinds you, although your Marriage be
perfected with the Infanta, it is impossible but that in Spain they will have
knowledge of the aversion you have thereto, and the ill treatment the Infanta
must expect, if at the point of conclusion you continue to show that all your
thoughts and affections are elsewhere. Besides I hold it for certain, that they
will take at Madrid the resolutions which we would take here in like case. And
therefore I entreat you to consider what blessings you may expect from God and
Men, if for this we must begin again the bloodiest War was ever known, and with
the more prejudice, that we have carried away the advantages of late; that God
has favored your cause and the holy intentions which you and the Queen have
ever had.

I the more willingly declare this to you, in that Pimentel in his journey has
intimated to me twice or thrice, that all the World says you are too amorous to
marry so soon; and that the same thing was writ to him from Flanders in terms
which gave him some disquiet.

I conclude all this discourse, by declaring to you, that if I find not by the
answer which I conjure you to make me with all speed, that there is reason to
hope you will return to a right mind, for your own good, for your honor, and
the preservation of this Kingdom, I have no other course to take, to give you
the last token of my fidelity, and zeal for your service, than to remit into
your hands all the benefits which it has pleased the deceased King, and you,
and the Queen to heap upon me, and to embark my self with my Family, to go and
pass the rest of my days in some corner of Italy, and pray to God that this
last Remedy may produce the cure which I wish more than all the things in the
world; being able to say, without exageration, and without using the terms of
submission and respect I owe, that there is no tenderness comparable to that
which I have for you; and that it will be impossible for me not to dye with
regret, should I see you do any thing which may blacken your reputation, and
expose your Person and State.

I believe you know me well enough, to believe that whatever I write comes from
the bottom of my heart, and that there is nothing which shall change my
resolution which I now denoted, but the answer which you will make me, that you
will henceforward begin a new course, and become Master of the passion to which
at present you are enslaved. You must do this, or make the two Persons, whom
you testify to so greatly honor with your affection, to be separated from you
for ever, and to become the most unfortunate Wretches on Earth.

The answer which you will make me, will serve me likewise for instruction in
what manner I ought to observe in the congress between Don Lewis and me in
reference to the Marriage; for after all, your Honor and Conscience will not
suffer you to choose the most faithful of all your Servants, to assure the King
of Spain of any thing which you will not inviolably observe.

I signify nothing of this to the Confident, it depends on you to communicate
to her what I have writ to you, protesting in the sight of God, that you cannot
do better than to follow her counsel, in the condition you are in, and to take
up the resolutions which God and all Christendom expects from you. For it is
certain, that if her life would procure your content, she would willingly part
with it, and therefore you are greatly to blame, if you imagine she does not
love you, because she does not flatter you in certain things, which being at
present according to your sense, yet are far remote from reason; and to speak
plainly, by the same consequence you must believe, that no body in the world
loves you, seeing no body will approve of your inclinations and conduct.

LETTER VI.
To the King against his passion.

At St. John de Luz July 22.
Sir,
MY pain being somewhat abated, I take my Pen to tell you, that I have received
your Letters of the 16th. 20th. and 22th. Instant, among which is the answer
which you are pleased to make me to the dispatch I sent from Cadillac. You do
me indeed the honor to tell me you are persuaded that I seek nothing but your
glory and the good of your State; and therefore you are resolved to follow more
than ever my advice; but at the same time you do the contrary. I had entreated
you to write no more to Rochelle, and you have answered me that would be too
hard, and that the Confident had approved your reasons; so that one may
conclude, that I have some credit with you, and that you will follow my
advices, provided they be according to your sentiments. You speak only at
present of following those of the Confident, because they agree in some sort
with yours; and without explaining your self more on my Letter from Cadillac,
you give me excessive assurances of your good will and intentions, of following
my counsels, yet without denoting precisely your will in respect of what I
ought to treat with Don Lewis. You conclude that you shall never more fail of
following the counsels of the Confident, and that you do not doubt but I
approve this resolution; this is in plain English but a shifting of the
question, and a mere put off. You are the Master of your conduct, but not of
obliging me to approve it, when I certainly know, that it is prejudicial to
your Honor, to the good of your State, and the happiness of your Subjects. In
fine, as I cannot commit a greater crime in your respect, than to disguise
things from you which concern your service, so I declare to you that I cannot
be at rest, nor satisfied, if I see not by the effects, that you make your self
Master of your self; for without this, all is lost, and the only remedy I am to
practice, is to retire and to carry along with me the cause of the miseries
which are ready to happen.

I have the ambition which an honest man ought to have, and perhaps in certain
particulars I pass the bounds. I love my Niece very well; but without
exageration, I love you yet more; and I more interest my self in your Glory,
and the preservation of your State, than in all the things in the World. And
therefore I cannot but repeat the things which I wrote to you from Cadillac;
and though they be not agreeable to you at present, yet I am sure you will love
me for 'em another day, and have the goodness to acknowledge, that I never
rendered you a more important service than this.

The Confident loves you with the greatest tenderness, and it is impossible for
her not to gratify your desires, although she knows they many times are
disagreeable to Reason; she lets you proceed, because she is not able to see
you out of humor. As to my part, I believe I have the same tenderness as the
Confident, but this tenderness makes me harder, and more firm to oppose what is
absolutely against your reputation and service; for should I do otherwise, I
should be accessory to your ruin.

You are pleased to give your self the trouble to tell me that you believe what
I sent you word was said of you, and the commerce you had at Rochelle, but that
neither you, nor the Confident, have heard any mention of it.

This is not strange that no body should speak to you about it; and for the
Confident, she cannot know what I know, but assuredly she knows a great many
things which she does not tell you, that she may not displease you.

I wish would Monsieur Turenne could dare to tell you the discourse held on
your occasion, and then you would see I advance nothing of my own head. In
fine, I reply to you, that all Europe talks of the passion you have, and that
every body speaks of it with that liberty as is prejudicial to us. Even at
Madrid the business is known, for they have not failed to write it from
Flanders and Paris, with intention to break the project of the Alliance which
is in hand, to hinder the execution of the Peace.

When I shall have the honor to see you, I will show you Papers which will
discover to you far more than what I have wrote. If you remedy not this without
delay, the affair will every day grow worse, and become incurable.

I ought moreover to complain that you take great care to send to Rochelle what
I write to you. Judge I pray you, if this be obliging to me, and advantageous
for you, and if this be a means to contribute to the cure of the Person to whom
you write.

As to the News I have to give you, I remit my self to Mr. Tellier; and
moreover you will do me right, if you believe I shall omit nothing here which
may tend to your service, notwithstanding the troubles I am in, and the great
difficulties I see must be surmounted.

LETTER VII.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Civility of Don Lewis. Manner of the Cardinal's
receiving him.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, July the 30th.
I Have retained this Currier in expectation of the answer of Mr. de Lionne,
and Mr. de Pimentel, to the end I may inform you of what they bring from Don
Lewis de Haro relating to our enterview.

Be pleased then to let the King and Queen know, that nothing could be added to
the Civility which Don Lewis showed me. He has moreover writ me a very obliging
Letter, and signified to me, that if my Distemper continued, he would come and
see me as far as Bayonne; and farther, that he was content to visit me, first
in France, passing cross the River which separates the two Kingdoms; but this
being a thing which was not thought proper at Madrid; he desired me not to take
it amiss if he tarried for the King his Master's answer to the Letter she wrote
him, assuring me beforehand, that this answer, which he should not fail to
receive to Morrow Night, would not be contrary to that he gave me concerning
his coming first to see me, being content I should receive his visit in bed,
seeing my indisposition would not let me do otherwise. I believe I shall
receive him at a Castle not far hence called Vrtebia Where was the enterview in
1463. of Lewis XI. King of France, and Hen. IV. King of Castile.
, and which I may return him at Hiron, or at Fontarabia. The Marshall de
Gramont will go to meet him with a great Train at his entrance into the
Kingdom. Orders will be given at the same time to make two Bridges on the River
of Andaye, which shall lead to a little Island which is in the midst, distant
about 500 Paces from the place, where the exchange of the two Queens Ann of
Spain, Wife of Lewis XIII. and Elizabeth of France, Wife of Philip Prince of
Spain. The exchange was made Nov. 9. 1615.
was made; and though this Island be a neutral Place, and in a manner nothing,
yet it is agreed, that without prejudice to the King's rights, he will raise
some Buildings there, and receive me there with all possible honor, contesting
about no advantages which I may pretend.

I could not well approve openly of his sending into Spain for this, but Don
Antonio Pimentel silenced me, in saying, that if this gave me any disturbance,
Don Lewis would come this very day to see me, without waiting the answer from
Madrid.

But seeing these Gentlemen do not hasten, and experience showing me they do
nothing by hazard, I therefore believe it my duty to entreat the King and Queen
that I may make an halt three or four days at Poictiers, under pretense of
resting my Train, to the end I may inform them of what passes in our first
Conference, in which I believe it will be no hard matter to discover the
intentions of Don Lewis, before their Majesty's continue their journey to
Bourdeaux. I beseech you therefore to acquaint them with it; though I wholly
refer my self to what they shall judge fitting.

LETTER VIII.
To Monsieur le Tellier: Preparatives for the Conferences. Buildings of
Bridges, and Chambers.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, the 5th of August, 1659.
I Have already informed you, that we have in a manner agreed, that Don Lewis
should give me the first visit, and that afterward I would return his at
Hiron, or Fontarabia, and that he will build a great House in an Isle, which
separates the two Kingdoms, where the Conferences will be held; but having
seen, that this Affair would hold long, he pretending not to enter on business
in the two first visits, which I have Collected from some words which Don
Antonio Pimentel has uttered; That Don Lewis might be sick when I gave him a
visit; and that moreover the world might find fault, that the Conserences
should be held in a place, which might be respected as Don Lewis's House,
because 'twas he that built it, though in a neutral place.

All these Reasons, I say, and especially that of abridging the Negotiation as
much as may be, made me advise yesterday morning with all our Gentlemen, and
resolve to tell Don Antonio Pimentel, that I thank Don Lewis for his civility
in offering to make me the first visit; and that being responsible, as we are,
to all Christendom, for the moments we tarried to enjoy the effects of the
peace, I therefore judged it expedient to retrench the first visits and without
any more delay we cause Bridges to be made, to pass each of us on his side into
the Isle, where might be equal Lodgings built, and a Chamber at the head of the
Isle, in an equal distance from the two Lodgings, in which there may be two
doors, one on his side, and the other on mine, by which we may enter, taking
both of us our places in the seats which shall be prepared from each party in
the midst of the Chamber, which we shall take care to build, and furnish each
of us half; whereby we shall avoid the inconveniences which Don Lewis
apprehends, if my Train and his could commodiously land, because there might be
Orders given to transport only a certain number of the most qualified persons
into the Island, and of whose behavior there would be no danger. There being
no difficulty in the execution of what is above mentioned, Pimentel having on
his part spoke conformably thereunto, and being set out yesterday in all haste
to carry the whole matter to Don Lewis; so I have set forth this morning at
break of day the Sieurs de Chouppes, and de Sevigny, with five or six able
Persons, and about forty Carpenters, to work incessantly at the Bridge and
Building, which must be made in concert with the Officers of Don Lewis; and I
have moreover sent for this effect twenty Wagons laden with Timber, and if
they work day and night as I have given Order, I believe our first Conference
may be held on Thursday next, or the next day at farthest.

Monsieur the Marechal de Villeroy, who went this Morning to view the place,
has related to me, that whatever has been Projected, may be easily executed.

I forgot to tell you, that all these Gentlemen have been very earnest with me,
to put off visiting Don Lewis at Fontarabia, should be come to see me here,
because this is to expose our selves without necessity to things, which
although there is no likely hood they will fall into Don Lewis's mind, yet are
practicable, there being persons about him, who being not over tender in either
Honor or Conscience, might suggest to him, this as a lucky occasion to make
advantage.

For my part, I acknowledge to you that I am not able to believe that any
person whatever can be so base; and I dare affirm Don Lewis is not capable of
having such a thought, and that if any one should dare to propose such a
treacherous project, he would very ill resent it; but there is no need of saying
any more of this. I entreat you to impart all this to the King and Queen, and
to believe that you have not a more faithful Friend.

LETTER IX.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Cardinal's impatience for the Conference.
Praeliminaries of the interview.

From St. John de Luz, August the 10th. 1659.
I Continually torment my self, using all diligence to hasten the happy day, in
which Don Lewis and I shall see one another; but yet I cannot vanquish the
slowness with which these Gentlemen proceed.

I was in hopes we might have seen one another this day, and I sent Monsieur de
Lionne yesterday morning for this effect, but you will see what he said to me
yesterday night by the Copy of the Letter which I send you.

This morning Chouppes came here to confirm me the same thing, we must have
patience whether we will or not.

Yet I receive mighty obliging complements every day from Don Lewis, who
signifies to me that he will yield to me in every thing, so earnest is he to
begin the conference.

Pimentel came as from him the other day, and I have agreed with him about the
smallest circumstances which are to be done on one side and the other, when we
shall see one another; which is to say, of the number of the Guards which we
are to bring, the Persons which shall accompany us in the Isle, to remain there
during the time of the Conference, and even to the sort of Tapestries which are
to be in the common Room.

I have no difficulty to agree about these trifles, I tell him that Don Lewis
or my reputation will receive no harm, when the Hangings and Carpets of one,
should not be so rich as those of the other, seeing it is well known we have
Masters, who have given us means enough to have the best.

I said likewise that if I believed I could make Christendom enjoy the
happiness of the Peace a quarter of an hour sooner, by leaving naked all the
Walls of my Apartment, that there is nothing in the World I would more gladly
do.

In fine, we must sometimes accommodate our selves to the infirmities of
others, but I can tell you, that if I loved ostentation, I have wherewith to
satisfy my self, seeing I have certainly better Tapestry, and in greater
quantity than Don Lewis; I have far more people than he of all kinds, which is
to say, more Domestics, more Guards, and more persons who accompany me, and I
believe there will be at least thirty Coaches with six Horses which will follow
me the day I go to the Conference.

They have desired there might be boards put up all along to the point of the
Isle, to the end there may be no communication between those who accompany me,
and those who shall come with Don Lewis; which I have liked well; for there is
danger, lest by the indiscretion of some Person there might arise some
inconveence; and whatever care might have been otherwise taken, it is
impossible but our French would have scofft at the close Breeches, of which the
Spaniards have already doubted. But methinks there is as much reason to laugh at
the largeness of ours, and we might easily reckon our selves eaven hereupon;
but the Spaniards remember they have been greatly derided in the enterview of
Lewis XI. and Don Henry IV. of Castile Comines 2: Book Memoirs. Chap. 8.
, the French wore their Clothes then as short and close, as they wear 'em now
large and magnificent. They would approve now of the mode of our Breeches,
which is quite contrary to that of those times; but I never expect, considering
the contrariety of these two Nations, that whatever Peace is made, we shall
ever meet clothed alike.

You may read all this to their Majesty's, but not in public, because there
would be Railleries made hereupon, which being related, here would produce very
ill effects.

There ran a report the King of Spain was very ill, and a Florentin Gentleman,
who came from Madrid had confirmed this News, but Pimentel has assured me of
the contrary; That it was true that the Prince had not suckle in two days, but
that the last Currier which came to Don Lewis, had brought News that the little
Prince is perfectly well.

LETTER X.
To Monsieur de Lionne. Complaint of the Spaniards delays.

From St. John de Luz, August the 12th. 1659.
I Cannot tell what to say of these lingrings, and it is a trouble to me to see
how the World murmurs at it. Had the Chamber of the Conference been undertaken
as I would have had it, I might have seen Don Lewis two days after; for all the
rest is needless, I having for my part offered to meet him with one only Valet.
There Is no body in Europe but has his eyes turned that way, and I am certain by
what is written from several parts, that these reasons are ill interpreted. You
know on what resolution I parted from Paris, and it being agreed that the
interview should be in a Church at Paris; every one therefore believed it would
not have been deserred a Moment. Yet this has not been executed, having not
been liked of by Don Lewis; and had he been pleased to tell me by Monsieur
Pimentel at Bayonne, that honoring me with a visit first, he would receive me
in bed when I returned his visit, I would have gladly complied, without
sticking at these trifles, though I might have pretense sufficient to stand out,
on the account of Cardinalship, whose Perogatives are well understood in
Germany, France, and Italy. I had consented to the buildof a common Room in the
Isle, and thus the conferences might have been already ended, and Christendom
begun to enjoy the effects of the Peace, after which it has so long breathed.

It Is needless to urge you to hasten them to put an end to this affair, for the
thing it self speaks sufficiently, and it seems to me, that Don Lewis and I
should merit more from the hands of God and Men, if we appeared each of us only
with one Gentleman without any state, seeing that all our Pomp contributes
nothing to the business in hand. As for the rest I remit my self to the Sieur
de Chouppes who is returning; and you may well come back here to night.

LETTER XI.
To the same. Of the Secretary Don P. Coloma. Of the renunciation of the
Infanta. Of Don Lewis's lingerings.

To Monsieur de Lionne. August 1st, 1659.
I Have received your Letter wherein I have been glad to find whatever has past
with the Secretary of State Coloma, and that I am not mistaken in the thoughts
I have had, that we may draw great advantages from treating with him; seeing
that besides the good dispositions which he had for all things which may
contribute to a perfect correspondence, between the King and the King of Spain,
and between Don Lewis and I, (which is not only necessary for the completing
the Peace, but moreover to secure the continuance of it, and to do a thousand
great things for the glory and advantage of the two Crowns) he is greatly
interress'd to show us that we may expect more facility in the points which are
to be discust by his mediation, than by that of Pimentel, with whom he has
reason to believe, I wish to continue to treat in the same manner as I have
done at Paris. We must then make our advantage of this conjuncture, and make
the best of the points which are still to be adjusted, seeing it is likely the
said Coloma will be the instrument to procure us the satisfactions which we may
desire.

You have done well to remind them of certain things, which might in some sort
overturn, or at least bring into question, what has been determined and signed
at Paris, and ratified since at Madrid; and you must carefully remember to hold
still the same course for the future, in all the occasions of this nature which
shall happen.

I wish you had replied to the Sieur Coloma, when he spoke to you of the
Marriage, and told you that we were only to regulate our selves on the contract
which had been made for that of the Queen, that he had reason, excepting the
Article concerning the renunciation, for he seems to have affected to have
spoken twice to you of it, to see what you would answer; and having made none,
he believes without doubt he has gained his cause, and that we pretend nothing
herein, although the reasons we have to deal otherwise be evident, and such as
cannot be contested, not only because of what has past at Lions with Monsieur
Pimentel, who made the overture of Marriage by the order of Don Lewis; but this
Marriage being the foundation of the Treaty, and the motive which we have had
to declare that we would reassume the bottom of the Negotiation of Madrid,
notwithstanding the changes which have happened since that time, by so many
progresses which the Arms of the King had made on all sides; and that we would
even sacrifice some of our conquests; yet we cannot be induced to lose so many
advantages which we may justly pretend, without the conclusion of the Marriage
of the King, with a Princess who might become Heiress of as great a Monarchy as
that of Spain.

For without this, the King would not have yielded so many points, and
ospecially in a time, wherein the posture of Affairs, and the strength of his
Arms, might make him expect fresh and greater advantages in the continuation of
the War.

And you well know, that I have convinced you several times, that Don Lewis's
intention could be no other, when he sent Monsieur Pimentel to Lions, than to
make the overture of the Marriage without renunciation, in the time when there
was but one Prince in Spain.

Seeing that Don Lewis and all the Spaniards believe, as it is true, that there
is not a greater Match in Europe than that of the Infanta; so it is to be
supposed, that they will grant that there is not a more considerable than that
of the King.

Let me entreat you then to take occasion to speak to the said Monsieur Coloma
on this matter, under pretense of having made reflection on what he has several
times told you, that the contract of the Queen ought to regulate this; for this
will better make known to us the intentions they have on this particular; and
give occasion to Don Lewis to speak to me of it, after which I shall be better
able to penetrate into other things.

I am obliged to tell you, that it is the temper of Don Lewis, not to resolve
so soon in Affairs, but to spin 'em out as long as possible. And therefore we
must be careful to press him incessantly, and make known to him by means of the
Sieur Coloma, that it is not for his reputation nor mine, to lose time
fruitlesly in adjusting things, which might be easily ended with equity and a
reciprocal satisfaction.

I shall be to morrow at Noon, without fail, at the Conference, as I have
appointed with Don Lewis, and knowing not whether you are determined to come to
night, I entreat you to do it, if you can without any great inconvenience.

LETTER. XII.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Conference with Don Lewis. Pimentel excluded from the
Negotiation. The Cardinal demands the reason of it, which Don Lewis tells him.
Preamble of the Treaty. The King is to send into Spain, to ask for the Infanta.
Whether the King of Spain should conduct the Infanta to the Frontiers. On the
Advantages which Spain pretended to gain for the Prince of Conde. Bold
Proposition of the Cardinal. Mutual Civility between the French and Spaniards.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, Aug. 19. 1659.
TO begin this Letter, I must tell you that the Conference I had on Saturday
last with Don Lewis de Haro, which has been the econd, lasted near four hours
and a half. Several of those points were examined, which are remitted to be
adjusted here, and we agreed in the greatest part, of which a Memorandum was
made, to be kept by us in writing. Don Lewis having named to do this with
Monsieur de Lionne, the Sieur Pedro Coloma Secretary of State, whom he brought
with him, Monsieur Pimentel has much resented it, and with reason, seeing that
after he had the happiness to conclude and sign the Peace at Paris, he should
be excluded from the Negotiation, and another put in his place. On which I will
make a small digression to their Majesty's, in that Lainet having vaunted on
the mortification given to the Sieur Pimentel, would have it believed that his
sacrifice had no other end, than the satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince, by
reason he was too quick in promising what I had required of him to his
prejudice. I thought I ought not to refrain saying a word hereupon to Don
Lewis, but in such a manner, as might do no wrong to Pimentel, and which might
neither occasion Don Lewis to believe that I took it ill he should make use of
one Minister rather than another.

I told him then, that I had a great curiosity to know whether he was satisfied
with the Conduct of Monsieur Pimentel, he having reason to question it, seeing
this Gentleman received not the public marks of his esteem and affection: That
as I should be ridiculous, if I concerned my self about the Ministers he
employed, or if I examined why he mortified those with whom I thought he should
be content, the King of Spain being Master of his own Subjects, and Ministers;
yet I was interessed in the ill treatment of Monsieur Pimentel, by reason that
the Prince of Conde's Agents published, that this was done, not only because
that he had proceeded beyond the Orders at Paris, touching the Interest of this
Prince, but moreover by reason that the Senior Don Lewis believed he could not
give to the said Prince a greater mark of his cordial friendship, than in
sacrificing Pimentel, who had so successfully served in an an Affair of so
great importance, and because I had an esteem for him, and considered him as my
friend.

I past further on to tell him, that the principal Motive which had obliged me
to talk by word of mouth with him on this frontier, having been not only to
commence a sincere and perfect friendship between our Masters and the two
Crowns; but moreover to establish a strict Correspondence between him and me,
as I had been informed he had desired on his side; but I lost the hope this
could ever be, if it were true he preferred the friendship of Monsieur the
Prince to mine, as it appeared in what past in relation to the Sieur Pimentel,
and which Lainet published with such care and ostentation. For this being so, I
need not take on my self the trouble for the time to come, to confirm this
friendship, seeing there is no likelihood of attaining it. So that I had great
reason to regret my journey and that of his Excellency; seeing all the
principal points of the peace having been Signed, and Concluded at Paris, and
all the rest being easily terminated, our interview (which in my regard had no
other object than this union between us, on which depended the quiet of
Christendom) would remain fruitless, the consideration of Monsieur the Prince
bringing an invincible obstacle to the end I proposed.

He seemed much concerned at what I told him on the subject of this amity, and
declared to me with great heat, that by all sorts of reasons he preferred mine
before that of the Prince, praying me to hear a recital of the manner he had
used with Monsieur Pimentel, having earnestly applied himself to give him,
before all the world, all possible marks of affection and esteem, not only
because he loved him, but because he considered in him, more than all his other
qualities, the happiness he had of being in my favor; that he would not have
showed such a great oversight as to mortify Monsieur Pimentel, because I
esteemed him, and by this means to please Monsieur the Prince; that he was not
obliged to answer for the discourses of Lainet, who spoke without grounds, and
according to his own fancy; that he wished he could serve Monsieur the Prince;
but by just means, and especially by the entreaties he made me, to use my
utmost endeavors with the King, to procure him something more advantageous in
this occasion, than what had been offered at Paris; that he never thought of
excluding Monsieur Pimentel from this Negotiation; his intention having been on
the contrary, to employ him more than ever; but that being likewise obliged to
make use of the Secretary of State, whom the King his Master had expressly sent
with him as an old experienced Minister; and who had all the Papers from whence
might be drawn the necessary notices to give the last stroke, as well to the
making of the Peace as the Marriage, he could not therefore but make use of
him, yet in the intention he should labor jointly with Pimentel.

But it not having been possible to oblige Mr. Pimentel to yield to him the
first place, he could not see how they could act together, seeing that the
Sieur Coloma by his Age, by the Office of Secretary of Sat, and by the King of
Spain's sending him here, to labor at what there is to do, ought to pass first.

And after having said a thousand obliging things, and testified that he wished
for nothing more in the world than my Friendship; because he was persuaded of
the same things I had told him, and by the great esteem he had for my person,
he concluded, That if I would have him deal otherwise in relation to Pimentel,
he would do it, and did not doubt but to make it be approved by his Master.

I answered all his offers with the civility I ought, and declared to him, that
being assured of his Friendship, I was not so ill advised as to pretend he
should make use of other Ministers, than those he should judge fitting, because
as to my regard they were all equal, seeing that I was assured of his good
intentions, and that executing the orders he should give them, all would pass
well.

I the rather made you a particular relation of what past on this point,
because it was very nice, and that I believed I might draw a great advantage in
all Negotiations for the time to come, by the discourses I have had hereupon
with Don Lewis, in whose mind I think I have imprinted, that my complaint was
chiefly grounded on the fear I had, lest his Friendship for the Prince, should
hinder that which he should have for me, and which I judged necessary for the
good of our Masters, their Subjects, and the quiet of all Christendom.

And I begin already to see the effects I hoped for; seeing Monsieur de Lionne,
whom I have sent to Andaye to labor with the Sieur Coloma, to reduce into
writing the points agreed between Don Lewis and I, sends me word, that he meets
with all the facility I told him of, in laboring with the said Sieur Coloma,
not only because he believed him well intention'd, but because he studies to
convince us that we shall have no less occasion to be satisfied with his
conduct than that of Monsieur Pimentel.

We accorded in this Conference about the preamble of the Treaty, which was one
of the things which I had agreed upon with Mr. Pimentel at Paris, to remit here
at my enterview with Don Lewis. And having found by his discourse that he was
not over fond in giving to the Pope any share in the conclusion of the Peace,
seeing that in effect the Officers of his Holiness had no ways cooperated
therein, and that he had gone so far as to say, that we must not deprive our
Masters of the glory which was due to them, in having taken the necessary steps
to conclude speedily the Peace which God had inspired into them: I was very
glad to let him fall into the matter, to the end the proposition of making only
mention in the preamble, of the King, and King of Spain, might come wholly from
him. Having thus afterward urged me to tell him what I thought on the manner
after which we should draw up this preamble, I told him, that I was wholly of
his opinion, not to take from our Kings the merit of having, by a Divine
inspiration, given quiet to Christendom; and added, that as nothing ought to
have contributed more to this, than the prayers of the Pope, so were his name
inserted, all the World would have attributed the greatest part of the work to
his endeavors. And so this point was adjusted to both our contents.

We spoke likewise of several other things of small consequence, and of which
for the most part the Plenipotentiaries of the two Kings were agreed at
Munster, and I entreated to hasten business, that Mr. Lionne and the Secretary
Coloma might reduce into writing these kind of things in which there could be
no essential difficulty; besides that we might afterward examine them
together, to see whether there was any thing to be added or diminished.

He liked also, that we should begin to work on the Articles of the Marriage,
having made him sensible, that if we dispatched not this point, there were so
many things which were to precede it, that we should find our selves straightened
for time, the Season advancing apace, and it being likely to be incommodious to
every body, if we deferred beyond the beginning of October, the execution of
what had been determined hereupon.

Taking occasion from the mention of the hastening the time for the
accomplishment of this Marriage, I told him that the King was resolved to send,
as is customary, a person of Quality to Madrid, to demand the Serenissima
Infanta, but seeing he that should be designed for this Office would spend a
great deal of time in making his Equipage, and that what diligence soever he
used, every thing could not be ready till the Month of September, I therefore
took the boldness to propose to him whether the Catholic King could agree,
that I should make this demand, declaring I had orders to go as far as Madrid,
and if I did not do it, 'twas the goodness of his Catholic Majesty, who had
spared me the trouble of so long a journey.

He immediately answered me, that he wished this were done in the manner I
mentioned, and that he would write about it the most favorably he could to the
King his Master, but that to speak sincerely to me, he did not believe the
Council would approve of this design, knowing the Duke of Maine was sent there
heretofore, and that the appearances were in some sort necessary in affairs of
this nature.

He only added, that to abridge the time, in case the proposition I made him,
was not approved at Madrid, there would be no inconveniency in the King's
sending as it were in Post, him that he should choose for this Employ, who
should be thus dispensed with, for making the preparations of an Ambassador;
against which no body could say any thing, because every one might see that it
was for expedition that this course was taken, for otherwise it would be
impossible to do it within the time; these Circumstantials and Ceremonies not
at all regarding the Essence of the thing.

I endeavored, after the discourse I had with him, to penetrate, whether the
King of Spain designed to come as far as the Frontiers, telling him how greatly
the Queen would rejoice to see and embrace him, as she had several times
testified to Monsieur Pimentel, when at Paris. To which he answered me, That if
the Queen desired it, the King his Master would willingly undertake the
journey, having no less tenderness for her, than she had for him; and having
demanded of him, if I might assure her Majesty of it, he told me I might. But
though he spoke to me in these terms, the advices which I have, and which have
been confirmed to me by the most considerable Persons about Don Lewis, say,
that although the King of Spain is not really sick, yet he has a kind of Palsy
in his arm, which will not suffer him to expose himself to the fatigue of so
long a journey, whence he cannot return, but in the winter, so that there
cannot be any probability of this, whatever is said by Don Lewis.

But it signifies not much that he will in this disguise what he knows, and
when the King of Spain shall find out some pretense to excuse himself from the
journey, in the time when he has made himself expected, this will alter
nothing, nor retard one moment the execution of what has been agreed. And I
send you this notice only, that their Majesty's may know to the full what Don
Lewis has said to me touching this matter, and the different advices I have
elsewhere. But their Majesty's will be surprised, when they know, that
notwithstanding whatever has past in reference to Monsieur the Prince, in the
first Conference, wherein I had so well answered the reasons that Don Lewis had
alleged to me, to oblige me to obtain for the Prince something more than what
had been agreed on at Paris, that I believed he would never have spoke more of
it. Yet Don Lewis has returned again to the charge at the solicitation of
Lainet, who had suggested to him new reasons.

It will not be amiss to tell you whatever has past; but their Majesty's are to
know that I have replied on this subject with greater earnestness than I did at
the first time, and that I have put Don Lewis out of a condition of contesting
any more hereupon.

And telling me in the heat of the discourse, that it was very hard, that we
would not consent the Catholic King should give Monsieur the Prince a
Recompense proportionable to the services which he had rendered him, and the
losses he had suffered in France, wherein the reputation of his Majesty was the
more concerned, that he had promised by a Treaty with this Prince, not to make
a Peace till he was entirely re-establisht in whatever he had then when he
entered into the Party of Spain; which was followed with other reasons of this
nature: I replied, without being moved, That if he took the pains to set down
in writing the reasons he had alleged to me with such great earnestness, I
would sign them on my side as the only ones which should hinder me from
consenting to what was proposed in favor of Monsieur the Prince.

And because that he had mightily enlarged to persuade me, that the King might
the rather acquiesce in the satisfying Monsieur the Prince, in that he had no
other intention than to serve faithfully his Majesty all the rest of his days,
and to deserve by this means the honor of his good will; I told him therefore,
that supposing this were as true, as it was dubious, considering how this
Prince had dealt with his Majesty, who had heapt on him so many favors; yet
his Majesty, and all those who had the honor to be of his Council, would be
accused of imprudence, should they confide again in the promises of this
Prince. And for conclusion, I told Don Lewis, that seeing he showed such
passion for the Prince's interests, I resolved on my side to contribute
thereto, in humbly entreating his Majesty to approve of a proposition which I
would offer to Don Lewis, by means of which the said Prince would obtain far
greater advantages than those he pretends to.

He heard this with great joy, showing great impatience to know what I would
mention to him in this matter; I told him then, I would beseech the King to
re-establish Monsieur the Prince and his Son, in all the Offices and
Governments, which they had before the said Prince engaged himself in the
service of the King of Spain, and that in exchange of the places which were
raised, they should have others given them, provided his Catholic Majesty
would leave Portugal as it was, which would end the War on all sides.

I never faw him so moved as he appeared in this occasion, wherein all the heat
of his body appeared in his face. He told me there was a great deal of
difference between the Duke of Braganza and Monsieur the Prince; to which I
replied, that he said true, for one was in possession of two Kingdoms, and that
the other had nothing. In fine, he far rejected this proposition, alleging to
me several other things, which, as you may believe, were not heard without
reply. After which I told him, that I would not let Lainet have any knowledge
of this overture, which, though it was rejected by his Excellency as
impracticable, yet would give occasion to this man to importune him in the name
of the Prince of Conde his Master.

I knew I might boldly make this proposition without apprehending to be taken
at my word, seeing that moreover this would be a means to demonstrate to Don
Lewis, what a ready disposition the King showed for Peace, and of what
consequence the point of Potugal was, which his Majesty had yielded at my
humble supplication, and to re-establish Monsieur the Prince in so many places,
Offices, and Governments, provided the King of Portugal might remain a
peaceable Possessor of what is at present in his Obedience.

And Don Lewis speaking to me continually of the great advantages which the
King would draw from this Peace, reckoning up all the Places and Provinces
which would remain in his Majesty's hands; I always helped my self out, by
telling him, that this was not to be put in the balance with the release which
we made on the Article of Portugal, although by other reasons, which I would
not let the Spaniards know the thing is not in effect such, as I endeavored to
make it appear.

Here is all I judged fit to write to you to make known to their Majesty's, to
whom it is fit to declare likewise, that God designs not only to have a peace
between these two great Potentates, but moreover to take away the aversion
which has always had such firm root between these two Nations.

For whereas Don Lewis and I were equally afraid there should happen some
quarrel between the Persons of our Train, during the course of the Conferences,
they live together as if they had for many years contracted a firm Friendship
between one another, which does not appear strange between Persons of rank; but
to see on both sides, from the most considerable, even to the Grooms and
Lacqueys, that there should be an emulation who should be most civil, and treat
one another most friendly; this is a thing so extraordinary, that it is no
marvel if we be greatly surprised with it.

Every day of the Conference I take care to provide Collations; and this
produces a good effect, for during the Conference, all the great Ones of Spain,
and the most considerable Persons of Don Lewis's Train, come and drink in my
Appartment; and those which belong to me go into that of Don Lewis's, where
they are likewise very well entertained. To morrow Monsieur the Marshall of
Gramont makes a great Feast at Andaye to the principal Lords who accompany Don
Lews. So that you see that the great Affairs in hand hinder not these Gentlemen
from making good cheer.

LETTER XIII.
To Monsieur de Lionne. On occasion of the following Conference.

From St. John de Luz, August the 21th. 1659.
I Come from receiving your Letter of Yesterday night six of the Clock; I am
very glad you have adjusted the Conference for to morrow, and I will be there
without fail at the usual hour.

I am the more pleased, that I see you have no great hopes of adjusting any
thing essential with Don Pedro Coloma, seeing you could no more do it with
Senior Don Lewis. I wish he executes the resolution which he told you he had
taken, to use on his side all kind of diligence, to the end this work may be
the sooner perfected, and if he keep his word, I promise you that the most
essential points shall be soon adjusted, at leastwise it shall be no fault of
mine if they be not.

But you will see (and I wish I were a false Prophet) that we shall confer four
or five hours, and depart as we are wont, which is to say, without coming to
any positive conclusion.

I should be very glad if you would come here to night, if it be possible, to
the end we might confer about the answers I have received from the King on the
particular you know; for we must concert the manner to execute well the orders
I have received from their Majesty's.

LETTER. XIV.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Of the Bishopric of Apt. Conference with Don Lewis.
His earnestness for the satisfaction of the Prince of Conde. Reasons of the
Conduct of Don Lewis. His Proposals on this Subject. Cardinal's Answers.
Complaint of the slowness of Don Pedro Coloma. Cardinal's judgment on the
Conduct of Don Lewis.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, August the 21th 1659.
I Wrote to you Yesterday by a Currier whom the Chevalier de Caderousse sent
me; and I defer the writing to their Majesty's what past in the last Conference
till the return of the King's Footman.

Before I enter on any other matter, let me entreat you to keep secret what I
wrote to you touching the Bishopric of Apt; for the King will be perhaps
obliged to have more consideration for the first President of the Parliament of
Aix, who requests it for his Brother, than for what I am to represent thereupon
to his Majesty. However, if he thinks fit, the determination of this Affair may
be deferred till my return to Bourdeaux; though I very much apprehend this will
not be so soon as I wish for, and judge fitting. You will know the reasons of
this fear, and what I do likewise to hasten the conclusion of this Affair.

This last Conference held above Five hours, and, in a word, there has been
nothing at all determined in it; for Don Lewis spent the greatest part of the
time in making me entreaties, and used all imaginable means to oblige me to
consent, that the King of Spain should give to Monsieur the Prince a Recompense
proportionable to the great losses he had fustained in his service.

Their Majesty's will easiy believe that I was not much moved with Don Lewis's
earnest entreaties; but being on the contrary weary with hearing so much said
on one Affair, on which I had before declared to him what I could do, and it
seeming to me that he was much to blame to lose fruitlesly a time so precious,
which should be employed in giving the last stroke to the Treaty of Peace which
had been already Concluded, Signed, and Ratified; I made him therefore plainly
understand that I came persuaded that we should not spend Three Hours time in
agreeing about all points which had been remitted to be adjusted here; but yet
I saw that we had lost Fifteen in Three Conferences, and that when he should
speak to me an Hundred times on the business of Monsieur the Prince, I could
never return him any new Answer.

Don Lewis being a Spaniard, besides the Phlegmatic Humor of his Nation, is
naturally slow and irresolute, and as far as I can see, it is no difficult
matter to divert him from concluding an Affair, when he is shown any difficulty
in it.

It Is no hard matter to discern what is purely his own, and what is suggested
to him by others; for I know very well, that in the Two first Conferences, and
even in this last, he was partly persuaded by my Reasons, and that he had
nothing to expect in behalf of Monsieur the Prince: Yet he always returned
fortified with what Lainet and the other Adherents of this Prince have told
him. I know likewise that he has received Letters from Brussels to press him
hereupon, and perhaps these Persons have persuaded him that I would yield at
last to his Instances.

I see him then furiously harassed by what Lainet and others tell him, by the
Letters which Monsieur the Prince writes him, and by the good Offices which
Caracene and the other Spanish Officers, whose Interest is to hinder the Peace,
do for him with Don Lewis.

Neither do I doubt but it has been suggested to him, That holding out, he will
compass all; and that rather than I should return with the rupture of the
Peace, I will consent to what ever he would have me.

It Is moreover certain that whatever the French, partakers with Monsieur the
Prince, or engaged in his service, write here to Lainet, and to the Prince in
Flanders, is lively represented to Don Lewis; and especially what Croisy has
sent several times to Brussels, which is to say, That Don Lewis holding out
will obtain for the Prince more than he desires, not only because a greater
Misfortune cannot happen to me than not to finish the Treaty of Peace, by the
ill effect which this would produce in the minds of all People, who would be
able to procure my Ruin, seeing it would be no hard matter to persuade the
World, that I had been the cause of this rupture, and all the evils with which
it would be apparently followed; but because he farther knows, it being
confirmed to him by the Advices of Persons well informed of the present State
of the Kingdom, of the impossibility of raising Money, of which I am as
sensible as any one, on which account I cannot imagine to continue the War; and
so much the rather, that I also know the Cabals are ready, in case of a
rupture, to break out upon me.

I know, as having seen them, that there have been several Memoirs sent from
Paris to Monsieur to Prince, who has sent them by an express Messenger to
Lainet, tending all of 'em to oblige Don Lewis to stand firm in what respects
Monsieur the Prince of Conde, and to insinuate, that should he be obliged to
continue the War, every thing would change for the advantage of Spain.

And the Prince being interressed that Don Lewis should thus believe, it is not
to be doubted but he sends him word that England will be for them, That he has
great Parties in France who will act strenuously for him, if the Peace be not
made. But if he can oblige Don Lewis to continue the War, I hope he will find
things in a different posture than that wherein they have been represented to
him; and that the Crown of Spain will thereby receive the prejudice.

I observe to you, whatever may make Don Lewis hold the Conduct he does, to the
end their Majesty's may see that I have not only his Humor to combat with,
but in general, the Spirit of all ill Frenchmen, who from several Reasons
hinder the finishing of a Work which destroys all their hopes of troubling the
Kingdom, and puts them out of a condition to show themselves.

I will now pass to the informing you, the most succinctly as I can, of the
most essential matters which Don Lewis proposed to me in this last Conference
in relation to Monsieur the Prince.

He took great care to exaggerate the Passion which Monsieur the Prince had to
acquire my good will, which he as much valued as the greatest Place which could
be given him; That he knew this Prince spoke herein sincerely; That he could
show it me by a private Advice he had received hereupon since Twenty Four
Hours; and that if I would he would make him come Post here with only Two
Gentlemen, as he himself desired, being assured that if we came to the Speech
of one another, we should not depart without mutual satisfaction, and thus all
would be ended.

I rejected this Proposition, making use for this of reasons which may easily
come into any Man's mind; and I declared to him in very obliging terms, that I
found no difficulty in my self of giving my Friendship to Monsieur the Prince
with the greatest sincerity; promising that if this Prince did what he ought,
in reference to the King, there would be no Relations nor Friends in France
from whom he might expect more marks of Service and Kindness than from me: And
I likewise told him, That I would willingly give him a Blank on this condition
for Monsieur the Prince to write his own terms hereupon; but that with all the
Protestations and un-interressedness which the Prince showed, I entreated his
Excellency to permit me to tell him, That having treated for Ten or Twelve
Years with him, I must better know his Humor than his Excellency, who knew him
only by the Letters he received from him, by the relations of the Agents and
Adherents of this Prince, and by the Conduct he had held for a certain time;
That having all his hope in the Protection which his Excellency promised him
from the King of Spain, he must be very imprudent if he had not held a very
submissive carriage, very complaisant, and in fine, such a one as is necessary
to beget a good opinion of him.

I added, That by this particular knowledge which I had of Monsieur the Prince,
I might tell him in the first place, That his Excellency would find himself
much wearied, were he to endure all the Importunities of Monsieur the Prince
when he should be near him; and that, in truth, he would little value my
Friendship, should it not presently produce to him in some sort or other the
Advantages he sollicites; and that I was sure his Excellency knew this as well
as I.

It was then he replied to me, Would you have a Prince of his Merit return into
France without Reputation, without any Places, Offices, or Governments? How
will you have him live?

I briskly answered him, As Five Hundred other Princes of the Blood, who
without attempting any thing against the King and the State, have yet never had
any Government or Offices; That most of the Princes of the Blood only desiring
them to do mischief, there is therefore great reason not to give 'em them: For
their security, and the receiving marks of respect from all Frenchmen, they
need only to live well, and serve the King faithfully, as they are hereunto
obliged more than any other Subjects.

Here he offered me a Thousand Flatteries, and said to me, Seeing you are not
willing we should give Mounsteur the Prince Places in Sovereignty, can I not at
least obtain from the King to give him some State, as the Two Calabrias, or the
Kingdom of Sardaignia?

I told him, I scarce believed him in earnest, and that he dexterously made me
these Offers, to show the Prince's Followers the desire the King his Master had
to do great things for him, knowing well 'twould cost him nothing in the end,
there being no likelihood that the King would consent that the Prince should,
having this Establishment, return into France: To which I yet added, That if
Monsieur the Prince, taken with the Present of a Kingdom, would receive it from
the King of Spain, I would consent to it. He replied to me, That in this case
Monsieur the Duke D'Anguienne might return into France, to keep there the place
of his Father, and enjoy whatever the King should consent to restore to
Monsieur the Prince. But I replied to him, That herein the Father and Son were
the same, and that such a kind of division would be, on a thousand accounts,
prejudicial to the Crown of France; and I concluded, that his Excellency must
resolve to give some considerable Sum of Money to Monsieur the Prince, with
which he might buy a considerable Estate in Land, which would remain to him and
his Heirs for ever, and would be more advantageous than Places which he must
lose when he dyed.

But he likes not this, saying, That if they gave him Money, 'twould be a
Gratification, and not a Recompense for the Services he had done, and what he
had lost in France.

In the heat of the Discourse he was so transported as to say. That his Master
would have no Allies, after the Promises he had made to Monsieur the Prince,
should he abandon him, and suffer him to be stripped of whatever might render
him, and had heretofore rendered him considerable to France.

I answered him Three things. The First, That Subjects who revolt against their
King, and put themselves under the protection of another, should never be
termed Allies, because this term is only applicable to Sovereign Princes, who
are at liberty to Ally themselves, and to do whatever they thought good.

The Second, That we have great Interest to use all our endeavors to treat
these Allies in such a manner, as might not be easy for the Crown of Spain to
have any of them for the future.

The Third, That the King's earnest desire for Peace, made him lay aside all
those regards to Portugal which Spain affected to have for the Prince.

The conclusion of my Discourse was, That we should once for all end this
Astair, that whatever respected the Interests of Monsieur the Prince had been
wholly concluded at Paris, and had it not been so, I had never taken such a
long Journey; That what remained behind, was to agree about the Gratification
which the King of Spain should give the Prince, to which the King would be
obliged to consent, provided it was not prejudicial to his Majesty, and
contrary to what had been stipulated by the Article of the Treaty concerning
this matter.

Don Lewis ended the Conference, in saying to me, That he would think again on
the Quality and Form of this Gratification, which he still called a Recompense,
and that he hoped we might agree upon it the first time we should see one
another, which was referred to Saturday.

I shall not enter on a particular relation of what past on diverse other
Points, because those which we agreed on were not of great consequence, and
there was nothing concluded on others. Neither will I tell you, that he omits
no occasion to speak of the King in the most obliging terms imaginable, and
expresses himself always on the Match, as if already concluded; and in the last
place he told me, that the Infanta's Person would be well liked of in France,
and that the Beauty of her Mind was no whit inferior to that of her Body.

We resolved a-fresh, that, to abridge the time, Mr. de Lionne and the
Secretary Coloma should set to the drawing up the necessary. Form to those
things of which we were agreed, and even go over again certain points on which
they should agree together, as being not of the greatest consequence.

But being informed by a Letter which Monsieur de Lionne wrote me this Morning,
that not only he advances nothing with Don Pedro Coloma, but that he could do
nothing with Don Lewis, whom he had seen Yesterday; I thereupon sent him word,
I could no longer bear with these delays, and that he would tell Don Lewis, I
wished we had our Conference, in which I should perceive by his Conduct what
success we might expect from this Affair.

And having instructed Monsieur de Lionne in the things I thought needful for
him to insinuate to Don Pedro Coloma, that by this Channel they might come to
Don Lewis, he has very well executed it, to the telling him I was afraid
Monsieur the Prince would prove fatal to Christendom, and be the cause of not
making that Peace at Madrid, which was determined and agreed on at Paris.

I believe it is fit their Majesty's should know my opinion in this matter,
which is, That Don Lewis of his own humor, and by the hopes of obtaining
something to the advantage of Monsieur the Prince, will drive out the time as
long as he can, according to the solicitation of Lainet, and other Adherents
of this Prince.

In the Second place. I believe that Lainet, by his manner of acting, has
gotten some ascendant over the Spirit of Don Lewis, seeing he has not the power
to determine himself on this Subject, and though he be never so well persuaded by
my Reasons when he leaves the Conferences, yet communicating them to Lainet, he
furnishes him with Supplies, and makes him believe I shall be obliged to yield
to them.

Yet with all this, as I am obliged to try all means to put forward Don Lewis,
and press him to a speedy determination, and that I know the present
constitution of Affairs obliges the Crown of Spain to seek its Advantages in
the Peace: Yet I believe I may on good grounds say, that all this will end
well; but it would be an Imprudence to be positive in things so liable to
Accidents.

LETTER XV.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Fourth Conference. Of the King's Marriage. Of
Renunciations. Don Lewis speaks again for the Prince of Conde. Sharp Answer of
the Cardinal, who seems indifferent whether the Match be made or not. Cunning
Proposition of the Cardinal, to sound the intention of the Spaniards, in
relation to Monsieur the Prince.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, Aug. 23 1659.
YEsterdays Conference was a little sharp; I got from it with an entire
satisfaction; in as much as the Strokes which I gave, some of which being bold
enough, have shown me the bottom of Don Lewis his Heart, and confirmed me in
the Judgment which I have made, That the end of this Negotiation will be good,
and produce nothing but what shall be advantageous to the Service and Honor of
the King.

The First Point which came into discourse, was that of the Marriage; there was
no great difficulty to agree in what was said on this Point. Monsieur de Lionne
and the Secretary Coloma being ordered to draw up the Articles and Letters
which the two Kings were to write to the Pope for a Dispensation, and all other
particulars which should be necessary for the more speedy finishing of this
Affair.

I made him a long Discourse on the Renunciations, telling him, that as the
King was going to be most obliged to promote and sustain the Interest of the
Serenissima Infanta, so I could not forbear proposing her to be considered by
the King her Father in this occasion; and though my Allegations could produce no
effect, yet I failed not to strengthen them with Reasons apparent enough, the
principal of which was, the ready disposition of the King to the Peace,
yielding several Points on the belief he should espouse the Serenissima
Infanta, without her being required in Spain to make any Renunciation; no one
being able to imagine that the only consideration of this Marriage could oblige
the King to yield on essential Points in the Treaty of Peace, as he had done;
seeing that without exceeding the bounds of Modesty, I may say, that if the
Infanta be the greatest Match in Europe, the King is likewise the same. And as
to the Emperor, his Dignity is transitory; and it is certain, he would esteem
himself the happiest Prince in the World, could he strip himself of his Quality
and Countries, to invest himself with the Kingdom of France or Spain. He
answered me, That what I said was true; but were I informed of the Offers which
the Emperor had made to obtain the Infanta, and the great Advantages the King
his Master might reap from this Alliance, whereas having preserred that of the
King, he has thereby given his Nephew the most sensible displeasure imaginable,
there being nothing able to appease him: I should be of the same opinion with
him, That the King prefers the making a cordial Friendship with the King of
France before all other considerations whatever; and to add to the Affection of
Uncle, the Tenderness of a Father: Their Majesty's know, and you likewise, that
in this point he has told us the real Truth, and that when he spoke of the
Offers the Emperor made the King of Spain, he means the Emperor would have
broke with France, and carried himself in all things as the Catholic King
would have had him, had he granted him the Infanta as she had been promised to
him.

For the Renunciations, he told me, he well saw that I had spoken to him about
them, that I might say, the King rendered this Office to the Serenissima Infanta
before he was her Spouse; but that he did not doubt but I was well assured Don
Lewis could not make in Spain the proposal of such a thing, and that he would
tell me as a secret, that in the King of Spain's Council there was not the
least thought of the Alliance without the Renunciation, excepting what he and
another had, all the Council being averse to the Marriage it self, believing
that notwithstanding these Renunciations, if his Master should come to lose his
two Children, as was greatly to be apprehended, being so young, the Eldest
being not above Twenty Months, France would lay claim to the Succession. I am
well persuaded of all this from very convincing Reasons, and moreover, I very
well remember what the Queen has several times told me, when the King her
Brother had but one Son; but I have been more pleased to hear the same thing
from the mouth of the chief Minister of Spain, and that all the Council of
Spain have spoken conformably thereto.

After this, he returned to the charge on the Interests of Monsieur the Prince,
repeating to me all the Reasons he had mentioned to me in his favor in the
preceding Conferences, adding thereto what ever Lainet and the Adherents of the
Prince had lately suggested to him; and he reproached me more vehemently than
ever, in that his earnest entreaties could not prevail with me to intercede
with the King in favor of a Prince who desired nothing more passionately, than
to merit by his most humble Services and Submissions, the good will of the King
and Queen, and my Friendship in particular, by giving me real marks of his; and
that if he could but receive some reasonable satisfaction, whereby he might
return into France without disgrace, all things would pass as Heart could wish,
and in fine, we should have another Golden Age.

He enlarged himself much on all the Examples there were of the Clemency of the
Kings of France, in regard to those who had wandered from their Duty, as
Monsieur the Prince had done; and he insisted chiefly on what the King had done
in reference to Monsieur the Prince of Conty, and the Mareschals of Turenne,
Hoquincourt, and Foucaut; and that, in fine, it was common enough in France to
commit the like Crimes, and not only to obtain Pardon for them, but also draw
Advantages from 'em: And it was no hard matter for me to observe, that he had
studied well the Lesson which Lainet had given him on this subject, seeing he
repeated it word for word.

I confess, this last Clause of his discourse greatly moved me, it seeming to
me, that the Spaniards endeavor as much as in them lies to establish this
Maxim, That Rebellion is not a Crime in France, but rather a means to raise
ones Fortune. But I replied to him. That the Prince of Conty, and the Marshall
of Turenne had implored the King's Clemency, and were returned to their Duty
with the greatest Submission, without pretending any thing, and without any
other condition, than that of being reestablished in the honor of his Favor;
that as to Hoquincourt and Foucaut, the King had done what the exigency of his
Service requires, and that I well saw that Spain could have wished any thing
else, to the end the first delivering them Peronne, Monsieur the Prince might
have the liberty of ranging as far as the Gates of Paris; and that the other
Besides the Mareschal's Staff, he had Fifty Thousand Louis Dor's given him in
ready Money.
holding firm in Brouage, and the Isle of Oleron, it should be impossible for
us to end the Civil War, to recover all the places of the Kingdom which she had
made us to lose, and to reduce Guienne and other Provinces as had been done:
That as to the rest, it was true, the French were more prone than the Spaniards
to fail in their Duty, but that the Kings, far from encouraging them by too
much Mildness to hold always this ill Conduct, had always used them with the
greatest Rigor, when the welfare of their Service had not obliged them to do
otherwise; that herein they varied not in France from the manner was used in
Spain, seeing when they could not remedy Rebellions and Insurrections which
happened, they had Patience, as is apparent in relation to the Portuguise and
Catalonians, who have been always sought to, and offered not only a Pardon, but
moreover new Privileges, and great Recompenses to those of the Country who had
most Credit: In fine, I hereunto added the Example of the Hollanders, who
having maintained their Rebellion to the end, had at length been acknowledged
by the King of Spain for Free and Independent States, and their Ambassadors
treated as those of Sovereigns. And I concluded, That if more Rebellions and
Revoltings were seen in France than in Spain, this mishap was somewhat lessned
by the facility wherewith the French returned to their Duty; which could not be
said of the Subjects of the King of Spain, who having once thrown off the Yoke,
never returned to their obedience again, but by force, as appeared sufficiently
by the Example of the Hollanders, who are peaceable Possessors of several
Provinces which were the Patrimony of the King of Spain not an Age past: That
all the Revolts which had happened in France had not yet caused the King to lose
a Thumb's breadth of Land; who on the contrary, by the apparent Blessing of
God, had extended on all hands the limits of his Kingdom, maugre the Union of
so many Princes and Parliaments who had conspired the Ruin of the State: So
that the proneness of the French in failing in their Duty was corrected by the
facility of their Return; whereas if the Subjects of Spain do more rarely
forget themselves; yet when they do it, they as seldom return.

I well perceived this Discourse racked Don Lewis, and I told him, I was
troubled he had obliged me to it, but the Honor of France and that of the King
required it.

In fine, showing some emotion, he spoke to me again in more earnest terms of
the satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince, telling me, his Master's Honor was
therein engaged, so that he could not excuse himself from doing something
considerable for him, without exposing himself to a perpetual blemish; and
therefore he prayed me once for all to tell him clearly what he might expect in
this point; seeing this being adjusted, all the rest would be easily accorded
in one single Conference.

It was here that I judged it conducing to the good success of this
Negotiation, for the Service and Dignity of the King, and to know the bottom of
Don Lewis's Heart, to transport my self by Address, in raising a little my
Voice. I told him then, Sir, you speak with a great deal of liberty and freedom
on the subject of Monsieur the Prince, which you regard as the principal
decision of this whole Affair. For my part, I must declare to you, that having
suffered more patiently than I ought Four Conferences to be taken up in
contesting a thing already adjusted in the Treaty of Peace Signed at Paris, and
ratified without therein changing a word, That the King will do nothing beyond
what I have declared to you; and that even when his Majesty would permit me to
make a longer stay on this Frontier, and we should have an Hundred more
Conserences, you will obtain nothing more of me, because his Majesty will never
consent, that the King of Spain should give the Prince a Recompense, which may
serve as a Monument to Posterity of his Rebellion, and of pernicious Example to
Persons of his Rank, to engage themselves in the service of Spain against the
King and their Country, to gain like Recompenses.

He would have interrupted me here, but entreating him to let me to go on, I
continued to say to him, That Monsieur the Prince must resolve, as I have
several times affirmed, to become wholly a Frenchman, or wholly a Spaniard;
That the King would never suffer he should receive from his Catholick-Majesty
other gratification than that I already mentioned; That it not being reasonable
Christendom should longer remain plunged in the Abyss of Miseries, wherein a
long War had thrown it for the Interests more or less of a particular Person,
to whom for the sake of the Peace, the King had parted with a thousand times
more Favors than he ought, and the success of the Affairs of this Kingdom
permitted. Besides, Justice required the King should use toward the Prince the
same manner as the King of Spain would use in relation to Portugal; otherwise I
well saw, with a sensible displeasure, that the consideration of Monsieur the
Prince, which had already hindered Three Years before the conclusion of the
Peace at Madrid, to the prejudice of all Christendom (of which they must give
an account to God, who had been the cause) might moreover occasion the rupture
of a Peace Concluded, Signed, and Ratified; and that if the Emissaries of
Monsieur the Prince and some other Persons were able to persuade Don Lewis,
that holding out on this point, I would yield my self in the end, it being
impossible for me to resolve to return without the work of the Peace receiving
its perfection, lest I incur the hatred of the People: I therefore declared to
him, that though it were true I should be greatly grieved in not succeeding in an
Affair so much desired of all the World; yet I should return with this
consolation, That no body could with the least show of Reason impute to me the
fault of the rupture of the Peace, for the conclusion of which I had so happily
labored at Paris; That I believed the King might expect from the Divine
Goodness, in the continuation of the War, the same Advantages, and it may be
greater than those had been given him after the return of Monsieur de Lionne
from Madrid, wherein the only consideration of Monsieur the Prince had hindered
the conclusion of the Peace.

It Is not possible for you to tell me how smooth Don Lewis was after this bold
Declaration, for there is no Civility nor obliging terms which he made not use
of to satisfy me; saying positively, That nothing in the World should be
capable of separating us without the entire establishment of the Peace, and the
tie of a sincere and perfect Amity between us; and that, in fine, he conjured
me to give him this day to see what he has to do on what regards the Interests
of Monsieur the Prince; and that, if I thought fit, we might see one another
again to Morrow, to terminate entirely this point, so that the King his Master
might be content.

Hence I took occasion to be more certain that nothing was capable to make Don
Lewis to break this Negotiation; seeing having spoken so earnestly to him, and
with such liberty bidding him choose his Bargain, he had from that very Instant
changed his Style, speaking to me in the terms I now related; to which my
silence, and the indifferency I affected for half an hour, engaged him more and
more. And this is what has occasioned me to begin this Dispatch in the manner I
have done, which is to say, by the judgment of what may be expected from the
Intentions and Conduct of Don Lewis in this Negotiation.

After we had paused a while, and I had began on my side to use more softness,
I thought it fitting to make a trial by a wile, and which should, without
engaging me to any thing, discover whether at bottom Don Lewis had so great a
Passion to procure in effect the satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince, or
whether it was only from ostentation, and to make a matter of Merit with the
Prince, that he insisted with so great firmness that Establishments should be
given him, offering still more considerable ones, as he found more repugnance
in us to consent, seeing as I have already denoted to you, he had proceeded so
far as the giving him either the two Calabrias or Sardaignia.

And I judged I ought no longer to defer the knowing the bottom of his thoughts
in this point, to the end I might see whether we might make our profit of the
permission which the King hd given me on the subject of Monsieur the Prince.

I took then occasion to exagerate the small reason he had to advise the King
his Master to offer Monsieur the Prince not only considerable Sums of Money, as
a mark of the good will he had for him, but likewise the Government of the Low
Countries, with the same Authority and the same Emoluments as the Cardinal
Infant had, besides the Gift of several considerable Places of that Country
situated on the Frontiers of France; seeing Monsieur the Prince himself (who
is Interessed in the thing, and who should himself forge Reasons to make it be
believed he should receive these Advantages without this depriving him of the
Favors which the King had already offered to grant him) had declared, he would
not accept of this Government; the Oath of Fidelity which he should be obliged
to make to the King of Spain being inconsistent with his re-establishment in
the King's Favor; which was so true, that Don Lewis had confirmed to me
whatever Caillet had told me conformably hereunto.

And as to Places, though Monsieur the Prince should not refuse the offer which
Don Lewis had made him from the part of the King his Master, but on the
contrary, declare he would accept this offer; yet it is not to be doubted but
he was persuaded the King would in no wise consent to it; the same Caillet
having told me, when going into Flanders, that the intention of the Prince was
to receive them to remit them to the King, to the end his Majesty might know he
would hold no correspondence with Spain, and to endeavor by my meditation to
obtain some recompense in France, which might render him unsuspected.

And I had the more reason to believe that it was the intention of Monsieur the
Prince to deal thus, in that Caillet returning from Flanders, entreated me
earnestly at Bayonne not to withstand the Advantages which the King of Spain
would offer his Master, in giving him considerable Posts in Flanders, seeing he
could assure me afresh, that Monsieur the Prince would use them, in the manner
he should be prescribed by his Majesty, who would thus draw all the Advantage
of the Places which the King of Spain should present him with. And continuing
my discourse, I told Don Lewis, I believed that not only Monsieur the Prince
had given order to Caillet to speak to me thus, but that likewise his
Excellency must approve of it, seeing he testified to desire only the
satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince in whatever manner he desired.

I concluded, I had no other end in representing to him all this, but to make
him see that Monsieur the Prince himself had judged he could not accept the
Government of Flanders, nor receive Places, but only to put them into the
King's hands, and to receive of his Majesty some recompense.

Had it been true that Don Lewis had no other intention but that of satisfying
Monsieur the Prince, he would not have failed of entering on the matter, and
pressing me to obtain for him some establishment in France, in recompense of
the Places which the King his Master would give him: But I saw plainly the
contrary, for having been long perplexed to answer me, he told me the intention
of his Master was not to give Places to Monsieur the Prince, without taking
sureties that they should not go out of his hands; that his Catholic Majesty
pretended to give him them only for a time, till he was entirely restored in
France, and several other ordinary Reasons which concluded nothing, but which
yet clearly confirmed me in what I suspected, as I have several times signified
to you.

After this were read all the points remitted here to be adjusted in the
Conferences we were to have together, and he seemed to be very ready to end
them speedily, whereto I hope will not a little contribute the manner I spoke
to him. In effect, he gave orders to the Secretary in my presence, to set
immediately with Mr. de Lionne to the drawing up most of these points in such
terms as they two should judge most agreeable. Here is what I thought fit you
should inform their Majesty's touching what has particularly passed in this
last Conference.

LETTER XVI.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Cardinal's want of time to write what had past in the
Fifth Conference.

From St. John de Luz, the 25th of August, 1659.
I Came just now from the Fifth Conference, but being unwilling to defer any
longer to send you the relation of what has past in the last, which seems
important enough to be known by their Majesty's: I therefore send back again to
you the same Currier you sent me, and who delivered me your Letters as I was
going into the Coach, to go to the usual Rendezvous, which I cannot answer till
to Morrow, when I shall likewise inform you of what past to day.

Yet I will tell you in short, to satisfy in some sort the curiosity their
Majesty's may have, that Affairs become every day more easy, Don Lewis having
spoken very soberly to me touching Monsieur the Prince, and in such rerms as
farther confirm me in the opinion that this Negotiation will be happily ended.
I entreat you to represent to their Majesty's, that I cannot have a greater
pleasure than in writing to them every hour what passes; but this is
impossible, for, without Hyperbolizing, I have scarce time to breath, all the
Ministers of the Princes which are here striving to visit me at every moment;
the Conferences consuming a whole Day, considering the time which is spent in
going and returning to the Isle, which is two Leagues hence, and the way
thither very tiresome.

And moreover, I am not only obliged to write to you as I do, that their
Majesty's may be informed of what passes, but moreover in general to all the
King's Ministers more exactly than I did when I had the honor to be near his
Majesty.

I write to you in such haste, that I have not so much time as to read over
what I have dictated, so that if there be any fault, and every thing be not in
so good order as I would have it, I entreat you to give your self the trouble
to excuse me hereupon to their Majesty's.

LETTER XVII.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Fifth Conference. Compliment of Don Lewis. Portraict
of the King. News of the Infanta. Restitution of Juliers. Ratification of the
Treaty made with the Duke of Modena. Six Articles which remain to be adjusted.
Earnestness of Don Lewis for the Prince. The Cardinal perplexes him by his
Answer. Proposes to him to give Sardaignia to the King of Portugal. Of Navarre.
Disposition of the Affairs of Europe advantageous to the Spaniards, in the
opinion of Don Lewis. Contrary Reasons of the Cardinal. His remarkable
Discourse on the Union of the two Kings. Cardinals Titles.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, the 25th of August, 1659.
I Thought that Yesterday's Conference, which was the Fifth, would have begun
by the point of Monsieur the Prince, because Don Lewis had entertained Monsieur
de Lionne a long time, on his telling him, by my order, that I was not well
satisfied, in understanding the intention of the King of Spain was not to make
satisfaction to Monsieur the Prince, as Don Lewis had so many times protested,
but only to render him considerable by Places, which might enable him in
certain Conjunctures to disturb the State; and likewise to encourage, by the
greatness of such a Recompense, the Persons of his condition, and others, to
engage readily on the side of Spain.

But he began by asking me News of the King and Queen's Health, and by telling
me, that the King his Master had laid his Commands upon him to entreat me to
bring him to the Feet of their Majesty's, (these are his own terms) and to
assure them he wished for nothing more passionately than to see himself there in
effect, and that he expected this Happiness with great reason, seeing by the
Letters he had received from Madrid, he knew that the King his Master resolved
on setting out sooner than the First of October.

He afterward added, that being entered into my Apartment, he had admired the
King's Picture done by Mignard, had observed in it a Prince well shaped, of
good Mien, and great Majesty; that he would write this afresh into Spain; and
could tell me without Flattery, That the Serenissima Infanta (Tenia muy linda
cara, y muy buen entendimiento) had a good Countenance, and as good Sense; and
that, in fine, she was worthy to be the Spouse of such a King. I will make a
digression, and tell you how I find confirmed what Don Lewis told me in
reference to the Catholic King, which is, That Don Pedro Coloma has showed
Monsieur de Lionne a Letter from his Wife, in which she signifies to him, the
King would not let the Infanta come alone, without accompanying her himself, as
the King his Father did in respect of the Queen, seeing he loved no less his
Daughter, than Philip III. loved his; and that it was resolved on, it should be
Don Lewis who should perform the Office of conducting her, that another might
not have this Honor. In effect, the Duke de Lerma, chief Minister of Philip
III. should have conducted the Queen, had he not been surprised by Sickness,
which obliged him to remit this Honor to the Duke d'Vzeda his Son: She says
farther in the same Letter, that giving the Infanta a visit, to tell her that
the affair which respected her was much advanced, and that her Gallant drew
near the Frontier: She answered muy cara y alegra nueva, mi padre me lo ha
dicho todo, which is to say, This news rejoices me, my Father told me as much.

I returned to Don Lewis, who largely discoursed to me of the manner how the
interview might be made on the Frontier; but this being a thing of which I must
more particularly entertain their Majesty's, I shall not mention any thing
farther on this point.

He entered in discourse on what regarded the restitution of Juliers to the Duke
of Newbourg, on which point Monsieur de Lionne had largely discoursed the day
before with Don Pedro Coloma, in examining with him the points which remain to
be adjusted. He told me, 'twas surprising he should have such a pretension, and
that it was so equitable, that he would not stick to counsel his Master to do
what I advised him hereupon; for he did not doubt but I would make some
reflection on the manner the Duke of Newbourg had used, after having been so
long time under the protection of the Catholic King, making a Treaty with
France, and engaging himself to embrace its Interests as he had done, with so
little respect to his Catholic Majesty, and so great prejudice to his Affairs,
that he would make me judge whether his proceeding deserved a Recompense, and
he to be put into a better condition than he was in when he was allied with
France; that he well saw all I could fairly pretend to was (to the end it might
not appear the King my Master abandoned his Allies) that the Catholic King
should forget what was past, and promise to consider the said Duke and his
Interests, as he did before he took the King's part.

I replied to him, We were far from our reckoning, seeing I was persuaded there
was nothing so just as to restore Juiliers to the Duke of Newbourg, to whom
this place belonged in just and full right, the King of Spain having none to
it, having been only put into his hands as a Pledge by the Father of this Duke,
to be kept against powerful Enemies who would have deprived him of it. That Don
Lewis knew all this Duchy went always under his Name, and that the Duke
apprehending no more to lose it, seeing the Peace which was going to be
concluded, empowered him to keep it without any fear; so I therefore could not
tell how he could do otherways than restore it to him. That the King had given
a good Example in the like occasion, seeing he not only restored to the Duke of
Savoy the Four Places he had put in trust into his Hands, which were the only
ones which remained to him in Piemont, (he having lost all the others, and
knowing well it was impossible to keep them) but also, all the rest to the
number of Sixteen, which his Majesty had all won by his Arms, and returned to
the said Duke as fast as he reestablished himself, and was in condition to
keep these said Places; and that so generous an Example should persuade his
Catholic Majesty to an imitation, in restoring to the Duke of Newbourg a
single place which had been delivered to him in trust, seeing the King had
restored Twenty Two, the greatest part of which had cost him so much Blood and
Treasure: That the King having made no difficulty of promising to the Duke of
Newbourg, in the Treaty his Majesty had made with him, to procure him the
surrender of Juliers, seeing it was his Patrimony; and the King of Spain having
so often declared, by his Ministers in Flanders, to his Father and to him, that
he would restore him this place as soon as the Peace should be made: I
therefore could not see how his Majesty can excuse himself from keeping his
Word in so equitable a thing, seeing I had seen his Excellency so firm in
demanding the satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince, alleging for his greatest
Reason, that the Catholic King had promised by a Treaty to procure it him, and
so much the rather, in that there was a great difference between a Sovereign
Prince, who required the restitution of a Place which he had parted with in
trust, and a Subject, who would have a Recompense for having in a most
rebellious manner taken up Arms against his Prince, and procured, at his
Country's cost, considerable Advantages to its Enemies: That the Oster he had
made me was no great matter: That the King his Master should consider the Duke
of Newbourg as before, without any grudge or Heart-burning; in as much as the
Allies being to be comprehended in the Treaty, the Catholic King could not
exempt himself from using the Duke of Newbourg as the other Allies of France,
this Duke being no less a Sovereign than the Duke of Savoy: So that if the King
has the goodness to pardon Monsieur the Prince, who, being his Subject, had
forgot his Duty in such a manner as he had done, it will be no great matter for
the Catholic King to do the same with the Duke of Newbourg, who was a Free
Prince.

Methinks there can be no answer to this; yet he long contested, though with very
weak Arguments, being not able to find good ones in an Affair of this nature. I
held out still firm; and seeing he was so too on his side, and that the
Secretary of State had told Monsieur de Lionne, that he did not doubt but this
point was likely to hinder the Peace, if I yielded not; I therefore told Don
Lewis, that I had not the power to do it, but would dispatch a Currier to the
King to know his pleafure.

I believed I ought to sustain this point with the firmness I have done, not
only that it may serve to show the Duke of Newbourg we have endeavored to
serve him to the end, having even resolved to tell Don Lewis in the first
Conference, That the King has commanded me to offer the restitution of Bergue
without any Recompense, provided justice be done this Duke; but likewise that
this release which I Will make valuable, may serve to obtain some advantage in
other points.

And it is fit the King should remember on this subject, that having well
foreseen the King of Spain would never consent to give this satisfaction to the
Duke of Newbourg, and much less at the mediation of France; I am therefore of
opinion his Majesty should engage himself no farther in the Treaty making at
Paris with the Ministers of this Duke, than to do all good Offices in his
favor.

He spoke to me afterward of the Duke of Modena, saying, The King his Master
judged it not fitting to send the Ratification of the Treaty which the Count de
Fuensaldaigne had made with this Prince, because he had discovered two things;
one of which was inconsistent with what an Article of the Treaty of Paris bore
touching the payment of the Dowry of the Infanta Margarita, this Count having
promised to the Duke of Modena what we would have given to the Duke of Savoy;
and that the other (which was to leave him the possession and enjoyment of
Correggio without the King of Spain's keeping a Garrison there) could not be
ratified, seeing Fuensaldaigne had promised it without having the power to do
it. Adding, it was not reasonable this Prince should be in a better condition,
for joining himself to France against the Catholic King, than when he adhered
more to Spain than France.

I told him I could not comprehend how they could retard one day the sending
the Ratification of a Treaty solemnly made by a Minister Governor of Milan and
his particular Friend; and so much the rather, that it was immediately executed
sincerely by the Duke of Modena who had sent back the Troops of France, which
he had kept for the security of his Country; had written to the King of Spain
in the term, the Count had desired; and, in fine, had done in general whatever
he was engaged to by the same Treaty: That I knew not what judgment the World
would make of the delaying the Ratification, and that at least for the time to
come there would be reason (perhaps to the great prejudice of Spain) not to
trust the highest Ministers of that Court. That the Duke had put such
confidence in what the Count de Fuensaldaigne had promised him on the point of
Correggio (on which this Count had received the Emperor's answer, that he might
do it, and that he would give the investiture, when the Treaty should be
signed, and the Duke of Modena should send to desire it) that his Highness had
already named an Ambassador to do this Office, and I even believed he was gone
in all haste to Vienna.

He made me replies, such as one may well judge, the matter being so just and
clear; but I stopped his mouth, as you shall see, in telling him there was no
need of ratifying this Treaty, which was already in better form, than if the
Ratification had been sent directly to Milan, seeing there was an Article in
the Treaty signed at Paris, by which it was said, that in respect of the
interests of the Duke of Modena, what he had treated and concluded with the
Count de Fuensaldaigne, should be confirmed; so that the King of Spain having
sent the Ratification of the Treaty of Paris, this Article by consequence was
no less ratified than the rest.

Don Lewis seeing he had nothing to answer me, saved himself by telling me,
That in consideration the Duke of Modena was my Nephew, the King his Master
would pass over this point as I desired.

I told him I was far from receiving as an obligation, what his Catholic
Majesty could not excuse himself from doing, without violating his Justice and
Honor; that the Duke of Modena would have great reason to complain of me,
should I pretend he were indebted to me for a thing, which is due to him by a
Treaty, by which he had likewise consented and executed other points in the
manner as the Count de Fuensaldaigne had desired. The Conclusion was, an
Article should be inserted in the Treaty, which should be couched in the terms
I desired.

I took afterward a Paper, in which are marked in Abridgment, all the points
which remain to be adjusted, to the number of twenty, and we agreed in all,
excepting five or six, the first of which is a pretension which I dexterously
proposed to join Constans to the County of Roussillon, which is a contiguous
Country, and of considerable extent, seeing it consists of more than two
hundred and fifty Villages.

The second concerns the Recompense of Bergue and la Bassee, the first of which
I may say, without bragging, I have gained to the King by pure address.

The third regards the pretensions which I likewise advanced, to have not only
the Bailywick of Artois, but moreover the places of this Province, which
depends on no Bailywick, as Merville and the Provostship of Chavancy, to which
in truth we have no right.

The fourth is touching what remains to be adjusted for a Road, which we
pretend in Lorrain, and the Salt Pits of that Country, for which Don Lewis has
entreated me to tarry till an Officer of the Duke of Lorrain arrives, who will
soon be here, and have power to treat and conclude whatever may regard the
interests of this Prince.

The fifth concerns the Affairs of England; and for very strong reasons I
placed it then last, as having judged 'twas not for the King's service to
insist thereon, before we agreed to the preamble of all the other points.

Yet we spoke of it several times, agreeing that this was too wicked an
Example, to be left unpunished to Posterity, that Subjects should arraign their
King, and put him to death; and that the Republic of England establishing it
self, 'twas a power to be redoubted by all it is Neighbors, seeing, without
exageration, it would be an hundred times more formidable than that of their
Kings.

I forgot to tell you, that the restitution of Hesdin is agreed to be made on
the day appointed, he taking on him the execution in some sort or other of what
he has promised hereupon.

I do not set down for the sixth the affair of Monsieur the Prince, though this
has been the subject of the greatest part of our Conferences, because that
though Don Lewis has not uttered a word thereupon, yet it seems to me he is
resolved, and will herein pretend nothing which may retard or break the Peace.

I was in some kind of astonishment, in that three hours had past, without his
so much as mentioning Monsieur the Prince; when he began to say to me: Will you
be always resolute? We shall separate without giving some satisfaction to
Monsieur the Prince, as I have so many times told you the King my Master is
obliged in Honor to do.

I told him, I thought this affair was ended, and no more talk should be of it,
and so much the rather, in that I thought that the satisfaction of this Prince
did not so much affect him, as to put him into a condition more considerable
than before; nor to give him signal marks, by which might be always seen in
France, how the Catholic Kings recompense the French, who range themselves on
their side; seeing on what I had said to him of the Propositions which Caillet
had made me, he had sufficiently declared himself, that in giving Places to
this Prince, they would take the necessary Precautions, that they might not
fall into the hands of the King; which had the more surprised me, that I had
imagined, his Excellency would be greatly pleased, if by means of the
gratification which his Catholic Majesty would give to Monsieur the Prince, he
might attain to that of changing it into other things, which were more likely
to contribute to his re-establishment in the King's favor, his Sovereign,
without the least inclination to Spain remaining behind; there being nothing in
my opinion, and that of all his Relations and Friends, more necessary than this
for his quiet, and the welfare of his affairs.

I added, that I had ever observed the greatest pleasure he could have, who
imparted a benefit, was, when this benefit might produce to him who receives
it, something more considerable, and more honorable; but that seeing his
Excellency was far from having this aim in respect of Monsieur the Prince, I
was forced against my will to believe he could have no other end, than that
which I denoted heretofore; insisting boldly on the giving great advantages to
Monsieur the Prince, in assurance the King would not grant them, and thus he
might oblige Monsieur the Prince at small cost.

I must acknowledge to you, I believe never man was so put to it as Don Lewis
appeared to me in this occasion, for assuredly it is fallen into his head, that
if Lainet and the other Adherents of Monsieur the Prince should come to know
the discourse I held to him, he will be troubled to get off from granting him
what he has so many times offered, and which might wholly meliorate his
conditition. He studied a long time, and though he told me afterward reasons
which would not permit him to give Places to Monsieur the Prince, without a
caution they should not go out of his Hands, he added he would consider afresh
what might be done for this Prince; to see if it were possible whether he could
be so happy, to find out some means whereby to give a satisfaction which I
could approve.

But I replied to him with the same firmness, that there is no other than the
giving him some Sum of Money to make some considerable purchase of Land; and
that for the discourses which I had held him, which perhaps he might take for
an overture capable of meliorating the condition of Monsieur the Prince, I
conjured him to believe, that the only desire of pleasing him in a thing, which
he had made known to me in such earnest terms, had induced me to this. For to
be plain, I much doubted whether the King would consent to this, though I was
determined to go and cast my self at his Feet to supplicate him; and that
however, I protested to him he could not do me a greater pleasure than not to
take me at my word, and to end this affair as is mentioned in the Treaty of
Paris, in converting into Silver the Prince's Gratification, as I have already
above denoted.

I forgot to tell you, that I had made him before this Proposition, That if he
would give to the King of Portugal the Kingdom of Sardaignia, which he had
offered to Monsieur the Prince, I would signify as much to his Majesty, and
use my utmost endeavors to make him relish this Proposition, with which the
King of Portugal might be satisfied; and I pleasantly enlarged my self
hereupon, to put him from insisting any more in hopes of succeeding in the
behalf of Monsieur the Prince.

I told him; Sir, here is the best Expedient in the World to satisfy this King,
and to give an opportunity to the King my Master, to show to the World that he
obtains for his Ally a handsome Retreat, as likewise to end the War on all
hands; seeing the King of Portugal embracing this Expedient, the Catholic
King, without drawing his Sword, may put himself in possession of several
Kingdoms, the least of which is more considerable than that of Sardaignia.

But this Proposition served only the more to perplex him, without his being
able to offer any solid reason to oppose it.

Neither indeed can there be any; for it would be far more advantageous to his
Catholic Majesty, to recover Portugal, without striking a stroke, in yielding
Sardaignia to this King, than to give as a pure gift this Province to Monsieur
the Prince.

And forasmuch as the principal end of the Relation I here make you, is to
inform the King, and, if I may express my self so, to instruct his Majesty in
whatever there is most important for his Service, and most conducing to the
interests of his Crown; so I will not omit, as far as my little leisure will
give me leave, to make known to the King all the accidents which happen in
several occasions in our Conferences.

And therefore I will tell you, that Don Lewis having taken again this last
time occasion to exagerate the extraordinary advantages received from this
Peace, by the means of which his Majesty assured his Conquests, and extended
their limits on all sides: I told him, that the King would willingly renounce
all this, if his Catholic Majesty would only deliver him Navarre in exchange,
which all the World knows belongs to him by so good a Title, that there is not a
Frenchman, who, from the first use of his Reason, is not persuaded the King has
no less right to this Kingdom than to the City of Paris.

He asked me, if I knew what Navarre was, seeing 'twas no greater than
Rousillon? Accept then the Proposal I made you (said I to him) assureing you,
that if you take me at my word, the King will make it good; but I suppose you
will do nothing herein, but had rather keep this little Country, wherein there
is not above Two or Three Places; for you well know; that the King my Master
had once Pampelune, his Catholic Majesty would be forced to dislodge from
Madrid.

He told me in another Rencounter, that the effects of War are uncertain; that
the Affairs of the Allies of France proceeded not so well in Germany as we
could wish; that they were near seeing in England such changes, as would give
Spain as many advantages as France had during the time of Cromwell; that there
was nothing to be expected from the Commotions in Naples; and supposing the
Peace was not made, there might a great many things happen in Portugal, which
would give the King his Master an opportunity to draw this Thorn out of his
Foot, and to employ elsewhere the Forces he had hitherto been constrained to
use on that side.

I answered him in two Words. Do you know why? It is because all is asleep; and
that you do not see several things break forth on all sides, which will give
you just reason to apprehend the progress of France for the future, more than
you have done hitherto; it is because the King, expecting whether the Peace
will be made, has ordered me to supersede all Negotiations, which may make him
enter into new engagements with Swedeland, England, and Portugal, although we
be continually solicited from all sides, with such offers as would affect any
other Prince, who can be less sensible than him of the Miseries which so long a
War has brought on Christendom.

And I concluded, That perhaps we had shut our Ears to more plausible
Propositions, and which might better succeed in the Kingdom of Naples, than all
those which had been made to us heretofore; and that I prayed to God with all
my Heart, that the execution of the Peace might oblige me to lie still,
otherwise I could easily show France to be in a more likely condition than ever
to make her self seared.

We passed afterward to entertaining our selves very friendly on the
conveniences which the two Crowns would find from the Peace; and I told him,
that I could not comprehend how those who had heretofore held our Places, and
our selves too, had not always labored with all our powers to unite our
Masters; seeing this Union raised equally the power of both, without giving
them the least jealousy; that I could assure him, the greatest part of the
Princes of Europe would not have a Peace; and that those whose Interest it was
to see it concluded, seared nothing more than to behold a strict friendship
made between the two Kings, because both one and the other grounded their
advantage in the continuation of the War, or at least, in the fomentation of
Jealousies and Mistrusts between the two Crowns; that the Conduct and
Intentions of these Princes seemed to me to learn us what we should do; and
that it was strange, we being able to give Laws to all of 'em, we should put
our selves into a condition to receive it from them; and that in stead of
obliging them to make their court to our Masters, by jealousies one of another,
they should court 'em themselves to the great prejudice of their dignity. But
after all, said I to him again, what reason can the two Kings have to make War
so obstinately against one another, and with so great damage to their States
and Subjects, seeing it is certain, that neither the Revolutions which can
happen thence, nor the progress which the Arms of the one can make over the
other in diverse times, will ever be capable of ruining so well one, that the
two Powers become entirely one single Body.

He testified he liked very well my discourse, and having repeated it, he told
me there was no replying to what I said; but I will tell you in your Ear, to
the end only their Majesty's may know it, that it troubles me to see him so
indifferent for the executing of any great Enterprise.

Let me entreat you to take care, that this particular be only known of their
Majesty's, it being of the greatest importance, that no one else hears it.

It is fit to write to the Chancellor, to impart to him in general that the
Business advances, and that there is reason to hope all will end well, to the
satisfaction of all honest People.

You do me a pleasure in drawing up the Titles I must take on me in the Treaty:
I could be well enough satisfied with that of Cardinal, but Don Lewis inserting
his, I must perhaps think my self in Honor bound to do the like. Besides I am
not displeased Posterity should see the Favors I have received from their
Majesty's: I think I have that of first Counselor to the King, and that I may
likewise assume that of Duke of Mayenne, although my Letters are not Registered in
Parliament.

LETTER XVIII.
To Monsieur de Lionne. Commotions of Flanders. News from Germany.

August 25. 1659.
I Have now received another Letter from the Sieur Talon, informing me that the
Body of Men commanded by St. Martin is still lodged above the Castle of Furnes;
it being difficult to contain our Troops, who are for reprisals, and being
weary of lying still, by reason of the suspension of Arms, they will be very
glad to have a lawful pretense of entering into the Country. And it plainly
appearing by the Conduct of the said St. Martin, that he has no other intention
but to harrass us, to the end we may be forced on some Action which may cause
the repture of the Suspension, and produce some alteration in the Negotiation
of the Peace. I persuade my self, that the Seignior Don Lewis, considering the
importance of the thing, will speedily send such punctual orders into Flanders
hereupon, as to remedy the inconveniences which may otherwise happen.

I fend you the last Dispatch, which I have received from Monsieur de
Bourdeaux, to the end you may show the Original to his Excellency, having
promised to impart to him the News I had of the state of Affairs in England,
which render the King's Journey which he had resolved on doubtful.

Those which I have received from Germany say, that it is still reported the
Emperor will attack the Bishopric of Bremen, and the King being obliged to be
Guarante of the Countries which have been furrendred to the King of Swedeland
by the Treaty of Munster, if the Emperor attacks them, his Majesty is
therefore resolved to send an Army into Germany to assist them, which will
certainly kindle again the War. And therefore I would have you to be very
earnest with Don Lewis, that he would write to Vienna in the manner he thinks
fitting, to prevent so great a Mischief.

Read this Letter in its place.

LETTER XIX.
Letter to the Pope. Of the Dowry of the Infanta. Duchy of Mayenne. Quality of
the Cardinal. Of Lorrain.

To Monsieur de Lionne. From St. John de Luz, August the 26th. 1659.
I Have received your Letter with the draught of that which you have wrote for
the Pope, on which I shall discourse to you by word of mouth.

I shall only tell you by the way, that the clause which you have inserted in
two Brackets, and which you tell me has been likewise so by Don Pedro Coloma in
his rough draught for the King his Master, is not consistent with what is
agreed on by the Preamble of the Treaty.

And therefore I have thought of an Expedient which I will communicate to you
to night, if you return here, as I judge 'twill be necessary: I profess I am
astonished at what Don Lewis told you, touching the Dowry of the Infanta; for
methinks he should not so much as use a word in an affair which speaks of it
self, and so conclusive for us, that I dare engage when I see him it will be
impossible for him to mention a little about it.

I have written to Colbert touching the Duchy of Mayenne, and as to what
concerns the Stewardship of the Bishopric of Bayeux, you may reckon to draw
from thence about 20000 Crowns a year, as the King has granted you, till such
time his Majesty has given you for your Children one or two Abbeys, of whose
Revenue I have heretofore acquainted you.

I could have wished I had been given only the Title of Cardinal in the Treaty,
but seeing I must do as Don Lewis has done; and that it is fit the World should
see the favors I have received from the King and Queen, I therefore think
might be inserted, except some small matter changed, if need requires,
according to the answers I shall receive from the Court; Cardinal of the Holy
Roman Church, Chief of the King's Council, Superintendant of the Queen's
Council, Duke of Mayenne, Governor and Lieutenant General of the Country of
Aunis, Rochelle, Brouage, Isles and Castles of Oleron, and Re, of Brisac, and
la Fere, Captain and Warden of the Castle, Royal House, and Park of Vincennes.

I shall be to Morrow Morning at the place of the Conference at the usual hour.
Let me entreat you to remember, in speaking to Don Pedro Coloma, to insinuate
to him, that the King yields the point of Juliers.

As to what concerns Lorrain, we must plainly declare, there can nothing be
changed thereupon, of what has been determined at Paris, and the passage to go
into Alsatia is indispensable. You may likewise tell him, that having
acquainted me with what Don Lewis said Yesterday, in relation to the Dowry, I
signified to you, I found it strange he should have so much as the thought of
speaking to you in the terms he did, and am greatly troubled to see that Don
Lewis, as well in great things as in small, will always bear the advantage.

LETTER XX.
To Monsieur le Tellier: Cardinal presses Don Lewis to make an end. Demand of
the Infanta. The Marshall de Gramont proposed to make it.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, the 26th of August, 1659.
I Write you again this Letter apart, to inform you, that pressing Don Lewis in
this last Conference to make an end, there being many things to do, and the
time short, if the Infanta be to come in the beginning of October; he replied
to me I had reason, and that he would not be wanting in any thing which lay in
his power; and therefore he thought himself obliged to tell me, that though he
had written to the King his Master, according to my desire, yet he did not
believe the Council of Spain would consent to the Proposal, being unwilling to
part with certain Formalities, which in some sort seem necessary, and as was
practiced heretofore by the Envoy of the Duke of Mayenne. Charles of Lorrain
sent in the Year 1612. Ambassador into Spain, to conclude the Marriage of Lewis
XIII with the Infanta Ann.


And therefore he advised me to write to the King, to the end his Majesty may
appoint some body for this employ, and that it mattered not, whether the person
who should be named were of the quality of the Duke of Mayenne, provided he
were a Duke; and to the end he may set forth in 8 or 10 days, as is absolutely
necessary, that the Infanta may set out immediately; his Majesty may order him
to take Post, omitting the trouble of Liveries, or other things for show, as is
usually practiced in such occasions; making a pretense, or, to speak better,
alleging for a reason, which is sufficiently true, that if we spend time in
making Preparations, wherein the main of the thing is not at all concerned, we
shall necessarily be obliged to remit the consummating of the Marriage till
after Winter, and therefore it were best this Ambassador should go Post.

And therefore let me entreat you, to tell the King and Queen, they must
without any delay resolve hereupon; and that I believe the fittest Person we
have here, to acquit himself worthily of this Employ, is the Marshall de
Gramont, who is considerable for his Birth, and capable of performing the
business, with all the decency which our small time will permit him; being
likewise here ready to set out when he shall be ordered. I do not question but
their Majesty's will approve of this proposal; and let me beg the favor of
you, to make known to me their intentions hereupon without delay.

LETTER XXI.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Sixth Conference, of which he makes a short relation.
King's Marriage. Journey of the Infanta. Diligence of Monsieur the Prince.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, August the 28th 1659.
I Send you this Footman with the Letters, which I make bold to write to their
Majesty's; that I may have the Honor, as often as I can, of informing them how
Affairs move here.

And to send to you the relation of what past in yesterday's Conference, which
is the sixth, and lasted near half the day; which Account I shall endeavor to
get ready between this and to Morrow, to the end the Sieur Bartet, whom I shall
send away in the Morning, may carry it. He will likewise inform their Majesty's
of abundance of little things which may satisfy their Curiosity. However I
shall tell you in general, to the end their Majesty's may expect with greater
patience, the Relation I intend; that we do hasten business, that almost all
the Articles are agreed on, excepting that of Flanders, and certain other
things of no great importance. As to the Recompense which we should pretend for
Bergue and la Bassee, Don Lewis has entreated me to speak of it to the Person
whom he daily expects from Brussels.

As to the point of Monsieur the Prince, he spoke to me again largely about it,
but in other terms than heretofore, beginning to declare to me he would contest
no more thereupon, and that this should not hinder the completing the Peace,
seeing he was resolved to comply with whatever his Majesty should desire on
this point.

And as to the Marriage, we are almost agreed in all the Articles relating to
it; in which Monsieur de Lionne and the Secretary of State Coloma, do
continually busy themselves, as well as in the Letters, and other Writings
necessary for the completing this Affair, to the end Don Lewis on his part,
and I on mine, may send to Bourdeaux and Madrid the Memoirs to draw up the
necessary dispatches. He declared to me he was mightily concerned at the
straitness of the time, if this affair were to be dispatched in the Month of
October, seeing the Infanta could not be espoused at Madrid, before the
dispensation from Rome, and that whatever diligence should be used for this
matter, it being necessary to dispatch the Currier from Madrid for this effect,
with the King his Master's Letter, he believed this could not be done till
toward the 10th of October at soonest. Adding other motives to convince me of
the length of time which this Affair would take up, when even the King his
Master should use all possible diligence on his part: I plainly saw he would
make me understand he believed it impossible this could be performed within the
time I had always mentioned; seeing that though the Infanta should not defer her
departure above Two Days after her Espousals, yet she must be on the Road near
Twenty Three or Twenty Four Days.

Which said, he gave me an hint on his Masters indisposition, which besides his
Age, would not let him take this Journey at the beginning of Winter. I answered
what I thought fit, and he remitted the rest to the first Conference. You shall
know the Answer, which the Sieur Bartet will bring you, the surplus of what has
passed hereupon.

Let me entreat you to inform the King and Queen, that I have made a pertinent
use of the Letters which it has pleased their Majesty's to write to me,
according to the tenor I signified to you was necessary.

I can assure you, that these Letters and yours have wrought a good effect in
the mind of Don Lewis, and given me occasion to quicken him to end this
Negotiation, whereby to put an end to all occasions of Jealousy and Suspicion,
which every day increased.

I am just now dispatching a Currier to Monsieur de Lionne at Andaye, where I
have sent him to work with Don Pedro Coloma, to let him know what Colbert has
now wrote to me, on the continuation of Monsieur the Prince's endeavors, to
engage as many People as he can into his Interests, designing, as it appears,
to give us more trouble than ever; and I will send word to the Sieur de Lionne,
to demand immediately audience of Don Lewis, to impart this to him, as having
received this Advice from you, by the King's Order, to the end you may be more
urgent with him to finish without delay, and to oblige Monsieur the Prince to
declare immediately whether he accepts or not of what the King has granted him
by the Treaty of Paris.

LETTER XXII.
To Monsieur de Lionne. Concerning Monsieur de Beauvais. Cabals of Monsieur the
Prince.

To Monsieur de Lionne. August 28. 1659.
I Have received your Note, with the Marquess de Mortara's Letter to Don
Antonio Pimentel. I will write very earnestly to Monsieur de Beauvais by an
express Messenger, and send him a Copy of the said Letter, to the end he may
justify himself on the Complaints made against him; and that he takes care for
the future, to act nothing contrary to what has been stipulated by the
Suspension, which I do not doubt but he will observe, and you may impart it to
Don Pedro Coloma, that he may give an account of it to Don Lewis.

But in the time your Note was giving me, I took my Pen to inform you that
Monsieur le Tellier has dispatched to me a Currier by the King's Order, to
acquaint me, that besides the notices which their Majesty's had already
received of the Cabals of Monsieur the Prince, of which they have thought fit
to inform me (and I have even showed Don Lewis what the Queen has been pleased
to write to me on this occasion) they have fresh informations, that this Prince
and the Marquess de Caracene had assured their Friends, that they should soon
have an occasion to put in execution what they had agreed on, but that they
expected Monsieur the Count de Harcourt should give 'em a Writing, in which he
should engage himself in the Prince's Interests; which Writing their Majesty's
know the Count has given, which has obliged his Majesty to command him near his
Person.

It will be fit to demand an express Audience of Don Lewis, to entertain him on
this point; and that you tell him, you have order to insist immediately on some
resolution in relation to the Prince: For his Majesty considering the Conduct
he continues to hold, in a time wherein he believes all things adjusted
touching his Interests, would speedily know what he might expect, that he may
resolve, according to the acceptance or refusal which he shall make of what has
been determined at Paris, on what respects him, and I entreat you to let me
know the answer to Morrow Morning at farthest, that I may give an account to
their Majesty's of it, by the return of Monsieur le Tellier's Messenger.

LETTER XXIII.
An earnest Letter from Cardinal Mazarin to Lewis XIV. the present King of
France, to dissuade him from loving his Niece. Her inclination, her conduct,
her designs. Assiduity of the King in writing to her; and of the passion he has
for her. Her small affection for the Cardinal. His Complaints. His
Remonstrances. The difference there is between the Infanta and his Niece. Of
the Marriage of the Duke de Richlieu. Reasons against the Marriage of the King
with his Niece. The Cardinal's displeasures.

To the King. From St. John de Luz, August the 28th. 1659.
LEt me entreat you to be persuaded once for all, that I cannot render you a
greater and more important service, than to speak to you with the liberty you
have permitted me hitherto, in matters relating to your welfare, for which none
of your Majesty's Servants can be more earnest and solicitous.

I shall begin with speaking to that part of your Letter of the 13th of August,
which relates to the deference the person in question has for me; and the other
points you have signified to me in her favor. I am not surprised at what you
write, seeing the passion you have for her, as is ordinary with others, hinders
you from discerning the truth; and I must answer you, that were it not for this
passion you would agree with me; that this Person is not capable of Friendship,
that she has an ambition without bounds, a restless and awkard Spirit, a
contempt for all the World, no prudence in her conduct, and an inclination to
all Extravagancies, that The Sequel has showed he knew his Niece's humor
perfectly.
she is more foolish than ever, since she has had the Honor to see you at St.
John d' Angely; and that instead of receiving your Letters twice a Week, she
receives them now every day. In fine, you would see as well as I, that she has
a thousand defects, and not one quality which may render her worthy your
affection. You testify in your Letter to believe, that the opinion I have of
her proceeds from the ill Offices done her. Is it possible you can believe I am
so penetrant and able in great affairs, and that I cannot see a jot into those
of my Family? Can I doubt of the intentions of this Person in my respect, when
I see she never forgets to do the contrary in every thing I desire; that she
turns into ridicule the advices I give for her conduct; that she glories in
that, which in the sight of all the World prejudices her Honor, and mine; that
she will needs become the Master, and change all the orders I give in my House;
and that, in fine, despising all the diligences I have used with so great love,
application and address, to bring her into a good course, and make her wise;
she persists in her follies, and will be thus exposed to the laughter of all
the World, who make it a continual Subject of Comedies, as will appear from the
Papers I keep by me, in which you may see the sentiments of all those who
discourse on this matter, which is at present the Enterainment of the best Wits
of all Nations.

Did the ill conduct of this Person prejudice only her self, and even me, I
might dissemble it; but this evil every day increasing, and this Commerce doing
an irreparable injury to the Glory and Quiet of my Master, it is impossible for
me to suffer it; and I shall be at length constrained to take resolutions, by
which every one may be fully convinced, that when the matter concerns your
service, I sacrifice all. And if I find my self so unhappy to perceive the
passion you have for this Creature blinds your reason, I must take up the
design I signified to you from Cadillac; for, in short, there is no power which
can deprive me of disposing how I please of my Family; and you will be one day
the first in commending me for the service I have done you, which will be
certainly the greatest of all, seeing by my resolution I have put you into a
condition of being happy, and with this the most Glorious and Compleatest King
on earth, Besides, mine Honor, which Jesus Christ, who is the Example of
Humility, said that he would not give to another (Honorem meum nemini dabo)
obliges me to defer no longer the doing what I ought to preserve it.

I return to the Person who holds her self more certain than ever to dispose
entirely of your Affection, after the new promises you have made her at St.
John d'Angely: and I know that if you be obliged to marry, she pretends to make
the Princess that shall espouse you miserable all her life; which cannot happen
without your being so too, and exposing your self to a thousand vexatious
disasters. For you cannot expect the blessing of Heaven, if you do nothing for
your part to deserve it. Since the last visit, which I ever believed would be
fatal to you, and for which reason I endeavored to hinder it, you have begun
again to write to her every day, not Letters, but entire Volumes, imparting to
her the most minute circumstances of Affairs, and placing in her the greatest
confidence, to the exclusion of every body else. So that all your time is taken
up in reading hers, and writing yours. And that which is most incomprehensible,
is, that you practice all imaginable expedients to heat your Passion, whilst
you are at the Eve of your Marriage. Thus do you your self labor to make your
self the most miserable of all Men; there being no condition more intolerable,
than a Marriage made against ones Stomach.

But pray tell me, I beseech you, what personage does this Girl pretend to act
after you be married? Has she so far forgot her Duty, to believe that when I
should be so dishonest, or, to speak better, sufficiently infamous, to allow
it, that she can drive on a trade so long which will ruin her Reputation?
Perhaps she thinks she can do this without any bodies murmuring at it, after
she has gained every bodies good will; but she is much mistaken; for her
Carriage has so moved all against her that know her, that I should be much
perplexed to name one only person who has any esteem or good will for her,
excepting Hortensia, Late Duchess Mazarine.
who is a Child, she has won by force of Flatteries, and giving her Money, and
other things; having found, as I believe, some Treasure, seeing she refused to
take Money which I had ordered Madam de Venelle to pay her in what quantity she
pleased when she went to Rochelle.

The greatest good fortune which can happen to this Person, is my not deferring
any longer to regulate Matters; and if I cannot make her wise, as I believe
it is impossible, at least, that her follies appear not any more in the view of
the World, for otherwise she will run a risk of being torn in pieces.

You hear all this with astonishment, because the affection you have for her
will not suffer you to see clearly in what relates to her; but as for my part,
who am not prejudiced, and who, at what price soever, will serve you in this
accident, which is the most important of your whole life, though it should cost
me mine: I see the truth as it is, and I will not suffer you to be ruined; for
otherwise I should be guilty of a kind of Treason. Let the event be what it
will, I matter not to dye, provided it be doing my duty, and serving you, as I
am obliged, especially in this occasion, wherein no body can do it better.

I had forgot to tell you, that to discover to you the better the affection
this person has for me, that she has never writ to me but two words, forced to
do it by Madam de Venelle; and after the sight of you at St. John d'Angely,
another Letter, which I know to be an effect of what you told her, being well
assured, that according to the favor you bear me, you omit nothing to oblige
her to render me all kinds of respects and marks of affection. But whatever
power you have over her Mind, you will never succeed in this point, and I now
declare to you it will be in vain. And moreover, how can you pretend she has
any deference and affection to me, whose thoughts are quite contrary to hers;
which is to say, she is for being a Libertine and an Extravagant, and I on the
contrary would have her to be Wise and Reserved.

I do not doubt but she knows all that I have the Honor to write to you, but
so far am I from being apprehensive of it, that there is nothing I more
passionately wish for; and would to God she were capable of answering you
pertinently on the matter, which you take care to impart to her, for I
earnestly wish to be free from that trouble. But I confess to you that at the
Age I am, and among all the Employments with which I am overwhelmed, and in
which I seem so fortunate to serve you with Reputation and Advantage to your
State; I cannot bear the being tormented by a Person, who should by all Laws
sacrifice her self to comfort me; and that which afflicts me to the utmost, is,
that in stead of sparing me this trouble, you contribute thereunto, in giving
to this Wretch, by the passion you show her, the courage and resolution to live
as she does.

I was wholly at ease by what you took the pains to write me, and by the
Conduct you began to hold since my dispatch from Cadillac; and I had believed
that you only thought of preparing the ways to be happy in your Marriage, which
could not be but in mastering of your Passion, which had made it self Master of
your Mind. But I have seen with a sensible displeasure, that after this fatal
Visit, which I would have hindered at the price of my Blood, all is fallen into
a worse condition than it was before; and you must not explain to me the thing
otherwise, for I cannot doubt of it, and I may say, I know all as well as you.
Pray consider after this, in what condition I am, and whether there be in the
World a Man more wretched than my self, who, after applying himself continually
with the greatest zeal to raise your Reputation, and to procure by all ways the
glory of your Arms, the ease of your Subjects, and the good of your State, has
the displeasure to see a Person who belongs to me, on the very point of
overturning all, and causing your Ruin, if you go on to give way to your
passion for her. When I call to mind what you were pleased to write me, That if
you could explain your self by word of Mouth, I should have an entire
satisfaction touching the disposition of your Mind, being resolved to do,
without reserve, whatever. I should see necessary for your Glory, and the good
of the Kingdom; it makes me desperate to see this Commerce last, which hinders
me from waiting on you, and endeavoring, according to your orders, to calm
your Spirit, and put you in a condition of being the happiest and compleatest
Monarch in the World; but I know not how to approach you, having reason to
believe that neither of us shall say any thing to content one another. For can
I without violating the Fidelity I owe you, and without betraying my
Obligations, abstain from showing you, that you take a course quite contrary to
what is decent, and to the Happiness you should aspire after; seeing that at
the very point of marrying your self, you abandon your self more than ever to
your Passion; for whatever power you have over your self, and whatever progress
you may have made through her counsel whom you love, in the art of dissembling,
you cannot conceal your aversion to this Marriage, although it be the most
profitable and glorious you can make. How can I forbear telling you, that you
prejudice the good of your Kingdom, that you draw on you the Reproaches of all
the World, and render your self liable to the wrath of God, if you marry with a
Princess whom you do not love, and in the intention of living ill with her, as
the other Person threatens. Do you believe that God can bless such devices, and
that, if you deal thus, you can avoid the feeling as many effects of his
Indignation as he has showed you hitherto of his Bounty? I should deceive you,
should I not condemn the Conduct you hold, and the care you take to make your
self miserable, seeing that instead of softly breaking off, as you have begun
to do, a Commerce, which is the greatest obstacle to the satisfaction which you
will receive from the Marriage which I treat on, you have renewed it with more
heat than ever, without considering that you are going to Espouse the Greatest
and most Virtuous Princess in the World; that she has had an inclination for
you from the Cradle; that there is nothing so advantageous in the present
Conjuncture for the Prosperity of your Affairs; that she is well shaped, and
that the Beauty of her Mind comes not short of that of her Body.

It is hereupon, if I were near you, I would conjure you to tell me, if there
be not sufficient to satisfy you in the possession of this Princess, who,
without doubt, will adore you, for all the excellent Qualities you possess, but
that another Passion, which you so carefully cultivate, is to you instead of a
great defect. For one may truly say, that the Person you dote on comes not near
the Beauty either of Mind or Body of the Princess who is to be your Spouse.
Besides that, she is infinitely above her in Quality and Birth.

Were I with you, I could not forbear remembering you of what you have said your
self in several rencounters on the occasion of the Marriage of the Marquess of
Richlieu; that there is nothing more shameful and odious than a disagreeable
Marriage.

I should never be weary in reminding you, with the respect I owe you, that the
thoughts you have, and which the person in question pretends you will not
easily get rid off, are very contrary to those you have had in relation to
Richlieu; and that by the decision you have given on this Subject, you your
self shall be judged in the presence of the Queen, when you say, that the
thought of Espousing this person had, for a principal motive, the testifying to
the World, that being not able sufficiently to recompense my Services, you
would do it by this means: for there is no body but would attribute so strange
a resolution to an amorous transport, rather than to my Services.

But when it should be true, that this only motive induced you thereunto, would
it be just that I should so far forget my self, as to consent that for my
particular Interest, and for the raising of my Reputation, I should suffer you
to lose yours. In truth, my Ambition puts me not on doing any Action which may
redound to my Glory; and I ought the rather to be thus affected, in that,
besides my Duty, your particular Favors oblige me hereunto. In fine, I
apprehend my Return, for assuredly I cannot entertain you to your likeing, nor
forbear telling you with great heat, what I now write to you, and other things
more earnest on this Head.

I find my self then much perplexed about what will become of me; and much more
in giving the last stroke in reference to your Marriage; for methinks I promise
what is not, and that I contribute to the establishment of a thing which will
make an innocent person miserable, who deserves your Affection; and your self
likewise, because you will be so.

It is time to render your self, and to declare your will without disguisement;
for it is better a thousand times to break all off, and to continue the War,
without any concern for the Miseries of Christendom, and the prejudice which
your Countries will receive, than to make this Marriage for your misfortune,
and consequently that of the whole Kingdom. And though I continue to labor to
forward the business, this shall not hinder me from executing what you will
please to command me hereupon. Yet I confess, I shall do it with regret and
with a sensible displeasure, if I do not see at the same time that you do what
is necessary to find contentment in the Marriage in hand. Then will I do what
God shall inspire me for your good; that I may not fail in any thing which may
depend on me to contribute to the satisfaction which I wish you in this
Marriage, which cannot be any thing else but what I wrote you from Cadillac
very precisely, after having well examined and resolved on what I signified to
you.

And the better to make you know, that the passion which you have hinders you
from relishing the pleasure, which you should feel in Espousing so great,
handsome, and complete a Princess, I will add, that you were wholly resolved, or
to speak better, wished at Lions to Espouse the Princess Marguerite of Savoy,
whose beauty and quality are not comparable to the Infanta's; and you may
remember, if you please, that you were angry at what the Queen and others said
to disgust you.

Here is whatever the passion, fidelity, and the zeal which I have for your
service and happiness, constrain me to represent with the liberty which I owe
as an old Servant, who breaths after nothing but your Glory, and who has more
interest and obligation than any other; not only to tell you the truth, but
likewise to sacrifice his life for so good a Master.

As to what remains, I protest to you, that nothing is capable to hinder me
from dying with sadness, should I see a person, who is so nearly related to me,
to cause you more mischief and damage, than I have rendered you services from
the first day I began to serve you.

I will likewise tell you, that I have great affairs in hand, as you know, but
that there is certainly none of so great importance as this, and which requires
more earnestly an end. And therefore, if need were, I would lay aside all
others, and only labor at this.

I conjure you to read this Letter with attention, and to do me the Honor to
denote to me your intentions without any reserve, to the end I may take the
resolutions which I shall judge most proper and necessary for your service.

LETTER XXIV.
To the Queen. Of Monsieur the Prince. They would in Spain put off the Marriage
till March. Reasons for this. Of the King's Passion.

The same day.
I Have made a very good and pertinent use of the Letter which I entreated the
Confident and you to write to me to show Don Lewis, especially that part where
you say you could wish he knew as well the Prince's humor as you and I do; for
then the Conferences would be ended, and Christendom enjoy the blessed effects
of the so long desired Peace. For he told me, that the Queen retained, he saw
still, her ill opinion of this Prince; and I could easily perceive your Letters
and those of Monsieur le Tellier made a great impression on his spirit. I write
to you by this Footman, and will do it to Morrow Morning by Bartet, by whom I
intend to inform the Confident and you of whatever past in Yesterday's
Conference. Yet I must profess to you, I am overcharged and greatly fear I
shall not be able to go through so much business.

I am obliged particularly to tell you, that it seems to me, from what I have
gathered from Don Lewis's discourses, that they are very willing at Madrid to
refer the Conclusion of the Marriage to the Month of March. Every body is
agreed that the King of Spain will greatly expose himself, if at his Age, and
with all his indispositions, he should undertake so troublesome a Journey in
Winter; and that the intention of Don Lewis is to sign and proclaim the Peace,
without any more delay, and to do the same in respect of the Articles of
Marriage, and then return to come back again with the King his Master in the
Month of March.

I believe the Confident, in humor wherein he is at present (for I well know
he has more passion than ever) will be very glad of this delay: and we shall
have more time by this means to tend his cure; for I declare to you, if he
marries in that disposition of mind he now is in, he will be miserable, and the
Infanta yet more, and you and I beyond all hopes. I have written to him a
Letter of about sixteen or eighteen Pages, and I wish he would let you read it.
I am certain 'twill not please him; however, I could not omit it, without
wronging my own Conscience and Reputation. For I protest to you, in the
presence of God, I would rather choose a thousand times to retire with my
Family, as I have written to him from Cadillac, and thereby contribute to his
cure, by sacrificing my Person and all that I have, than to live near him, and
see him unhappy, and out of a capacity of being the most Glorious and
Compleatest Prince in the World, as I wish he may, and will certainly be, if it
be not his own fault. Besides that, I am ashamed to tell Don Lewis, in relation
to the Marriage, several things contrary to truth, to the prejudice of a
Princess, who without all controversy deserves the Confident's affection.

I cannot express to you how greatly this afflicts me, the thoughts of it not
letting me take a minutes rest; and that which drives me to the greatest
despair, is, that all my misfortune comes from a Person from whom I might
otherwise expect to receive comfort. It is, Madam, your favor that keeps me
alive, and the assurance I have in you, and likewise a little hope, that the
Confident will at length come to himself. I shall see it by the answer he makes
me, but more by the conduct he holds, for hereupon I shall without any more
loss of time take my measures. I humbly entreat you to send me speedily word
how you find him affected toward this Marriage, and whether he is for having
it in October, November, or March, to the end, that I may take such courses as
your Letters shall direct me.

LETTER XXV.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Reasons why he cannot write at large.

From St. John de Luz, August the 29th 1659.
I Wrote Yesterday to you by the King's Footman, telling you I would send to
day the Sieur Bortet, with the relation of what past in the last Conference;
but informing you of what is most essential, though other particulars may
satisfy your curiosity but learn you nothing considerable, I have therefore
omitted the doing this to day, to spend the time on something more urgent and
useful, which is on the Articles to be inserted in the Treaty, and to make
known to Monsieur de Lionne, who is at Andaye, the manner he is to proceed in
things he has to adjust with the Sieur Don Pedro Coloma.

So that I shall defer the departure of the Sieur Bartet till to Morrow in the
Afternoon, and will send by him not only the Memorandum of the last Conference,
but likewise that of to Morrow.

In the mean time, I direct the Packet hereunto adjoining for the King to you,
and take the opportunity of this Messenger who has been sent to me by the Agent
of the Clergy, and who returns to Paris, to confirm to you the assurances of my
Friendship and Services.

LETTER XXVI.
To the King. He entreats him to return an answer to his preceding Letter.

From St. John de Luz, August the 29th. 1659.
I Received almost at the same time your two Letters of the 27th and 28th, and
return you my most humble thanks for the continual assurances you are pleased
to give me of your favor, which I will endeavor to deserve all my life by my
services. I pretend I have rendered you a most important one within 24 hours,
having writ to you with the liberty and freedom a faithful Servant ought, who
interesses himself more for your glory and happiness, than thousands of others.
I expect your answer with great impatience, seeing I must thereupon take the
resolutions which I can judge will be most conducive for the delivering you
from the passion which at present possesses you.

I shall add nothing to what I have already writ to you, but that you may see
what is written from Court to Persons who are here, and what they say who come
from thence, whence you may know, that notwithstanding the dissimulation etc.

LETTER XXVII.
To the Queen. On the King's Marriage.

The same day.
YOur last which I received are of the 27th and 28th; and seeing the
satisfaction you have in the things I have wrote, mine is beyond expression. It
seems to me by the manner Don Pedro Coloma goes to work, that Don Lewis is for
making an end; but I have great reason to apprehend, as I have already given my
self the honor to write to you, that the consummation of the Marriage will be
deferred; though I well know Don Lewis dispatched Yesterday Morning a Messenger
to Madrid, on occasion of what I had told him the day before on that Subject.

I wait to hear from you what you will judge most fitting, after consideration
on what I wrote Yesterday by the Footman, this being of great use to me in
reference to the conduct I am to hold; and therefore according to what I shall
know to morrow, I will write to Monsieur le Tellier, to the end I may learn
from him the intentions of the Confident, whose answer I wait for to my long
Letter of Yesterday, which I fear has not pleased him, but I do not question
but it will in the end, begging of God in the mean time to deliver him from the
passion which at present masters him.

I shall not let Bartet go till to morrow, for going again to this Conference,
there will be more matter to entertain you.

LETTER XXVIII.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Don Lewis is to send Pimentel to make some
Propositions. Reasons of the boldness of the Cardinal's Offers to Don Lewis.

To Monsieur le Tellier, From St. John de Luz, August the 30th. 1659.
BArtet shall bring you the relation of what past at Yesterday's Conference,
which shall be short, Don Lewis and I having not been half the time in
Conference as we were wont to be; and having prayed me to approve, that on what
regards Monsieur the Prince, Bergue, la Bassee, and the other pretensions,
which we have as well to Roussillon, as on the side of Luxembourg and Artois,
he might send me to day Monsieur Pimentel, to acquaint me freely with his
intentions, and to propose to me some expedient which he believed I might like
of. And though it seems to me, that if he had any agreeable proposal to make he
would have made it himself; yet to judge of his intention we must tarry till
the arrival of Pimentel, who has written to Des Meaux that he will be here to
night without fail; and I shall not omit to make known immediately to their
Majesty's the subject of our Conversation by the dispatch which the Sieur
Bartet shall carry, who may set out to morrow night.

However you will find here the relation of what past in the curious Conference
which I wrote you shall receive by the said Bartet. I would not have a bad
judgment made of the boldness with which I make Propositions to Don Lewis, and
offer him certain things, pretending to be very earnest he should accept of
them; for though I know very well, if he should, we should be prejudiced
thereby, yet I am sure we run no risk, knowing well by the information I have
of their interests, that it is impossible for them to close with them: so that
without hazarding any thing I draw by this dealing more advantage than you can
well imagine, and I hope 'twill appear so evidently in what remains to be
adjusted. I consider sometimes that if there were an Ambassador in my place; he
could not give such bold strokes as I do; because fearing he should be taken at
his word in offering certain things, he will likewise dread the being disowned
and recalled with disgrace. So that I see it a great advantage to Kings when
they employ such Persons in great affairs, who, being fully assured of their
good will, negotiate boldly, and hesitate not to propose a thousand Expedients
to get their ends.

LETTER XXIX.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Particulars of the sixth Conference. Of the signing
the Treaty of Marriage. The Spaniards cannot be ready so soon for the
Ceremonies of Marriage. Of the Train the two Kings will bring along with them.
Of the demand of the Infanta by the Marshall de Gramont. Of the Dowry. King's
Conquests. Of the valuation of the Dowry. Earnestness of Don Lewis for Monsieur
the Prince, and Cardinal's replies. Of the King of England's Ministers visit.
Lockart Ambassador from the Commonwealth of England. Pleasant adventure
happening to the Abbot Siri with Don Christoval, and their discourse.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, August the 30th 1659.
TO inform their Majesty's of several particulars, which have past in the last
Conference which may serve to discover to them what has been said on the points
which have been discust and contested, I must enter on a particular account of
what I could yesterday give you only in general. But the curiosity which they
may have, having I think been satisfied in what was essential, by the Letter I
wrote to you returning from the said Conference; I will begin by telling you,
that being agreed in the Articles which respected the Marriage, which I
proposed my self to sign when it should be time, in Don Lewis's Apartment, to
the end it might appear as it is reasonable, that this Ceremony had been
performed in Spain in the same manner as the Duke of Mayenne did it at Madrid;
when he went thither to make the demand of the Queen; Don Lewis thankt me for
the thoughts I had, though to speak the truth, 'twas a thing about which the
Secretary of State had already made some proposal to Monsieur de Lionne. There
may aris^ some difficulty on the Signing of the Witnesses, which are ever
chosen on both sides of the greatest Quality; but I have considered to remedy
this; we may do as is done in the Treaties of Peace, which is to say, make two
Writings, the one signed by the Spaniards, which we shall keep, the French
signing the other.

It Is certain Don Lewis expects some Currier from Madrid, to be instructed in
the impossibilities there are to consummate the Marriage in the time prefixed;
for he took a great deal of care to reckon up to me whatever must precede the
departure of the Infanta. But I perceive the real reason was, that their
Liveries, and other necessary preparations for such an Action, could not be
finished so soon, telling me, that what was gotten ready in Fifteen days at
Paris could not be so in Two Months at Madrid. That the Treasurer had wrote to
him he had orders from his Catholic Majesty to spare no cost to hasten things,
and had already paid out Two Hundred Thousand Crowns for the Liveries of his
Majesty's Household, and the Livery of his Guards, which consist of Three
Companies of an Hundred Gentlemen each, one of Spaniards, another of
Burgundians, and the other of Germans. I have learnt since that this is the
real cause of this delay, Don Antonio Pimentel having freely told me as much,
by the order of Don Lewis, who came the other day to visit me here. He told me
among other things, that should the King of Spain give a Million of Gold more,
he could not thereby hasten the preparations Four Days; that the great Lords
who must necessarily accompany him, by reason of their Offices, were forced to
send to Naples and Milan to get their Clothes and Liveries made.

Don Lewis speaking to me of this attendance of Persons of Quality on both
sides, gave me to understand the Two Kings would do well to bring along with
them only such a number as would be absolutely necessary, whereby they might
shorten their Journey, and lessen the expense of their Subjects, who had been
at great charge already by the War.

I upheld his Discourse, saying, That the King had already thanked most of the
Persons of the highest Rank in his Kingdom, who had offered themselves to wait
on him with all the Splendor usual on the like occasions; so that his Majesty
would bring scarcely any one along with him beyond what is necessary for his
actual Service.

He much approved of this Overture, and I believe it will not be his fault if
his Master does not do the same; and I suppose I have very well palliated the
truth of what passes in your Court, which is empty enough of persons of Quality
for this occasion; seeing the Princes, Dukes, and Peers, and other Officers of
the Crown excuse themselves from this Journey from the reasons you know.

I told afterward Don Lewis, that according to the Overture he had made,
neither the Catholic King, nor the Infanta would be much concerned, if in the
necessity there was of gaining time in this conjuncture, a Person was not sent
of the same Quality as the Duke of Mayenne, nor with the Splendor he showed in
this occasion, seeing the Person on whom his Majesty might cast his Eye might
ride Post, that I had dispatched a Currier to the King, to propose to him the
Marshall de Grammont, who besides his Birth, was Duke and Peer, and an Officer
of the Crown, spoke Spanish, and who in my judgment, had all the Qualities
requisite for this Employ. Whereupon he assured me, he should be very glad if
his Majesty would make this choice.

He afterward spoke to me of the Dowry, and drew a Letter out of his Pocket
which Don Antonio Pimentel had writ to him from Lions, in which he signified to
him, that speaking to him about the Dowry, I had hinted, That part of it might
be raised from the Conquests which the King had made since the rupture of the
Negotiation of Madrid. Whereupon he enlarged himself, according to his usual
manner, exaggerating the great Advantages which France would draw from this
Peace, and that the least thing the King could do was to accept of the Dowry
from these Conquests.

I confess, I had charged Pimentel at Lions to write in the manner he had done,
in the belief they would never pretend in Spain, the Infanta should make a
general renunciation of what ever might appertain to her in certain occasions;
and he had been told, we intended not to restore a Finger's breadth of Land of
whatever the King's Arms had conquered since the year 1656; and I not only
confirmed to Don Lowis the same thing I had told Pimentel, but I farther
informed him, that thinking it just to do for the sake of so great a Minister
something more than what had been done for the Sieur Pimentel; I therefore
declared to him, that after having yielded on the point of the Renunciation,
the King would consent to give to his Catholic Majesty not one part of the
Dowry, but the whole, for some of the Conquests we had made since that time,
provided they entirely remained in our hands. He replied to me, he thought we
had 'em entirely, seeing that instead of Valentia, Mortaria, Oudenarde, and
Ipres, which were agreed to be surrendered as well as Dixinude, Menin, and
Comines, which I well knew to be Posts not able to hold out Four Days against
him that should be Master of the Field; he yielded us Thionville, Damvilliers,
Bethune, La Bassee, and le Quesnoy, which were agreed on at Madrid to be
restored, and moreover Hesdin, which was the strongest and most important
place, which Spain could yield up to France, besides the Bailiwicks of Artois,
Air, and St. Omers, which consist of to great a number of Villages, that they
reach further than twenty Leagues, and which render the King Master of a
Province the more considerable in that it borders on France, adding, That I had
farther the address to draw from Pimentel the Provostship of Jury, and
Wardenship of Bourborg, on which we had not the least reason for a pretension.

But though there be nothing more true than what he told me hereupon, and that
what we draw hence is worth without question the double of what we yield; yet I
boldly replied to him, and without fearing to be taken at my word, considering
the knowledge I have of their interests and intentions, that he would give me
occasion to merit greatly with the King; if he would insist both parties should
keep in reference to the Conquests to what was determined at Madrid, and the
King retain what his Arms have acquired since that time.

But it concerns 'em so greatly not to leave us a Foot in the State of Milan,
nor pieces, as Oudenarde and Ipres, which are capable of keeping always Peoples
minds restless, that I did not doubt but he would answer me as he did: That we
should hold what had been determined, and that the question being only about
Money, he did not believe it was for the King his Master's Honor to dispute on
that Head; as he also believed, I could what Monsieur de Lionne had said to Don
Pedro Coloma, to augment the Sum of the Dowry which was given to the Queen,
which would not work the same effect at present as it did then, because Money
was in that time scarcer than now.

I replied to him, I should not do the King a pleasure, should I stop a moment
on an affair of this nature for the same reason he had told me, that it was not
for the honor of so great a King to contend for more or less of Money; and I
told him in laughing, that if he would take the pains to defray the charge
which would be made in this occasion, I would give him a faithful account of
it, and we would take nothing for the Dowry. He might indeed tell me justly,
that if any Princess were married without a Dowry, it should be the Infanta, by
reason of the excellent qualities she possessed. That which I am afraid will give
us the greatest trouble, is, that the valuation of Five Hundred Thousand
Crowns, which were given the Queen, was made in Silver, which is to say, in
Rials: and as in that time the Crowns in Gold were not worth much more than the
half of what they are now, we shall come to lose above Twelve Hundred Thousand
Livers, should they pay us in this manner: in which perhaps they would not be
ill grounded, seeing the words of the Contract converting into Silver the
Crowns of Gold, say the like Sum should be given in Rials. However I have
thought of a way how to make our reasons pass and extricate my self out of this
affair to the King's advantage, remembering I have heard him say, when 'twas
discoursed that the Daughter of la Baziniere had 500000 Crowns Portion, that he
did not believe her whom he should marry would have more. For if I compass the
thing, as I hope to do in making be valued the Crowns in Gold mentioned in the
contract on the current price of our Crowns, the Sum will amount very near to
three Millions of Livers; which will come very seasonable to stop a gap of the
expense which we cannot be exempted from in paying almost the like Sum to be
given the Arch Dukes for Alsace, which is yielded to us by the Treaty of
Munster.

Having spent almost two hours in regulating whatever concerned the Marriage,
and supputing the precise time, in which the Infanta might be here with the
King her Father, Don Lewis, to whom his Catholic Majesty has designed this
honor, according to his own report, very earnestly told me (having perhaps
considered within himself, we might conceive some suspicion on the delaying the
Infanta's Journey, and the consummating the Marriage) that we should without
any more ado sign, execute, and proclaim the peace, send to Rome for the
dispensation, sign here the Articles of the Marriage, and in general, perform
all that is necessary to engage the Prince, so that no accident may make him
change; assuring me that on their side, they would use their utmost endeavors
to gain time.

We must not wonder at the care Don Lewis has taken to speak to me after this
manner, being persuaded the King most passionately desires to see this affair
ended, considering him as a Gallant who impatiently expects the hour he is to
see his Mistress.

I believed this Conference would have past without his returning to the charge
on the point of Monsieur the Prince; but having repeated to me the Declaration
he had made me in the two preceding, he began by professing he was much
perplexed in this Affair, not only for the reasons he had with great prolixity
deduced to me heretofore, but like wise because this Prince had ordered his
Agents who are here to solicit nothing, but to approve entirely whatever Don
Lewis would do touching his interests. So that he found himself at present his
Plenipotentiary, but at the same time incapacitated to procure him any
advantage.

He agreed with me, that this was a cunning piece of dexterity for the Prince
to do thus in a desperate case, to try whether this way of proceeding, might
procure him any advantage, which he could not hope for by any other means. And
continuing his discourse, he insisted more than ever he had done, That I would
like Monsieur the Prince should come here, and that seeing our selves together
we might be good Friends, which is what he most passionately desired; that he
Don Lewis greatly wished the same, as likewise to see this Prince the most
faithful and zealous Servant the King can have: That he believed as this was
for the advantage of Monsieur the Prince, so it was no less conducing to his
Majesty's Service and my credit He afterward much insisted on the sincerity,
with which this Prince would faithfully and punctually execute, whatever he had
promised in relation to the King, and my Person in particular, and on the just
apprehension of being undone if he dealt otherwise; seeing he would not have
only the King's power to fear, but moreover the resentment of his Catholic
Majesty, the Infanta and of him Don Lewis, who would become his greatest
Enemies, should he fail in the least particluar he had promised.

To which I replied, That being assured of his good intentions, and the freedom
with which he spoke to me; I had all the grateful sense which I ought; but that
it was fit his Excellency should know something might so happen in France, That
not only the Prince of Conde would have a mind to stir, but that he would do it
without mattering the complaints, which the King of Spain and his Excellency
might make against him, provided he therein found his advantage; seeing it had
been seen by experience, as this Prince knew perhaps better than another, that
the Cabals, Commotions, and Revolutions of France had never deeper roots, nor
produced greater effects to the prejudice of its Kings, than when it did not
appear they had any relation to Spain; because the French, generally speaking,
were very prone to engage themselves in the Commotions exited by the great ones
of the Kingdom for particular interests; but regard with horror whatever tends
to the making them enter into a Confederacy with Strangers, and especially
Spaniards; from whence his Excellency might easily perceive whether there is
reason to believe, that Monsieur the Prince could be withheld by the fear of
his Catholic Majesty and his Excellency, in case he had a mind to do mischief,
and an opportunity offered.

He afterward urged me to tell him whether 'twas not possible for some
security to be granted to the Prince, as he knew had been given in France in
several occasions to Persons of less quality than he. I answered there was no
Example of this usage to any body, except the Protestants, to whom the good of
the State and other considerations required the giving some places which have
since been drawn out of their hands; that his security had been provided for by
what had been inserted in his favor in the Treaty signed at Paris, and that it
was his own fault he had not a greater, seeing that returning with a Resolution
to live well, and to serve faithfully the King, not only he had nothing to
apprehend, but might expect favors from his bounty and generosity; of which he
had less reason to doubt than any body, having had more experience of this than
any Subject besides.

Don Lewis pressed me afresh, to obtain of the King that Monsieur the Prince
might come hither, saying for this he would owe me the greatest respect, and
hereby all would be ended to the Prince's satisfaction.

I answered it depended on him to give it himself in fifteen days time, and I
should have the honor of presenting him my self to the King and Queen; and
that he had nothingelse to do but to accept of the favors which the King and
Queen offered him by the Treaty: and this answer was the cause he spoke to me
no more about it; but it was I who pursued the matter, making him dexterously
value the Overture I had made him to use my endeavors with the King to give
some recompense in France to Monsieur the Prince, if he gave himself his
helping hand thereto, in casting himself at the King's Feet, and remitting to
his Majesty the places which the Catholic King should give him; which I did
with the address I have already mentioned to you, informing him that my
proposing this Expedient had no other motive but the drawing his Excellency out
of the perplexity he seemed to be in; though I well knew I should have a great
deal of trouble to make the King relish it, because Monsieur the Prince would
owe all the obligation of the favors I might procure him from the King to his
Catholic Majesty, his most Christian Majesty choosing rather generously to
bestow some on him in another time, when he shall deserve them, than to grant
him 'em at present, as a Recompense for what he should yield to his Majesty.

I farther added, That if he liked to s^nd me Caillet, I would make him value
the firmness with which his Excellency acted in favor of Monsieur the Prince;
and that I might moreover engage him to make me Propositions more positive than
those he had made me going and coming from his Master, on the remitting to the
King the Places which his Catholic Majesty should give him.

But he told me, he would have no body meddle in this Affair but himself; and
he seemed to me more tortured at my having reduced him to the point of making
me necessarily know that he had no intention of giving such like Recompense to
the Prince, or that he had done it for an ill end; that is to say, to render
him always dependent on the King of Spain, and to put him into a condition to
make one day use of such an Establishment, to the great damage and disservice
of this Crown.

And I pressed him in this occasion more than I had done in any before; telling
him, That if the Prince and his Agents could discover the Overture I had made
him, they would not let him rest a day till they had prevailed with him to take
me at my word, for otherwise they would not have stuck to have taken it for
granted, that his Excellency never had the thought really to oblige Monsieur
the Prince, seeing if he had in truth for him the kindness he pretended, he
should be glad of this opportunity of manding his Fortune.

It Is certain, had I let Lainet or Caillet know what passed on this occasion,
'twould have happened either that Don Lewis must have condescended to their
importunities, which would have turned to the advantage of the King, or that
they would have come to Daggers drawn, after which the Prince must have
separated himself ill satisfied with the Spaniards. As Don Lewis had reserved
himself to make me some Proposition, as well on what regarded Monsieur the
Prince, as on the exchange of Bergue and la Bassee, Pimentel came, and after
having entertained me twice long enough on these two points, having among other
things laid down, that the Wardenship of Bergue had nothing in common with
Bergue, and that thus this place must be reckoned for nothing, seeing 'twas
agreed on it should be razed at the instant it should be remitted. I plainly
perceived this tended to the offering me nothing in exchange; therefore I spoke
to him so decisively on this point, and what regarded Monsieur the Prince, that
having said he would inform Don Lewis of it, to the end he might discourse with
me about it in this days Conference, he returned without daring to make me the
Proposition he was charged with, judging well, that I might be nettled with it,
and make some answer which might vex Don Lewis.

I forgot hitherto to impart to their Majesty's, that the Minister of England
who resides in Spain, and is at present with Don Lewis, being come into my
Lodging to make me a visit, without sending me before hand the least word of
it, used so familiarly with me, that he came up to my Chamber without any other
Ceremony, as if we had been the best friends in the World, or that the King his
Master had been at Paris in the King's Interests, as he is at Brussels in those
of the King of Spain. I sent word to him by Besmeaux, that I could not receive
him, having had in these beginnings occasion to apprehend that so extraordinary
a proceeding must have been concerted with Don Lewis, to give to Mr. Locker
some jealousy, which might cause a change in our Affairs with the
Commonwealth of England. However, I caused this Resident to be told in his
Ear, that I thought I could better serve his Master in behaving my self as I
did, than if I dealt otherwise.

The Ambassador Locker having desired me to know of Don Lewis whether he might
see him pursuant to the Orders he had of his Superiors, to inform him their
intention was to live in peace with all, and that he was furnished with power
to conclude it with his Excellency, in case his Excellency had likewise power
from the King of Spain.

I told all this to Don Lewis, who answered me, he might go to Andaye, and that
sending his Gentleman to demand Audience the next day, he would give it him at
the hour he appointed; and upon my telling him he should take care no disorder
happened, by reason there were Scotch and Irish at Fontarabia, Don Lewis desired
me to assure him he might rely on his Word.

I shall end this Dispatch by the recital of an Adventure which happened during
the last Conference to the Abbot Siri in Don Lewis's Apartment, in the presence
of most of the Spanish and French Lords.

This Abbot discoursing with one Don Christoval, Secretary of Languages to Don
Lewis, who talks with great freedom, and is wholly devoted to the Prince's
Interests, and as such a great Friend of Lainet's: Don Christoval violently
fell upon Pimentel, calling him an Ignoramus, for having made the Treaty of
Paris, and blaming highly Don Lewis, for having employed in an Affair of this
importance a Man that did not understand the World; and moreover for having
ratified this Treaty, and undertaken so long a Journey to Sign the most
disadvantagious Peace as Spain ever made; adding, 'twould have been better for
his Reputation he had shut himself up in the Convent of the Carmelit Friars,
which is a place where Don Lewis often goes when he is at Madrid. Not content
with this, he enters on retailing the particular Articles of the Peace, setting
forth the great advantages the King of France would make of the Peace, and the
irreparable prejudices redounding thereby to the King of Spain, whom he saw on
the point of abandoning a Prince who had so successfully served him, having
been the chief Instrument in all the Glorious Actions which the Arms of Spain
had performed since the War began.

To which the Abbot Siri answering, in the terms he ought, to disabuse him; the
other began to attack him on his History, even to the telling him plainly, that
when he published it, the Marquess de la Fuente, who was Ambassador at Venice,
was much to blame, in not having used weighty Reasons (by which he meant
Spanish Pistols) to engage the Author to write in a manner more favorable to
the Spaniards, and to suppress the Fictions he uttered in favor of France; and
if you had to do with me, said he, and you would not come to Reason, I should
not have stuck to have sent you into the other World. And then falling again on
Don Lewis, he affirmed, that instead of sending the Marquess de la Fuente on an
Embassy to Vienna, he should have sent for him home, and made him be severely
punished; and the Abbot not having spoken well of Count de Sirvela, Don
Christoval set upon him again for that. But the Abbot answered, that he could
not speak otherwise of that Minister, who had behaved himself very ill in
several Rencounters, and that having inserted in his History, that the
Spaniards had caused Boccalin to be killed at Venice, because he would not be
prevailed on to write after their manner; if such a misfortune should happen to
him, there would arise some other Historian who would have writ it, so that the
Spaniards would be more decried for their violences. And the conclusion was,
that he did not marvel to see Don Christoval so angry at the Peace, on there
not being given the Prince all the Advantages he pretended to; in as much as
the French knew as well as the Spaniards that he received Twelve Thousand
Crowns Pension from this Prince.

But that which was most pleasant was, that Don Christoval, who is a German,
born in Carinthia, and whom the Abbot Siri believed to be a natural Spaniard,
affirming they had committed a great oversight in giving the Infanta to the
King, because if the Emperor had had her with the Low Countries, he could have
made War with France, with an Army of Fifty or Threescore Thousand Men, which
would have put the King of Spain into a condition to make on all sides such
progresses as he could desire. The Abbot Siri replied to him, there were no
better way in the World to make the King soon Master of the Low Countries; for
these Fifty or Sixty Thousand Drunkards would have only served to enrage the
People, and make 'em put themselves under the King's Protection, who would
assuredly more apprehended the Crafts and Artifices of the Spaniards, who only
hereby maintained themselves in the possession of the Low Countries, than all
the great Armies which the Emperor could have employed on that side.

Then Don Christoval, in parting from the Abbot Siri, gave him a Lozenge, which
he immediately put into the hands of a Spaniard who was near him, saying, he
was not such a Fool to put it into his mouth, coming from a Man who so lately
told him, that if he had been at Venice, he would have sent him into the other
World.

I have been willing to end this Relation by a facetious Story to divert their
Majesty's.

LETTER XXX.
To Monsieur de Lionne. Proposition of Pimentel touching Monsieur the Prince.
Complaints of the Cardinal on this occasion.

The 1st of September. 1659.
I Just now received your Letter, with the Copies of those which the King and
King of Spain are to write to Rome; and having nothing to reply thereupon, I
shall content my self in telling you, that I have been in no ways satisfied
with the visit of Monsieur Pimentel; for instead of coming here laden with
Expedients and Propositions to agree in an instant in what remains to be
adjusted, his Discourse had no other aim but to press me vigorously to concur
in satisfying Monsieur the Prince; protesting to me, that the King of Spain and
Don Lewis would think themselves hereby excessively obliged to me; and
repeating to me all the Reasons Don Lewis had laid before me in our several
Conferences, and to which I think I have sufficiently answered.

I acknowledge I was obliged to answer him with some smartness, and I hope he
will relate whatever I said to him to Don Lewis, without forgetting any thing.
We must absolutely make an end one way or other, for this great delay brings an
irreparable prejudice to the King's Affairs; and whatever Don Lewis can allege
to the contrary, I am assured, that his Reputation and mine suffer very much by
it; for we shall find it an hard matter to show what we have done considerable
in all our Conferences.

It Is true, that as to my own particular, my Heart is at rest, in as much as it
has not been my fault that we have not ended all things in one Conference. Not
only I have omitted nothing to hasten Don Lewis, but the last time we saw one
another, I told him again with great freedom, that the more or less
satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince deserved not the deferring for one quarter
of an hour the putting an end to the Sufferings of Christendom.

Neither could I forbear telling the Sieur Pimentel, that I came in the belief
I should not see the Senior Don Lewis thrice, not only without ending together
whatever remained to do for the Peace, but likewise without dispatching the
greatest Affairs relating to the good of Christendom, the Glory of the Kings
our Masters, and the Advantage of their Subjects. After an attentive hearing of
this, he told me, he would make a relation of it to Don Lewis; and would
afterward send you word whether there would be a Conference to Morrow.

I send you here a Memorial of the Assembly of Franckfort in favor of the
House of Nassau, to the end you may use it in your Conferences with Don Pedro
Coloma.

LETTER XXXI.
To Monsieur de Lionne. Cardinal's trouble at his sending his Letter to
Fontarabia.

The same day.
I Have received your Letter, with the Papers which were sent you from Paris,
and that which Don Pedro Coloma wrote me. I am greatly troubled at your sending
a Secretary to Fontarabia to show mine to Don Antonio Pimentel; for I had no
other design in writing to you this Morning, than barely to tell you of the
displeasure I had of seeing every day how the end of this Negotiation is put
off; seeing that after whatever Don Lewis had told me in our last Conference, I
saw the said Sieur Pimentel come to me without proposing any thing material to
me. Had I intended you should have showed my Letter, I should not have failed
signifying as much; and besides that this was a manifest affectation to send it
expressly to Fontarabia, it seems to me, that it is not conceived in terms which
may produce a good effect. This is a thing which cannot be remedied. You may
make answer, That I shall be to Morrow at the usual hour at the Conference, and
only bring with me Forty or Fifty of my Guards.

LETTER XXXII.
To the King. Cardinal's modest Remonstrance to the King, on the little
satisfaction he had given him in his answer; and on his Passion.

AT the Instant I received your Letter, I take my Pen to give my self the
Honor of telling you, That though the answer be succinct enough, yet I know
easily thereby your intentions, and disposition of mind. Your goodness has not
permitted you till now, to write to me, nor speak to me as you do in this
occasion: yet I am not surprised at it, for since Lions, I have ever doubted,
that if I were not sacrificed to the Person you know, I should be to another.
If you have taken the pains to examine my Letter, you will see therein
sufficient occasion to thank me for what I have wrote to you from an
indispensable and pure motive of your Service, Glory, and Honor; and you would
not treat me like an extravagant Person, as you do, in telling me I have an ill
opinion of you, and that I believe you to be a Liar. I should not deserve to
live, should I have such like thoughts of my Master; but I speak the truth,
without being wanting in the respect I owe you, when I affirm that the passion
you have for the Person you love, hinders you from seeing her defects, and that
I know she hates me, notwithstanding what you have been pleased to signify to
me to the contrary. For without doing you any wrong, I believe I know her
better than any body alive. If you are angry with me, as you express in the
beginning of your Letter, you need only order me the place where I should come
to feel the marks of your indignation, and I will not fail therein. At least be
sure, I shall without reluctance, loudly publish that you have reason for what
you do, and that I only am to blame. Yet I hope you are too just to take from
me my Honor in requital for my Services; and methinks it should be sufficient,
that you take from me my life, and whatever I have in the World; without
depriving me of the liberty which the Laws both Divine and Humane give me of
disposing of my Family. I humbly entreat your pardon, if I have been too
importunate with you, assuring you I will not be so for the time to come. As to
the rest, to abridge the time of your Marriage, I shall sign the Articles of
it, and those of the Peace, according to your orders, after which I will go and
end my days at the place you shall enjoin me; content with the happiness of
having served for 30 Years the King your Father and your self, your Arms nor
affairs having lost any of their reputation. I beg only the favor of you to be
persuaded, that whatever may happen to me, I shall be to the last moment of my
life the most faithful and zealous Creature you have.

LETTER XXXIII.
To the Queen. He imparts to her his grief at the King's discontent.

The same day.
I Am on the brink of despair, beholding your trouble at what you have had the
goodness to write me: would to God I could ease you at the cost of my own
blood, for I would part with it on this occasion with all imaginable joy. The
Confident's answer is expressed in terms, which sufficiently discover he has no
affection for me, nor my interests, so that I have nothing to do but to execute
his orders to abridge the time of the Marriage; and having signed the Contract
and Articles of Peace, which will be glorious and advantageous for his Person
and State, take the resolution, which shall be the most proper to deliver him
from my importunities, and the best for his Service; beseeching God to bless my
intentions. For in this case the Confident will be the greatest and happiest
Prince in the World. My heart is so full of anguish, that I can say no more,
and you may easily believe it, if you reflect never so little on what passes in
my mind in this conjuncture. I might have dissembled in the Letter I wrote to
the Confident till my return to him, but God forbid I should deal thus with my
Master, to whom I am wont to open my whole heart without reserve. Let me
entreat you to pray to God for me, for I never more needed his assistance. I
would not send the Confident word, that my Nephew designed an escape from
Brisac, and though he said when he was taken, his intention was to get to me,
thinking you would approve of it; the truth is, this was the least of his
thoughts (and I believe) my Niece has contrived this: and you may judge what
this may oblige me to suspect. Be pleased to reflect whether the Confident has
reason to desire I should love her, and believe her affectionate to me, and
desirous of my Master's Honor. We must take care the Confident mentions not a
word of this to any body.

LETTER XXXIV.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Seventh Conference. Of the sending a Gentleman to
Portugal, and of the Affairs of that Kingdom. Discourse of the Cardinal with
Mr. Locker. New entreaties of Don Lewis for Monsieur the Prince. Renunciation
of Spain to Alsatia. Proposition of Don Lewis touching Olivenz rejected.
Pimentel repeats the Propositions of Don Lewis. Reflections of this Letter
proposed to the Cardinal, who makes answer. Presents to be made.

To Monsieur le Tellier. From St. John de Luz, September the 2d. 1659.
I Have already signified to you, that I had no great account to give you, to
inform their Majesty's of what past in the last Conference, which lasted not
above half so long as the others.

The first thing Don Lewis asked me, was, whether I would dispatch a Gentleman
into Portugal, as I had told him I would, to impart to the Duke of Braganza
what had been inserted in the Treaty concerning him; and I told him I thought
it not so convenient to hasten this Envoy, although the Gentleman was ready, and
had the King's Dispatches before I came here: It being imprudent to send News,
which most certainly would not have a welcome reception in Portugal, without
first ending whatever concerned Monsieur the Prince, whose interests his
Excellency still maintained with such heat and constancy; though in truth I
should rest satisfied with the reiterated Declarations he had made me, That
this point should not in any fort retard the proclaiming and execution of the
Peace.

He afterward persuaded me to lay aside all suspicion of the Success of this
Negotiation; and that I should no longer defer thesending away this Gentleman,
because perhaps the Duchess of Braganza, who is of the Family of the Gusmans,
and his Cousin German; seeing an impossibility of maintaining her Son in the
State he is in, after the Peace concluded between the two Crowns, might resolve
on having recourse to the Catholic King's Clemency, to shelter her Person and
all her Family from the inevitable misfortune which threatened them; and thus he
might be freed from the trouble of bringing Troops from Italy and Flanders into
Spain, to form a great Army to be employed in the recovery of Portugal.

I could easily perceive by his discourse, in which he much enlarged himself,
he could wish this War were ended rather by a Treaty than Arms: and I believe
if the Queen of Portugal would take this course, she might greatly advantage
the condition of her Son and her self, in returning her self a Subject of
Spain; which is what I shall not fail to acquaint this Queen with, to the end
that considering well in what condition affairs will be in after the Peace, she
may take that resolution she shall judge most proper.

Neither do I doubt, but if she would have elsewhere the recompense of her
Son's and her Estate in that Country, and even with Usury, and also any thing
else fitting for her, she might easily obtain it; seeing Don Lewis has told me
in several occasions, that if she would be content to have conferred on her Son
the Office of Constable of Castile, and other Honors of this nature, he
believed the King his Master would grant 'em them for the sake of the Peace,
and the cessation of all hostilities.

I hereupon took occasion to draw advantage from our Entertainment, in
acquainting Don Lewis that I was willing to do him a pleasure to dispatch the
said Envoy. I dexterously engaged him to grant me a continuation of the
suspension of Arms from the part of the King his Master for the whole Month of
December with Portugal; although according to what had been determined at
Paris, it should end at the conclusion of the next Month; which certainly is
very advantageous in the present conjuncture to the King of Portugal; for
hereby he has more time to prepare himself, and to make an accommodation with
Holland, and engage the States and England to assist him.

Being informed by Mr. Locker that the Ambassador of Portugal will set forward
immediately for London, this makes me observe to you on the business of
Portugal, that having discoursed sufficiently of the presumption of this
Nation, he ended by exagerating to the utmost point, that they are incapable
whatever Peace is made, and whatever facility by this means his Catholic
Majesty has to employ all his Forces against Portugal, ever to yield they have
any reason to be afraid. For, said he to me, they will always maintain, at they
do at present, that the King of Spain can obtain no advantage of 'em, but by
the Treachery of some of the Portuguises themselves; which they have published
to be the cause of the raising the Siege of Bajador, and not the fear of the
Army which came to attack their Lines. And it must be acknowledged that herein
he has good reason, and speaks as one that has a perfect knowledge of their
humor, which may cast 'em into some wretched disaster, for I do not perceive
they seem to be concerned to defend themselves, or to make an accommodation. So
that for want of foresight, the King and Queen of Portugal run a great risk of
falling into great perplexities, and losing their Crown and Persons, without
bringing any Remedy.

We afterward discoursed of England, and agreed on what could be wished on both
sides, which is to say, if the War continued between his Catholic Majesty and
England, we should observe a perfect neutrality, without giving any assistance,
either during the present Reign, or under another, which might continue the War
with Spain; and that on their side, if England should come to have a War with
us, they should do the same in relation to us.

I thought of getting clear out of this Conference, without a word of Monsieur
the Prince, but I found my self much mistaken; for Don Lewis having made me the
usual declaration, that this point should in no sort retard the execution of
the Peace; and I having answered him, it would delay it, seeing he spoke to me
continually about it, to the great prejudice of Christendom, whose quiet ought
not to be deferred one moment for the more or less satisfaction of a particular
Person, who deserved punishment, for having been guilty of the most horrid
Rebellion was ever seen: he began by repeating to me the things he so often had
mentioned to me, to wit the great advantages which the King drew from this
Peace. He insisted mightily on the renunciation of Alsatia, which the King his
Master made without any recompense, though it be certain, that this Province and
Brisac cannot be lawfully acquired by France, but by the King of Spain's
renunciation, to whom this should return in case of failure of the Line of the
Arch Duke of Inspruck; wherein it is certain he has reason, and that he looks
with astonishment on all the great advantages which France gains; there being
no instance of any Peace she has made, in which she has so greatly profited,
whether in reputation, or number of Places, and extent of Country, which on all
sides enlarges her Frontiers.

In fine, the conclusion of his discourse was, That though on account of all
these Reasons, the King his Master might expect some relaxations in favor of
Monsieur the Prince, yet he had order to declare to me that his Catholic
Majesty would think himself obliged to the King, regarding it as an effect of
his generosity: and that himself in particular would be so too, and do all
things to show me his acknowledgments, if I would use my endeavors for this.

I told him, That as I could not always repeat the same things every time he
held me the same discourses, I would only add, That these kind of generosities
are commonly exercised between private Persons; but that great Kings, what
Friendship soever they might have, never steered by these motives, in things
which regarded their reputation, and the good of their Kingdoms: and that as I
would never pretend to the liberty of asking of the King of Spain any thing
which should be against his interest and honor; so I could not but find it
strange, that his Excellency, far from dealing thus, should insist still on the
same arguments, though I had (without vanity be it spoken) entirely overthrown
'em.

He afterward desired me not to take it ill, if he proposed to me an Expedient
he had thought on, which was that his Catholic Majesty, to oblige the King to
give a place of surety to Monsieur the Prince, as Havre de Grace might be;
should give Olivenza to the Duke of Braganza, besides his re-establishment in
his Lands and Honors, and the Office of Constable of Castile.

I told him I belived he jeered me, and that we should make no great progress,
if we spent our time in such kind of projects; that Monsieur the Prince would
be more considerable with Havre de Grace, than he was heretofore with all the
Places and Governments he had; and that the King of Portugal would receive for
a recompense of two Kingdoms he was now possessed of, his Estate and a place
which was in the heart of Spain forty Leagues off of Lisbon and Portugal; which
is to say, that instead of surety, this which was offered him was a Trap for
him; and that did I not believe he offered me these Proposals to move laughter,
I should have great reason to be scandalized at his thinking me a man fit to
put such discourses on.

He fell to laughing in effect, and replied to me, he saw well I was informed
what kind of place Olivenza was, and that I had reason to say, that if his
Master recovered Portugal, this place and that of Elvas should be raised, as
having been fortified by the Duke of Braganza, only to make head against the
Countries under his Catholic Majesty's Obedience. However he omitted not for
all this, to use other discourses touching Monsieur the Prince; and perceiving
I grew a little hot in my answers; Well then, said he, we will conclude the
Peace, we will do it sincerely; Monsieur the Prince shall cast himself at his
most Christian Majesty's feet, and present him his Son, whom he shall leave
with his Majesty; and he will go to Venice, or Holland, where he may live on
the Money my Master will give him in payment of what he owes him: and this will
not be over well.

I answered him, that Monsieur the Prince accepting the favors the King
offered him by the Peace, neither he, nor his Family would want the Spanish
Money for subsistence; and that as to the rest, he need not be at the pains to
cast himself at the King's feet, nor bring his Son thither, unless he
determined before hand to submit to what he was obliged by the Treaty of Paris,
seeing without the King could not receive him, nor let him enjoy the
Privileges granted him by this Treaty. So that the Trial he made to see
whether the Prince might not do thus, served only to disabuse him, and put him
out of hopes of it.

After this, I thought 'twas fit to conclude, although the Conference lasted
not so long as half the time of the others, and I made the bad weather and
rotten ways a pretense for this. But as I arose, he prayed me to give him the
liberty of sending Monsieur Pimentel to me, by whom he hoped to propose to me
some Expedient, as well in relation to Monsieur the Prince, as what remained to
be adjusted, which would be to my satisfaction. I told him I should be very
glad of it, desiring nothing more than to embrace all those which might put an
end to this Negotiation, without prejudicing the Honor or Service of the King

But I must confess to you I was strangely surprised when I found by the
discourse Pimentel held me, that instead of offering me Proposals on the
Overture I had made to use my endeavors with the King, to obtain some new
favor for Monsieur the Prince, if he laid at his Majesty's feet the Places
should be given him by his Catholic Majesty, he repeated to me the same things
Don Lewis had mentioned to me to excite the King's Generosity, and to oblige me
to contribute what in me lay thereto, and let slip before me, that Don Lewis
had promised to make him the happiest man in Spain, if he could prevail with me
on this point.

I replied to all this, that I had reason to be angry with Don Lewis in
thinking me capable to give at the stances of a Person whom he sent me, what I
had refused at his: and as to the rest I took Monsieur Pimentel to be too
honest a man to design the raising his own Fortune on the ruin of my
Reputation. After this, I pretended to be in a passion at Don Lewis's
Proceedings, and to apprehend he had concealed Ends in these delays he brought
in settling matters, which might have been adjusted in one only Conference,
adding, I did not doubt but if I imparted this manner of proceeding to the
King, his Majesty would command my return, it being apparent this delay greatly
prejudiced his Affairs. For besides his losing several advantages which he
might reasonably expect in this Campaign, he is likewise obliged on the belief
the Peace will be soon proclaimed, to hold his Allies in Suspense, who press
him on all hands to make particular Treaties with them.

In fine, to avoid the prolixity wherein I should fall, were I to give a
particular account of what past with Pimentel, I shall content my self, with
assuring their Majesty's, that I sent him away as well satisfied with my
reasons as I could be my self, and in a disposition of apprehending greatly the
Resolutions I might take thereupon: and being not yet satisfied with whatever I
had said to him, I wrote to Monsieur de Lionne, who was at Andaye, to the end
that communicating my Note to the Sieur Pimentel, he might the more easily
remember to represent the same things to Don Lewis, and in a manner as earnest
as I had explained my self in; of which charge I do not doubt but he will well
acquit himself, hoping that in the first Conference Don Lewis will yield to the
putting an end to this affair.

The business ended not here, for continuing to speak to me still on Monsieur
the Prince, he told me he could safely call God to witness, that he had no
other motive in this pursuit, than to see all Parties so well satisfied, that
there might never happen the least alteration in the Peace which was about
concluding; and that as my particular friend he would entrust me with a scruple
which came into his head, which was, that he greatly apprehended lest the
Infanta, who on one hand had a great deal of wit, and on the other a great deal
of tenderness for the King her Father, having heard talk of nothing else for
several years, but the great services Monsieur the Prince had rendered him; that
he had been the cause, by the diversions made in France, of the taking of
Barcelona, and the reduction of all Catalonia, and other Advantages which Spain
had obtained, whether in taking Places from us, and especially Cambray, the
preservation of which they believe they wholly owe to him; that he apprehended,
I say, That coming into France with all these things in her mind, she should
prevail in all occasions relating to the Prince's Service, in procuring him the
King's favor, and all the marks of it he could desire; which perhaps might not
produce a good effect, whether in relation to the Public, or what might
particularly concern me.

I replied to him with a smiling Countenance, that I found my self greatly
obliged to him for his good intentions, and the Friendship he showed me, in
opening to me his heart on so nice an affair; but I entreated him not to be
much troubled at whatever might happen hereupon; because that though I no ways
doubted of the inclinations of the Serenissima Infanta toward Monsieur the
Prince, whom she loved as a faithful Servant of her Father, and the Spanish
Monarchy, not knowing at present other interests than those of the King her
Father; yet I assured my self, that being the King's Wife, she would prefer the
Interests and Service of the King her Husband and his Children before any other
consideration; and look with an ill Eye on Monsieur the Prince, as believing
him capable of falling again into the same faults, to the prejudice of a
Kingdom of which she would be the Queen: and though I had well observed that
his Excellency had contented himself with speaking of the inclination of the
Infanta for Monsieur the Prince, without mentioning any thing of the aversion
she had for me, who have done a great deal more against the House of Spain,
than Monsieur the Prince had done for it. I ever doubted of the Hatred of the
Infanta to me, without any great trouble, considering from the same reason,
that becoming Queen of France, she would honor with her good will a Person who
has served the King and Kingdom with all the Fidelity and Industry possible,
and who would continue to do it to his last breath: So that marrying the King,
Monsieur the Prince and I should change places in her affections, where she
would give me that he possesses at present, and to him mine.

I am now to tell you, to the end their Majesty's may know it, that I have
learnt from Pimentel, that the Horses which Don Lewis would give to the King,
which according to the relation of those who have seen them, are the stateliest
in the World, will not be presented in his name, but in the name of the
Catholic King, who has ordered him to put them into my hands to take care they
be sent to his Majesty.

So that we must think of returning a Present to the King of Spain, which I
will remit to Don Lewis by the King's order, to the end he may carry it to the
King his Master. I have already wrote to Paris what I judge fit, and in due
time, will send the Memorial of things, of which I think the Present should
consist; and though it is usual to give things wherein there is more Art than
Riches, yet I will endeavor so to order it, that here may be both.

We must also make a considerable Present to Don Lewis, as well for that he
will sign the Articles of Marriage, as that it will be he that will Espouse the
Infanta in Virtue of the King's Power, and sign the Treaty likewise of Peace. A
Present must likewise be made to the Secretary of State Don Pedro Coloma.

LETTER XXXV.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Eighth Conference; Begun in such a manner that the
Cardinal thought all would be broke off. Earnest instances of Don Lewis for the
Prince, the Cardinal's answers.

From St. John de Luz, September the 3d. 1659.
YOu will find hereunto adjoining the Relation I told you should be delivered
to you by the Sieur Charlet, and I defer till to Morrow the sending you that of
Yesterday's Conference, if we do not hold one again to Morrow. For although I
employ every moment to dispatch Business; yet I question my strength, and their
Majesty's must bear with me, if I do not inform them of every thing so
succinctly as I would.

I have put something into the Letters which I gave to Messieurs de Noailles
and de Vardes for their Majesty's, touching what past in Yesterday's
Conference; but seeing the Sieur Bartret will arrive sooner than they, to give
an account to their Majesty's, that I thought in the beginning of the last
Conference, that all would break off, considering how Don Lewis spoke to me of
the satisfaction of Monsieur the Prince, in telling me with great concern,
'twas very strange, that after so many Instances made, he might not obtain that
the Catholic King should recompense the Services which Monsieur the Prince had
done him. In fine, the business proceeded so far, that I expressed my self in
terms which left it to his own choice, whether we should break off the
Negotiation, but he quickly grew cool, and hindered me from rising up, with
great protestations his Intention was always the same in relation to the Peace,
the consummation of which was no longer to be doubted; so that having been
sometime without appeasing my self, I began again to treat with him as before,
and the end of this Conference, which lasted near Six Hours, was well enough,
as their Majesty's will see by the relation I shall send them. I must not omit
the saying by the way, that I well foresaw I should hazard no great matter in
resenting so stiffly the dissatisfaction Don Lewis gave me about the Prince; for
I immediately read in his Countenance, he came with intention to make this last
trial, at the pursuit of Monsieur the Prince's Agents, and some Spaniards his
Abettors, who have near access to Don Lewis; so that 'twas no difficult matter
for me to make Head against Don Lewis Sally; and I am bold to say, I did it in
such a manner, that all the advantage remained on my side; and I hope this
action will produce something considerable for the King. He earnestly entreated
me not to communicate to any body what ^past Yesterday between us, which is
what I promised him, and I have kept my word; and therefore it is fit no body
should be acquainted with it.

LETTER XXXVI.
To Monsieur le Tellier. Particular relation of the Eighth Conference. Of the
Duke of Lorrain. Discourse of the Cardinal with the said Duke's Envoy. Small
inclination of the Spaniards to this Duke. His Treaty with France in 1639. The
Elector Palatine scarcely recovers half of his Countries, though protected by
France and Swedeland. Great effort of Don Lewis for Monsieur the Prince; as
strongly repulsed. Of the Constable of St. Paul. Rebellions severely punished
in France. Replies of Don Lewis furnished him by Monsieur the Prince's Agents.
His new Proposition in favor of him. Contrary Proposition of the Cardinal. Of
the Duke of Newbourg.

From St. John de Luz, Sep. 4. 1659.
I Will now make you a Rehearsal of what past in Yesterdays Conference, which
was the Eighth, to the end their Majesty's may know the particulars of it. It
began with the Interests of Monsieur de Lorrain, on occasion of the Sieur de la
Chaussee, who came from him, and brought Letters for Don Lewis and me. Don
Lewis told me, this Duke desired leave to come here to solicit in person his
own Affairs, but he must see the King his Master first; and he spoke to me in
terms whereby I easily found his intention was not to bring him here in haste;
and Don Lewis having ever spoken to me about the Duke, as of a Person who
enjoyed his full liberty: I thought it therefore not amiss to hint to him by
the way, that this Gentleman knew otherwise, seeing he told me, that the Duke
of Lorrain thought himself under a greater constraint than ever, in that he was
obliged to give it under his hand not to stir from Toledo and the adjacent
places, and not to come within Six Leagues of Madrid; so that he was more
confined now than when he had his Guards; for then he flattered himself with
some hopes of escaping, of which he could have no thoughts now.

I told him moreover something of the Conversation which I had with this
Gentleman, to confirm him by the answers I had made, that the King intended to
alter nothing which had been determined at Paris in relation to Lorrain. But
it is fit their Majesty's should know the discourse I had with the Sieur de
Chaussee.

He began by telling me, his Master would see the best Friend, and most
affectionate Servant I had in the World; that he desired nothing with greater
passion than my Alliance; that his intention was not to marry, nor to return
into Lorrain, if 'twere not desired; but to remit all to Prince Charles his
Nephew, and to go into Germany, into England, or any other place his Majesty
should prescribe; that he would resolve on all this with Madam, and with his
Brother, and other Princes of his House; and that, in fine, he had still some
interest in the World, and Friends to render some signal Service to France, if
his Majesty thought fit to employ him the rest of his days.

Hitherto all went well, but the end spoiled all; for he added, that his Master
would choose rather to dye a thousand Deaths, than to re-enter into Lorrain, on
condition of sacrificing the least part of it; and that I ought to interess my
self herein, by reason of the Alliance he proposed to me. In fine, he talked to
me of restoring all to Monsieur de Lorrain, just as if it had been no more than
a pair of Gloves.

I told him, I was sorry for the Proposal of the Alliance which his Highness
had ordered him to make me, because this stopped my Mouth, and hindered me from
speaking so much as one word in favor of his Interests, it being impossible to
hinder every one from believing that my own would make me speak, though in effect
I could never have any other than those of the King and the State, for the
least of which I should think my self happy to sacrifice both my Family and my
own Person; that after this, his Highness would plainly see I was the
unlikeliest Instrument to procure any change in what had been determined at
Paris with the King of Spain's Plenipotentiary, and ratifyed afterward; that I
might truly say, the King's Goodness in relation to the Duke, and Lorrain and
his Family, had been extraordinary; seeing that if his Majesty had stood out
from yielding the point of Portugal, and restoring so many Places as he yields
by the Treaty of Peace, on condition of retaining Lorrain, no body doubts but
the Catholic King would have consented to it.

I told him further, That there were several Persons who well knew Don Lewis
his mind, and who affirm, that if we would only re-establish Monsieur the
Prince in what he had before his Rebellion, he would willingly have yielded all
Lorrain to the King. I showed my self afterward very much surprised at
Monsieur de Lorrain's having so much as a thought that others could obtain more
for him than he could obtain for himself; seeing by the Treaty he made in 1639,
with the deceased King, he authentically yielded the Comte of Clermont, Stenay,
and Jamets: Besides that, having promised and ratified several other things,
with an express protestation to forfeit all his Countries in case he failed
therein, yet he had kept nothing which he had promised since his re-entrance;
that the King dealt very favorably with him, in restoring to him all Lorrain,
on the conditions mentioned in the Treaty of Paris; seeing since this Treaty
his Highness had continued with more obstinacy than ever to serve Spain against
France; that all the World must needs be surpised at the King's Generosity,
who possessing all Lorrain, and being able easily to keep it, yet restored it
almost entire to the Duke, who Fifteen years before had omitted nothing to
signalize his aversion against this Crown; and that this Generosity appeared
the greater, in that the King of Spain, whom the Duke had so long time and so
successfully served, had clapped him up in Prison, instead of rewarding him.

I ended this Discourse, in praying the Gentleman to tell or write to his
Master, that he had reason to think himself happy, for the manner after which
France dealt with him; and to have a livelier sense of this, he need only to
call to mind the History of Princes who had unfortunately lost their Countries,
though they had not done the Hundred part of what his Highness had done against
France; and that without having recourse to past Ages, there were Examples to
be met with in this; as those of the King of England, and so many Princes of
Germany, wholly stripped or deprived of the greatest part of what they had; and
especially the Elector Palatin, who having been no longer out of his Countries
than the Duke of Lorrain, and having had the good fortune to be protected by
France, Swedeland, and the Protestants of Germany, who obstinately refused to
hearken to any terms of Peace, if the Emperor did not entirely re-establish
him; he, I say, thought himself very happy to sacrifice one part of his Country
to recover another. And to shut the Duke of Lorrain's Mouth, I added, that
supposing the Spaniards had as much affection for him, and as great desire to
oblige him, as the contrary has appeared by the rigorous usage they have showed
him (it being not very ordinary to detain Sovereign Princes) yet the necessity
of their Affairs would hardly permit them to do more for the Duke of Lorrain,
than France and Swedeland could do for the Palatin, when their Armies were
victorious in Germany. Besides, there could be no likelihood that the Spaniards
should obtain more for the Duke of Lorrain than they could obtain for
themselves; and so much the less, in that they having lost a great many Places
by the War, were constrained to give up a great part of 'em for the procuring a
Peace.

I return to Don Lewis, who being prepared, as I have already told you, to make
a fresh sally with all his Forces in behalf of Monsieur the Prince, saying,
that the King his Master would not be content with this Peace, if we were
resolved to accept of no expedient, by whose means he might in some sort acquit
himself of his Engagements, in as much as Monsieur the Prince having no
security, and wandering where God should direct him, it would be impossible to
enjoy the effects of the Peace so perfectly as the King his Master wished. And
though he showed a great earnestness in saying to me what I now tell you, yet I
affected to answer him with great sedateness; saying, that I was very much
obliged to him for his freedom of expressions to me, in what he had now
uttered, being a kind of declaration, that the Peace should not last long; that
I no longer wondered at what Don Christoval told the Abbot Siri; that if he
were not obliged to publish so soon what past in relation to the Peace, he
would have occasion to write in another manner in a short time; so that I saw I
had nothing else to do but to take my leave of him, with the greatest grief, in
having been so good a Prophet, when having seen him return so many times to
press me about the Prince, I had said, that the consideration of Monsieur the
Prince having hindered the conclusion of the Peace of Christendom at Madrid
above Three years since, his Interest would still hinder the conclusion of the
Peace, which was so lately Signed and Ratified at Paris; and that I trusted
God, who had bestowed so many Blessings on France, for a Recompense of the
King's intentions, who in the midst of his Successes had sent even to Madrid
for a Peace, without obtaining it, by reason of the firmness with which his
Catholic Majesty had insisted on the Prince's satisfactions, that he, I say,
would crown his Majesty's Arms with greater Successes, for having brought on
his side so great facilities toward the conclusion of the Peace, when his Arms
were in a condition to make on all sides a greater progress than ever.

I cannot sufficiently represent to their Majesty's how greatly he appeared
astonished at my answer, and I should be obliged to a long Discourse, if I
would write all the particulars he uttered to me, and all the entreaties he
made me not to take in ill part what he had said to me; protesting again, that
the consideration of Monsieur the Prince should never hinder the execution of
the Peace; and that if he had told me, the King his Master would not be
satisfied, it was not with the Peace he meant, but only for the not having
obtained what he desired in favor of Monsieur the Prince. It will be enough to
say, that by his way and expressions I had cause quickly to appease my self,
but I dexterously kept my self from showing it, to induce him the more to put
an end to our satisfaction.

I told him then, this was a new method of Negotiating, to say that Monsieur
the Prince should not hinder the consummation of the Peace, whilst in effect he
did hinder it by a continual returning to his Interests; and having before he
spoke to me of this ill satisfaction of the King his Master, replied to me all
the same Reasons he had alleged to me in favor of the Prince, setting
perpetually before me, that Rebellions were common in France, and that those
who had been guilty of 'em had been always reestablished; and hinting to me
again what was done in respect to the Constable of St. Paul, I thought my self
obliged to answer him, that I was tired with hearing the same things so many
times repeated, and so much the more in that I did not doubt but he was
convinced by the answers I made him, to inform him, and give him means to
confound Lainet, and the other Adherents of Monsieur the Prince, who
continually furnished him with Arms, though weak ones, to defend his cause; that
we should once for all agree to bring no more into debate such points as had
been already decided; it seeming to me I had sufficiently showed him, that if
Rebellions were more frequent among the French, they were more dangerous, and
of longer durance among the Spaniards; that if he would take the pains to
examine after what manner they were chastised in France, when there was an
opportunity of doing it, he would soon see by the severity which all its Kings
have used, that they were not very encouraging to the French to make revolts;
that not to ascend higher than the Reign of Henry IV. he would find the Marshal
of Biron with his Head taken off, without having executed any thing of what he
had projected against the State; he would see the last Duke of Montmorency, so
Illustrious by the Services of his Ancestors, chastis'd in the same manner as
Biron, the Quality of his Relations, and the endeavors used on all hands to
obtain his Pardon, being not able to prevail with Lewis XIII. He would see
Monsieur de Cinqmars Grand Escuyer and Favorite of this King, and Thuanus
punished in the same fashion, the first having executed nothing of the Treaty
made with the Count Duke D'Olivarez, nor the second committed any other crime
than that of having known the thing, in which he had no part, and not having
revealed it; that as to Monsieur the Prince, I could not but remember his
Excellency, that Lewis Prince of Conde his great Grandfather would have had his
Head taken off at Orleans, had not Francis II. dyed suddenly on the Eve of the
Day he intended this Execution to be done.

I ended, in desiring him to advertise Monsieur the Prince's People not to have
so often in their mouths the Example of the Constable of St. Paul, for if he
made often his accommodation, and even with great advantages, because the
necessity of Affairs required it, yet he at length lost his Head.

The Don Lewis cried out, 'twas true, but in the accommodations he was always
reestablished in his Estate, and even in the Places he had on the Sum. Ah,
Sir, said I to him, would you have Monsieur the Prince now reestablished, and
make such an end as the Constable of St. Paul did? I believe you love him too
well to wish him the same Fortune.

It is fit their Majesty's should know, that by the Discourse Don Lewis has
held to me in this Rencounter, I have plainly found out, that he repeated to me
the substance of the Letters which Croisy wrote to Brussels, and the Memoirs
which have been sent to Paris by Monsieur the Prince.

I have likewise experimented, that it has befallen Don Lewis what usually
happens to those who are constrained to fight, by their being showed their
Honor is therein engaged; which is to say, to depart the Lists with
disadvantage, because they therein entered against their Wills, and only to
deliver themselves from the importunity of their Friends.

He has been most certainly persuaded, he might boldly say what he list, and
without any danger threaten the breaking off of the Treaty, without this
endangering of me to resolve on a Rupture: And therefore I have omitted nothing
to deliver him from this conceit, making known to him, as I have done in this
Conference, that though the Passion with which their Majesty's wish for Peace be
apparent to all the World, and that on my side, I should have an extreme regret
to return hence without concluding any thing, and in the assurance of seeing
the War begin again, yet I must esteem it advantageous, and even glorious this
should happen on Monsieur the Prince's account, it being certain, that not only
this Action would be blamed by the Spaniards, but that even the very Stones in
the Street would rise up against those who had been the cause of this.

Don Lewis replied to me what is precisely in one of Croisy's Letters, which
is, that all France would be in an uproar, if it were known the Peace failed of
being concluded because a reasonable Satisfaction was not given Monsieur the
Prince: Afterward using me with great gentleness, he told me, after a Thousand
Flatteries, he could swear we should part the best Friends in the World; and
began to enter on the Overture I have already denoted I made, to give to the
King the Places with which Monsieur the Prince was to be gratified; and that in
this case, I would cast my self at the King's Feet, to entreat him to bestow on
the Prince and his Son some favors by means of which both one and the other
might be better assured of his Majesty's Goodness to 'em.

He told me then, that if I made this Overture to give him a mark of my
Kindness, to the end, to handsomely disengage the King his Master from Monsieur
the Prince, and that I had no other motive of supplicating the King to make him
a better Treatment, assuring his Majesty, that the Prince should lay at his
Feet the Gratification which the King of Spain should make him, we might soon
come to an Agreement, seeing he did not believe that in this case I should
insist on the more or the less.

I interrupted him here, entreating him in no sort to speak to me of this,
because I could not see any Reason to hope that the King would consent to it,
and that it was out of pure Affection I undertook to intercede with his
Majesty, to the end, that when the Prince begged Pardon for the fault he had
committed, and did remit into his Hands the Places which his Catholic Majesty
should give him, he might then give him and his Son some proof of his
Reconciliation. And I greatly extended this Discourse, omitting nothing which
might warrant him, and engage him to accept of this Expedient, endeavoring to
edg him on by the refusal I made.

And perceiving from the beginning he pretended to acquit himself, in giving
something of small consideration, I replied to him, That should he consent to
my proposing to the King whatever I knew had been offered to Monsieur the
Prince, I had very strong Reasons to be persuaded that his Majesty would be
against it, and the Queen would, in the opinion which she had of the Prince,
confirm his aversion.

He entreated me not to doubt of the Offer he had made me hereupon, in
proposing to give to the Prince some Places in Sovereignty; but that Lainet
well knew these Places were to be given him only with the Securities and
necessary Precautions of never disposing of them in favor of the King, nor
serving his Majesty with the said Places, and farther on condition, that the
Line of Monsieur the Prince failing, they should return to Spain. He asked me,
whether I believed 'twas the same thing to give on these conditions Places to
Monsieur the Prince, as to give them purely to the King; and whether there was
any comparison between adding to so many Conquests, which the King retained in
the Low Countries, what was intended to be given to the Prince, or to give 'em
to this Prince, who would have nothing else but these, and who might in a
Thousand Conjunctures profitably serve Spain; and that by the same reason, I
told him the King would never consent to this; I need not doubt but this was
advantageous to the King his Master.

I answered him, I could not but agree with him; there was great difference
between giving to the King and to Monsieur the Prince; and that for this
effect, giving something less, I would not fail in using my endeavors with his
Majesty, as I had already offered, without being responsible in any sort for
his accepting this Overture.

He continued afterward his Discourse; and I cannot sufficiently represent to
their Majesty's the pain he had to bring forth the Proposition which assuredly
he had premeditated to make me, when he should see the Sally I now spoke of
would not succeed.

In fine, having told me he would make me an offer, in which he should confound
what the King his Master would do for the Prince, and what he would give for
Bergue, reckoning la Bassee for nothing, because it should be demolished; he
spoke to me of Mariembourg and Philippe ville, with their dependances,
exaggerating the quality and importance of these two Towns, in telling me, that
Caracene had signified to him, they could not be alienated without causing an
irreparable prejudice to Spain in all she possessed on the side of the Meuse.

I replied to him, he was in jest, or thought me very ignorant, and easily
imposed on, that he must not speak to me but of Air, St. Omers, or Cambraye,
and du Cambresis, or of Avenues, Charlemont, Philippe ville, and Mariembourg,
as they were offered to Monsieur the Prince. I believed it fit to propose this,
though their Majesty's know only the last Places were offered to him; and as to
us, we may truly say, that the first, which is to say Avenues, is worth the
three others.

He replied to me, that not to spend the time fruitlesly, he was obliged to
declare to me, taking God to witness, that there had never been any mention
made of Avenues to the Prince: And after a Thousand Contorsions, and
inexpressible Pangs to bring forth the word, he said in fine, to make an end of
the business, he would dispatch in all haste to the King his Master, to entreat
him to approve of the offering of Avenues, which was in our respect far more
important than Cambray; and that this was a thing of so great moment, and which
would make so many People murmur against him for the making such a Proposal,
that he entreated me not to take him at his word, nor build on what he told me
till he had received an answer from Madrid.

Although I was lively touched with this Proposal, there being nothing in my
opinion more profitable to the King than the acquisition of Avenues, which is
assuredly one of the strongest Places in the Low Countries, and which renders
us more powerful than the King of Spain in Hainault, and wholly covers Tierache
and Champain, when we shall have withdrawn Rocroy: yet I showed him great
coldness, saying, the offer was not proportionable to what we rendered, and to
the effect my endeavors with the King might produce in the Princes favor, if
his Majesty should like it.

He hereupon seemed mightily concerned, and at the point of despair, and crying
out, he was very unfortunate, seeing I made no reckoning of an offer which he
trembled for having made, as fearing the Council of Spain would rise up against
him when they shall hear the news of it.

And I continuing in my coldness, entreated him not to expose himself to the
reproach would be made him in Spain, for having offered me Avenues, besides
Philippe ville and Mariembourg, seeing the Peace concluded at Paris might be
executed without a word of all this, there being nothing else to do but to
retain, as it is contained in this Treaty, Bergue, and la Bassee, which the
King would never suffer to be raised on any account, considering the
Contributions established in this Country by the means of this Place, which
whether by its Situation, or Fortification, was in time of War far more
considerable than any of those he offered me. I said this, though I knew well the
contrary, and that the King could not retain la Bassee without raising it Three
Months after; that as to the Prince, I would ask nothing, but on the contrary,
be eternally obliged to him, if he would exempt me from executing a
Proposition, which the only Passion of obliging his Excellency had constrained
me to make; that there was no more to do but to keep to the Treaty of Paris,
and to give Monsieur the Prince a Gratification in Money; to which I declared
the King would not oppose, and thus this Negotiation without any more delay
would be ended.

All this served only to heat him the more in the desire of procuring by all
sorts of means some satisfaction to the Prince; and he told me, I had given him
a good Example of what he ought to do, by the pressing instances I had made him
in favor of the Duke of Newbourg, even to the offering that the King should
yield to his Catholic Majesty one of the best Places left him, provided
Juliers were rendered to this Duke. It was easy for me to silence him hereupon,
in answering, that not to take notice of the disparity between a Free Prince
and a Subject, and between a place which had been deposited in trust to have it
again afterward when the Duke needed no longer the King of Spain's help to
preserve it, and what the King had freely given to the Prince when he was in
his Duty; this Prince, by a detestable Perfidiousness, had abused Places and
Governments which he held from the King, in favoring the Enterprises of the
Spaniards; and that with all this disparity, after having insisted a little in
favor of the Duke of Newbourgh, the King gave over this point, being
scrupulous, whatever Justice there was in his pretension to retard one moment
the quiet of Christendom for the Interest of a particular Person, though never so
well grounded; but that his Excellency, instead of dealing thus, returned
continually to the Charge, esteeming himself never vanquished on the Interest
of Monsieur the Prince; that I hoped he would honor me with so good an opinion
of me, to believe I wanted neither Understanding nor Resolution to maintain the
Duke of Newbourg's Cause, had not the Commiseration of all the People, who
groan under the delays of the Peace, touched the King's Heart, and obliged his
Majesty to send me order to no longer insist thereupon.

And I ended, in telling him, I was not surprised at the obstinacy I found in
his Excellency, when the Question concerned the restoring to this Duke a Place
which the Catholic King held only as a Pledge; it not being the Spanish
fashion ever to restore what they once get hold on, unless it be to draw thence
a greater advantage; so that I could not but be troubled they had not yet
learned the way of parting with what was not their own, whatever Example France
has given them of the contrary in the last Treaty, by which she restored above
Twenty Places to the Duke of Savoy, though they had cost the Crown so much Blood
and Treasure. The Conference ended in our mutual promising that no mention
should be made to any body of what had been treated, and especially of the
offer he had made me; and that we should spend one whole day in examining the
things we had discoursed of; that we should see one another to day, and that I
should return him an answer on the proposal he had made me from his own part,
without power from the King his Master.

FINIS.

