P'AITIDOLOGIA OR A Tract of the Disease RHACHITIS Commonly called the RICKETS.

Showing the Signs, Cause, Symptoms, and Prognostics: Together with a most
accurate and ingenious Method of CURE.

Written originally in Latin, (according to a new-framed Hypothesis) by that
most learned Philosopher, and Famous Physician, Dr. John Mayow, late Fellow of
All-Souls-Coll. in the Academy of OXON.

And now (for the Benefit of his Countrymen) faithfully rendered into English.

By W. S.

To which is subjoined a profitable Appendix, touching WEIGHTS and MEASURES
used in the Composition of Medicines and exhibition of Medicinal Doses.

OXFORD, Printed by L. L. for Th. Fickus. 1685

TO The most Vigilant, Industrious and Expert MIDWIFE Mrs. MARY COOMES, the
Translator Wishes all Happiness.
Worthy Patroness!
IT was an inviolable Decree among the Egyptians, that every Physician should
have but one Disease for his Province; whereby is meant, that he was to employ
his utmost Industry, in order to improve his Faculty for the good of Mankind:
And now adays too, it is so far from being thought an Absurdity so to do, that
the best of Professors are not ashamed (but esteem it requisite and highly
conducible) to make a particular Scrutiny into the knowledge of some one
Distemper, eminently above others, according to the Inclination of their
natural Genius.

Our learned Author is not herein to be excepted; for albeit he was a person of
extensive parts, and was blessed with a more than ordinary Capacity; yet did he
signalize his Practice by a more particular Enquiry into the true Cause and
Cure of the RICKETS, an after long Observation and Experience (that others
might reap advantage from his Labors and Study,) published a Tract of this
Disease: I having perused the same and well weighed what was written, I was
heartily solicitous to communicate it in our Mother Tongue, to Posterity, that
it might become more generally useful, and diffusive to the Intelligence of
such as have the Care of Children, and particularly to Midwives who ought to be
of good Understanding, and to abound with great Notion relating to Medicines
exhibited to Children, touching whose Infirmities it is a most usual thing to
have recourse to them.

Now having (by the Divine Assistance) completed this Undertaking, I did after
mature Deliberation, think fit to make a Dedication of this small Treatise to
you, having so great esteem for you, that I blush not to acquaint the World in
short, that in what you Profess, appertaining either to Women or Children,
(before, or in, or after the Birth,) you are so well Experienced, Dextrous and
truly Judicious, that you may be justly styled, the Oxonian LVCINA, or Complete
Midwife, What I have done as to the Appendix of Weights and Measures, I nowise
doubt but the same will prove more delightful and satisfactory, than what in
the Writings of any other English Author is yet extant. So commiting the same
to your Patronage, I subscribe my self

Yours in all Sincerity WILLIAM SVRY.

TO THE READER.
THose Things which are truly Glorious and highly Divine, do manifest this one
grand Proof of their Excellency, in that they continue perpetually Immutable,
not being subject to Alteration. Now whereas this is a very great Perfection,
and to enjoy a long and prosperous Life is a superexcellent or surmounting and
supreme Good; justly then, and not without cause do those Creatures, which are
in a mortal State aspire thereat, and naturally desire to Be, and to Live. But
since they cannot wholly and absolutely attain this; yet thus much have they
acquired' viz. to have, in some respect, a Perpetual being; not in Number, but
in Species, which abides ever. For which reason, the Birth and Procreation of
Living Creatures are continuated by immutable Eternity, that what cannot be
preserved in singular Substance, might at least persevere in Species. For it
falls out on necessity, that every Individual, whereas it perceives it self to
be mortal and dissoluble, wishes to reserve something in its own Similitude,
in its stead; in as much as in some degree it comfort Languid and Declining
Age, and by which as it were growing young and fresh again, it is in a manner
perpetuated and made permanent. Hence arises that Lust or Desire of Begetting,
which Nature has imparted to all Living Creatures, that their Species might be
forever preserved. Which being premised, we come next to consider, that as we
want the absolute Perfection (in this humane State) of Immortality; So likewise
we are deprived of the benefit of constant Vigor, Strength and Sanity, which
not only Decaying Age gradually supervening, but a numerous Host of Diseases
too, (which Sin has entailed upon the Race of Adam) sufficiently confirm. If
therefore we respect and ponder the Advantage, Force and Faculties of all Arts,
none will be found more excellent, more worthy, or more to be wished for by the
sons of men, than that of Physic; which (as the learned Fernelius defines) Est
Ars ad humani corporis Sanitatem tuendam, profligandosque morbos, comparata. It
is an Art ordained to preserve the Health of man's body, and to profligate
Diseases. This great gift has the Infinite Being, out of his boundless mercy
bestowed on mankind, that, as he has been pleased to necessitate a
continuation of the Species, so also this Temporal Life might not be altogether
burdensome; but by a seasonable Application of suitable Remedies, all Diseases
and Dolors (from the Cradle to the Crutch) whether Internal or External, might
be cured or at least alleviated.

Certainly then whatever is written on this Subject viz. Medicine,
(presupposing it to be rationally deduced from the Fountains of Learning and
Experience) it must on necessity prove acceptable; and that worthy old Adage,
Bonu^ quo communius eo melius, affords us a good and profitable Plea for
Translation. For why should any thing that tends to a general Advantage, be hid
from Vulgar Apprehension, Knowledge being the most delightful and commodious
thing in nature. It Is undoubtedly great Pity that a Secret should be secured and
fettered by the Padlock of a foreign Language, whereas the same being ushered
into the World by a Mother Tongue, might arrive to some wonderful Improvement,
and diffuse it self to the utmost Limits of Christian Charity. That Author
merits but small commendation, who respecting more his proper Praise, than the
common Good of Mankind, emits a Tract into the World, grudging his Works to be
read by any others, then such as shall (being book-learned themselves) admire
his Eloquence, and honor him with the Title of a Learned Man. Such a one (in
my Opinion) is like to the Sun obnubilated, yielding most Light where there is
least need of it. Tho a person of great Learning deems it a kind of Trespass on
his Parts, so much to debase himself, as to commit his endeavors to public
View in an inferior Language; yet, if some other is pleased to render the same
easy to the Apprehension of a Multitude, which before was commodious but to
few; it not only not derogates from the Authors Credit, but also may enrich the
Understanding of many a one, whose aspiring Genius, otherwise perhaps might
grow Languid, for want of a Recruit.

A Judicious Brain is not hereditary to a Grecian or Latinist only. Various
Examples of men famous in Physic, the Mathematics, yea most Arts and
Sciences, who never were grounded in any but their Mother Tongue, may be
produced. Not being a Linguist, proves a man to be a mere Ignoramus; no more
than the Language of the Beast, infers a good Conclusion to think or say, every
one, that knows it, to be a Cicero.

In truth, the Veneration I have always had for Charitable Intentions, was the
strongest Motive that urged and inured me to this Enterprise. And we are bound
to confess, (whatever praejudicial Spirits dare depose to the contrary) that
Mankind can rarely be obliged with a more acceptable piece of Service, then
that of reducing one Language into another.

If therefore this noble Medicinal Art infer so great Commodity and
Delectation; if likewise, (as I have made it apparent) from Translation so
great Improvement accrue to most men, and (as I may boldly say) to all Nations;
here may thou, Reader! divert thy Apprehension, and improve thy Knowledge,
not with a mean, but remarkable and late discovery; viz. An Investigation of a
Distemper called the RICKETS, incident to Babes and Infants only, whose
Tenderness and Immaturity of Age and Understanding, as they impede the
Exploration and Disquisition of the Diseases Origin, so likewise add
difficulty to to the Cure. The famous Author (when living, much admired for his
profound Knowledge, and secure Judgment) amongst his most ingenious
Philosophical Tracts, which largly recommend his Worth, has pitched upon a
Scrutiny of this Eisease in all its parts Diagnostick, Prognostic and
Therapeutick, as well Pharmaceutical as Chirurgical. To be brief, this Tract
may justly bear the Title of Gemma Medica, the Glory of whose Splendor the
most Nebulous Aspect of frowning Zoilus, connot diminish or obumbrate. His
Hypothesis, touching the Crookedness of the Bones is undeniable, and not to be
paralleled, by the bravest Aesculapius this refined Age can produce.

Accept hereof (kind Reader!) with as much Candor, as I have with Cheerfulness
Translated it, and in so doing, thou will highly recompense me for my Pains,
and encourage me to Publish something else shortly, which will not be less
worthy thy perusal. In the mean time Farewell, and enjoy these Fruits of my
Labor, which will tend both to thy Pleasure and Profit.

Thine in all honest Endeavors W. S.

ERRATA.
PAge 26, Line 16. for 1. r. 2. p, 35. l. 17. r. grow not only. p. 35. l. 22.
for inflicted, r. inflected. p. 47. l. 15. for to, r. too. p. 64. l. 14. for
affect. r. effect. p. 75. l. 13. for half an Ounce, r. half a Dram. p. 76. l.
6. for a Scruple, r. half a Scruple, p. 90. l. 14. for efer'd, r. referred.

fig. 1.



fig. 2.



fig. 3.



fig 4.



fig 5



fig. 6.



fig 7



fig. 8.



fig 9



fig 10



fig. 11.



A Tract of the Disease RHACHITIS, commonly called the RICKETS
The Proeme.
THe Renowned GLISSON is the only man (as far as I know) who has wrote any
thing touching the Rickets: which may seem to be very strange, since a Disease
for the most part does scarcely spread so much as the ill habit of writing
concerning it. And truly, so accurate a Treatise of this Disease lately set
forth by Dr. Glisson, and the Authority of so great a man, might deter me from
writing, did I not believe him to be such an one as would willingly pardon a
lover of the Truth, tho now and then dissenting from him. Yet whereas I am
making have along with him to the same Goal, it must needs be that most an end
I trace the same Footsteps. Wherefore by leave of so great a Person, I may
lawfully repeat, (since it cannot be otherwise,) some things declared by him
already.

CHAP. I. Of the time when and Place where the Disease Rhachitis had its first
Rise, and who are most subject thereto.
THis Disease had its first rise in the Western parts of England, above Forty
years ago: But afterward (as it is the custom of Diseases and evils to spread
themselves further) it infested the Cradles of Infants, (but more seldom in
the Northern Countries, throughout all England.

Therefore they are Infants who chiefly are sick of this disease; and they are
more frequently vexed therewith, from the sixth month after the Birth to the
eighteenth, and from a year and a half to the end of two years and a half so
that for the most part the time of its Invasion, are those two years which
presently ensue the age of six months from the Birth.

CHAP. II. Of the Signs or Symptoms of the Disease.
THe Diagnosis or knowledge of this Disease, (as of others,) does depend upon
the understanding of the Symptoms, which are these that follow.

1. The proportion of the parts is irregular: viz. The Head bigger than it
ought to be.

2. The Face over-fat,

3. The Wit too acute in respect of the Age.

4. The external Members, chiefly the musculous, lean and extenuated.

5. The Skin loose and flagging.

6. The Bones for the most part bowed, and those about the Joints standing out,
and knotty.

7. The Spine or Backbone is varioufly inflected.

8. The Breast is straight or narrow.

9. The Extremities of the Ribs knotty.

10. The Abdomen somewhat puffed up, and stretched out. These things are
outwardly observed, but inwardly.

11. The Liver is perceived over-large; as also most of the Parenchymaes, or
fleshy substances.

12. The Ventricle and Intestines rise into a greater Bulk, than in those who
are sound.

13. The Mesenterium is affected with Glandules too great; if not with Srumae
or Waddles.

These are the Symptoms within the Abdomen; within the breast,

14. The Lungs are discerned stuffed and tumid; and the same sometimes purulent,
strumous, and very often growing fast to the Pleura.

15. The Jugular Veins, and Carotid Arteries, are sometimes found larger than
their just proportion; but the Brain is faulty only as to its Proportion and
massy Bulk.

16. Lastly, to these is added an Enervation of almost all the Parts; also a
certain drowsiness and Impatience of Labor and Exercise: For, the little
Children cannot play, except sitting, and with much ado can stand on their
feet. And at last in the Progress of the Disease, the burden of their Head,
can hardly be sustained by their weak neck.

These are the so many and so great Symptoms of this Malady: In the next place
we must search out what may be the fruitful (cause or mischief of so numerous
an offspring.

CHAP. III. Of the Cause of the Disease. That it consists not in the
naughtiness of the Blood; nor in the depraved constitution of the Parts.
FIrst, We suppose the Cause of this Disease not to consist in the vitiated
Influx of the blood, for so the whole mass of blood would be corrupted, which
since it is indifferently conveyed to every part, the more impure blood would
affect all of them more or less; which notwithstanding in this infirmity never
happens: For the Head, as also the Bowels are well disposed only more than
usually great; yea, the very Parenchymaes which chiefly consist of affused
blood, whereas they are found very much like to those of the Healthful, they in
like manner argue the blood to be good and laudable. For it were absurd to
assert I know not what Elective attraction, whereby the head and bowels well
disposed, do attract all the good blood, but send away the bad into other
parts: For this Attraction, (were there any) would be from all parts alike,
since to every part there is a congruity and necessity of good blood, which are
thought to bring to pass a motion of that kind.

Secondly, we affirm the Foundation of that Affect, not to consist in the
depraved constitution of the parts themselves; as if the parts molested with
frigid and moist Intemperature; were unapt for receiving the Heart's influx:
For, whence does arise this so great an Humiditie and Coldness of some parts,
in comparison of the rest, since all of them are irrigated with the like hot
blood and spirits alike? For neither do I suppose the frigiditie innate to the
parts, but to be preternaturally in them; neither truly must we believe the
parts themselves to withstand their own nutrition. For those operate nothing in
the Act of nutrition; but only receive the nutriment brought to them by
toleration: So that I certainly believe, there is no other unaptness in the
parts, whereby they become not nourished, except Obstructions only, by means
whereof they cannot take Aliment: Wherefore the cause of this Malady, cannot be
in the constitution of the parts them selves; nor is it reasonable to judge
Humidity the cause of the disease, but rather the Effect.

CHAP. IV. That the Nerves as well as the Blood do help to nourish; and this
disease does peculiarly depend upon the defect of the Nervous Influx.
HOwever whereas the parts are really Cold. and (tho largely supplied with
blood good enough) are not nourished; We must altogether conclude that
something else besides the blood alone, is requisite to heat and nutrition.
Whatsoever this be there is a necessity that it be carried through some of the
Vessels. The Arteries conveigh the blood, the Veins carry back that which is
brought; and the Nerves only remain, which can conveigh the Liquor, or at least
nutritious spirits.

But, that no man may doubt whether the Nerves carry any thing necessary to
nutrition, I shall allege an Experiment known to every body; to wit, if a
Nerve serving to any part be cut off from it, not only the sense of that part,
but also all manner of nourishment, is utterity lost, insomuch as the same for
the time to come shall become as it were withered.

But however, this nervous Liquor alone does not perform, the whole duty of
nutrition. For besides it, ye blood diffused through the Arteries obtains not a
small part as to nourishing. Forasmuch as the nervous juice being mingled with
the blood does cause a certain Effervescence or Heat, whereupon the matter meet
for the nourishing of the parts, is precipitated; and through the defect of
this nervous liquor's influx, tho the blood in this affect be pretty laudable,
yet wanting its due ferment, it is neither available te excite due heat in the
parts, nor to execute the office of Nutrition.

CHAP. V. The Definition, or Description of the Rhachitis, together with the
Cause thereof: Wherein is showed, that it proceeds not from the faultiness of
the Brain; but from the obstruction of the spinal Marrow.
FRom what has been said, we need not be afraid to affirm, that The RHACHITIS
is a Disease, arising from the unequal distribution of the Nervous Liquor
through the defect or superabundance whereof, some Parts defrauded of Nutriment
are attenuated, other parts being over-cloyed [therewith,] grow too bulky.

But this Vice of inequality consists not in the Influx of the Brain; for, from
this fountain being vitiated, meet nutriment would accrue to no part at all.
and truly, the Head and other parts, which partake of the nerves that have
their original from the Brain, do enjoy Nutriment laudable enough, tho in too
great abudance; yet whereas those Parts which have Nerves springing from the
spinalis Medulla, do become lean; it is certainly manifest, that although in the
brain, (as it were the public storehouse, shop, or workhouse of the whole
body,) an increase or store of vital spirits ample enough is elaborated; yet,
the Spinalis medulla, as it were the Princely road or highway tending from that
mart or empory is altogether overcharged and encumbered by thick and glutinous
humors, whereby the Passage for the nervous nutriment is blocked up: whence it
comes to pass, that the Nerves which descend from the Spinal marrow, being
destitute of that nutritious liquor, bring no aid at all to the languishing
parts which they approach. Hence comes an Atrophy, and very great extenuation
of those parts. So at last it is reasonable that we determine this to be the
cause of this malady; and the rather, for that the reason of all the symptoms
proper to this disease, may more clearly and easily be derived from this
Fountain, as from what follows shall be manifest.

CHAP. VI. The Reason of the Symptoms, and first of the too great Augmentation
of the Head.
IN this affect it falls out, that the head is increased to an unreasonable
bigness, which indeed from our supposition must needs be: For the nutritious
liquor of the brain is wont in a great measure to be discharged on the Spinal
Marrow; but that Passage now being stopped the whole is distributed to the
nerves descended from the brain. Hereupon, whereas the head does acquire too
liberal an increase of nutriment from those nerves turgid with nutritious
juice, it must on necessity be advanced to an extraordinary bigness. From this
cause also, the countenance (in respect of the Age) is over-big and the wit too
acute: for, as the spirits being exhausted, do render us dull and languid; in
like-manner; plenty thereof congested in the brain, makes us wise and witty.

CHAP. VII. Of the swelling or puffing up of the Abdomen.
THe inward Parts of the Abdomen are wont for the most part to exceed their
just proportion: there is indeed the like reason or cause for this, as there is
for the symptoms of the head; For it is very certain, that these Plexus or
foldings of so many nerves, serving to the lower most belly, (as chiefly of the
Wandering Pair and Intercostal Nerves,) are the Ofl, spring of those which are
descended from the Brain: That now it is no wonder, if the aforesaid Viscera,
enjoying more plentiful nourishment brought unto them by the said nerves, do
grow larger. For although the Intercostal Nerves receive Branches from the
spinalis medulla, such as can bring unto them no nutritious Liquor, yet, that
too liberal influx of the brain does abundantly recompense for this defect.

As for the Liver, and the rest of the Parenchymaes, which seem principally to
consist of affused blood, the nervous juice perhaps is not so necessary for
their nutrition: yet, whereas the Muscles of the Abdomen spread over them, have
nerves from the Spinalis medulla, which certainly can bring no nutriment from
that dried fountain, hence it comes to pass that the Viscera or Bowels inwardly
surging, do press the Muscles aforesaid, and cause them to be stretched out as
not growing with equal pace.

CHAP. VIII. Of strumous Glondules, or hard Kernels.
FUrthermore it happens that the Mesentery is affected with great Kernels, and
Strumous Tumors. That the cause of this symptom may the better be known, I
shall briefly premit the Origin of Glandules. The nervous Liquor being mingled
by due fermentation with the Blood, does pass into a nutritious carnal
substance; but, if the Nerve being replete and turgid shall pour forth its
liquor (which is very much like unto the white of an Eg,) into the interspaces
of the flesh; the matter so effused does not any more make flesh, through the
defect of blood requisite hereto, but is congealed ed into a Glandulous body
very much like unto it self; which from Observation is manifest: For being
about to make an Experiment on a Dog, I pricked a nerve, whereupon the dog was
afterward miserably wrested with Convulsions, and about three months after, I
found a Glandulous concretion remarkable enough, where that wound or Puncture
before hand was inflicted, which seems to arise from the nervous liquor flowing
from the Puncture of the Nerve.

These things being premised; whereas so much nervous liquor is transfered from
the repleted brain, through the Wandering Pair and Intercostol nerves, into the
Abdomen, as cannot be changed into the substance of the Viscera that liquor is
deposited into the interspaces of the Membranes, (whereof many occur,) and
there procures strumae or waddles in great number.

Neither only in the Abdomen but wheresoever the nerves springing from the
brain, (which grow turgid with that Liquor) do approach, there strumous Tumors
are to be seen; yet such as vanish away shortly after the Cure of the disease:
For, the nervous Liquor, which, being effused in so great plenty from the Brain
(through the nerves springing from thence) did abound to the Generation of the
Strumoe, is now for the greatest part derived into the Spinalis medulla; so
that those Strumoe, defrauded of nutriment, in a short time are dried away.

CHAP. IX. Of the Crookedness of the Bones. Dr. Glissons Opinion touching the
same, is set down.
IN this Affect also the Bones are wont to be bowed more or less; especially
those of the Cubit and Tibia: The joints also for the most part, bend
outwardly: the Extremities of the Ribs (where they are joined with the
Cartilages of the Sternum,) are knotty; The Bones of the joints protuberant;
likewise the whole Spine is variously inflected, partly outward, partly
inwards.

I do not conceive that this crookedness of the bones does proceed from their
Flexibility, since that Children afflicted with this malady, have rather greater
and firmer bones than others, as shall more at large be declared: But since
this incurvitie of the benes is so notable, we may be a little more prolix in
the Disquisition thereof; and first I shall produce the Learned Glissons
opinion, and then my own.

We may compare the Bones (says the famous man) to which this crookedness
uses to happen, to a Pillar; and not unaptly, seeing that when they are
erected, they resemble a Pillar: And from thence we deduce a demonstration that
illustrates and makes the matter very plain. Let the Pillar therefore consist
of three stones a. b. c. placed over one another Fig. 1. We suppose it such a
one as is perpendicularly erected on every side, and of the same height: If
therefore you shall fasten in a wedge on the right side between the stones a.
b. through the line f. d. The head of the Pillar, namely the stone a. will of
necessity be bended toward d. and will make an Angle in d. and the height of
the Pillar on the right side will be higher than on the left, as may be seen in
Fig 1. In like manner, if you drive in another wedge through g. e. into the
stones b. c. the Pillar will be yet more bowed, and an Angle will be made in e.
Now therefore the Pillar stands bent to the left hand, as you see in the same
Figure. But if you build a Pillar of more stones, and betwixt every two, (as
has been said,) a wedge be interposed on one side, it will not resemble the
Figure of a Pillar, but the proportion of a Bow, as is plainly perceived by the
third Figure.

Now that we may accommodate these things to the present buisness; if the bones
aforesaid be more plentifully nourished, and therefore do grow out more on
that, than the opposite side; there is a necessity, that that must grow
crooked: For here the overplentiful nutrition of that side has the same power,
after the same manner, to bow the Bones, as the interposed wedge has to bow
the Pillar; fave that the wedge is fastened only in some places of the side of
the Pillar, and the over-plentiful nutrition of the side of the bone is
commonly equally made, according to the whole length thereof, and because of
this equal nutrition of the bone, the bowing thereof does exactly represent
part of a Circle without Angles.

CHAP. X. The Authors opinion. That the Bones in this Disease are sufficiently
nourished; but not the musculous Parts, the extenuation whereof is the only
Cause that the Bones are bowed; as is illustrated by Example. Of the inflexion
of the Spine. Why the Bones of the Thigh and Shoulder are very seldom bowed.
ACcording to this Hypothesis; to wit, the over-plentiful Nutrition of one
side, the Famous man indeed by an ingenious Comment does demonstrate the
crookedness of the Bones. But, (by the leave of so great a Person,) how does
that over-plentiful nutrition of one side appear to us, when as the blood
wherewith the bones are nourished, is not less equally dispensed in this
Affect, than it is in such as are healthful? And were there any such
inequality, the over-plentiful Aliment would be admitted in by the hinder-part
of the Tibia or Shank-bone, as being less exposed to the Cold, and softer; and
then the posteriour and elongated side of the bowed shank would be unequal, and
the anteriour concave: but it is quite contrary; for the shank in this Affect
is wont to stand out forward.

Yea further, we may gather from the very Figure or shape of the bowed bones,
that they grow equally on both sides: For the bones are after the manner of the
Fourth Figure, which may represent the Tibia, or shankbone; where the concave
part, a. is just as long as the unequal part, b. For otherwise, if the Tibia
were formed as in the fifth figure, the Thigh Bone, b, placed above it, could
not be sustained without a manifest Obliquity of the body, as may be seen in
the said Figure.

Let us then investigate some other cause of this crookedness; and that the
matter may the more clearly appear, the following things are briefly to be
premised.

1. We affirm that in this Disease, the Bones are not to be numbered omong the
affected parts, in respect of Nutrition; for they are not nourished, or do they
grow less, than in those that are healthy; as we have found by observation: For
we find that the blood alone is sufficient for their nutrition, and that there
is no need of the nervous Juice, as in the nourishing of the other parts. For
since the bones are deemed to have no sense [or feeling] as in themselves; it
is withal to be thought that they have little or no commerce with the Nerves.

2. We take it for granted, that in this Affect, the musculous and nervous
parts do in nowise wax bigger, by reason of the defect of the nervous Liquor
that is requisite for their nutrition.

These things being premised let, a. in the sixth Figure be the Shank-bone; b,
the muscles affixt to it behind, and constituting the calf of the Leg. Whereas
therefore the Shank-bone does increase and grow longer; yet the same being held
down (as it were with a string, (by the muscles which grow not with equapace,
insomuch that it cannot grow straight; there is a necessity, that that bone
should stand bent like a Bow, being stretched out by the Fibers of the muscles
which are shorter.

Let us illustrate this our Hypothesis by Example. If a Cord or String be
fastened to a young growing Tree, at the top and toward the root; but in such
manner as the same be not bent thereby, as in the seventh Figure is described;
I no ways doubt but that Tree will become bowed as it grows, after the manner
of the eighth Figure. For this demonstration does depend, upon this
Mathematical assertion; viz. If a Line [assigned to certain bounds,] be
stretched out longer within the same bounds or limits, it must on necessity of
a straight line become a crooked one: Which is the very same that happens to
the bones in this Affect.

And this may further be confirmed, in that bowed bones always respect [or be^d
towards] the muscle annexed to them on the concave part, as a Bow does its
string; as may be seen in a shank which bears forward, and is Unequal; but, in
the hinder part that respects the Muscles it is concave: this same also does
take place in other bones, from a strong Argument, that the bones are not
otherwise inflected by the Muscles, than a bow is by its string. From which a
reason may be sought; why Women-Quacks are wont with success daily to rub the
concave side of the bones, and not the unequal: viz. The Muscle sited on the
concave side of the bone is nourished and increases, the nutritious liquor
being more plentifully caled forth by this kind of Friction; that now it is no
marvel, (the string being stretched out longer,) if the bone, extended and
bowed by it, be withal relaxed, and become straighter. And from this cause,
they that are cured of this disease, grow [for the most part] very tall in
Stature; for the Bones grow not as in others; but also, whilst they become
straight of crooked ones, they are much more elongated.

The Spine also is variously in flicted, partly inwards, and partly outward,
which arises from the various Position of the Muscles in diverse parts of the
Spine; The Spine, to wit, in the Superior part, (by the muscles outwardly
affixt,) is bowed inwards, but in the inferior part, (by the muscles Psoas
inwardly annexed, and very strong,) it is bent outward; as in the ninth Figure
is showed, wherein, a. a. is the Spine, b. the Muscles affixt outwardly, and
bowing the Spine in the superior part inwards; and, c. the internal muscles of
the Loins called Psoas, bending the same outward.

In like manner also I suppose this cause or reason of Crookedness takes place,
not only in this Affect, but likewise in other cases: For if at any time it
falls out, in tender Age, that any muscle through deffect of nutriment be
extenuated; the bone to which the same is annexed, must needs be bowed thereby.

In the Thighs, and Shoulders, where the Bones are equally restrained by
muscles fastened on every side, those (being posited in aequilibrio, or equal
poize) are rarely bowed in any part: but since they cannot be stretched out in
length, they must (as they do) on necessity grow out in bigness, and sometimes
also become knotty.

CHAP. XI. Why the Breast grows straight or narrow, and accuminated.
MOreover, it happens in this affect, that the Breast becomes straight and
accuminated; and this Symptom in like manner may easily be illustrated by our
Hypothesis: For The Ribs cannot enlarge their Arches, unless the Intercostal
muscles be also extended, as may be seen in the tenth Figure, where the
Proportions of the Ribs, a. a. a. a. cannot be elongated, unless the
intercostal muscles be likewise stretched out or enlarged.

But we take it for granted that the said muscles, (in as much as nerves are
imparted to them from the Spinalis Medulla,) cannot be lengthened through
defect of Aliment.

Ergo, neither can the Ribs, nor yet the Breast grow wider.

For, whereas the Ribs are nonrished, yet being stayed by the said muscles,
that they cannot be augmented as to longitude; they must needs (as it comes to
pass) grow Knotty: But, neither is this Augment suitable to the provision or
plenty of Aliment, wherefore the anteriour extremities of the Ribs are yet
further lengthened to an edge, for there remains but this one way of
increasing, as in the eleventh Figure is shown, wherein let, a, a, be the Ribs,
whose extremities, b, b, grow outwardly to an edge; for they cannot be bowed
inwards, since it would be much contrary to their natural Site.

Likewise the Muscles of the Abdomen conduce not a little to the narrowness of
the Breast, which, as we said, being extenuated and tighted do draw the
inferior Ribs, to which they are fastened, downwards, and so straighten the
Breast.

With the self same reason may be demonstrated the vices of the other bones; to
wit, whereas the joynt-bones in the Wrists and Ancles cannot be bowed by reason
of their brevity, they do bunch forth into knots or nodes.

But let what has been said, touching the crookedness of the bones suffice.

CHAP. XII. Of the Asthma, Pursiness, or shortness of Breath, in this Affect.
IT is no wonder, if the Lungs, which have not room to dilate themselves, are
stuffed with clotted blood, (as it falls out) and puffed up, by reason of the
aforesaid straightness of the breast: Hereupon, sometimes they become purulent,
and for the most part grow fast to the Pleura; and and from this cause the
Asthma and difficulty of breathing, do afflict the Patients.

CHAP. XIII. From what Cause the Imbecility or Feebleness of the Body does
arise.
AS to the very great feebleness of the body in this Affect, and awkerdness to
any motion; although the extenuation of the Muscles does in some measure make way
for this Symptom, yet this alone seems not efficacious enough, since the
impairing of strength is greater than according to the Extenuation of the
Muscles: For, the sick cannot stand on their feet, neither (in the Progress of
the disease) are they able to sustain the weight of their head. Wherefore we
must investigate some more remote cause of so great Imbecility, which indeed
can be no other than the defect of the Animal Spirits inevitably ensuing the
said obstruction of the Nerves: For, the Animal sprits are not requisite or
necessary for nutrition alone, but also for motion.

And so at length we have, (as it were from a Fountain,) deduced the Symptoms
of this disease, from the obstruction of the Spinalis medulla.

CHAP. XIV. Why elderly Persons, or those of riper years, are not molested with
this Disease.
BUt here may arise a Querie: How comes it to pass, that adult or Elderly
Persons are never infested with this Malady; whereas they, as well as Infants,
may suffer Obstructions of the Nerves, as it happens in the Palsy, and other
the like distempers? I answer; although perhaps Children are chiefly obnoxious to
this disease; yet those of riper years are sometimes troubled with this Affect
under a different name. Nevertheless, because the aforesaid Symptoms for the
greatest part do never befall Elderly People; this does not arise from the
difference of the Disease, but of the Age. For, whereas the massy Bulk of the
Head, the crookedness of the Bones, and some other Symptoms proceed from the
enormous augmentation of the Parts, it is altogether impossible that adult
persons, and such as are grown to the highest Pitch, ( to wit such as have
attained their full growth) should grow irregularly; and for that reason the
Bulk of the Head is not augmented beyond measure in elderly persons sick of
this disease, as it is in Children; because the head is at full growth, which
the Laws of Nature it self deny to exceed. But although the parts cannot be
enormously augmented in those that are elderly; yet, the disease sufficiently
discovers it self, by extenuating the same, which one thing in such [ viz.
adult Persons] it can only do.

CHAP. XV. The Prognostic of this Disease comprehended in Seven Aphorisms.
AS to the Prognosis, Praescience, or Prognostication of the Event of this
Disease, of it self for the most part it is not mortal: yet sometimes the
Symptoms waxing grievous, it degenerates into a Phthisis, Consumption,
Hectick-Feaver, Dropsy of the Lungs, or Ascites; and so at length it proves
deadly to the Patient. But a more easy Prognostic may be instituted from the
Rules following.

1. If this Disease lay hold on the Patient before the Birth, or presently
after; it is [then] most dangerous, and for the most part Lethal.

2. By how much the sooner after the Birth this Affect invades [the Infant,] it
is so much the more dangerous.

3. By how much the more the Symptoms of the Disease grow worse and worse; viz.
If there be to great a disproportion of the Parts, and very great extenuation;
so much the more difficult is the Cure.

4. If this Affect have the aforesaid Diseases joined with it, it scarcely ever
terminates in Health.

5. Whosoever are not cured before the fifth year of their Age, they are sickly
all their life time afterward.

6. The Scab or Itch coming upon this Disease, confers much to the Cure thereof.

7. We need not doubt of their Health, in whom the Symptoms of the Disease are
not increased, but rather diminished.

CHAP. XVI. The Method of Curing.
AFter that we have made enquiry into the Cause and Prognostic of this
Disease, it now remains that we come to its Precaution, or prevention, and cure.

Whereas then the cause of this Affect does consist in the obstruction of the
Spinalis medulla, and the Imbecility of the nerves thence descended; the
Principal Indications as well preservatory as curatory are, that the nerves be
strengthened, and the Obstructions prevented, or taken away to this end,
Medicaments Cathartick, Phlebotomy, also Digestives, Diuretics, Diaphoretics,
and Specifics may be made use of, whose Forms and manner of Using, we shall set
down below.

As to what belongs to the Cure of the Disease, in the Institution thereof, we
must begin with Purgation; which is so much the more convenient in this Affect,
for that Phlegmatic Humors are for the most part congested in the lowest Belly
in great abundance, and the inward parts of the Abdomen are frequently affected
with strumous Tumors. Purgation may be ordained by Clysters, Emeticks, or
Purging Lenitives.

CHAP. XVII. The use of Clysters, and some Forms thereof.
IF the Belly be Costive, or infested with Colical Torments, let Clysters be
freque^tly made use of, which are not merely solutive, but moreover also, let
them be compounded of Alterants and Corroboratives. We will describe some forms
thereof.

A Laxative, Anodyne, and Carminative, Clyster.
Take of the Leaves of Mallows Mj. the Flowers of Melilot, Cammomil, Elder, of
each Pj. Annis-seds and Fennel seeds bruised of each, half a dram; Boil them in
a sufficient Quantity of new Cow's- milk. To 4.5. or 6. Ounces of the Colature,
add Brown Sugar, and Syrup of Violets, or Roses, of each one Ounce, mingle
them, make a Clyster to be injected Lukewarm, a long while after Meals.

Another.
Take the Root of Marsh mallow bruised, half an Ounce; the Leaves of Mallows,
and Pellitory of the Wall, of eaeh, half a handful; the Flowers of Chammomil,
and Elder, of each, a small handful; Carminative Seeds, two drams: boil them in
a sufficient Quantity of Posset-Ale. To 5, or 6, Ounces of the Colature, add of
the Lenitive Electuary, or Diacassia, half an Ounce: Fresh Butter six Drams:
mingle them: make a Clyster to be injected lukewarm.

Corroborant Clysters may be made after this manner.

A Corroborant Clyster.
Take of fresh Stone-horse dung one Ounce and an half; Flowers of Rosemary and
Sage, of each, a small handful; of Juniper berries, two Drams; Annis-seeds and
Fennel-Seeds, of each, half a Dram: Digest them warm and close stopped, with a
sufficient quantity of Posset Ale. In 4, 5, or 6, Ounces of the Colature,
Dissolve of brown Sugar, one Ounce, Fresh butter six Drams. mingle them; make a
Clyster: Moreover, six Drams of Calabrian Manna may be added, if you see cause.

Another.
Take 20, or 30, washed Hoglice: to which being bruised, pour on 4. or 5.
Ounces of Possetdrink made with White Wind. In the Expression dissolve of Brown
Sugar, one Ounce; Venetian Turpentine dissolved in the white of an Egg, one or
two Drams. Mingle them, make a Clyster to be injected luke warm.

CHAP. XVIII. The use of Emeticks or Vomitory Medicines, and some Forms thereof.
IF the Ventricle be loaded with vicious Humors, and they tend upward, let
Emeticks be exhibited; nevertheless so as in the Prescription thereof
Consideration must be had of the tender Age. Let the Vomitories consist rather
of Salt of Vitriol, and Wine of Squils, than of stibiated medicines; for that
it is not so safe to exhibit them to Infants, for fear of Convulsions; albeit
in some Cases stibiated Medicines may also be made use of.

A Gentle Vomitory.
Take of the wine, or Oxymel of Squils, from half an Ounce to an Ounce; which
being taken, half an hour after, let the Patient drink Posset-Ale in great
abundance; then with a Feather, or Finger, thrust down the Throat, provoke
Vomiting, and sometimes repeat it.

Another.
Take Oxymel of Squil's, from half an Ounce to an Ounce; If Vomiting succeed
not, half an hour after, give half a Scruple, or fifteen Grains of salt of
Vitriol, in a draught of Posset-Ale.

If strength will permit, stronger Emeticks may be used: As this that follows.

A stronger Vomitory.
Take of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum well depurated by settlement, from
one dram to two, according to the Age, and strength of the Patient; Oxymel of
Squills, three drams, or half an ounce; simple-water of Wall-nuts, or of the
lesser Gentory, six drams: Mingle them, make a Vomitory.

CHAP. XIX. Some Examples of Cathartics, or Purging Medicines.
A gentle Purgation (some days after a Vomitory, or else if Vomition be not
requisite) may be ordained, and repeated by Intervals.

A Gentle Purging Draught.
Take the Cream of Tartar, from ten Grains to fifteen; Augustan Syrup, or Syrup
of Succory with Rhubarb, from six drams to one ounce; mingle them: Let it be
taken very early in the morning, either by it self, or in a draught of
Posset-Ale.

Another.
Take Calabrian Manna, from half an ounce to an ounce; Vitriolated Tartar from
five Grains to ten; mingle them. Let the mixture be taken in the morning, in
Broth, or Posset - Ale.

A Purging Syrup.
R. Of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak, sharp-pointed dock, each six drams;
Bark of the Roots of Elder, Dwarf-Elder, of each half an ounce; Roots of
Osmondroyal, Male-fern, Succory, of each, half an ounce; The Herbs Agrimony,
Liver-wort, Speedwell, Hart's-tongue, Ceterach, of each, half a handful: Boil
them in three Pints of Springwater, to the Consumption of the third part. Let
the Liquor be strained into a Matrace, whereunto put of the Leaves of Senna,
two ounces, Rhubarb, one ounce, Dodder of Time, yellow Sanders, of each, two
drams; of Annisseeds, Fennel-seeds, of each on? dram; Salt of Worm wood, one
dram and a half: Infuse them warm, and close-stopt 12 hours; to the straining
cleared by settlement, add an equal quantity of Sugar; and by the mere
dissolution of the Sugar, or gentle boiling, make a Syrup according to Art. The
Dose is from 1, to 3, spoon-fulls, either by it self, or in some appropriate
Liquor.

A Purging Electuary.
To the abovementioned Purging Infusio^, add of Cassia, and Tamarinds,
extracted with part of the same Infusion, Calabrian Manna strained or purified,
and of the best Sugar, of each I ounce and a half; Evaporate them with a gentle
Heat to the Consistence of an Electuary. The Dose is, the Quantity of a
Wallnut, more or less according to its Operation.

Purgative Pills.
R: Of the Species of Hiera-Picra simplex, one dram; of the best Rhubarb
powdered, half a dram; vitriolated Tartar, one scruple, Gu^-Ammoniac dissolved
in Vinegar, fifteen Grains: With a sufficient quantity of Elixir Proprietatis
of Paracelsus, let a Pilulary Mass be made, whereof let from half a scruple to
a scruple be formed into Pills, and given at the hour of sleep.

A Bochet of Rhubarb, and yellow Sanders, made in proper distilled Waters, may
be made use of.

If the Patient be affected with Worms, or ^^^^mous Swellings, or there b^ any
suspicion of the Venereal Evil, the following Bolus may be exhibited between
whiles.

A Purging Bolus.
Take Mercurius dulcis, from six Grains to ten; Conserve of the Flowers of
Succory half a dram; mix them, make a Bolus. Let it be given very early in the
morning, the Patient drinking immediately after it a convenient Dose of the
Purging Syrup, or Infusion.

Another.
R. Mercurius dulcis, from six Gr. to ten; Rosin of Jalap or Scammony, from two
Grains to four; Chemical Oil of Juniper berries, one drop. Make a Powder, which
reduce into a Bolus with one dram of the Pulp of a coddled [or roasted] Apple,
or with Conserve of Violets. Let the Patient take it early in the morning.

CHAP. XX. Chirurgical Remedies.
AFter gentle Purgation, if the Patient be of a Sanguine Temper, Phlebotomy or
Bloodletting takes place. The Empiricks of our Nation, are wont to draw Blood
in a small quantity by scarifying the hollow part of the Ear, which they
perform with a bluntish Knife, rather than with a sharp Penknife, and that
they repeat twice or thrice, interposing the space or interval of about seven
days. Tho Practitioners do celebrate much this kind of Scarification, yet I
cannot tell but that Leeches profit as much or more. Neither do I suppose that
it is to be feared, that Leeches by their sucking would affect a greater Flux
of Blood toward the Head. For what Blood soever (by reason of their suction)
comes near to the Part which they are applied to, the same is evacuated by the
very suction: and as to the greater afflux of Blood, which is caused by the
fullness of the Vessels, that also takes place in Phlebotomy.

Moreover, Issues bring very great help in this Affect, and especially a
Fontinel excited between the first and second Vertebrae of the Neck; for so the
same being applied to the Origin of the Disease will be of more efficacy. The
use of Fonticles chiefly cousists in that the same conduce to evacuate the
superfluous Serositie of the Brain, and thereby to diminish its irregular
magnitude, and also to dry up the too great humidity of the Spinalis Medulla,
and consequently to corroborate the Nerves thence descended. A Seton may very
well supply the place of a Fontinel.

As for Vesicatories or Blisterplaisters, it is not to be doubted, but that
they will bring help, being applied to the Vertebrae of the Neck, and behind
the Ears. But their virtue is soon exerted, and the frequent use of them is too
troublesome and painful for Children.

Furthermore, Cupping-Glasses without Scarification applied according to the
whole length of the Spine, seem to be of no small Moment to correct the Cold
and moist temper of the Spinalis Medulla, and to take away the torpour of the
Nerves: Yea sometimes also I suppose they may be applied near the uppermost
Vertebrae of the Neck, with Scarification.

CHAP. XXI. Specific Alterants, [or Remedies peculiar to this Disease, being
such as alter and correct the Blood and Humors.]
BEsides Purging and Chirurgical Remedies, specific alterant Medicines may also
be used; to which Diaphoretics and Diuretics are sometimes to be added, some
Examples whereof we will set down.

Specific Remedies, which are found most effectual to cure this Malady, are
either Simple, or Compound; and indeed among the Simple ones, these following
are most approved.

Specific Remedies.
The Wood Guaiacum, and its Bark. Sassafras. Wood of the Lentick tree. Rosemary
wood. The knotty parts [or tops] of the Fir Tree. Root of China. Sarsaparilla.
The three sorts of Sanders. The Root of Osmond-Royal, or rather the Spikes or
little Fibers of its Roots. The Roots of Male-Fern, or rather the Buds just
bursting forth out of the Earth. Roots of, Grass. Asparagus. Eringo. Succory.
Bur-dock.
The Capillary Herbs, and especially the English black Maidenhair. Spleen-wort.
Wall Rue or Tent-wort. Hart's-tongue. Liver-wort. The Bark of Caper-roots. Male
Speed-well. Agrimony. Brook-lime. Watercresses. The Leaves and Flowers of
Sage. Rosemary. Archangel. Betony. Tamarisk.
The preparation of Steel, as its Salt or Vitriol. Tartar. Castoreum. The
Flowers of Brimstone. Earthworms. Hog-lice prepared. And the like.
Whereof Compounds may be formed after this manner.
A Decoction.
R. The Spikes of the Roots of Osmond-Royal, or the Roots of Male-Fern, or the
Buds of its Roots scarce yet burst out of the Ground, one handful: Boil the
same in a Pint of Milk, or Spring water to the Consumption of the third part.
Let the Colature be edulcorated with Sugar, and taken twice or thrice in a day.

Another.
Take Of the Leaves of Tee. one dram; of the flowers of Sage and of Betony, of
each half a dram. Whereupon, the same being put into a fit Vessel, pour of
Water, which has boiled a while, one pint: Infuse them close stopped, and
lukewarm, for about an hour's space. Let the Colature be edulcorated with
Sugar, and drank as the other.

A Bochet of the Roots of China Sarsaparilla, and Sassafras, boiled in Spring
water, may be made use of.

A Decoction.
Take of the fibers or spikes of the Roots of Osmond-Royal, roots of Bur-dock,
Grass-roots, and roots of Succory, of each one ounce; of the Herbs of
Male-speedwel, Agrimony, Hartstongue, Liver-wort, Maiden hair of each half a
handful: Of the shavings of Hearts horn, and Ivory of each half an ounce;
stoned Raisons one ounce. Boil them in four pounds of Spring Water, to the
consumption of the third part; add thereto of White Wind or Rhenish, half a
pound, and presently strain it into a fit Vessel; to which let there be put of
the leaves of Brook-lime, Watercresses, and of the Tops of the Fir Tree, of
each half a handful; of Juniper Berries, half an ounce; make an Infusion Warm
and close stopped for about two hours. Keep the Colature in Glasses well closed,
and edulcorate it at your pleasure: The Dose is, two or three Ounces at medical
hours.

Medicated Ale.
Take of the Wood of the Lentisk-tree, Rosemary; Roots of Sarsaparilla, of
Osmond-royal, or of Male-fern, of each, three ounces; Herbs, Agrimony,
Maidenhair, Speedwell, Hearts tongue; Sage, Betony, of each Mij. Tops of the
Fir Tree, Tamarisk, of each Mj. boil them in four Gallons of Ale to the
Consumption of one; let the Colature Ferment or Work, and then repose it in a
small Vessel, wherein hang a little bag, made of fine Linen and filled with the
following things, viz. Hog-lice washed in white wind, and lightly bruised No.
200. Juniper berries, ij. Nutmegs sliced No. 2 together with a piece of steel
or Iron to sink the Bag.

If there be any suspicion of the Seurvy, you likewise may put into the Vessel,
the leaves of Brooklime, and Watercresses, of each Mij. Let them remain there
about a fortnight; and then let the Liquor be taken for ordinary drink.

An Electuary.
Take Conserve of the roots of Succory, and of the flowers of Betony, of each
one ounce; Conserve of Rosemary-flowers, of the flowers of Tamarisk, and Rinds
of Lemmons, of each half an ounce; preserved Myrobalanes No. 2; of the compound
powder of Crabs-claws, one dram; Cream of Tartar, and flowers of Salt.
Ammoniac, of each half a dram; of yellow Sanders, j. with Syrup of Coral as
much as is sufficient make an Electuary: Let the Patient take the quantity of a
Nutmeg, in the morning, and at five a clock in the Afternoon, drinking
thereupon a draught of some proper Liquor.

A Powder.
Take of the Powder of prepared Hog-lice, two drams; of Nutmegs half an ounce;
of the flowers of salt Ammoniac, two scruples; make a Powder; the Dose is from
8 Gr. to 15, in some Apozeme, Broth or any other convenient Liquor.

Pills.
This same Powder may be reduced into a Pilulary Mass, with a sufficient
quantity of Capivius's Balsom, to be formed into little Pills: The Dose is
about a Scruple.

A Powder.
Take of the Roots of Osmond Royal, or of Male-fern, one dram and an half; of
the Roots of Male Peony one dram; Wood of Sassafras, yellow Sanders, Seeds of
Watercresses, of each, one Scruple; candied Orange. Peel, two drams; make a
Powder. The Dose is from half a Scruple to a Scruple as above.

Lozenges or Tablets.
Of the prescribed Powder you may form Lozenges with Seven times the weight of
white Sugar dissolved in black cherry-water, and boiled to a tabulary
consistence; each of them being in weight one dram: Let from half a dram, to a
dram be taken twice in a day, drinking after it some appropriate Liquor.

A Distilled Water.
Take of the root of Cuckoo pint, Male Peony, Osmond-royal, or Male-fern, of
each four ounces. Leaves of Sage, Betony Rosemary, watercresses, Brooklime,
Male-speedwell, Liver-wort, tops of the Fir Tree, of each, three handfulls; of
green Walnuts half a pound; washed Hog-lice three ounces; cleansed Earthworms,
one pound; of the best Castoreum one dram. To these being cut and bruised pour
six pounds [ viz. three quarts] of Posset Drink made with white wind: distill
them in a Common Still, let the whole Liquor be mingled: The Dose is from one
ounce to two ounces twice in a day, after the taking of some solid Medicine.

CHAP. XXII. Chemical Specifics; Also of Sweating and Bathing.
AMong the Remedies. which are approved in this Affect, that which was invented
by the honorable Boil called by the name of Ens Veneris) is exceeding famous.
It is composed of Salt Ammoniac, and edulcorated Colcothar, sublimed twice or
thrice together. The Dose is from three Grains to six, in some convenient
Liquor, at the hour of sleep: I suppose the efficacy of that Medicine chiefly
arises from the Salt Ammoniac, in as much as by reason of the very great
tenuity of its parts, it is highly useful to take away the Obstructions that do
procure this Malady: and it is likewise probable, that the Flowers of Salt
Ammoniac are sublimed together with the Colcothar, a certain narcotick Sulphur
of the Colcothar, of an Earthy or Copperlike nature or Quality, does ascend
together with the Salt Ammoniac: And that kind of Sulphur seems not very meet
for this Disease.

A certain Artificial Salt of an Ammoniac quality, and of notable virtue, may
be composed after this manner.

Take of the Volatile Salt of Harts-Horne, Blood, or Urine, a sufficient
quantity; upon which being put into a long Vial, pour rectified Spirit of Salt,
or of Sulphur rectified per campanam, drop by drop, until Ebullition can no
longer be excited; this Salt being resolved, let it be filtered, and by a
gentle heat reduced to the dryness of a Salt. The Dose is three or four Grains
very early in the morning, or at the hour of sleep, in some appropriated Liquor.

Furthermore, those things which consist of Volatile Salt purely saltish, bring
notable help in this Disease, in which rank are Spirit of Blood, of Hearts Horn,
of Salt Ammoniac, and the like: But above all, those Spirits being impregnated
with Amber, or Castoreum.

Elixir Proprietatis, with the Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or prepared after
the vulgar manner, may also be made use of, for as much as it is not only a
very good Digestive, but the same is likewise profitable to destroy Worms and
to hinder the Corruption of Humors, and gently to subduce the Belly, the Dose
is from six Grains to ten, in two Spoonfuls of a convenient Liquor.

If the Lungs are stuffed (as they are wont to be) with Viscid Humors, and the
Mesentery be affected with Strumous Glandules, the Balsome of Sulphur may be
exhibited; whereof three or four Drops are to be taken in some convenient
Liquor or Syrup.

In some Cases also the use of Steel is necessary, inasmuch as it is endued
with a notable opening Quality, and does not only help Concoction, but also
confirms and strengthens the tone of the Bowels, yet it is not to be used
without caution; for in the Cough, Plurisie, Obstruction of the Lungs, Hectic,
Fevers, and other Diseases of that kind, we must altogether abstain from the
use of Steel.

Unto the aforesaid Medicines Diaphoretics, or such as provoke Sweat, may
sometimes be added As the Decoction of Guaiacum, and others of that sort, which
may be taken in Bed, and Sweat procured suitable to the strength of the Patient.

Hitherto also may be referred the use of a natural Bath, such as the Bathonian
Wells, which are much commended to provoke Sweat, and to strengthen the Nerves
in this affect. And truly I have often found by observation, that the use of
the aforesaid Baths does very much conduce to allay the swelling of the
Abdomen, which in this Malady is wont to be very remarkable: Likewise
Artificial Baths made of Cephalic Herbs, and Tartar or Nitre boiled in Water,
may be made use of.

The following Fomentation is much approved; to wit, The sick Party being
placed in a Vessel sufficiently large: Put Malt which has been a while infused
in boiling Water, (as is usual in the Brewing of Beer, or Ale,) [or fresh
Grains] round about him, lukewarm, and let the Patient, almost covered
therewith, remain therein to Sweat.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Remedies that correct the Symptoms.
MOreover, consideration must be had of the Symptoms that are consequent to
this Disease; of which the most frequent is the Looseness or Flux of the Belly;
to the Cure whereof, the more gentle Catharticks, (such as the infusio^ of
Rhubarb, Tamarinds, and Sanders, or a Bolus compounded of them,) do principally
conduce; But sometimes also we must come to Astringents, and Opiates, Purgation
nevertheless and Vomiting being now and then premised; Forms whereof may be
found here and there amongst Authors.

Furthermore, Immoderate Sweat is wont to afflict the Patient in this Affect;
which, if it come upon the Fit of a Fever, may be Critical, and ought not
rashly to be restrained, but if the same flow inordinately and without cause,
it is a sign that the Body is oppressed with Cacochymical Humors; and in such
case that kind of Sweat is to be amended by Gentle Purgation administered
between whiles. But let Purging be chiefly instituted of Rhubarb: Vomiting also
may bring help here; neither are Aperitives, and such as help Concoction to be
omitted.

Laborious Dentition, or painful Breeding of Teeth, is familiar to this
Disease, and often induces a Fever. In which case, make gentle Evacuation,
chiefly with Clysters; although sometimes Purgation, and Vomiting also, (which
being gently provoked, is much approved) may be used. If a Tooth be about to
cut the Gum, Nurses are wont to rub the same with a piece of smooth Coral; but
the Root of Marshmallows, or of Sharp pointed Dock, may supply it is stead: And
sometimes it will be worth your while to make way for the Tooth ready to burst
out by Section. Likewise Epispastic or drawing Plasters applied behind the
Ears, bring ease. But if Dolor and Watchfulness do urge, Hypnoticks, such as
Syrup of Poppies, to the weight of one or two Drams, may be exhibited.

Besides internal Medicines and Chirurgical Remedies, External likewise are to
be used; of which rank are all sorts of Exercise. If strength will bear, let
walking be much used; or, at least, let the little Children play sitting, and
be exercised by tossing them to and fro in the Nurses Arms, and rocking him in
the Cradle: For, by Exercise, the Influx of the Blood and Animal Spirits, is
promoted to the Musculous Parts, where upon Heat is excited in the same ready
to languish. The Mass of Blood too is stirred up to a swifter Morion by the
constriction of the Muscles; and the same is worked up and down in the Lungs by
reason of the more vehement Respiration caused by Exercise, and is impregnated
with fermentative Particles; whereas, on the other side, the Blood by continual
Rest grows grumous, thick, or as it were clotted, and so becomes more apt to
cause Obstructions.

Frictions (or rubbing of the parts) which are performed with warm
Woollen-Clothes, are of no small moment in the Cure of this Disease. The Parts
to be rubbed are the Backbone, (which does principally suffer, as we have
shown,) and the Musculous Parts; but with this Caution, that you must forbear
to rub on that side of the Bones that stands outward, but the concave parts of
the Bones may be rubbed more liberally, the Reason whereof we have assigned
before.

Hitherto also belongs the Contrectation of the Hypochondria, whereby the
Bowels are sometimes lifted up, and sometimes depressed, by thrusting of the
Fingers-ends now and then under the False-Ribs: For by this means we prevent
the Liver and other Bowels from their preternatural growing to the Peritoneum,
or otherwise, which happens not seldom in this Affect, by reason of the
tension of the Hypochondria.

Moreover, Ligatures fitted to the Thigh and Leg upon the Knee, and to the Arms
upon the Elbow avail much; but they must be loose enough and foft, so as they
may not hinder the increment or thriving of the Part whereunto they are
applied: For the Utility of Ligatures consists in this; that they help to
revel the afflux of Blood from the Head, and to deduce it toward the
extenuated Parts To this Title may be efer'd Fasciatio^, or the Swathing of
certain parts; as likewise button'd-Boots, which help much not only to strengthen
the Parts, but further to correct the Crookedness of the Bones, and bending of
the Joints. But in the use of these, care must be taken, that they press down a
little the protuberant part of the Bone, but hardly touch the hollow part.

To erect the Trunk of the Body, Boddice may be made of two Clothes sewed
together, thick beset with Shingles, or Lath-like pieces of Whale-bone, which
must be fitted to the Bodies of the Infants, so as the Spine be held upright,
and the prominent Bones repressed.

Neither must we here omit the Artificial Suspension of the Body by the
assistance of a certain pendulous Instrument made after such a manner with
Swathingbands, that it crosses the Breast coming under the Armpits, and goes
about the Head, and under the Chin, and then receives the Hands with two
Handles, whereby the weight of the Body is sustained, partly by the Child's
hands, partly by his head, and partly by his Armpits.

Now at last let us set down some of those things which are outwardly to be
applied.

A Fomentation of any sort of Wine, as also of common Aqua vitae, does avail
much to corroborate the Nervous parts; apply the same to the debilitated Parts,
and especially to the Spine, and then anoint those parts with proper Oil or
Unguent, of which hereafter. In lieu of Wine, the following Decoction may be made
use of as,

A Fomentation.
Take of the root of Osmondroyal and Male Fern, each three ounces; of the
Flowers of Betony, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Watercresses, each, one handful;
of the Flowers of Chamomil, Melilot, and Elder, each a small handful;
Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, of each, half an ounce. Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Spring Water, to two pound; put thereto of Whitewine, or common
Aqua vitae, one pound. Keep the straining for use.

An Ointment for the debilitated Parts.
Take of the Leaves of Elder, Bay, Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary, Betony, tops of
Lavender, each two handfuls; Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, of ^ach, one ounce:
Put these being cut and bruised into a convenient Vesiel, with three pound of
May-butter, or fresh Butter unsalted, and half a pint of Aqua vitae; boylthem
gent lyto the consumption of the Aqua vitae: To the expression being yet hot,
add of Oil of Nutmegs made by expression, half an ounce; of Peruvian Balsom,
one dram; mix them, make an Unguent: Instead of May-butter, Beef-marrow, or
Deer's-suet, and Oil of Earthworms, or Fox-oyl, of each one pound and a half
may be substituted.

Apply Unguents pretty warm, before a clear fire, and rub them on with a hot
hand until they be dry; that it may penetrate the more, mix a little of some
proper Liquor with the same, in the time of using.

If the Abdomen be stretched out, and tumid, apply the following Ointment.

A Liniment for the Swelling of the Abdomen.
Take of the Oils of Capers, Wormwood, and Elder, each one ounce; of Vng. e
succ. aperitivis, or the Unguent above prescribed, one ounce and a half; of
Gum-Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, half an ounce: Make a Liniment; wherewith a
little portion of the following Liquor may be mingled in the time of using it.

A Decoction to be used with the Liniment.
Take of the Root of White Briony, one ounce; of the Leaves of Wormwood,
Centory, Sage, each, one handful; Flowers of Elder, and Melilot, of each a
small handful; of Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, each two drams: Boil them in
three pounds of Spring Water, to the wasting of half; add thereto of
Rhenishwine half a pint. Keep the straining for your use.

Whilst the Unguents are applied to the Hypochondria, let the Nurse handle the
Viscera or Bowels, as is before directed. Emplasters also can in this part
bring help;

A Plaster for the Hypochondria.
Take of the compound Emplaster of Melilot, as much as will suffice; spread it
on taw'd Leather, and apply it to the Hypochondria.

If there be a Tumor near the Region of the Liver; add to one Ounce of the
aforesaid Emplaster, of yellow Sanders powdered one dram; of Oil of Wormwood,
and Wax as much as suffices to make an Emplaster.

Another.
Take the Juice of Brooklime, Watercresses, Elder, and Wormwood, of each one
Ounce; Let the clarified Juices be reduced by a gentle heat, to the consistence
of an Extract; to which add of Gum-Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, and boiled to
a thickness, two ounces; of Venice Turpentine one ounce; of Yellow Sanders
powdered 2 drams, of Oil of Capers, and Wax as much as is sufficient: make a
Plaster to be applied as before.

If the Lungs be affected, Anoint the Breast with Unguent. Pectorale, or
Dialthaea, or both mixed together, wherewith at the time of inunction, you must
mix some oil of Nutmegs made by Expression.

A Pectoral Unguent.
Take of Green Liquorice, four ounces; of fresh unsalted Butter one pound,
Bruise them together in a stone Mortar, and macerate them in a Bath four hours,
then strain them; repeat this three times with an equal quantity of of fresh
Liquorice, Let the Ointment clarified accerding to art, be kept for use: Where
with in the time of using, you may mix an equal quantity of Vng. Pectorale,
with a little Oil of Nutmegs made by expression.

Forasmuch as this Disease does arise from the obstruction and debilitie of the
Spinalis Medulla, corroborating Fomentations, and Unguents, such as are now
already prescribed, may be thereto applied, wherewith Balsome of Tolu may be
mixed in a small quantity; such are Emplastrum Nervinum, de Betonica, as also
that which follows.

An Emplaster for the Spine.
Take of the first prescribed Ointment, two ounces; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in
Vinegar, and Burgundy-Pitch, of each half an ounce; Mastich, Frankincense, and
Caranna, of each two drams; of Castoreum, half a dram; of prepared Earthworms,
one dram and a half; of Salt Ammoniac, two drams: Wax enough to make an
Emplaster; spread a sufficient quantity of this upon taw'd-Leather, whose Form
may be varied; for as the superior or inferior Parts are infirm, the Plaster
is to be applied to the upper or lower part of the Spine, and sometimes
according to the whole length of it: And so much for the Method of Curing the
RICKETS.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TOUCHING WEIGHTS AND MEASURES Used in the Composition of
Medicines, and in the Exhibition of Medicinal Doses.

BY W.S.

Gradibus venit Incrementum.

OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Tho. Fickus
Bookseller. 1684.

An Appendix touching Medical Weights and Measures.
I. Of MEDICAL WEIGHTS.
THE Aestimation or Value of all things is deduced from Number, Weight, or
Measure. Now, as for Number, there is the same Reason and Account universally
dispersed throughout all the Regions of the World: But, as to Weight or
Measure, it is not so; for there is a vast Variety, every Government
vindicating it is proper Weight, and it is proper Measure, which bears the Name
or Title of it is peculiar Country. And whereas, above all things, whatsoever is
instituted for Medicinal use, it ought to be confined to sure and common Rules;
certainly then Weights should be established certain and common to all men,
that by a General Law and Custom, there may be a General Consent and Agreement
among all Nations; it being a Matter of no small moment, if we rightly consider
the Scope we aim at in the use of them: For upon these oftentimes depends the
Life, or Death, of the Patient.

Therefore, that a true Knowledge thereof may be had, we shall describe, First,
What kind of Weights Physicians and Apothecaries do ordinarily use; Secondly,
Their Contents or Ponderation, and their Marks, Notes or Characters; Thirdly,
And Lastly, the whole Series shall be comprehended in a formal Scheme or Table
adapted to the Memory: The like Method (as near as we can) shall be observed
when we come to treat of Measures.

1. In the first place then, you must by the way take notice, that to effect
the confirmation of a certain and common Rule as aforesaid, a Minute, or
smallest Weight, (from which, as from a Springhead, being augmented by
continual Addition, the rest do accrue) must be ordained; even as Geometry has
it is Punctum, whence all Lines have their Rise or Beginning; and Arithmetic
it is Unity, from which the large Family of Numbers derive their Pedigree.

The smallest Weight made use of in Physical Concerns, is termed a Grain, upon
which the other Weights do rely, as their Basis; and it is fit and expedient,
that the same should be constant, allowable and firm: Wherefore it cannot be a
Grain of Barley, Wheat, Vetch or Pulse, (as some foolishly imagine) by reason
that no Nation produces them of equal Weight; but that Minute Money-weight
which Goldsmiths call a Grain, (and in Latin may justly be termed Momentum, as
well as Granum,) is rated and accounted the same in all Nations throughout the
habitable Orb, which the sacred Hunger of Gold, and furious Lust after Riches,
does keep unviolated and uncorrupted, and that too by Marks and Patterns
tranferr'd to all Places.

From this Minute Weight, viz, a Grain, do arise the greater, (that is to say)
the Scriptule or Scruple, the Dram or Dram, the Ounce, and the Pound. Even as
many Grains of Corn constitute an an Ear, and many Ears create a Crop for the
painful Husbandman: So a more certain Addition of Grain-weights make up a
Scruple, certain Scruples a Dram, and so forward, as I am about to set down.
And no doubt for that reason, the word Granum is metaphorically attributed to
the smallest Weight, from a discreet and gradual augmentation whereof (as from
a Fountain) all the rest do flow:

2. Having thus laid the Foundation of our Work, we (loving method) come next
to speak of the Scriptule or Scruple, formerly consisting of twenty four
Grains, which the word (...), used by the Grecians pro scriptulo, does plainly
denote; and for that reason Scriptules or Scruples are called by them (...),
because a Scruple then did, and now ought to consist of as many Grains or
Minute-weights, as they have Characters or Letters in their Alphabet: But now
adays the same retains but Twenty Grains. So then it is not incredible that the
ancient Weight has been diminished and adulteraetd through the Avarice of
Druggists and others who buy their Commodities by the greatest Weight they can,
and vend the same by as light ones as they dare.

Next in order follows the Dram or Dram, in which are contained Three
Scruples; and so consequently Sixty Grains.

To this we subjoyn the Ounce Weight, wherein are comprehended, Eight Drams, or
Twenty four Scruples or Four Hundred and Eighty Grains.

And lastly, the Physical Pound (which is Troy-weight) retains only Twelve
Ounces, and by this most aqueous Liquors are measured, as shall be shown
hereafter: But the Druggists and Grocers Pound (being Aver dupois-weight) does
consist of Sixteen Ounces; and is indeed generally made use of among the
Apothecaries. Wherefore we contract the whole Series of our buisness in this
manner.

A Grain is the least Weight usually prescribed in Physic, and is thus noted,
Gr.

A Scruple has Twenty Grains, and is marked thus,.

A Dram weighs Three Scruples, and has this Character,.

An Ounce containing Eight Drams, bears this Signature,.

A Pound-Troy, (of which we shall take notice in this place, as solely de jure
bono appertaining to Medical Ponderation,) contains Twelve Ounces, and is
known by this mark, lb.

3. That I may not frustrate the Reader's expectation, it now remains that I
present to his view the following Table of Troy-weight, and withal declare the
use of it.

The Table of WEIGHTS.
The Characters Gr. 1 Pound contains 12 96 288 5760 1 Ounce contains 8 24 480 1
Dram contains 3 60 1 Scruple contains 20

This Table needs no Explication; but, as for it is Use or Application, it shall
be made manifest by Examples, for the sake of Tyroes and others who may stand
in need thereof.

I. Example.
AN Apothecary made up a Pilulary Mass weighing one Pound and a half; he was
requested by a Physician living in the Country, to convey the same to him
(formed into Pills) in little Boxes, viz. a Dram in each Box. Now to know how
many Boxes are required; or how many Drams the said Mass will produce. Seek the
Denomination or Title I Pound (in words at length) toward the left hand, and
this Character on the top, and at the Angle of meeting you will find 96 the
Number of drams contained in I Pound; to which if you add 48 the half-number
for the Half-pound, the Aggregate will be 144 the Number sought for.

2. Example.
A Physician prescribed a Specific Powder, whose Composition weighed ij, iij,
and iss. Half a Dram at a time thereof to be taken by the Patient in a proper
Vehicle: The Quoery is, how many Doses were contained in the whole Composition?

Looking into the foregoing Table in manner aforesaid, you will find the
matter thus; having respect to the number given, if it transcend Unity.

ij. contain 32 Doses or Half-Drams. iij. 6 iss. 1

In all 39 Doses.

II. Of MEASVRES.
HAving discussed all ambiguity as touching Medical Ponderation, we shall with
the more ease and brevity treat of Measures; so much dependence have they ou
the former, that without the knowledge of those, no certain Rule can be given
for these.

1. Whereas great and uncertain is the variety of them, the Use of many is, not
without cause, utterly abolished; and instead of those Concave Bodies,
wherewith the Ancients were wont to proportionate both Dry and Liquid
Substances, the modern Physicians every where usurp Concave Measures, whose
Contents are correspondent to Troy-weights, some whereof are capacious of one
Pound-weight, some of two Pounds, others of three or more Pounds; yea, others
containing smaller Weights to wit, Ounces, or Ounce, and half-Ounce, to measure
aqueous or oleous Liquids withal, referring Arid things to Weight: If lesser
Proportion be exacted, a Guess may sometimes serve turn; where it is
ineffectual or dangerous to confide to Conjectures, the same is precisely
performed by small Weights, all things being duly balanced.

2. As in the Description of Weights, we began with the Grain, or smallest; so
treating of Measures for Liquids, (those for Arids being for the most part
exploded) we deem it expedient to begin with the greatest, viz. the Wine
Gallon; and for brevitie's sake shall set down it is Division, Sub. divisions,
and Characters, as follows.

The Greater Measures.
A Gallon Measure contains 2 Pottles or 8 Pounds. A Pottle 2 Quarts 4 Pounds. A
Quart 2 Pints 4 Pounds.

The Smaller Measures.
The Pint measure contains 1 Pound-Troy, or 12 Ounces. The Pint 6 Ounces. The
Pint 3 Ounces. The ha. P. 1 Ounce and. The Ounce 1 Ounce. The Ounce Ounce.

The said Measures are usually expressed by the Marks or Characters of the
Weights to which they are applicable; as by the subsequent Table (which
likewise, as that of Weights preceding is sufficiently explanatory in it self,)
does manifestly appear.

3. And so we come gradually to the Mensuration-Table it self; and shall
propose one Question, the Resolution whereof will give light enough, as
touching the Use of it.

A Table of MEASVRES for Liquids.
lb. S 1 Gallon is equivalent to 8 96 192 1 Pottle 4 48 96 1 Quart 2 24 48 1
Pint 1 12 24 Pint 0 6 12 Pint 0 3 6 Quarter 0 1 3 1 Ounce 0 1 2 Ounce 0 1

A precious Liquor drawn off per Alembicum to the quantity of 3 Quarts, 1 Pint,
1 half. Pint, 1 quarter-Pint, was reposed unciatim or Ounce by Ounce for common
Sale; now it is demanded, how many Ounce. Bottles were requisite for it is
reposition? Answer 93. For

2 Quarts or 1 Pottle is answerable to 48 In all 93 Ounces. 1 Quart 24 1 Pint
12 Pint 06 Pint 03

Note, that Oil is lighter than Wine by a ninth part; and Honey is weightier
than Wine by the half: So that whatever Measure contains of Wine 9 Ounces,
receives of Oil but 8 Ounces, and is capable to hold 13 Ounces and an half of
Honey.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT may be expected, that I should add an Interpretation of the Grecian, Roman,
and Arabian Weights and Measures, for the better understanding of some ancient
Authors; but (they being in these days altogether obsolete,) I shall at present
superlede.

FINIS.
The most difficult Terms of Art, belonging to the afore-going Treatise and
Appendix, Alphabetically Explained.
ABdomen. The lowest Cavity of the Body called the Paunch or Belly, severed
within, from the Breast by the Midriff, and bounden above by the Heart-pit, and
beneath by the Share-bones. Aliment. Nourishment. Alterants or Alteratives.
Medicines that change or alter the Discrasy or evil Disposition of the Blood.
Anodyne. That eases Pains. Aperients or Aperitives. Medicines that open, or
take away Obstructions. Aphorisms: Short general Rules. Arteries. Mensbranous
Spermatical Vessels, which by Pulsation conveigh away the Blood from the Heart
to the Veins. Ascites: A kind of Dropsy wherein the Abdomen is swelled like a
Bottle, from a watriss humor contained within the Cavity thereof. Dr. Willis.
Asthma: It is a difficult and pursie Breathing, with a great shaking of the
Breast, and for the most part without any Fever. D. W. Astringents. Binding
Medicines. Atrophy: A Consumption of the Flesh, when the same wastes away, and
the Food taken in does not nourish. Bolus: So much of an Electuary or other
solid Medicine as the Patient may well take at one time in his Mouth.
Cacochymical humors. i. e. Evil or vicious humors. Carminative: That
expels Wind. Carotid Arteries: Two Arteries in the Neck that go up to the
Brain. Cartilage: It is a similar Part; Cold, dry and void of sense, flexible;
and not so hard as a Bone; called also a Gristle or Tendrel, as of the Ear or
Nose. Chirurgical: Belonging to Surgery. Colature: It is taken for any
Liquor slrained, or separated from its Feculency, Sediment, or more gross
Ingredients. Concoction: 'Digestion. Concretion: A gathering together or
congealing of any substance. Corroborant or Corroborative: Strengthening, or
confirming. Costive: Bound in Body. Cubit: The two Bones of the Arm; to wit,
The lesser above called Radius, reaching from the Shoulder to the Elbow; and
larger below called Ulna, reaching from the Elbow to the Wrist. Dentition:
Breeding of Teeth. Diaphoreticks: Medicines that dissolve and send forth
Humors by Transpiration or breathing through the Pores; that is to say, such
as cause or procure Sweat. Digestives: Medicines that concoct, digest, or
prepare the Humors to be corrected or evacuated. Diuretics: Medicines that
provoke Urine; or cause to piss often. Dolor: Grief, Pain or Ache. Dose: A
quantity of Physic to be given at one time. Edulcorated: Sweetened, or made
sweet with Sugar, Honey, and the like. Emeticks: Medicines causing a Vomit;
called also Vomitories. Empiticks: Quacks, Post-doctors, or Mountebanks.
Enervation: A weakening or enfeebling. Epispastic: Attractive, or Drawing.
Fasciation: Swathing. Fonticles or Fontinels: Issues. Friction: A rubbing of
the Parts. Glandules: Kernels or soft spungy Substances in the Body appointed
to receive excrementitious humors. Hypnoticks: Medicines that procure or
conciliate Sleep. Hypochondria: That part of the Belly and Sides under the
shorts Ribs. Hypothesis: The Cause, Ground, or Supposition, whereon we rely in
the framing of an Argument. Intercostal Muscels: Muscles placed between the
Ribs, in that form as in Fig. 10. Intercostal Nerves: The ninth or last Pair of
Nerves so called because it marches down by the Roots of the Ribs, and betwixt
every Rib it receives a Branch from the Spinal Marrow. Jugular Veins: Certain
Veins in the Neck so called. Laxative: Loosening. Liniment: A soft Ointment.
Ligature: Bandage, or Swathing of any I art. Medicament: A Medicine.
Mesenterium: The Mesentery. It is a membranous Part, situate in the middle of
the lower Belly, serving not only for conveying some Vessels to the Intestines,
and others from them; but also it ties most of the Guts together so
artificially, that for all their manifold Windings they are not entangled and
confounded. The Veins it contains are called the Mesaraick Veins. Muscle: Is a
dissimilar Part, [to wit, whose Portions are neither of the same Substance, nor
the same Denomination, for it is composed of Flesh, Nervous Fibers, and a
Tendon;] and the proper Instrument of Voluntary Motion. Nerve: It is a simple
Spermatical part, called a Sinew. Nervous Liquor: It is the Nutritious Juice of
the Nerves. Nutriment or Nutrition: Nourishment. Opiates: Meaicines wherein
Opium is an Ingredient; and is often taken for any Medicine that procures
Sleep. Parenchyma: A fleshly Substance, and chiefly of the Liver, Spleen, and
Lights. Peritonaeum: The inmost membranous Coat of the Belly. Phlebotomy:
Breathing of a Vein, or Blood-letting. Phthisis or Phthisick: It is properly, a
withering away of the whole Body, arising from an Ulcer, or other ill Formation
of the Lungs. Dr. Willis. Pleura: A thin Membrane that investeth the Ribs on
both sides. Prognostic A fore knowledge, or understanding of the future State
of a Disease, founded on the due consideration of the present State. Psoas: Two
great Muscles sited in the inward part of the Loins. Purulent: Mattery, or foul
Corruption. Respiration: An Action whereby the Air is received in, and driven
forth of the Lungs, called Breathing. Scarification: A cutting or Lancing.
Serositv: Moisture. Specifics: Remedies proper to any one peculiar Disease.
Spine: The Backbone. Spinalis Medulla: The Pith of the Backbone, called the
Spinal Marrow. Sternum: The Breast Bone. Strumae, and Strumous Swellings: Hard
Kernels, or Swellings. Tibia: The Bone of the Leg, called the Shank or
Shin-bone. Veneral-Evil: The French Pox, or Modish Disease. Ventricle: The
Stomach. Vertebrae of the Neck. The 7 Bones of the Neck, behind the lowermost
whereof is joined to the uppermost Vertebrae of the Back, which are in number
12. Vesicatories: Medicines that raise Blisters. Viscera: The Bowels, to wit,
The Heart, Liver and Lungs. Ung. e Succ. aperitivis: An Ointment of Opening
Juices.
The Index, or Table of the CONTENTS.
THE Proeme. Page 1

CHAP. I. Of the time when, and place where the Disease Rhachitis had it is
first Rise, and who are most subject thereto. Page 3 CHAP. II. Of the Signs or
Symptoms of the Disease. Page 4 CHAP. III. Of the Cause of the Disease: That it
consists not in the naughtiness of the Blood; nor in the depraved
Constitution of the Parts. Page 8 CHAP. IV. That the Nerves, as well as the
Blood do help to nourish, and this Disease does peculiarly depend upon the
Defect of the Nervous Influx. Page 11 CHAP. V. The Definition or Description of
the Rhachitis; together with the Cause thereof: Wherein is showed, that it
proceeds not from the faultiness of the Brain; but from the Obstruction of the
Spinalis Medulla. Page 14 CHAP. VI. The Reasons of the Symptoms; and first, of
the too great augmentation of the Head. Page 17 CHAP. VII. Of the Swelling, or
puffing up of the Abdomen. Page 18 CHAP. VIII. Of Strumous Glandules, or hard
Kernels. Page 20 CHAP. IX. Of the Crookedness of the Bones. Dr. Glisson's
Opinion touching the same is set down. Page 24 CHAP. X. The Author's Opinion
etc. Page 28 CHAP. XI. Why the Breast grows straight or narrow, and acuminated.
Page 38 CHAP. XII. Of the Asthma, Pursiness, or shortness of Breath. Page 41
CHAP. XIII. From what Cause the Imbecility of the Body does arise. Page 42
CHAP. XIV. Why Elderly Persons are not molested with this Disease. Page 44
CHAP. XV. The Prognostic of the Disease. Page 46 CHAP. XVI. The Method of
Curing. Page 49 CHAP. XVII. The Use of Clysters, and some Forms thereof. Page
51 CHAP. XVIII. The Use of Emetics or Vomitory Medicines, and Forms thereof.
Page 55 CHAP. XIX. Some Examples of Catharticks, or Purging Medicines. Page 57
CHAP. XX. Chirurgical Remedies. Page 63 CHAP. XXI. Specific Alteratives. Page
67 CHAP. XXII. Chemical Specifics; also of Sweating and Bathing. Page 78 CHAP.
XXIII. Of Remedies that correct the Symptoms. Page 84
In the Appendix. Of Medical Weights. Page 1 Of Measures. Page 12


