THE CAUSE and CURE OF Strife and Divisions.

Being the Substance of Two SERMONS, PREACHED In London, March the 12th and
26th, 1695.

By RICHARD MAYO, Minister of God's Word.

Blessed are the Peacemakers,

Matthew. 5.9. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, near Mercers Chapel, at the lower-end of Cheap Side, 1695.

TO THE READER.
THE following Sermons were Composed (as some very well know) under the
disadvantage of a great hurry of Affairs, wherein I was unavoidably engaged. I
had not the least thought of Printing them, when I Preached them: But some that
heard them, (being induced more, as I suppose, by the seasonableness of the
Subject, than any thing else) importuned me so to do; and when Entreaties could
not prevail, they threatened me into an unwilling compliance, by declaring their
fixed Resolutions of doing it for me: Hereupon I was loath that these Sermons
should be thrust forth into the World by their hands, and so have their
Errata's, as well as my own Imperfections, to answer for.

I am not so vain as to think, that others will receive them as favorably
altogether as some heard them; but yet, I hope, they will be entertained with
somewhat of that charity: The recommending of which, is the design of them, and
of

R. M.

BOOKS Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns near Mercers
Chapel, at the lower-end of Cheap Side.
1. THE Life and Death of Edmund Staunton, D. D. To which is added, First, His
Treatise of Christian Conference. Secondly, His Dialogue betwixt a Minister and
a Stranger.

2. A Plain Answer to this Practical Question, What course may a Christian take
to have his Heart quickened and enlarged in Secret Prayer?

3. Two Conferences: One, Betwixt a Papist and a Jew. The other, Betwixt a
Protestant and a Jew. In two Letters. These three published by Mr. Richard Mayo.

4. Free Justification by Christ. Written in Latin, by John Fox, Author of the
Book of Martyrs. Translated into English for the benefit of those who love
their Souls, and would not mistake in so great a Point.

5. The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons.

6. Charity, in Reference to other Men's Sins. Both by Mr. John How, Minister of
the Gospel.

7. A Discourse: The Design of which is, To revive Love among Protestants of
all Persuasions. By Nathaniel Vincent, Minister of the Gospel.

8. The Little Peacemaker, discovering Foolish Pride, the Makebate. By
Charles Morton, Minister of the Gospel.

9. The Kingdom of God among Men. A Tract of the Sound State of Religion, or
that Christianity which is described in the Holy Scriptures. By John Corbet,
late Minister of the Gospel.

10. Church Concord: Containing, First, Disswasives from unnecessary Divisions,
and the real Concord of Moderate Independents with Presbyterians. Secondly, The
Terms necessary for Concords among all true Churches and Christians. By Mr.
Richard Baxter.

THE CAUSE and CURE OF DIVISIONS.
1 COR. III. v. For whereas there is among you Envying, and Strife and
Divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as Men?


THE Apostle Paul, as he traveled from place to place, preaching the Kingdom
of God, he came to the ancient City of Corinth, the Metropolis of Achaia, now
called Morea, and there he tarried a Year and six Months. The reason (it may
be) of his long stay in that City was this, God had told him in a Vision, that
he had much people in that place, and that he would be with him there. Here he
planted a famous Church, which was afterward watered by Apollo. A Church that
came behind no other in Spiritual Gifts, they were enriched in all utterance
and all knowledge. Nevertheless, in this fair Garden there sprang up many
noxious Weeds, such as Paul never planted and Apollo never watered, and to be
sure God never blessed.

Particularly, the Text tells us, there were envying, strife and divisions
amongst them; they were broken and crumbled into Parties and Factions, some
said they were of Paul, and others said they were of Apollo: and hereby they
made it appear, that they were carnal, and walked as Men. So much shall serve
for the contexture of these words.

In the Text it self, you may take notice of a Crimination and of an
Interrogation. The Crimination is in the former part of the Verse, there are
amongst you envying, strife and divisions. The Interrogation is in the latter
part, seeing it is so with you, are ye not carnal, and walk as Men?

He lays three things to the charge of these Corinthians.

The first is envying, or envy, ((...),) the word is sometimes used in a good
sense, but here it is to be taken in a bad sense. So it is also in the 13th
Chapter of this Epistle, v. 4. and in 2 Cor. 12.20. and in many other places.
In the Epistle of James, the Epithet (...) is added to it, which we render
bitter envying.

The second Evil that he charge these Corinthians with is strife, ((...),)
the word is rendered contention in 1 Cor. 1.11 there he says, that it had been
declared to him, that there were contentions among them. It seems, there was
not only envying in their Hearts, but that brake out into contentious words and
actions.

The third Evil is divisions, ((...),) the word is rendered seditions, in Gal.
5.20. and in the Margent of your Bibles there it is rendered factions. These are
the three evil Distempers that did rage, if they did not reign, amongst the
Corinthans.

Hereupon the Apostle does sharply interrogate and reprehend them: Seeing these
Evils are found among you, Are ye not carnal and walk as Men? Let me speak a
little to each of these Phrases. Are ye not carnal? are not these things works
of the flesh? and don't they argue you to be carnal and fleshly? his way of
speaking has a quickness in it. Thrice he puts this Question to them in the
compass of two Verses: But how is it to be understood? In the first Chapter he
calls them Saints, and says they were sanctified in Christ Jesus; how is it
then, that he tells them here they were carnal? To this, I answer, They were so
comparatively. If they were compared with more spiritual Christians, then they
were but carnal: As one of competent knowledge, if he be compared to a great
Scholar, he is but ignorant; there is Flesh in those that are regenerate, as
well as Spirit, the one lusts, or wars against the other. And so far as the
Flesh prevails in God's own Children, they may be said to be carnal.

It follows, Do ye not walk as Men? Why, how would the Apostle have them walk?
Not as mere Men, but as Christians and as Saints. It is as if he had said, It
does not become you, who are Saints, and called out of the World, to walk as
the Men of the World walk, and to do as they do. If they be envious, you must
not be envious; if they are contentious and quarrelsom, you must not be
contentious and quarrelsom. They that are Saints and would be so accounted,
they must behave themselves as more than mere Men.

Thus I have a little discanted upon the Terms in the Text. There are three
Observations that are obvious to every Eye.

Obs. 1. That Envy, or Envying, is the Cause and Companion of Strife and
Divisions. Obs. 2. That Strife and Divisions are often found in the Churches of
Christ, and among particular Christians. Obs. 3. That so far as these prevail
in any, they are carnal and walk as Men.
It Is the second of these Observations that I shall insist upon, and in the
handling thereof I shall touch a little upon the first and the third. This then
is the Point before us,

That Strife and Divisions are often found in the Churches of Christ, and among
particular Christians. This is a Doctrine that you should Hear, and we should
Preach, with weeping Eyes, and with broken Hearts.

Let this be premised, That I shall not meddle with Civil Contentions, such as
are in Kingdoms and Commonwealths: But with Religious (or, rather, Irreligious)
Contentions and Divisions, such as are in Churches and amongst particular
Christians: And these are of two sorts, either when Christians differ in
Doctrine and Opinion, or else when, though they agree pretty well in Opinion,
yet they break the Bonds of Love and Peace, they fall into Factions and
Parties, and live in Malice and Uncharitableness; having (as one expresses it)
Rancour in their Hearts, Revilings in their Mouths, Rage and Rudeness in their
Carriage, one toward another. Thus it was in the Church of Corinth, and
amongst these Corinthians. The Apostle tells them, 1 Cor. 11.18. that he heard
there were Divisions amongst them, ((...)) Schisms and Rents. And then again,
in 1 Cor. 1.11. he tells them it was declared to him by them of the House of
Chloe, (You see he tells them from whom he had this Relation, he quotes his
Authors.) that there were contentions among them, ((...)) strifes and quarrels.
And then again, in the Text he tells them, that there were not only strifes and
contentions, but divisions and factions among them. And in the next Verse he
does particularize and instance in some of these Divisions and Factions; some
of them said they were of Paul, and others they were of Apollo. He does not
here find fault with their respecting one Minister more than another: it cannot
be otherwise, but Christians must needs esteem them most by whom they receive
most good, by whose Ministry they have been converted and brought home to God.
How could these Corinthians but honor Paul, when Paul himself says in the
next Chapter, that he had begotten them through the Gospel, and if they had
never so many instructers, yet he was their Father. Again, It is not possible
but Christians should respect some Ministers more than others, because of their
relation to them, and because of their excelling Gifts and Graces, and the like.

You Will say then, Where lay the fault of these Corinthians, when some of them
said they were of Paul, and others of them they were of Apollo? Why their fault
seems to lie in this, that they cried up Paul and Apollo in a factious siding
way. They had (it may be) their persons in admiration; they made them Heads of
Parties, and were ready to call themselves after their Names; it is as if some
had said, they were Paul's Disciples; and others had said, they were Apollo's
Disciples and Followers. Though here they are brought in saying no more than we
are of Paul, and we are of Apollo, yet doubtless there were diverse of them that
upon occasion did enlarge themselves upon this subject. Methinks I hear a
factious Corinthian speaking in this wise.

Oh, what an incomparable Person or Preacher is Paul! How am I ravished with
the gracious words that come out of his mouth! Next to the seeing of Christ in
the flesh, there is nothing more to be desired than to hear Paul from the
Pulpit: He speaks as if he had a Window into the Hearts of his Hearers, as if
he were within a Man, and supplied the place of Conscience: He is a true
Gospel-Preacher; how sweetly does he display the Grace, the free Grace of God,
and the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

As for Apollo, he is a mere Flash, a tinkling Cymbal; and let me tell you
withal, that he is an Arminian, a legal Preacher, one that preaches nothing
but Works. Well, for my part, I am of Paul, I am his Disciple. Apollo is not
worthy to be named the same day with him.

Another says, when he has done: Well, commend me to Apollo; for my part, I am
of Apollo. He is ((...),) an eloquent Person, a most rhetorical and
golden-mouthed Preacher; he charms his Hearers, and chains their Ears to his
Lips; by the fluency and variety of his Expressions, he does captivate their
Hearts and Affections. Moreover, he is ((...)) fervent in spirit; he has not
such a drowsy, dreaming way of Preaching, as some Men have. Sometimes he is a
Boanerges, a Son of Thunder, and sometimes he is a Barnabas, a Son of
Consolation. As for Paul, though he be called an Apostle, he is but a dull
Preacher in comparison; though his Writings are weighty, yet his Speech is
contemptible.

And besides this, I must tell you, he is an Antinomean; he cries down the
righteousness of the Law, and makes light of personal and inherent
Righteousness. Well, let who will be of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am one of his
Disciples. I don't say, that such as this is the Language of any of the
Citizens of London; but this or such like was the Language of the Citizens of
Corinth.

The factiousness of these Corinthians is farther exemplified by that parallel
place in 1 Cor. 1.12. there you read how every one of them said, I am of Paul,
and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. By every one of them, he
means many or several of them. Here are two more mentioned than were before,
and they are Cephas and Christ. By Cephas, is meant Peter. We don't read, that
he was ever at Corinth; how then came he to be in such request among the
Corinthians? To this it is said, that some of the Corinthians, who believed in
Jesus Christ, were Jews, and because Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision,
therefore they magnified him, and said they were his Disciples. But what did
they mean, who said they were of Christ? This is commendable in persons, to
call themselves after his Name, to own themselves to be his Disciples; it is no
fault in a Man to call Christ Master, and to profess himself a Christian.
Therefore some of the Ancients did put a good sense upon this Clause:
Chrysostom thinks this was Paul's own saying, I am of Christ.

But all our modern Expositors, with good reason, do censure them also who said
they were of Christ, because they spoke it factiously and schismatically; they
said they were of, or for Christ, in opposition to his Ministers; they
pretended to the immediate teachings of Christ, and had no need of the Ministry
of such as Paul, Apollo, or Cephas. This is the manner of some in our days, and
it might be the way and manner of some in those days to despise the Ministry
and Ordinances of Christ, under a pretext of the immediate enjoyment of Christ,
and inspirations of his Spirit.

I meet with some Expositors that give this farther account of those who said
they were of Christ, and so came under the Apostle's reprehension: they were
such as did appropriate Christ to themselves, and those of their own
persuasion; so the Donatists of old are said to do. But whither have I been
carried with tracing the footsteps of these factious Corinthians? Let me return
to what I was upon, that is, to show you the commonness of Contentions and
Divisions in Churches, and among particular Christians. It was much after the
same manner at Rome, as it was at Corinth: the believing Romans had their
Quarrels and Contentions about observing of Days, and eating of Meats: See the
whole Fourteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; the differences amongst
them did grow to a very great height, the stronger sort did despise the
weaker, and the weaker sort did judge and censure the stronger. The like
Divisions and Differences there were amongst the Galathians. The Mosaical
Ceremonies were a Bone of Contention among them; about these and other things
they snarled so long, till they were ready to bite and devour one another, and
were in danger to be consumed one of another, V. Gal. 5.15. The Ephesians also
were not free from these Contentions and Factions: Of their own selves did Men
arise, speaking perverse things, and drawing away Disciples after them, Acts
20.30. In other Churches matters were much at the same pass, as I might show
you; and this happened (as one observes) whilst the Blood of Christ was yet
warm, and several of the Apostles were yet alive. And as there were these
Janglings and Contentions in Churches, so also they were not wanting amongst
particular Christians: What a falling out was there betwixt Paul and and
Barnabas? There was such a Paroxism, so sharp a Contention betwixt them, that
they could not keep company together, but they departed asunder one from
another. In the primitive times, the Christians were no sooner delivered from
the bloody Persecution of their Enemies, but they fell a persecuting one
another. Socrates tells us, in his Ecclesiastical History, how, when
Constantine came to the Nicene Council, the Members of that Council were
quarelling together and libelling one another, to the great grief of that good
Emperor. Chrysostom and Epiphanius were so angry one with another, that
Epiphanius wished, that Chrysostom might never die a Bishop; and Chrysostom
wished, that Epiphanius might never go home alive: And it fell out to both
accordingly. Jerome and Ruffinus, who were once very intimate and great Friends,
by and by they fell out, and were at Daggers draw; they railed and wrote one
against another. Austin writing to Jerome about this matter, he bewails it with
very pathetical Expressions: Woe is me, (says he) that I cannot meet you two
together; I would fall down at your feet, and beg of you, for your own sakes,
for Christ and his Churches sake, that you would be reconciled one to another.

In later times, Christians were no sooner crept out of Popish Darkness and
Superstition, but they fell together by the ears amongst themselves: What
bitter Strife and Contentions were there betwixt Luther and Zwinglius, and many
others of the eminent Reformers. So that Unity is no infallible Mark of a true
Church: There may (as one says well) be Unity out of the Church of Christ; and,
on the other hand, Contention and Division may be in it.

Give me leave a little to enquire into the Causes of Contentions and
Divisions, that are in Churches and among particular Christians.

1. The first great cause hereof is the Devil; you may plainly see his cloven
foot in them; he is that envious one that sows the Seeds of Discord in the
Field of the Church; he labors to keep his own Kingdom in Peace, and to cause
Commotions and Divisions in the Kingdom of Christ: like a Salamander, he likes
to live in the Fire of Contention. Though we use to speak of the Devil in the
Singular Number, yet there is a Plurality of Devils, an innumerable company of
those wicked Spirits, whose main province it is to promote Contentions amongst
God's People. I doubt not but there be Legions of them in London, who attend at
this day upon this very Service. They put Enmity betwixt Christians and
Christians, they fill them with Envying, Strife and Divisions. Some say, the
Devils cause Storms and Tempests in the Air: Sure I am, these blustering Storms
of Contention, that are in the Christian World at this day, and particularly in
England and London, are raised by these Evil Spirits.

As the Devil has his Angels, so he has his Agents also among the Children of
Men, who push forward these Contentions and Divisions: All Places are full of
such Boute-feus. The Scripture calls them ((...)) Devils, who by their Lies and
Slanders, and such like means, do sow Discord among Brethren.

2. Christians themselves are the causes of their Contentions; as the Lord said
of the Israelites, that their destruction was of themselves: So I may say of
Christians, their Divisions are of and from themselves. I might here show you
how their different Education, their different Interests, their different
Tempers and Constitutions, do occasion Divisions amongst themselves and one
another: but let me rather show you how their unmortify'd Corruptions are the
main causes hereof. These divide Men from God, and from one another also. James
4.1. There the Apostle asks a Question, and resolves it himself: From whence
come Wars and Fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your Lusts,
that war in your Members? The Interrogation has the force of an Affirmation;
it is as if he had said they do certainly come from thence. This is true, not
only of those Wars and Fightings that are in Kingdoms and amongst Princes, but
of those Janglings and Contentions that are in Churches and amongst particular
Christians.

Let me instance in some particular Lusts and Corruptions, that are the great
Make-bates in the World and in the Church.

1. The first is Envying, or Envy. This, as I hinted before, is the Parent of
Strife and Division. Hence it is, that Envy and Strife are so often coupled
together in Scripture, it is because the one is the companion and cause of the
other. The first strife and contention we read of in the World was betwixt Cain
and Abel; and what occasioned it, but Envy? It Is said of Joseph's Brethren,
that they envied him, and therefore they could not speak peaceably unto him.
Most of those Debates and Contentions that are in Men and Christians, do spring
from this bitter Root. The Churches of Christ are cut in pieces, (like the
Levite's Wife) by the envy of those that are the Members thereof. There is a
Spirit in good Men themselves that lusts unto Envy; and, where this is
predominant, there is nothing that can stand before it.

2. A second Lust is Pride. These two, Envy and Pride, are Worms that breed in
the sweetest Roses. The later of these is as productive of Divisions as the
former. Solomon says, Prove. 13.10. That only by Pride comes Contention. By
only, is meant chiefly. If there be no cause of contention, yet Pride will
occasion it: Proud persons are always quarrelsom, like gouty and swollen Legs,
they keep at a distance one from another.

3. A third is Passion. Anger and Strife are near a kin. Prove. 29.22. Solomon
there says, An angry Man stirs up strife. You had the same before, in Prove.
15.18. Passionate persons disturb the Peace of the places where they live, and
the Societies to which they do belong.

4. A fourth is Covetousness. This is the root of all Evil, and more
particularly of Strife and Division. One says, that Meum and Tuum, make all the
stir that is in the World. The sweetness of Lucre amongst Men, and Christians
too, is likened by another to Honey that is set before Bears, they will fight
and tear one another Throats out to come at it.

5. A fifth is Self-seeking. This is the great Incendiary in Church and State,
it sets Men and Christians together by the ears; they that seek and love
themselves, are ready upon all occasions to fall out with others.

6. A sixth is Tale-bearing. This is grown an Epidemical Evil, and it is the
cause of much contention; it separates very Friends. Solomon says, Prove. 26.20.
Where no Wood is, there Fire goes out; so where there is no Talebearer, the
Strife cease.

7. The seventh is Evil Surmising. You read of this in 1 Timothy 6.4. and there
it is coupled with Strife and Railing, and it is one great occasion of it. By
Evil Surmising, is meant groundless Jealousy and Suspicion. This is contrary
to Christian Charity, which thinks no evil, which believes and hopes all
things, and takes every thing by the best handle.

3. What if I should add, in the third place, That God has a hand in those
Divisions that are amongst his People. It Is very plain, that his hand was in
that Division which was between the two, and the ten Tribes of Israel: Read 1
Kings 12.24. There the Lord tells Rehoboam and the House of Judah and Benjamin,
Ye shall not go up, nor sight against your Brethren, the Children of Israel,
for this thing is from me. Compare this with the 15th Verse of the same
Chapter. Our Savior tells his Hearers, there must be Scandals or Offenses; and
the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, there must be Heresies; and it may as
well be said, there must be Divisions. God does not only permit, but, for wise
Reasons, he does appoint and ordain them; he does it that the approved may be
made manifest, that the Graces of his People may be tried and exercised. He
orders it thus in judgment to wicked Men. Divisions amongst the godly, are a
stone of stumbling unto the ungodly. God said in the Old Testament, and it is
cited in the New: Behold, I lay, in Zion, a Stumbling-stone. Wicked sinners
rejoice at the division of God's People; it is Nuts to them to see these
quarelling and contending with one another. But this (it may be) will cost them
dear, it may occasion their stumbling, and falling, and the breaking of their
Necks.

Thus you have seen the Cause, but what is the Cure of these Contentions and
Divisions in the Churches of Christ and among particular Christians? Let me
speak a little to this, and I think it may be a word in season. The Christians
in Corinth were not more divided and shattered, than the Christians in London
are at this day. What Jeremy says of the Israelites, that may be said of us:
Our Wounds are grievous, our Bruises are incurable, and we have no healing
Medicines; there is no Balm in our Giliad, nor Physician in our Climate. I have
heard of a Disease, that is called Opprobrium Medicorum, The Disgrace of
Physicians; because they do not know what to say or do to it. I may say of this
evil Disease, called Contention and Division, it is Opprobrium Theologorum, The
Disgrace of Divines; they know not what to say or do, in order to the healing
of it. Once a Year there is commonly a Disease in London which is epidemical
and raging, but Division is a Distemper that rages and is rampant among us all
the Year long, and there is no stopping of it. Nevertheless, I shall prescribe
something that may have a tendency to the Cure hereof. Prosper me, O Lord, I
pray thee at this time, and let my Words be acceptable to these thy Servants;
may they profit by them themselves, and may they, as there is occasion,
communicate them unto others.

All that I shall say (at least for the present) upon this Subject shall be
reduced to two general Heads.

1. Be you thoroughly persuaded and convinced of the great. Evil that is in
Strife and Division. This one Persuasion and Conviction is enough to keep a
Child of God, a godly Man or Woman, from being concerned therein. I observe the
generality of Professors are ready to think, that there is no evil in
Contention and Division; but, as Jonah said, he did well to be angry: so they
are apt to say, they do well to contend and divide; they behave themselves so,
as if they thought it to be their Duty and not their Sin. When they are
exhorted to mortify and put away Strife and Division, they are ready to say,
as Pilate in another case, Why, what evil has it done? or what evil can it do?
Lying and Swearing, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, these and such like, are Evils
and gross Evils, but what evil is there in Contention and Division? Now, for
the conviction of such, I shall endeavor to show you the great evil that is
therein: And the Lord set it home upon our Hearts.

1. Contentions and Divisions they are from the Flesh that dwells in us; that
is the bitter root from whence they spring. Hence it is that the Corinthians, so
far as these prevailed in them, are said to be carnal or fleshly, to have more
Flesh than Spirit in them. Hence it is also, that they are called Works of the
Flesh, Gal. 5.20. There the Apostle reckons up many manifest Works of the
Flesh, and among them he rangeth Variance, Strife, Emulations, and Seditions,
which is the very word that is rendered Divisions here in my Text. This one
thing were enough to show the great evil that is in Strife and Division, that
they are Works of the Flesh, and reckoned among the most notorious Sins; such
as Fornication, Adultery, Witchcraft, Idolatry, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
the like.

2. Contentions and Divisions (especially such as are in Churches and amongst
Christians) are expressly forbidden in the Holy Scriptures: Read what the
Apostle says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. I beseech, or I exhort you,
Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that there be no Divisions
among you. There are many Precepts and Commands in Scripture for Peace, Love,
and Union, and in all these there are Prohibitions of Strife and Divisions. The
Apostle Paul requires the believing Romans and Thessalonians, to be of one
mind, and to live in peace: he exhorts the Colossians, that the peace of God
may rule in their hearts, to the which they are called in one body. Our Savior
himself has told his Disciples, Mark 9. ult. that he would have them to have
salt in themselves, and to be at peace one with another: that is, he would have
them savoury and peaceable Christians.

What a solemn Charge does he give them as to this particular, John 13.34. A
New Commandment (says he) do I give to you, that ye love one another. It Is as
if he had said, I will have this Command, though it be as old as any other, to
be accounted new, to be called my Command, and to go under my Name, that when
ever any Strife should begin to kindle among you, the remembrance of this
particular Charge or Command of mine may be the more apt to quench it: And it is
worth your marking, that he does not only give them this Commandment, but to
make it the more effectual, he annexeth a powerful Argument to it, and that is
his loving them, I charge you, that as I have loved you, so also that you love
one another. Oh, what will not the love of Christ constrain Christians to do!
It will prevail with them (as there is occasion) to lay down their Lives:
Surely then it will prevail with them to lay down their Contentions and
Divisions. One thing more I would observe, That our Savior, in this last
Sermon of his to his Disciples, does again and again mind them of this very
thing, you have much the same words, John 15.12. This is my Commandment, that
ye love one another as I have loved you. And again, Verse 17. These things I
command you, that ye love one another. This is no tautology in our Savior; it
did not arise from want of Matter, but from the weightiness of the Subject; he
laid a great stress upon this Commandment, therefore he so often repeats it.
Now this shows the greatness of this Sin of Contention and Division, that is is
so directly contrary to such express and renewed Precepts.

3. Contentions and Divisions are contrary to the Prayer of Christ; yea, to
that Prayer which he made so publicly and solemnly in the hearing of his
Disciples. What he insisted on so much in Preaching, he enlarges on in Prayer
likewise. Peace was the Legacy he left his Disciples, and Peace was the
Blessing he desires the Father to bestow upon them. He says, John 17.11. Holy
Father, keep, through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me. Keep them;
Why, and for what? See what follows, That they may be one, as we are. As if he
had said, Father, there is a perfect agreement betwixt us, we never had any
difference; let there therefore be the like concord and agreement betwixt my
Followers, as there is betwixt me and thee; let them be one, as we are. And as
he prayed thus for his more immediate Disciples, so he requested the same for
and in behalf of them who in aftertimes should believe in him through their
Word. So you will find a little lower, in the 21st and the 23d Verse of that 17th
of John. It is as if he had said, I know, that my Followers in future times
will meet with great Temptations, to divide them one from another; therefore I
pray thee, Father, that they may be strongly united together, that there may be
as firm an Union as is possible betwixt them. This is enough, if I should say
no more, to show the evil that is in Divisions, that Christ did put up so many
Petitions to prevent them. He does not pray so much, that his Followers may be
preserved from the cruel Persecutions of their Enemies, as that they may be
kept from uncharitable Contentions amongst themselves. Surely that Blessing is
worth their utmost Care, as Christ counted worthy of his redoubled Prayer. Oh,
let this serve to aggravate this Sin of Contention, that it is directly
contrary, not only to the Command, but to the Solemn Prayer of our Lord. I
might show you, how Strife and Division is against your own Prayers: You often
pray, and pray hard for the Peace and Union of Christians; but this is a
powerful Consideration indeed, that it is against the Desire and Prayer of
Jesus Christ himself.

4. Contentions and Divisions do greatly dishonor Christ; his Name and
Doctrine is hereby blasphemed; it makes our Hearts to bleed within us, to hear
Christ reproached by the black Mouths of his Enemies, and nothing more opens
them, than the Divisions of his Friends and Followers.

It Is worth your observation, that when Christ prayed for the Union of his
Followers, he backed it with this Argument, that the World might believe and
know, that he was sent of the Father. So he says, John 17.21. Let them be one,
that the World may believe, that thou have sent me. And again, Verse 23. Let
them be perfect in one, that the World may know, that thou have sent me. As if
he had said, the Divisions and Contentions of my Disciples, will tempt the Men
of the World to think, that I did not come out from thee; that I, who am their
Lord and Master, am but an Impostor; that my Gospel is but a Fable, and the
Religion they have received from me, is but a Romance. If those that believe in
me are contentious, then standers by will be Atheists. If there be no Love in
the Church, there will be no Faith in the World. This one thing is sufficient
to proclaim the great evil of Strife and Divisions, that they are so
dishonorable to Christ and to his Name. Who does not tremble, to have his hand
in that which brings an apparent Reproach upon Christ and the Christian
Religion! It Is storied of Alexander Severus, That seeing two Christians at
variance one with the other, he forbad them any longer to assume the Name of
Christians; because that by their strife and contention, they dishonored their
Lord and Master. Oh, how many in the midst of us, and round about us, might be
interdicted the Christian Name, for the same reason!

5. Which follows upon the former, Contentions and Divisions do stumble and
harden the ungodly; they keep some from entering into the good Ways of God, and
they make others, that began to enter into them, to turn back. Two things in
God's People become great Stumbling Blocks to the wicked; one is, their
Scandalous Sins and Miscarriages; the other is, their Foolish Strife and
Divisions. These make wicked and ungodly Men shy of Religion, and of closing
with the good Ways of God: They say, Look what Quarrels and Divisions there are
among these Professors of Religion: God bless us from such a Religion as this;
if this be their Religion, thus to fall out and contend one with another, we
will have nothing to do with it or them. God is a God of Peace and Love, and
therefore such contentious Persons as these, can be none of his People. We
complain sometimes, that Conversion is a rare Work; that very few are converted
and brought home to Christ in our days; whenas it is a wonder, considering our
divisions, that any at all are converted, that all don't keep at the greatest
distance from the Ways and People of God.

6. Contentions and Divisions do grieve the Spirit of God, and the Spirits of
those that are truly godly. They grieve the Spirit of God; that peaceful Dove
cannot away with those that are full of Gall and Bitterness. When the Apostle
had dehorted the Ephesians from grieving the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. he
immediately subjoyns this Exhortation, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice; and be ye
kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for
Christ's sake, has forgiven you. Again, These Divisions do grieve and sadden
the Spirits of those that are truly godly; nothing lies nearer the Hearts of
some good and godly Men, than the uncharitable Contentions of their Brethren;
these Breaches do break their very Hearts; they are weary of their Lives, upon
the account thereof, and are ready to wish, with that German Divine, That they
were out of the World, that so they might be delivered from the implacable
Enmities and Contentions of Ministers and Christians.

7. Contentions and Divisions do stir up much corruption in Christians, and
they open a wide door to many other Sins: Solomon says, Prove. 17.19. He loves
transgression, that loves strife; he occasions abundance of it in himself and
in others also. There is a world of anger, envy, malice, and revenge in the
hearts of Men, and contention gives them vent and draws them forth. The Apostle
James says, James 3.14. If ye have bitter envyings and strife, glory not. Don't
think or boast of your selves, to be such good Christians; these will stain all
your other Excellencies, and will stir up all your other Corruptions. So it
follows, Verse 16. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every
evil work. Strife and Contention is the Devil's Forge, and if he can give a
Christian a heat or two therein, he will quickly be softened and made malleable
for the Hammer of his Temptations. Meek Moses, when he was a little heated, he
spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. Oh, the Lies and Slanders, the Whisperings and
Backbitings, the Censures and Detractions, that come out of this Mint! From
hence it is, that Christians, instead of reproving, they fall a reproaching one
another; instead of comforting, they fall a censuring one another; instead of
provoking one another to love and good works, they provoke one another to anger
and wrath and to other evil works.

2. The second Direction is, To pursue those things that promote Peace and
Union. The Scripture in some places calls upon us to pursue and follow Peace;
though it runs or flys from us, yet we must pursue and follow it. This Advice
is given in Heb. 12.14. 1 Pet. 3.11. In both these places the Greek word does
signify, to pursue or follow a thing eagerly, as Hunters do their Prey. And in
one place we are required not only to follow peace, but to follow after the
things that make for peace. Where Is that? Why, it is in Romans 14.19. There it is
said, Let us follow after the things that make for peace: ((...)) the things of
peace; such things are meant as are conducible and subservient thereunto. The
Lord help us to take out this Lesson: Many pretend to be followers of peace,
that decline the things that make for it. Let me descend unto particulars:

1. Make out after those Graces that have an uniting property: Let these be in
you, and abound. I told you before, that there are sundry Lusts and Corruptions
which occasion Strife and Division: And now I will show you, that there are
sundry Graces and gracious Qualifications, which conduce to Peace and Union.

1. There is the Grace of Love: I mean, Brotherly Love. This is of an uniting
and knitting nature. We are said, Col. 2.2. to be knit together in love. This
Grace obliges Christians to all acts of mutual kindness one to another; it
expels Prejudices and Jealousies; it extinguisheth the unhallowed Fire of
Anger and Wrath toward one another. The excellent Properties of Love are laid
down at large, 1 Cor 13. There it is said, That charity or love suffers long,
and is kind; it envieth not, it does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity,
but rejoices in the truth, bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things. Where is the Love to be found in our days,
that is endu'd with these Properties? It is because there is so little love,
that there is so much strife and division among us: Because love is waxed cold,
therefore Christians are so sick of the burning Fever of Contention.

2. There is the Grace of Self-denial. Self is the great Makebate, and
Self-denial is the great Peacemaker. If Christians could learn to deny
themselves, they would be at peace one with another. The Apostle exhorts the
Philippians, in Phil. 2.3. to let nothing be done through strife. But how
should this be prevented? See what he adds in the next Verse, Look not every
Man on his own things, but every Man also on the things of others. Oh, what
peaceable Times should we have, if Christians would love others as they love
themselves! There would be another World, if that Rule were but observed which
you find in 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no Man seek his own, but every one another's
wealth.

3. There is the Grace of Humility. As Pride causes, so Humility cures
Contentions and Division. Solomon says, Prove. 28.25. He that is of a proud
heart, stirs up strife. But he that is of an humble and lowly Spirit, does
quench or extinguish it. We may say to Humility, what Tertullus said to Faelix,
By thee we enjoy much quietness. But where are Christians that now adays are
clothed with Humility? There would be an end of Strife, if we would put on
this Garment, If in lowliness of mind, each would esteem others better than
themselves. Vid. Phil. 2.3.

4. There is the Grace of Meekness. This has a peacemaking Property. It is
mentioned in Scripture, as that which contributes greatly to Peace and Unity.
Ephesians. 4.2. There we are enjoined to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace: And in order thereunto, we must abound in all lowliness and meekness.
And to these we must add longsuffering and forbearance; so it follows in that
Text. Ay, these are the Graces we must exercise our selves unto, and in, if we
would keep the Peace amongst Brethren. These are uniting and adorning Graces;
but these Ornaments are laid aside, and quite out of fashion in our times.

2. You must imbibe such Principles as have an uniting property. Let me mention
some few of these, and I will but mention them.

1. The first is, That Christians should be one in Affection, though they are
of different Opinions in the lesser Matters of Religion: If they have not
altogether the same Mind, yet they should have the same Love. That is the
Apostle's Phrase in Phil. 2.2.

2. A second is, That Peace is such a precious Commodity, that we must purchase
it whatsoever we pay for it. Whatsoever it costs us, (provided we don't part
with apparent Truth and true Holiness) we have a good Bargain of it.

3. A third is, That in many cases it is more honorable to yield, than to
overcome: It Is a greater thing to have power over our selves, than to have
power over others. The Story of two Philosophers, Aristippus and Aeschines, is
very memorable: When they were at variance, Aristippus came to Aeschines, and
said, Come, shall we be Friends? Yes, says Aeschines, with all my heart. Now
remember, says Aristippus, that though I am your Senior, yet I first sought
Peace. True, says Aeschines; and for this, I shall always acknowledge you the
more worthy person; for I began the Strife, and you the Peace.

4. A fourth is, That it is better to be too mild and gentle, than to be too
severe and rigorous: If lenity be at any time an error, it is an error on the
right hand; it is by much the more eligible extreme. Oh, how great a Virtue is
Moderation!

5. A fifth is, That it is better to suffer the greatest evil, than to do the
least. By the former, I may be mischief'd by others; but by the latter, I
mischief my self.

6. A sixth is, The Weal of the Public is to be preferred to our Personal
Welfare. The Contentions and Divisions that are amongst Christians, proceed
from the narrowness of their Spirits; Men of Public Spirits, are Men of
Peaceable Spirits. Oh, what Halcion Days should we see, if Christians were
possessed of these and such like Principles!

3. You must exercise and inure your selves to those Practices, that have an
uniting property. Let me touch also upon some of these.

1. Endeavor to take or make up Breaches betimes. Contentions, that are but
sparkles at first, if let alone, they will quickly grow into a great flame. How
much have I seen a little Fire kindle? When Christians fall out, one Person or
Patty, it may be, is faulty at first; but, by and by, such as were faultless,
are involved in the same guilt. Solomon says, Prove. 17.14. That the beginning
of strife, is as when one lets out water. If it be not presently stopped, it will
bear down all before it. Oh, nip Contentions in the bud, or you know not to
what they will grow, or how far they will spread!

2. Remember that good old Rule of our Savior's, To do to others, what you
would have others to do to you. This practice would set us all to rights. Would
not you have others bear with you? Then do you bear with others. Would not you
have others put the best Sense upon your Words and Actions? Why then do you put
the best Sense upon others Words and Actions. Would not you have others to
reproach and back-bite you? Then don't you reproach and back bite others. Do
but walk by this Rule, and, as one says, your own Will, in a justifiable sense,
will be your Law.

3. Count all them your Brethren, in whom you see any thing of the image and
likeness of your Father. Be of a catholic temper, and not wedded to a Party.
Receive any that are serious in Religion, though they would reject you; and
labor to pull those to you, that thrust you from them. Speak well of those,
that speak evil of you. Let Luther call me Devil, (says Calvin) yet I will
acknowledge him for an eminent Servant of God.

4. Accommodate your selves to others, as far as lawfully you may. Take the
Apostle Paul for your Pattern; read what he said and did, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21,
22. Though I be free from all Men, yet have I made my self a servant unto all,
that I might gain the more. Unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain
the Jews; to them that are under the law, that I might gain them that are under
the law; to them that are without the law, as without law, (being not without
the law to God, but under the law to Christ) that I might gain them that are
without law; to the weak, I became as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am
made all things to all Men, that I might by all means save some. All this while
the Apostle was not guilty of neutrality and carnal compliance with others.
Blessed Paul! if thou had lived in our days, thou would have been counted
a Man of a trimming and temporizing Temper. Under this Head, let me commend one
Practice to you, and that is, to submit and yield to those that are
contentious, so far as you can do it with a safe Conscience. The Apostle
Peter's counsel should be followed, 1 Pet. 5.5. Let the younger submit
themselves to the elder, yea, all of you be subject one to another. Many live
as if there were no such Text in their Bibles.

5. Learn the holy Art of bridling your Tongues: That little Member causes
much contention in the World and in the Church. What peaceable Times should we
see, if Christians had the Grace to govern their Passions and refrain from
passionate Expressions; if they did debate the things wherein they differ with
hard Arguments and soft Words! Solomon says, Prove. 15.1. That a soft answer
turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. We have a Proverb, That
hard to hard, never do well. How much Strife would be prevented and cured, if a
Law of Kindness did command all our Mouths. Sometimes a boisterous Wind is
allayed by a gentle Rain. Soft Words are as cheap as hard; gentle and courteous
Language is as easy, as that which is sour or bitter.

6. Never contend about those things which you do not fully understand. I might
have mentioned Ignorance amongst the Make-bates: This is certain, That most of
our Peace-breakers are persons that are very ignorant, that know not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm. This may be truly said, That most of our
Contentions are mere Logomachies; the Strife among us, for the most part, is
about Words, and not Things. There was a great strife of old between the
Eastern and Western Churches. The Eastern Churches and Christians said, there
were three Subsistences in the Trinity, but not three Persons. The Western
said, there were three Persons, but not three Subsistences. Athanasius steps in
and reconciles them both. The Contentions that were amongst the Nestorians and
Eutychians, were only verbal, so that we may wonder, and ask, with the Apostle,
If there was not a wise Man among them? And what shall I say of the Strife and
Division that is among the more religious People of this Island, at this day?
It is unaccountable. A thinking Christian is ready to wonder and say, Are there
no wise Men, and indu'd with knowledge, that can with meekness of wisdom
compose these Differences that are among us? Are they all such Fools as Solomon
describes? He says, Prove. 18.6. A Fool's lips enter into contention. I cannot
say, that all the Debates in England and London, about Matters of Religion, are
merely verbal; but I dare affirm this of many, if not the most of them, nay,
the greater part by far, of our litigant and contentious Christians, can give
no account of those Points about which they contend, nor do they know the
Hinges upon which the things in controversy turn.

Here let me insert a Story of modern date: Two Persons lately met together, at
a Friend's House, where they had a great deal of warm Discourse about those
that go under the denomination of Presbyterians and Independents: One standing
by, interposed, and desired them to inform him, What was the real difference
betwixt those two Sorts or Parties. For a while there was deep silence, till
anon he urged them to answer him, telling them, It was a most unseemly thing,
for persons to contend about what they did not know or understand. At length
one of them answered, The Independents were stricter in their admission of
Members into their particular Congregations than the others were. Hereupon the
other replied, That, to his knowledge, that was false; forasmuch as some, that
had been rejected for scandalous Conversations by Presbyterians, had been
received into Independent Congregations. This threw Oil into the the Fire, and
increased their warmth; till by and by this third person began sharply to
reprove them both, telling them, he expected to have heard of some difference
in the Principles of these Parties, which might have made for his information;
but all that he could hear, did amount to no more, than that there was a
difference in the Practice of some particular Congregations, which would be in
the most reformed Churches to the World's end. Therefore he desired them to lay
aside those unchristian Heats that were betwixt them, and not inveigh one
against another, for they knew not what themselves. And his Admonition was not
ineffectual, for they parted good Friends, and in a better Temper.

7. Take out three Lessons, that are taught us by the Apostle Paul: He gives
us, in his Epistles, a Trinity of Precepts, that would cause Unity among
Christians, if they were but observed and learned.

The first is in 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and do your own business,
etc. Many study how they may be troublesome, and neglecting their own affairs at
home, they wander about from House to House; though they are idle, yet they are
pragmatical and busybodies too; they are tatlers also, their tongues never
lie still, but are speaking things which they ought not, they sit and speak
against their brethren, and slander their own mothers children. This was the
fault of some Women in the Apostles times, but now Men are as faulty herein as
Women. This Practice does greatly contribute to the heightning and increasing
the Differences that are amongst Christians, and there is no better Remedy,
than for all to follow the Apostle's Advice, That every Man study to be quiet,
and to do his own business.

The second is in Romans 14.22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self. He does not
speak of Faith here in the Fundamentals of Religion, but in indifferent things
(which are the Subject Matter he is treating of.) Our belief or persuasion
therein is not unseasonably to be uttered, so as to occasion scandal or
contention. All Doctrins of Faith are not of that necessity, that they should
be urged at all times and upon all persons. Though no truth must be denied, yet
many truths may be forborne. They that are zealous for truth, must remember that
direction in Ephesians. 4.15. To speak the truth in love; or, as the words
signify, they must truth it in love.

The third is in Phil. 3.15, 16. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be
thus minded, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this to you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same rule, let us mind the same thing. I will not stay to open this Text, it is
done to our hands, by several that have wrote purposely upon it: I will only
add, that if these three Apostolical Rules were conscientiously and strictly
observed, most of the Breaches among us would be healed, and future Ruptures in
Churches and amongst Christians would be prevented.

8. Be humbled for Strife and Division, and supplicate Heaven for Peace and
Union.

1. Be humbled for Strife and Division. Many rejoice, but do you mourn by
reason hereof: Whilst others bring Fuel to increase, do you bring Tears to
quench the Fire that is kindled amongst Christians. If you have no hand in
Divisions, yet let your Hearts be broken for them. I will allude to that place
in the Book of Judges, For the Divisions of Reuben, let there be great Sorrow
of Heart.

2. Supplicate Heaven, the God of Heaven, for Peace and Union. Beseech the God
of Love and Peace, to pour down the Spirit of Love and Peace upon his Church
and People. To this you are exhorted, Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee. Say, Peace be within thy Walls,
and Prosperity within thy Palaces. For your Brethren and Companions sake, say
now, Peace be within thee. Pray for the Churches and Christians in our days, as
the Apostle Paul does for the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. The Lord of Peace
give them Peace always, by all means. This is a Service that every one may and
ought to have a hand in. This is a Blessing that God can easily bestow upon his
People; nothing is hard, much less impossible unto him, he can make Men to be
of one Mind in a House; and he can make his Children to be of one Mind in his
House. He brake down the middle Wall of Partition betwixt Jews and Gentiles,
and of twain made one: He can do the like among dissenting and contending
Christians. This is that which he has promised. He has said, That in the
later days his People shall dwell in peaceable Habitations, Isai. 32.18. That
the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid: The Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together,
and the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox; and the sucking Child shall play on
the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his Hand on the
Cockatrice-den; and that they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all his Holy
Mountain, Isai. 11.7, 8, 9. He has said, Verse 13. That the Envy of Ephraim
shall depart, and the Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off; that Ephraim shall
not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim. He has said, That Judah and Ephraim
(though two Sticks) shall be joined one to another into one Stick, and they
shall become one in his hand, Ezekiel. 37.16, 17. And he has farther promised,
That he will turn to his People a pure Language, and they shall serve him with
one consent, or shoulder. Zeph. 3.9. That he will give them one Heart and one
Way. These and diverse other Promises God has made of this sort, which he likes
his People should plead, and put him in remembrance of. I wish I could say,
that this Generation shall not pass away, till these things come to pass: But
considering the improbability of such a Blessing for the present, I fear I may
take up Balaam's words, and say, Who shall live, when God will do this? In mean
time, what reason have we to besiege Heaven, and apply to God by Fasting and
Prayer, (to do this together, and to do this apart) that God would cause these
Janglings and Contentions, that are among his People, to cease? If some Plague
or Drought came upon us, we should reckon it high time to Fast and Pray. Yet
these (as one observes) are in themselves but Miseries; when our Contentions
are so our Miseries, that they are also our Sins. It may be, these Devils of
Strife and Division, will be driven out no other way, but by Fasting and Prayer.

Let me conclude all with a double Exhortation.

The first is to those that are Ministers. They are the Ambassadors of Peace;
they are sent by him who is the Prince of Peace; therefore they should use
their utmost Endeavors to prevent and remove all Strife and Divisions. Yet,
how it comes to pass I know not, they are many times the greatest promoters
thereof. One has observed, That there are few Rents and Contentions in
Churches in which Ministers have not the chief hand. Jerome has a remarkable
Note upon Hosea 9.8. He says (Veteres scrutans Historias, nullos invenire
possum scidisse ecclesiam praeter eos qui Sacerdotes a Deo positi fuerunt.)
searching the ancient Histories, I can find none, that have rent the Church
like those that sustain the Office of Ministers. This is a sad Charge, and it
is too justly laid upon many of that Order. Luther prayed, that the Church
might be delivered from sundry Evils, and among the rest, (a pastore
contentioso) from contentious Preachers or Pastors. It touched me to the quick
the other day, to hear one tell me, That we, who are Ministers, are the cause
of all the Contentions that are in City and Country at this day. I thought with
my self, there was too much of truth in what he said. If we would unite and
agree, our Hearers would unite and agree likewise; generally it is, like
Pastors, like People: They are (tuba instata) a sounding Trumpet; they sound
according to the Breath we breath into them, either a Retreat or an Onset, a
Parley or an Alarm. Oh, how inexcusable are we that teach others, should be
peaceable, and be our selves turbulent! We are like Physicians, that prescribe
such Rules to their Patients, as they never observe themselves. It will never
be well with us, till we give our Hearers a large and fair Copy of Peace and
Unity in our own Practices.

2. I would exhort private Christians to this Duty, to follow after Peace, and
the things that make for it. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, have
peace with all Men, and especially one with another. Let me exhort you, as the
Apostle Paul does these Corinthians: Hear what he says to them, in his first
Epistle, Chap. 1.10. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment. Hear what he says to them in his second Epistle, Chap. 13.11.
Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love
and peace shall be with you. Oh, that this Exhortation could reach all the
Christians in England and in London! Oh, that every Pulpit in this Kingdom and
City did ring with this Message! Peace and Union is that which all seem to
desire. (Pacem te poscimus omnes.) Ask every Man in this Congregation, or in
this City, Have you any hand in the Strife and Divisions that are among us? and
he will answer, No, not I. Again, ask any one, Don't you desire Peace and Love
and Union among your Brethren and Neighbors? and he will answer, Yes, I do.
But though all seem to desire it, how few be they that do really endeavor it?
or that will be at any cost or pains to accomplish it? all exclaim against
Strife and Division, but though every one cries out of the Thief, who will be
at the trouble to stop him?

Give me leave now, in the close of all, to commend to you some moving
Considerations.

1. Consider what God is. He is (as was said before) the God of Love and Peace;
he is called, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. the very God of Peace. And in 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. the
Lord of Peace himself. The Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, he is the Prince
of Peace. He is King of Salem; which is, by interpretation, King of Peace. His
entering into this World was solemnized with a Song of Peace; whilst he staid
in this World, he preached and made Peace. When he departed out of this World,
he bequeathed unto his Followers the precious Legacy of Peace. The holy Spirit
of God, is the great worker of Peace; Peace is one of the Fruits of the Spirit.
There is a cluster of these Fruits in Gal. 5.22. there is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness. What sweet Fruits are here? Many
Christians live as if they had never tasted any of them. Well, but what an
Argument is here to provoke us to peaceableness? This is to make us like unto
God, to resemble Father, Son and Spirit. Oh, how contrary do they walk to God,
who walk in Strife and Contention!

2. Consider what you are, and profess to be. You are the Children, the Sons
and Daughters of Peace. You are called to Peace, 1 Cor. 7.15. You have Peace
with God, and therefore you should have Peace one with another; you are going
to one Home, and therefore you should not fall out by the Way: Why should there
be Strife betwixt Abraham and Lot, seeing they were Brethren? Oh consider,
Christians, you are Children of the same Father, Members of the same Body,
Professors of the same Faith, Partakers of the same Spirit, Retainers to the
same Lord, you have the same Baptism and hope of your Calling, and if you fall
out, who shall agree? You should be looped together, as the Curtains of the
Tabernacles were; you should be all of a piece. Vid. Mal. 2.10.

3. Consider where you are, and among whom you live. They are not all your
Friends that stand by and look upon you, whilst you discover your shame and
nakedness; no, they are many of them your Enemies, and though they carry it
fair outwardly, yet they inwardly hate you: And whilst you contend and quarrel
one with another, they laugh in their sleeves, and are ready to say, Aha! so
would we have it. It was an aggravation of the folly of Abraham and Lot's
Herdsmen and Servants, that they should strive together, and one with another,
when the Canaanite and the Perizite dwelt in the Land. You know how to apply it.

4. Consider what the end of these things is like to be. Our Contentions are
sad Prognostics of some impending Judgment. One says well, That a lowering Sky,
shows foul Weather to be at hand. So the lowering Countenances and contentious
Carriages of Christians toward one another, do indicate a Storm to be near us.
When the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, it was a forerunner of the
destruction of the Temple. Cambden observes, that the Divisions of the English
was the Scaling-ladder by which the Romans came into England. If the Romanists
come among us again, they will part the fray, and end the strife among us. If we
should see again the Marian Days, or have a Popish Prince, I am confident the
Episcopal and Erastian would agree together and the Presbyterian and
Independent would embrace one another. If Christians bite and devour one
another, God will be provoked to give them up to be devoured of others. Vid.
Mal. 4.6. If God turn not the Heart of the Fathers to the Children, and the
Heart of the Children to the Fathers, and the Heart of Christians one to
another, he will come and smite the Earth with a Curse.

5. Consider what Rebukes you have been lately under, for your former
Contentions and Divisions: How great were your felt and feared Troubles? You
are as Brands just now plucked out of the burning; the smell of the Fire is yet
upon you: And will you, as soon as the Rod is off your Backs, return to your
old work again? Remember the Resolutions you had, and the Promises you made, if
ever God again should turn back your captivity. Read, when you have leisure,
Ezra 9. from Verse 5. to the end.

6. Consider what Harmony and Agreement there is among others. Gebal and Ammon
and Amalek can confederate and join together with one consent. Thieves and
Murderers can cast in their Lot together, and have all one Purse. The very
Devils have concord among themselves, Satan is not divided against Satan. Yea,
Lions and Tigers, the fiercest and wildest Beasts, will live peaceably one with
another. (Saevis inter se convenit ursis.) This Consideration may help to lay
our Animosities and Contentions. But,

7. Consider what Harmony and sweet Accord all the Saints have and shall have
in Heaven. There are no Storms and Tempests in that upper Region: There Luther
and Zwinglius are perfectly reconciled.

8. Consider what a lame Account we shall be able to give to Christ at his
coming, of these our Contentions and Divisions. We cannot give any rational
account of them now, but how speechless shall we be then? Read Matthew. 24.48,
49, 50, 51.

9. Consider the good and benefit of Peace and Union. It is pleasing to God; it
is a credit to the Gospel; it is a powerful Lodestone to draw the World to
Christ, like Cummin-seed, it makes the Doves to flock the Windows; it promotes
Edification among Christians; the Church edifies it self in love.

10. Consider the evil and harm of Strife and Division. Much has been said of
this already: See the first general Direction: Let me only add, That it greatly
gratifies the Devil; he is pleased to see them, who are reconciled to God, to
be at variance among themselves; How glad is he, when he can persuade Christ's
Followers to do more than his Crucifiers did; that is, to rend his seamless
Coat? This Contention and Division amongst Christians, hinders their growth in
Grace: The Body and the Members thereof do never thrive and grow in a Fever;
it cuts off all their intercourse with Heaven; hereby Prayers are hindered; they
will be little in Prayer to God, who are much in squabling one with another;
yea, it hinders all mutual Edification; it spoils all Christian Intercourse and
Converse: One says well, It is as baneful to Christian Communion, as a great
Plague or Pestilence is to a Markettown.

Let me then resume my Exhortation: Christians, I do, in Christ's Name and
Words, beseech you, To have Peace one with another. Oh, beware of Strife and
Division! Mark and avoid them (whoever they be) that are the causes thereof.

Let me end with that pathetical Obtestation of the Apostle Paul, Phil. 2.1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one mind. To
which let me add that Prayer of the same Apostle, Romans 15.5, 6. Now the God of
patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus, that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Reader may take notice,

1. THat more is printed than was preached, especially toward the latter end.

2. Though I have spoken much of the Causes and Divisions in general, yet I have
spoken little of the Causes of our Strife and Divisions in particular, that is
a Noli me tangere. No near, says the Sailer.

3. I expect to be censured by some, for what I have said; it is a thankless
Office to attempt the reconciling of persons at variance; it is to take a Dog by
the Ears; it is to interpose between angry Duellers. (...), Nazianz. It Is to put
ones Hand into a Nest of Hornets.

4. I almost despair of seeing the hurt of the Daughter of my People healed,
and their Divisions cured, while I live. And when I meddled with this Argument,
I thought of the Saying of one to Luther, when he first set about the Work of
Reformation, What do thou mean? thou will but beat the Air. Abi in cellam
tuam, and dic miserere Deus nostri.

5. There are several useful Discourses extant upon this Subject, in our own
Language; from some of which, I have borrowed some Notions, if not Expressions,
viz. Mr. Burrows's Irenicum, Mr. Baxter's Cure of Church-Divisions, Mr. Steel
against Uncharitable Contentions in the Church of God, Mr. How Is Carnality of
Religious Contention, and his Attempt to allay Animosities among Protestants,
Mr. Flavel's Gospel-Unity, Mr. Culverwel's Schism, Mr. Gurnal's Complete
Armor, from Page 149, to 159. Mr. Vincent's design to revive Love, etc.

6. Let none be offended at what is said, Page 12. about God's having a hand in
the Divisions of his People: This is consistent with his Holiness and hatred of
Sin, it does not make him the Author of it. Vid. Acts 2.23. and 4.27, 28. and
Mr. Strong's Treatise, showing the Subordination of the Will of Man to the Will
of God; from Page 202, to 214.

7. There are some Literal Errors of the Press, which may easily be corrected
or overlooked; e. g. In p. 3. for discanted, r. descanted, p. 6. for
Antinomean, r. Antinomian. p. 8. for height, r. height: p. 19. for them, r.
these. p. 21. for others, r. other.

FINIS.

