Imprimatur,

GVIL. JANE.
Jan. 9. 77.
A Conference Betwixt a PAPIST AND A JEW: OR, A LETTER FROM A Merchant in
LONDON, to His Correspondent in AMSTERDAM.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, 1678.

A Conference betwixt a PAPIST and a JEW: etc.
Kind Sir,
YOurs of the 22d of this instant December I received, I give you my hearty
thanks for the Contents. It may serve in part for a requital, to remit you an
account of a late Conference betwixt a Papist and a Jew at my House. The
occasion was this: On the 14th instant, being Friday, a Jesuit (one Father S.)
whom I have always found most friendly and ingenuous, came to my house about
Noon to get a return for 200 l. in Paris. I readily complied with his request,
and desired him withal, to stay and take a short Dinner with me. Without much
importunity he was persuaded: My Dinner was only a Dish of Salt-fish, and a
joint of Pork roasted; and though we had but ordinary cheer, yet down we sat,
and were very cheerful. Before we had fully Dined in came L. the Jew, to
discourse me about a Commodity that I had inquired after; I desired him also to
sit down and bear us company. My Wife knowing the Man, and his manner, said to
him, Mr. L. I am sorry that we have nothing here that you can eat. I am sure
said she (pointing to the Pork, the only Dish remaining now upon the Table) you
are for none of this. Father S. (observing what she said, and supposing L. to
be a Roman Catholic, and that his Abstinence did arise from the same
scrupulosity with those of that persuasion) began to scrape acquaintance with
him, and asked him what Countryman he was, and how long he had lived in this
City? I prevented the reply of L. and told Father S. that I judged he was
mistaken in my friend, that he was no Roman Catholic, but a Jew; and refrained
Pork not because it was Friday, and so forbidden by the Church of Rome, but
because it was Swines flesh, and so he apprehended it to forbidden of God. And
here it would have made you smile if you had stood by, and heard what a
Paroxism or sharp debate there arose betwixt Father S. and my Wife about this
question, Whether he or the Jew had the greatest ground for such Abstinence;
and to speak without partiality she put him hard to it. After the Table was
cleared, Father S. desired to have some more serious Discourse with L. and told
him, that he wondered how any man in his right senses could persist in Jewish
Infidelity; adding withal, that he would undertake in an hours time to convince
him, that the promised Messiah was come, and that Jesus of Nazareth was he. L.
answered that he was a Trader, and altogether unfit to manage a Controversy of
that moment, and therefore desired to be excused from meddling with it. Father
S. replied, that it was more than probable there were some of their Priests or
Rabbis in this City, and that if he pleased, he would meet the ablest of them,
and argue this point in his hearing, and he hoped to his conviction and
satisfaction. L. consented, and promised, if a convenient time and place were
appointed, to bring a friend with him for this purpose. I interposed, and
offered my House for the place of their meeting, which they well approved of,
and appointed that day Sevenday at three of the Clock in the Afternoon for the
time. L. desired that there might be no noise or notice given of this their
intention, alleging that it might be of ill and dangerous consequence to those
of their Religion, if it should come to the ear of the Magistrate. Hereupon
they agreed that there should be no words of it, and that no persons besides,
my Wife and I should be present, but themselves and L's friend. Upon this they
parted, and all three came punctually at the time appointed. I carried them up
into a Chamber which had a Closet in it, where I had placed one that was
dextrous in Stenography, and drew the Table pretty near the Closet-door, that
he might hear and write all that past. When they were sat, I made it my
request, that an intimate friend of mine who was in the House might be
permitted to come up and be an auditor. This was Mr. B. whom I had habited like
a Gentleman. They said if he were a friend of mine, and did desire it, they had
nothing against it. Whereupon I brought him in, and set him a Chair at a little
distance from the Table. After a short silence, Father S. began and said to L.
I suppose this is your friend you spoke of at our last meeting in this House,
and promised to bring with you this day. L. answered, yes, it was; upon which
they gave each other a friendly bow or salute. Then they first considered what
should be the main Question or Subject Matter of their Conference, and anon it
was resolved into this, Whether Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah? The next
thing they considered, was, Whether this Question should be argued
Syllogistically, the one taking the part of an Opponent, the other of a
Respondent; or Whether they should alternately deliver their conceptions in a
continued Discourse without interrupting one another? L's friend desired the
latter way, because he was not acquainted, as he said, with our way of arguing
in the Schools. A Third thing they resolved upon, was this, that the Conference
should not last above Two hours, and that neither of them should speak above
half an hour at once. Having agreed those three Preliminaries, Father S. began,
and after he had a little stated the Question, showing whom he meant by Jesus
of Nazareth, and whom he meant by the Messiah, he proceeded thus. Though I
might urge many arguments to prove what I affirm, That Jesus of Nazareth is the
Messiah foretold by the Prophets; yet I shall insist only upon one. And that
is, the many Miracles that were wrought by himself, and by his followers in his
Name, which were sufficient to convince the World that he came from God, and
that he was that Prophet whom our Fathers expected, and that God had promised.
I fearing that my Scribe in the Closet could not well hear Father S. he spoke
so low, (and indeed afterward I understood I was not deceived) made bold to
desire him a little to lift up his voice, which he readily did, and withal
followed his argument so closely, and pressed it so nervously, that I confess I
was greatly confirmed thereby, and concluded L. and his friend would become his
Converts, and wondered with my self what rejoinder could possibly be meditated
by either of them.

His Argument he thus formed: He that testified of himself that he was the
Messiah, and confirmed his Testimony by many infallible Miracles, which were
wrought by himself and by his followers in his name, he must needs be the
Messiah: But Jesus of Nazareth testified thus of himself, and confirmed his
Testimony by many infallible Miracles, which were wrought by himself and by his
followers in his name; Therefore Jesus of Nazareth must needs be the Messiah.
The Proposition, says he, I suppose no rational man will deny, whatever his
persuasion be in matters of Religion; especially if he understand by Miracles,
as I do, such wonderful Works as are contrary to the course of Nature, and
above and beyond the reach of any mere Creature, and as are the product of an
Almighty Power. It cannot be imagined that God, who is the faithful and merciful
Governor of the Universe, would alter the course of Nature, and set the seal
of his Omnipotency to a lie, and suffer the greatest inducement of belief to be
made use of to draw the world into error and perdition. Two things I take for
granted, nor can they be rationally gainsaid. First, That none but God, and
such as are assisted by him, can work real Miracles. Satan and such as are
acted and aided by him may work Wonders, such as may breed admiration in the
beholders; but to work Miracles properly and strictly so called, is above the
power of Satan, or any created Being. This is the prerogative of him alone,
whose Power is infinite and unlimited. Secondly, That God never did, nor never
will communicate this Power to any of working Miracles to confirm a falsehood.
To believe or affirm any such thing concerning God, does border at least upon
blasphemy. It Is as if God should lend the Devil his seal to sign his Delusions,
and suffer it too to be done in his Name, how then should he govern the world
in righteousness? and how deplorable and remediless were the condition of poor
mortals, seeing they have no way left them to undeceive themselves, but must
run into irrecoverable ruin, and entitle God to their seduction and perdition?

That Testimony then which has the attestation of Miracles, is undoubtedly
Divine. Hereby Moses did prove his Mission from God. Pharaoh and the Egyptians
did not except against the argument, only they thought, at least for a season,
his Works and Wonders were not supernatural, and that their Sorcerers could vye
with him in works of Wonder, which we read in Exodus; they attempted by
Enchantments and Diabolical assistance, till at length they acknowledged a
Divine and supernatural Power to work with Moses, and ingenuously confessed that
it was the finger of God. And had Moses affirmed himself to be the Messiah, and
continued to work such Miracles to confirm it, the Israelites and others had
been obliged to believe it. They must have concluded, that no man could do the
Miracles that he did, except God were with him, and wrought in and by him; and
that God would never work with a Deluder, and lend him his seal (as I said
before) to sign his Delusions, and deceive the world in his Name. Moses
therefore never had that pretext, but told the people plainly of a Messiah to
come, of a Prophet that God would raise up to them of their brethren that
should be like unto him, that should come with Signs and Miracles as he had
done, whom they should hearken to and obey.

Accordingly when Jesus our Savior was made of a woman, and manifested in the
flesh, the fullness of time being come, the main argument he used to bring the
world to believe in him was this of Signs and Miracles. Hence 'twas that he
told his followers, That the Works he wrought did bear witness of him: and when
the Jews that were round about him asked him how long he made them to doubt, and
desired him to tell them plainly if he were the Christ: he answered, That he
had already told them, that the Works which he did in his Fathers Name, did
testify of him. Yea, said he, if I do not the works of my Father, believe me
not: but if I do, although you believe not me, yet believe the Works. And again
he says, Believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, or else believe
me for the very Works sake. He tells them further, That if he had not done the
Works amongst them that none other man did, or could do, they had not sinned in
not believing in him. This also we find to be the great argument upon which so
many believed; when they saw the Miracles that he he did, they said, This is of
a truth that Prophet that should come into the world. They had been in doubt
for a while whether John the Baptist was not the Christ; but anon they
considered that John wrought no Miracle, but all things that John spoke of
Jesus were true; and besides he had done many Miracles, and therefore many
believed in him. Thus much for the demonstration of the Major Proposition.

Now I come to the Assumption or Minor Proposition, which is, That Jesus of
Nazareth testified of himself that he was the Messiah, and confirmed his
Testimony by many infallible Miracles which were wrought by himself and by his
followers in his name. That he testified thus of himself is not denied. He told
the Jews, Unless you believe that I am he you shall die in your sins. This was
the main part of that good Confession which he witnessed before Pontius Pilate
the Roman Governor, and it was the main quarrel your Ancestors had against
him; for though they expected about this time the coming of the Messiah, and
that for good reasons, because Daniel's seventy weeks were run out, and the
Scepter was departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his feet, and the
like yet they would not hear that Jesus of Nazareth should be the person. Alas!
he had not the port and presence of a worldly Potentate, such as they dreamt
of: When they saw him, there was no form or comeliness for which they should
desire him. They hid their faces from him, and esteemed him not, as was
foretold by Isaiah the Prophet.

That therefore which remains to be proved, is, that he confirmed this his
Testimony by many infallible Miracles, which were wrought by himself and by his
followers in his name. Let me begin with the Miracles which he wrought himself,
of which there was a very great number, and that of diverse kinds; and these
were not done in a corner, but in the face of the world, before multitudes, and
that in the presence of, if not upon the persons of some of his greatest
enemies. His first Miracle after his showing himself to Israel, was at a
Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, where he turned Water, and a great quantity
of it into Wine. After that he fed more than once a great multitude, even
several thousands with a few barley-loaves and small fishes, which were so
miraculously multiplied, that after they had eaten and were filled, his
followers gathered up more fragments than there was at first in whole meat. He
healed all manner of Diseases, whether the diseased were present or absent; and
this he did, as likewise his other Miracles, with a words-speaking. Some of
those wonderful Cures he did on the Sabbath Day, for which the Pharisees (his
inveterate enemies) did find fault with him, though they could not deny the
matter of fact. He made the Lame to walk, the Deaf to hear, the Dumb to speak,
the Blind to see, concerning which the chief Priests and Elders had not only
the attestation of bystanders, but the Confession of the parties themselves,
whom they curiously interrogated about the thing done, and his manner of doing
it. He cleansed many Lepers, and cast out many Devils, which his enemies
beholding could not deny, but blasphemed, and said, that he did it by
Diabolical aid, and that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.
Some who were dead he restored to life again, particularly one that was
carrying to his grave, and another that had lain some time in his grave, even
till his friends said that he stunk. And this he did in the sight of many Jews,
who thereupon believed in him, having seen the Miracle that he did; yea the
chief Priests consulted about making away Lazarus, the person so miraculously
raised, because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed
on Jesus.

The time limited for my Discourse would fail me, should I but instance in the
twentieth part of those many uncontrouled Miracles which Jesus wrought in the
space of three years or thereabout. And when his hour was come in which he
should be cut off, though not for his own sins, (as the Prophet Daniel had
foretold) and should make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring in an
everlasting righteousness; even when he hung upon the Cross, and was made sin
and a curse for us, then there was a quaking of the Earth, a rending of the
Rocks; yea the vail of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom, and for
the space of three hours the Sun was darkened without any Eclipse; which was
noted as a prodigious thing by the learned Astronomers of those times, one of
which is reported to have said, That either the God of Nature suffered, or the
frame of the World shall suddenly be dissolved. Yea the Centurion and his
Soldiers that attended, had such consternation at the things that happened, that
they feared greatly, and said, Truly this was the Son of God. But above all,
his Rising again from the dead is most remarkable; therein he declared himself
to be the Son of God with power. This fell out on the third day as he himself
had foretold: And if this one thing be cleared up, it is instead of a thousand
Demonstrations. Now the greatest evidence that we can possibly have of a thing
of this nature, is the testimony or attestation of others. This then is
attested by a cloud of Witnesses; they were not a few, but many, to whom he
showed himself alive, and that many times after his Passion, by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God. There are but two things that can possibly be objected
against their Testimony. The first is, That those persons, who were witnesses
of his Resurrection, (as they called themselves) might possibly be deceived,
and that they saw a fantastical instead of a true Body. But this could not be,
for they did not only see, but feel and handle him; yea, one of them put his
finger into the holes in his hands and feet, and his hand into his side, such
was his incredulity. They did not only feel and handle him, but they did also
eat and drink with him after he Rose from the dead. If an Argument drawn from
all those senses will not hold, how then can we be sure that we our selves, and
all the persons we converse with, are not Phantasmes and mere Apparitions? And
how could the Jews be sure that it was Jesus whom they crucified, and secured
in the Sepulcher? In the same way that they were sure of the one, his followers
were sure of the other. But if they were not deceived, yet, secondly, they
might be deceivers. They might steal away the Body of Jesus by night, and give
it out that he was risen from the dead next morning. Two things show the
incrediblity of such a thing. 1. It is not credible his followers could do it.
The chief Priests were aware that he had spoken beforehand of his Rising the
third day, and they foresaw that if this happened, the last error (as they
counted it) would be worse than the first. Therefore they obtained leave of
Pilate to make all sure, and some of them went themselves to see it done, and
then they placed a strong and diligent Watch to keep the Sepulcher. But here it
may be objected, that the Watchmen fell asleep, and then his Disciples came and
stole him away. This indeed you Jews believe to this day, and we know your
Ancestors hired the Watchmen to spread abroad this report. But then, Why were
not they punished for their carelessness and oscitancy? And if they were asleep,
How could they tell what the Disciples did? And if they were awake, Why did
they not oppose them that did it? The keepers for all their hire did make
another relation of what happened; How an Angel descended with great splendour,
whose countenance was like lightning, and rolled away the stone at the mouth of
the Sepulcher, which did so terrify them, as that they became as dead men. Is
it credible that the Disciples, if they stole away the Body of their Master,
would stay to strip him, and lay the Linnen-cloths so decently by themselves?
Would they not rather have carried him away in his Winding Sheet, especially
when he was wound up in Linen with a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes, which has a
clammy and glutinous property? Would they not have been afraid lest any of the
Keepers should awake, but stay and do so needless and difficult a work? But
then, Secondly, as they could not do this if they would, so it is not credible
that they would have done this if they could. Their writings, their
conversations, show them to be persons of great integrity and holiness; whereas
if they had done this thing, and imposed upon the World in this kind, they
would have been a company, not only of very wicked persons, but of incarnate
Devils. Mahomet's villainy would not have compared with it. What, to belly God in
such a manner, and to cry up Faith in Jesus as risen again from the dead, when
he is still under the power of Death, and no otherwise risen than as they stole
him out of the Grave! This would have been hellish unparalleled wickedness, and
to be abhorred by all men of common honesty. But to put this out of question,
there were other witnesses of his Resurrection besides his immediate Disciples.
He was seen in Galilae of above 500 persons at once; many of whom lived a long
while after to witness what they had seen: And had his Disciples and others
conspired together so foully to belly God and their own Consciences, we may
imagine it must have been for some advantage to themselves; but contrariwise,
they knew that to profess Christ and the Christian Religion, was to bring upon
themselves and theirs the greatest odium and persecution.

Yea God himself would have abhorred such Miscreants; but on the contrary we
find they are approved of God, and that by many miraculous signs and wonders
which he did by them, and by that abundant measure of his Spirit which he
poured out in extraordinary gifts and graces upon them. And this would have led
me to the last term in my assumption, that Jesus his testimony of himself was
confirmed not only by his own Miracles, but also by the Miracles that his
followers did in his name. For the truth is, they did as great Miracles in the
Name of Jesus, as ever he did in his own person. They cured all manner of
infirmities, and that not leisurely by the application of Medicines; but
suddenly and miraculously by a words speaking. The very shadow of Peter, one of
his Disciples, healed the sick as they lay in Beds or Couches in the Streets. A
certain man aged 40 years and upward, that had been lame from his mothers womb,
was carried and laid daily at the Gate of the Temple, which was called
Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the Temple. To him this Peter
said, Silver and gold I have none, but such as I have, I give thee: in the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk: And he took him by the right
hand, and lift him up, and immediately his feet and ancles received strength,
and he entered into the Temple, walking and leaping, and praising God. This was
manifest to all them that dwelt in Jerusalem, and acknowledged to be a notable
Miracle by the Rulers of the people and the Elders of Israel. One Dorcas that
was dead, he restored to life with a words speaking, which was known to all the
inhabitants of Joppa, which occasioned the conversion of that Town to the
Christian Religion. I might instance in the Miracles that were wrought by other
Disciples and followers of Jesus. Let me conclude with a word or two concerning
Paul, who was once mad against the Christians, and did zealously persecute them
in every City. He was miraculously converted by Jesus Christ's appearing to him
in the way as he went about this work to Damascus; a great light shone round
about him, which his Companions saw as well as himself, and a voice spoke to
him saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks. He was struck blind for many days: But anon the eyes of his
body and mind both being enlightened, he preaches that Faith which before he
persecuted; and, which is to our purpose, many signal and special Miracles were
done by his hands, so that from his Body were brought to the Sick,
Handkerchiefs, or Aprons, and the Diseases departed from them, and the evil
Spirits went out of them. But I forbear any further naming of these
particulars; and having thus clearly and fully proved the Premises, I hope you
will yield the Conclusion, which is, That Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah.

After a short pause, L's friend, the Rabbi, broke silence, and spoke as
follows. Sir, I desire you would have the like patience in hearing my answer,
as I have had in hearing your argument. The Question before us is of greatest
consideration, both with us Jews, and you Christians; and you may imagine that
before now, I have debated it both with my self and others. I remember some
years ago in Portugal I was assaulted with this very Argument of proving Jesus
of Nazareth to be the Messiah, by his working of Miracles; and finding that it
was much urged by the Christians, I spent some time in studying that point, and
formed an answer to this argument in writing, and that Writing I brought with
me; which I the rather did, because my friend told me, this was the Subject to
be argued, and I did suppose you might happily attempt the proving of it by
this very medium: And because I have a bad memory, and speak no good English, I
shall beg leave to make use of my Papers. So having pulled a little Manuscript
out of his Pocket, and turned over a few leaves, he made a fold at the place he
sought, and laid it by him a while, and thus proceeded. As to that, Sir, which
you called your Proposition, I shall offer nothing in contradiction to it, it
seems to be founded on the greatest reason; nor will any of ours gainsay those
two positions you mentioned, 1st, That God only can work real Miracles. 2dly,
That he will not, as I remember you well expressed it, set his Seal to a lie.
Jehovah is a God of Truth and Righteousness.

But, Sir, as to that which you called your Assumption, it does not in our
opinion carry the like evidence and demonstration with it. For to be plain with
you, it does not appear to us, That though Jesus of Nazareth did testify he
was the Messiah, he confirmed that Testimony by such infallible Miracles,
either of his own or his followers; nor has any thing been urged by you for
the manifesting thereof, but what you have found in your own Books, which you
cannot but know are questioned by us as to their Authority and Verity. And
surely had our Fathers, and the Chief Priests of our Nation, seen any such
Miracles done by Jesus of Nazareth, as your records do mention, they were men
of that Religion and Learning, that they would not have so evilly entreated
him, but would have paid him more respect and veneration. We believe therefore,
as our Ancestors have believed before us, that they were some of them Forgeries
and feigned Miracles, and that others of them (pardon the word) were Diabolical
achievements. And we are the more confirmed in this belief, because your
latter Records and Chronicles do tell us of multitudes of Miracles, which were
wrought as they say by men and women of your Religion, which seem to us to be
very fabulous, yea ridiculous. Yet these are received amongst you likewise as
certain and infallible, and have the approbation of your Church, and of the
High Priest whom you call the Pope, and the Sanhedrim of Cardinals. And some of
these do vye with the Miracles of Jesus and his Disciples, and seem to be much
of the same sort or kind. Let me name a few of many, and they are such as I
have taken out of great Authors, and licensed or allowed Records. And pardon me
if I don't cite the Author and places where they are chronicled; if you desire
it I can produce my vouchers for every story, and those such as are authentic.
Then taking up his little book, and putting on a pair of Spectacles, he read as
follows. Your words, said he, do first make mention of Jesus his miraculous
Conception, before they speak of his and his followers miraculous actions. This
I have heard urged by others, though it was omitted by you, How he was
conceived of the Holy Spirit, and then born of a Virgin without the knowledge of
man. A like Miracle is recorded in one of your Church-histories published not
long since with allowance; how St. Kentigerne's Mother begged of Jesus, that
she might imitate his Virgin Mother in the conception and birth of a child:
accordingly within a little time she finds her self with child, but often
protests she never knew any man. But by the Law of that Country where she
lived, she must be cast headlong from the top of a high mountain. She weeps and
prays, but the Executioner does his work, down she falls, but is so far from
being killed or dashed in pieces, that she has no bruise or hurt. Then she is
carried on shipboard many miles into the Sea, and there turned out into a small
boat of leather, destitute of all humane help; yet with great speed and safety
she arriveth at a far distant Port; and landing, she is delivered of that
admirable Saint, and miraculously conceived son, St. Kentigerne.

As to Miraculous actions, the forementioned book, and others of equal or
greater authority, will afford plenty that do not only compare with, but exceed
the Miracles of Jesus and his Disciples. As for instanee, your Records speak of
Jesus his fasting forty days; and I can show you where it is recorded of St.
Patrick, that he fasted a whole Lent, (which I think with you is forty days)
without any humane sustenance, where one St. Ardan is said to fast full fifty
days, and to grow fatter upon it.

And whereas it is said, That Jesus fed five thousand persons with five loaves
and two small fishes, St. Patrick is said to have fed fourteen thousand men
with one Cow, two Stags, and two wild Boars; and it was talked how next day the
Cow was alive again.

And as for Jesus his turning Water into Wine, it is not so much as is commonly
affirmed of your Priests, how by repeating four or five words, they can turn
Wine into Blood, and Bread into Flesh, and that the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
himself; though you affirm he is ascended into Heaven, and shall there remain
till his second coming. And it is recorded of one Odo an Archbishop of
Canterbury, that when some of his Clergy did doubt of such Transmutation or
Transubstantiation, that he prayed with tears whilst he was at Mass, that God
would convince them by a sign; and the body of Jesus which he held in his hands
(that is the bread) began to pour forth blood into the Chalice; which they
perceiving, desired the Prelate to pray that the blood might be changed again,
lest vengeance should fall upon them for their incredulity; he does so, and it
became wine.

Again, whereas your Records speak how Jesus and his Disciples did heal all
manner of Diseases, whether the Diseased were present or absent, and that with
a words speaking; the like is also recorded of some of his more modern
followers. Take for instance St. David a great light of the Church, as he is
called; He invited St. Kined to come to his Synod; St. Kined excused himself,
because he was lame and crooked, unfit for such holy company, and unable for so
great a journey: Whereupon St. David prays him strait and sound. But the other
still delayed his coming; upon which St. David unprays his former prayer, and
he becomes lame and crooked again. St. Bernard had great success, as appears in
your Histories this way, for he cured one in Spain of a fore disease whilst he
was in France; he cured one of a Dropsy by putting his own girdle about him;
another of the Headache by sending him his cap to wear; another that lay a
dying, he restored by sending him his coat; with a many more of the like kind.

As for casting out of Devils, nothing is more ordinary than for your Priests
to do that feat by their Exorcisms; your holy water with the sign of the Cross
is said to be frequently successful in this work. And I find in one of your
Histories, how a Woman was dispossessed of seven Devils at Lauretto by calling on
the Virgin Mary for help; and when four were cast out, the other three called
Heroth, Horribilis, and Arcto, with much difficulty were removed, one cries out,
Mary, Mary, thou art too cruel against us; another howled lamentably, and said,
Mary, thou art too powerful in this place, where thou do force us out of our
possession against our will. And the Priest, who by Mary's aid did this
Miracle, made him tell what place that was: who answered, it was the Virgins
Bedchamber, wherein after the Angel Gabriel's message, she conceived God;
which was, as other Histories speak, brought thither by a Miracle. Nay, some of
your great Saints have contended with the Devil and worsted him; as St.
Dunstan, who caught him by the Nose with a pair of hot Tongs, and plucked him
so hard, that the Devil was glad to shift from him by breaking down a Wall,
crying out, it did so smart, once and again, oh what has this Bald-pate done!

As for raising the dead, this also has been frequently practiced. St. Francis
makes one dye that answered his disciples roughly when they would have borrowed
his Cart, and afterward raised him up again, and restored him to life. A man
and his Son going a Pilgrimage to St. James at Compostella, light upon a wicked
Host, that first makes them drunk, and then puts two Silver Cups into their
Wallets. They are pursued, and being taken and tried, the Son was hanged, the
Father goes on his Pilgrimage, and returns Thirty six days after to the-body
of his Son still hanging; he makes grievous lamentations, till by and by the
hanged Son began to comfort him, saying, Most dear Father, weep not, but
rejoice, for I was never better in all my life; St. James supports and comforts
me with heavenly sweetness: The Father overjoyed, makes known the business, the
people flock together, the man is taken down, and the Host hanged up in his
room.

I could show you where St. David is said to have raised a Boy from the dead,
who afterward waited upon him. St. Patrick to have raised one from the dead
that was almost devoured by Hogs. And St. Alban being to be Martyred, people
thronged to see his Martyrdom, and crouding very hard by a deep River, many
fell in and were drowned: The Saint perceiving it, prays that all might see his
passion; and to that purpose the Waters may be dried up: It was done
accordingly, and those that were drowned before, are now found safe at the
bottom of the River.

Again, whereas it is recorded, that Jesus raised himself from the dead: I can
turn you to Records in great credit with you, where some of your eminent Saints
are reported to have done things little inferior thereunto. St. Dennis the
Patron of France, when his head was cut off, carried that head of his two Miles
in his hands. St. Winifred vowing Virginity, was wooed by a Kings Son: To make
her escape, she pretends to dress her (for he found her much unready) and to
return again; but out of a backdoor she goes, and makes toward the Church: on
the side of a Hill she is overtaken by her Suitor, whose love was turned into
rage; and she continuing in her obstinacy, he cut off her head, and there rose
up a Well, which still bears her name: The head tumbles down into the Church
amongst the People, St. Benno takes it up, seeks the murderer, and finds him
wiping his bloody Sword upon the grass; he pronounces his Curse against him,
whereupon he falls down dead. St. Benno often kissing the Head, joins it to the
Body, covers it with his Mantle, and goes to the Altar to say Mass; that done,
to the Body he returns and begins a Sermon, and prays for the Virgin, whereto
the People say Amen: Presently the Virgin rises up as if it were from sleep,
wipes her face from dust and sweat, and goes to the Church to give thanks: Only
where the section was made, there was a circle like a white Thread all her life.
St. Clare, a Noble English man, to avoid Marrying a noble and beautiful Virgin,
runs away to France; there a Lady falls in love with him; to escape her, he
leaves the Monastry he was in; this turns her kindness into fury: she sends two
Murderers, who cut off his head; he rises straight, and with his hands takes
up his Head, carries it unto a Fountain, into which he cast it; thence he takes
it again, and carries it unto the Oratory of his Cell, and thence went forvvard
to a little Village near the River Epta; where for ought appears he ended his
procession. My allotted time will not suffer me to proceed, though I have
collected some scores of these Miracles; and indeed there is great plenty of
them to be had. In one thing, to conclude, the Miracles of these modern Saints,
exceed the Miracles of Jesus or his immediate followers; for they are recorded
to have delivered Souls out of Hell Torments, which Jesus himself did never
pretend to do. Gregory the Great (one of your Chief priests) wept so long for
Trajan the Emperor, that he obtained deliverance of his Soul from Hell,
although we read he was charged to ask no more so great a favor for any, at
least, that died unbaptized. So St. Dunstan delivered King Edwins Soul from
Infernal torments; and when the Devils quarreled with him about it, he
stopped their mouths by asking them what reason they had to find fault with
it, if Christ and he thought good to pardon him? St. Nicholas also delivered
his own Brothers Soul from Hell, though it cost him Fifteen days and nights
praying and weeping, as St. Antonine reports. Now Sir, I think I am even with
you in point of Miracles, and must tell you, that we Jews (however we are
charged with Infidelity) are not such Infidels, or Idiots rather, to believe a
reality in any of these Stories. Surely the Almighty Power would not trifle
thus with mortals. These are therefore either errant Forgeries, or else
devilish Achievements; and we cannot but think the same of the Miracles of
Christ and his Disciples, because the one are recorded and received by you as
well as the other: And therefore they are no proof that the Testimony of Jesus
was Divine, or that he is the Messiah.

Father S. sat all this while (as I could perceive) very uneasily; and when
the Rabbi had ended, he never looked up, nor made one word of reply; but his
countenance as well as his silence, did argue him full of confusion and
disturbance in his mind. I looked upon Mr. B. and shook my head, I feared
occasion might be given these Jews to triumph if the Conference ended thus; and
that they would be hardened themselves, and would also harden others in their
unbelief and prejudice against the Christian Faith; wherefore I hoped that Mr.
B. would take up the argument, and confute the Rabbi's cavils: Nor was I
disappointed; for anon he rose up, and drew nearer the Table, and said, Sirs,
you have greatly obliged me, in permitting me to be present hitherto in the
capacity of a Hearer, and you will further oblige me, if you will permit me
(now there has been so long a silence) to interpose a little as a Speaker. As
my Discourse is not premeditated, so it shall not be prolix. The Argument this
worthy person has urged to prove that Jesus (our Lord and Savior) is the
Christ, is of greater weight than to be so easily blown away: As you have
already granted his Major, so I question not but you will also grant his Minor
Proposition, when I shall make it manifest, that there is a vast difference or
disproportion betwixt the pretended Miracles that you have gleaned out of some
latter Writings, and the real Miracles that were done by Jesus our Lord, and
his immediate followers, as they are recorded in the Scripture. As for the
former, falsehood and forgery is engraven upon them in capital Letters.

This will appear if you consider how the report of these Miracles comes not
forth till many years after they are done; or there is no mention of a
competent number of credible persons that were witnesses of the doing of them.
Besides, the greatest number of Christians either never heard or never approved
of any such Miracles; yea there is nothing they have more disowned both by word
and writing, than the Legends of such fabulous Wonders; they have always
accounted them as a subtle device of Satan the old Serpent to disparage the
Christian Religion, and the wicked policy of a certain Sect amongst them to
uphold an Antichristian faction. Let it not stumble you that I speak of Sects
and Factions amongst us Christians, they are found in all Religions, they are
with you Jews, and they were of old with your Fathers, who were divided and
crumbled into Sects and Parties, such as the Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes,
Herodians, and the like. With us Christians there is a great Sect or Faction of
those who are commonly called Papists, or Roman Catholics, who have made the
greatest schism or rent that ever was in the Christian Church, who anathematize
and curse all those that are not of their Faction or Communion; and although
they are numerous, and pretend to be the Catholic Church, and do fill Spain
and Portugal, and some other Countries, with which it may be you have been most
conversant; yet they are but few comparatively, that is in comparison of other
Christians that are in the Western and Eastern parts of the World, as the
Protestants of several Kingdoms and Commonwealths, the Moscovites, the Greeks,
the Abassines, the Armenians, the Copties, the Circassians, the Mengressians,
the Georgians, and the like. It Is then with this Popish Sect only that these
fictitious Miracles are found; the generality of Christians do openly declare
that Miracles are long since ceased; nor was there any need of their
continuance in the Church, the Christian Faith being already not only
sufficiently, but abundantly confirmed by the Miracles, the infallible Miracles
of our Savior, and the Primitive Christians, who showed their Patent or
Commission under this Broad-Seal of Heaven, to the conviction and utter
silencing of their most obstinate enemies, both Jews and Gentiles. You know
that Moses confirmed the Law, and the Ordinances thereof, by Miracles first
wrought in Egypt, and afterward on Mount Sinai, and in the Wilderness; but
when your Fathers were convinced of Moses his Authority, and were once settled
in the Land of Canaan, then those Miracles ceased. So the Gospel and the
Ordinances thereof were at first confirmed by the uncontrouled Miracles of our
Savior and the Primitive Christians, (as indeed it was meet that those who
pretended a new Revelation from God, should confirm it with a Divine
attestation) but since the Christian Religion is now diffused both far and
near, for the same reason all Miracles are at an end. As men water Orchards at
the first planting of them; but when the Trees are well rooted, they do so no
more. But amongst the Schismatical Papists, Miracles are still pretended, who
care not what wrong they do to the Christian Religion, or the common cause of
Christianity, so they increase their own Party. By means hereof, they delude
the more ignorant and credulous sort of people, of whose souls their Priests
make great merchandise. In King Henry the Eighths time, by the diligence of the
Lord Cromwell, one of the chief Ministers of State, many of the abominable
cheats and forgeries of the Papists in this kind were made manifest throughout
this Nation, which was one great cause of the Reformation that followed. And it
is no slight evidence of the verity and Divine Authority of the Scriptures of
the New Testament, that this was foretold therein some hundreds of years before
it came to pass; for so it is there recorded, that there should be a great
Defection or Apostasy in the Christian Church, which also should be headed by
the Bishop of Rome; and though he be not named, yet any one with half an eye
may perceive he is intended: never did Glove better fit a hand, nor shoo a
foot, than the Character the Scripture gives of the Head of that Apostasy does
agree to the Romish Pope: And concerning him it says expressly, That his coming
should be after the working of Satan with power and signs, and lying wonders:
In the Greek it is (...), with wonders of a lie, an usual Hebraism, as you
understand, to note the notorious falsehood of his wonders. And in another place
it speaks of a Beast (meaning the same person), whom the world should wonder
after, and worship too, and that for this Reason, Because he does great wonders
in the sight of men. This may fuffice for these lying Wonders, with their
impudent Authors.

But as for the Miracles of our Savior, and his immediate followers, they are
of another nature, and wear upon themselves marks of infallibility; they are
recorded in the age and places when and where they were wrought; they were done
(as this worthy person well observed) not in a corner, but in the face of the
world, before multitudes of witnesses, and those persons of known credit and
integrity. Insomuch, that your Ancestors the Jews, that lived in those days,
and enquired diligently into these things, did never once deny the matter of
fact, that such Miracles were indeed done; but they said they were done by
Diabolical assistance? And others of them have said, that Jesus had found out
the right pronunciation of that ineffable name, the nomen Tetragrammaton, and
that it was sewed in his thigh, and that by the power thereof he did all his
Miracles. How ridiculous are such evasions: It seems evident enough, that many
of the Pharisees and Rabbis themselves in those days lay under this
conviction, That Jesus came from God, and was the Christ, and professed too their
faith in him, though the most of them did it secretly for fear of the Jews; Who
had agreed, that if any did confess that he was Christ, they should be put out
of the synagogue. Josephus, a man of great Learning, who lived near those
times, and who was a Jew by Nation and Religion, in the 18 Book of his
Antiquities, does publish this passage to the world, That in the time of
Tiberius Caesar, there was one Jesus, a wise man (if says he, it be lawful to
call him a man); for he was the performer of diverse miraculous works, and the
instructor of those who willingly entertained the truth. This was Christ, who
being accused by the Princes of our Nation before Pilate, and afterward
condemned to the Cross, yet did not his followers forbear to love him for the
ignominy of his Death, for he appeared unto them the third day after, as the
Divine Prophet had before testified of the same, and diverse other wonderful
things of him.

Let me desire you to use your reason: Do but think with your self, if the
Miracles I am speaking of, had been forged or feigned, how easy a matter had
it been for the Jews, that lived in those times, to have discovered and
disproved the fraud and falsehood thereof? Put the case there should at this
instant go abroad, a report of one in London, that did great Miracles, and that
very frequently, that cured the blind, the lame, the deaf, the dumb, the
diseased of all sorts that came or were brought to him, with a word speaking;
that he cast out Devils, and raised the dead; and that his followers did the
like, and that frequently in all parts of the Land; and that these things were
done in the presence of thousands, of throngs and multitudes of people. I pray
you judge if it were not the easiest matter in the world to disprove this, if it
were false and feigned; and whether it were possible that whole Cities and
Countries should believe it, and seal their belief thereof with their blood;
nay, consider whether the easiness and certainty of disproving this report,
were not like to bring them all under the greatest scorn and contempt
imaginable, that should publish it. You see the case is parallel, and I need
not stay to apply it; it is strange to observe, that the Jews of those times,
whose hearts were ready to burst with envy and malice at the success of the
Gospel, never publicly objected the forging or feigning of those Miracles by
which it was confirmed. Yea, it is farther observable, that the Heathens
themselves, and the great ones amongst them too, did openly assent to the
reality thereof. We find it in true Records, how Tiberius himself upon a Letter
from Pilate concerning Jesus, of the Miracles he wrought, and of the manner of
his Death and Resurrection, did move in the Senate of Rome, that he might be
admitted amongst their gods; and though they refused the motion, because, as
some say, it was not first moved by themselves; or as others say, because if
they received him, they must renounce their other gods; yet the Emperor
persisted in his opinion of Jesus, and gave the Christians great liberty all
his days.

Yea, the Turks acknowledge Jesus our Savior to be sent of God, and that he
confirmed his Mission by Miracles, and upbraid the Jews for not believing God
by his Prophet Jesus; and Mahomet threatens judgment against them for it in
his Alchoran, saying, that Jesus Christ was the Word and Power of God, sent to
convince the World by Miracles; That he was born of a Virgin, conceived without
an earthly Father by Divine inspiration; that he cured all manner of Diseases,
and raised the dead to life again; That he was taken at length into Heaven, and
shall come again: Thus much of our Faith is confessed by those Infidels. I could
go forward, but that I see the time is well nigh expired that you allowed for
this Conference, and therefore I shall not be guilty of a farther absurdity;
but I beg your pardon for that I have already committed by an unrequested
interposing in your serious debate. And for a close, I must tell you, Sir, that
you must yield the Conclusion in this Gentlemen's Argument, or else deny his
major proposition, which yet you say is founded upon the greatest reason; or
else you must fly to the evasion of your Fathers, which is, That Jesus our Lord
did indeed work Miracles, but it was by the power of the Devil. And to say
this, pardon the expression, is no less than Blasphemy: It is in effect, to
say, That the Devil is God; and to ascribe the Attributes and Prerogative of
God unto him. For if Satan can do such Miracles without control, to persuade
poor mortals to an entertainment of error, and to delude the World, who have no
sufficient means (as was said before) to discover the delusion, then it plainly
follows that he is a God in Power, and the Almighty Governor of the World; or
at least, that God has so little mercy, or justice, or care of mankind, as to
give them to the power of the Devil to be remedilesly deluded by him: And he
that will believe this rather than the Christian Faith, deserves to perish in
his blasphemy and infidelity. I have done when I have made this one request to
you, That you will please to favor me with such another meeting, and I shall
hope by the assistance of that Spirit which proceeds from the Father and the
Son, which three are one God, the same in substance, equal in Power and Glory;
I say by his assistance, and by other Arguments, and by those taken from the
writings of Moses and the Prophets, and some of your own Rabbinical Authors,
clearly and convincingly to demonstrate, That Jesus is the Messiah; yea, the
only begotten Son of God, and the Savior of the World.

L. the Jew was much affected (as I did perceive) with Mr. B's close and warm
Discourse (and indeed what with the matter, and his manner of delivering it, I
think we were all affected more or less); he turns to his friend, and desires
him by all means to accept of this Gentleman's motion, and appoint another
meeting.

The Rabbi made a low bow to Mr. B. and said, Sir, I heartily thank you for
your plain and ingenuous Discourse, and I willingly acknowledge that I have
received more information from it than from any person or Author that ever I
yet conversed with; yea, what if I should say, Within a little you have
persuaded me to be a Christian. I must not conceal, that it has been the
opinion of some of our Learned men, That the Messiah is come, and that for our
sins he lies concealed. I have been often staggered in my self when I have
thought of this matter. I dare not shut my eyes against clear light, but open
them as wide as I can. Therefore, Sir, on this day fortnight at the same hour I
shall gladly meet you, and, if it may be, I am content that this house in which
we now are, should be the place; only I beg leave to bring one or two of my
Brethren with me; and yet I desire also that we may be private, and that not
above the number of three or four at most be present besides our selves. I told
them my House was at their service, and that I was rejoiced to see so good an
effect of the past Conference; I called for a bottle of Sack, they drank in a
friendly manner to one another, so L. and his friend took their leave.

When they were gone, Father S. applied himself to Mr. B. and thanked him for
his seasonable interposition, and desired his farther acquaintance. I must,
said he, confess to you, That I am one of those that you call Roman Catholics,
but I was not aware that our Church by the Miracles she approves of, and allows
to be wrought in her, did give such a stab to the Christian Faith, as I now
find it does. I confess I have been long of opinion that those Miracles of our
Saints that are so much magnified amongst us, are most of them false and
fabulous. And I remember that I have read in Ludovicus Vives, a learned Writer
of our own, how he calls the Golden Legend a History unworthy of the Saints,
and that the Author had a brazen face. Yea, he says expressly, that the lives of
the Saints are corrupted with abundance of lies, and that the Authors did set
down not what the Saints did, but what themselves would have had them done.

Mr. B. understanding that Father S. was a Roman Catholic, desired his pardon
that he had spoke so keenly against the Church and Pope of Rome; adding, that
he saw a necessity of it for the undeceiving of the Jew. And, Sir, said he,
give me leave to tell you, that your Church by her lying Wonders, and forged
Miracles, has greatly disserved and disparaged the Faith of Christ, and gone
about to invalidate the chiefest argument, as you your self acknowledged, for
the confirmation of it. And let me add, that the Jews are farther prejudiced
against Christianity by the Papists amongst whom they mostly converse,
especially in these Western parts of the World, and that is by your Adoration
of Images, the Host, the Cross, and the Relics of the Saints; for they are
great Zealots in the second Commandment, and utter enemies to all Idolatry. To
which may be added, your debarring the general use of the New Testament, which
is the probable means of the obtaining the knowledge of Christ, and the
Christian Religion.

Father S. replied, that though he was a Roman Catholic, yet withal he was a
Christian; and I think, said he, it is high time for me and all Christians
besides, to think of renouncing Communion with that Church whose principles and
practices shall encourage men to continue Jews and Infidels; and as the Jew
said, That within a little he was persuaded to be a Christian, so could he say,
that within a little he was persuaded to be a Protestant. Upon this they take
leave of one another, promising to meet again at the time before mentioned.

Sir, I judged this Narrative would not be unacceptable to you. If any thing
occurs in the next meeting that is worthy your notice, it shall be readily
communicated by

Yours in many Obligations, N. H.

FINIS.

