THE Test and Trial of Medicines, AND The different MODES of Medical Practice.

Showing what Hopes of Help, from Physic and Physicians.

By E. M. Med. D.

Mundus Errore tenetur.
MEdicines being of the greatest Importance, and the principal part of the Art
of Physic: they require the greatest Consideration, serious Care, and strict
Examination, for an assurance of their validity and worth; for as much as the
Reputation of the Physician, and Life of the Patient, does depend thereon: an
error or neglect herein, frustrates and baffles all the Physician's Learning;
and if he be not skillful (not by Book reading, but Manual Operation) in this
grand work, all his other learned qualifications are but deceit, and avail
little in Curing. And since the Import of Medicines is so great, as being the
immediate Instruments contending with Diseases; and from their Power and
Excellency, Curing is performed or frustrated; it mainly behooves the Physician
(and as much it concerns the Patient) that he be completely provided with a
stock of elaborate, excelling Medicines, reformed and well proved; such as he
may confide in; to oppose the secret intestine Enemies, that prey upon Health
and Life; and with which he may repair and support the Fabric of humane
Bodies, unto the period of their term, by the common Course of Nature: else it
may be said, this or that Person came to an untimely end; as many do, for want
of good means, or due administration. This premised, I proceed to the matter
proposed.

All Medicines, that are designed and formed by Art, in respect of their
Latitude, comprehension, and adaption; may be divided into three Ranks or
Classes: and then they are either Catholic, Specific, or Appropriate.

The Catholic (or universal) is a Medicine of large extent and comprehension,
applicable to, and useful in many and various Diseases, and also in diverse
Persons.

The Specific Medicine is such, as Nature or Art has specificated and designed
for the Cure of one particular Disease only; and that in diverse Persons.

The Appropriate Medicine, is yet narrower and more restrained, being
prescribed for, and adapted to the particular Case of one single Person only;
under such circumstances and complicated Infirmities.

Now to compare these three sorts of Medicines, of different extensions; as
touching their worth, usefulness and certainty in Curing; my Judgment and
Experience determines thus.

The Catholic Medicine, that has been studiously formed, often revised, reformed
and meliorated, by a skilful Artist in Pharmacy; long and often proved, and
thereby approved, for its amicable, steady, and certain operation; and most
frequently attended with Success: this excels all other; for its generous
Latitude, and comprehensive Virtues; being a ready, most confiding, and
advantageous assistant against many Diseases; very useful, and fitly applicable
to diverse Persons, though differently seized and afflicted; but requiring such
manner of Operation as this Catholic performs: whether it be Cathartic,
Diaphoretic, Diuretic, etc. thus allowing a plurality of Catholics, distinct in
their operations.

The Specific Medicine (that is truly so) having been frequently experimented,
and seldom failing to do its Work; is a rare good Medicine for a single
Disease; but then it is bounded within that narrow compass of one particular
Malady; and its virtues are not of that generous, useful, and extensive Nature,
like the Catholic Medicine; and is therefore inferior in excellency and worth,
excepting only against that Disease, for which it is specificated, or
peculiarly adapted.

The Appropriate prescribed Medicine, adapted to Person and Case (in the new
Mode of Practice) though seemingly sounded upon much Learning, by traditional
Book assistance; yet is much more casual, hazardous, uncertain in operation and
success, much less to be presumed and relied on, than the two former Medicines:
for this is but a Prescript designed by conjecture and probability, and an
Experiment to be made at a venture, or at best by analogy, which is no certain
Rule: and therefore this appropriated chance-Medicine, must come far behind the
two former, in dignity and safety, because they are Medicines proved and
approved; this never was proved, but waits for Sentence until the trial be
past; and whether this appropriated Recipe will prove good or bad, the Doctor
cannot tell, but he hopes well: and this he will say for himself, the
Ingredients are all good and harmless: but that is not sufficient; for granted
that all these things be innocent and good in themselves, as you say, it does
not therefore necessarily follow, that they must needs make a good Medicine,
for such a purpose, and to operate so and so; but it may happen much otherwise.

Now the reason why this Appropriated Medicine, though contrived and appointed
by learned Men, should be thus uncertain and dubious to rely on, are these:
First, Because every new association of ingredients, or variety of preparation
and manner of composition (to form an Appropriate Medicine) so much alters the
Ingredients, in their properties and virtues, by acting and re-acting upon each
other, that their single Natures and Virtues are not the same in this, as they
were in another Conjunction: and every new mixture, or different preparation,
makes such a change in their harmony and agreement, that the result or product
is not foreknown by the best guessing judgment; but trial and use must declare,
whether it be good or bad: whether these things will yoke, and draw amicably
together; whether they will all concur and conspire with the intended
operation: and if they will be subjugated, unite and comply with the form of
the Medicine; and whether a disproportion in their quantities may not appear
afterward, and some ingredient may be unduly exalted, and prevail over the
rest, to a disgust at least, if not a greater injury; in biassing the Medicine
from the operation intended. He that can make all these requisites, so evenly
to fall in with the Medicine, and hit it so rightly, upon the first projection
(of an Appropriated Medicine) is a wonderful lucky Man: and to do all this, in
a quarter of an hour, at the Sick Man's Chamber, with Pen and Ink; and I cannot
design and complete a Medicine at home in a quarter of a year, with the use of
a Laboratory, to be well satisfied therein; this is strange, very strange. But
look into these appropriated Recipes, filed at the Shops, and the Mystery of
this does plainly appear; That they are not such as the World does believe them
to be; but a sort of squinting, discordant, uncertain, unreformed Medicines,
upon the view of an expert Operator in Pharmacy.

Secondly, No certainty of knowledge in the Patient you design the appropriated
Medicine for (surer than the Catholic and Specific adaption) in as much as no
idiosyncratical, or individual propriety of Person is foreknown; in point of
operation and agreement of Medicine, farther than the trials and experiments
made upon the humane Nature of Bodies, with many other Persons: and therefore
every new invented, untryed Medicine, adapted to Person and Case, are but
presumed, uncertain and unsafe; and it necessarily follows, that the Catholic
and Specific Medicines, are much to be preferred, and more to be relied on,
because sufficiently tried and proved, to agree and perform with many.

And thus much in short (yet much more is to be said) concerning appropriated
Recipe's or Prescripts, untried new Medicines, contrived with Pen and Ink, and
transmitted to the Shops to be made up: being compared with the Catholics and
Specificks, the Pharmaceutick Arcana's, standing Medicines, reposited in the
Physicians Closet, being the result and perfection of long labor,
industriously and carefully prepared in their own Laboratory, well proved and
completed, ready for Practice. And this determination, upon the comparison of
Medicines in this triple division; I make from Reason, and my Experience in
both the Modes of Practice, having first been conversant near ten years
together in the prescribing Practice, making Experiments with Appropriate
Medicines, pro re nata; and since, for above twenty years, operating in
Medicinal Preparations (to be Master of Catholic and Specific Medicines, more
secure and certain in their Operations) and practicing therewith.

Having thus showed you the several distinct and bounded Latitudes, the aim and
scope of Medicines, in their design of Adaptation to Persons and Cases, and my
Judgment thereupon; next we shall consider Medicines, in their different manner
of Operation or Working; how they assist Nature against all the Diseases that
assault and afflict her; and what effects we may rationally expect from their
Power and Virtues. And here you will have before you, Natures Directory, for
performing of Cures in all Diseases that shall present; and how she is to be
relieved in her praeternatural State, and deviations from her right and regular
Course.

There are six Cardinal Operations, or principal ways, by which Medicines do
operate, for the discharge and throwing off all excremental, morbific matter,
that is bred or received into the Body, viz. by Purgation, Transpiration,
Vrination, Salivation, Expectoration and Corroboration; hereby to preserve or
restore Health decayed: and these are promoted and used in Nature's Method,
which she performs in the constant work of Nutrition; casting out the relics,
and superfluous matter of our food, not fit to be retained; she works by stool,
transpires, urines, salivates, expectorates; and lastly corroborates, with the
Quintessence extracted from Aliment; and this enables Nature to perform all the
rest.

Now these Evacuations, and Roborating assistance, are to be promoted by
Medicine, as Nature oppressed or decayed, does chiefly require and stand in
need of; sometimes the one, sometimes the other. In some Cases, one of these
Operations, duly prosecuted, with an excellent good Medicine, is sufficient; as
Purgation alone sometimes does all that is needful to restore the Person
complaining: other conditions of Body may require two: as Purging, and also
roborating the Faculties. Sometimes three several operations are required by
turns: to restore lost Health, and sometimes four are needful; as in
Contumacious and Complicated Diseases, in difficult and decayed Bodies. And by
this Method all Physicians ought to go with secure well proved Medicines; and
thus all Cures are regularly to be performed, and not otherwise, by various,
uncertain, invented Medicines.

Now these being the certain ways, and only chief Methods of Curing; the
frustration and failing herein (as to the Physician's part) is from the
insufficiency and defect of Medicines, to operate completely those Intentions.
And since the design of Curing, most safely and most certainly, falls under
such a method and management as this; then it mainly concerns the Physician, to
be furnished with a stock of such choice Medicines of his own elaboration,
formed, reformed, and sufficiently proved, wherewith to dispatch his
Undertakings satisfactorily, and with credit: and it as much concerns the Sick
and Diseased, to find out such Physicians, from whom they may expect the
greatest help and relief, they are capable of; especially in difficult and
deplorable Cases; and not to be Patient sufferers, and tryers of conjectural
new invented Recipe's, and uncertain traditional Book Medicines, taken up upon
trust, collected from Authors, and transcribed from one another.

There are three principal things which concerns a Physician to know, when he
is sent for to the sick or diseased; in any of which, if he fails, the Patient
may miscarry or linger.

First, By questions, and by the symptoms that present, what the Disease or
Complication of Diseases the Patient labors under.

Secondly, What Operation, or Operations of Nature in Man's Body, are to be
promoted, or assisted; for relief in the present Case; and which to precede.

Thirdly, With what Medicine, or Medicines, this Operation, or Operations, are
to be performed by.

For the first, That is to be done at the Patient's House, in his presence. The
two latter, at the Physician's House: he must make no Medicines with Pen and
Ink in the Patient's Chamber; but return home, and there consider of the
operation indicated, and most rational to give help in that Case; whether
purging, sweating, corroborating, etc. otherwise: which having determined, the
Medicine is to be sent away immediately, if so requiring: and this Medicine
ought to be ready prepared (by himself and Servants) and well proved, long
before the use of it was wanted, or required.

But the Prescriber, he makes Medicines upon a piece of Paper in the Sick Man's
Chamber; and would have the Patient believe, that all his Complaints are put
into the Medicine; something for this, and something for that, and another
ingredient for the other ailment: but alas, here is a great mistake, Medicines
will not be designed and formed after this manner; Medicines are not to be made
by Indications, though they are to be exhibited by Indications. You must not
mix this and that together, as proper and suitable (in your Fancy) against
this and that complicated Infirmity; the Medicinal Composition may then prove
as discordant and disorderly in it self, as the Diseases in the Patient's Body
were repugnant, and exasperating one another. Because (you will say) the
ingredients are all very good; therefore the Medicine must needs be very good:
that is a non sequitur. You must steer by another Compass, if ever you will
arrive at the true knowledge of Medicines, or the right Method of Curing. After
your Mode of guessing at Medicines, many an unlucky Medicine has been
invented; the effects whereof are too bad: but all must then be fathered upon
the Disease, that was so intractable and malignant, as to produce such
unexpected strange Symptoms: pertinent to this matter, take the following Story.

Calling at a House, where formerly I had a Patient, there was one sick at that
time there; the People of the House, being my acquaintance, desired me to go
up, and give my opinion of the Sick Person, which I refused, because under the
charge and cure of another Physician: but being importuned, I was prevailed
upon, and did go into the Chamber; I viewed the sick, and asked some Questions;
understanding who the Physician was, a Man of good Learning and Repute, I gave
him his due, and said, he well knew what he had to do; and seeing some Glasses
upon the Table; I tasted of one, with a Label, inscribed, The Cordial: of a
maukish, flat, and sweet taste, more likely to make a Stomach sickish, than to
refresh and cheer a faint languishing Stomach. I took another Bottle, and
tasted a few drops upon the Pallat, turning it about in my Mouth, but swallowed
none; yet this so drew my Chaps together, with such vehement astringency, that
my breath was stopped a while, until I could recover my self: If any one would
give me a hundred Guineas, I durst not take a Spoonful down, for fear of
suffocation. I said little; only that I did not like that Medicine; but my
thoughts were full. Two or three days after, meeting a Servant of that House in
the street, I asked how that Patient did; the answer returned, she was dead.
Now these Medicines were prescribed by guess, at a venture, and ill composed:
or else the Apothecary, or his Servant, was highly in fault: but where the
miscarriage was, did not belong to me to examine; and so it past off. The
Doctor was an able Man; the Apothecary was an honest Man; and the Patient was
become a dead Woman: and there is an end of the Story. But not a few such
Casualties do fall out in the Prescribing Practice; and many People can tell
such Melancholy Tales, something like to this. The Diseases, and unhappy
Casualties thereupon, in and about London, if a true account could be had,
would make a Weekly Bill, not inconsiderable, but worth remarking.

I see, and do hear of many learned Men, and yet I can see but a very few
learned Medicines: either they fail in the association; (an Ox and an Ass
cannot well draw together) or by disproportion in quantities, or in the manner
of Process, and finishing. If Learning be not brought down into the Medicine,
what signifies Learning in point of Curing; only a varnish, and a flourish, to
set off and dazel Folks Eyes: Let me see the Medicine, I Will tell you what the
Doctor's Learning is worth, in the design of Curing.

The great Men of the World, that can command all the assistance and help this
Art can afford; and therefore deem themselves the more secure; are oftentimes
the most unfortunate, under Physic, of all others; chiefly at the times of the
greatest danger, in acute and peracute Sicknesses: having three or four, or
more Physicians to attend them: each of them must put in for a share, in
designing and forming the Medicines: one will have this, another that
ingredient, and a third, something else to be added: then the form of the
Medicines, and the Modus praeparandi, is not readily agreed upon, but dissent
and thwarting arises there, each Man stiff in his opinion, and loath to yield;
but the urgency of the Case, admitting no delay, sometimes forces an abrupt
Conclusion; not a free Consent, and general Concurrence. Now what can you
expect from these Consultations, and excogitated new Compositions, though
designed by Men of Learning; for they themselves can have no assurance in them,
but an uncertain conjecture; no well grounded hope: and so long as Practice
thus depends upon the Invention of Remedies, whose operations will be very
Casual, and then success must needs be very dubious. And now, my Lord, you have
but a Chance Medicine for all your Guineas; but that is not all the loss; here
is a cast thrown for your Life: it may happen well, by the benign aspect of
your Stars; the good Providence that protects you; but not the Doctor's Skill:
they put it upon the Venture; they can have no true knowledge of such
Appropriated Medicines; and what the result of their mixture will be, is but
strangely presumed, and groundlesly hoped; being formed without a Rule, and not
confirmed by experimented Proofs: for although the single ingredients be good
and innocent in themselves, yet what their Concord will be in Composition, and
what Concurrence to the intention aimed; nothing but Experience in the Trial
can determine. If then dubious Medicines be put upon dangerous Diseases, the
attempt seems desperate, and the event looks fatal.

If this be the Practice of Physic, then Physic shall never be practiced
(after this manner) upon me: then rather give me the Countryman's Pepper
Posset, and I Will venture it that way. I don't like to die by Physic: then I
shall know, whether my Disease be mortal or not: but he that dies in the other
chance Practice, who can tell, whether his Disease, or his Medicines, let him
slip, or thrust him out of the World. It Is a known saying, Plures gula quam
gladius: and I wish it were not as probably true, Plures Medicamenta quam
morbus. I have a farther charge to exhibit against the Prescribing Practice,
which you may expect at my next opportunity: then the World shall see what they
have doted on, and what they have trusted their lives with.

In my former Sheet called, A serious Debate, relating to Health and Sickness:
having there set forth and aproved, that from the beginning, and for many
hundred years after, Physicians were all Preparers of Medicines for their own
Practice. That Medicines were then celebrated with the Author's Names and
Places, for the People to resort thither. That of later times, Physicians have
imprudently departed from that laudable and exemplary custom; and taken up the
new Mode of prescribing to the Shops: an innovation hazardous to the Patient,
injurious to the Progress and Performance of this Art; rendering it uncertain
and unsafe: and in the end will prove the ruin of the Professors. That
although illiterate Empericks have defamed the publishing of Medicines, by
spreading their trifles abroad; yet the legal Physician is not to decline his
duty, because such Interlopers incroach upon his Privileges and right; for
such abuses will happen in the best of things.

And as for my self, having deserted the Prescribing Practice near thirty
years, and adhered to the Practice of the Antie^ts; I there made mention of
some Medicines of my own Preparation, conform to the Ancient Custom of the most
renowned Physicians, and there gave an account of their Virtues, Dose, and
manner of use; that those who stand in need thereof, may know where such help
is to be had: which perhaps elsewhere, the like may not to be purchased. In
vain it is diligently to labor a long time, and earnestly pursue the acquiring
of extraordinary means; and being attained, then to bury the success in
obscurity, and deprive the World of that relief, which many have languished for
want thereof, and now are dead.

The Medicines named, were such as most generally are wanted; viz. Scorbutic
Pills, and a Restoring Elixir.

The Pills, by their Purgative and Diuretic Operations, radically cleanse and
purify the Body, from all Scorbutic and degenerate humors: which being
evacuated and drawn forth, the various Diseases bred from those Causes, must
needs wither, and will daily lessen, if duly prosecuted: They fitly apply to
most Cases, requiring Purgation and urinary evacuations, and readily serve upon
all emergent occasions, or seasonable preventions; operating with great ease
and safety, in young or aged, and the tenderest or weakest Persons, the Dose
being suitable. And being of such great use, and durable in keeping; some
provident People, do keep them as necessary provision, to be ready, and not to
seek them at the time of need.

The Restoring Elixir performs a different operation from the Pills; but is
frequently used by turns with them: for as they by cleansing carry of the
impurities and noxious humors that oppress, clog, and obstruct the functions
of several Parts of the Body, from performing their office; so this assisting
Elixir is very useful, to quicken, strengthen, and raise up the faculties that
are languid and weak; to rectify and reinforce them, when declining and
deviating; giving an additional strength, for reducing them again into the true
execution of their offices.

I there also mentioned a Medicine very useful and proper for Ireland, against
the Disease frequent in that Country, and other Diseases usually attending
Camps and Navies, which have proved so mortal to many now of late; which gives
me cause to think, the Medicinal help has not been so fit, and efficacious, as
ought to be. If people of the best rank be meanly served at home, though
purchased at a considerable Charge; what will not serve to fill up a Chest, to
be sent abroad for the use of Soldiers and Seamen? the formality of Physic is
enough; they did not die without the use of Medicines; and to alter this
course, is against some Men's Interests; therefore any thing else proposed,
though ten times better, it shall be opposed and stifled. I wish so well to the
public service, that my zeal makes me bold to offer my sentiments, which I
hope will not be resented ill, because intended well.

But I hear, there is care taken for a better supply; that ten Physicians are
put upon the work. If they be Pharmacopoeians, Operators in Medicines; I shall
expect something extraordinary from them; but otherwise, if Readers of
Medicines, and only Book Learned; I expect no more than the result of other
Consultations; conjectural, presumed, chance Medicines. I cannot well think,
how a complete, adapt Medicine, should be made by Consultation, unless the
occasion requiring, could wait upon many Adjournments, and days of trial; to
prove, reform, and meliorate their first invention: for many a Medicine that
has been thought very good and promising upon the projection, has been found
mean upon the trial, and rejected.

One Man's experience in a Medicine, is better than ten Men's invention of a
Medicine: take that for an Aphorism. And one Man sometimes finds out that,
which a hundred cannot; and thousands never did. Here are ten Men's Heads, but
where are the Hands? The Apothecaries are to find Hands: If Heads and Hands do
not go together, I doubt the Medicines will be spurious. But farther, you will
say, here will be ten Men's experience, and that is surer than one Man's: but then
consider how hard a thing, and almost impossible it is, that the experience of
many in the form, and methodical use of Medicines, should run so even, and
represent each other in uniformity and likeness; but there must be some grains
of allowance for disparity here and there, to piece them together, for an
accord and union of Parity; to stamp the certainty of one homogeneous
experience upon them; and when that is done, I say, all these experiences, so
modelled, and reduced into one Mass, cannot be truly called concurring
experience, in omnibus, that deserves a Probatum est, and a true Copy to form
experienced Medicines by; but you must call it a probable experiment to be
made; and as yet wants Confirmation by proofs. If it be so, as in reason it is;
then I must say, that a comprehensive single Medicine, well approved by one
Man's Experience (si sit Artifex) is more to be relied on, than a Method of
Medicines, from such a compounded Experience of many. But if I prove, you can
make no true observation in your new Mode of Practice, and your experience not
grounded thereupon; your judgment must needs appear fallacious, and the
essential part of your ability taken away: for what is it that makes a
Physician able and secure in practice, but experience founded upon true
observations: and without this knowledge, he is but as a Novice, an uncertain
conjecturing Man in the methods of Curing, although an ancient Practiser. But
this I must prosecute in my next.

Since all Learning, reasoning, and designing of Medicines, must give way, and
yield up to Experience; than which nothing so certain to depend on; I must then
prefer my single tried Remedy, before the methods of any learned Consultation
whatever. Having seen the proofs thereof, and manner of operation, in various,
difficult, and deplorable Cases: one whereof was my own, and the condition so
desperate, as I would not wade through the like again, for a heap of Gold and
Diamonds: when all hopes in other Medicines failed, this alone rescued me (Deo
juvante) performing the whole course, and answering all the indications that
remarkable cure required. The story too long to insert here; or the
Contumacious Diseases of others, in which this Medicine has relieved. One part
of its usefulness and excellency lies here; that it is easily managed; whereas
Methods of Medicines, being various, both in Method and Medicine; they always
require the attendance of a Physician, upon each particular sick Person, which
cannot be allowed to an Army marching, or dispersed into Quarters, or a Fleet
at Sea. And as for internal Ulcers, or Wounds made by Gunshot, or Instrument,
where the Surgeon's hand cannot come to dress, but must depend upon internal
means; this promotes digestion in the wounded part, and also discharges the
purulent matter, or quittour; performing the office of a Balsam, and disposes
to healing: and if a Surgeon has such an expedient as this to work with, it
facilitates and sets forward his business with all imaginable safety. This is
no new Invention (to allure) contrived upon the present expedition and juncture
of Affairs; but I can prove it was fortunately designed some years since, upon
an extraordinary emergent occasion; with its use and successes in various cases
afterward in Practice. So that I offered nothing upon bare projection and
rational probability, but grounded upon matters of fact, the greatest assurance
that can be given to support the credit of a Medicine.

I am the more free upon the Character of this Medicine (yet not the half of
what I have to say) because I mentioned it as most advantageous for the Public
Service; that you may not think I offered a trifle, or what is ordinary: I wish
there may be such a Medicine found in the Medicinal Apparatus, for Army or
Navy; but I do not expect it. As for Contagious Diseases, which oftentimes do
infest Armies and Fleets (the causes whereof I could assign) and begets great
Mortality, and this for want of a right understanding thereof, good,
preventive, and curative means, and due Administration; but few are fitted for
this work. I have seen the highest Contagion that has been known in England
(Plague at London, 1665.) and voluntarily engaged therein from first to last)
when most Physicians ran away, and deserted the people in that Calamity: But I
being provided with Antidotes preventive and Curative, and knowing it was my
Duty, I therefore feared nothing; and visited those People, seized with the
Pestilence (as I do now any other Disease) my self remaining in good health
during the Contagion.

I wish for a sight of the Catalogue of Medicines designed for the service;
then I could say something more in this matter.

Quibusdam Remedia. monstranda sunt, quibusdam inculcanda. Senec. From my House
in Old Southampton Buildings, over against Gray's Inn, Jan. 1690. E. Maynwaringe.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Treatise of the Scurvey: Showing the various Nature, and Care of that
Disease. By Everard Maynwaringe, Dr. in Physic.

The History and Mystery of the Venerial Lues, Gonorrhoea's, etc. Resolving the
Doubts and Fears of such as are surprised with this secret perplexing Malady,
etc.

A Treatise of Consumptions, Scorbutic Atrophies, Hectic Fevers, Phthises,
S^ermatick and Venereous wasting, etc.

Of Pains, Inflammations, Tumors, Apostems, Ulcers, Cancers, Gangrens, and
Mortifications, internal. Therein showing the secret Causes and course of many
Chronick and Acute Mortal Diseases, rarely discerned. With a Tract of Fontanels
or Issues, and Seto^s.

The Complete Physician, qualified and dignified; the Rise and Progress of
Physic, illustrated: Physicians of different Sects and Judgments distinguished.

The Ancient and Modern Practice of Physic, Examined, Stated and Compared: The
Preparation and Custody, of Medicines; (as it was the Primitive Custom)
asserted and proved to be the proper charge, and grand Duty of every Physician
successively, etc.

The Method and Means of enjoying Health, Vigor, and long Life: Demonstrated
from the Causes of Abbreviation and Prolongation.

A Serious Debate, and general Concern; relating to Health and Sickness. The
Second Impression with a Postscript.

All Writ by the same Author.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON.

Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet; and Thomas Horn, at
the South-Entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1690.


