Mayne's Treatise of Justification.

St Paul's Travailing-pangs, With his Legal-Galatians, OR, A Treatise of
Justification; Wherein these two Assertions are chiefly evinced, viz. 1. That
Justification is not by the Law, but by Faith. 2. That yet men are generally
prone to seek Justification by the Law.


Together with several Characters assigned of a Legal and Evangelical spirit.

To which is added (By way of Appendix) the manner of transferring
Justification from the Law to Faith.

By Zach. Main, M. A.

My little Children, of whom I travail in Birth again till Christ be formed in
you, Gal. 4.19. Tell me ye that DESIRE to be under the Law, now after that ye
have known God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly Elements whereunto
ye DESIRE again to be in bondage, ver. 21.9. I through the Law am dead to the
Law, that I might live unto God, Gal. 2.19. Mirae quidem and inauditae sunt
istae definitiones, quod vivere Legi sit mori Deo, and mori Legi sit vivere
Deo. Tu vero disce eas recte intelligere. London, Printed by M. I. for Joseph
Leigh at the upper end of Bazing hall street near the Naggs head Tavern, and
Henry Cripys in Pope's Head Ally. 1662.

The Preface.
Courteous Reader,
THe Subject of this Treatise being the Justification of a sinner is very
weighty, the same things being made in the Scripture the conditions of complete
Justification and Salvation; and yet this weighty subject is exceedingly
controverted. A thing of ill and dangerous consequence! If I had therefore any
thing to produce that was new and sound upon this argument, which might serve
for the healing of the breaches that are amongst us, I might be very well
excused for increasing the vast number of Books by adding one more.

There are no less then four several opinions amongst good men touching the
matter of Justification, or the condition of it; two of which I may term
extreme, the other two middle or moderate Opinions.

The first is that of the Antinomians, who, because the Apostle Paul disputes
against Legal Works, banish all consideration of Works, though the most
Evangelical and rightly principled, from having any place at all in our
Justification. Amongst these Luther himself will be found to be a chief Leader,
though otherwise an eminent servant of God. And that I do not accuse him
falsely, let such passages as these witness for me, that are to be found in his
Commentary upon the Galatians (in which he lays that distinction of
Righteousness into active and passive, as the foundation of all his building in
the doctrine of Justification, and so makes the righteousness of the Gospel, by
which we are justified, to be only a passive righteousness) Page 10. of his
Commentary printed at Wittenberg 1535. Ego non quaero Justitiam activam (says
he) deberem quidem hab^re and facere eam, etc. that is, I seek not after active
righteousness, I ought indeed to have it and do it, but if I had it, etc.
therefore I cast my self, rejicio me extra totam justitiam abliv^m, and meam
and legis divinae, and simplicietr illam passivam amplector, without, out of,
or beyond ALL ACTIVE RIGHTEOUSNESS, both mine, and that of Gods Law, and I
simply embrace a passive righteousness, which is that of Grace, Mercy, etc. in
a word, that of Christ, and his holy spirit, which we do not do, but suffer to
be done upon us, quod non facimus, sed patimur. So again, Summa igitur ars
Cristianorum est nescire legem, ignorare legem, and TOTAM justitiam activam;
that is, It is the greatest art and wisdom of a Christian not to know, or own
the Law, Works, or any such thing as active righteousness in the matter of
Justification. Here you see he excludes all kind of Works whatsoever. So
again, page 11. Haec est nostra Theologia, etc. that is, This is our Divinity,
by which we teach accurately to distinguish between these two righteousnesses
active and passive; that Faith and Manners may not be confounded, Works and
Grace. But to mention no more, see page 12. Nihil ergo facimus nos? Nihil
operamur ad hanc justitiam consequendam? Respondeo nihil; What then do we do
nothing? Do we work nothing toward the obtaining of this righteousness? I
answer nothing; quia haec justitia est prorsus nihil facere, nihil audire,
nihil scire de Lege, aut de Operibus, sed hoc s^lum scire, and credere, quod
Christus transierit ad Patrem, and jam non videtur; that is, Because this
Righteousness, this passive Gospel-righteousness is only to DO NOTHING, to hear
nothing, to know nothing of the Law or Works, but only to know and believe
this, that Christ is gone to the Father and is not now to be seen. Here are
indeed many good words, and Gospel expressions, That we must go to Grace and
Mercy, and that the Law cannot save us, that we must not tamper with the Law in
the matter of Justification, we must ignorare legem, nescire legem, be wholly
ignorant of and disown the Law in the matter of Justification. These are all
good expressions, were it not for their companions, such as these: I cast my
self extra totam justitiam activam, out OF ALL ACTIVE righteousness, and meam
and divinae Legis, that is, All of one kind or another Legal or Evangelical,
so it be active righteousness. So again, That I simply embrace a passive
righteousness, such as we do not do but suffer. What will be said then to Faith
it self? Surely we act it not suffer it only, and that is our
Gospelrighteousness. Again, to shut out MANNERS out of Justification is
strange. But the worst expression of all is that last quoted, What then do we
do nothing? Do we work nothing toward the obtaining our Justification? I
answer nothing: Because THIS Gospel- RIGHTEOUSNESS IS INDEED TO DO NOTHING, BUT
ONLY TO BELIEVE THAT CHRIST IS GONE TO THE FATHER, etc. Neither can these
passages of Luther be interpreted of the first justification of a Sinner upon
his first believing (which I wish they could) that there faith justifies
without works; which one ingeniously, yet truly, expresses thus; Fides foeta
justificat ante partum, that faith, though it have only an obediential frame
and disposition in it to do good works, yet, effectually justifies at first
conversion before such good works are brought forth. I say Luthers expressions
cannot be taken in this sense, for he manifestly speaks of the whole life and
practice of a Christian or Saint of God, in his treating with God for his
justification, and pardon at any time. Ego non quaer^ justitiam activam (says
he) that is, I do not seek after active righteousness now at this time that I
am a Christian; that is, I do not value it in the business of Justification;
not but chat he did seek after holiness of life, as he says himself, Deberem
quidem habere and facere eam; I ought indeed to have it and do it; but when I
have it, I make no use of it in my treating with God for justification; and to
give one instance, which must needs prove that he does not mean it of
Justification at first believing. In page 10. he takes men off, when they come
to dye, from taking their comfort or discomfort from their past life (which, if
ever they were justified is the longest time after their first Justification)
without any distinction about it; whereas we find, that when Hezekiah came to
die, and had the sentence of death passed upon him by God, he presently
reflects upon his past-life, and has a great confidence upon it, nay and uses
the holiness of his life past as an argument with God to spare him longer; Isa.
38.2, 3. Then Hezekiah (after he had received the sentence from Isaiah) turned
his face to the wall, and said, Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and HAVE DONE THAT WHICH
WAS GOOD IN THY SIGHT. And so St Paul, when he thinks of leaving the world, he
reflects upon his past life; 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, HENCEFORTH there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, etc. But that I may not do Luther wrong, I shall
quote the whole passage, which I think has great usef lness in it, were it not
almost spoiled by that Antinomia^ dead fly that may be found in it, Ejusmodi
est humana imbecillitas, etc. such is the weakness and misery of Mankind, that
in terrors of conscience, and danger of death, we look at nothing else but our
Works, our own worthiness, and the Law nostram dignitatem and Legem. Which when
it shows us our sin, presently comes into our mind our past life; and then
with great grief of soul does the sinner groan, thus thinking with himself: Ah
quam perdite vixi, utinam liceret diutius vivere, tum velim emendare vitam
meam, etc. Ah how wickedly have I lived! would God I were to live longer, then
would I certainly amend my life and live better, etc. Upon which he adds, Nec
potest ratio humana, neither can HUMANE REASON (a very vile thing with the
Antinomians!) ita hoc malum est nobis insitum, illamque infelicem (...)
comparavimus, so is this evil imbred in us, and such an unhappy custom have we
gotten, that humane reason cannot, ex h^c spectro justitiae activae seu
propriae evolvere and attollere sese, get it self out of the sight of this
Bugbear or apparition called Active Righteousness, or our own proper
Righteousness, and lift it self up to the sight of Passive Righteousness, or
Christian Righteousness, but it simply sticks upon and rests in the Active. Now
I do really believe, that when we come to dye, we shall sinde great use indeed
of our faith in the mercies of God, and blood of Christ, and a little comfort
immediately vouchsafed from God by the lifting up the light of his countenance
upon us will be better worth to us, and of more speedy help in those bitter
agonies we may be cast into, than all the comfort we may be able to conclude to
our selves from the imperfect obedience of our past lives. But yet believe it,
he that then shall have the testimony of a clear conscience, and the fair
appearance or apparition of a good past life, or active righteousness, so as to
be able to use the words of good Hezekiah unto the Lord, Remember how I have
done that which was goad in thy sight, will have no occasion to turn from it as
a foul spectre or ghastly apparition; but he will rather welcome it as his good
Angel, and desire it is company with him into the other world: for upon this
account it is that they are blessed that dye in the Lord, for that they rest
from their labors, and THEIR WORKS FOLLOW THEM, Rev. 14.13. I might add many
other passages out of Luther and others, but these may suffice to show the
first extreme opinion in the business of Justification, that Works of no kind
have any thing to do there at all.

The other extreme Opinion of some good men, is. That the righteousness of
faith is an holy temper of heart, or a Christ-like nature in a man's soul,
which, because it is produced very much by faith, it is called the
righteousness of faith. Now certainly these bend the stick too much the other
way; for though Holiness be requisite unto Justification, yet it is not the
only requisite, nor the chief condition of it, upon which the honor is put by
God. Yet this Opinion I look upon to be much safer than the Antinomian Doctrine.

As for the two middle Opinions, that hold the mean betwixt these two extremes,
they are that of Mr John Goodwin and Mr Baxter; Mr Goodwin allows Evangelical
works a share in Justification, but then it is only in that part or kind of
Justification which consists in the divine approbation, but excludes them out
of that part or that kind of Justification which consists in remission of
sins, which yet he affirms is the strict Gospel-justification; and for this,
he makes faith alone to be the condition of it.

In the last place, Mr Baxter makes Faith and Evangelical Works together the
complete condition of that Justification which consists in pardon of sins, as
well as of the divine approbation, only that Faith is the principal, Works the
last principal condition, and to this Opinion I must needs adhere. Though for
Mr Goodwins I look upon it to be sufficiently removed from the Antinomian, in
that it makes Faith as an act not only as a hand receiving Christ's
righteousness, (as some Antinomians love to speak) the condition of
Justification, and Works too to be necessary unto the obtaining divine
approbation; besides, that he holds that the final Justification at the day of
Judgment shall proceed according to Works. And indeed I am so far of his
opinion, that I think faith has a far greater share in our Justification,
than all our good Works put together; yea, that our good Works do chiefly
justifye as they have faith in them, and for the sake of that faith that
spirits them, of which I have given some proof in the ensuing Treatise, page
270, 271. out of Heb. 11. where the Apostle sindes out a faith in the actions
of several of the Patriarchs, and says it was by faith that they did this or
that and were justified, though their story mention nothing of their faith at
all. And it may be said as well that Works without Faith are dead being alone,
as that Faith without Works is dead being alone.

Now these four Opinions lying fair in view, in all which, there are good men
engaged, and in some of them to a great heat of contention; it were a worthy
design (in any man that were able) to endeavor their reconciliation to each
other, (if all means have not been used) and especially considering that there
is no other thing requisite in order to it, but a right state of this or these
two questions, Whether, and, if so, How far Evangelical Works have an
influence upon the justification of a sinner? I say, there is nothing else
necessary to the ending of the controversies between all these, but the stating
of this question, and the honest attending to such a state given: For that all
the parties agree upon the same things for matter, viz. That we must believe,
and that we must do good Works and that to our utmost; only one says
Evangelical Works have a share in our justification; another says they have
none; one says they signify so much, another but so much, none deny that good
works are to be done. I might mention another difference in opinion concerning
faith in justification, and that is concerning what kind of faith it is that
is the condition of our justification; whether only that faith that has a
direct and express respect to Christ and his death, or else all acts of faith
whatsoever upon the power, goodness, and faithfulness of God, as well as that
upon Christ and his blood. I hope I have in some of these things added one mire
at least unto the treasury of Knowledge, or else I were very impertinent indeed.

But this was not my design in composing this Treatise, to give a state of such
questions, and therefore what I have done of such a kind, I have cast at the
end of my Book, as not being chiefly intended, nor indeed intended at all at
first, but only as I found that it would be necessary to say something upon
them.

Or if I had desired to engage in such a design, these several reasons might
have discouraged me: First, that it required vast abilities to undertake it;
Secondly, That I thought it had been very well performed by Mr Baxter already;
and Thirdly, That though any should be judiciously satisfied, that he could
give a better state than yet had been given, he might very well doubt how it
would be entertained amongst the contenders, when Mr Baxter (of whom I have
heard a very learned and godly Person say of late, That he would shine in
heaven for his book of Aphorisms) yet by it purchased the highest displeasure
from his Presbyterian Brethren.

My design therefore was wholly of another nature; for observing that the
Subject was as well practical and experimental as disputable (though there are
very worthy and lofty speculations to be had about it) I thought it the most
efficacious way of ending the disputes about it, at least of making it useful
to honest men (leaving disputers to themselves) to show how it was practical
and experimental, and by how much the shorrer I was in my doctrine upon this
Subject, to be so much the larger in my application.

And indeed I must needs say I observed, as I thought, that those who had
hitherto written upon this Subject were deficient in one great piece of
Application. Mr Baxter and others I thought had done excellent service against
the Antinomians, who have sadly provoked them in these late times both in the
Pulpit and Press, and their private suggestions and insinuations: but then they
were more sparing in using the two-edged sword of Truth in this Subject on that
side where it should cut the Legalist: whereas there was as much or more need
to set themselves against them, as against the Antinomian.

If we would learn what Legality was that we might avoid it, we must go to the
Antinomians; there was little to be heard of this Subject amongst others;
though in the mean time they did most dangerously poison their Auditors and
Disciples with false descriptions of Legality; so that I have my self, whilst
formerly an Antinomian and an Enthusiast, looked upon that to be as ugly as
Hell and Damnation, which I now receive for good, wholesome, and precious
Evangelical truth; I could well have approved of that saying of Luther
formerly, Operatores sunt Martyrs Diab^li, that is, That those that do mind
Works in the matter of Justification, though Evangelical works, so far as they
mind them, they are the Devils Martyrs, and bear their testimony by the
anguishes of their spirit against the Righteousness of the Gospel; and yet from
such Teachers we must receive the notes of Legality, others that are enemies to
the Antinomians not offering at this Subject, at least in that professed way as
the Antinomians do.

This I looked upon to be a considerable defect, especially when I observed
that the Apostle Paul in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, as also in
some other places, lets out the chief of his zeal, Romans 61, 2. What shall we
say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forb^d. So ver.
15. Romans 3.5, 7, 8.
and uses the greatest strength of argument against this sort of men; whereas
he is but here and there sparingly touching upon the Libertine, which I hold to
be the practical Antinomian.

And as I said even now, this Subject is a practical Subject, and highly
experimental, yea every whit, and rather more experienced in the inconveniences
of Legality, than of those of Antinomiansme, For the Law and Grace contend for
the dominion and mastery in every heart that but entertains the thoughts of
Religion. Now where the notion of Grace prevails in a right way, there is the
right Saint or Christian; By this division thou may (if thou judge
necessary) supply a member of a division that may seem to be wanting. Page 117,
118. where I have divided all Religious persons into two forts, viz. Legal and
Evangelical; though were i^ not for giving offense I might still leave the
Antinomian, that is, the high practical Antinomian out of the number of
Religious persons.
where it prevails in a wrong way, without a due seriousness of heart, there is
Antinomianisme; when the Law prevails, there is Legality: Now I verily believe
that there are ten Legalists to one Antinomian, for all the Superstitious world
are Legalists; and I have shown in the following Treatise that there are many
moral Legalists: and there is evident reason why there may well be more
Legalists than Antinomians, for that, with a little knowledge in Religion men
may prove Legalists, whereas to be Antinomians requires somewhat more than
ordinary of notion in Religion; besides, there is another reason why there
should be at least equal care taken if not more (in the application of the
doctrine of Justification) for the searching and rooting out of Legality than
there is to be had for the destroying Antinomianism; because, destructive
Legality takes faster hold of men that are under it, than destructive
Antinomianisme does. For the Legalist that depends upon his external
Privileges or performances is not so easily beaten out of his hold, as the
Antinomian that is destructively so, that is, a Libertine; (for there is a
partial Antinomianism as well as a partial Legality that is not destructive)
because he falls under an easy and obvious conviction (except he have gotten a
brawny conscience) for that his miscarriages are more gross, whereas a
Legalists faults are hidden and spiritual:

However I am sure there is both for the number of Legalists and their usual
rootedness in that distemper reason for equal provision to be made about them
to what there is to be made about the Antinomians. Now finding that there was
not, at least not finding that there was equal care taken, I adventured to say
something about it; I wish I may provoke some other to do it better, and they
shall have my hearty prayers to the Lord for their assistance in such a work.

And besides these several reasons which I have mentioned, as moving me to the
composing of this Treatise, especially that part of it which consists of the
characters, there was another very prevailing with me, and it was my own
necessity of being well enlightened about this matter. For I found daily use
use of some of the observations which I have here given thee, in every prayer,
yea in the mannagement of my spirit all the day long. I found the Law striving
to get the mastery of my spirit, that is, sin by the (severity of the)
commandem^nt would have destroyed all that little life and quickness which I
had in the service of God, would have made me unwilling to serve God, to be
averse unto him and his ways, yea to conceive a professed displeasure against
God himself, till I have been relieved by some of these considerations which I
here tender unto thee for the same end, with an earnest prayer that they may do
thy soul good, as I hope they have done mine.

And I doubt not, but Luther being a good man, and one of a great spirit, had a
considerable and worthy design in endeavoring to get the Law out of his
conscience, as his phrase is, I mean getting it from its dominion over him,
though he might herein over-do it, as it is certain he did overspeak it. I
shall here do him the right to quote a large and lively branch of his
Discourse, that is not (as I apprehend) liable to exception; it is in his
Preface or Argument before his Commentary, page 14. says he, When at any time
the Law would ascend into thy conscience and domineer there, ibi dom^naci, say
unto it, Law, or Lady Law (as in some places he speaks) Domina Lex, will thou
ascend into the Kingdom of my conscience, and rule there, and argue it of sin,
and take away my joy which I have by faith in Christ, and bring me into
desperation, that I perish? hoc praeter officium tuum facis, here thou go
beyond thy Commission: stay within thy own bounds, consiste intra tuos limits,
and exerce dominium in carnem, and exercise dominion over my flesh; (which
expression I do not well understand, except it be that so far as we are
fleshly we are still under the Law, and therefore as the Law was given to
humble us at first, so it has the same use still, as also to direct our lives)
exercise thy dominion over my flesh, conscientiam autem ne atting as mihi, but
offer not to touch my conscience, for I am baptized, and called by the Gospel
into the communion of righteousness, and eternal life, unto the Kingdom of
Christ, in which my conscience is quieted, (or does acquiesce) where there is
no Law, (that is, no Law for condemnation) but mere remission of sins, mera
remissio peccatorum, peace, quietness, joy, salvation, and eternal life; ista
ne inter^nrbes mihi, do not hinder me, nor disturb me in the enjoyment and
possession of these things; let not the Law, which is an hard tyrant and cruel
exactor reign in my conscience, but Christ the Son of God, the King of Peace
and Righteousness, the most sweet Savior and Mediator.

And now I have have only this to beg pardon of thee for, that I have spoken
to so great and weighty things in so unstudyed and undigested a dress and
method; but as an argument to prevail with thee for my pardon, I assure thee,
that could I have promised my self an opportunity of printing these papers some
two or three years hence, (and the Lord continued life) I should have detained
them in my own custody so long, on purpose that they might have received a
better formation.

If thou take offense at me for that I have taken liberty in something or other
to vary from most of those few Authors that I quote in the Treatise, I crave
not thy pardon for it, for neither will the Authors themselves have any reason
to be angry, when they consider and believe that, if I had not valued them I
should never have quoted them, and, but for that I valued the truth before
them, I should never have varied from them.

Once more Reader, if thou should think it undecent that there should be any
thing in the following Advertisement (for which I am so much beholden to the
Reverend Author of it) different from what is asserted in the body of the Book;
as for instance, that the Author seems to judge that there is no repetition
of the act of Justification as it signifies pardon, that Works justify only in
sensu morali, not in sensu forensi; take this for thy satisfaction, that I had
full power from the Worthy Author of it to have left ^ut, yea, or put in what I
pleased in the printing of it. But I presumed not to add or diminish one
tittle, as judging it but equity and justice that others (especially the
Learned, should have the same liberty to differ from me that I take to differ
from them. Besides, I account this so far from being any lessening to the
value of the testimony given me, that I reckon it a greater advantage to
receive it from a Learned man, from whom I presumed to differ, than if he had
been perfectly of my mind.

Now the presence of God and of thy best understanding be with thee in the
reading; and so I bid thee farewell.

Thine in Christ, Zach. Main.

An Advertisement unto the READER, concerning the Author, Subject, and contents
of the Treatise ensuing.
THE Treatise in thy hand, whilst yet unread, may (possibly) suffer in thy
esteem through want of years in the Composer: against which inconvenience I
thought it might be some kind of relief unto it, to send it forth attended
with a sober Preface, drawn up by a Person, whose years, though but meanly
improved, are sufficient to discern between impertinencies, and matters of
weight and worth. The Apostle in this brief address unto Timothy, Let no man
despise thy youth 1 Timothy 4.12.
, supposes two things; 1. That youth is obnoxious to neglect, or undervaluing,
by men. 2. That young men may nonwithstanding redeem themselves from under this
disadvantage, and stave off their enemy, Contempt, which otherwise threatens
to be upon them, and make a prey and spoil of that, which is honorable, and
might be useful, in them. In the place cited, the Holy Ghost prescribes unto
Timothy this method for the healing of that weakness in men, by reason whereof
they were like to be injurious unto him (and, indeed, unto themselves more) in
respect of his youth; But be thou an ensample [or, the pattern, (...)] of those
that are faithful, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in says,
in purity; meaning, that by hearkening to this counsel, he should impose a
pleasing necessity upon men, to make him, his youth notwithstanding, at least
equal, in honor, reverence, and respects with such persons, who by maturity of
years a^e invested with a natural right and title unto such Privileges.

How the Author of the Discourse before thee, has qui^^ed himself in the five
particulars last specified by the Apostle, Conversation, Charity, Spirit,
Faith, Purity, in order to the vindication or balancing of his years, I must
referr both thee and my self unto those, who have h^d longer time, and more and
larger opportunities to understand him in these then I have had: although it be
meet for us both (...) judge, that he has seen Christianly provident, even by
these, to way-lay that prejudice and disparagement which his under-growth in
age exposes him unto. But as far as by word, speech, or writing, a young man
may secure his years from the imputation of inconsiderableness, and purchase
himself an equitable title to divide the heritage of Reverence and honor, with
men of a far longer standing in the world, he that has befriended the world
with the Treatise ensuing, has (to the best of my understanding) very
substantially performed both.

Not to insist upon the style, which is grave, and yet pleasant enough, and at
a due distance from affectation; the argument, or theme undertaken in the Book,
The Justification of a sinner, is, both of as important and necessary, and of
as sublime and difficult a contemplation, at least in many of the veins or
branches of it, as any other subject within the circumference of Divinity, or
Christian Religion. Yea, whereas in the best and most serviceable of the years
of my earthly Pilgrimage, I have been (by the providence of God) occasionally
engaged to wade somewhat far in the deep waters of those two mysterious
Articles of the Common Faith of Christians. Justification and Predestination,
and so necessitated to inquire into and consider, with the best of my
understanding, the respective natures of them both; if I were now desired to
give my sense concerning the difference between them in point of difficulty, or
whether of the two requires more of the reason and understanding of a man, to
come at any well-grounded satisfaction in all matters of moment relating to it,
I must award the precedeney herein unto Justification: For though the Doctrines
of Election and Reprobation be resented by many, as points of a most abstruse
and sublime consideration, yet I really judge, upon the credit of my unpartial
diligence in making the comparison, that the secret veins running along in, and
spreading themselves over, the body of the Doctrine of Justification, are both
more in number, and also of a more spiritual and hidden nature, harder to be
clearly opened, than those that occur in the other Doctrines.

Not having had time to peruse the Treatise since the printing of it, nor any
other knowledge of the contents of it, but only what I gained by some broken
communications about them with the Author, when his leisure and mine could
agree, (which was not very often) whilst he was preparing it for the Press, I
am not able to give thee a steady account how far he has traversed his
Subject, or about how many of the arcana, or difficult Queries relating to it
he has engaged his pen in the present Discourse. I suppose it never came near
his thoughts, to interess so small a Tract in all the inquireable points about
Justification (nor do I know any man, amongst those many that have served the
Christian World in that argument, that have raised the pitch of their
Undertaking so high.) But I well remember he has labored very commendably,
and to the good contentment (I doubt not) of the consciences of those that
shall conseientiously read and mind what he has written, in sundry
particulars, very necessary to be understood by those that are desirous to know
the whole counsel of God in that Great and most important Article of their most
holy Profession (I mean, Justification.) He has with a strong hand removed
that stumbling Stone of Justification from eternity, which the Spirit of
Antinomianisme has laid in the way of Christian profession, and at which, not
a few, learned and unlearned, have stumbled. This Error being so broad-fac'd
and palpable, had need have the countenance of some, that are counted Pillars
in the Christian Church to support it. And were it (...) so gross, and easy of
detection, I might take the beldness with modesty enough, to challenge and
accuse it of a most malesique and dangerous influence upon the very life of
Christianity. For besides other threatening tendencies of ^t of this kind, both
the face and heart of it are set to deprive the world of the spirit, life, and
soul of all that the great Apostle Paul has written in his Epistles, in
asserting the Doctrine of Justification by Faith against the Jews, and all
others opposing it: which is a good part (not to say the best, or gredtest
part) of all the heavenly Legatie, which he has left in writing unto the
world, for that Love's sake which he bare in his lifetime to the salvation of
it. For if the great contest between him and his Oppanents (the Jews) was not
about Justification it self, or about the means, whereby it is to be obtained
in the sight of God, but only about the manifestation, or declarative of it,
and this before men, which they must of necessity affirm, that hold men really
and actually justified by God from eternity; then (doubtless) the Jews, who
pleaded for Justification by Works, had the better end of the staff; inasmuch
as these have a greater declarative force, at least in reference unto men, of
the state of Justification, or of the acceptance of a person with God, than
Faith has. This, not reason and experience only, but the Scripture it self
supposes from place to place, still making ways and works of Righteousness,
and fruitfulness in well-doing, the most unquestionable Characters and proofs
of persons justified, and in favor with God. Places of this import, and very
pregnantly such, might soon be drawn together in great numbers; but I judge this
needless, by reason of the frequent and familiar occurrencie of such places.
Whereas Faith is here represented, as in, and of, it self, inevident, and as
standing in need of the light of Works, to make it visible or manifest unto
men, Jam. 2.18. 1 John 37.10. Romans 8.1. Besides, the Apostle, in his Epistle to
the Romans, where he is more large in the vindication of his Doctrine
concerning Justification by Faith, then elsewhere in any place, speaks
expressly of the constituting [i. e. of the actual making] of men just, or
righteous, c. 5.19. [that is, the investing men with the state of
Justification] but no where mentions any thing concerning the manifestation
of such a state. And the truth is, that the contest about Justification,
wherein be engaged against the Jews with so much zeal, so much ardencie of
desire to convince them, with such variety of exquisite and ponderous arguing,
to bring the truth to light, against which they contended with him; the contest
(I say) had hardly been worth all this oleum and opera, all this solemnity,
and height of engagement by such a man, had it been only about the
manifestation, and not about the way and means of procuring a justified estate.
An account of this assertion might be given, if need were.

Another thing worthy consideration about the great Subject of the Treatise,
is, whether, and if so, why justification, or Forgiveness of sins, is ascribed,
as well to such acts of Faith, which do not, at least directly, or immediately,
relate unto Christ, or unto the death of Christ, as unto these which do. Thou will sinde here more produced from the Scriptures to prove the (...) of such an
ascription, then, as far as my reading and memory can inform me, is to be met
with elsewhere: and as much said upon a rational and probable account for
clearing the (...), or reason of it, as may be sufficient to quiet the thoughts
of men in the case. For it does not bear hard at all, either upon the Wisdom
of God, or upon any of his words in the Scripture, to conceive, that any act
from a believing frame or disposition of soul in man toward God, should reduce
him under the Divine Decree of Justification, and so interesse him in the
benefit or blessing hereof; considering, that every such act does arguitive (as
the Schoolmen speak) that is, virtually and consequentially, comprehend in it
such an act of believing also, which is directly and immediately acted upon
Christ, or his death. It is a rule in the Civil Law, ^avores sunt ampliandi;
the meaning is, that such passages or clauses in the Law which were intended in
way of favor or benefit unto men, ought to be interpreted in the largest and
most comprehensive sense that the words will any way bear: as on the other hand
there is this rule, In odiosis stricte facienda est interpretatio; Such sayings
in the Law, which concern the punishment of persons, in one kind or other, are
to be understood in as narrow and restrained a sense as the words will permit.
Doubtless these notions for the expounding of Laws, both in the one case and
the other, are equitable, agreeable to reason and the light of nature; and
consequently are to be found in the nature of God himself, who (as the
Scripture informs us) made man in his own image, or likeness; and vested the
same, or the like principles, or impressions, of Reason, Equity, and
Understanding in him, with those that were in himself. So that it need be no
great matter of wonder that God should be very indulgent and large in
interpreting such clauses in the Gospel, which relate unto the justification
and salvation of men, and (consequently) should find justifying Faith in such
acts of believing, which may any ways, even by the most abstruse, subtle, or
profound way of arguing, be conceived to evince or comprehend it.

Whether upon every reiterated or repeated act of believing, the believer is
justified afresh; if so, what does a supervenient act of Justification profit
him that is perfectly justified already? or how is there place for the effect
of such an act, as that of Justification in him, all whose sins, by means of
his being in Christ are already pardoned by God? or if not, what should be the
reason why one act of the same Faith should not justify, as well as another?
Are problemes worthy the consideration and inquiry of an ingenuous Student in
the mysterious science of Justification? These also or some of them, are
ingeniously discussed, and endeavored to be resolved in this Treatise.
Doubtless every new act of believing does not procure or bring unto him that so
acts a new justification (properly so called, and which consists in
remission of sins.) Nor is this any disparagement to an after-act of believing,
in comparison of any former, or the first act in this kind, by which
Justification in this sense was obtained, nor does it argue any whit less
acceptance of it with God. For as the saying in natural Philosophy is, Quiequid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis, the qualification, or condition of
the Subject, does often, if not always, modifie the effect of the act that is
exercised or acted upon it: So he, who by virtue of a former act of believing
remains and is in a complete state of Justification, all his sins being
forgiven him by God, is not capable of receiving the forgiveness of them (at
least in the same sense, or kind) the second time, because he needs i^ not.
For it being unpossible for God, in respect of the infinity of his Wisdom, to
do any thing superstuous, no creature can be in a regular capacity of receiving
any matter of grace or favor from him, unless in one respect or other it
stands in need of it. Every repeated act of Faith does (indeed) obtain from
God another kind of Justification, I mean, Approbation; which is often in
Scripture expressed, and this without any great acyrology, or impropriety of
speech, by the word Justification. For though men were approved of him before,
as well as justified, yet Approbation being susceptive of magis and minus, or
of degrees, which Justification, strictly taken, is not; they may be often
approved, yet not often (in that sense) justified (their former justification
remaining.) That forgiveness of sins which Christ teaches us to ask of God
daily, either imports the continuation of the first act whereby he justified
us, which it is meet we should ask of him, in respect of our new and daily
transgressions; or (which I rather conceive, yet with submission) Gods
forbearing to punish us with temporal punishments for our daily sins, being at
liberty we know) thus to punish us, notwithstanding our justified estate, if he
be not entreated by us in this respect to forgive us. Other great and high
concernments the care of repeated acts of belicoing, which are not proper to be
mentioned here.

(...) in Christ, or in God by means of Christ (for the Scripture uses both
expressions indifferently) qualifieth and inricheth the soul with all
principles of righteousness and goodness, and so constitutes a person
inherently just and righteous, some of late have conceived, that in this notion
or consideration it justifies, and that God, looking upon man as inwardly just
and righteous, by the worthy operation of Faith in and upon his heart and soul,
pronounces him accordingly to be a just and righteous person. With this
conceit thou will ^ade the Author of the Treatise cast into somewhat a like
passion with Paul at Athens, when he beheld the City (...), given to Idolatry;
the Text says, (...), his spirit was sharply-provoked, or stirred, within him,
Act. 17.16. I found him not so warm at any other work in all his Book, as in
his wrestlings against this Opinion. His zeal in the case is very pardonable,
if not commendable rather, the matter being exceeding weighty: For if that be
all the Justification we receive from God, to be pronounced just, or righteous
by him, according to that righteousness, which he sees truly and really
inherent in us, and for the same, what becomes of our sins? Are these still
retained and unforgiven? Or if they be forgiven, is the forgiveness of them
nothing, no part of our Justification? And if they be forgiven, are they
forgiven for the sake of that inherent righteousness, for, and according unto,
which (says the Opinion) God pronounces us righteous, that is justifies us?
Does not this notion wholly evacuate the firstborn inter Magnalia Dei, the
most adorable Vouchsasement, that ever the Grace, and Love, or Bounty of God
issued forth unto the world; I mean, the propitiatory Sucrifice of Christ?
Besides, if God shall pronounce us righteous only for, and according to that
righteousness which he sees and knows to be in us, and this be our
Justification, the Grace of God will have but a saint and feeble hand in our
Justification. For it is but a kind of debt for him, that certainly knows
another man to be righteous, to give testimory unto him accordingly, and to
pronounce him such upon occasion. But for the further eviction of this so
Anti-Evangelical a notion, I referr thee to the Treatise it self. Only (if
thou please) bear me a few words about what I conceive may be the occasion
(at least in part) of the sad mistake. When God in the Scripture calls or
pronounces men righteous for, and according to, that righteousness which is
really and truly vested in them. 1. He speaks not of an absolute, district
and perfect righteousness, or such which without any more ade, gives them a
right of claim to Heaven, but first, of such a righteousness which is inchoate
only, and wants many degrees of its perfect growth and stature, admitting no
small mixture of unrighteousness with it, according to these, and many like
Scriptures: In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, etc. 1 John 1.8.10. Who can understand his errors?
Cleanse thou me from secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. There is not a just man on
earth that does good and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. There is no man that
sins not, 1 King. 8.46. Secondly, He speaks of a comparative
righteousness, pronouncing the Saints righteous, [ viz. in respect of the
world, which as John says, lies in wickedness. Again,

2. When God pronounces Believers righteous for, and according to that good
and righteous frame of heart which he sees in them, he does not justify them
in the sense of the word Justify, in the Questions and Controversies about the
justification of a sinner, namely, sensu forensi, as persons are said to be
justified from Crimes laid to their charge by a Judge; but sensu morali, as
when persons that are approved by whomsoever, for any thing either done by
them, or known or supposed to he in them, are said to be justified by them. The
word Justify is frequently used in this sense in the Scriptures. Job 27.5,
33.32, 11.2. Prove. 17.15. compared with Chapter 24.34, and 28.4. Matt. 11.19. Luke
7.35. Matthew. 12.37. (with many others.) Whereas when God is said to justify
those that believe, with that Justification which is said to be of, or unto
life, ({ i.e. unto salvation) Romans 5.18. he is said to forgive their
iniquities, to cover their sins, not to impute sin unto them, etc. Romans 4.5.
compared with 6.7, 8. Acts 13.38. with 39 See also Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Luke
1.77. Romans 3.25. with 8.26* The forgiveness of sins is (indeed) a most
absolute, district and complete righteousness [in its kind] having no mixture
or tincture of any weakness or imperfection in it; and, as to the benefit and
comfort of all that receive it, comprehending in it the constant observation of
the whole Law of God to every the least iota or tittle of it. In respect of
this most exquisite, absolute and divine perfection of it, as well as in
others, it may well be termed (as it is Romans 3.21, 22. twice together) THE
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF God. It is like the non-advertency of these particulars might
render the Judgments of some learned men the more obnoxious to the error now
impleaded.

Yet further, he that desires to understand himself like a Christian in so
material a piece of his profession, as Justification, had need be able and
expert to distinguish the terms, and phrases, which frequently occur in the
Scriptures relating to it, out of their ambiguities and diversities of
significations and imports; and so likewise to know when different words or
expressions are the same in sense and import, either expressly, or implicitly,
and by consequence, otherwise they will never sit easia and light some in their
judgment about many particulars belonging to it. I must not stand to instance
in particulars; I have already exceeded the intended proportion of my
Advertisement. But in this concernment also thou will find the Treatise at hand
a good Benefactor unto thee: This will inform thee, that the word Righteousness
does not always signify the principle or virtue of righteousness inherent in
the soul, but sometimes that which we may call an adherent, or a relative
righteousness, viz. a non-imputation of sin, or the forgiveness of sin, called
also (as we lately showed) the Righteousness of God, and sometimes the
Righteousness of Faith; that is, which is obtained by Faith. So again, it will
acquaint thee with different significations of the words, Just, Justify,
Justification, and some others; by the knowledge whereof the rough ways of the
study of Justification will be made smooth.

But the carriages or passages of the Treatise hitherto pointed at, are (in the
eye of my comparing faculty) but as Pictures of Silver, the Apple of Gold
amongst them; and which to me is vena basilica, the Master-Vein of the
Discourse, is that quarter of it in which the Evangelical purity and simplicity
of Justification is asserted against the importune, yet subtle and close
insinuations of a legal spirit. For as I know no Doctrine greater then that of
Justification, within the whole Hemisphere of Christian Profession (as before
was hinted) so neither do I apprehend any thing more threatening the world with
the loss of the great benefit and blessing of this great Doctrine, then that
(...), that Spiritual Wickedness which so much haunteth it especially in the
practique of it; I mean, the Spirit that so violently, and this so generally,
tempts and importuneth men to take somewhat from the Law for the relief of
Christ in his great work of Justification; as if in this case also it were
true, that two are better then one, This Spirit (I believe) was never more
narrowly sifted, or more closely pursued then here: He is detected by certain
signs and symptoms, lurking in several forms and shapes, at the root of the
hearts and minds of men; yea it is here showed, that there are few or none so
purely, distinctly, and sixedly Evangelical in their notion of Justification,
but some grudgings (at least) of Legalism hang upon them, as if they durst not
entrust themselves or their souls in the hand of the Grace, or Promise of God
in Christ, without some encouragement from Moses. But the comfort is, that
every touch or tincture of this bewitching Spirit, is not exclusive from the
blessing of Justification; a truth well stated in the Discourse before thee.
The reason or occasion rather why this Epilectical Distemper of falling upon
the Law in the high concernment of Justification, is so Epidemical amongst the
children of men, seems to be the most transcendent brightness of the glory of
the Grace of God in his terms or way of Justification, which exceeding
brightness does so praestringere oculos, dazzle the weak eye of their Reason and
Understanding, that they are very hardly able to look steadfastly upon it
without some refraction or allay; as it is said that the Children of Israel
could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance,
but were afraid to come nigh him, (yea Aaron himself was afraid) until he had
put a covering o^ Veil upon his face, [that is, I conteive not such a covering
which did altogether hide, or keep from their sight the luster or shining of
his face, but which only did (as it were) correct the disproportion of it to
their sight, and reduce it to a temper or degree passable with it, and pleasing
to it] Exodus 34 30.33, etc. with 2 Cor. 3 7.13. To bring forth the mind of God
concerning justification, in respect of the absolute freeness and
non-de^endency of it upon the La^, into a clear, convincing, and satisfactory
light, is (I conceive) the highest service that can (lightly) be performed to
the Christian world. He that is well grounded and rooted in the knowledge
hereof, and also understands in any good measure the weight and worth of a
justified estate, stands upon ground of the greatest advantage to anticipate
his future equality with the holy Angels, as well in holiness as in happiness
and joy. For I believe that the Grace of God in Justification thoroughly
apprehended, and seriously believed, is of too strong an eng agement, yea too
soveraignly enclining unto holiness, to be (readily or easily) turned into
wantonness.

But I keep thee too long in the Porch, for in the House thou will find many
more pleasant things (for in matters of spiritual concernment all profitable
things are to be counted pleasant) then I have all this while acquainted thee
with: There are diverse choice strains of Spiritual Discourse, with several
lights set up in many dark places of Scripture, which I have not set down in my
Inventory: For I judge it more honorable to the Author, (yea and to his friend
also, that was willing to serve his pen with a few lines of good will) that his
Treatise be found above his Preface, rather then beneath it. My desire and
design in this my Anteloquium, was not so much to raise, as to encourage thy
expectation. To wish thee as much Christian satisfaction and contentment i^ the
perusal of the Treatise, as my self received by the Author imparting some of
the Contents unto me, would be to wish thee liberally. The blessing of him that
justifies the ungodly, and yet is just in so doing, be upon thee, and upon all
thy Conscientious labors, and applications unto him in the use of all means
which he has sealed for the saving of thy soul; and when thou shall be full of
comfort and peace, forget not him who remembers thee at the Throne of Grace,
and rests,

Thy Christian Friend, that has but one heart for thee and himself, J. G.

ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 10. read times. p. 5. l. 7. r. Gal. 2.16. p. 8 l. 26. leave out
and then the Law must justify him. page 9. lin. last, r. Joh. 8.7. p. 10. l.
26. r. us by: p. 11. l. 16. leave our therefore. p. 21. l. 27. r. Covenant. p.
22. l. 12. r. Romans 10.5. p. 23. l. 20. r. serves. p. 53. l. 11. r. this. ibid.
lin. 33. r. Ordinances. p. 58. l. 1. r. Commentators. p. 63. l. 7. r. makes. p.
67. l. last r. and thou. p. 81. l. 7. r. we are. p. 86. l. 8. r. Epaphras. ult.
r. from the 15 to the 19. p. 87. l. 31. r. have thought. p. 90. l last r. take.
p. 92. l. 26. r. no good. p. 103. l. 1. r. wonder. p. 115. l. 1. r. own. p.
124. l. 19. r. Justice. p. 135. l. last r. thou set. p 137. 1. 31. leave out
they. p. 139. l. 20. r. none. p. 180. l. last r. spirit for call. p. 192. last
5 lines to be left out. p. 194. l. 9. r. same time. p. 1^5. l 9. r. hands. lin.
21. r. honest. p. 197. l. 16. 1. cruelties. p. 200. l. 26. r. so far. lin.
lastr. self. p. 202. l. 9. r. legality. p. 210. l. 23. r. how Ahab. p. 231. l.
14. 1. and. l. 25 r. discourse. l. 31. r. Pharisce. 232. l. 15. r. certainly. p
258. l. 17. r. neglect to study. p. 239. l. 3. r. Christ. p. 243. l. last r.
terminated. p. 244 l 8. r. from. p. 310. l. 5. for Christ read sin. p. 321. l.
1. r. says. p. 323. marg. r inference from it. p. 341. l. 15. r. that. p. 345.
l. 19. r. fundamental. p. 349. l. 34. r. thy.

Of Justification.
JUstification may be considered as an Act of God upon the Creature, The
de^^nicion, or description of Justification.
or as a state of the Creature resulting from that act: As God's act, it is,
God's reckoning or reputing a man just and righteous. As the Creatures state,
it is, his being reckoned, and standing for just and righteous in the sight of
God. That this is a Scripture-desinition or description, may appear from Romans
2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the
Law shall be justified: Where to be just before God, and to be justified, is
all one; therefore Justification is a man's being just before God, reckoned,
reputed by God so to be; Another place that proves this description, you have
Gal. 3.11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, is
evident; for the just shall live by Faith: The justified man is a just man in
the sight of God. To be justified before God, or in the sight of God, or by
God, are all one; for it is the same phrase, (...) in both places; and the
meaning is only this, that God must reckon that man just whosoever is
justified, according to that in 2 Cor. 10.18. Not he that commends himself is
approved: I may add, not he whom all the men on earth, or all the Augels in
Heaven commend, is therefore approved, but whom the Lord commends.

This act or state of Justification is variously expressed in the Scripture, I
shall give just a taste of it. The description of ^ustification v^ried in the
Scripture.
In Genesis 4.7. It is called God's accepting of us: If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? And again, Gods having respect unto us, in the same chap. v.
4.5. The Lord had respect unto Abel, and unto his Offering; but unto Cain and
his Offering he had not respect.

Once more; Justification is expressed thus, To have a Tessimony from God that
we please him, Heb. 11.6. But I shall keep to my first description, because
that is especially made use of by the Apostle Paul, in his professed Discourses
upon this subject, viz. That Justification is a man's being reputed just and
righteous in the sight of God; and indeed the Apostle Paul as a close Disputant
keeps to his terms, and rallyes all the terms of a sort together, which in this
business are these three especially, (...), and (...), that is, Just, Justice
or Rightcousness, and Justification. Every ^ustified person^s reputed a just
man, by virtue of a Justice or Righteousness that constitutes him so, or at
least makes him a Subject immediately sit for this Act of Justification to pass
upon him: For Justification is a legal or judicial Act, the Act usually of a
Court. Now men in their Courts will not pronounce a man just when he is
accused, or is brought upon his justification; except there be a righteousness
appearing in him, except there be something sufficient brought in his
justification: And do we think that God will transact such a great business more
slightly than we are wont to do? Why, this Justification of a man's person, it
is done in the sight of God; and (that I may a little illustrate it) it seems
to be done in the Court of Heaven, before all tht Augels of God; for they
re^oice at the conversion of a Sinner, and so at his Justification, Luke 12.8,
9.15.10. Therefore in the Court of Heaven, when one is to be justified, the
great inquiry that is made, is after a Righteousness: And the Apostle Paul's
Epistles when he treats of this subject, ring of nothing so loudly as of a
Righteousness: No less then thirty several time does the Apostle make mention
of that Word Rightcousness, in that one Epistle to the Romans and and at least
twenty of those times it is referred unto Justification; therefore
Justification must be by a Righteonsness: The great Question therefore is this;
What is the Righteousness which if a man have, he is a Subject capable of being
justified, that is, reputed a just man in the sight of God? Now the Answer to
this Question cannot be made, till I have established four preliminary
Propositions.

The first position is this, That there are only two kinds of righteousness
imaginable by us; Romans 10.5.6. The Righteousness of God, and our own
Righteousness, Romans 10.3. And as Righteousness is thus variously distinguished,
so is Justification (which is the Reward of Righteousness) said to be of
several kinds, according to the several Righteousness which it proceeds upon;
(if the Righteousness be that of the Law, by the Works of the Law, then is the
Reward reckoned of Debt; if the Righteousness be that of Faith, the Reward is
in the nature of a Grace or Gift, Romans 4 4. Now to him that works (according
to the Law) the Reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt, and (...) contra,
to him that believes, and is for the Righteousness of Faith, the Reward, that
is, Justification, is reckoned of Grace, not of Debt. Having thus given a
distinct account what Justification is, how that it is the constituting a man
just before God; and what ground or reason it proceeds upon, viz. Upon a
Righteousness found with the person to be justified; he has a Righteousness to
plead for him: And having given you the only distinction that there is of
Righteousness, it is of the Law, or Faith; however either part of the
distinction may be varied in synonymous expressions; and so the Justification
following upon one of these Righteousnesses, viz. That of the Law is of Debt;
upon the other, viz. The Righteousness of Faith is of Grace; I shall draw up
the terms that belong to either part of the distinction, whether of
Righteousness or Justification, together, that so ye may see the Apostle is
full of these two, and only these two; as also, that the Scriptures may appear
wherein this subject is touched at, and so fall upon a fair dispute for the
Cause, which is this, Whether of these two ways must serve us in the present
state of things? Which way of Righteousness, which way of Justification we must
betake our selves unto, if we would be saved? For without Justification, no
Salvation; and Salvation at the day of Judgment will follow only upon our
Justification in this life; God will then do that in the face of all the world
in acquitting or condemning, which now he does effectually in a more covert and
secret manner. To draw up (therefore) these two parties into the field. 1. The
Law in its party or list of Synonyma's, has these severals, The works of the
Law, 2 Gal. 1.6. The deeds of the Law, Romans 3.20.28. The Law of Works, ver. 27.
By works, without any addition of the Law. If Abraham were justified by works,
he has whereof to glory, Romans 4.2. Here glorying and boasting belong to this
Tribe too, as a consequent upon Legal-Justification, or Law-Justification. The
Verb used is this, To him that works. I shall not instance in any further
Synonyma's belonging to the Law, such as this, that it is called a fleshly way,
and flesh; Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh. I come to give the synonymaes or conjugata that belong to
the way of Faith: The substantives are these, 1. Faith alone; Faith was
reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. The Faith of God, Romans 3.3. The Law of
Faith, ver. 27. The righteousness of faith: Romans 4.13. Grace it is of Faith,
that it might be of Grace. Abundance of Grace, and the gift of righteousness,
Romans 5.17. It is also called the Promise. Faith then is made void, and the
Promise made of none effect, Romans 4.14. And lastly, to mention no more the
Promises; is the Law then against the Promises of God, Gal. 3.21. the verbs, To
him that works not, but believes, his Faith is counted unto him for
righteousness. Having given this Muster-Roll as it were) of both parties, I
come now to some other Positions, the first was this viz. 1. That there are but
these two ways (imaginable of fication; there are but two sorts of
Righteousness, and so but two ways by which men do, or with pretense of reason
can seek Justification in, else there had been more mentioned by the Apostle.

The second position is this, Romans 11.6. If by Grace, then it is no more of
works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be by works then it is no
more of Grace, o^herwise work is no more work, Romans 4.4, 5. Now to him that
works is the reward, not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that
works not, but believes, his Faith is counted for righteousness.

3d. Romans 7.10. The Commandment was ordained to be unto life; yea, this way was
the ancient, and the first of the ways of God in his dealing with man, and
seems to be natural, and necessary to the primitive Estate of mankind; For God
made made man upright in his own Image, of knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness, and gave him the Law, though not written in Tables of stone, yet in
his heart, which was better; else it had not been sin to have committed
Murder, Adultery, Stealth, false-witness bearing, Perjury, Idolatry, and what
not, in the Estate of innocence; for where there is no Law, there is no
transgression.

God gave man a Law, and surnished him with ability to have hept it to a
tittle; so that, if he would, he might have had the works of the Law to show
for himself, The way of Justification by the ^aw unsolded and a^gued to be the
first and natural way of juslification.
at what time soever the Creator should have called him to account, and all the
time he and others had kept themselves innocent and holy; they must have been
acceptable to God: he would have had respect to them and their works; and they
would have obtained this Testimony from God, that they pleased him; which was
all that Enoch (who was too good to live in the World) had to show for his
justification: And this had been enough for Adam, or any other man to have
produced for their Justification, if Satan had at any time turned Accuser: And
thus living according to the Will of God, they should have continued in the
favor of God, and perhaps after some term of years have been translated to
some more happy an estate: Then they might have gloryed without sinning; that
is, they might have pleased themselves with such thoughts and speeches as
these: Happy are we that we took heed and care to please God, and kept our
selves innocent; for now have we obtained a glorious reward; we might have
ruined our selves, as we see the Angels have done: We had a Power to have
started aside from God; but we have kept our selves from that mischief: Such an
innocent glorying as this (and no higher glorying can I imagine lawful, even in
such a state) was not forbidden by the Law of Works; it was not excluded Romans
3.27. Thus we see Justification is a a thing feasible and attainable by works;
by the Law, if a man have the works of it: Our Savior and the elect Augels
were justified by the Law.


Yea, our Savior Christ had the Works of the Law, and the Law justified him;
and the Angels that kept their first estate, they were doubtless approved by
the Law of their Creation, and had all the Apostate Angels turned Devils and
false Accusers of them, as they are of the Brethren, their Works would have
justified them in the sight of God, Not that the good Angels had no other
reward but what a Covenant of Works would allow.
and before the world; though I say not that the good Angels have no other
reward but what a Covenant of works allots. But I doubt not to affirm, That the
good Angels were justified and rewarded by a Covenant of Works; in as much as
there was a full trial made, when the other Angels fell of their voluntary
obedience: So that the Law in it self, has not only a power to justify and
reward, but has actually rewarded the observers of it, those that had the
righteousness of it: Yea all the Work of our redemption by Christ, was brought
about only with the good leave of the Law: Christ must make a recognition, and
publicly own the Authority and Majesty that was still remaining in the Law:
acknowledgement must be made how that that had been offended; and some
reparation must be made unto the glory of God, which was much impaired; as it
is a revenue from us, in the transgression of the Law: And this was the only
way decreed by God, that the Law must satisfy it self upon him, whosoever
would undertake our Redemption; and then the Law must justify him; all which
it did upon our Savior: Which proves the unquestionable Power and Authority
that the Law had in it to justify man, had he but the works of it.

But now let any man or Angel but sin, If the ^aw be once broken in a tittle,
it can justify no longer.
and the Law can justify him no longer; if he have but the least failing in
obedience, the Law can only condemn this person, Man or Angel, whoever he be;
but I shall limit my self to mankind: For this take that Scripture, Gal. 3.10
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law, to do them. So that if a man has once sinned, and yet seeks
to be justified, he must not seek justification by the righteousness of the Law
any longer; there comes a necessity of Grace, Pardon, Mercy, which the Law has
not in it; the Law has no such thing as Grace or Pardon in it. The Law only
says, He that does them, shall live in them; and he that does them not, is
accursed.

Now this Grace, Mercy and Pardon which a man comes to have a necessity of,
upon his first breach of the Law, is in the way of Faith, which I have proved
to be the opposite way of Justification to that of the Law. It is of Faith
(says the Apostle) that it might be by Grace; the way of Grace is the way of
Faith.

So that is the third assertion, with its explication and proof. The fourth
Assertion is this, Romans 3.23. For all have sinned and come short of the glory
of God. The Jews call the Gentiles by this Name, The sinners of the Gentiles,
or of the Nations: But what says the Apostle speaking of the Jews, of whom
himself was one? What then? Are we better then they? No, in no wise: For we
have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, as it
is written, There is none righteous, no not one, v. 9, 10. When the Jews
brought a Woman taken in Adultery, unto our Savior, to see what Judgment he
would pass upon her, he delivered the Woman by this sentence of stoning her,
Let him that has no sin, cast the first stone at her: Now if there had then
been but one there that durst pretend to have been without sin, the Woman might
perhaps have lost her life, John 8.34. And we find it amongst our selves, none
but some brainsick people dare pretend to be free from sin; even actual sin,
committed in their own person, either in deed, word, or thought at least. Now
if we have all thus offended the law, and transgressed the law, shall we dare
appeal unto it, or can it justify us?

The fifth assertion therefore, Romans 8.3. Justification is called (...) that
impossibility of the law, translated thus, What the Law could not do; the law
now cannot do it, according to that famous assertion of the Apostle Paul to
this very purpose. Gal. 3.21. For if there had been a Law given which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law: The Iavv
cannot now justify, and what is the reason? Why the Apostle tells us in Romans
8.3. What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh: The law
became thus disabled in the matter of Justification through the flesh, through
sinful flesh, as appears by the following words; so that now it could not
justify us if it would never so fain.

We can conceive no way now that the Lord has to justify by us the law, but
this one; first to pardon, then to give us a stock of grace and ability to keep
his law, as he gave to Adam; but then mark, here you see, first the way of
Grace and Faith must be made use of, before the law can do us any good, or
stand us in any stead: therefore still the fifth assertion holds true that the
law in the present state of things cannot justify us, except the way of grace
should first pass upon us, and then what need we come to the law again? No,
it is so true that the law cannot now justify us, nor give life unto us;
that if it could have done it, it should have done it, and God would not have
made use of any other way.

I might now give several Scripture-proofs of this assertion, under several
Heads: As,

1. By the Law now comes only the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. Therefore by
the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified; for by the Law is the
knowledge of sin. Wherever the Law comes now amongst sinners, it discovers
that they are guilty in such, and such a particular; I had not known sin (says
the Apostle) but by the Law; for I had not known lust, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not covet, Romans 7.7.

2. The Law works therefore Wrath, therefore it cannot justify; this is the
Apostles Argument Romans 4. ver. 15. Now the Law works Wrath these two ways,
either it sets home the Wrath of God already deserved upon the Conscience,
or it gives occasion to further sinning, and so to a further desert of Wrath;
for the Law has this strange effect now upon a sinners heart that seeks to be
justified by it, that it will (contrary to the first design of it which was to
sanctify, justify, and save) it will now stir up all manner of lusts in the
heart (as the Sun shining on a Dunghill sends forth a stink) and so not only
discovers our former illdemerits and deserving of Wrath, but provokes to
further sinning, and so lays us under more wrath still; if this be not a truth,
let any make sense of these Scriptures, if they can, Romans 7.8, 9, 10, 11.
Sintaking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
Concupisence, for without the Law sin was dead; for I was alive without the Law
once; but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed; and the
Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death; for sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me. 13. Was
then that which is good, made death unto me? God forbid; but sin that it might
appear sin, working death in me, by that which is good, that sin by the
Commandment might become out of measure sinful. I know several of these
expressions are, and may be in part interpreted of sin in the guilt, that it
appears by the law; but it must also be understood of the power of sin, that
the law discovers that likewise whilst it irritates and provokes it; and I
would fain know if there can be any other sense of that whole context from the
1. to the 7. ver of that chap. especially the 5. ver. When we were in the
flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law, did work in our members to
bring forth fruit unto death.

3. The law by both these effects discovering of sin, and exciting sin, as also
showing the Wrath due to sin is so far from justifying, that it becomes the
Ministration of Death and Condemnation to the sinner, and not of justification
unto life; and for this we may consult the whole third Chap. of the second to
the Corinthians.

My 6th. Faith is the only way for us, appears from what has been already
said and proved: For if the law be no way, and there be only these two ways
imaginable, then there is no other way but this of Faith left us: But I shall
yet give one full Scripture Proof of this, Romans 3.21. Therefore by the deeds of
the Law there shall no fiesh be justified in his sight; but now the
righteousness of God without the Law is manifested -- even the righteousness
which is of God by Faith. 24. Being justified freely by his Grace. 28.
Therefore we conclude, That a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of
the Law.

The 7th. and last Proposition is this, That de facto, there has been no other
way of Justification which has taken effect upon any sinful man, nor any other
way adhered to by any of the true Saints of God since the fall of Adam, but
this way of Faith. And the Apostle takes this way of proof, viz from the event:
For most people are more affected with Events, then with Arguments from the
nature and profound reason of the thing. Therefore having proved it first from
the nature of the law, I come to examples, and they shall be but two, one
plain, the other mystical; and lastly, prove it from a Testimony out of David
to this way of Justification by Faith; herein following the Apostle in the way
which he takes, or rather herein only marking out the way which he takes, not
imitating it in doing the like.

The first and onely-plain example which the Apostle proves Justification by
Faith by, is that of Abraham; this example of Abraham the Apostle has
continual recourse to, in his Discourses of this subject, both in the Romans
and Galatians, and well might, having to deal with the Jews and Jewd^izing
Gentiles, who gloryed in nothing more, then to be called and accounted
Abraham's Seed; and the Apostle in his urging this Example, plainly proceeds
upon such a supposition as this, Certainly your Father Abraham was justified in
the right way, and you will desire to be justified in no other way then he was:
Now He prove to you clearly, that he was not justified by the law, nor by
works, but by Faith, and by the promise; therefore justification is not by the
law, nor by works, but by Faith. Thus the Apostle argues, Romans 4. Gal. 3.
Romans 4.1. What shall we say then, that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to the
flesh has found? That is, either Abraham our fleshly Father has found, or
Abraham our Father has found according to the flesh, that is, in the way of a
fleshly righteousness: What has he found? Has he found Justification by the
flesh? Shall we say he has? It follows ver. 2. For if Abrahaw were justified
by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God; that is, but he has
not whereof to glory before God, therefore he was not justified by works:
For if he were justified by works, he might glory before God; for the law of
works, if a man has these works, does not exclude glorying before God: But
now Abraham has not whereof to glory before God, therefore he was not
justified by works, v. 3. For what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God,
and it was counted to him for righteousness, v. 4, 5. Now he that believes, as
the Scriture says Abraham did, he works not, that is, seeks not
Justification by works. Now see Gal. 3. where the same example is brought in
proof by the Apostle, v. 6. Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him
for righteousness, v. 7. Know therefore, that they which are of Faith, and for
the way of believing, the same are the true Children of Abraham, and the only
blessed or justified persons, v. 18. For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it
is no more of the Promise; but God gave it to Abraham by Promise, therefore he
had not the Inheritance by the Law, nor the Works of it; therefore we must not
expect it that way, for we must bejustified the same way that Abraham was.
Having given you the plain example, I shall likewise give you the Mystical or
Allegorical example which the Apostle produces to prove this last assertion,
that de facto, Faith has been all along the way of Justification; and it is
safe using Allegories when the truth is once well established; and I have heard
it observed, that the Jews were much taken with this way of Allegories: The
Allegorical example therefore is that of Hagar and Saraah, The Allegory of
Hagar and Sarah.
Isaac and Ishmael, in Gal. 4. from the 21. ver. to the end. The substance of
it is this; Hagar was Mount Sinai in Arabia; and that Mountain which the Jews
call Sinai, the Arabians call Hagar: Now upon Mount Sinai, or Mount Hagar,
was the Law delivered, as much as to say, Allegorically: Hagar and her Seed
are for Mount Sinai, for the Law, and the Works of it, for justification: But
now Sarah answers Jerusalem that is above, and to Mount Sion; that is, she
was a Type of the Gospel Church, which is for Justification by Faith. Now
what says the Scripture ( v: 30.) concerning these two Mothers and their
Children, which was not only true literally, but is to be understood
mystically and figuratively of the two Seeds, of those two sorts of men that
adhere, the one to the Law for justification, the other to the way of
believing; what says the Scripture? Cast out the Bondwoman and her son, for
the son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with the Son of the Freewoman; as
much as to say, Those that go to Mount Sinai, to the Law for Justification,
shall never be heirs of God, but only the Gospel-Churcch, those that adhere to
the way of Justification by Faith, according to that Scripture, Gal. 3.18. If
the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of the Promise; but God gave it to
Abraham and Sarah, and her Seed by promise. Abraham is the Father of us all,
Romans 4.16. and Saraah, which answers to Jerusalem that is above, is the
Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. Now if any should object, that this prove; de
facto only since Abraham's time, for all that would be accounted of his Seed:
I answer. Let them look into Heb. 11. and there they may see a Catalogue of
Saints from Abels time, down to the time of the Maccabees, and in the end of
that chap it is said, These all obtained a good report through faith ver. 39.

I come now to my last proof, which was to be from Testimony out of David,
which the Apostle likewise makes use of for an Argument, Rom 4.6, 7. wherein
the Apostle tells us there is a description of the blessedness of
Justification, and particularly that Justification which is by Faith and give
me a Scriprure-description, this is Authentic and Divine: Ver. 6. Even as
David als^ describes the blessedness of the man unto whom Go^ imputes
righteousness without works: This is purely a description of Justification by
Faith: Now what is it? It follows v. 7, 8. saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; blessed is the man to whom
the Lord will not impute sin: Here David makes him the only blessed man that
is justified by Faith; and what is this Justification other then pardon of sin,
forgiveness of Iniquity, Mercy, Grace, a thing that the Law is not acquainted
with; the Law cannot justify the ungodly, as Faith can, Romans 4.5. How Faith
receives pardon, and what this Faith is, I shall have best opportunity to
discover in the following part of this Discourse; in the mean time I reckon
that I have established these two positions in the general, that the Law is now
no way of Justification; and that Faith which is the way of Grace and Pardon,
is the only way left us, which sufficiently appears from Reason and Example;
the Reason is that of the fall and sinfulness of mankind: The Example is that
of Abraham, which may serve instead of all, and that which is of kin to it,
viz. the Allegory of Hagar and Sarah, Isaac and Ishmael, together with all the
Saints of the Old Testament, reckoned up in Heb. 11.

To which as an overplus, I may add the reason of God's approbation of this
way of believing, and preferring this way before the reviving the old way of
Works again: And this we have Romans 4.16. The reason why after there was once a
necessity of pardon, the Lord was pleased to continue the way of grace
altogether.
Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace. When once man had fallen,
and so brought on a necessity of another way of Salvation, (if the Lord
wouldshew so much mercy) when once the way of Grace became necessary, the Great
God liked this way of Grace altogether; not to pardon man, and then set him up
a new in the way of Works; and the Lord liked the continuation of the way of
Grace, rather then re-introducing the old way, that hereby he might have a
great revenue of Glory from his Grace, which would be shown in this way; the
Lord liked not so well that his Creature should come, and (as it were)
challenge his Justification and Salvation as a Debt, which in the way of the
Law he might have done; To him that works the reward is not reckoned of
Grace, but of Debt: The Lord liked not that the Creature should glory and boast
that it had saved it self, as in the way of Works it might have done; for
glorying is not excluded by the Law of Works, but only by the Law of Faith;
whereas this way of Grace excludes glorying, and that indebtedness of God to
the Creature, and holds the Creature in continual debt and obligation to God:
When Paul would have had the Thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan taken
off from buffeting him, the Lord teaches Paul to be contented with this
answer, My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness, 2 Cor. 12 7, 8, 9. This way of believing taught Paul to depend upon
the Grace and Strength of God, by which the Lord received an Honor which he
should not have had if the temptation had been suddenly taken off. And this we
find to be the great Reason alleged by the Apostle frequently in this subject:
God in the way of his Gospel Grace, goes quite cross to that way which man
would have chosen, for this very reason, to hinder man's glorying and boasting;
so we have it, 1 Cor. 1.28, 29. The base things of the World, and things which
are despised, has God chosen to bring to naught the things that are, that no
flesh should glory in his presence: And in the 30.31. But of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption, that according as it is written, He that glories, let him
glory in the Lord: So in Romans 3. when the Apostle had showed what God had
declared to be his Righteousness, even that of Faith, Where is glorying then,
says the Apostle? It is excluded. Again, the righteousness of the Law and
Works, is called our own righteousness; but Faith is called the righteousness
of God, Romans 3.22 Now God will not allow that we should be justified by our own
righteousness, he will have another righteousness which is not our own, that we
may glory in him alone.

Having asserted and proved those two Positions, That the Law is no way, and
that Faith is the only way of Justification: I come now to answer the
objections that may be made against what I have asserted, either in behalf of
the Law, or against the way of believing.

The great objection (and that which contains almost all that can be mentioned)
is started by the Apostle Paul himself, Gal. 3.19. Object. Wherefore then
serves the law.
Wherefore then serves the Law? is the Law of no use then, as you seem to make
it? For if it were once a way of life, as you acknowledge, and the Scripture
affirms it was ordained to be unto life, Romans 7.10. and it be now no way unto
life, but the way of Faith only is, then you make it an old antiquated thing
out of date, out of use. And the Apostle is sensible that this inconvenience
would be objected, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith?

But the meaning of the objection in Gal. 3.19. is chiefly this, Wherefore then
serves the Law; that is, To what end or purpose was the Law given to the
Children of Israel by Moses? You assert, say the objectors, that as soon as
Adam fell, the Law became of no use to him, nor any of his posterity, in the
matter of Justification; but yet we find that the Law was given by Moses 2000.
years after Adam's fall, and it was given in the most glorious manner, with the
most astonishing glory that ever God appeared in, at any time unto the World;
it was delivered by Angels, with the voice of a Trumpet, with Thundering, and
Lightning, and Earthquakes, so that the whole Mountain was of a fire; and all
the people saw and heard the thunder and fire, and the voice of Words: Yea God
himself is said to descend upon the Mount in fire, and speak with Moses, Deuteronomy.
4.17, 18, 19, 20. Heb. 18.19, 20, 21. And say the Objectors, Whereas you seem
to say in your third Position, That the Law was only a way of Justification to
Adam: The Scripture makes no mention that ever the Law was given to Adam, but
only to the Children of Israel; and when ever you have a comparison made
between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, or betwixt the Law
and Faith, it is the comparing still of the Covenant with the Children of
Israel under the Old Testament, and the Nevv-Covenant mad by Christ with his
people under the Gospel: So we sind these two ways compared in 2 Cor. 3.
throughout the chap. and Heb. 8. throughout that chapter; but especially from
v. 6. to the end; In 2 Cor. 3. there the Law is indeed called a Ministration of
death, but yet it is the Law of Moses; for in the same ver. it is said to be
written and engraven in stones, which is plainly the Law of the ten
Commandments; and that when Moses brought them to the people, his countenance
had such a glory and luster upon it, that the children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold his face, ver. 7. And this Law of Moses is called the
Old Testament, ver. 6. And this is that which is compared with the Gospel which
Paul preached, ver, 12.13. Seeing that we have such hope, we use great
plainness of speech, and not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, etc.
Ergo, The Law reached further then the days of Adam for a way of Justification;
for it was given to the Children of Israel by Moses, and it was their Covenant
or Testament; and if it be done away, it was not till the days of the Gospel
by Christ, according to that of the Apostle John, 1 John 17. The Law was given
by Moses, but Grace came by Jesus Christ: So in Gal. 3 23. Before Faith came,
we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be
revealed. So in Heb 8.6. speaking of Christ; But now has he obtained a more
excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant,
which was established upon better promises, ver. 7. For if that first Covenant
had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second; but
finding fault, he says, Behold the days come says the Lord, when I will make
a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah, not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I brought them
out of the Land of Egypt. And what Covenant was that I pray, but the Law, the
Law of Moses? ver. 13. In that he says a New Covenant, he has made the first
old; now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. From this
whole context I conclude, says the objector, That the Law, which is famously
known to be the Law of Moses, was a Conant till Christ's time at least, with the
people of of God, Jews and Proselytes, and so a way of Justification, which is
quite contrary to your fifth and seventh Positions; or else show of what use
the Law was, when given to the Children of Israel besides this of being a way
of Justification, or a Covenant of Works, which is all one. Wherefore then
serves the Law? Is it of no use now unto us? Or rather, wherefore then was it
given to the Jews? Was it of no use to them? Was it not their Covenant? And
therefore must it not be their way of Justification? Else show how it would
deserve the Name of the first, or old Covenant or Testament?

Nay, to add a little more matter of Objection, the Law has the Language of a
Covenant, a condition annexed, and that when it was given to the children of
Israel; and the Lord tells his people, Lev. 18.5. after the delivery of the
Law, That if a man do these things, he shall live; And Moses is said by the
Apostle Paul, Romans 5.10. in those words of Leviticus, to describe a legal
righteousness in opposition to the Righteousness of Faith; For Moses describes
the righteousness of the Law, that the man which does those things, shall live
by them; but the righteousness which is of Faith, speakethon this wise -- that
is, in an opposite manner: Therefore certainly says the objection, the Law
when it was given by Moses, was given as a way of Justification: Nay our
Savior himself says in Luke 10.28. speaking of the law of Moses, This do, and
thou shall live: Therefore certainly the law is a way, if not the only way of
Justification unto fallen man; for those Jews then were fallen, as well as we
are now.

This is the objection, which is indeed weighty and considerable, and of
purpose raised by the Apostle, in the first great branch of it, that it might
receive an answer: It consists of several branches, to all which I shall
endeavor to apply an answer in its place; and first I shall begin with that
part which is greatest, which when well answered, the rest will receive an
easy solution; and it is this: For what ends or purposes was the Law given to
the Children of Israel, if not for a way of Justification? Now as I gave the
objection first in the Apostles words, so I shall give you the answer to it in
his words in that same Chap. Gal. 3. This great objection therefore the Apostle
answers in the same way that our Savior sometimes answered the cavilling
Pharisees with a question all as hard, or harder.

A: You come, says the Apostle, in a cavilling way against the Doctrine of
Faith which we preach, and tell me, the law has been a way, and therefore is a
way, and the way of Justification; and you tell me it was not only a way to
Adam in innocence, but to all the people of God, before that Jesus, and we his
Apostles preached up this way of believing: And you go to prove this last thing
that you say, that it was the way to all the Saints of God till Christ's time
(which is the great thing that I deny) by a mere cavil; Forsooth else wherefore
does it serve? Of what use else is it? And I answer: you with an harder
question by far? Wherefore then sereth the promise? To what end serve the
promises? To what end serves the Gospel that was preached to Abraham? Gal. 3.8.
The Scriptute foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, etc. You ask, To what end serves the
Law then? And I ask, To what end serves the Gospel then, that was preached to
Abraham before the law was given? Yea, to what end serves the Covenant made of
God in Christ, to A^braham and his Seed 430. years before ever the law was
given by Moses, ver. 17. Shall I ever be induced to believe, that when God had
set up a way of Grace, nay had established and confirmed it in a Covenant, not
to Adam only, who was a remote Father, but to our Father Abraham and his Seed,
nay had confirmed it in Christ; shall I think that the law coming by Moses 430
years after, should disannul this Covenant, and make the promise of none
effect? What did God repent of his being so gracious, and set up a way that had
no Grace, and can have no Grace in it? or was not the great God obliged to make
good his Promise and Covenant? Why, if it be but a man's covenant, yet after it
is confirmed, no man disannulleth or adds thereto. Now this was Gods
Covenant, and therefore says the Apostle. Gal. 3 15, 16, 17, 18. that is, This
is the full scope and genius of his Discourse; Finding thus a Covenant made and
confirmed so long before, I will never believe, it can never be, that the law
coming so long after, should come in to put an end to it, to make the way of
Justification by Faith to cease; What ever therefore the law came for, this
could never be the end of it.

And here the Apostle might have ended the enquiry, having silenced the
question by a greater: For it is as certain, (if not more) that God cannot fa^l
in the promise of his Grace, as it is that he should exact the rigor of his
Law. But yet now, if those which make the objection will be sober, the Apostle
will give them further satisfaction yet.

2. Ans. There were other ends of giving the Law, There were other ends of
giving the Law, besides justification by the works of it.
besides Justification by the works of it; For the Apostle will readily allow
that there were great and weighty ends of the delivery of the law, that it was
delivered with great Majesty and Authority, that the law is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just, and good: The Apostle never speaks lightly of the
law; no you shall find, says the Apostle, that by the preaching of Faith we go
the highest way in the World to establish the Laws Romans 3.31. We will allow any
thing that can be thought or imagined for the honor of the law, if you will
abate us thus much, that it is not a way of Justification: I come therefore to
show some other ends of the law's being given (which were indeed very
considerable) besides that of its being a way of Justification by the works of
it.

And first in general, and I shall answer in the words of the Apostle in the
same verse, where the objection is made, Gal. 3.19. Is was added because of
transgression.
The Law was added because of transgressions, till the Seed should come to whom
the Promise was made: Here may be observed in this answer, the substance of the
answer, which is the true reason of the laws being given; and two at least (if
not more) cautionary circumstances in the manner of expressing this reason or
answer. The substance of the answer, or the main reason of the law's being
given, was this; it was (...), it was given for the sake of, or by occasion of,
or because of transgressions. How transgressions occasioned, and even
necessitated the giving of the law, we shall easily understand, if we consider,
that, All transgressions did not occasion the giving of the Law
first it was not given because of Adam's transgression or transgressions; for
then it must have been presently given as soon as Adam fell, whereas it was not
given for the space of 2400. years after Adam's fall; so it seems it was not
necessary to be given for Adam's Salvation, by occasion of his transgressions,
he had indeed the promise of the Seed of the Woman given him presently upon his
fall, by which he was to be saved. Again, it was not necessary to be given for
Abraham's salvation, not by occasion of his transgressions; it was not given in
his time; he had the promise and the Gospel preached to him, by the Faith of
which he was saved; the Law was not given till above 400. years after he
received the promise, which was long after Abraham was dead and buried: So you
see all transgressions did not necessitate the Law's being given; for all the
good men that were before the Law had their transgressions, and yet the Law was
not given in their time, they went to Heaven without it. The truth is therefore
this seems to be the plain reason of the Law's being added with respect to
transgressions. Before the Law and the Scriptures written by Moses, How
transgressions occasioned the Laws delivery.
the People of God had only the Light of Nature, the Promise given to Adam, or
other promises and discoveries from God, made to some eminent Patriarch, such
as Enoch and Noah, but especially and famously to Abraham; and by these
delivered to the people. Enoch is said to be the seventh from Adam, and to
prophecy, Jude 14. and Noah to be the 8th person, a Preacher of Righteousness;
which perhaps may as well signify his being the eighth famous Preacher from
Adam, as one of the eight saved in the Ark, 2 Pet. 2.5. from these the people
of God before the Law had a traditional Divinity and Gospel, which might serve
well enough, and did very well with the People of God in their days (who were
but few, as it should seem) to hinder them from running out violently into
transgressions; but when God had entered into Covenant with a carnal Seed of
Abraham that should come of his Son Isaac; and this Seed of Abraham according
to the promise, grew and multiplied like the stars of Heaven for number, and
could not be contained in their duty by so few traditional Rules as the
Patriarchs and the good men in their days lived and served God by, or that the
Prophets which they had amongst them, one at a time, were not able to teach so
great a people as they should be taught, but that they would be apt to break
out into manifold transgressions, except they had the Law written plainly for
them in Tables of Stone, so that every man might teach his Neighbor, when they
grew irregular and ungodly, saying, Know the Lord; then, for the sake of these
transgressions, and for the prevention of them the Law was added. So you see
the Law was given by Moses only occasionally. If the Children of Israel could
have been contained in obedience as well as Adam and the Church of God in his
time was, and till Abraham's time, and after Abraham's time for a great while,
and this without the Law, it seems the Law had never been given by Moses.

This is the substance of the answer, and to this suits exceeding well another
place of the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.7, 8, 9. There are a sort of men (says he)
that have swerved from the way of Faith, and they will needs be teachers of the
Law; but alas, they know not what they undertake in it: It Is true (says the
Apostle) the Law is good if a man use it lawfully; but you may make such an use
of the Law, viz. in the matter of Justificaton, that it may do you a mischief:
And whereas these ignorant Lawpreachers tell us, that the Law was given by
Moses for a way of Justification, we know, says he, ver. 9. that the Law is
not made, was never given for the righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners, for the unholy and profane; for
these serve the Laws of the first Table, for Murderers of Fathers, and
Murderers of Mothers, for Man-slayers, serves the sixth Commandment. For
Whoremongers, and them that defile themselves with mankind, serves the seventh
Commandment; for Men-slayers the eighth; for Liars, for perjured persons the
ninth; and if there be any thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine. The Law
was given because of these transgressions and transgressors, else it should not
have been given at all more then it was before, viz: Clearly written in the
heart of man before the fall, and obscurely, in the heart of all men ever
since, yet plainly enough for those that were minded to use their light
faithfully and honestly, together with those vouchsafements they should have
had from God at times of further Discoveries.

This is the substance of the answer of the Apostle; and this reason, Because
of transgressions, you see was a weighty reason why the Law should be given to
the Jews, if God had any love for them to make them his people above all other
Nations, viz. to keep them from running out into these gross sins, which
otherwise they would, and other Nations not having the Law did run out into C.
19. Ver. 19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation: And as for his
Judgments, they have not known them; for though the Work of the Law be written
in every man's heart as the Apostle tells us, Romans 2.14.15. (where he is
speaking of the Gentiles) yet men will not be at the pains to read or study
what is written there, neither would Israel have done it, had not the Law been
written for them in Tables of stone too; they would not have known God's
Judgments any more then other Nations, had not God given his Law to them by
Moses: And this we see by the event; for that, notwithstanding this Law, yet
when they came amongst other Nations, they ran into their abominations, though
they had express Laws against them; what would they have done therefore if they
had been wholly without this Law? There was therefore a necessity, at least a
great requisitness of a Law to be given to Israel, if God loved them, and would
manifest his love to them more then to any other people; he could not do it in
an higher instance, then in giving them the Law. Therefore you see the Law
might be given for other reasons then this, to be a way of Justification by the
works of it, I will show further anon why the law was given with respect to
transgression. I shall only in the mean time observe one or two things
further in the Apostles answer to the objection, which I mentioned by the Name
of cautionary circumstances in his Answer; one is this, (...), it was added,
non data sed addita est; it is not said simply, the Law was given, but added
because of transgressions; Added to what? Why to the Promises, to the Gospel
that was on foot before, long before; above 2000. years before, in Adam's
time; 430. years before, in Abraham's time; it was added to the Covenant that
was before confirmed of God in Christ; and it was added, not as a supplement,
for the Gospel was complete in it self; it saved thousands before ever the
Law was given by Moses; and it would have saved thousands more, and might
have served till the coming of Christ, for all any absolute necessity that
there was of it. Only if the Lord would be so gracious to his people of
Israel above all Nations in the World, to give them his Will in Writing at
large, that they might be the better contained in their obedience, better then
other Nations were; This was the Lords Bounty and Grace to them; but it is
certain, 'tvvas never given them to be so much as a necessary supplement to the
Gospel that was before, in the matter of Justification: It was added only
occasionally, as an useful Appendix, not as a necessary supplement; not with
design to supplant, but to serve the Gospel. I have mentioned one of the
limitations or cautionary circumstances which the Apostle uses in his
assigning the reason of the Lavv's being given; As the law was given only
occasionally and additionally, so it was but a temporary dispensation.
it was added, there is another, (...) until such time as the Seed should
come. As the Law was but occasionally and additionally given at first; so it is
but temporary in its continuance; as there is (...) in its beginning; so there
is an (...), a set-time of its continuance: Here observe, that though the
Apostle does allow that there was a weighty reason, a great occasion of the
Law's being given; yet he is afraid at the same time, lest the Law should get
too much advantage by this allowance of his, and therefore gives these several
terms of diminution, whilst he speaks most for the honor of the Law. Let us
return now a little more to discover the mystery that is contained in that
phrase (...), the Law was added, because of Transgressions; for you shall find
that there is much of mystery in it yet, besides what I have mentioned; What I
have mentioned, lies more obvious; that which remains is much more wonderful
and mysterious, yet expressly asserted by the Apostle in several places. The Law
therefore was added because of transgression in these three respects. The Law
was added because of transgression, in three respects.
1. To hinder transgression from being committed. 2. To aggravate
transgressions that were or should be committed. And 3. ultimately to finish
transgressions, and make an end of sin by driving and directing the wounded
sinner to a Savior. And all those three reasons are as I may say, fundamental
in the occasion of the Law its being added to the promises, till the time that
the Seed should come. 1. The Law was added because of transgressions, that is,
to hinder transgressions from being committed; and the Law was added to hinder
transgressions these two ways. 1. As a large plain Rule to show them what was
their duty, that so they might not run into transgressions through ignorance:
And 2dly, as a fiery Law to deter them from sin, and frighten them into their
duty, that so they might not run into transgressions through negligence. 1. As
a large plain Rule to show them their duty. This particular, and this only I
insisted upon ere-while, when I explained what was the substance of the
Apostles Answer to the Objection, and I shall add no more unto it.

2dly, It did not only hinder transgression by informing them in their duty
lest they should run into transgression through ignorance; but as a fiery Law
to deter them from transgression, and to frighten them into their duty, that
they might not transgress through negligence; though this does not so much
refer to the matter of the Law, as to the manner of its delivery. But yet this
manner of its delivery is as much taken notice of by the Apostle, and was as
necessary almost as the matter of the Law it self. Now this manner of its
delivery with dread and terror, consists of two things: 1. Wherein consists the
terror of the Law.
That it was delivered with thunderings and lightnings, etc. 2. That it was
delivered much in the form of a Covenant of Works, without that mixture of
promises which the Gospel abounds with; and these two things make up the terror
of the Law of Moses; and indeed this terror made up of these two parts, is
almost all that which is peculiar to their dispensation: For else, for the
matter of it (setting aside the Ceremonial and Judicial Law) it remains still
obliging us in the days of the Gospel; and the Apostle professes to establish
the Law even by the preaching of Faith: It Is true, it was first of all given to
the Jews, that was their privilege; but now that it is given, it is ours as
well as theirs; that therefore which seems to be peculiar to them in it, was
the manner of its delivery, both being without promises, and in that terrible
manner given upon the Mount; but yet still it was thus given because of
transgressions, to hinder transgressions; they needed this terror at that time;
Children though they know their duty, must have some terror to make them do it:
The Heir, whilst he is a Child, differs nothing from a servant, though he be
Lord of all; he is used like a servant, harshly, severely; he is under Tutors
and Governors till the time appointed by the Father, Gal. 4.2. there is the
same (...) that the Apostle has in his answer to the objection, (...): But
because this particular has some affinity with the second general end
mentioned, why the Law was given with respect to transgressions, I shall now
enter upon that; and it was this, 2. The Law was added because of
transgressions, for the heightning and aggravating of transgressions, Romans
5.20. The Law entered, that the offense might abound, (...), subingressa est,
irrepsit; the Holy Ghost is pleased frequently to use such words as should show
that the Law came in by the by, for some considerable ends indeed that the Lord
had in delivering it, but not as the great established way for Justification,
for certainly that could not come in by the by; but the Law came in thus, it
stole in, subingressa est, it crept in by stealth irrepsit, so the Original
signifies. But what was the end of the Law when it thus entered? why, it entered
because of transgressions, that the offenses of men might abound: In the 12.
ver. of R^^. 5. (...) read, that sin entered into the World; and (...), that
the Law entered; the Law hunted it, followed it, stole in afterward to
discover sin; for as ver. 13. has it, Before, or until the Law, sin was in the
world; that is, not before the Law did oblige, but before the Law was delivered
in such a solemn manner as it was upon Mount Sinai; before the Law sin was in
the world; but sin was not imputed when there was no Law; yet death reigned all
this while till Moses his time, which was the curse of the Law. Now that men
might know wherefore they suffered death, and the curse, it was sit the Law
should come into the world in a solemn manner delivered, that so sin might be
imputed by men to themselves, as it was by God to men, witness death, the curse
of the Law, which reigned from Adam to Moses; from Adam that sinned, to Moses
that gave the Law; sin did not appear to be sin, till the Law entered; and
therefore it is said, Sin that it might appear sin, working death in me by that
which is good, ( viz. the Law) that sin by the Commandment might become out of
measure sinful. So Romans 3.20 the Apostle proves that the Law cannot justify;
for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. The Law is so far from justifying
(says the Apostle) that it only brings sin to light, brings the knowledge of
sin with it, makes the offense to abound; and if that be the way to justify
sinners, to aggravate their sins, and bind on their guilts more then ever upon
their consciences, let any man judge; and therefore indeed the Law in the
immediate great intent of it was a killing Letter, an Administration of Death,
a Ministration of Condemnation, a Ministration of Desperation, and not of
righteousness unto justification; and accordingly it was delivered with
thundering and lightning upon Mount Sinai, to show the horrible fire, darkness
and tempest that there was in the Law it self, to all that should come near it,
to think to make use of it for a way of Justification; as Moses put a Vail upon
his face to show the vailedness of his Dispensation, so the Law was delivered
with fire, to show the fieriness of the Law unto the conscience; for the Law
was not only terrible to the beholders of it, when it was given upon Mount
Sinai; but this terribleness is in the Law it self, to all that ever had to do
with it, feelingly ever since, to all that ever came near it for justification.
Indeed for those that stand aloof off from it, only play about it at a
distance, and hope to be saved in a loose way by their works, by their good
doings, and by their good meanings, they may perhaps never feel the stinging
fiery lashes of the Law; but let any of these self-Justiciaries drive their
Principle to an Head, let them come up near to the Law, let them advance toward
Mount Sinai, and approach it, and challenge their Justification from God by the
Law, and they shall quickly find themselves scorched and scalded, and sent away
with sad hearts and affrightned consciences; they'^ find the Law to be a
ministration of Death, and not of Righteousness. I might here show in several
particulars, how the L^w does discover sin, it discovers habitual sin; St Paul,
or the man personated in Romans 7. had never found there had been such a
bottomless depth, such a lively body of death within him, but for the Law; when
that came, sin revived, and he dyed, Romans 7.9. 2. It discovers actual sin; I
had not known sin (that is, lustings to be sin) except the Law had said, Thou
shall not covet, ver. 7. But I shall not insist longer upon this particular:
The third end of the Law's being ^^ded
I hasten to the third great end of the Law's being added with respect to
transgressions, and that was for the finishing of transgressions, and making an
end of sin as the expressions are, though somewhat otherwise used, Dan. 9.24.
What shall we think, that when God had given promises to Abraham, and confirmed
a Covenant in Christ to him and his Seed, that he now gave a law to drive all
his people into despair? this amounts all to one, as if he had broken his
promise and his covenant, as I have before argued out of the Apostle Paul; did
the Lord only send his law that they might know their duty, and be affrightned
into their duty, as the first particular carries it? and if they did not do
their duty, should the law aggravate their sin, and bind on their guilts upon
their Conscience, and so leave them under desparation, and be a ministration of
death to them? Was this all the Law came for? If this were all, they might
better have been without the law at a venture, then have had it; they might
have done better with the promises alone: This therefore was not all the end of
the Law, to bring them into desperation, and there to leave them; but by this
desperation, which indeed the Law was to bring them into, to make them hunger
and thirst after another righteousness then that of the law, which by the law
they might see they could not have, to make them in love with the promises,
with any thing that looks like mercy and grace, and in a word to direct them
and drive them to Christ and a Gospel-Justification, Gal. 3.24. The law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by Faith, ver.
22. The Scripture (that is the Law) has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe. 23.
Before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, included as prisoners, shut up
unto the Faith which should afterward be revealed. Romans 10.3. Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness, unto every one that believes. So that indeed
the Law was given, not to undermine the promise, but to serve the ends and
honor of the promise. The law entered not to preach a Legal Justification, but
an Evangelical. The Law came into the world to confess its own impotency to
save or justify us, as also to send and direct us to one that could, according
to that of Romans 3.20.21.22: Therefore by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be
justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin: But now the
righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets, even the righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. The righteousness of God
without the law is witnessed by the law: There are other Scriptures to this
purpose, which I forbear to mention. Thus the Law and the Gospel do mutually
good turns for one another; the Law preaches the Gospel most effectually; for
men never well close with the Gospel, till they feel the lash of the Law: And
the Gospel again most effectually establishes and obliges to the keeping of
the Law; for till men have a principle of faith, they never have a living
principle of obedience; thus the elder, which is the Law, is made to serve the
younger, that is, the Gospel; but the Gospel has an ingenuity in it, to return
the Law a due acknowledgement.

And the Law might well direct the sinner to Christ, and preach Justification
by Faith; for this was the only way of recovering its own honor and
obedience, which was due unto it, Reas. 1. Why the Law might well direct to
Christ.
as appears in these three particulars. First, for that Christ personally
fulfilled it to a tittle; he lived a most perfect life, and performed unerring
obedience for more then thirty years together, here amongst men upon earth; and
this is said by some Divines to be for the Justification of his own person,
Rom, 10.4. Yea, and in their persons thus far, that they perform a sincere
obedience, and endeavor an unerring obedience to the law; and thus the
righteousness of the law is said to be fuifilled in them, in as much as they
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8 4.

So that now I have answered the great objection against Justification by
Faith, which was th s, Wherefore then serves the Law? and that with some
advantage to the present cause; I have shown, that whatever the law was
intended for in its delivery, it was not given for a way of Justification,
because the way of faith was established before; the reasons of its delivery
were these: 1. It was given to the Jews in mercy, to show them their duty more
plainly then they could otherwise have known it by the light of nature, or any
other way of teaching which they had amongst them till that time, that so they
might not run into transgressions through ignorance, and it was given with
terror, that they might not rush into transgressions through negligence; and
these two particulars made up the first end of the delivery of the law, viz. to
hinder transgressions from being committed. 2. It was added to heighten
transgressions in the guilt of them, when they should be committed. 3. Not to
leave them in desparation, but to direct them unto Christ; and I have shown
that great advantage did accrue to the law this way, that hereby it came to
pass, that though it was not fulfilled by the first Adam in the first giving of
it, yet it was all as well fulfilled by the second, and every way recompensed
and satisfied as if it had never been broken; so that I reckon the Objection is
quite taken off, and may be retorted upon the objectors, thus: If they ask,
Wherefore then serves the Law? We answer, It serves to lead men unto Christ,
that they may be justified by Faith.

I have some things yet to add upon the two last last ends of the law's being
given, which I thought not fit to insert in the first mention of them; upon the
second end of the law's being given, viz. for the aggravating of transgression,
and loading the Conscience with guilt, I have this to add. It is so true that
the law was given to the Jews to make the offense to abound, and to press the
conscience with guilt, that it had the same effect upon the Gentile World to
whom it was not delivered as it was unto the Jews; so says the Apostle, Rom 3.
where, when he had recited out of the Psalms, a Catalogue of sins which the law
does condemn men for, from the 10. to the 19. ver. in that 19. ver. Now we know
(says he) that whatsoever things the Law says, it says to them who are under
the Law, that every mouth may be stopped and the whole world might be guilty
before God. Certainly the Gentiles are a part, and the greatest part of the
world; now the whole World becomes guilty before God by the law, and every
mouth is silenced and stopped by it. I do not say that the law as given to the
Jews by Moses, had this effect upon the Gentiles, to whom it was not given; but
the Apostle tells us, Romans 2.15. how this came to pass, that the law, though
not given to the Gentiles in the same manner as it was to the Jews, did yet
convince and condemn the Gentiles as well as the Jews, because the effect and
substance of the same law that was written upon Tables of Stone by Moses, was
written in the hearts of the Gentiles; so that their thoughts did accuse them
when they did evil, as well as excuse them when they did well. Now hence I draw
an argument, a minor^^ If the law written, upon the hearts of the Gentiles,
though obscurely, had yet an accusing and condemning power in it to them, how
might it well have upon the Jews, to whom it was delivered plainly written and
engraven in stones, with thunder, lightning and earthquakes, as is before
expressed?

That which I have to add upon the third great end of the Law it is being
delivered, viz. to direct and bring the wounded sinner to Christ, O How (...)
Christ?
is by way of answer to this question, How did the Law lead to Christ? I shall
give several answers unto this question, and first of all, The Law was our
Schoolmaster unto Christ, A. ^^
as the Dispensation of the Law, made way for the Dispensation of the Gospel.
Sour things make the sweet more pleasant; Darkness makes Light more desirable;
Slavery and Severity makes Liberty more welcome. Quinese^t serv^re nescit
imperare, the School makes fair way for the University. This consideration
makes the succession of the Gospel to the Law more comely; and it is insisted
on very much by the Apostle in Gal. 4, for the seven first verses. Ver. 3. When
we were Children, we were in bondage unto the Law; but when the fullness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son to redeem us into liberty, and to give us the
spirit of sons, Gal. 3 23. Before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, and
kept under by the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be
revealed; wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that
we might be justified by Faith; but after that faith is come, we are no longer
under a Schoolmaster; it would now be an incongruous thing to be under a
Schoolmaster any longer, as it was very convenient that before we should be;
and thus the Law was a Schoolmaster unto Christ, (as John Baptist was) by its
severities to humble us, and break our hearts, and to make us (...) people
ready and prepared for the Lord. And the beauty and great convenience of the
succession of these two Administrations of the Law and Gospel each to other,
appears still in the great work of Conversion upon every sinners heart, where
the same method is observed: first to humble the soul by legal convictions,
then to make a discovery of Christ and the Grace of the Gospel. And this our
practical Divines insist much upon in their Sermons and Treatises, giving us
this account of the Work of Grace upon the heart, that first there is
conviction, compunction and humiliation, all yet a legal work; then Faith or
Conversion. And I do verily believe, that the Spirit of God does use this
method (though as all acknowledge, not with the same degrees) in every work of
Regeneration. And again they observe, that as after the Gospel and Faith is
come, it is absurd to return to the Law of Moses in the whole Dispensation of
it; so they apply that Scripture Romans 8.15. Ye have not received the Spirit of
Bondage again to fear, to this purpose; That after men have received the Spirit
of Adoption, (which in some degree every regenerate person has received) they
receive not again the spirit of bondage to fear; which they take to be a spirit
of legal convictions, preparatory to the Work of Conversion; and indeed
(according to the Calvinist-principles) it must needs be true, that after they
are regenerate, they can never receive a spirit of Bondage again, because a
spirit of bondage is not Grace, but only preparatory to it; and therefore men
that have once been regenerate, can never return to this Spirit without being
emptied of all Grace.

But here it may be further queryed, Q How did the Law direct those to Christ
that lived and lived before Christ came?
that indeed it is not to be doubted that the Law in the dispensation of it,
made excellent way unto the Gospel; for those that were to live in the days of
the Gospel; as we find in the Analogical succession of Law and Gospel in the
Work of Grace; but how was the Law a Schoolmaster unto Christ to those that
lived in the days of the Old Testament? Who dyed before Christ came? How were
they directed to Christ by the Law? The Law might perhaps be a Ministration of
death, and desperation only to them: How did the Law witness the righteousness
of God by Faith unto them? In answer I shall first of all premise these two
things and then answer more directly.

Or the answer may be better given after this distinction of the Law. A
different acceptance of the Law in the Scripture.
The Law in Scripture amongst the various significations of it, has these two
very eminent. 1. It signifies the strict and bare command, and so is naturally
a Covenant of Works that has no mercy or grace in it, can only justify the
righteous, and condemn the transgressor; and in this sense it has been taken
by me (for the most part) hitherto in my Discourse; and I have produced several
places where it is taken in this sense in the Scripture. Take that for
instance, As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse, as it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the Book of the Law, to do them, Gal. 3.10. 2dly, The Law is taken in a
sense all as large as this is strict; and that is, for the whole Old Testament.
So it is likewise taken in several Scriptures, Gal. 4.21. Tell me, ye that
desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? For it is written, that
Abraham had two sons, etc. where the whole Book of Genesis is made a part of
the Law; again in Romans 3. the Apostle makes the Psalms a part of the Law, where
having quoted a great part of the 14. Psalm in the 19. ver. says he, Now we
know, that whatsoever things the Law says, etc. and so in other Scriptures.
Now to apply the distinction in answer to the last query; The Law strictly
taken for a Covenant of Works, did only teach Christ virtually and by
consequence, as it taught them that they could not be justified by its
righteousness; and thus (for ought I know) the Law in its accusations taught
Christ to the Gentiles, as it convinced them of the insufficiency of their own
righteousness. But now the Law in the second sense as taken for the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, taught Christ formally and directly, though more
obscurely then the Gospel teaches him, viz. in Types and Prophecies; it were
endless to reckon up all the Types, Promises and Prophesies of Christ that are
in the Old Testament: This way indeed the Law could not teach Christ unto the
Gentiles, who had not the Scriptures of the Old Testament. It is now high time,
and yet in this place seasonable enough, to answer some other parts of the
objection (which I proposed at large some pages since) which pleads for the Law
its being a way of Justification unto the Jews at least, before the coming of
Christ, if not to us now; and something of that which remains yet unanswered,
Obj. 2. The Law was given to the Jews as their covenant.
is this: If the Law was not given to be a way of Justification, why is it
called a Covenant, the Old Testament or Covenant, 2 Cor. 3.14. and the first
Covenant, Heb. 7.8. expressly said to be made with the Children of Israel, when
the Lord took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt? For
whatever you have argued about Adam's estate of innocence, that God made a
Covenant of Works with him, and that if he would, he might have been justified
by Works, by the Law; that since him all men have sinned, and the Law was no
way of Justification to them; Whatever you have argued to this purpose, say the
objectors, yet we find not that the Law was given to Adam, but only to the
children of Israel by Moses, and given to them as a Covenant, therefore called
the old Covenant, or first Covenant, in Heb. 8. out of Jer. 31.31, 32.33, 34.
Therefore it was given them as a way of Justification; for certainly the
Justification that they were to seek of God, they were to seek in the way of a
Covenant, therefore in the way of the Law, which was their Covenant.

To this I answer some things by way of concession, A. 1. By way of concession
in two particulars.
afterward some things more concluding: And first of all I grant that the Law
is no where (to my remembrance) said to be given to Adam, but only to the
children of Israel; I am sure usually when mention is made of the giving of the
law, Where the law is said to be given, it is to the children of Israel, not to
Adam. Yet Adam had the Law, and it was a Covenant of works to him. 1. He had
the Law.
it is likewise noted in the same place as given to the children of Israel by
Moses, so 2 Cor. 3, 7. Heb. 8.9. 1 John 17. For the Law was given by Moses,
Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added because of
transgressions -- and it was ordained by Angels upon Mount Sinai, in the hands
of a Mediator, viz. Moses: Though when I make this concession that the Law is
not said to be given to Adam, but to the children of Israel by Moses, I still
think it may be easily collected from the Scriptures, that Adam had the Law
too, and that it was to him a Covenant of Works. 1. That he had the Law; for 1.
if Adam as a creature had not the Law written in his heart, how came the
Gentiles, who had not the Law given them by Moses, to have it written in their
hearts? 2. Else as I urged it before, it had been no sin for man in innocence
to have killed whom he pleased, to have lied, forsworn himself, to have defiled
his own body by Adultery, or other uncleanness; for where there is no Law,
there is no transgression. 3. If Adam had not the Law before his fall, how came
he to have it written in his heart presently after? as it is certain he had;
for all other men have it so written, and I cannot think that Adam alone wanted
this excellency of all mankind; neither do I think that he got this advantage
by his fall, to have the effect of the Law written in his heart, which he had
not written there before; therefore he had it written in his heart before the
Fall. It was to him a Covenant of works.
2. It was a Covenant of Works to Adam in innocence. For Adam then had no need
of Grace or Pardon before his fall; and I have proved that the Law is in its
own nature a Covenant of Works; and Adam had the Law, therefore it was a
Covenant of Works to Adam; I deny not but Adam might have some positive Laws in
his Covenant of Works, as we find one, viz. that of the forbidden fruit.

My second Concession is this, That the Law was given to the Jews as a
Covenant; 2d. Concession.
and wherever mention is made of the Old-Covenant, or First Covenant, the
parties covenanted withal, are the people of the Jews: So it is in 2 Cor.
3.6.14. in the 6. ver. we have mention made of the New Covenant, which is that
made by Christ in preaching the Gospel; and in the 14th, of the Old Testament
or Covenant, which is that made with the Jews: So in Heb. 8.6, 7. the first
Covenant is that which Moses was the Mediator of; the second or better Covenant
is that which Christ is the Mediator of; this must not, cannot be denied; and I
have been often offended at persons, that when they make a distinction of the
Covenants, a first and second, old and new, they make the first, that with Adam
in innocence; and the second the Covenant of grace made with the faithful ever
since; this though it may be true Divinity, yet is not Scriptural; or if it be
somewhat Scriptural, yet it is only to be drawn by consequence out of the
Scripture: But there is another determination in this business that is more
plainly Scriptural in the words and phrases of Scripture, which is, that the
first Covenant, the old Covenant or Testament, is God's Covenant with the Jews
by Moses; the new Covenant is that made with the faithful by Christ; and what
others aim at in that other way of stating the Covenants, may be attained
without that confusion which they make.

Having made two as fair Concessions as the objectors can desire, A. 2.
I come now to the determination of the question, or repelling the Objection,
after I have minded you of a distinction of the Law, which I lately gave, and
it was this, That sometimes the Law is taken strictly for the bare command,
with the threatening annexed to the breach of it, and the promise of life upon
the strict obeence of it: So it is in Gal. 3.10. sometimes it is taken for the
whole Old Testament, as Romans 3.19. where the Psalms of David are made a part of
the law; sometimes taken for the five Books of Moses, as in Luke 24.44. where
the Old Testament is divided into these three parts, The Law of Moses, the
Prophets and the Psalms. Now I answer, Take the Law in the first sense for a
Covenant of Works strictly, and so it was not given for a Covenant to the Jews,
for then it must have come in against the promises, or the Covenant of God in
Christ that was made before: But take it in the second or third sense, either
for the whole Old Testament (as we call the Writings of the holy men of God
till our Saviors time) or for the five Books of Moses, the dispensation by
Moses from the Mount; and this I confess was a Covenant to them, but then it
was a Covenant of Grace, and indeed contained in it all the promises that were
given before it, that traditional Gospel which Abraham and the holy Patriarchs
before him were saved by, is inserted in the Law of Moses, else it had been a
vain thing for the Apostle Paul to have undertaken to prove Justification by
Faith out of the Old Testament, yea out of the Law of Moses; for, as a man
cannot bring a clean thing out of an unclean, so neither can he bring Gospel
out of pure Law; if therefore the Law of Moses had not been a Covenant of
Grace, the Apostle could never have proved Justification by faith out of it,
which yet he does not only by strained consequences, but as there professedly.
Abraham believed God, (says he) and it was imputed to him for righteousness;
they therefore which are of Faith, are blessed and justified with faithful
Abraham, Galathians 3. ver. 6, 7, 9. which is as fair an Enthymema, as can be,
and every Sophister can supply the Proposition that is wanting. St. Paul proves
Justification by Faith by two great Arguments out of Genesis, the first Book of
Moses, viz: by Abraham's Justification, and the Allegory of Hagar and Sarah,
which I explained and urged before.

Nay the Apostle makes a great affirmation indeed, which is this that even
Moses himself the great Law-Covenant Mediator, does in his Writings give a
clear distinction of the two Covenants of Works and Grace, shows us the tenor
of one Covenant and another; When he had produced the Allegory of Hagar and
Sarah out of Genesis, says he, Alas, Moses in this Story gives you
Allegorically the two Covenants, Gal. 4 21. to the 24. But the chief place for
proof of what I have said, is Romans 10.5, 6. -- for Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, That the man which does these things, shall
live by them, Lev. 18.5* But the righteousness which is of Faith speaks on
this wise, Say not in thine heart who shall ascend up into Heaven, etc. and so
goes on in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. Here we see Moses in his
Writings, delineates and describes the two ways of Works and Grace, of the Law
and Faith; and it is proved out of the same ^oses, that the Law is no way to
justify sinners: Now I shall but draw out the Apostles Argument, which I
suppose to be this: Moses describes two ways of Justification, that by the Law,
and that by Faith; that by the Law Moses tells you is no way for sinners,
because you must continue in all things, or you are accursed; therefore
certainly he described the way of Faith too, that ye might betake your selves
unto it for justification and life; therefore the Law, take it either for the
whole Old Testament, or for the Dispensation by Moses, and it was a Covenant
indeed with the Jews; but it was a Covenant of Grace, for in it Moses
describes the way of Grace, that his Disciples might adhere unto it. But here
you will object still; Well, Object.
if Moses his Dispensation or Covenant which he was the Mediator of, was a
Covenant of Grace, and not of Works for Justification, why is it called a
killing Letter, a Ministration of Death, a Ministration of Condemnation, as it
is 2 Cor 3.6, 7, 9. Why is the Lord said to find fault with it, and so to
abrogate it, and make a new Covenant? Heb. 8 7, 8. By this it should seem to be
a Covenant of Works, for else God would not have found fault with a Covenant of
Grace, nor abrogated it.

To this I answer, 1. Here observe, That this (...) no Jewish Argument; for
they would not acknowledge that their Law is a ministration of death whilst
they seek life by it, nor yet a ministration of condemnation, whilst they seek
justification by the righteousness of it; but it is a cavil or objection
against the Apostle Paul, who calls the Law a ministration of death and
condemnation, and yet acknowledges that it was the Jews covenant, and that
Moses in it describes the righteousness of Faith.

2dly,

3dly, Jews; their minds were blinded, so that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly look to the end of that which is alolished, they could not see
Christ the end of the Law, 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15.

4thly, Israel had not only blinded eyes, and a veiled heart, but Moses had
also a Vail upon his face, ver. 13. which was one reason they could not see
that Grace which was in his Dispensation. Moses had a vail over his face, so
that they could not look steadfastly to the end of his Dispensation. The fault
of the first Covenant.
There was some kind of fault as it were in the Law it self, so the Apostle
tells us, Heb. 8.7. For if that first Covenant had been faultless, there should
no place have been sought for the second. What this fault was, is commonly
known and discoursed, and it was the obscurity of it; the promises of it were
not so plain; and therefore it is said, Christ is the Mediator of a better
Covenant, established upon better promises, ver. 6. There was a Covenant of
works inserted in their Dispensation. Else how could the Apostle give you a
description of the righteousness of it out of Moses? Which he does both in Romans
10.5. and Gal. 3.12. And no caveat entered in the place where the Covenant of
Works is delivered: It Is true, the same Moses describes the righteousness of
Faith too; but an inobservant Reader might chance to mistake the Covenant of
Works for his way to Heaven, as well as take the Covenant of Grace for his way;
and they might keep in that way all their lives, if they were not strict
observers of the effects of that way upon their Consciences, which was to gall
and sting them, and weary them out of their very lives, till they came to the
way of Grace. And thus we find the generality of the Jews did mistake, and
ruined themselves by it; so that unless God had by a wonderful hand, as he
plucked Lot out of Sodom, and perhaps by irresistible illuminations and
attractions, brought a remnant to himself, all Israel had been burnt up by the
Wrath of God; they had been as Sodom and Gomorrah, Romans 9.29. to the end: Romans
10.1.2.3. I might well transcribe every word of these eight Verses.

Now this was the fault which God found with his first Covenant; that though it
were a Covenant of Grace, yet he is so gracious, that he thought it was not
plain enough to save the generality of them; they would be still mistaking and
misconstruing his Covenant; it would not make them holy enough, nor save enough
of them; and therefore this Fault the Lord amends in the second ^ovenant, in
the New Covenant, Heb. 8 9 For finding fault he says, Behold the days come,
says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I took them by
the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt; because here is the reason of
the change, because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not:
It was a Covevenant which they brake with me, and I brake with them upon; there
was a fault in that Covenant which seems to be this: It had not Grace enough in
it to hold them, they continued not in it: The fault is laid upon the Covenant,
not so much upon the parties covenanting, though they were not free from blame;
God indeed was free he was ready to give his Grace and Spirit under the first
Covenant, but the Covenant was not a free channel for conveyance of this
precious Water of Life, for the Spirit runs freest in the clear promise; and
therefore the Gospel, which is full of rich and plain promises, is called the
ministration of the Spirit, and called by the Name of Spirit; whereas the Law
of Moses was a dead, mere outside literal thing, in comparison of it, 2 Cor.
3.6. I say, the fault was laid upon the covenant, which yet was a covenant of
Grace: Now what other fault it could be then this, that the Lord did not think
it gracious enough, I cannot imagine; and I think that is the fault the
Scripture pitcheth upon: Now because Moses's Dispensation, or the first
covenant made with the Jews, was thus faulty, had a covenant of Works in (...),
and was mistaken by the Jews to be a covenant of Works, it might well be called
by the Apostle, There was the same reason of the Gospel its being added to the
Law, that there was of the dispensation of Moses to be added to what they knew
of God before.
a killing letter, a ministration of death and condemnation, and deserve to be
abrogated and disannulled, if the Lord will make a better, clearer, more
gracious and saving; and yet it can by no means be concluded hence, that it was
truly, either in its own nature, or in the intention of the Lord who gave it, a
covenant of Works; nay the contrary hereunto, is sufficiently evinced.

Ob. 4. But yet there is a very considerable Objection behind, which is thus:
You have acknowledged that in Moses's Writings there is a covenant of Works
described; that St. Paul asserts; now I will add says the Objection) that it
is not only there described, but there commended to the children of Israel as
a part at least, if not the chiefest part of the Dispensation by Moses; and it
is given with as great Authority, and has as solemn a Sanction upon it as any
part of the Law of Moses; for in that place which the Apostle Paul quotes out
of Moses, viz. Lev. 18.5. for the description of a legal righteousness, we have
these words, Ye shall therefore keep mp Seatutes and my Judgments, which if a
man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord. So in the foregoing verses 1, 2.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them, I am the Lord your God; then follow the three verses wherein the
covenant of Works is described; ver. 3. After the doings of the Land of Egypt
wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do; and after the doings of the Land of Canaan,
whither I bring you; shall ye not do; neither shall ye walk in their
Ordinancee. Ver. 4. Ye shall do my Judgments, and keep mine Ordinances, to
walk therein; I am the Lord your God. Ver, 5. Ye shall therefore keep my
Statutes, and my Judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the
Lord. Here I observe, 1. The simplicity and plainness of the delivery of these
commands, which contain the covenant of Works; they are delivered without any
caveat or caution to the Reader, lest he should mistake this for his covenant
which he should be saved by. 2. I observe the Authority and Majesty they are
delivered with; even with this addition three several times in the compass of
four verses, I am the Lord, and I am the Lord your God. This does not look like
an old antiquated covenant made with Adam about 2000. years before, and of use
to him, but only for the strst day of his creation: I conclude therefore says
the objector, That it is a valid covenant, and delivered with intention that
men should be justified by it; And besides I add that which has great strength
in it, That even Jesus Christ himself repeats this covenant of Works in Moses
his own Words, and directs a man to this covenant for salvation, that came to
ask of him what he should do to be saved; the place is, Luke 10.25, 26, 27, 28.
And behold a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying, Master, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him, What is written in the
Law? How read thou? Christ sends him to the Law; and you shall see it is not
to the Law in a large sense, as it comprehends both a covenant of Works and a
covenant of Grace; but to the Law taken strictly for a covenant of Works; it
follows therefore ver. 27. The Lawyer answering, said, The Law says, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self: And
Jesus said unto him, Thou have answered right; this do, and thou shall live;
which are the very words of Moses, where he describes a legal righteousness;
From whence I conclude, That the Covenant of Works is still good unto
Justification; the Covenant of Works is still in force; else Moses would never
have delivered it in that simplicity, and with that Authority; else Jesus
Christ himself would never have directed one unto it, to get eternal life by it.

I answer, 1. Moses indeed did deliver a covenant of Works to the people of
Israel, as truly as he did a covenant of Grace, and that without any caution
(that I can find) in the place where it is delivered; and I think I may say
also, that our Savior Christ did deliver a Covenant of Works too, in that 10.
of Luke abovementioned.

And 2dly, All men are naturally under a Covenant of works.
There was indeed a positive Law besides given to Adam; but the observing of it
needed not have created any trouble to innocent man: All men are naturally
under a covenant of Works, for they are naturally under the Law of their
Creation, which is the covenant of Works. Yea the Saints themselves are not
freed from it, any further then from the condemning power of it, by Christ's
having suffered the penalty for them. That all men are naturally under the Law,
or under a covenant of Works, which are all one, appears, for that all those
whom Christ came to redeem, were under the Law, Gal. 4.5. which must be meant
of the Law, strictly taken for a covenant of Works; for else none but the Jews
and proselyted Gentiles were under the Law, as delivered by Moses; whereas in
that Scripture it is plain, that all those whom Christ came to redeem, were
under the Law; therefore it is meant under the Law as a covenant of Works.
Besides, the Apostle in Romans 7. the first six verses, argues thus, That the
conscience or soul of a man must either be married to the Law as its Husband,
or to Christ as its Husband; and till it is married to Christ, the Law is its
natural Husband; but when it is married to Christ, the law is its husband no
longer; therefore till a man come to Christ, he is under a covenant of Works;
therefore all men naturally are under a covenant of Works, for no man is in
Christ by nature.

I answer in the third place, Moses and our Savior both preached a covenant of
Works, as well as a covenant of Grace; and well might, because all men are
naturally under it: Yet neither our Savior, nor Moses did it, with design to
make men seek justification by Works, but only to burden men's consciences with
insupportable loads of guilt, that so they might readily flee to the hope that
was set before them in the covenant of Grace, which they had together with the
covenant of Works in the same Dispensation; That Moses did it with this design,
St. Paul asserts, as I have shown in several places; the law entered that the
offense might abound, and so was a Schoolmaster unto Christ: And that our
Savior did it with this design, the place quoted in the objection will
sufficiently evidence, Luke 10.25. to the 28.25. v. Behold a certain Lawyer
stood up and tempted him, saying, Master what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? Here this Lawyer came not with a good intention; for it is said he stood
up and tempted our Savior, made the question rather to see what our Savior
would say, then to get any satisfaction to himself; and in the 29. ver. it is
said, This Lawyer was willing to justify himself. Now how could the pride of
this tempting Lawyer be better repressed, then by sending him to the Law, to a
covenant of Works; which if he would but set himself in earnest to keep, would
quickly prick the bladder of his pride; and let out that wind with which he was
so swollen, as to dare come and tempt Christ, and justify himself? But now our
Savior takes another course with the Woman of Canaan, who after she was tried
with a knock or two, with some harsh words, so as to be called Dog, yet
continuing humble and submissive, had her faith extolled by our Savior, and is
strengthened with the highest consolations; as we have the story, Matt. 15.
from ver. 22. to ver. 29. Thus God resists the proud, he has a Covenant of
Works to oppose them withal; but he gives Grace, and shows Mercy to the
humble; he has a covenant of Grace to comfort them with.

Moses was given to them for a covenant of Works; else why had they such
multitude of ceremonies imposed upon them, if they were not to have life for
the observation and doing of them, together with the duties of the moral Law?
And it is very observable, that in that place of Leviticus which the Apostle
quotes, as containing the righteousness of the law, the ceremonies are as
strictly enjoined as the moral duties of the law are, with this badge of the
law of works upon them, The man that does them, shall live in them, Lev. 18.4,
5. Ye shall do my Judgments; that is, say Commentors, my judicial Laws, and
keep mine Ordinances; that is, say they, either moral or ceremonial; so in ver.
5. You shall therefore keep my Statutes and Judgments, which if a man do, he
shall live in them; I am the Lord. Now hence I argue, says the Objector, Here
you have acknowledged, is a covenant of Works described. Now here is their
whole Dispensation by Moses, of laws moral, ceremonial, and judicial,
contained; therefore their whole Dispensation was a covenant of Works; besides,
if the Law moral alone, which you have called the law of Nature, he of it self
a covenant of Works, as it seems to have been to Adam, who had but a few other
commands besides, viz. such as we call Positive; and if every man by Nature be
under a covenant of works (though a stranger to the Old Testament or New, as
having never heard of either) being under the law of his creation; how much
more were the Israelites under a covenant of Works, who, besides the moral law,
had the judicial and ceremonial added for them to observe, and altogether given
them with this language of a covenant of Works, these ye shall observe, which
if a man do, he shall live in them; I am the Lord. I shall add only one
observation more to strengthen the objection, and it is this, That when St.
Paul disputes against the Galatians for embracing a covenant of Works, most of
his Work lies in beating them off from the ceremonial law, which they were
exceedingly addicted to, as looking upon the law of Moses to be very much of
the nature of the covenant of Works, and the ceremonial law as a great sign of
it, there being so much work cut out for them in it, and verily believing that
if they were pretty strict in keeping the ceremonial law, God would justify
and save them. Therefore it is very probable, that the law of Moses was given
to them as a covenant of Works, for this reason as well as others, that there
were so many ceremonies appointed for them to observe; most of which it is more
then probable the greater number did not understand, and so must take up, und
satisfy themselves with the Work done, then which, what can look more like a
covenant of works, for men to do a great many things which they did not
understand, merely because God had commanded them? Now for answer to this
objection, and I shall give it in several particulars.

Jews, and so to the Galatians; for when they found such a great task of
ceremonies set them, they cared not much to study the meaning of them, but took
up with the doing of them, which to do, did not much trouble their hearts or
consciences, and so placed themselves by it under a covenant of works, in
their treating with God for Justification.

2dly, I grant that the ceremonial law was a great burden, and an
unsupportable yoke even to those that were good amongst the Jews, Acts 15.10.
and it is a great piece of the liberty of the Gospel, to be freed from it.

3dly, I grant that the laws moral, judicial, and ceremonial, were given
altogether, and are included in that place, where a covenant of works, or the
righteousness of the Law is said to be described by the Apostle; and I grant in
this particular, that though the law of nature alone is a covenant of works to
those that are in a state of nature, though they never received any positive
law from God; yet that it is possible for a ceremonial law, or a law
consisting of many ceremonies, or positive laws to be a part of a covenant of
works; as we find in Adam's covenant of works, there was a Sacrament, as some
reckon it, of the Tree of life; and there was a positive law concerning the
forbidden fruit, which were neither of them branches of the law of Nature; and
he might have been as well forbidden as allowed all the trees save one, if the
Lord had pleased; he might have had a systeme of positive and ceremonial laws
inserted in his covenant of works, if the Lord had thought good, and no wrong
had been done him; for he was able to have kept them.

4thly, is the great mystery of the Gospel? Now if any say they understood it
not, and yet must do it, and so it was all one to them as if it had not
singnified any thing at all; and therefore must still pass with them as a
covenant of works.

I answer, 1 in the words of the Apostle, Romans 3: 3. What though some did not
believe, did not understand, must their unbelief and ignorance make the Faith
of God, that Doctrine of Faith which the ceremonial law preached, of none
effect, or signification? But you will say, they could not see the blood of
Christ in the blood of a sacrifice, having no clearer discoveries then they had
of Christ? I ans. I confess I cannot say they could see so much, though still
so much was contained in it, as now we well understand. But yet if they could
not see so much, yet somewhat they might have learned; for certainly God
appoints no idle, useless, insignificant ceremonies in his Worship; therefore I
suppose they might have learnt thus much by their ceremonies, and particularly
by their sacrifices, which I suppose was known even amongst Heathens in their
sacrifices, that when they killed a Beast for attoning the anger of God, here
life went for life, and God might as well have taken their lives from them, as
accepted the life of that Beast; and so by this they might see that their lives
and salvations did depend purely upon the Mercy and Grace of God; now this
sufficiently weaned them from the law or covenant of works, which had no Grace
or Pardon in it; it was therefore the grossest mistake of all to understand the
ceremonial law for a part of the covenant of Works, when it was greatly
intended to be a Gospel to them.

5thly and lastly, If yet it were dark, and did confound them with the
multitude of duties which it imposed; Why might it not herein do the good turn
that a covenant of Works did for them? Which was to make them study and search,
and long for the pure and clear discoveries of that rich Grace which we now see
in the days of the Gospel? I have now done with this objection also, which I
of purpose kept out from the rest, in which I only considered the moral law as
a covenant of Works, for these two reasons: 1. For that the ceremonial law
neither was, nor could be a part of the covenant of Works, which the moral law
both was, and is to all that are under a covenant of works. 2dly, and
consequently, I therefore kept off from any consideration of the ceremonial
law, in my discourses about the law its being given by Moses, that so I might
have my discourse run clear in the business of the covenant of works, and draw
a line in it from Adams estate in innocence, to the very days of the Gospel,
which with any mixture of discourse about the ceremonial law, would have been
broken and disturbed. Whereas now you see the law taken strictly for a
covenant of works, might have justified Adam, but could not justify the
children of Israel; and therefore though added to the promise given to Abraham,
and that in the language of a covenant of works, yet was never given with
design that they should accept it for such unto Justification; which appears
from this double demonstration, as I may call it, a priori, and a posteriori. A
priori, for that before the law was given there was a covenant of Grace, which
the law could not come in to disannul; and a posteriori, for that the very same
Moses that brought their law from God out of the Mount, did not more truly
acquaint them with the nature of a legal righteousness, then he did with the
righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.6. But the righteousness of faith speaks on
this wise, Say not in thy heart, etc. being a text quoted out of the same
Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.11. which make this argument, wherefore should Moses first
describe to you a legal righteousness, and tell you, as appears by clear
consequence out of him, that ye cannot attain unto that righteousness, and then
describe unto you the righteousness of faith; but for this end, that ye might
forgo the one, and cleave to the other? And there are infinite places in other
Scriptures of the Old Testament, which give their testimony to Christ, and the
Righteousness of Faith, which sufficiently argue, that the Old Testament never
went about to establish a way of Justification by the Law.

And here I think it may be of great use to search into this place of Moses,
which the Apostle asserts to contain the description of the righteousness which
is by faith, that so we may find both that it is so, and what this
righteousness of faith is. The place is, Deuteronomy. 30.11. to 15. quoted and
paraphrased by the Apostle, Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9. An inquiry into the sense of
Deuteronomy: 30 11, 12
in Romans 10.6. But the righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise,
Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? etc. clearly referring to
Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, -- as any may see in the Margent of their Bibles. Now let us
go to that place in Deuteronomy. and see what Gospel there is in it, and how evident
it is, that there is Gospel in it. The words are these: For this commandment
which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far
off; it is not in heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? Neither is it
beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us, and
bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? but the Word is nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. This is the whole
Paragraph, in which the covenant of Grace, or the righteousness of Faith is
described, according to the Apostle Paul. But how is the Gospel or
righteousness of Faith described here? First of all, I must separate that which
does not seem to look like Gospel, from that which is pure Gospel, in this
place: And here we may observe, That the matter of the Gospel spoken of, is the
law or commandment which he had delivered to them; This Commandment which I
command thee this day; the same which is spoken of (as I think, there being no
visible difference as to matter) in Lev. 18.5. the place asserted by the
Apostle to contain a legal righteousness; it was for matter, the law of Moses;
This Commandment, says he, which I command thee this day. Again. I think it
will appear to be meant of the ten commandments, because it is added, That
Commandment which I command thee, is not far from thee, but is nigh thee, even
in thy heart and mouth: Now the ceremonial law was not written in their heart;
neither had all the children of Israel, nor the generality of them to whom yet
this is spoken, been taught the law effectually by the Spirit of God, so as
that should be the sense of these words, This Commandment is in thine heart;
and indeed, that is the promise of the new Covenant, not of this by Moses; but
the effect of the Moral law was in their heart, for it was in the heart of
Heathens; If it be objected, as perhaps it may by some that the matter of the
Commandment which Moses commanded them that day, was not likely to be the ten
commandments, nor that chiefly; nor to be the same with that in Lev. 18.
because this is in Deute^^rom^, which very word signifies a second Law, or a
second Edition and giving of the Law, and had more Gospel in it then the Law in
the first giving of it had. I answer, 1. by concession, That there were indeed
two several Covenants, which the Lord is said to have made by Moses with the
children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.1. These are the words of the Covenant which the
Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the Land of Moab,
be ides the Covenant which he made with them in Ho^eb; which a as a Mountain
adjoining to, if not a part of Mount Sinat. 2. That perhaps in this
Deutetonomy, or second Covenant by Moses, there (...) m^^^ promises, and more
of Gospel, then in the first Edition of the Law there was. But 3dly, This does
not hinder, but the commandment mentioned in Deuteronomy. ^0. might be chiefly for
matter of it the moral Law, or ten Commandments, it is true, there were promises
added to encourage unto the keeping of them; and there were also terrible
threatenings unto the breaking of them; all the twelve tribes being divided into
two equal parts, the one half placed upon Mount Gerizim, to bless the people
that were obedient to the Law, the other half upon Mount Ebal, to curse all
that brake it, Deuteronomy 27.11, 12, 13* But that commandment, for the sake of which
these promises and threatenings were added, was the Law of the ten words or two
tables, which were twice given to Moses in Sinai, and again repeated in this
Covenant in the Land of Moab, as we may see in Deuteronomy. 5. and the very word Deuteronomy.
signifies a second Law, or a second giving of the Law.
and this was the Commandment which that day Moses commanded them.

Lastly, Another thing in this Paragraph that will not seem perhaps to some to
look like Gospel, is this. That all the comfort of this Gospel by Moses, lies
in Doing. This Commandment (says he) is not far off, but in thy heart and in
thy mouth, that thou may do it; and so obtain life and justification by it:
This seems to look right like that place in Levitious so often mentioned, where
Moses is said to describe a Legal Righteousness; The man that does them, shall
live in them: And so in all the Chapter after, there is blessing if they do the
command and cursing if they do not; this to some may not look like Gospel. But
yet here is the Gospel, and therefore wherein does it lie? Wherein is the
Gospel expressed in this place of Deuteronomy.
or how will it appear? I have showed wherein it cannot lie, or does not seem
to lie; I will show yet wherein it must be expressed, and wherein it is visibly
expressed, and that is, in that easiness which Moses does so much insist upon
in this Scripture of doing the Commandment. The Commandment for the matter of
it was perhaps the same with the Covenant of Works; and Doing (partly at least)
brought in the reward of it, that is, Justification: But is this the Language
of a Covenant of Works think you, to fallen man, such as the Israelites were?
The Commandment is easy; there are no such difficulties in keeping it, as you
may imagine; ye shall not need to climb as high as Heaven after it, nor to
coast all Lands, and compass the Ocean for it; propose no such vast
undertakings to thy self for the accomplishment of it, for thou need not;
the Word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, that is near; yea but nearer yet, in thine
heart, that thou may do it, and thou may do it with ease and sweetness;
No, I have shown at large, that the Covenant of Works, or the Law taken
strictly as a way of Justification, serves now to sinners only to terrify
their Consciences with laying home its charge; it has no such comfortable
words in it; nay I showed out of the Scripture, that it is an utter
impossibility that the Law should be done by a sinner so as to justify him: A
man might as well climb up to Heaven, or compass the vast Ocean* yea (to add
another impossibility which the Apostle adds in his Paraphras upon this Text in
Deuteronomy. a man might as well descend into the infernal Abyss, and make a
resurrection, as be justified by the Law: This therefore cannot be the Language
of the Law. But now take the keeping the Law in a Gospel-sence (as perhaps that
Romans 8.4. is to be understood, where the righteousness of the Law is said to be
fulfilled in us, that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit) and then
the Gospel in this Scripture is obvious; it is easy to keep the Law now, even
that commandment which Moses commanded them, even the Moral Law; that is, to
keep it sincerely, not exactly to a tittle, but in the substance of it: This
Word therefore which Moses means when he says, The word is nigh thee, as the
Apostle adds in his Paraphrase, must be the word of faith which he preached.
The Word is nigh thee; that is, not the Word of the Moral law taken in its
utmost exactness, to be fulfilled to a tittle; this is not nigh thee; it is as
far as Heaven, further then either of the Indies, further then Hell it self;
thou sinner can never attain unto it, to do it. But yet the Word of the same
Commandment in a moderated sense, in the gracious acceptance of God, where
sincere obedience is accepted for unerring observance of it; This Word is nigh
thee, even in thy heart and in thy month, that thou may do it; and it is
(says the Apostle) the Word of Faith which we preach; this the new creature
can undertake with the assistance of God, even the keeping the Commandments of
God in an Evangelical manner, through Faith, which works by Love: Here thou
do not claim thy wages upon thy doings, as if they deserved it; or as if they
answered the letter of the Law; and so thou come not to the Law for thy
Justification; but though the great Rule of thine obedience be the Law, yet
thou go to the Gospel for thy Justification; thou come by Faith to the
Promise, and Goodness, and Grace of God for thy Justification. And indeed,
there is nothing but Faith will encourage thee in such a keeping of the Law as
this is. The Law strictly taken, will dishearten thee; that will thus reason
the case with thee: What are all thy works, what is all thy obedience, so long
as thoughast broken such and such a Commandment, have omitted such and such a
duty? What is thy sincerity good for? What is thy good meaning and real
intention worth? I must have a full task performed; I must have unerring,
never-failing obedience, or else I must curse thee with all the curses which
thou find written against sinners: Now the Soul by Faith thus answers the
Law: It Is true, were I to stand to thy award, it must be all as thou have said;
but I am upon other terms with the Lord for my Justification; I am upon terms
of Grace and Mercy, of which there are no footsteps in thy whole way of
Justification; and though I was born under thy power, yet I have a Savior that
has freed me from under it, by suffering the penalty for my breach of it; and
now I am assured, That if I walk faithfully, and deal honestly with God,
endeavoring in sincerity to walk after the Spirit, to do all the Wills of God
from the heart, my sincere obedience will now be as well accepted, as unerring
obedience would once have been. Thus you see, Faith bears off from coming to a
legal-Justification, and Faith bears up the Soul against all expostulations of
the Law with it, and against all the accusations of Satan in the Conscienc, and
yet does keep the soul intent upon the design of universal obedience to the
pure and holy Law of God. Faith requires thy obedience to the Law; the
preaching of Faith does establish the Law; and yet the Law in this moderated
sense only observed, requires thee to go, or rather takes for granted that
thou go to Grace, Mercy and Pardon by Faith, for that thou art not an exact
Doer of the Law. So I have shown how this place in Deuteronomy. seems to speak Law,
yet must be understood to speak Gospel; and what Gospel that is which it
speaks. Yet I may not expect to go off without opposition in this
interpretation; and I am sensible that these two or three things will be
objected against me, Objections against the interpretation of Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12.
1. That I make Faith too easy a business, as if those that could not keep the
Law, are yet able to believe; whereas some think it as hard a business to
believe, as to keep the whole Law. 2. They Will say, That I make the Gospel but a
Covenant of works in a new dress, and substitute Evangelical obedience in the
room of Legal, as the matter of our Justification. 3. They may perhaps add,
that I leave out the great Gospel-mysterie, which according to the Apostle is
contained in Deuteronomy. and that is Christ. That which Moses expresses thus, the
Commandment which I command thee, is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who
shall ascend for us into Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and
do it; The Apostle Paul expresses thus, Who shall ascend for us into Heaven,
(that is, to bring Christ down from above; or who shall descend into the deep?
that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.) But what says it? The Word
is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart; and (leaving out, that thou
may do it, he adds) the Word of Faith which we preach, that if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Here we see the Apostle
sinds Christ in all that speech of Moses; and it was Faith on him that
justified; therefore it was not a keeping of the Law according to sincerity,
instead of unerring obedience, which Moses meant, and so the exposition given
of Moses is useless. Now I shall answer first this last objection against the
interpretation of Moses his Covenant of Grace, and then come to the other two
objections; and I shall do it in the words of truth, (as I hope) I am sure in
the words soberness. The last objection first answered.
1. I do believe all this, which the Apostle adds by way of Paraphrase, to
agree well with the words of Moses. 2. That yet I cannot believe that any
ordinary Saint, or any other then some mightily inspired by God, like an
Apostle, could have understood all that in Moses his words, when they were
first delivered, viz. That Christ should descend into the deep, and after that
be raised from the dead, and ascend into Heaven, because Moses says; Say not
in thine heart, Who shall ascend for us into Heaven, and bring the Word from
thence, that we may hear it, and do it? Or because Moses says, Who shall go
for us beyond the Seas, and bring the Word unto us? -- Neither can I believe
that it was their duty in Moses's time to confess with their mouth the Lord
Jesus, or to believe in their heart that God had raised him from the dead (a
thing which was not at that time true) I say, I do not think it was their duty
to believe it, because to us it is contained in the Word of Faith, to wit, the
Gospel which the Apostle preached. Neither do I believe that it was a necessary
duty of that time, so much as to believe that God would raise Christ from the
dead, and that for this reason; For all the Apostles in the days of Christ's
Flesh, were ignorant of this Mystery; yea, did not believe it, or understand it
after Christ had told them of it, as is very plein in Luke 18. from 31. to 35.
The reciting the words of that Text is plain proof enough, without urging them
by force of Argument. 31. Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them,
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the Prophets
concerning the Son of Man, shall be accomplished. Ver. 33. They shall scourge
him, and put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again. Now it is
said ver. 34. that they understood none of these things; and this saying was
hid from them; neither knew they the things that were spoken. Therefore
certainly these things were not necessary to be known and believed in Moses his
time: And therefore, though there be so much Gospel contained in that Text of
Deuteronomy. to us, now that the Apostle has discovered it, (unless we will say, they
are additional glosses upon that Text of Moses, which perhaps may prove no
false Divinity) I say, Permit all that be contained to us in that Text of Deuteronomy.
which St. Paul has discovered in it, yet by them under the Old Testament (as I
think) there could be no more understood then this; That they were not to lay
it upon themselves as absolutely necessary to salvation, and so unto
Justification, to keep the whole Law in the strictness of it, but that they
were to mind the keeping of it from their heart, to turn unto the Lord their
God with all their heart, and with all their souls, and so to keep his
Commandments and his Statutes which are written in this Book of the Law, as it
is ver. 10. immediately preceding those Verses in Deuteronomy. 30. where the
righteousness of Faith is said to be described, and this to do, to keep the Law
with all their heart sincerely, they should find easy and pleasant; whenas for
a strict Covenant of Works, Do this, and thou shall live, they would find it an
unsupportable yoke and burden.

Now I come to answer those other two objections against my interpretation; The
first ^ answered.
the first is this, That I make Faith too easy athing in comparison of keeping
the Law; whereas many good men judge it a hard to believe, as to keep the whole
Law:

I answer, 1. That indeed I do think the way of Faith to be an easier way in it
self then keeping the whole Law: For I ask any sober man, Whether it be not
easier to keep the Law in a sincere manner, that is, to guide my actions only
by the rule of it, and honestly to endeavor toconform to it, though in some
things I fail) if this be not easier, then the exact keeping the Law to a
tittle? The question I suppose is answered as soon as made. Why then I say, I
look upon the way of believing to be this: Corning to God humbling my self for
my sins, addicting my self to his service, and walking faithfully with him, The
description (...).
and in this way of well doing, seeking for glory, honor and ^mmortality: In
one word, It is an Honesty to God, upon terms of Grace, and I being honest and
true to him, doubt not of his faithfulness to me, for pardoning my sins, and
providing for me here, and saving me here after: Erge, if this be Faith (for
proof of which I refer to my interpretation, and require a better or fairer in
confutation of it) I say, if this be faith, then the way of Faith is easier
then keeping the whole Law.

2. But yet I have not said, that though it be easier, yet it is in a man's own
power to believe; it is not i^ a man's own power to move a finger without God,
and it is equally impossible without God to move a singer, and to remove a
Mountain; yet there is no man in his right wits but will acknowledge, that it
is easier in it self to move a singer, then to remove a Mountain. The last
objection is this:

But then you substitute Evangelical works in the room of Legal; and so still
you turn the Gospel, The second objection answered
which is called the Law of Faith, into a Covenant of Works.

Now for this objection, I confess it has some weight in it, though for those
that make it, they are usually soaring in high notions, and strangely wedded
unto their own apprehensions, and are somewhat of an Antinomian strain; yet I
will acknowledge, that it may be made by a sober man: I should prevent my self
in what I have to say in the following part of this Treatise, if I should
answer it at large in this place; yet to give some taste of an answer here, I
make this distinction; That there are indeed two ways of running upon a
Covenant of works, either in whole, or in part. Two ways of running upon a
Covenant of Works
1. Either upon a Covenant of Works purely and strictly, so none durst touch or
meddle with it. 2. Upon it in part, so as to mix it with the Gospel. A. Now I
answer therefore, That indeed our great care is to be laid out about avoiding
of these mixtures of legality in our treating with God for Justification; and
that is the great design of this Treatise, to caveat us against these mixtures
which we are very apt to be saulty in, as I hope they shall see in the sequel
of my Discourse, that please to go on in it. Hitherto we have seen, that there
is Gospel in the Law of Moses, and what this Gospel in the Law is; as also,
that the reason why it was delivered by Moses, could be no other, but to put
his Disciples upon the way of believing, for Justification. There are many
other places in Moses, especially in the Book of Deuteronomy. that have much Gospel in
them. I shall only add one Allegorical or Typical Argument, which yet I think
has much evidence in it, to prove that the Law of Moses had Gospel in it; it
is this: That the Law of the two Tables when it was written the second time by
Moses from the mouth of God, or else by the singer of God himself, are ordained
by God to be put in the Ark, and the Ark to be put under the Mercy-seat, and
Cherubims to cover the Mercy-Seat, and the presence of God eminently promised
to be found between those Cherubins, Exodus 25.21, 22. Thou shall put the
Mercy-Seat above upon the Ark, and in the Ark thou shall put the Testimony that
I shall give thee, and there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with
thee from above the Mercy-Seat, from between the two Cherubims which are upon
the Ark of the ^estimony of All things, etc. Hence I frame this argument; If
the Law be hid in the Ark, which alone seems to be an instrument of Salvation,
and this Ark placed under the Mercy-Seat; the Greek word for which, being
(...), is in Rom 3 25. applied to Christ, and translated Propitiation, -- whom
God has set forth to be a Propitation through Faith in his Blood; and the
presence of God eminently promised to them upon this Mercy-Seat or Throne of
Grace, then the Law which was in its own nature a Covenant of Works, and to
sinners a killing-letter, was yet to the Israelites shrouded, and covered with
Grace and Mercy, (Mercy rejoicing against, or triumphing over Judgment, Jam.
2.13.) and they defended and protected from the wrath and curse of it, by a
gracious presence of God with them: that Christ's offering was interposed
betwixt the Law and them, and that this was in some sort (though more darkly
then to us) signified and discovered to them, and so, that the law was never
given them with this design, that they should seek Justification by it as a
Covenant of Works.

I have done with the objections of the Jews, which may be made against my
first Position, that Justification is not, cannot be by the Law; that it is,
and must be by faith, all which were made by occasion of the Old Testament
Dispensation, chiefly the giving of the Law by Moses. I shall before I conclude
the more Doctrinal part of my Treatise, only mention an objection which might
be made on behalf of the Gentiles, against Justification by Faith, and for
Justification by the Law: And it is this.

You have said that the Law of our Creation is naturally a Covenat of Works,
The objection in behalf of the Gentiles against Justification by Faith.
and that the Gentiles had the Law, or the effect and substance of it written
in their hearts, and we read not of any Promises that they had; therefore
either they could not be justified at all, or they must be justified by the law.

I answer: 1. All are not of Opinion that the Heathens were in a justifiable
condition till Christ was explicitly and plainly preached to them; and for
those that are not of it, they will meet with no difficulty in this Objection;
for, if the Heathens could not be justified at all, it cease the enquiry
which way they were to be justified

2. Some are of Opinion, That God never made any creatures under an utter
impossibility of pleasing him, and being made happy by him.

3. Therefore in a consonancy to my preceding Discourse, I say, If it can be
made appear that the Heathens without the law of Moses, and the Scriptures
tures of the Old Testament could not discover so much of the Goodness, Grace,
Mercy, and Love of God to mankind, as upon which to ground a lively hope, an
unfeigned and operative faith, that God was ready upon their repentance and
amendment of life, to forgive their sins, and to be at peace with them; the
second opinion is to be avoided, and the first received: For, I do verily
believe, that if the Heathens were any of them saved, or in a possibility to be
saved and justified, it must be by their treating of God in the way of
believing, for that the law was rendered utterly weak, and unable to ^ustifie so
much as one sinner. Now because I do not think it convenient in this place to
engage in that controversy, Whether or no the Gentiles were in a salvable
condition; I shall neither produce the Scriptures which seem to prove they had
sufficient Gospel Light to produce Faith, (which they must have if they were
saved) nor the others, which would seem to prove that they had no such light.

Now to conclude this first part, having proved it ex hypothesi, on the
Gentiles part, that if any of them were saved, it must be by faith, and
absolutely as to the Jews, notwithstanding all the objections to the contrary,
that they were under a Covenant of Grace, and that the law was never given to
them to put them upon seeking Justification by the works of it. The first great
Propositions which were under demonstration, still stand firm and unsha^en;
That the law is no way to sinners for Justification; That Faith is a way, and
the only way; and that God has set up this way, without which all mankind
must have perished, and that he has led his people in this way throughout all
ages, before the law, and under the law; that as they were all under sin by the
law, so they were likewise under the discoveries of Grace for their
Justification by Faith: I come now to some more practical and experimental
inquiries, which I shall introduce with an use of Conviction and Reprehension
from the Doctrinal part of the foregoing Discourse.

WE have seen in the foregoing Discourse, that there are but two ways of
Justification, the one by Works, the other by Faith; that these two are
opposite one to the other; that the Law or Works is now no way to fallen man,
but Faith only; that all that ever were justified, were justified by faith,
even Abraham, and David, and all the Saints of God under the Old Testament, all
the Saints before the giving of the law by Moses, and ever after; yea the
Gentiles themselves, if any were saved, must be saved this way. An use
Conviction and Reproof
How greatly then are they mistaken, that even under the Gospel will needs be
justified by Works? This falls with clear evidence of conviction and
reprehension upon such a generation of men; and yet such there are in abundance
(who would think it!) even at this day; yea the greatest part of professors run
this way. Although man be turned out of Paradise, (which was his place of
Justification by Works) and at the door a Cherubin be set with a flaming Sword
to dispute the passage, yet they will needs enter again, though they venture
life and soul and all. Though Mount Sinai be covered all over with smoke,
though they hear the thunderings, see the lightnings, feel the Earth quake at a
distance, and be forbid to approach the Mount, yet they wi^ make up toward a
cousuming fire that will certainly devour them. Though one way of Justification
be impossible, so that the Apostle professes That if there had been a Law
given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the
Law, Gal. 3.21. I say, though one be absolute^ impossible, and the other way
easy, yet they wi^ leave the easy way, and take that way which is no passable
way at all. Yea though after they are entered upon that way, they feel
themselves lashe^ and galled, and stung as it were to death with fier^
Serpents, in a Wilderness and Labyrinth of guilts and pressures of Spirit, yet
they will not be beaten off from going this way, but only a very few of them.
They run still upon the Pikes, and press upon the thick Bosses of God's
Bucklers. Yea, ^ thing stranger yet! Though the law it self preach faith, yet
those that pretend to very great skill it the law, and are called great
boasters of the law^ they will not believe the law in this particular^ though
the law give witness to the way of believing, yet they will understand the law
as giving testimony rather to its own way of Justification.

Now to set home this Conviction and Reprehension, Consider that there are
these four great iniquities found in a legal Spirit: 1. An horrible perverseness
and self-willednefs; When God would have them go one way, they will go another;
(...) right cousness of God is revealed in the Gospel, from faith to faith, as
it is written, The Just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17. And they give God the
lie, and say, The Just shall live by Works, and will go the quite opposite and
contraty way 2. Here we see their intolerable pride, which is the root of this
self-willedness; they will not be justified by Gods Righteousness, but by their
own Righteousness; they prefer their own Way to God's, their own dis-approved
Works, to God's approved Way of Righteousness. 3. Here we see the sottish
senselesness, and brutish fool-hardiness of these men; for in doing thus, they
are as a Ship that runs her self upon a Rock; as a Moth that flies at the
Candle; they perish every Mothers Child of them that thus steer their course.
4. See the high dis-ingenuity that there is in this way of theirs: What do they
herein, but spurn at the very bowels of their Heavenly Father? When God had
found man fallen by his own voluntary defection, he might have left him as he
did the fallen Angels, to have perished for ever; but he was graciously
resolved not so to lose his creature, but finds out a way how he might recover
his creature (Man) again, in which certainly there are most admirable
contrivances of Wisdom, Power and Mercy; and he proposes terms of
Reconciliation; he offers his Sons blood; bids the sinner but come and humble
himself, and ask pardon, and return to his Allegiance, and trust in him for
Pardon, Grace and Perseverance to Eternal life: No, says the Legal
self-Justificiary, I have never sinned, I have deserved no anger, no
displeasure; I need no pardon, no mercy, I have no need of the blood of Christ:
I say, all this, and a great deal more, which were not fit to be expressed,
must lie as in the Seed, and in the Root, in a Legal Spirit, though perhaps it
may never come directly to such expressions, nor actual imaginations; for let
any one but imagine what would be the Language of a sinner that seeks not
Justification by Faith, Grace and Mercy, but by the Law, which can justify
none but for perfect and unerring obedience; and I think I may say, it can be
no other but such as I have mentioned, or fat worse; it must be only a deal of
blasphemy against the Grace of God, as useless and needless against the person
of Christ as coming into the World to save sinners, when there was no need o^ a
Savior, etc Now to have these things lie in his heart at the bottom, though
but as in a spawn, not perfected or come to the birth, how odious must it needs
be in the eyes of God and good men? And yet all this lies in a legal-Spirit,
for which they justly lie under a severe reproof from the foregoing assertions.
Obj.


But surely (may some say) there are no such men as these you mention; there
are none that pretend themselves perfectly holy; there are none but think they
stand in need of pardon; we all cry God mercy for our sins; and why should you
say that men are generally apt to do thus, to seek Justification by Works, and
that most professors run this way?

I answer, Ans.
1. That it is true, few men profess to go this way amongst us, and perhaps few
ever, (except those that do, or have held perfection in this life, and that as
a thing necessary to salvation) did profess to expect salvation by the Law as a
Covenant of Works in the strict sense of it.

2. That yet there are very many; and (as I have said) the most of professors
are guilty of this folly, yea we are all of us naturally inclinable unto it,
viz. To seek Justification by the Covenant of Works; and in proof and
explication of this second answer or assertion, I shall do these three things:
1. Prove that the greatest part of men and professors go this way. 2. I shall
endeavor to discover wherein their error or mistake lies, that they should not
dare to profess this way, and yet be thus deeply guilty. And 3dly, I shall give
some characters of a Legal and Evangelical spirit, whereby we may discover if
we are guilty, and unto what degree we faulty this way. The f^^st particular in
the convict ontha^ very many are guilty of legality
The first thing which I am to do, is to prove, that there are very many men,
yea many, most professors that are guilty of this folly; yea, that we are all
naturally inclinable to it, and have been from the beginning. If there had not
been such a generation of men in the Apostles times, all the Discourses and
Argumentations of the Apostle Paul against this sort of men, in his Epistles to
the Romans and Galatians, had been useless: Now certainly the Apostle did not
trifle so with the world, as to set up Enemies in his own imagination, and then
sight with them: And yet it cannot be denied by any, that the Apostle spends
large Disco rses and Argumentations against such a sort of men. Besides, that
the thing may be out of question, that there were such men, the Apostle Paul
names them, points them out with the finger, lays hold of them, binds them down
with such Arguments, as they can never dis-entangle themselves from. He points
them out; they were the Jews, they were the Galatians, and others; the Jews,
see Romans 10.1, 2, 3. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel
is, that they may be saved; for I bear them record, that they have a zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge; for they being ignoram of Gods
rightcousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted to the right cousness of God. Here you see the Apostle draws up an
high charge against Israel in the lump, and bulk, that is, the people of the
Jews in general; it was a general mistake of theirs, that they missed of God's
righteousness, that is, as I have explained it, the righteousness which is of
God by Faith, and went about to establish their own righteousness, that is, a
righteousness of works of the Law; they were ignorant of this, that Christ is
the end of the Law for righteousness, as it is in ver. 4. of that chap. The
Jews they would needs be justified by works; they are one sort of men named by
the Apostle, as guilty in this particular. But, which is yet stranger, not
only the Jews, but the Galatians, who were Gentiles, who had never received
the Law, and lived under it, as the Jews had; had only been educated in
Heathen Idolatries and filthiness, till the Gospel came amongst them; yet even
these, after they had received the Gospel, had begun in the Spirit, that is, in
the way of Justification by Faith, in a Gospel way, and had made public
Encomiums of the blessed Estate the Gospel had brought them into, crying, O the
blessedness! Gal. 4.15. They so loved the Apostle Paul for his preaching the
Gospel to them, that they could have pulled out their own eyes, and have given
them to him if it would have done him any good; yet even these, after all this,
they no sooner had some Law-Teachers come amongst them, but they turn off from
the Apostles Doctrine unto another Gospel; not that there is any more then one
Gospel but some under pretense of ^oining the Law to the Gospel, to make them
more complete in their Christian Religion, had perverred the Gospel of Christ;
and instead of making a more complete Gospel, had reduced all the Gospel they
had left, under the service of the Law; so that the Law was uppermost, and
ruled in the great business of Justification; and yet these after they had thus
sophisticated the Gospel, had gotten the Galatians to be their admirers and
followers; which puts the Apostle upon strange admirations, exclamations,
expostulations with his Galatians in his Epistle to them; I wonder (says he)
ye are so soon removed from him that called you unto the Grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel, Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. And, where is the blessedness ye spoke of
when I first preached the Gospel to you? Gal. 4.16. And again (says he)
certainly you are bewitched, O ye foolish Galatians, Gal. 3.1. And again, O my
little children, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be formed in you,
Gal. 4.19. He had traveled with them in the new birth once already, and Christ
had been in some sort formed in them; they had received the Gospel, but they
were now turned off to the Law, and he was fain to travel with them again; you
may see plainly what their disease was, Gal. 4.21. Tell me ye that desire to be
under the Law -- they had a desire to be under the Law; and in chap. 2.16.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Here the Apostle mentions the
Disease, that they would needs be justified by the works of the Law; and he
proposes his own, and the other Apostles and converted Jews, their examples
for their imitation; We (says he, in ver. 15.) We, who are Jews by nature, and
not sinners of the Gentiles (that was the name they gave the Gentiles) we
knowing that a man is not justified by works, have believed in Christ -- and,
if we have done so, who had more pretense of reason to cleave to the Law then
ever you had, if we have quitted the I aw for the Gospel, certainly we may well
wonder at you, that were sometimes sinners of the Gentiles, and not Jews born,
that you should quit the Gospel for the Law: So Gal. 4.89. Although then when
ye knew not God, were without God in the world, as other Gentiles were,
Although then ye did service to them who by nature are no Gods, that is, served
Idols; and although this was somewhat tolerable then in the days of your
ignorance, yet now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God,
how tur^ ye again, or back to the weak and beggarly Elements, unto which ye
desire again to be in bondage? Not that they ever were in bondage before to the
Jewish Ceremonies, but they were in bondage before unto Idols, and they had
been freed by Christ, and now fell back, and desired to be in bondage again,
not as before unto their Idols, but to Jewish Ceremonies, and the keeping the
Law of Moses: And this the Apostle aggravates so, that he seems to make it a
worse business in the days of their knowledge, thus to go off to the Law, then
in the days of their ignorance to serve Idols. Thus you have seen their
Disease; now for further proof yet, that this was their distemper, we may
observe, that the Apostle applies several arguments by way of remedy, which
were proper only for this distemper, in that one chap. Gal. 3. I shall observe
mine several Arguments sive of which are contained in the first five verses of
that chap. and are more particular and experimental for the conviction of the
Galatians, the minor of every 'yllogism being evident in their experience; the
major evident in its own nature, or from Scripture; the other four being
sufficiently convincing to every man, and of no particular concernment to them
more then others; in ver. 1. Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey
the truth, before whose eyes fesus Christ has been evidently set forth, as if
he had been crucified amongst you? Makes this syllogism, They who had Christ
clearly preached to them; so as if he had been crucified before their eyes,
should not for shame go off to the Law -- But you have had Christ thus clearly
preached; Ergo, 2d. Argument in the 2d. ver. Ye received the Spirit by this
plain preaching of Christ, which ye never did by your Law-Preachers: This, one
would think, was a mighty Argument to them. This only would I learn of you,
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the preaching of Faith.
The Syllogism; They that have received the Spirit by the preaching of Faith,
should not for shame go off -- But you have received -- Ergo, 3d. Arg. in ver.
3. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in
the flesh? It Is a disgrace for wise men to begin in any way, and alter their
way at all before they make an end, but it is a higher disgrace to begin in a
better way, and end in a worse; to begin in the Spirit, and to end in the
Flesh: As much as Spirit does excel Flesh (their Horses are Flesh, and not
Spirit, Isa. 31.3.) so much does the Gospel-way of Justification excel the
Legal. The Syllogism is this They that have once begun in a more excellent way
then the Law is, should not go off to the Law; but you have begun in a more
excellent way, viz. the Spirit: Ergo, 4th. Arg. from the 4. ver. Have ye
suffered so many things in vain, if it be (...) in vain? They had not only
embraced the Gospel, and begun in the Spirit to do something; but they had
suffered many things from the persecuting Jews, for professing a pure
Gospel-way; and now would lose all their sufferings. 5th. Arg. from the 5th.
ver. He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles among
you, does he it by the works (...) the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? The
Law-Preachers could neither administer the Spirit to their Hearers, nor yet
work miracles in proof of what they delivered, both which the Apostle had done,
and their present Minister Epaphrus did do; and yet they were so mad upon the
Law, and the way of Justification by works, that they were ready to shake off
the Gospel for the insupportable burden of the Law. There are ye see at least
five Arguments in the compass of five verses proper to them, and all five
proposed in the way of interrogation, to express the Apostles vehemence, his
trouble at their desection, his strange admiration at it, his longing for their
recovery, all which this interrogation-form implies. Then the Apostle proceeds
to general and universal Arguments, not of such particular concernment to them,
such as I have in my former Discourse urged, viz. the example of Abraham from
the 6. to the 10. from the nature of the Law, requiring strict obedience, or
else accursing the sinner, ver. 10. from an express proof out of the
Old Testament, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by Faith, therefore not by the
Law, (says the Apostle) for the Law is not of Faith, 11, 12. And then comes in
that great Argument which I have so largely insisted upon, That there was a
Covenant of Grace on foot before ever the Law was given by Moses, which could
not be broken; therefore the Law came not in for a way of Justification, else
it must have disannulled this Covenant, from the 15 to the 1.

I now recollect and argue, Here you see that not only the Jews, but the
Gentiles desired to be under the Law, would needs be justified by the works of
the Law, else the Apostle had disputed largely and strenuously against no
Enemy: Nay the Galatians, though they never had had the Law before, but only
first Heathen Idolatry, and then a pure Gospel, and received it with joy and
admiration, and great intensness of affection; received the Spirit through the
Ministry of it, suffered much for the profession of it; begun well, and did run
well; yet, though they had begun in the Spirit, no sooner came the Law-Preachers
among them, but they turned from St. Paul, who had called them unto Christ,
like fools, and men bewitched unto another Gospel, that is, unto a Law-Gospel.
The Law-Preachers no sooner came amongst the Galatians, but they turned the
very Gospel which the Apostle had preached and they received into so much Law,
so that there ye might have seen Christians to be the pure Disciples of Moses,
nay far worse then the true Seed were in Moses's time. Now from hence I infer
the first assertion in the coviction, viz. That there have been, and therefore
may be such a generation of men that (notwithstanding the preaching of the
Gospel, nay and the profession of the Gospel, are legal in the business of
Justification, followers of the Law, seek to be justified by works; and also,
that we are very apt to run into this way without much care and caution: Who
would ever thought that the Galatians that had so many reasons to engage them
to keep in that way of Faith, should ever have turned carnal and fleshly in the
business of Justification? Certainly this Apostasy of theirs argues a great
aptitude in humane nature to this way, unless you will think that the Galatians
were of another make from all the men in the world.

I shall add somewhat moreof proof to this proposition, and the parts of it, by
and by; only I must first enter upon the explication of the 2d. thing proposed,
viz. Wherein this legality lies, or wherein the great inistake lies, that so
many should seek to be justified by a Covenant of Works, and yet acknowledge
themselves sinners; and in the explication of this, there will new proof arise
to the first Proposition, viz. That men are generally addicted to the way of
works.

2dly, 2d. par^icul^ in the con^iction, viz. wherein (...). I Nega^vel.
Therefore it comes to be explained wherein this legality lies, of what it
consists, which men are so generally inclinable unto; and this is the chief
thingin the Conviction; this I shall dispatch in three Propositions; the first
is negative, showing what it is not, yet ought to be, if they understood what
they go about. 1. It is not a professed putting themselves upon the Law of God
strictly, as it requires perfect, unerring obedience for Justification; so the
Jews durst not adventure their souls; the Jews acknowledged themselves sinners,
though not such sinners as the Gentiles: We find when the Jews brought the
Woman to Christ that was taken in Adultery, he set the Woman at liberty by this
Sentence of stoning her; He that has no sin let him (...) the first stone.

Neither did the Galatians assert themselves free from sins alas! they had been
sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 4.8. They had been Idolaters; and accordingly the
Apostle disputes against them with such arguments as took that pro confesso,
that they were sinners, Gal. 3.10. Is many as are of the works of the Law, are
under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. Now surely (as
it might be supplied) you will not pretend to have continued in all things;
therefore you cannot expect to be justified by the works of the Law.

Though I must needs say this, If they had gone wisely to work in their seeking
Justification by the Law, they must first have found themselves free from sin,
hitherto of their lives, together with a power of keeping themselves free for
the remainder of their lives, or else must have desisted in the beginning; and
therefore the Apostle batters down their high imaginations of
self-righteousness with such arguments as these; The Law says, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things; now you have not continued in all
things: And in Romans 3.19, 20. when the Apostle had recited a Catalogue of sins
out of the Law, he infers, Now, we know that whatsoever things the Law says,
it says to them that are under the Law (and so to you Jews especially) that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God: As
much as to have said, As for all these sins, some are found in one, and some in
another; and wherever any of them is found, there that man's mouth is stopped
by the Law, and every such person is become guilty or subject to the Judgment
of God: 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin; the Law tells you what is
sin, and so the wrath due to sin; and by the Law every transgrestion should
receive a just recompense of reward. And so Gal. 5.3. I testify again to every
man that is circumcised, (which was the usual sign of their going off to the
Law) that he is a debtor to do the whole Law. And yet this you dare not
undertake, O ye Galatians, this you dare not profess to do. A strange
Dispensation that they gave themselves, that they would aim to be justified by
the Law, and yet not hold themselves obliged to keep the whole Law! How could
they ever think that the Law should justify them! and yet these arguments
brought by the Apostle to convince them, both show, that they did not pretend
to answer the Law byunerring obedience, and fulfilling of it, as also that they
should have done thus, had they gone wisely to work.

So much for the first Proposition, showing what their way was not, yet ought
to have been, had they understood themselves.

2. Yet though they did not profess to appeal to a strict Covenant of Works for
Justification, and did not understand themselves in what they did, yet by the
way that the Jews and Galatians took for righteousness, they fell under that
way of Works, and were so reckoned by God to be, and by the Apostle in his
Discourses against them; else his Arguments had concluded nothing against them.
And the reason is this, for that, though they did not formally intend a
Covenant of Works, yet the way they took, was of that nature and tendency; and
we have a distinction in the Schools, of sinis Scientiae and Scientis; now the
sinis Scientiae is eternal and unalterable, as proceeding from the nature of
the thing, let the finis Scientis be what it will; so if the way they took be
legal, it is no matter whether they intended it or no. But you will say, What
was that in their way, or what is that in this way which you say men usually
taken, which makes it so justly, and unavoidably be called and reckoned by God
a putting our selves under a Covenant of Works, though we are not our selves
aware of it? I answer in the third and last place.

3dly, Wherein Legality consists, positively.
It is such a mixture of the Covenant of Works with the Covenant of Grace, as
in which the Covenant of Works is predominant, and so most justly gives the
denomination to their way; I fix upon the Word Predominant: For else (as I shall
show anon) all the Saints have some legal mixtures in their Spirits, even
whilst they treat God for their justification and acceptance; but because they
are biased and swayed more by Evangelical Principles, then by Legal, they are
after the Spirit, not after the Flesh, in the business of Justification.

I showed in the first Proposition, that the Jews and Galatians did not profess
themselves perfectly holy, and so durst not appeal to the Law in a strict sense
for a righteousness: I shall now further show how in many things it appears
that these Legallists, even whilst such, did profess and adhere to the Gospel,
which is the way of Grace; and then, that yet by reason of their Legal
mixtures, all their Gospel was soured to them, and turned into so much Law; and
they are no longer to be reckoned for Christians, but the Disciples of Moses,
in Gal. 5.2 3, 4. There are three proofs of this together, that they were great
professors of the Gospel, when yet at the same time the Apostle disputes
against them, as adhering to a Covenant of Works for Justification. Ver. 2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, That if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing: Here you see they thought to have had some profit and benefit by
Christ: Now this was a great mixture of Gospel in their way; for if hope of
benefit by Christ, be not Gospel, what is? Nay you may see in another place of
this Epistle, that they had hope in the death of Christ, which cert^inly is a
mixture of the Gospel with their Legal way, Gal. 2.21. If righteousness come by
the Law (as your way leads you to say) then Christ is dead in vain; but you
will not allow that Christ died in vain; you hope for benefit from the death of
Christ, notwithstanding your cleaving to the Law for a righteousness: Here was
a great mixture you see of Gospel with their way. And in the 3d. ver. of Gal.
5. we see they thought it was not their duty to keep the whole Law, but that I
have spoken to already: in ver. 4. You may see yet the strangest mixture of
Gospel in their way, which yet the Apostle calls Legal, that can be imagined;
for they did profess themselves (all this while they so cried up the Law, were
such admirers of it, and Votaries to it) they did profess themselves to be
under Grace, to be in the way of Grace, Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of none
effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ^e are fallen from
Grace; that is, from the way of Grace and Mercy, to be upon perfect, strict,
exact terms with God; Ye renounce the Grace of God, the benefit of Christ's
death; Christ can do you do good; let your false Preachers call what they
preach Gospel, while they will; and you may think you are removed to another
and better Gospel then what you received from me, chap. ^. v. 6, 7, 8. But
there is no other Gospel but what I preached: Some indeed have perverted the
Gospel of Christ, and made it a mongrel thing; but it is Name now muse not be
Gospel any longer, but Law and Works, not Grace and Gospel. Here you have ^^en
that they did not only avoid the rigor of the Law, in exacting perfect
obedience to a tittle, but did take in the Gospel-Principles into their way of
Justification; such as the Death of Christ and the Grace of God; and yet these
were legal all this while, else the Apostle had disputed impertinently where he
had no Adversary: Now what was that which soured all their Gospel, which made
their Grace no Grace, and their Christ no Christ, and made them perfect Debtors
to the Law, thus unexpectedly to themselves, but this? that they went to make a
compromise betwixt the Law and the Gospel in the matter of Justification; they
would join them together, that were as irreconcilable as fire and water. The
Law is not of Faith; if it be of Grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise
work is no more work.

Now by reason of the incompossibility and incompatibleness of these two, in
their For else, as the Elements are said to be mixed in a natural body, losing
their proper forms, so the L^w and Gospel will well mix, one of them, viz. the
Law, losing as I may say, its natural form of a Covenant of works, may be well
reconciled to the Gospel, and mixed with it, for the matter of it.
proper and precise notion and nature, they that mix these two, must destroy
one of them; they can never agree togegether in this business of Justification,
any otherwise then heat and cold agree in water, that look unto what degree the
one is there, the other is expelled; so much as there is of cold, so much there
is wanting of heat; and so much as there is of heat, so much there is wanting
of cold; so here, so much as there is wanting of legality in any heart, so much
there is of a Gospel Spirit, and e contra. Now because these Jews and Galatians
did more hanker after the Law, then after the Gospel (though they owned many
Gospel-principles, and durst not own the Law in the strictness of it, yet)
their predominancy of inclination to the Law for righteousness, justly gave
them the denomination of Legal; as the predominancy of cold in water justly
gives it the name of cold water; and the Evangelical or Gospel-like men and
women, though they have always had some Legal-mixtures in their obedience, yet,
because Gospel-Principles are predominant, they obtain the name of Spiritual
and Evangelical.

And according to this representation which I have now given of Legal-persons,
that is, that they are more propending and inclining to the Law, then to the
Gospel, does the Apostle be-speak them, and speak of them; he speaks to them so
in Gal. 4.21. Tell me (says he) you that Desire to be under the Law -- They
were such, as though they durst not quit the Gospel, and come off wholly to the
Law, yet had a desire to be under the Law. So he speaks of them, Romans 9.31, 32.
But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained
unto the Law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it, not by Faith,
but as it were by the works of the Law. And this, though it were but an^ as it
were, and a Desire, yet it ranked them under a Covenant of Works; and
accordingly the Apostle uses such arguments against them, as would have served
any that had perfectly renounced the way of Faith and the Death of Christ, and
wholly betaken themselves to the Law of Works.

I have done with the second particular in the Conviction, viz. the explication
of the Legality which is so generally to be found, and wherein the deceit lies;
that men, who acknowledge themselves sinners, and profess themselves
Christians, may yet set themselves under a Covenant of Works for their
Justification: They that will, after what I have said, deny that there may be,
or has been such a thing, such persons to be found that did acknowledge
themselves sinners, and profess themselves Christians, and yet sought to be
justified by the works of the Law, let them quarrel with the Scriptures, and
with the Apostle Paul if they dare, out of whom I have so clearly described
them, and confute him if they can: Again, if any one questions that which I
have asserted to be the manner how this comes to pass, that these persons are
justly denominated and reputed Legal self-Justificiaries, viz. by the
predominancy of their inclination to the Law, more then to the Gospel, let them
show a more probable way, and I shall gladly quit this

Now the explication and proof of this matter being the very great thing of all
should not pass without some improvement or observation from it, which I shall
perform by and by; in the mean time, methinks a sober person might very well
desire to be further satisfied in this great business, viz. the explication of
the nature of a Legal-Spirit. I suppose it will be acknowledged, that that
which gives denomination to a Legal-Spirit, is, his greater propension to the
Law, then to the Gospel; but yet it may be queried: Wherein does this
propension exert and show it self? in what one word, or more then one, would
you express it? Now this I confess is the great difficulty; hic labor, hoc opus
est; this were worthy of the most excellent Saint, and the most learned and
accurate Head to discover; I can do it only after my manner, that is, rawly
enough; but would God I could provoke some able man to undertake it in the
strength of God.

Very many of those that have meddled with it, have dealt rudely and yet saucily
with this subject, I mean the Autinomians: They will express the whole business
presently, in one word; and tell you that it is Doing. So far as you seek to
get life by doing, you are legal; they will tell you, ye mu^^ not act for life,
but from life; a mighty distinction with them, though quite false: And for
proo^^ they will bring you such a Scripture as this, Mark 10.17. where the young
man came to our Savior, and said, What shall I Do that I may inherit Eternal
life? Which is a question that I suppose might be asked by a good man, though
he was not good that asked it; unless it be asked with such a design as if one
thought that the doing good actions might merit, heaven; by this Divinity of
theirs which they have of late spread far and near, they have made their
followers, which I fear are very many, think strangely of good works, as if
they had no influence a^ all, not so much as secondary to the obtaining o^ our
salva^ion; and so only as matters of love and thankfulness from us; but not as
absolutely necessary unto the pleasing of God, and continuing in his favor,
according to that of our Savior, Joh. 15.9, 10. As the Father has loved me,
so have I loved you; continue in my love. How may we do that? ver. 10. tells
us; If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept
my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. Yet I would do the Antanomians
this right, to say that I think they have very many of them aimed honestly;
that they have lighted upon many Gospel-strains, and have done very well in
observing that there is a vast difference betwixt serving God with a Legal, and
with an Evangelical Spirit; though they have not been so happy in telling us
wherein the difference lies; and for the difference which they make, the Legal
way to lie in Doing, the Evangelical way in Believing, I confess it has a
great countenance from Scripture, as to the sound of words; but, as they
explain their sense, I reckon there is a great disagreement from the Scripture.
As to their sense of the word Believing, I shall have some occasion to examine it
anon; but as to the word Doing in their sense, I say at present, That though
the Scripture seems to express the whole business of Legality in that word,
Romans 4:4. Working or Doing; yet certainly in a far other sense from their
explication of it: For the Scripture in that place understands Working or Doing
in a strict Law-sense, so as to expect a Reward for it of Debt; whereas they
will tell you, if you look upon Works as having any influence upon
Justification, let the works be what they will, you are so far Legal. Now having
proved, as I suppose, their exposition of Working or Doing to be but a false
gloss, I shall do my endeavor (and no more can be expected) to deliver the
truth in this matter.

I suppose therefore, according to that Text Romans 4 4. where Legal Works or
working are accurately described, that Legality lies in Doing any work with
this supposition or conceit in my mind, that now I have justly obliged God, not
only by a Justice of performing promise, but a Justice of strict distribution
according to the natural desert of an action: My meaning is best expressed in
that commonly known word of Merit; he that does an action to God supposing that
he has now merited a reward from God by distributive Justice, The reason why I
make prefumtion of Merit, the form of Legality, is for that reward of Debt is
the Characteristical note of a Legal Reward; therefore the expectation or
presumtion of such a reward ought to be in a Legal Spirit.
he is Legal in his action, and none other.

It will bepresently said, Then there will not be found so many Legal
professors as you assert there are, for that few amongst us, if any at all,
acknowledge Merits. I answer, though they do not acknowledge it with their
mouths, yet this I suppose is the secret Language of their hearts, and where it
is not, let them be free from the imputation of Legality for me; I see no rule
to condemn them of it, though I will add this. I think many men may disown it in
words, nay and think they are not guilty of it, that yet are extremely guilty;
such a a secret unsearchable Disease of heart is this of Legality.

I have perfectly done with the explication or discovery of the Disease in its
own nature; I shall come anon to give some symptoms of it, that are signs and
effects of it; in the mean time let us see what improvement, what observations
we can make upon that Anatomical Discovery which was made of the Galatians e'ne
now.

And here, Obser.
first of all, I shall observe the strange and unhappy disappointments that the
Legal self-Justitiaries meet with, the miserable cheat that they put upon
themselves. They think to mix Law and Gospel, they dare not stand to the Law
alone; they would fain have a little help from the Gospel to eke out their
defects in a Legal Righteousness, and alas! the Gospel turns them off with
scorn to the Law only, to be tried and judged by it; which will certainly
condemn and devour them.

2dly, Obser.
I observe the strange absurdities and selfcontradictions which these
self-Justitiaries, both Jews and Gentiles, run into, in their prosecution of a
Legal Righteousness: There are no less then four contradictions which the
Galatians ran into in this business: 1. They would be justified by the Law, and
yet acknowledged themselves sinners, which is a contradiction; for it is
obvious that the Law must condemn sinners. 2. They would be justified by the
Law, and yet not be bound to do the whole Law; where^s the Law has no other
way imaginable to justify any persons, but when they have the works of the
Law, when they have done the whole Law. He that does them, shall live in them.
3. They would be justified by the Law, and yet have benefit by Christ and his
death; whereas Christ ^ras not the Minister of Circumcision; Christ came into
the world and dyed, because the Law was broken, and could not justify. 4. See
the greatest of contradictions imaginable. They would be justifisied by the
Law, and yet profess the Gospel, and the way of Grace; therefore the Apostle
convinces them with this Argument, If ye seek Justification by the Law, ye are
fallen from Grace, Romans 11.6. If by Grace, then it is no more of works; yet all
these absurdities and contradictions the Galatians swallowed, that they might
go on with their way of Works, which they were so greedy after, and addicted
to, besides all those evident arguments, both general, and of more particular
concernment to them, which they went against; though they had received the
Spirit by the Gospel; though miracles were done amongst them in confirmation of
the Gospel, neither of which attended the Law; though they had done and
suffered so many things for the Gospel, yet all of a sudden, like men
bewitched, away they turn to the Law, and in effect, though not in profession,
they leave the Gospel. From whence again I add new proof, as I promised to the
first thing proposed in the conviction, which is my third observation.

Therefore certainly mankind is exceedingly addicted to this way of works,
Obser.
though not in a-strict way, yet in this mixed way, which comes all to one at
last, and must be called by the same Name I say I may justly infer from this
one example of the Galatians, That mankind is exceedingly addicted unto this
way of works.

For though an argument ab exemplo be not ordinarily cogent, yet such an
example as this will of it self almost amount to a demonstration; for it is not
an example of one man, but of a great company of men; they were the Churches of
Galatia, as it is in chap. 1. ver. 2. and Galaria was not a Town or a City, but
a large Country that had many Churches up and down in it; and these were such
as had gladly received the Gospel, they had received the Apostle Paul as if he
had been an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus; they blessed themselves
exceedingly in this, that they had heard the Gospel from him, they received the
Spirit by it. etc. Now notwithstanding all this, no sooner do a company of
Law-Preachers come that could do no Miracles at all, could not convey the
Spirit in their Ministry, and yet the Galatians are so bewitched, and besotted
with them, through their own natural inclinations to a Legal Righteousness,
that they fall off to the Law in the sight and view of all those demonstrations
and convictions to the contrary, and swallow down four several contradictions
to boot; Ergo, hence it evidently appears, that men are exceeding apt to run
into this way of Justification by Works; unless we shall imagine, that this
inclination in whole Churches of Galatia, was some strange kind of special
distemper, arising from the soil or some such trifling cause that hinders it
from being common to us with them: I say, I take it for proved and granted from
this example, which is to me much like an Induction; the whole Nation of the
Jews, the Churches of Galatia, that were Gentiles, were wholly given to this
way; therefore this way is mighty natural to mankind; and we have all a strong
propension and inclination to it; but here comes in one considerable objection,
upon the answering of which, the truth of this last Assertion will be much
clearer, and that is this:

You say, Object.
that because the Nation of the Jews and the Gentile- Galatians were so much
addicted to the way of Justification of Works, therefore it is an argument,
that all mankind is addicted to this way, and that we are in danger of running
into this way; but you do not seem to observe the great snare and
stumbling block that lay in their way, to put them upon it, and that was the
Ceremonial Law, which they did not understand as typical of Christ and
Gospel-Mysteries, but looked upon it as a task of duties, which if they did go
through, and do their best to keep, they should undoubtedly please God, and be
saved: Now this Ceremonial Law was given to the Jews, and not perfectly out of
use when the Galatians were thus led aside by it; but was preached up by the
devout Jews that were turned to Christianity, that if they were not
circumcised, and kept not the Law of Moses, they could not be saved, Act. 15.1.
Now this the Galatians receiving as true, and holding the Gospel with it, they
did with the Jews too much dote upon Ceremonial Observances; and so their
Gospel which they professed with it, was sowred and spoiled by it; but we are
not in this danger; we know that the Ceremonial Law is down, and so we are free
from this snare and danger; therefore we need not fear lest we run into a
Covenant of Works, or seek Justification by works. This is the objection, and
you see it is considerable, to which I shall endeavor an answer.

And first of all I answer by way of concession in three particulars. Ans.
1. It Is true, the Jews, had the Ceremonial Law imposed upon them by God, and
the Galatians by the seduction of false Teachers, received it likewise as their
duty. 2. The Ceremonial Law was apt to prove a snare to all that were under it,
in leading them into a Covenant of Works: For to be set to do a great many
things which we understand no meaning almost in, how naturally will it teach us
to take up with the opus operatum the work done, and to look no further? Which
easily mis-leads us into an opinion of Merit, especially when we think our
selves prettily well to have discharged our selves of the duties of the Moral
Law besides. 3. Let it be granted that this did actually prove a great snare
both to the Jews and Galatians, which appears from this, that the Apostle when
he is rebuking the Galatians for their Legality, he instanceth for proofs often
in their observing the Ceremonial Law, Gal. 4.8, 9. I winder (says he) that
after ye were set free from bondage to Idols by the Gospel of Christ, ye should
desire again to enter into bondage to ceremonies, which there he calls beggarly
rudiments; and in ver. 10, 11. says he, Ye observe days, and months, and
times, and years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain: Nay, the Apostle instanceth so frequently in the business of the
Ceremonial Law, that an incurious Reader might think that all thrir fault was
but this, that they made Conscience of keeping the Ceremonial Law; though it is
certain, and I have proved it already, that this was not the greatest fault
they had fallen into; for then the Apostle would only have gone about to
convince them, that the Ceremonial Law was abolished by the death of Christ, or
at least that they being Gentiles, need not have their Consciences obliged to
it; which does not scarce at all appear to have been any part of his design;
but his main design is to beat them off from a Covenant of works, unto which
the Ceremonial Law served for an Inlet. And indeed this was the nature and
genius of their mischievous error; they thought, as the Jews also did, that
though they were not so strict as they should be in observing the great and
weighty duties of the Moral Law, yet if they were strict and careful in
observing the Ceremonial, this would make some amends for their other great
defects; and herein we see the Ceremonial Law proved a great snare. Thus our
Savior charge the Jews, even whilst it was their duty to keep the
ceremonial Law, that they placed the observances of the ceremonial Law in the
room of their obedience to the moral Law; Ye pay tithe of Mint, and Annise, and
Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and
Faith; these ought ye to have done, and notto leave the other undone, Matthew.
23.23. and so in Isa 1. chap. ver. 10. And this I think is the judgment of all
Divines to have been the error of the Jews and Galatians. Now let these three
things be granted; yet in the 4th. place by way of direct answer to the
objection: Though the Ceremonial L^w were apt to prove a Snare, and actually
did prove a Snare to the Jews and Galatians, yet it was their natural
inclination to Legality, to a Legal way of treating with God for their
Justification and acceptance, that betrayed them into this Snare, or that made
it prove such a Snare to them: For else the Ceremonial Law was, in its true
use, and in the design of the Lord when he first gave it, a great blessing unto
the people of Israel, it was a part of that Dispensation which is called their
wisdom and their glory in the sight of the Nations, Deuteronomy. 4.6. I say, the
Ceremonial Law was not in its own nature unavoidably such a snare as would lead
them to a Covenant of Works, nor in the design of God who gave it; nay it was
designed to be to them a sigurative Gospel; and therefore, though it was
somewhat capable of being made use of to such an end, to serve the turn and
humor of a Legal Spirit, yet none but those that were so addicted, could have
made such a perverse and destructive use of it, or, if it had been unavoidably,
I say, make the supposition that it had been unavoidably such a dangerous snare
to the Jews, who had the Ceremonial Law given them from Mount Sinai, yet the
Gentile- Galatians had not such a temptation to receive it, with that
veneration that the Jews had; and having received the Gospel before, and still
retaining the profession of it, might have been well antidoted against the
danger of it; and yet they receive it suddenly in this noxious and mischievous
use of it: And for what reason can we imagine all this to have come to pass,
but because they were naturally disposed, and exceeding apt to catch at any
occasion of serving God, as it were by the works of the Law, or according to a
Covenant of Works. 5thly, I say therefore, that though we have not the
Ceremonial Law of the Jews to prove a Snare to us, yet we have this radicated
inclination to a Covenant of Works which betrayed the Jews and Galatians by
occasion of the Ceremonial Law, into the prosecution of Justification by Works;
and this I think was formerly evinced from the example of the Jews and
Galatians, as by an induction. 6thly, As for the ceremonial Law, perhaps it
would be granted, that if we had such reason to receive it as the Jews had
before Christ, when it was their duty to observe it, or but such a seeming
reason as the Galatians after their seduction thought they had; perhaps it
would be granted, that if the case were so with us as it was with either of
them, that then we should be in great danger to do as they did, and to vent
that natural Legality, or addictedness to the way of works, which has been
evinced to be in all men, in ceremonial observances: Now let but so much be
granted, and then I have this to offer, That though we are free from the
ceremonial Law of the Jews, and know it abrogated by Christ's death, yet we may
still have a like danger, though not the same; nay, the Christian Church has
for many hundreds of years (I shall not meddle with the present state of
things) I say, the Christian Church has for many hundreds of years together
formerly, been under as great a danger from ceremonies, as the Jew^ were in
from the ceremonial Law; and for proof of this, I shall only quote some
passages out of the preface to the Book of Common Prayer, under the title, Of
Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained; where you have these,
besides other expressions: Some Ceremonies are put away, because the great
excess and multitude of them has so increased in these later days, that the
burden of them was intolerable; whereof St. Austine in his time complained
that they were grown to such a number, that the estate of Christian people was
in worse case concerning that matter, then were the Jews; and he counseled
that such yoke and burden should be taken away, as time would serve quietly to
do it. But what would St. Austine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of
late days used amongst us, whereunto the multitude used in his time was not to
be compared? This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many
of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, then declare and set
forth Christ's benefits unto us. There are other considerable passages
concerning ceremonies in that Preface; but this that I have transcribed, serves
sufficiently for my purpose, and I suppose fully takes off the objection, that
since the ceremonial Law is down, Christians cannot be in the same danger that
the Jews and Galatians were from ceremonies. I have yet one more particular to
add by way of answer to the objection, and it is this in the seventh place.
That I verily believe, though the Jews had had no such Law given them, nor the
Gentile-Galatians such a Law preached amongst them by the Jews, nor had any
such ceremonies ever been set up in the Church of Christ, as the quotation
speaks of; yet both the Jews and Galatians, and we all have such an inclination
to, such an earnest desire after the way of Works, that without a strict hand
over our selves from giving way to this natural disposition, we should be all
exceeding apt to find out some way or other of venting this humor, either by
inventing ceremonies and superisttions, or doing the duties of the Moral Law
superficially, and yet resting upon them for our Justification: As for duties
or good works that are truly good, though they may be abused after their
performance by a spiritual pride adhering to them; nay, though they may perhaps
be spoiled sometimes by an opinion of merit, yet because I cannot think it
possible for a man that does exercise himself to serve God with a perfect
heart, to turn all his really-good Works into Legal-Works, by an opinion of
Merit; I shall except this from being a third way in which Legality predominant
may exert and show it self. But for the other two ways of invented ceremonies,
or superstitiu^s observances, and an external obedience to the duties of the
Moral Law, I think the nature of man is so addicted to the way of Works, that
though there were no ceremonial Law amongst us at present, either from God or
men; yet men would generally find out one or both of those ways to vent their
Legality, even to an opinion of merit in them. This I shall show to have been
usually practiced in the times of the Scripture, and since, and in our own
time; that is, that ceremonies or external services, not commanded in the moral
Law, were invented even whilst there was a ceremonial Law in force, and vast
numbers since its abolition, and both rested upon; as also, that a superficial
performance of Moral Duties is found both in the Scripture, and in our own
experience to have been rested upon. For the latter first; How common wa^ it
with the Jews in our Saviors time to think, that if they kept the Letter of
the Law, they had discharged their duty contained in that commandment! If they
did not kill a man, they thought they discharged their duty in the sixth
Commandment: If they did not commit Adultery, they had discharged the seventh;
and so having kept the Law, they might expect the Law should justify them; and
therefore St. Paul whilst a Pharisee, he was touching the Law blameless, as he
thought, which if he had truly been, and continued so, he might well have
expected to be justified by it: And so the young Pharisee, Matthew. 19.20 says of
the Commandments, All these have I kept from my youth: And upon this he rested
hitherto. I have heard one my self whom I judged a wicked man, and so did many
others besides me; yet says he, Well, I am confident if any Family in such a
place have the blessing of God, ours has; for we have prayers morning and
evening, and never a cross or angry word passes between me and my wife from
one end of the week to the other. This imperfect obedience to the Moral Law, he
made the matter of his Justification, perhaps even to an explicit opinion of
Merit. Thus you see men that have any conformity to the Motal Law, are apt to
place their trust there: But now because there are few so strict as St. Paul
whilst a a Pharisee was, or as the young man was; but that there is a
consciousness of guilt from the Moral Law, therefore they are the lewest
Legallists that rest upon their obedience to the Moral Law alone, if any do;
they must help patch up their righteousness with ceremonial observances, so
that the ceremonial Law (whether given by God, or invented by men) has most
custom, and bears up the weight of these men's expectations; and I think I may
make this assertion, (at least this guess) that there were never any in the
world that sought Justification by works, but they were much in love with some
superstitlons, or at least with Ceremonies; yea, even those who have been most
strict in observing the duties of the Moral Law, as to the Letter of it; your
greatest Pharisees, they are as much for obfervation of Ceremonies as any men
in the world. How were the Pharisees in our Saviors time addicted to invented
ceremonies and superstitions, though one would think they had enough ceremonies
in their Law already? What washings had they invented? etc. And it is said,
they taught for Doctrines humane traditions and inventions, Mat. 15.9.

Wicked men, and those that are careless in keeping the Moral Law, are for
ceremonies to patch up a righteousness; Pharisees are for them to have a
redundancy of righteousness, such as may make sure work, yea such as may serve
themselves and others too; and this cannot well be but by such Works as were
not their duty to do, and so must be inventions of their own; so that, however
it comes to pass one way or another, both the strict Legalist, and looser
self-Justitiaries, lay the chief stress in pleasing God, and seeking his favor
upon ceremonious observances. I shall instance in one place of Scripture,
where, as I take it, there is a full and lively Description of a
Legal-self-Justitiary; it is Mic. 6 6, 7, 8. And wherein is it that he pleases
himself most, or hopes to please God best, but in ceremonies, (that is external
services not commanded in the Moral Law) and some of those invented? Wherewith
(says he) shall I come before the Lord and how my self before the high God?
Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year old, will
the Lord be pleased, (so as to justify me) with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first born for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul^ Here you see the poor man offers
very fair in his way; if he may have it by ceremonious services, he will do any
thing, he will suffer the loss of any thing his Estate, his Relations; yea his
dearest Relations, his firstborn; here the man mixeth Heathenish Sacrifices
with Jewish ceremonies; but you see the man is willing, at least seems willing
to do any thing: The Papists will whip themselves; Baal's Ptiests w^^ cut
themselves AFTER THEIR MANNER, with Knives and Lances till the blood gush out
upon them, 1 Ki. 18.28. Any thing but BELIEVING. These self. Justificiaries are
quite out in their guess what will please God. They are ready to think with
Naama^ when he was to be cleansed of his Leprosy, that they must do some GREAT
THING to be cured, 2 King. 5 13. They slightly pass over THIS POOR EUSINESS OF
BELIEVING, as he did his command of washing in Jordan. Are not Abana and
Parphar, Rivers of Damasous, better then all the waters of Israel? May not I
wash in them and be clean (says he) so he turned and went away in arage, vor.
11, 12. So says the legal Spirit, Pish, what is this Believing, I wonder! that
is a poor thing; what, only Believe! I Will offer to God rich Sacrifices,
Holoenrists, and Hecatombs; nay, thousands of Rams, ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil; yea my firstborn, the fruit of my Body; this is better then believing in
any man's Judgment. Any thing but believing. But it is better to hear the Lord
to declare himself what he is pleased with, than go by our own foolish guesses;
and therefore see the 8. ver. of Mic. 6. and the Lord tells us what it is; nay
the Lord tells us that we know our selves what it is, if we would but consult
our own hearts, ver. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do Justice, and to show Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God. Alas! God does not require all this operous, laborious,
and costly service which men are apt to put themselves upon. He loves nothing
but truth in the inward parts. Serve God honestly, trust in him, love thy
neighbor, do Justice, show mercy, and this is better then all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, Mark 12.33. And this I shall show anon (as I
have partly already in the exposition of that Deuteronomy. 30.11.) is believing, that
is, it contains the great mystery of believing in it. Not that I have so little
of a Scholar, as to say or think, that showing mercy is believing; or doing
justly is believing, except in a figurative sense, as we put the Name of the
cause upon the effect, or the Name of the chief ingredient upon the whole
composition. We must not so miscall things, lest at last we have no Names left
us to call things by; but I say, herein is contained the mystery of the way of
believing, in opposition to the way of Works. But to return, What a brave
flourish does Micah's man make with his legal Righteousness? What high
promises? What vast offers does he make? thousands of Rams, ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil, more then ever any Emperor in the world could set on running!
Yet these mighty offers does this man here make to the Lord for his favor, in
the mean time he misseth passes by this poor contemptible way of believing.
Only believe, believe and all things are possible. Do justly, love mercy, and
walk humbly with thy God. No, but men that will merit heaven; they must be doing
such a number of Duties, so many Ave-maries, so many Pater-nosters, Heathenish,
vain repetitions; they must give themselves so many stripes of a Good Friday.
Surely they think God slights plain honesty as an homely thing, and that he is
taken with gallant, gandy, magnificent services, or else with barbarous
cruelties and severities.

Thus I reckon I have in some sort proved my seventh and last assertion in
answer to the objection, viz. That men are so far addicted to the way of works,
that though they had no ceremonial Law at all, yet they would be finding out
some way or other to vent this humor, either in superficial obedience to the
Moral law, or in full tasks of Ceremonious observances which they could invent
for themselves. The Heathens did it in barbarous Sacrifices, and vain
repetitions; the Pharisees in diverse washings, and that Jew in Micah, in costly
and diabolical offerings; so that though we are freed from the Ceremonial law
of the Jews, and should be freed altogether from the Ceremonies in the
Christian Church, yet we are not quite out of all danger of seeking
Justification by works. All now that I can apprehend my self any way engaged to
speak unto further, upon the second particular in the conviction, by way of
discovery wherein this legality should lie, is, That seeing I have asserted
that it must consist only in opinion of Merit; I should speak a little to
prove that there is such a thing as that commonly in practice in the world of
which I shall give a brief proof both in Jew and Gentile, which will yet
further evince, that we are not wholly free from the danger; and then I shall
come to give some marks and signs of a Legal-spirit. That there was such a
thing among the Jews, Mr. John Smith a late Writer, in his select Discourses,
has taken very good pains to prove. In that Discourse which treats of a Legal
and Evangelical Righteousness, he tells us, That it was a great affirmation of
the Jewish Doctors, That happiness by way of Merit, is far greater and much
more magnificent then that which is by way of Mercy; and so that they reckoned
(they are his own words) upon a more triumphant and illustrious kind of
happiness, victoriously to be achieved by the merit of their own works, then
that beggarly kind of happiness (as they seem to look, upon it) which comes
like an Alms from Divine bounty. And accordingly they held (I shall give you the
Authors words) That the Law delivered to them upon Mount Sinai, was a
sufficient Dispensation from God, and ALL THAT NEEDED TO BE DONE BY HIM for the
advancing of them to a state of perfection and blessedness; and that the proper
end and scope of their Law was nothing but to afford them several ways and
means of merit. But yet see what their great brags of Merit came to! See what
strange Dispensations they gave themselves! even such as the Galatians gave
themselves, whilst they sought to be justified by works; for the same Author in
the third Chapter of the Discourse mentioned, quotes this passage out of the
Misna, Lib. Maccoth. Sect. ult. (...) the meaning whereof is, That therefore
the Precepts of the Law were so many in number, that so they might single out
where they pleased, and in exercising themselves therein, procure Eternal life;
or as Obadias de Bartenora expounds it, that whosoever shall perform any one of
the 613. Precepts of the Law (for so many they make in number; without any
worldly respect for love of the Precept, behold, this man shall merit thereby
everlasting life. Here they might have been convinced by those two Arguments
which the Apostle Paul uses against the Galatians, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things. And he that is circumcised, that is, professes
to be justified by the Law, is a debtor to keep the WHOLE Law. And this we find
the Pharisees to do in our Saviors time, and they taught, that if a man had
devoted what he should have given his Parents, to God, he was dispensed with
from the duty of the fifth Commandment to Father and Mother; he might say it
was corban, that is, a gift already given to God, Mark 7.11. Matthew. 15.5. So
that they taught their Disciples to pick and choose among the Commandments,
which they would do, and which they would leave undone; nay, to leave out some
of the greatest commands of all, that they might but fulfill some one of their
inventions. Here you have seen the presumption of mankind in the business of
Merit, instanced in the Jews; they liked the way of Merit rather then the way
of Mercy, and yet cheated themselves with this, That if they kept any one Law
of the 613. (that is, if they kept it constantly, as the same Author tells us)
they should merit everlasting life. And that there is such a thing as opinion
of Merit in their serving of God at this day amongst men professing
Christianity, we may know easily, if we hear but what the Papists teach, and
hold, and practice; they won the very word Merit, that good works are
meritorious: And, if they seem to avoid the thing which we mean, by their
distinction of Meritum excongruo, and condigno, yet we will easily fasten the
Thing upon them. For Merit, as I have said, in the Scripture-notion of it, is
when a man that does any action to God, expects the Reward of Debt, and so
demands it at the hands of the Law: Now these men profess that they can do more
then the Law requires of them; they can lay up a stock of good Works that shall
serve for others, which the Church may dispose of to those that want them, and
they shall be meritorious for them; therefore it must follow that they have
done what the Law requires; for how can he do works of supererogation, which
were not demanded of him by the Law, and which the Church may dispose of at
pleasure, who has not kept the whole Law? There is such a thing as opinion of
Merit amongst the Papists in their serving of God; therefore we may be guilty
of it: How does the Pope tell them, and they believe it, that if they do such
and such things, which are not made the condition of pardon by God, for going
such a pilgrimage, for taking such a penance, etc. they shall have their sins
pardoned for so long a time? And wherein does Justification consist so much as
in pardon of sin? Therefore they seek Justification by Works, even by
inventions of their own, which is worse then by Works commanded. Now that which
is so gross amongst them, may be as truly though more refinedly amongst our
selves. I have now done with the two first particulars in the Conviction. I
shall only now recollect what I have said and proved, that so I may borrow
some strength for what follows, and so proceed.

Is it so then, that all mankind is so exceeding apt to seek Justification by
Works? And is it such an hidden and unsearchable evil of heart, that we cannot
easily know it, it has so many self-deceits, and runs through so many
contradictions? Does it lie in opinion of Merit, and yet is Merit so generally
disowned, and yet so many real votaries to it? What need then have we to
search, and try if we are not guilty in this particular, and how far we may
possibly be guilty? For, though we have found out the very notion in which it
must lie, viz. The Opinion of Merit; yet this will not serve usually to find it
out by; for who of us does not renounce Merits, and yet who of us (if the
foregoing assertions be true) is not addicted to Legality? I shall come
therefore to some other ways of discovery of this evil distemper of heart; some
marks and signs of it, some effects which discover their cause, though never so
occult and hidden before. And this is the third particular in the Conviction
which I promised: The first was to discover, that there are such men as seek
Justification by Works. The second was to discover wherein their Legality lies:
And this third to discover by some signs where this Legality is to be found,
either in a predominancy, or in any less degree.

Now for the discharge of this last part of my Work in the Conviction; The
third thing in the Conviction, viz. the Characters
I shall first premise two things, and then come to the Characters. The first
is this, That all men in the world are either profane and Atheistical; or else
in some way or other Religious; as for those that are profane and atheistical,
I have nothing to do with them in this Discourse, for that they have nothing to
do with Justification, who make no pursuit after it at all. The second
observation that I would premise, is this. That as for the Religious World,
those that treat with God after any sort for their salvation, they are all
reducible to one of these two sorts; they are either Legal or Evangelical in
their service and obedience; for there being but two ways of Justification,
either in the Scripture, or imaginable by us by unerring obedience and
meriting, or by the way of mercy, which accepts an humble sincerity; I say,
there being only these two ways, all that seek Justification must be of one of
these two ways; and hence I would infer, that wherever we find in Scripture
any two ways of serving God, that have followers and abettors, being two
opposite ways, whereof one is good and acceptable, the other evil and
displeasing to God, there are these two ways of Legal and Evangelical service;
and the Characters of the good way may be referred to the head of Evangelical,
the Characters of the bad unto the head of Legal Worshippers: Or if we cannot
make a clear reference of every miscarriage in Religion unto legallity, yet
this I dare affirm, and shall prove, That the distinction of Legal and
Evangelical Worshippers, or of such as are fleshly, and such as are spiritual
in the Worship of God, is very ancient; nay as ancient as all Antiquity; so
that throughout all ages in the Scripture, and in our own age in undeniable
experience, there may be traced these two sorts of religious persons, and that
by Characters that are visibly Legalor Evangelical. And whatever be the
infinite perty differences of Sects in any age or place, yet all men professing
Religion, may be reduced to these two classes or sorts of Legal and Evangelical
Worshippers; and these are the great things that are to be minded in them; if
you find that they are spiritual Worshippers, pass by their petty differences;
if they are fleshly, be not deceived by that fair show which they make in the
flesh; for the Antiquity and continual suceession of these two sorts of
Worshippers, and that as they include all sorts of Religious persons, see one
Scripture, and then I come to the Characters; it is in Gal. 4.29. But as then,
that is, in Abraham's time, he of the one side that was born after the flesh,
the son of the Bondwoman Hagar, the Son of a Covenant of Works, perse^nted him
on the other side, that was born after the Spirit, that is, the true Son of the
Promise, the Evangelical Worshipper, so it is now. As it was in the beginning,
so it is, and ever will be to the end of the World, two sorts of Worshippers,
which two sorts all Religious persons may be referred unto. If it were proper
to enlarge upon this observation, I could give more ample proof of it.

Now for the Characters, It is a (...) way which ^e joiceth and glories in
external privileges and performances The proof that the legal way is an
external fleshly way.
the first shall be this, They that are for a Covenant of Works, for the Law,
are much and chiefly for external services; this I have partly touched before;
but I have a very fair occasion to speak to it here again, and I dare promise
the Reader to free him from the trouble of needless repetition. I say, those
that are under predominant Legality in treating with God for their
justification and acceptance, they are chiefly for external services in their
Worship, and expressions of their obedience unto God. This the Apostle calls
flesh, or a fleshly outward way of serving God, in Phil. 3.2, 3. -- the Apostle
speaks home to this Character. I will give you (says the Apostle in the first
ver.) some SAFE advice and counsel what sort and party of men you should avoid,
and what sort you should close with: Ver. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil
workers; beware of that evil sort of Worshippers that are in the sight of God
no better then Dogs, and not children: Now who are they? Why the concision
(...). By the Concision is usually understood the Circumcision, or legal Jew,
that gloryed in his Circumcision, here called the Concision, by an Ironical
Paronomasia, alluding to the Factions and Schisms which they made every where;
Beware of these (says the Apostle) and do not receive them, nor adher to them;
for we are the Circumcision, that is, the true Children of Abraham which
worship God in the SPIRIT, in a true SPIRITUAL way of Worship, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no considence in the flesh, which they, the legal
Worshippers have; they are fieshly, we are after the Spirit, and worship God in
the Spirit. They have considence in the flesh, we have none. Now what is this
confidence in the flesh, which the Concision, the Dogs and evil Workers had,
but the true Worshippers had not: This the Apostle explains at large in the 4,
5, and 6. verses. For (says he) if any other man thinks that he has whereof
he might TRUST in the FLESH, I more. What is that of the Flesh wherein he might
glory if he would? He tells us ver. 5. I was circumcised the eighth day, of the
stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as
touching the Law a Pharisee, or blameless; so i^ follows ver. 9. as touching
the righteousness which is in the Law, blameless; that is, as touching the
letter of the law Moral or Ceremonial. This is the matter of fleshly glorying
or boasting, which you see is made up either of external Rites and Privileges,
or the external obedience to the moral law.

That which he calls flesh, is an external thing. Now that fleshly and legal
are Synonymous, or words importing the same thing, and so used by the Apostle,
is not only clear in this Scripture, but in other Scriptures; for instance
Gal. 3.3. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, that is, a Gospel-way,
are ye now made perfect by the flesh? that is, will ye end in a legal, that is,
a fleshly way? Fleshly and Legal are all one: Now the way of the Flesh is an
external way, made up of outward Rites, Ceremonies, Privileges and
Performances; therefore a legal way is a way in which men please themselves
with external Privileges and Performances.

I showed before, that those that are addicted to the way of works, durst not
pretend to an universal conformity to the law in a strict sense of it, and yet
do seek to be justified by Works; therefore they must have some Works to glory
in, and to uphold their Spirits in a confidence of Divine acceptance: Now
therefore what can these Works be, other then external conformities to the
ceremonial or moral law, and these ceremonies either as given by God, or else
superstiously invented by themselves? I shall now a little further exemplify
what I then asserted, and that by some assistance from the second thing
premised, in showing that in all times the evil sort of Worshippers (which
because they are not Evangelical, must be legal) have done, and do exceedingly
please themselves in external Privileges and Performances, in doing which I
shall avoid useless repetitions.

We find, The first external privilege which the Jews gloried in.
that the Jews who were as well to be condemned for Legality before the days
of the Gospel, as under it, (there having been always a fleshly and spiritual
Seed) were exceedingly taken with their being circumcised, and of the Seed of
Abraham, and made a peculiar people to God in the Lump and Body of the Nation,
which did not hinder at all, but for particular persons they might be wicked
enough, strangers to God, and heirs of wrath. Thus the Jews, as Jews, scorned
the Gentiles, called them Dogs, and the sinners of the Gentiles, or Nations;
whereas to be Jews born, was nothing but an external Privilege. And therefore
the Apostle, when he comes to convince them of this folly and vain fleshly
boasting, he makes no more ado but to cut them off from this stump that they
stood upon, by that great distinction so frequent in his Epistles, of Israel
according to the flesh, and the true Israel, or the true Seed according to the
Promise, that is, Believers: All are not Israel that are of Israel, (says he)
and he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which
is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. Now that which amongst us may
answer to such a fleshly boast as this was of the Jews, (for I chiefly aim at
the usefulness of this Doctrine to our selves) may be this, viz, the Name of
Christians, and the general Baptism that all amongst us can pretend unto:
Though this cannot be accounted so great a Privilege to us, (now that
Christendom is so large) as Circumcision, and being natural or proselyted Jews
was to them, who were a single Nation, chosen for a peculiar people to God out
of all the Nations of the World. I come therefore to some other things.

They gloried also very much in their Temple; The second external privilege
the ^^ws gloried in.
there is an eminent place amongst many, for this, Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in
lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord are THESE; that is, THESE BUILDINGS, THESE COURTS, pointing, as it
were, with their singer at the Buildings of the Temple; as much as if they had
said, See! we have the Temple of the Lord with us, and his Worship and Service
amongst us, and therefore no evil can come to us, whatever these Fanatic
Prophets threaten us with. Now see what a strange infatuation and besottednesse
these men were under! for they were as wicked as men could be, by oppression
and blood-guiltiness, yea Idolatry it self; as you may see in ver. 10. Will ye
steal murder, and commit Adultrey, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other Gods, whom ye know not, and come and stand before me
in this House, which is called by my Name, and say, we are delivered to do all
these abominations? It this House, which is called by my Name, become a Den of
Robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, says the Lord. Here is a
crew of Legal-Worshippers, of Carnal-Worshippers, that certainly could not
pretend to Justification by the strict Law of God, yet trusted in the Temple
and Temple-Worship, ver. 8. Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot profit;
and what those words are, you have seen in ver. 4. Trust ye not in lying words,
saying, the Temple of the Lord, etc. No, says the Lord. ver. 3. Amend your
ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place: Here is
Mercy, Grace, Pardon; here they are put upon the way of believing, ver. 5, 6.
For if ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, and if ye thoroughly
execute judgment between a man and his Neighbor, if ye oppress not the
stranger -- then will I cause you to dwell in this Land that I gave to your
Fathers for ever and ever; But else never think that the Temple or Temple
Worship can save you, or deliver you -- Ver. 12. Go to Shiloh, go unto my place
which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it
for the wickedness of my people Israel. Now did God destroy his people at
Shiloh for their wickedness, the place where God set his Name at the first, and
cannot he deal as severely with a second place? Therefore says God, except ye
repent, and amend your ways, I will do unto this House as I did to Shiloh, and
I will destroy you as I did my people at Shiloh, for all your Temple. But here
we see how men may dote upon a Temple, so as to think themselves secure from
God's Judgments, though they themselves are full of wickedness: Whysomewhat like
this are our people ready to do, tho God forbid there should be such a gross
thing found amongst us in the days of the Gospel, as this of the Jews was; yet
how do many dote upon Churches and consecrated places, crying, as it were, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and that after our blessed Savior
has told us as much as this in my apprehension, that one place is no holier
then another; neither Jerusalem nor Mount Gerizim, but men should worship the
Father in spirit and truth, and in every place (says the Apostle, (perhaps we
might gloss) in every place alike) men should lift up holy hands, without wrath
or doubting; and yet how are some apt to think that if they pray in a Church,
though the Assembly be not there, that a prayer in a Church is far more
acceptable then in their Closet at home? Not as if I did not far more prefer
public Worship, then private or secret devotion; or that I were against a
convenient decent Meeting Place.

Again, The Jews gloried in ceremonious services.
how did this Jewish, Legal, Carnal righteousness please and pride it self in
the ceremonial service of Sacrifices, and the like, but never look at the
heart, Isa. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me,
says the Lord; I am full of Burn, ^fferings of Rams, and the fat of fed
Beasts: I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-Goats.
Ver. 13. Bring no more vain Oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the
new Moons, and Sabbaths I cannot away with -- Not as if all these things were
at this time unlawful, for they were their duty; but here you see they were
abundant in these, and failed in matters of common honesty and justice, as we
may see ver. 15, 16, 17. Your hands are full of blood; wash ye, make ye clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn
to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed^ judge the fatherless, plead
for the Widow. These things they ought to have done, and not to leave the other
undone; and when ye have done these things, says the Lord, Come now, and let
us reason together, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as
Snow, etc. ver. 18. Here was Gospel, that if they would mind the true
reformation of their hearts and lives, they might expect the pardon of their
sins; but these Legal- Jews they never mind this inward holiness, no nor common
honesty, and yet make no question but they shall make God amends very well by
keeping Festivals, New Mons, Sabbaths, days of solemn Assemblies, and by
Sacrifices of Rams, Lambs, Bullocks, He-Goats; as if God were fed with the
blood and fat of these beasts, and were migtihly attoned by incense and sweet
perfumes, See Psalm. 50. from 7. to 14.
as if then he must needs smell a savor of rest in all that they did.

And the Gal. we find were come to this, Gal. 3.10. Ye observe days, and
months, and times, and years, that is, Jewish Feasts; I am afraid of you, lest
I have bestowed upon you labor in vain: When they once came to observe them,
there was a great deal of danger, and cause for the Apostles sear, that they
would rest in the observance of them, for that this was the reason why they
took to observing of them (when it was not now any longer the Jews duty so much
as to observe them) because of their inclination to a Covenant of Works, which
chiefly expresses it self in an external service.

So likewise the Colossians (amongst whom the same pestilent Law-Preachers had
been) they were ensnared to the making conscience of days, Sabbaths and new
Moons, and also in the business of meats, that some were clean, and others
unclean, which was once the Jews duty to observe; insomuch that Peter tells the
Lord, he had been so strict in the business hitherto, that nothing common or
unclean (meaning of the flesh of unclean Beasts and Fowls) had entered into his
mouth, Acts 11.6.8. But now was not only not their duty any longer, but at
least to the Gentiles a sin to make any conscience in it; for that they could
hardly begin such a thing, at such a time, upon the inticement of false
Teachers (for none else persuaded the Gentiles to it) but from an evil
inclination of swerving from the pure Gospel which they had received from the
Apostles, unto a Covenant of Works, thus served out to them by their false
Teachers. And it argues almost as ill a disposition in the Galatians and
Colossians but to take up these things as their duty, as it did in the Jews to
place so much in them when they were their duty; Let no man judge you in meat,
or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new. Moon, or of the
Sabbath-dayes, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ,
Col. 2.14, 16, 17. These things when they were in use, and were men's duties,
were at best but shadows; and yet these shadows did men exceedingly glory in,
and preferred them before true holiness, and the spiritual Worship of God; yea
they thought verily, that whilst they did observe these things, they might
commit all manner of Villainies, and yet escape the judgment of God: Yea, they
thought they were delivered to do all sorts of abominations, as it is in Jer,
7.10.

The Apostle finds out such a generation of Jews in his time, Romans 2. from the
17. to the 25. Behold thon art called a Jew, and restest in the Law (a full
expression, I think, of one that seeks Justification by the Law) and make thy
boast of God, and know his will: And the Apostle proceeds to describe a
great Lawyer indeed, one that thought himself sit to be a Guide of the blind, a
Light of them that walk in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of
babes, and one that had the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law. Yet
what kind of man is he for his Morals? Why he is a Thief, an Adulterer, a
Sacrilegious person, what not? ver 21, 22. Thou therefore which teach
another, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do
thou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Yet this man hopes to be saved by the Law; for it is said, He took up his rest
in the Law, he rested in the Law, and made his boast of God. Where then must he
center his hopes? and upon what can he ground his boasting, but upon some
ceremonial performances? Therefore one that seeks Justification by the Law,
may, and it is often found that they do practice it only in some ceremonious
observances. I shall give only one proof more of this, and so hasten on to
what follows; and it shall be of the Lawyers, Scribes and Pharisees in our
Savior's time, who were the great boasters of the Law, and expected
Justification by the righteousness of it. I have already observed, that they
were much for Tything of Mint, Annise and Cummin, those lesser things of the
Law: I shall add more of our Saviors observation upon them, Matthew. 23.5. That
they made broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of their Garments:
Of which, says Dr. Hammond, the first, to wit, Phylacteries, was an invention
of their own wholly, together with a multitude of attending Ceremonies. The
second indeed, that of Borders, prescribed by God, but yet both abused by them
to a vain glorying and boasting; They washed the outside of the Cup and
Platter, but within there was nothing but filthiness and nastiness. They were
without as whited Sepulchers, but within Sepulchers still that is full of dead
men's bones, and all rottenness; they did devour Widows Houses, teach
undutifulness to Parents, etc. Now what could these men therefore, that yet
sought to be justified by the Law, uphold themselves withal, but in outward
conformities, even to an excess in ceremonious observances? Invented Ceremonies
and Superstitions.


Now I shall observe in a few word what invented ceremonies they had, besides
those which the Law laid, upon them, in which also they gloryed; and then apply
that part of the Character to our selves, or the present age which concerns
Ceremonies, either commanded or invented. We find often, that our Savior
charged the Pharisees with teaching for Doctrines the Commandments, Traditions
and Impositions of men, (...), Mark 7.7. For, laying aside the Commandments of
God, says our Savior, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of Pots
and Cups, and many other such like things ye do: One of which things among the
many other, was their Phylacteries, of which Dr. Hammond says they were
inventions of their own; and if it were not too large, I would here transcribe
all that he says upon it in his Comment on Matthew. 23.5. I cannot omit some
things. These Phylacteries (says he) were a great part (though a great mistake
and deceit) of the Religion of the latter Jews, upon God's Commandment Deuteronomy.
6.8. Exodus 13.16. of binding those words, for a sign upon their hands, and as
front lets between their eyes; which certainly were but figurative exprestions
of that which was before mentioned, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach them
diligently, etc. This carnal people, which were apt to turn all inward Piety
into outward Formality, would needs understand this Precept literally, and
made them Scrouls of Parchment, in which they wrote four sections of the
Pentateuch, (he mentions which they were.) These Rolls of Parchment were by
them prepared with a great multitude of Ceremonies and Decrees made by them, of
the Creatures of whose Skins that Parchment was to be made; of the Knives with
which it was to be cut, and a great deal more: Being made, they sitted and
applied them to the foreheads, and to the wrists, and they were called
Phylacleries, either because they were to help keep the Law in their memory, or
because they were a kind of Amulet or Charm against Fascinations and Diseases;
against the Malus Genius, says Paulus Fagius. This the learned Doctor tells us
was a great part of their Religion, and yet a matter of pure invention,
attended with a great multitude of ceremonies. I may not here omit the story of
Micah, Judge. 17. who had a house-full of Gods, v. 5. and had made an Ephod and
Teraphim, and for want of a Priest, consecrated one of his Sons; but yet at
last lighting of a poor Levite of Bethleem-Judah, a young man that had no
charge, he bargains with him for ten shekels of silver by the year, about fifty
shillings perhaps, a Suit of Apparel, and Victuals; and Micah he consecrates
the Levite for his Priest, and what follows? Why an high confidence of Divine
acceptance: Now I know (says he) that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have
a Levite to my Priest. This is the confidence of a great Idolater, merely from
a Levite-Priest for his false Gods; in which indeed it is plain he pretended to
worship the Lord the true God.

I shall give but one place more about inventions; it is Col. 2.20, 21, 22.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why (as
though living in the world, that is, living in a mere worldly Religion, a
humane, external, and for the most part invented thing) are ye subject to
Ordinances, (such as these, touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to
perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of men, which are
words that express humane inventions. That these Colossians herein were Legal,
that Micah was Legal, that the Pharisees that enlarged their Phylacteries, were
Legal, I need not trouble my self to prove, having in the beginning showed the
equal latitudes of legal and fleshly, fleshly and external, and the external,
legal, fleshly way, to lie in dependence upon, and glorying in outward
privileges and performances either commanded or invented.

Now let us see what we have of these Ceremonies which we do, or easily may
play the Jews or Legal self-Justitiaries in, and then pass on. For this is the
chief thing in the Characters that I have to mind, viz. how far they may
concern us, that so they may serve us for trial and examination how far we are
inclined to a Legal way of serving God. The Jews fault was, that they
over-prized Holydaies, Festivals, New Mons, whilst they were their duty to
observe them. The Galatians and Colossians fault was, that they meddled with
them at all Now as for our people, truly I think the generality, (I speak not
of the great Zealots for Ceremonies) do not place much in Holy Days, as to
Religion; their greatest danger is from profaneness upon Holydaies, in their
Whitsun-Ales and Wakes, etc. But if we would step over amongst the Papists, we
might see great doings upon Holy Days. I am informed, upon St Peter's day they
carry the Pope upon men's shoulders into St. Peter's Church; which doubtless
has pomp enough attending it; and that upon Candle-mass-day they have the
picture of the Virg^in Mary and Christ in her arms, which they carry about with
Candles or Tapers burning at noonday, etc.

Again, the Jews thought themselves very pure and holy, if they kept themselves
from Legal uncleanness, and from eating every thing that was unclean, and
placed too much in this, whilst it was their duty to observe these things. The
Colossians erred but in making conscience of the Legal uncleanness of Meats;
Let no man judge you, (says the Apostle) in meat or drink; that is, value no
man's judgment, let no man abridge you of your liberty in it. Now for our
selves, we are wholly free from Jewish Observations about meats, and I think
pretty free from any Religious Observations at all about meats; and if we are
forbid flesh in Lent those that are healthy, yet the reason which the Law
gives, is civil and political for the breed of Cattle; but if we should come to
have our Consciences ensnared to think, that flesh were not as lawful in it
self all the Lent-time, as at another time; this were a symptom of Legality,
venting it self in superstition. But now if we go over amongst the Papists,
what conscientious observations of Meats are there? To eat an Egg in Lent, is
punished with imprisonment, etc. and that upon a religious account, which is a
plain argument of legality amongst them very rise. I might instance in Priests
Vestments, as I apprehend an high piece of formality, very fit to please the
humor of a Legal Spirit, that for want of substance, pleases it self with
shadows, shows and outsides; but I shall not proceed further to touch at
things; he that has an eye to see, let him look into the Scriptures; and he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
But we may speak freey of the Papists and their Superstitions, not only in
doing, but in putting themselves upon needless sufferings; What Pilgrimages and
Processionings; what Abstinencies and Penances do they put themselves upon,
wearing Sackcloath, scourging themselves? What crossings, cringings and
sprinklings do they impose upon themselves? 'twere endless almost but to name
the kinds of their inventions: Yea some of our own people will say over the
Creed and ten Commandments for a prayer, and when they come as beggars at your
door, they will say over the Lords, Prayer, as if it were a charm to the house
from all mischief. Now I look upon all Superstitions, where they are with any
seriousness practiced, as those things which do exactly sit a Legal Spirit;
for, as I have several times intimated, your Legallists cannot endure to come
at the Law in the spiritual sense of it, so none but a Gospel Spirit does; it
is Faith alone that establishes the Law, and obeys the Law: Now because the
Legallist cannot endure to come up to the true spiritual obedience of the Law,
and yet seeks to be justified by Works; he is fain to find out a thousand
things to please himself, and satisfy his Conscience with, whereby he thinks
he makes God amends; and we have seen in the instances before us, how that
though men are as wicked as they could be, by lying, swearing, and committing
adultry, yea and Idolatry too; yet they cried, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord; they thought God must love them because they were Jews,
especially when they brought him rich Sacrifices, and burnt rich Incense, and
kept all their Festivals in the time and manner appointed* Now what then their
over-valuing the Commands of the Coromonial Law was, that is Superstition to us
now. For not having such a Law left us by God, we find out somewhat like it,
and place the same considences in it that they did in their Law; only ours is
so much the worse by not being of Divine institution.

I have now only one particular more belonging to this Character of external
fleshly service; and that is, an external partial conformity to the moral Law,
which is indeed the last and strongest fort of a Legal-spirit. As for these
external Privileges or Ceremonies and Superstitious Performances which I have
insisted upon, they are a slighty thin covering if we come once to try it, and
rationally to examine it; and though people wrap themselves in it, yet they
cannot bear out any rough argument from galling or pinching through it.
External conformity to the duties of the Moral Law.
What defense is it for an Harlot to say, This day have I paid my vows, to one
that can convince her of being a common Whore, Prove. 7.14. But now if men have
lived in some conformity to the duties of the Moral Law, as the young man in
the Gospel had done, All these have I kept from my youth, (says he) speaking
of the commandments: Believe it, our Savior himself shall not by an ordinary
word persuade him that he lacks any thing more. Let us see the beld audacious
Pharisee in the Parable, that goes into the Temple to pray; how does he
challenge his acceptance with God? and upon what terms? We have it in Luke
18.11. God I thank (says he) that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the week; I give
tithes of all that I possess. Really the man might well have thanked God, as he
did, had it not been for two things; 1. His making comparisons. 2 His valuing
those things which he mentions, as a sufficient Righteousness: It was good not
to be an Extortioner, Unjust, an Adulterer; it was good to fast, and to give
tithes of all; and he might well bless God that he was enabled to do these
things: but this was but a partial holiness; for all the Commands are not
reckoned up here; then perhaps it was but an external obedience to these
commands that are referred to; he was no actual Adulterer, but might he not
commit heart-Adultery? He was no Extortioner or unjust person, as he says: But
if it were true at all, it may be it was only thus, That he was not so in the
highest degree; perhaps what others accounted injustice and extortion, he did
not: But I need not go upon a Perhaps; I will lead the Reader to a certain
place of Scripture where the Legallist prides himself, and challenges
acceptance from God only upon a partial and external obedience unto some
duties of the first Table; it is Isa. 58.2, 3. In the 2d. ver. we have an high
commendation, as one would think of them; They seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
Ordinances of their God; they ask of me the Ordinances o^ of Justice, they take
delight in approaching to God. These are great matters, and upon these the Jews
grew high, and argue the case with God for his acceptance; they wonder, when
they are so good, that God should make so little reckoning, so small account of
them, ver. 3. Wherefore have (...) fasted, say they, and thou see not?
Wherefore have (...) afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? The Lord
answers them in the same verse, Behold! in the day of your fast ye find
pleasure, and exact all your (...) bour; behold! ye fast for strife and debate,
and to smit^ with the fist of wickedness. They did something in o^ after their
Fasts which was contradictory to the nature and design of a Fast; they did
indeed observ^ the ontside of the duty, as ver. 5. tells us; they d^^ afflict
their soul, they went with heads bowed down a^ butrush, and did spread
sa^kcloth and ashes under the^ Here was all the outside of a Fast; But what
(sait^ the Lord) will thou call this a Fast, and an accepta^ day unto the Lord?
Ver. 6. Is not this the fast which I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Here is a fast indeed, all others are but mock-fasts,
the outside and Formalities of a Fast, which (when overmuch attended) use to
eat up the substance of a duty. Here you see external conformities to the
duties of the moral Law may fill men with a pride, so far as to challenge
divine acceptance, making no question but they have well deserved the favor of
Almighty God, whilst in the mean time they are oppressors and exactors; which
argues, that a legal way in the service of God, is a fleshly and external way.
And besides, I observe in this Scripture that we may as well let our Legality
run out in Divine Services in duties of Worship, as in second-Table-duties; and
indeed I think that is a worse kind of Legality (for it is usually attended
with more wickedness) than when men take up with being just and true in their
dealings with men. Thus our rude people if they go to Morning and Evening
prayer, and join with the Church in the service bymaking their responds, and
observing the several gestures of sitting, standing and kneeling, they are
ready to please themselves with an opinion that they are very well accepted of
God, though they are known wicked people. I shall now apply the Character,
though I have done little else all this while; but now I shall do it more
professedly.

Would thou know if thou be under the predominancy of this dangerous evil
of Legality? Then try thy self by this Character. The application or u^e of the
Character.
How do thou find thy self affected with any external privileges? Do set
thon but only a due value upon them? For though we may not overvalue them, we
must not slight them. What conscience have thou of places, days, meats? Beware
of having thy conscience ensnared by them; for this will presently betray thee
into legality; for first you come to have a conscience of these things, and
then you let the strength of your spirits and of your devotion run out into
them; and so they prove as a Wen unto all the true spiritual Worship of God. If
thou valuest these things beyond the true spiritual Worship of God, thou art a
Legallist of the worst sort; for there are two kinds of Legal persons better
then thy self, who yet perish. But to leave this, I come to the external
conformities unto the Moral Law, the partial obedience to this, and man's
resting in it; and here is the greatest danger of all. First sort or Moral
Legal (...) such as dependchiefly upon a partial Motality.
There are some men that are not far from the Kingdom of God, as the expression
is Mark 12.34. and think themselves in it, and of it, that yet are not: Now
these can be none other but such as have high conformities to the commands of
the Moral Law; for notwithstanding all the observation of Ceremonies whilst
they were in force, notwithstanding all the external privileges that men might
have, yet, without a great conformity to the Moral Law, men might be at a vast
distance from the Kingdom of God; but to be near it, not far from it, supposes
great strictness of life, that none shall be able to say, Black is that persons
eye, as the proverb is. Now I say, there may be many of these that yet are not
justified, and so have not put themselves upon the right way of Justification.
Now what can be their ruin? Truly nothing but one of these two, Either that
they know some lust in themselves which they will not part with; or else that
they have deluded themselves to think that they are holy enough, and so holy as
God is well pleased with them. Now I am so charitable as to think, that when
men have come up so high as to be near the Kingdom of God, they do not allow
themselves in a gross known sin; therefore their ruin must arise from hence,
that they think themselves holy enough, and that they have merited the favor
of God by being so much better than their neighbors, as the Pharisees in the
Parable did; and this yet is Legality, and that which is most properly so called

Now though there are many that are near the Kingdom of God, and yet perish by
Legality; A second sort of moral Legallists.
yet there is a greater number still that are not so high in their conformity
to the Moral Law, that yet perish by resting in their conformity to the Moral
Law, such as it is. And of this sort I take to be very many of our ordinary
people that perish, God knows who they are, I judge no man, but many of our
ordinary people that perish, who are not high Devotionists, nor in any excess
superstitious; yet use no great endeavors to get to Heaven, are at no pains
with their hearts, to get in Grace, to cast out lusts, to get the knowledge of
God and Christ, find no difficulty in Religion, understand it not at all to be
a Warfare, a wrestling with Principalities and Powers, a race, a great piece of
Merchandise, wherein we venture all for the Pearl, and are often like
Merchants, in danger of losing all; which things I suppose no true Christian
can be utterly senseless of; all they that they do is this, they live a plain
quiet life, mind their business, manage their trade, do Justice between man and
man, (which things are good and commendable in themselves) and perhaps they may
may have Prayers morning and evening in their Families; yet such men, though
this be the whole of their lives, will expect to go to Heaven when they dye;
they will cry God mercy for their fins in a general way, and with a Lord have
mercy upon them, they make no doubt to get to Heaven; Now these must lay the
stress of their hopes and expectations upon this, That they wronged no man,
they have given every man his own, and perhaps have had some duties morning and
evening in their Families, and therefore that he that made them, may well
afford to save them: Here these men trust upon a conformity to some second
table duties, and a slighty performance of some duties of the first Table.

By what I have said, I suppose men may examine themselves whether they are
guilty of predominant Legality by resting upon an external or partial
performance of the duties of the Moral Law. of which I have made two sorts, a
lower, and an higher, and I free both from being necessarily superstitious, or
that their chief danger should arise from thence: And for the first sort I ask,
Art thou careless of getting divine knowledge in the Scriptures? Art thou at no
pains with thy heart in Religion? Do thou find no difficulties in it? Art not
thou put to struglings, wrestlings, sightings? and yet expectest thou to get to
Heaven? Why then thou art one of the common sort that perish by resting upon an
outward conformity to the Moral Law.

Again, for the higher, but unsincere Moralist; Do thou find a difficulty in
Religion? Is it ready to break thine heart almost, with the trouble that it
puts thee to? Thou art fain to be constant in duties morning and evening, and
it may be oftener; thou art just between man and man; it may be thou bestowest
much of thine Estate upon the poor, and many other good things thou do;
perhaps thou have some time or other parted with some very beloved sin, that
was to thee as a right eye, or a right hand; thou have found Religion costly
and troublesome to thee; and now thou expectest when ever thou die, to go to
Heaven. But stay man, art thou humble? Do thou see no imperfections in thy
self notwithstanding thy superlative holiness beyond thy neighbors? Art not
thou made sometimes to confess before the Lord, and that with great brokenness
of heart, that thou art an unprofitable servant? Art not thou made to admire at
the rich Grace of God, that he should take pity on thee when thou wast in thy
blood? That he should have thoughts of love to thee, should send his good
Spirit into thine heart to move thee, and turn thee to himself, etc? If thou
have experience of none of these things, be thou as strict as thou will, so
that hone can accuse thee; so strict that thine own Conscience does not loudly
accuse thee; I tell thee (whether thou be superstitious and ceremonious yea
orno; for it seldom happens but such an one as thou art is so) thou art one of
those that are indeed not far from the Kingdom of God, but yet not in it, nor
ever shall be whilst thou continuest so; thou art a Legal self-justitiary,
that restest in an external unsincere obedience to the Law of God. I have
perfectly done with the Character as it is given to discover predominant
Legality. Yet here I shall enter two cautions, one concerning the Moralist, the
other concerning the Papist. A caution concerning the term Moralist.


For the term Moralist which I use, I fear it may give offense to some
ingenuous and worthy persons, and therefore I thus explain my self, that I do
not oppose Moral to Spiritual, as if the most spiritual Commands of the Gospel
were not Moral; or as if the most spiritual Saint were not the highest
Morallist; or as if Morality were a low Principle; I know not but I may reduce
all the duties of the Gospel to Morality; and I think no sober man will deny
them to be Moral Duties: But I make use of it as part of that common
distinction made betwixt those two kinds of Laws which Moses delivered, of
which some were only ceremonial and typical, and to last but for a time; the
other Moral, that is to say, according to the common understanding of it,
Perpetual; though as to the Etymological signification of the Word, Moral
signifies as much as that which concerns Manners: So Moral Philosophy is
opposed to all other Philosophy, as Practical is opposed to Speculative; and in
this signification of the Word Moral, all the ceremonial Laws whilst they were
in use, might have been called Moral; but because use swayes Language more then
the Etymology of Words, I here understand the Word Moral purely in opposition
to ceremonial or superstitious; so as it signifies those duties that are to be
performed by us, as having a more substantial goodness in their own nature,
such as Justice, Mercy, and Prayer, etc. Now those men that depend for a
righteousness upon the imperfect unsincere performance of these duties I call
Legal Morallists, of which there are evidently two sorts, A caution, concerning
the Papists.
an higher and a lower, there being another sort of Legallists which I have
spoken of, namely the ceremonious Legallist. Now I shall likewise enter a
caution concerning the Papists, in whom I have instanced often in the matter of
Ceremonies and Superstitions, and their placing a confidence in them. And to
show that I do not delight to disparage so much as any one man, much less an
whole party of men (but that my only aim is to make true proof of my
assertions) I shall, to do them right, quote an Author of their own, whereby it
will appear plainly that some of them (at least) are sensible of the
insufficiency of these things, viz. Ceremonious and superstitiou. Observances,
yea conformities unto some duties of the moral Law, whilst their conformities
do not proceed from an universal Charity. The Author is Francis de Sales, once
Bishop and Prince of Geneva, who in his Introduction to a devout life, in the
very first Chapter, has th^se Expressions. Every one (says he) painteth
Devotion according to his own passion and fancy. He that is given to fasting,
thinks himself very devout if he fast often, be his his heart never so full of
rancour: And not daring to moisten his tongue in Wine or Water for sobriety's
sake, yet makes no difficulty to drink deep of the blood of his neighbor by
slander and calumny. Another will account himself sull of Devotion for HUDLING
OVER A MULTITUDE OF PRAYERS EVERY MORNING, though afterward he give his tongue
a liberty to utter offensive, arrogant, and reproachful speeches amongst his
Neighbors and Family. One willingly draws an Alms out of his purse to give to
the poor, but cannot draw Clemency out of his heart to pardon his Enemies.
Another forgiveth his Enemies, yet cares not to satisfy his Creditors but by
constraint. All these people are devout in the vote of the vulgar, yet indeed
they are not so at all. And then he gives us an handsome allusion. The servants
of King Saul (says he) sought David in his House, but Michol having laid a
Statue in his bed, and covering it with David's Apparel, made them believe it
was David himself sick in bed: So many persons cover themselves with certain
EXTERNAL ACTIONS BELONGING TO DEVOTION, and the World believes them truly
devout and SPIRITUAL; whereas indeed they are but statues and apparitions of
Devotion.

Now God forbid that I should judge such a man as this (if he but follow his
own directions) to be in a way destructive to his soul, when he professes to
aim at true SPIRITUALWORSHIP, not contenting himself with EXTERNAL ACTIONS
only in the service of God, Though still I must needs say (notwithstanding
such an Author as this amongst them) that (I think) the Papists do generally
ruin themselves by resting upon externals, nay inventions in the service of
God. So much for the cautions, and for the Character, as it concerns those that
are under predominant Legality.

Now because the same character that will discover it at this height, will
discover it also where it is in any less degree; and for that I have asserted
that there is a mixture of Legality in the services of the best Christians and
Saints of God, I think it good to improve this character yet further, for the
discovery of that Legality which may be found in the Saints themselves. That
Legality of the Saints therefore which is discoverable and reprovable by this
Character, is, 1. That I doubt not but some good men have a Conscience of some
superstitious observations, and I would not for all the world think; the
contrary, lest I should condemn the generat on of the just, and think too
hardly of some dear Saints of God. And I must needs confess, there is too much
occasion given men to run into this extreme of Superstition, by the irreverence
of others (perhaps good men) in the service of God. How ordina^ily do many sit
at prayers in the Church, when they are not necessitated by weakness, or any
other occasion? and with their Hats upon their heads. Now how easily may this
give occasion to others that take offense at this irreverence, out of a fear
lest they should not be reverent enough in the service of God, to approve of
kneeling at the Sacrament, which I doubt not but many good men may be very
zealous for, as also forbowing at the Name of Jesus. But yet I reckon that good
men are in greater danger of Legality in the matter of Moral duties, then in
ceremonies and superstitions; for though I have acknowledged that some good men
may have a conscience of some superstitious observations, being misled by the
care to be sufficiently reverent; yet to be greatly superstitious in
Gospel-days, is a shrewd sign of a rotten heart, and so not so incident to good
men. 2dly. For the duties of the Moral Law, good men's Legality lies in two
particulars: 1. When they have performed a duty rightly and spiritually, they
are apt to reflect upon it with a spiritual pride, and ready to lay too much
stress upon it, and to think that now God must needs grant the Petitions they
have asked; whereas perhaps they have answer enough in the very sweetness of
the duty it self, and the communion with God which they have enjoyed in it; and
therefore if they are not humbled after such a duty, to see their great
unworthiness notwithstanding all they have done, they are so far guilty of
Legality; Or which is more usual, 2dly. The Saints too often content themselves
with doing their tale and number of duties, praying morning and evening,
perhaps reading so many Chapters, but are not spiritual in what they do,
watching over their hearts that they worship God in a right manner with those
spiritual affections stirring in prayer, that attention in reading that should
be; this is commonly known by the name of resting in duties; this is ^egality,
and yet I think that which is found more or less in all the Saints; and so far
indulged to themselves by some Saints, till at last they have a general
deadness and benummedness in all their Graces, and then they fall into sad
complaints of desertions, and run into a maze and a Labyrinth of doubts and
troubles of mind, which perhaps they get not out of for some years together. As
for those Saints that pick and choose amongst the Commandments, that are
high-flown in their notions, and yet err grossly in matters of common Justice
and honesty, that are indeed not only slanderously reported, or unworthily
suspected to be so) disobedient to Magistrates, with other like irregular
Christians, I have nothing to say to them here. I refer these to the head of
hypocritical Legallists, that expect to be justified by a parcial obedience to
the Commands of the Moral Law, these not being spots of Gods Children.

There are other miscarriages of the Saints in duties that are to be referred
to their Legality of Spirit; as for instance, if they chance through
extraordinary occasions to have missed the time of prayer morning or evening,
to have missed the reading their number of Chapters, or doing any good task
which they had laid upon themselves, then they have a great fear and terror,
lest God should be angry and displeased with them, though indeed Mercy was at
ended instead of Sacrifice; but such as these belong to another head or
character of a Legal Spirit, to wit, a Spirit of Bondage, which I shall come
unto anon.

I have now perfectly done with the first Character as to its explication,
proof, and application, both to Legality predominant, and that which is found
in a less degree, in which I may be thought tedious enough: Only I would not
leave so much as a cavil, without some endeavor at least of an answer to it
Now I am sensible that thoughts may arise in some, as if this whole particular
were impertinent.

Obj. Whoever thought before (may they chance say) that Superstition was
Legality? that a partial performance of the Moral Law, either by the less
strict, or more strict Morallists, was Legality? If men would seek to be
justified by the Law, they would endeavor at least to keep the whole Law; and
if they knew they fell short of it, as those profane wicked men which you
mention out of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and other places, that were very wicked did,
and yet rested in Ceremonious performances, and external Privileges, these
indeed deserve the Name of wicked men, but not of Legallists, or such as seek
justification by the Law.

Now to this I answer, and I shall say but little more then what I have said
before; 1. It Is true, none ought to seek Justification by the Law, but those
that have perfectly kept it hitherto, and undertake to keep it for the future
part of their lives. 2. If any seek justification any other way, they do but
be-fool themselves. 3. But yet the Jews and Galatians did seek justification by
Works, by the Law; ASIT WERE by the Works of the Law; else the Apostle had
disputed against no adversary: And yet they did not pretend to perfect and
unerring obedience. So I reckon the objection is answered already, that men may
seek Justification by the Law, that have not, nor think they have the exact
Works of it. But yet to give some overplus of answer: There being a generation
of men that do seek Justification by the Works of the Law, yea, forasmuch as
all men are apt to seek it this way, it must be in some kind of actions or
other: Now I have shown that these very men that are taxed for Legality by the
Apostle, viz. the Jews and Galatians, they were also taxed for their being so
much in love with ceremonies and superstitions, and with external obedience
(only) to the Moral Law; and I cannot learn wherein else their fault of
Legality lay; therefore this must be their Legality: For it is certain they
must vent their Legality in something, in some way or other; and I finding no
other great way of theirs, but one of these three, viz. ceremonies,
superstitions, and external conformity to themoral law, which all agree in this
general nature of an external and fleshly service, such as does not reach the
heart, conclude that their way branches it self forth only into these three
particulars. Besides I have shown that there was a continual succession of
Legallists from the beginning, and they all agree in this general of external
service, therefore this must be the very matter of their Legality. And for full
proof, having shown what is the form of Legality, to wit, expecting the reward
as of Debt, or Merit. I have found out this form enlivening and quickening this
fleshly matter of the Legallists service and obedience to God. Thus I have
shown how the ceremonious Jew with his appointed Ceremonies and invented
Superstitions, Micah in the Book of Judges, and the Legal Jew in the Prophecy
of Micah, made no doubt but to DESERVE very well the favor of Almighty God.
The Partial Moralists in Isa. ^8. wonder that God should not accept of their
fastings, and take it very heinously when they had so well deserved it, that
they should be so unexpectedly slighted and dis-regarded. So would the Papists
and our selves (many of us) wonder, that upon crying, Lord, Lord open to us,
after we had been so superstitious and ceremonious in his service on earth, we
should be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. I come now to the second Character.

The second mark or sign of a Legal Spirit by which it may be found out, is
this, That it is proud and impatient in the service of God. I shall give
Scripture Proof that a Legal Spirit is proud and impatient, and
Scripture-instances. For a sinful creature to think that it can merit, is pride
in it self; yet this I have proved already, that the Jews and Galatians, and
all that practice Legality, are for the Doctrine of Merit, and they make no
doubt but they shall very well deserve the favor of God; some by their rich
Sacrifices and high Superstitions, others by their external obedience to the
Commands of the Moral Law. Surely (says Micah) now God will do me good: God I
thank thee that I am so much better then other men, says the Pharisee, and
upon this challenges his acceptance, they take it for granted that God cannot
but be well pleased with them. This is their pride in its direct and formal
act. But now, what if the Lord show them some dislike? Why there we shall see
their pride in its effects, impatience, anger, weariness, fullenness. I gave
one instance of displeasure against God in the former haracter, Isa 58.3, 4.
Wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our soul, and thou take no pleasure? They seem to take it very ill
at God's hands.

Another instance we have in Cain, who when he found that God did not accept
him with an answer from heaven, as he did Abel, he is sullen, and dogged, and
falls into an angry and malicious passion; Cain was very wroth, and his
countenance fell, Genesis 4.3. 4 and in ver. 6. God comes graciously to argue him
out of this angry and su len fit: And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou
wrath? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? Do but as Abel has done, offer in faith, offer thy heart with thy
Sacrifice, and thou shall be accepted as he was. No, but Cain ('it is like)
thought he had done well enough in bringing the fruit of the ground an offering
unto the Lord, and that he might very well have deserved to be accepted as well
as his younger Brother; and therefore he continues his wrath and malice, and
perhaps if he could have had his will at the great God (for it was against him
that his passion was chiefly stirred) he would have discovered the utmost
malice against him. But because he could not, his poor servant, and true
spiritual Worshipper Abel must rue it, and he takes his first opportunity, and
kills him, ver. 8.

Others again of Cain's gang, Legal-Worshippers, when they have found that God
did not accept them (as they thought he might well have done) they are quite
weary of his service, and cry out with those in Malachi, chap. 1. ver. 13. Ye
have said also, Behold what a weariness is it! And ye have snuffed at it: And
so Amos 8.5 they cry, When will the new Moon be gone, and the Sabbath, that we
may set forth Wheat? Will such hypocrites (think you) pray always? Will they
always call upon God? No, where a man does not sind acceptance, he will be at
last weary of waiting. Now, though whosoever comes with faith and love and an
hearty-good-will, shall be sure to sind acceptance with God, yet an hypocrite,
or a Legal-Worshipper shall never find it; and therefore he will be apt ever
now and then to grow weary, if not quite to cast off the service of God. I
shall instance in a proud speech of one that was quite weary, it was the King
of Israel, 2 King. 6.33. And he said, (speaking of the Famine in Samaria) This
evil is of the Lord, and why should I wait ou^ he Lord any longer? It seems,
say Commentators, that Elisha had made the King some promise of deliverance
from the Famine after a while, and the King had waited for the fulfilling it;
but at last the King seeing the extremity of the Famine upon the woman that eat
the flesh of her child, he would wait no longer: Well, and how does he vent
this rage and impatience? Why, he would take off Elisha's Head. Well, and what
then? Would that cease the Famine? No; but says he by his Messenger, This evil
is of the Lord; God deals exceeding hardly and severely with us, therefore I Will
cut off his servants Head. A goodly consequence! and that which sussiciently
argues against whom chiesly his anger was aimed, even against the Lord himself.
Now that this anger, impatience, and weariness in the service of God, is an
argument of Legality, is clear, for that pride is the root of it, namely such a
pride as by which we think there is very good reason why God should accept of
us, and no just reason why the Lord should deal thus severely with us; which if
it does not contain Legality, or opinion of merit in it, I despair of making
any proof in this business; and yet I shall not only give this proof by way of
argument, but clear Scripture Proof that this impatiency proceeds from
Legality; it is in Hab. 2.3, 4. Behold the vision is yet for an appointed time,
but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry: This was the very case with the
wicked King last instanced out of 2 King 6.33. if the Visiontarry, wait for it:
But now it follows ver. 4. If you will not wait, if your soul be lifted up in
you with pride and impatience, why this soul that is lifted up, is not upright
in him; this Spirit is quite contrary to the Spirit of a just and justified
man: But the just shall live by Faith; that is, will be patient in such
straits; this is the great famous place which the Apostle Pau. makes use of to
prove Justification by Faith in three several Epistles, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11.
Heb. 10 38. Ergo, Impatience, weariness of the service of God is a great
argument and symptom of a Legal Spirit in the service of God, the thing that we
have now under demonstration.

Now to apply this Character: So far as thou find thy self sloathful,
sluggish in the service of God, ready to draw back, and to be weary of
welldoing; contentious against God, with Job; angry, as Jeremy and Jonah were
in their sits of distemper. So far Legality is discovered to be the principle
of serving God. For the Spirit of the Gospel is humble and cheerful; I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, says the
Church in Micah, chapter 7 9. If God defers to hear and answer prayers, yea gives
denials, yet the true Saints of God think it their duty to wait patiently on
the Lord, and to find out the cause of these denials in themselves: Christ
calls the woman of Canaan Dog; Truth Lord, says she, yet the Dogs eat of the
crumbs: And this is commended for an high piece of faith, Mar. 7.28 I join
these Scriptures of Old and New Testament together, and use them promiscuously
for proof of the same thing, because it is plain there were spiritual
Worshippers under the Old Testament, as well as there are Legal-Worshippers in
the new.

Now in a consonancy to, and connection with this latter part of this last
Character, viz. the irksomness, heaviness, and weary somness that there is
often found in a Legal Spirit as to the service of God, I might make this a
third Character, That a Legal Spirit is weak and feeble, and devoid of all
strength in the service of God: But I shall make this rather an Observation
then a Character of a Legal Spirit; yet I shall insist some what upon it.

I say then, The Legal spirit is without, strength in the service of God.
That the Legal-Worshipper is fainthearted and weak in the service of God, like
Ephraim in Hos. 7.11. as a silly Dove without heart; and it may very well be,
for the joy of the Lord alone is our strength, Neh. 8.10. Which joy the
Legallist never partakes of, having never any true sense of divine acceptance:
And indeed, what strength can the Law give, us that is now, through our fall,
become a poor, weak, feeble thing it self? What the Law could not do in that it
was weak through the flesh, etc. Romans 8.3. The Law became weak through our
sinful flesh, so that it can neither justify, nor sanctify, and it gives no
quickness at all in the service of God; it gives quickness to the body of death
indeed, and to the motions of sin in our members, as it is Romans 7.^. but none
at all to serve God with. The A postle therefore appeals to the Galatians
experience, that they never received the Spirit by all the preaching of the Law
which they had amongst them, Gal 3 2. And this was the very reason of God's
n^a^ing a new Covenant, of his removing his old Dispensat on by Moses, which
was so full of Law, and so like a Covenant of Works, Heb 7.8, 19. For there is
verily a disannulling of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof; for the Law made nothing perfect. Thus the Law being
weak, the Legallist must needs be a weak, imperfect thing in the service of
God. But now it is said. They that wait on the Lord by Faith, shall renew their
strength; they shall mount up with wirgs like Eagle; they Well run, and not be
weary, and they shall walk, and not faint. Isa. 40.31. He that believes on me,
says our Savior, out of his belly shall flow kavers of living water; this
spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believed on him should receive, John
7.38, 39. The Gospel of Christ is, and in its preportion ever was so far as at
any time it was understood and embraced in the times of the Old Testament the
Ministration of the Spirit. In Col. 1.11. the Apostle prays for his Colossians,
that they may be strengthened with All might according to his glorious power;
in the Gospel there is ALL MIGHT and a g^orious Power to strengthen and quicken
the Saints with; no wonder therefore if this quicken and encourage them
mightily in the service of God, beyond what ever the Law can do for its
dependants and admirers.

I might here take fair occasion to discover what infinite quickening
considerations and motive^ the Gospel carries in it unto the spiritual service
of God beyond what the Law could afford: But seeing I do not so much as make
this a Character, I shall not take the liberty to enlarge further upon it.

I shall only now acquaint the Reader why I do not make this a Character, and
then pass on. And truly one great reason is for the sakes of some good people,
I may say very many that we have amongst us who, if we should make this a
Character of a legal spirit, that it is weak, sluggish, heartless in the
service of God, that it is not lively, active and vigorous; they would
presently apply it to themselves, and cry out that they are legal, for that
they find themselves that they are just thus whereas yet it is true, that every
true Saint, the meanest Saint in the World has more life and vigor of heart in
his serving God, then the devoutest and strictest legallist in the World: And
what if I should say, in comparing the two Dispensations of the Old and
New Testament, that there is never a Gospel-Saint since the day that the Spirit
came down upon the Apostles, but has more life and spirit or it is h^s fault
if he have not) then the highest true Saint under the Old Testament? Would not
that Scripture bear me out in it, which says, that John the Baptist was the
greatest that ever was born of a woman before him, and yet that the least in
the Kingdom of Heaven (which is often interpreted of the Gospel-state of the
Church) is greater then he, Matthew. 11.11. And would not that other Scripture
countenance it, which says, The feeble shall be as David, Zech. 10.8: And
accordingly I might affirm, that if these complaining Saints had but the true
courage of Saints, and the true Character of themselves, and at the same time
the Character of the highest legallists, yea of the most spiritual Saints under
the Old Testament, they might truly conclude that their Religion was of an
higher strain then either that of the one, or of the other If any will make any
abate meant of this observation in the height of it, as that the advancement of
the least Salnt in the kingdom of Heaven above John the Baptist, should be
meant of Gospelpriviledges, let them do as they see cause.
; and so this observation might well serve for a Character to them: Yet because
the Saints of God do not always understand, nor are able to make a judgment of
their condition, and for that I aim only at such Characters as may be useful
to persons for trial of themselves, I shall at present let this pass without
pressing it any further, only I could wish these multitudes of grovelling,
creeping, complaining Saints, were well chid and awakened, for they make
Ministers that they cannot preach free Divinity, lest they should perhaps
grieve them: And I verily believe that it has spoiled many a good Sermon, that
would have been far more lively, both for the conviction of wicked men, and the
quickening of other good Christians that could have born it, and done well with
it, merely the stuffing it with cautions, and qualifying many brave
expressions, lest some of these weak tender Christians should be offended;
which tenderness in most, is rather a delicacy of spirit, then the quick sense
of a wounded Spirit, which indeed must be tenderly dealt with. Good men many of
them have gotten such effeminate Antinomian Consciences, that they cannot bear
sound Doctrine; many Gospel strains are legal in their apprehension. But I must
forbear this ^^nguage, lest I have little thanks for not making this a
Character; I shall only say, before I pass off, that methinks when we serve the
great God upon terms of Mercy and Grace, when he offers us pardon of our sins,
and the salvation of our souls freely, we should be mighty cheerful, and quick,
and diligent; when we consider our high calling, to be the children of God,
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, it should mightily quicken and
enoble our Spirits; Seems it a light thing (says David) to, be a Kings
Son-in-Law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed? 1 Samuel 18.23.
And certainly it argues a great want of faith and hope, not to be very much
quickened with these considerations; but / pass on.

And as I have now avoided making this a Character, which I might have made
one; so I shall endeavor to un-make another that has been made one by some, or
at least to unmake it in part.

They would make this another Character of a legal Spirit, A salfe Character of
a Legal Spirit.
That it is selfish and mercenary in the service of God, only works for wages
and for the reward, but does nothing out of pure love, nobleness and ingenuity.
I have heard it delivered in a great Assembly as a great observation, That
selflove has no more Religion in it than an Horse. That is, as I understand
it, so far as a man acts toward God for any good that should accrue to
himself; so far his Religion is unacceptable. Now for the word ONLY, I confess
I know not what to say to that, how that should be a good Spirit that worships
and serves God ONLY for the reward. But I suppose, they that speak
undervaluingly of this Principle, do mean, or at least should mean by the
tendency of their Discourses, that it is a legal Principle to serve God in hope
of the reward, or for the reward, and that so far as we serve God from this
Principle, we are legal, or at least we miscarry in so doing. And indeed to
show that I do not slander a party, I have heard several Discourses wherein
this has been hotly argued, that it is not a right, or at least not a
Gospel-Principle to serve God for fear of Head, which is to me all one as to
serve him in hope of a reward; for to avoid Hell is a negative reward, as the
enjoying Heaven is a positive. Now for my part I think (whatever we may account
of selflove when it is the only principle) yet, that it is a very good
principle in other honest company, and withal I think that there is no Saint
upon earth that does act toward God merely upon the principle of self-love,
which I shall show by and by: But I will say more yet, and that is this, That I
think self-love, or acting for the reward, and to labor in hope, as the
Husbandman does, who not only labors in hope, but for his hope or for that
which he expects else he would not have taken that labor) I say, to act for
the reward, or in hope of the reward, and so likewise that we may avoid Hell
needs not so far the association of other Principles to countenance and credit
it, as if it were not it self a right Gospel-Principle, for I think, to be
encouraged by the reward which the Gospel promises on purpose, that so we
might be encouraged, argues a true Gospel Spirit, answering the Gospel-motive;
and so that outward motive from the Word or Promise, becomes an inward
Principle.

It were endless to quote the Scriptures that encourage us in holiness by the
consideration of glory to come. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give
thee the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. One more; That which ye have already, hold
fast till I come; and he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to
him will I give power over the Nations, (and he shall rule them with a rod of
Iron) even as I received of my Father, and I will give him the Morning Star,
Rev. 2 25, 26 27, 28 So it is likewise a Gospel-principle to serve God that we
may avoid Hell: We have both together, to get Heaven, and avoid Hell, made
Gospel-motives, Heb. 12.28, 29 Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be
moved, let us have Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire. And it is the advice of our
Savior, Luke 12.5. To fear God who can cast body and soul into Hell; and for
that reason, I say unto you my friends, fear him; they are our Saviors Words.
Luke 12 4, 5.

Now with whatever fair shows and pretenses men may impose these Doctrines upon
themselves or others, that they must not serve God for fear of Hell, nor hope
of Heaven; I look upon Satan to be the Forger of these devices; for if he can
get us once out of the fear of Hell, and out of the hopes of Heaven, he will make
no doubt to bring us into what temptations soever he shall entice us with.

And I would fain know what the other principles are, when these are removed
upon which we should be constrained or engaged to serve God. There is indeed
one more lest very considerable; but these men that dislike the hope of reward,
and fear of punishment, will not like this neither; and it is because it is the
duty of the Creature to serve its Creator, whether he promises any reward or
no. Now this will not look neither like a Gospel-principle, being the very Law
of Creation. Well then, what principles will they suggest for
Gospel-principles? Why such as these, Love, and Ingenuity, and Gratitude, and
apprehending an excellency in the ways of God. Now I confess these are good
principles, and these are right Gospel-principles, the fruit of the Spirit is
love; And, we love him, because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. which is
gratitude; Shall we continue in sin because we are not under the Law, but under
Grace, and that so Grace may abound? God forbid. This were highly disingenuons,
Romans 6.1.15. And in keeping thy Commandments, there is great reward, Psalm.
19.11. There is a sight of the excellency of the precept. But pray observe,
that where nobleness and ingenuity is the only Principle of Actions, there is
no necessity for any thing to be done at all; for actions of nobleness, and
ingenuity, and gratitude, come under no Law, but are left free to the Agent to
do, or not to do; only that hereby as he does them or not, the Agent will
discover whether he be of an unworthy Spirit or no. And thus these men have
brought things to a fair pass, that God is to be served under the Gospel only
upon courtesy; so that any that will, may slip their neck out of Christ's yoke,
and their back from under his burden, or else they must acknowledge that men
ought to serve God, because there is a MUST upon it; it is our duty as
Creatures, if we will not, there is an Hell to punish; but to encourage you in
it, if you will, there is an Heaven to reward.

And what if a Legal Spirit go to work with these principles ONLY, as indeed I
think he has no other, and that he may have all these in a degree, viz. the
sense of his Obligation as a Creature, the fear of Hell, and some general hope
of Heaven: I say, What if he may have all these principles, are they
evertheless good or unsuitable to the Gospel, because he uses them? If he used
them to good ends, or used them aright, they would do him good, as well as they
do others good; the reason why these do him no good, is, for that in the use of
the same principles in the general, which a good man may use, A Legallist has
always these three gross defects that undo him. Three ruining defects in the
service of a Legallist.
First, though the hope of Heaven in general, as a place of happiness, may
somewhat quicken him in what he does, yet he has no true notion or
apprehension of Heaven, that the happiness of it consists chiefly in likeness
to God, in holiness, which if it were his notion of Heaven, he could not find
in his heart to desire it, much less to endeavor after it. The second gross
defect is this; All the endeavors that he makes to please God in one thing or
in another, (as I have instanced in several ways) never reach to a thorough
heart-work; whereas that is the chief thing that God looks after, because he is
a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits. And the lastthing is this, That yet, for
all this slightiness and hypocrifie of a Legal Spirit, the very rule that he
proceeds by in his expectations of his Reward, is, That God is bound to give it
him, as having well deserved it at his hands. Now what though a Legallist may
make use of the same principles that an Evangelical Spirit does unsuccessfully,
yet what should hinder but the Evangelical Worshipper may use the same
principles rightly, and with acceptance from God? May not a good thing be
abused, or not rightly used? And does this destroy the nature of it.

Let us now a little examine the word Mercenary, because indeed it sounds
harshly, as if it were a low principle for a Christran to act toward God by;
and then we will see briefly, what other Principles there are in conjunction
with it in every true Saint of God. The word Mercenary, founds so ill merely
from the common usage of it, not so much from the Etymology or native
signification; the Natural signification of it is, when any one acts for wages,
or for a reward: the use of it is when a man that is engaged to do courtifies,
or at least stands not in any need to receive courtesies, will yet do no good
turns for any, without a good reward in his hand, or well assured to him; nay
perhaps, will do any mischief, if he may be well rewarded; so that
Mercenariness is a Vice always contrary to Nobleness, that is, more free to
do, than receive courtesies, and often contrary to justice; but now this
Mercenariness, especially as contrary to nobleness, is a Vice only or chiefly
amongst equals, and those that stand not in need of one another; as for those
that are far inferior, it is pride with them to be unwilling to receive
courresies, or rewards; for wherefore are any advanced in place, but that they
may do good to those that are below them. It Is no dishonor at all for a poor
man that wants bread, to hire our his labor for a reward; nor for a child that
is bound, to do what his facher commands, to be encouraged by any reward that
his father proposes to any action.

Now, let us apply these things to the bufiness before us, and we shall see how
ill, or how well Mercenariness becomes us in our service of God: First of all,
we are not here to consider the Saints as doing evil things for a reward, that
is the worst Mercenariness of all; no, but they serve God for a reward. Now
wherein can the sordidness of this Spirit lie; is it that we need not to
receive courtesies at the hands of God? or that we cannot endure to receive a
courtesy which we know we are not able to requite? Such a struin of nobleness
there is sometimes found amongst men; out if we should aim at such a strain of
nobleness with God, How will such men ever offer to receive heaven, especially
when they did not work for it, which makes it far more obliging? Truly, in my
mind, it is very high pride for a poor creature, that is poor, and blind, and
naked, and in want of all things, that, when God offers to supply his poverty,
to cure his blindness, to cover his nakedness, he shall not be exceedingly
over-joyed at it; and seeing that these supplies are of this nature, that they
cannot be completely obtained till we come to heaven, nor yet certainly
obtained, except we persevere whilst we are here, to labor after them, it
seems a strange wantonness to me that men should not labor, and own it that
they do labor for them, as the command is, No fault in laboring for the
reward, except it be for the reward of a debt.
Labor for that meat which perishes not, John 6.27. 3. The truth is, I cannot
apprehend any fault in this principle of acting for a reward, except it should
have that formality or Quatenus in it, that it is for a reward as of debt. Does
the Scripture any where complain of any of the servants of God, that they
served him for what they got by him? Or forbid them to serve him for this
reason, because they got by him? It Is true, our Savior upbraids some of his
Followers, that they followed him because of the Loaves, John 6 26. But if they
had been followers as well of his Doctrine and Life, as they were of his bodily
presence, though it had been as well for the Loaves of Bread for a natural
life, as of the Bread of Life from Heaven, they had never received such a check.

It Is only an accusation made by the Devil, that Job served God for what he
got by him. Does Job serve God for naught? Have not thou made a Hedge about
him? etc. Job 1.9, 10, 11. And what if Job did serve God for this reason
partly? Is it not better to serve God for something, then to serve the Devil
for nothing but lying-pleasures, and Hell at last? But, as I intimated before,
so now I affirm, That no true Saint of God acts toward God only from this
principle of Selflove; there are other Gospel-principles that are in the heart
of every Saint more or less, as love to God, ingenuity, gratitude; yea, there
are in some, strains of highest nobleness and generosity. We love God (says
the Apostle, 1 John 4.19.) because he loved us first; there is Love and
Gratitude? Shall we sin that Grace may abound? God forbid. This I have said to
be ingenuity. There have been Saints that have demonstrated to all the World
that they did not serve God barely for a reward, either for a temporal reward,
no nor for that which is Eternal in some strains of obedience; for the temporal
reward, I think all the Saints do usually discover this, because they look upon
it as their portion, when they come into the service of God, to meet with
sufferings in the World; and there is an evident instance for this in Job, whom
God made an example of the greatest outward, yea and inward troubles too in a
great measure, for this very end, as one great reason, that he might make the
Devil a liar, who accused Job to have served God only for these many blessings
which the Lord had conferred upon him, as we may see in the 9.10, 11. ver. of
that 1. of Job; Put forth thine hand (says the Devil to the Lord) and touch
all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face; which yet Job never did,
though yet the Lord did more against Job, then here Satan desired to have done.
But I shall touch at higher instances, they are those of Moses and St. Paul;
The first of which was content to have his Name blot ted out of the Book of
life, Exodus 32. the other to be acoursed from Christ, Romans 9.1, 2, 3. each for
their Brethren, their Kinsfolk according to the flesh, that so God might be
glorified in their salvation; Ergo, whilst these men were thus spirited, they
served God rather for his glory, then for their own salvation; for they that
would fain have been instrumental to serve others by their preaching and
exhortations, and yet were content for their sakes, so they might be saved, not
to be saved themselves, did not serve God in preaching to men, for their own
salvation only, chiefly, nor indeed at all, whilst they are thus considered.
Here you see I acknowledge thus much to the Antinomians, and I think I meet
them half way, and I would it might satisfy them; I acknowledge that no Saint
acts to God purely from a Principle of self-love; there are other good
Principles in association with it; and in the next place I acknowledge that,
some Saints may act, at least in some strains, so nobly, so generously, as to
serve God faithfully, and yet not mind their own salvation at all: witness
Moses, and Saint Paul, and Job as to temporal good things at least. But yet
upon these instances of Saint Paul and Moses, Moses and St. Paul their
nobleness in serving ^od.
I would make these Observations. 1. That high strain in which they both met,
was but occasional, and upon a supposition: it was no constant rule by which
they walked; Moses's strain was this, That if God would destroy his people, he
should e'ne destroy him too; if he would not pardon their sin in making the
calf, he should e'ne blot his name out of the Book of life: there was such a
near conjunction betwixt himself and his flock or people, that he could not
endure to outlive them: nay, perhaps that he did not desire to go to heaven
without a considerable number of them: here was as it were a provocation to his
noble love of his countrymen. But I would fain know how this strain could be
any rule to Moses in his walking? Or whether it signifies thus much? That he
did not for his own particular, in his conversation, endeavor to please God
with this design partly, that he might obtain eternal life. Nay, is it not
expressly said of Moses, Hebr. 11.29. That he had respect unto the recompense of
reward? So I might say of Saint Paul's action, that it was a strain only upon a
supposition, which supposition not coming to pass, nor possible could be no
ground for a Series of actions; For this was St, Paul's action; upon supposition
that the Jews might be saved by his damnation, he was content to be accursed
from Christ; which was a supposition impossible, that for the sake of a man
that had been, and still was a sinner, thousands of sinners should be pardoned
and saved. 2. It is not perfectly out of question, Whether Moses his action
were warrantable: I have seen Commentators who say, that, This great zeal of
his, might have some mixture of corrupt passion in it, which might make him to
speak unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. And methinks there is some sign
of a reproof of this expression of Moses in the very place where he speaks it,
Exodus 2.32. For that the Lord in the next verse, seems to repeat Moses his
words, with a reflection upon them, as when any is angry at expressions, they
will be apt to repeat them again with a displeasure, verse. 33. And the Lord said
unto Moses, whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book?
Why should thou desire to be blotted out? So I might perhaps aggravate Saint
Paul's action: Why should he desire to be accursed from Christ, that others
might be blessed by Christ? Why should he express his love to the Jews in such
an high instance, especially when it could stand them in no stead. Nay, for my
part, I know not whether it be lawful for any man to be content for any ones
sake to lose heaven, or be cast into hell: methinks it is a piece of
selfhatred, or at least too high a breach upon that innate principle of
self-love which God has planted in the soul. And certainly that instance of
love in our Savior his dying for us (which yet was the highest instance in the
world of regular love) was not of such a kind as this; for he did not dye for
us to remain accursed, but under-went the curse, that so he might procure the
blessing for his people, yea, and for himself, Hebr. 12.2. Who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame. But in the third
place, not to undertake to censure Saint Paul, especially in such an action,
where, if there was an error, it was only in excess of love to men's souls,
and high nobleness and generosity. I may safely add this, that I prosess I
cannot see how his action, or that of Moses are imitable by us; for I know not
by what rule we are obliged, or so much as permitted to do any such action:
though some would persuade us that we are obliged to be content to be damned,
that God may be glorified: thus far I shall go with them, That it is every ones
duty to be so humble, as to think that if God cast us into hell, he does us no
wrong: But I cannot go so far in compliaure with their fantastical expressions
of love, and submission to God, and designs for his glory, as to say, that if
God may be glorified in my destruction, I am content, etc. Alas! What good can
my destruction do to God? Or what glory can God have in destroying me, if I
walk sincerely with him? and therefore these are but foolish suppositions, and
idle offers, which perhaps some good people may make; much-like those in
another case of enjoying communion with God, they will say, If God were in
Hell, his Presence would make Hell to be Heaven; and they had rather be in Hell
with God, than in Heaven without him. People had better show their love to God,
and their humility in those actions and duties which he calls them unto, then
in such suppositions and fantastical expressions and imaginations as these:
That is the third observation, I see not how this action of Moses or St. Paul
are imitable by us.

4. Neither were they in constant practice by themselves, or at least they were
not the only principles which they acted by; for Moses I have proved already
that he had respect to the recompense of reward, and that encouraged him in
doing and suffering for God. And as for St. Paul, we find him pressing toward
the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, and
exhorting others so to do, Phil. 3.14, 15. And though I doubt not but St. Paul
did preach the Gospel willingly, yet he tells us that he did not preach merely
as a free-will-offering to God; but there was a necessity upon him, he MUST do
it; Though I preach the Gospel (says he) yet I have nothing to glory of, (as
if I had done a thing that I was not bound to do) for necessity is Iaid upon
me, a dispensation is committed to me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.11. And so we find in the same chap. ver. 24. this advice; So
run that ye may obtain; which argues, that the obtaining the prize not only
may be, but ought to be in our eyes; and ver. 27. he tells us of himself, that
he kept under his body, and brought it into subjection, lest himself should be
a castaway. So that you see, besides these high Principles of nobleness,
ingenuity, gratitude, (which are all good and excellent) yet there are other
principles that are good and commendable, yea, Evangelical When I say they are
Evangelical Principles, I mean they are either so properly, or by way of
reduction to, and confonary with ^vangelical Principles, properly so called,
they are at least allowed, if not brought to light only by the Gospel.
such as these, that it is our duty, and that else there is a woe pronounced
against us, that we may obtain the prize, that we may not be cast-aways. I
shall just give a brief account of the order of principles in a Christians
acting for God, as I apprehend them to lie, and then show why this of
mercenariness cannot be made a Character of a Legal Spirie, and then come to
give some more true Scripture-Characters. The order of principles in every
Saints heart in his acting for God. The 3. first.
Now I suppose that the order of Principles in every Saints heart is this; 1.
He considers himself a Creature, and so bound to obey his Creator; and since
God has always proposed some reward to the keeping, and threatening to the
breach of his Law; therefore these three principles may go hand in hand
together; and these are the first Principles that any is to begin with in
serving God: Now I think there is no exceeding in any one of these Principles;
a man cannot be too sensible of his obligation as a Creature to serve his
Creator; a man cannot be too sensible of the greatness of the reward, nor of
the danger of Hell; yet I think every Christian has somewhat more to move him
in his service to God then barely these three Principles; as for instance, some
such as I have named, love to God, gratitude, yea many times nobleness of
heart. We love God (says the Apostle) speaking in the name of all the Saints,
because he loved us first, etc. and these further Principles seem to follow in
this order from the first, that when I am thoroughly convinced that it is my
duty to live to God, when I consider what danger I avoid in it, what good I
obtain by it, I am engaged to love that God, Then Love.
who takes such care of his Creatures, that he would not have them perish, nay,
that he would not have them do their duty for naught; here is now another
Principle, a Principle of Love, beyond the three first Principles: Again, I
consider the greatness of the reward, the richness of the grace in providing it
by the gift of Christ, the Fathers giving him, and his giving himself; the
sending the Spirit into our hearts to persuade us, and win upon us to accept of
this grace; all the care that the Lord takes about us; and hereby I am yet more
and more engaged to love and gratitude: Aster that nobleness
One may easily be here set all in a flame of love, not counting his life dear
for such a God, for such a Savior; if there be the least spark of Nobleness in
one's natural spirit, it will inflame the whole soul to do some excellent
service for God; not as the Legallist does, supposing that hereby he shall
oblige God, and that perhaps only in some fantastical service, as rich
sacrifices, or multitudes of superstitious observations; but the principle
shall be only an humble love and gratitude, and the action shall be a true
useful, and ingenious action, wherein some real service shall be done for God.

I shall give an instance in the Apostle Paul, in that place last mentioned, 1
Cor. 9.17, 18. a place where you have the Apostle doing two things, one of
necessity, that had a woe upon it, if he did it not; so that whether he did it
willingly or unwillingly, he must do it, and that was the preaching the Gospel;
the other purely voluntary, and so free lest him, that he might have done the
contrary to what he did, and not have sinned at all; and that was as to his
maintenance for preaching; he might have expected from them that they should
maintain him; but he would not, he would maintain himself; and this he took
such comfort in, that he calls this his glorying (as I take it) and he would
rather dye, then that any man should make this his glorying void. Now the
principle of this his action was not Legal, as if he thought by this to lay
some obligation upon God, or his Lord Christ Jesus; for he knew that he was so
far obliged to the Lord for his mercies, that he could never lay an obligation
upon God. The principle therefore was only this of gratitude and nobleness; he
had such a good Master, that he could never do enough for; and therefore when
he had sent him to preach the Gospel, which he must unavoidably do, the Apostle
spyed out an opportunity of doing his duty herein more effectually, and that
was, if he would preach the Gospel upon free-cost, though he was allowed by his
Master to have demanded a reward; and now spying out this, how he might do an
eminent service, which yet was a free will offering, he catches at it, and will
rather dye then let go this opportunity. Ver. 5. It were better for me to dye,
then that any man should make my glorying void; upon which take this paraphrase
of a learned Commentator; I have preached the Gospel on free-cost, and would
rather choose to famish by doing so, then be deprived of this way of advancing
the Gospel; and I would not for all the world lose this comfors and joy, that I
have preached to you, without receiving any thing from you. Here you see at the
same time the Apostle can act from a principle of necessity, and also of
voluntariness or nobleness; he preaches the Gospel from the consideration of a
necessity, and he takes nothing for his preaching out of a principle of
nobleness; and yet this second service is a real service, and advantage to the
Gospel; not such a foolish thing as for men to whip themselves, or to offer to
the shrine of some Saint, or to say such a tale of Pater nosters, etc. That
therefore is another Christian Principle in acting for God, viz. Gratitude and
Nobleness.

I shall only mention one more, and it is this, When one has been used to
serve God, The last and highest principle of action is from the excellency of
the work it self.
the ways of God are so good in themselves, that a man will find a great
sweetness and satisfaction in them; that they are the only ways that perfect a
man's nature, they are the only ways that are rational, he shall more and more
see every sin to be a gross absurdity, according to that Scriptuture, Heb.
5.14. Strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, even those, who by
reason of use have their senses exercised to discern good and evil: And believe
it, this is an high attainment, to have a sense of what is good and excellent,
and of what is evil and base; and to love the first, and hate the latter for it
self; this is certainly the very love and hatred that God himself has: Now
though I have allowed that there are these three Gospel-principles of Love and
Gratitude, Nobleness and Generosity, loving and hating things for their own
desert, which men may arrive at; yet I dare not speak a light word of the three
first principles mentioned especially of that first, viz. of serving God as our
Creator, which I think will be an everlasting principle of service after we have
received the fullest reward. And for those principles of acting in hope of the
reward, and to avoid Hell, I say first, as before, that they are good and
warrantable, nay Evangelical principles of action, and therefore cannot (simply
considered) be reckoned for legal principles; yet perhaps I might say this, in
agreement with those that make them characters of a legal spirit, that if they
could be discovered in any person to be the only principle of action (as in
Ahab and Pharaoh the avoiding the Judgments that they were sensible of to hang
over them, were visibly the only motives of their religious acts) that person
might be adjudged legal. But of this more when I come to speak of a Spirit of
Bondage, which is the next Scripture-Character that I shall give of a Legal
Spirit: Only in the mean time I reckon that I have evinced that, taking it in
the general, without that distinctness in which we are to proceed; so it is not
a sufficient argument, nor any argument at all of a Legal Spirit to act toward
God for fear of punishment, or in hope of the reward.

I come now to a third Character of a Legal Spirit, The third Character of a
Legal Spirit.
and it is this, To be under a Spirit of Bondage, is an argument of a Legal
Spirit. That this is an Argument or Character of a Legal Spirit, first let us
see some Scripture Proof, and then I shall come to show what a Spirit of
Bondage is. Now for Scripture Proof; I think there is no Character of a Legal
Spirit plainer in the Scripture then this; I reckon indeed that the first, viz.
That it is external and fleshly in the ser^ice of God, was a plain
Scripture-Character; but I think this is rather plainer, in Gal. 4.22, 23. For
it is written that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other by a
freewoman; but he who was of the bondwoman, was born after the FLESH, but he
of the freewoman was by promise: which things are an Allegory; for these are
the two Covenants. The one from Mount Sinai, which gendreth to bondage, which
is Hagar; This is the Law-Covenant: Ergo, Legalists are under a spirit of
Bondage, and they that are predominantly, or properly said to be under a spirit
of Bondage, are Legalists: the Proposition is convertible, by reason that a
spirit of Bondage is a property of a Legal spirit. Again, for a little more
Scripture Proof: 1. It Is proved from its contrary; the spirit which is contrary
to a spirit of Bondage, is a spirit of Adoption or Sonship: (...); now this
Spirit of Adoption is a peculiar privilege of the Gospel; therefore the spirit
of Bondage must belong to the Law, Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father; which I shall make bold to Paraphrase thus: Ye
have not now under the Gospel received the spirit of Bondage again, as ye did
under the Law (for some of these Romans to whom he writes, were Jews) but ye
have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby both you and I, (for the person
is changed) and all Gospel-Saints, cry Abba Father.

The Law SO FAR as it did reign over the spirits of good people in the days of
the Old Testament, brought them under a spirit of Bondage, SO FAR; and
therefore the ve^ same Saints that now were under a Spirit of Adoption, by the
Gospel, yet had been under ^ spirit of Bondage in the times of the Law in a
great measure; unless we will make the person. YE, to signify specifically,
not numericall, that is, of Saints like them of the same Nation in times past,
and not of those very Saints i^ person to whom he writes: but which way s^^ver
understood, it asserts that the Saints of Go^ in the times of the Old
Testament, were in (...) great measureunder a spirit of bondage, through the
darkness of the Dispensation; which argues, that for those that were under the
Law wholly, they were certainly under a severe Bondage from the Law, and so
that this may very well be made a Character of a Legal spirit. I am not
ignorant that there is another interpretation given of this Scripture by some,
yet very agreeable with this that I here give, viz. That in every work of
conversion there is a legal conviction, which they call a Spirit of Bondage,
which goes before faith; and that after a man has truly believed, he never
receives, or returns to a spirit of Bondage again. But I think this is not the
genuine interpretation; only it may be allowed for true in a great measure:
and I might borrow strength from it for my present purpose; for that this
spirit of Bondage in this interpretation, is the effect, or the work of the Law
only; but of this the Reader may see more in the 41. page of the foregoing
discourse. I come now to show what a spirit of Bondage is: now this discovers
it self in the very name Bondage or Slavery; as also by its opposition to a
spirit of Adoption or Sonship; they that are under it serve not God as
children serve a father, but as slaves serve a cruel master: again, it is
notified to us by the inseparable companion of this spirit, and that is fear;
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; (...), and that which
is here called, (...), is in the 2 Timothy 1.7. called, (...), a spirit of fear;
God has not given to us (says the Apostle, that is under the Gospel) a spirit
of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind. A Gospel spirit is a
spirit of love; a Legal spirit is a spirit of fear. I shall give only one
Scripture more for this, that is, 1 John 4.17, 18, 19. Herein is our love made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is
(says the Apostle) so are we in this world. There is no fear in love, but
perfect love casts out fear: because fear has torment, he that seareth is
not made perfect in love. We love him, because he first loved us. Here I
collect and argue. We, that is, We Saints converted by the Gospel, have all of
us a principle of Love, which is quite contrary to that of fear. We shall have
boldness in the day of Judgment; and this we have some fore-tasts of in this
world; for that spirit which is opposed to (...), a spirit of Bondage to fear,
is (...), a spirit of Love and Sonship or Adoption, which has an holy
boldness in it, Hebr. 4.16. and teaches us to call God Father. But on the
contrary, the Legal spirit has no such boldness in the presence of God, but is
always silled with a tormenting fear and horror at the thoughts of God; even
as the Devils are in a great degree, who believe and tremble, and as Cain was,
who when he could have no rest in his spirit, went forth from the presence of
the Lord, which he could not endure, and fell to building a city, in
probability to drown the noise of his Conscience, which else would still have
rung in his ears, and alarmed him with this dreadful sentence, My punishment
is greater than I can be^^ or my sin is greater than can be forgiven. Perfect
love casts out fear; then such as is the proportion a^^ degree of Love to
God, to such proportion and degree (...) the tormenting fear of God abated.

Yet here I must needs acquaint the Reader that there is another exposition of
this Text, which I think, is very allowable, if not more genuine than the
former, that is, that perfect love to God casts out all anxious and
solicitous fear of suffering; and persecution for God's Cause; I shall
transcribe somewhat of Dr. Hammond upon the place, ver. 17. Herein is our love
made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment -- because as
he is, so are we in this world; which he first thus translates, In this the
love with us is perfected, that we have boldness -- and then paraphraseth thus:
In this the perfection of that love which is to be found in a Christian
consists, that in a time of danger, when we are brought before Judges, and may
probably lose our lives for confessing of Christ, then we retain courage and
cheerfulness, and confess him willingly; that we behave our selves in this
world as Christ did when he was here, that is, lay down our lives in
testification of the truth; ver. 18. there is no fear in love; that is, (says
he) such love as this which was in Christ, has no fear in it; Christ ventured
and under-went the utmost, even death it self for us. I need transcribe no
more: But yet I think I may argue strongly, even from this Exposition, that
which I aim at, viz. that a Gospel Spirit is free from slavish fear of God, at
least in a great measure; for still the love spoken of in this text, it is love
to God; this love to God is a great Gospel-principle, as appears in the text.
Now can any bear a great love to any person, and yet have a slavish fear, a
tormenting fear of that person at the same time? For my part, I think love and
fear, with respect to the same person, are very near as opposite as love and
hatred; and a tormenting, slavish fear of any person, cannot long be without a
great degree of hatred: Is it not a famous question in the Politiques
concerning the security of a Prince: An praestat timeri quam diligi? Whether it
be more safe for a Prince to be loved or feared of his Subjects? Brtvis
differentia inter legem and Evangelium est ^mor and am^^. Aquina: and August.
Which things if they were not in consistent, the question would need no
decision. Again, take the Exposition last given, that perfect love to God
casts out all fear of men; it fills us with courage and resolution, so that
we are afraid of no sufferings whatsoever: Yet is it possible that a man
should, from the extraordinary inflammedness of his love to God, be full of
boldness and courage in the day of Judgment, that is, the day of hottest
trials and persecutions, fear nothing, because it is for God, whom he loves
dearly, and that for this very reason, that he loved him first, upon terms of
gratitude; and yet that this man should have his Spirit contracted and
oppressed at the same time with a tormenting fear of the God for whom he
suffers? I have argued before, that his love to God would not suffer such a
tormenting fear of God; I argue now, that the expansion and enlargedness of
heart and soul in his courage and boldness for God, is inconsistent with that
contraction of spirit which a slavish fear of God at the same time must needs
cause. A man that has his spirit broken by the tormenting fear of God, can
have no courage before men at all; Every man that meets me, will kill me,
says Cain when a slavish terror of God had seized upon him. The sinners in
Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites, Isa. 33.14. Why
what is the matter? it follows: Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire?
Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? When men have a sense of
the Wrath of God toward them, which is the cause of this slavish fear, it
sills them with fearfulness and terror in all things else; they begin to be
afraid of their own shadow. Therefore this boldness in the day of man's
judgment here spoken of, must suppose first, some boldness in the presence of
God; and so the sense of the text runs clear. There is no fear in Love, where a
man loves God heartily, and especially out of a love of Gratitude, because God
loved him first, that soul has boldness and courage in all his sufferings: The
Righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. But the wicked flees when none
pursues: If God be for us, says the good man, who can be against us? Who
shall separate us says the Apostle, from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, etc.
In all these things (and can there be greater in the day of man's Judgment) we
are more then Conquerors, through him that loved us, Romans 8.35, 36. Here is a
courageous, fearless Love; but whence is it spirited, but from the sense of the
Love of God. No soul pressed with a slavish fear of God, could have uttered
these triumphant expressions And I think, that according to this second
Exposition of this place in John's Epistle, is that Scripture to be
interpreted, 2 Timothy 1.7. For God has not given us the spirit of fear,
(timidity or cowardice) but of power, of love, and of a sound mind; which is
thus paraphrased by a Commentator: Surely that God that gave us this Commission
and Gifts (for the Ministry) has not given thee or me so poor a cowardly
spirit, as that we should be afraid of the dangers and threats of men against
the preaching of the Gospel, but courageous hearts to encounter any difficulty;
a love of God which will actuate this Valor, and cast out all fear of danger,
and withal, a tranquillity of mind, and a full contentedness in whatsoever
estate. (...), a Spirit of sobriety; then it follows fully and clearly in
countenance of this Exposition, ver. 8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the
^estimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but be thou partaker of the
afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God. Now whereas I have
used these two Scriptures in the Epistle to Tim. and that of John, in another
sense above; then what I conceive is the most genuine; yet still in a sense
consistent with that which is genuine; the reason was, not for want of
Scriptures to prove what I intended, but for that these Scriptures are used by
others in the first sense, and might well be used so allusively; and for that I
had no such way to restare them to their true interpretation, as first by
allowing them the accommodation of that other sense, and then showing that this
latter is the more proper.
.

But here I must make a twofold distinction of fear, viz. in the kinds, and in
the degrees of it. The first distinction of fear.
1. In the kinds, there is a lawful and acceptable, yea necessary fear of God,
and there is an unlawful, or at least unacceptable fear of God. The first is,
that awe we are to have of the Divine Majesty as we are creatures, and with
which we are commanded to work out our own salvation even with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.22. This signifies no mor but the creature; keeping its due
distance, knowing its place and condition of a creature, having a due sense of
the weighty concernment and importance of that salvation which we are to work
out, considering the danger we escape, and the prize we press forward unto;
these considerations make us greatly in earnest; it is no trifling business we
are about, and therefore we do it, and are to do it with fear and trembling,
and greatest circumspection. So the Apostle Paul says, he was conversant
amongst the Corinthians, in fear and great trembling, 1 Cor. 2.3. which, say
Commentators, may signify not only his fear from persecution, but those which
did arise from the consideration of the greatness of his Work of saving souls.
This fear now is lawful and commendable, and so far from being contrary to love
as it may very well proceed from love; love to our selves, when we are working
out our salvation; and love to others when we are helping onward their
salvation. But then there is a slavish fear of God in the spirits of men, which
does not further, but extremely hinder the working out of their salvation. This
fear we find in the sloathful servant, that never set upon improving his
Masters Talent, but laid it up in a Napkin, and when his Master called him to
an account for his Talent, he tells his Master plainly what was the reason he
never so much as endeavored to improve it. For IFEARED thee (says he) because
thou art an austere man; thou take up that thou laidest not down, and reapest
that thou did not sow. Lu. 19.21, 22. Thus every Legallist has at the bottom
of his heart, if not in his mouth (as this man in the parable has) strange
prejudices and mis-representations of God, which beget slavish tormenting fear
within him at the thoughts of God, and therefore may well be called, as it is
most appositely, by the Apostle^ a spirit of bondage, of a servant, of a slave,
a spirit of bondage to ^ear. And for this I shall have recourse to Mr. Smith of
Cambridge in his Discourse of Superstition, who has indeed a rich vein of his
own, and excellent quotations out of other Authors; and has in that Discourse
many things applicable to my present purpose. In it he makes Superstition,
according to the etymology of the Word (...) to consist in an over-timerous and
dreadful apprehension of the Deity; for with he quotes Helf ychius, whotakes
(...), and (...), for all one, and expounds (...) to be one, that is, (...) or
(...), that a superstitious person is one that is very prompt to worship the
gods, but withal is very fearful of them; and Mr. Smith tells us that
Superstition is indeed nothing else but a false opinion of the Deity, that
renders him dreadful and terrible, as being rigorous and imperious, that which
represents him as austere and apt to be angry: And he further tells us, that
Plutarch has thus defined it in his Book (...) etc. A strong and passionate
opinion, and such a supposition as is productive of a fear debasing and
terrifying a man with the representation of the Gods, as grievous and hurtful
to mankind: Besides he tells us, That wicked men, whom he makes the
superstitious, are apt to account the Divine Supremacy as but a piece of
Tyranny, that, by its sovereign will, makes too great encroachments upon their
rights and properties, and therefore are slavishly afraid of him. I shall
recite but two quotations more out of him, which I am not a little affected
with; the one is out of Plutarch, the other out of Maximus Tyrius. Plutarch's
is this, (...), that if we understood God aright, it would beget a freedom and
liberty of soul within us, an hope from virtuous actions, and not gender to a
spirit of Bondage, which is the Apostles own phrase, (...). The other of
Maximus Tyrius is as remarkable in his dissert. 4. concerning the difference
betwixt a friend and a flatterer: (...) (says he) (...), etc. the sense
whereof is this; The pious man is Gods friend, (this is only I think said of
Abraham the great Believer) the supersliticus is a flatterer of God; and
indeed, most happy and blessed is the condition of the pious man, Gods friend;
but right miserable and sad is the state of the superstitious. The pious man
emboldned by a good Conscience, and encouraged by the sense of his integrity,
comes to God without fear and dread; but the superstitious being sunk and
deprest through the sense of his own wickedness, comes not without much fear,
being void of all hope and considence, and dreading the gods as so many
tyrants. It is no small pleasure to me to read heathens thus rightly
apprehending and expressing this twofold way of approaching to God; which
altering but the number of (...) into (...), looks so like that which is Divine
and Apostolical, Now for all this which here I have transcribed out of Mr.
Smith touching superstition, I reckon it may be well applied to the Legallist;
and I shall not need to add any more in describing their slavish fear of God.

The second distinction which I promised was of the degrees of fear, The second
distinction of fear.
and this distinction is likewise very necessary, for that such is the weakness
of the Saints themselves, that many of them may have a great degree even of
slavish fear of God, and may be far gone under a Spirit of Bondage. The Saints
of the Old Testament by reason of the darkness of their dispensation, were, in
a great measure generally under this fear; and it is an observation of some,
(how solid I leave to others to judge) that therefore the Saints of the
Old Testament are so commonly known by that Name, Such as feared the Lord,
because their dispensation was so legal and dark, and attended with a Spirit of
Bondage; but however that observation be censured, I am sure the Apostle makes
an assertion somewhat like it, In Gal. 4.1, 2. That the heir as long as he is a
Child, differs nothing from a servant; (...) though he be Lord of all; even
so we when we were children, were in bondage, (...). The sense is this
peremptorily; The true spiritual Seed, and heirs according to the Promise, had
much of a spirit of bondage and fear in the days of the Old Testament; and so
still it is very possible, and often found, that many true Saints, heirs of
God, as then they differed, (...) nothing, that is, nothing to speak of; so now
they differ but (...), very little (such is their weakness) from servants, by
reason of the great mixtures of bondage and fear, which they have in their
spirits in the service of God; but yet now, though I have allowed this great
mixture of a Spirit of bondage in the Saints, even to a great degree; yet I
affirm, that now, and in all ages past, the Saints and wicked Legallists are to
be discerned and distinguished the one from the other by the degrees of this
fear, as truly as before I distinguished them in the kinds of fear; for, as much
as the Saints of God have, or may have of a slavish fear in the service of God,
yet they have all enough of that spirit of adoption and holy boldness, so as to
overbalance it, and to enable them to cry, Abba, that is, ^ather; which a
mere Legallist has not, but is overborn by his fears, and acts toward God
only under the anguish and incitation of a spirit of Bondage: Yea, though the
gospel bring so much more of the Spirit of Adoption and Sonship with it, than
the Old Testament did; that, in comparison with it, the Old Testament be called
a killing-letter, and a Ministration of death; yet I shall make this further
assertion, That all the true Saints of God even under the Old Testament, had so
much of a Spirit of Adoption as did overbalance their slavish fear and spirit
of bondage in the service of God; and the reason is this, for that God has in
all ages accepted of men only as they treated with him upon Gospel-terms and
principles. A spirit of a slave was always unacceptable unto God. The two
Covenants (as I have shown at large) were in Moses his time, and Abraham's
time; and the one gendered to bondage, that was that from Mount Sinai; the
other unto liberty, and that is from Mount Zion, the new Jerusalem, which is
the Mother of us all that are, shall be, or ever were the true sons and heirs
of it; therefore they had always in a SUFFICIENT DEGREE a spirit of liberty, of
sons, a spirit of adoption.

Having made the spirit of bondage a Character, and given you the distinctions
upon it, I shall briefly show the inseparable connection that there is between a
legal spirit and it, and the very reason how it comes to pass. The inseparable
connection between a spirit of bondage and a legal spirit.


And indeed it must needs be, that a legal spirit should be attended with fear
and terror; for his very way of serving God leads him into it. He goes to serve
God, and to procure acceptance with him by the Works of the Law; now the Law
(as I have show nis of that nature that it cannot justify but where there is
perfect, unerring obedience; and therefore to all that seek justification by
it, and are not surnished with this obedience, it can only prove a
Ministration of death, terror, and desperation: So that, let the Legallist
fancy what he pleases at first when he enters upon his way, as perhaps he may
think to please God, and satisfy his own Conscience with offering up some
external services, either ceremonious or moral, and never pretend to keep the
whole law, and so not to seek justification in the true and proper way that the
Law is to justify; yet he shall find himself first reputed and reckoned
amongst those that seek Justification by the Law, (as the Galatians were, who
yet did not pretend to the proper righteousness of the Law) and then he shall
find in the next place, that because of the imperfection of his obedience, the
Law is too weak to justify him, and yet it will still show him his duty, and
press him to the doing of it, and it will discover his defects, and sins, and
the wrath due for them; but to allow strength for the fulfilling it self, or to
procure pardon for any breach of it, this it cannot do; and so all the effects
of the Law upon the Legallist, can be only to lash, sting and vex him, which
must needs sill his soul with horror and dread of that God whom he serves.

Now I shall not undertake to show on the contrary how the very nature of the
gospel-way must needs produce peace, and an holy boldness and confidence in the
sight of God, though I might show that out of the very way it self these things
would seem to spring; or at least, that it is very agreeable and suitable to
the gospel-way of treating God, that it should be accompanied with peace, joy
and holy boldness in the presence of God; for if the great and holy God will
admit any sinful creatures, whilst they remain in part sinful, into fellowship
and holy boldness with himself, who can they be other then those that renounce
all love to sin, abhor themselves by reason of sin, and cast themselves for
pardon and salvation purely upon his mercy and grace? All which I have shown to
be essential to the Evangelical or gospel-way, the way of faith and grace which
I am contending for, Besides, we know the gospel way of serving God receives a
denomination from faith; it is called, the way of Faith; They that are OF FAITH
are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. Now if this way has so much of
faith in it, (which we know has affiance in its notion) that Faith should
deserve to give name to this way, as it does, then certainly this way cannot
want an holy boldness and confidence in it.

But instead of insisting upon this way of proof from the very nature and
constitution of the Gospel: I shall content my self with a few more
Scripture-proofs besides what I first mentioned in the entrance of this
Character, to show that peace, joy and holy boldness in the presence of God,
are great effects of a Gospel-way of serving God, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the
SPIRIT is love, joy, peace, etc. By the spirit is meant either the gospel, or
the holy ghost, which is conveyed by it, or that better part which is within
us, called so in opposition to the Flesh: or if you will all three, and then
the sense is this, The Spiritual, or New-nature within us, brought forth by the
Holy Ghost, in the preaching of the Gospel has such fruits as these; Love,
Joy, Peace, etc. So Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God, that is, the Gospel, where
it comes in power, is not meat and drink, that is, it consists not of these
chiefly, if at all; but it is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost; these are the great designs and effects of the Gospel. And we know that
the Gospel is the great ministration of the Spirit who is given in the Gospel
as a Comforter, as an earnest of the inheritance, as an Advocate within us,
teaching us to cry Abba Father. It were endless to give all the places which
make for the proof of this proposition, that the Gospel has great joys and
comforts attending it; and that the opposite way to it of serving God, which is
by the Law, can have no such thing.

If it should be here objected, that it is strange, Obj.
if the Gospel-way be so full of comfort and boly boldness in the presence of
God, so attended with the Spirit of Adoption, as you have declared, that there
should be so many sad, drooping, desponding Saints as there are, that though
they live holily, and we cannot but think they are good men, yet are not
acquainted with any of those comforts, durst not call God Father, are full of
fears and doubts touching the favor of God toward them, etc.

I confess that this is a considerable objection: Ans.
But I must answer it much after the same manner as I discoursed upon that
which I might have made the third character, viz. that a Gospel Spirit was
vigorous, quick, and lively in the service of God; that a Legal-spirit was
weak, sluggish, and unactive. For I meet with the same kind of Christians in
this Objection that then I met with, who durst not be tried by that character.

First of all therefore I acknowledge, there are many sad souls whom I cannot
but think to be godly, and true Gospel-saints, and so much I acknowledged in
giving the second distinction (...) this character. But

Secondly, I dare say the Gospel has comforts for them, if they could but
receive them, which yet the Law has not in it for the Legallists; no, the Law
is full charged with wrath against them; and did they but fully understand what
infinite treasures of wrath the Law contains in it self for them, there is
never a Legallist in the world but would be fuller of horror and desperation
than were Cain or Judas.

Thirdly, Setting aside what may be of extraordinary dispensation in the
troubles of some Saints, I think it is generally their own fault that they have
no more comfort and considence than they have. God would have us rejoice,
Rejoice is the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice
evermore, 1 These. 5.16. The Gospel would have us rejoice, the holy Spirit is
ready to fill ou^ hearts with laughter, and our tongue with singing, in Col.
3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly -- singing with grace in your
hearts to the Lord. in Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Be ye filled with the Spirit, speaking
(...) your selves in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making
melody in your hearts to the Lord. So we see it is the great duty of the Gospel
for Saints to rejoice in the thoughts of God. But there are several ways by
which the Saints may, and many do deprive themselves of comfort; by falling
into sins, which to be sure will break their peace, or else by admitting Satan's
subtilties against their peace, hearkening to all the whispers of the Serpent
against themselves, who sometimes tells them they are not elected; at other
times, that they have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost; another time,
that they have out-stood the day of grace, or that the spirit of God is
departed from them; and these things I believe many that have the Spirit of God
dwelling in them, have not out-stood their day of grace, much less committed
the sin against the holy Ghost, may yet call into question, and hear Satan's
suggestions about them so long, till they be brought into a perfect maze and
labyrinth of thoughts, doubts and fears; so that, except the Lord should bring
them our by a Miracle almost, I cannot imagine how they should get out: This
fear and terror therefore was from their own faust at first, though now they
cannot help themselves.

4thly, Yet still I think it may be asserted, that even for these very persons
concerning whom the objection is made, and which are mentioned in the last
particular, that even these when they are themselves, and have the right use of
their understandings (for I reckon that such sad souls pass through many
deliriums, and irrational imaginations) have all of them more kindly strains of
ingenuity to God, and of filial boldness, than any Legallist in the world ever
has; they have their lucida intervalla, the smiles of God sometimes, and feel
the supports of the everlasting Arms; or if they have not that which you may
call comfort, yet at least they are enabled to act toward God with a better
spirit then that of a slave

5. But for others that are not thus; and I hope I may say, the greater part of
true Saints they have a comfort and joy in the service of God, and their hearts
are mightily lightened and quickened by it: Thy word (says David) is sweeter to
me then the h^ney or the honeycomb; Psalm. 19.10. thy word has quickened me,
Psalm. 119.50. I rejoiced in thy word, as one that sindeth great spoil, Psalm.
119.162. their joy bore the Apostles up above all their sufferings* 2 Cor. 15.
for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, siour consolation also abounds
by Christ: and accordingly, we are advised by our Savior, that when we suffer
for righteousness sake, we should rejoice and be exceeding glad, or leap for
joy, as the word signifies, M^. 5.12. And certainly, if the joy of the Gospel
be such as will carry us thorough the greatest sufferings, it may well carry us
thorough all the ordinary affairs and occasions of this life: Yet for this see
one place in the Book of Ecclesiastes, chapter 9.7, 8. Go thy way, eat thy Bread
with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; why so? it follows, for now
God accepts thy works; When a man's ways please the Lord, and he has a sense
of it (which none but a Gospel-Saint ever has) it will make him go cheerfully
through all the actions and occasions of his life. Now if there be such a
general joy upon the true Saints of God, arising from their Gospel-way of
serving God, as will carry them through sufferings, and through all the actions
of their lives, and by consequence into the presence of God with a cheerfulness
and holy boldness; is it not most injurious, that the troubles and sadness of a
few Saints, brought upon themselves against the design of the Gospel, through
the subtilties of Satan, and the Saints own default, should be thought able to
make this assertion too light, viz. that a Gospel Spirit has an holy boldness
and a cheerfulness in it, and is freed from the Spirit of bondage (which
accompanies a Legal Spirit) into the glorious liberty of sonship and adoption.

I shall only make one observation more before I pass off from the explication
and proof of this Character, which I think will add some light unto it, and it
will be of a very contrary nature from the observation which the objection
fastens upon, and it is this.

It has been laid to the charge of the Puritans, that they are too familiar
with God in their Prayers: Now truly I will not undertake to defend those good
men that have been honored with that Name, in every thing; but I think in this
particular, (as in many other things) they have a great excellency, in that
they know better than their adversaries, how to use an holy boldness at the
throne of grace. And yet to show that I am not altogether senseless of the
danger that there is of erring this way, I do here acquaint my Reader that I
verily believe, that many have grossly erred herein: I have heard of one very
famous once in London, a Tradesman, that being gotten in a Pulpit, made thus
bold with the great God in prayer, Thou have said, O Lord, that concerning thy
sons, and concerning thy daughters, we should command thee: we command thee
therefore, etc: I need not go to aggravate this boldness: I have heard others
my self, unreasonably (as I thought) bold in their expressions in prayer; but I
dare not charge this upon those good people in the general, which have been
called Puritans.

But I am sure however it is with them in one extreme, it is as bad and worse
with the Papists, and those that are superstitiously addicted in the other,
that they dare not use that holy boldness which is allowed them, nay, which is
necessary to be used. They think it too great a boldness to go to God in prayer
without the mediation and intercession of some Saint or Angel; or if they go to
the right Mediator, they dare not go to him but by the intercession of the
Virgin Mary; all which are but over-servile fears, and denials to themselves of
that true liberty and boldness which the Lord admits us unto. If they go to
celebrate the Eucharist, the Supper or Feast of Christ's body and blood, which
we are to eat and to drink at the Lords Table for our souls health, first the
people must not have the Wine; then the Bread must be carried about, and
worshipped like a god; the Table upon which it is consecrated, must be an
Altar; it must not be received, but upon your knees; nor taken, as the command
is, Take eat; but received from the Priests hand into your mouths, which are
all but so many superstitious and servile usages of that Ordinance, which all
ought to have an holy boldness in, and is not at all prejudiced, but rather
furthered as to Divine acceptance, by how much the more of discreet and
judicious boldness we have in the use of it: And here I shall take liberty to
say something to the nature of Superstition, which I shall presently have done
with, and so pass on to the application of this Character.

And here I shall take liberty to say something to the nature of Superstition,
having (as I reckon) a fair occasion for it; and yet I shall quickly have done
with it, and so pass on to the application (...) the Character.

Superstition therefore (which I humbly offer) either consists in, or arises
from an overcimorous and dreadful apprehension of the Deity. Mr. Smith of
Cambridge whom I have so often mentioned, with those other great Authors which
he quotes, seems to make that the only notion of Superstition, that it is an
overtimorous apprehension of God: Now I suppose Mr. Smith's reasons, together
with the Arguments and Authority of those whom he quotes, may very well serve
to make that notion of Superstition to pass as a true notion, though not the
only notion of Superstition; though indeed Mr. Smith in that Discourse partly
reproves Cicero for translating the word (...), by Superstitio; but allowing
this for a true notion of Superstition: Yet Mr. Smith in the same Discourse
mentions two others, one of which he calls a gloss of the late Ages imposition,
the other a too-strict confining it to Polytheisme. This last being by the
Author intimated to be Mr. Mede's (as I suppose) or Dr. Hammoud's; the other
that which Mr. Mede or Dr. Hammond has confuted, or freed the Word from. Now
Mr. Mede's, or the learned Author of our age (as he speaks) his notion of
Superstition is this; I shall give it in Mr. Smith's own words; He seems (says
he) to have too strictly confined it to a cowardly-worship of the ancient
Gentile-Daemons, as if Superstition and Polytheism were indeed the same thing;
whereas Polytheism or Daemon-worship is but one branch of it. Now this
Superstition, viz. a worshipping the Superstites (allowing it that name, as Mr.
Smith does) I take to be a Superstition that arises from an overtimorous
apprehension of the Deity; but does not so much consist in it; for they that
are guilty of making so many Mediators with God, do it chiefly for this reason,
for that they have such a dreadful apprehension of God, that they think they
may not dare to come and pray to him without those Mediators, nor to Christ
himself without the Mediation of his blessed Mother.

The reason why ^^ness the Author intimated by Mr Smith, to be Mr. Mede, is,
for that he makes great use of the business of Daemon-worship, and by it proves
the Papists highly guilty of Idolatry for worshipping of Saints, which he
parallels with Gentile-Daemons; though at the same he be for many of those
things which some in these LATE AGES have thought Superstitious, as the
holiness of Churches the Supper of the Lord to be called a Sacrifice, the Table
to be called the Altar, etc. Now this I suppose is that Superstition, or that
which by the latter ages imposition is called Superstition, and is said by Mr.
Smith to be confuted out of the Name by Mr. Mede, or that learned Author of our
own. Now I must confess I have taken the Word Superstition in this sense
altogether, in several places of my Discourse, herein being in the mistaken
notion (it seems) of the late ages about what is Superstition. And I must needs
say, I take Superstition to be the placing a Religion in things which will not
admit of it, and where it ought not to be, as in the differences of meats,
which once had a Religion in their observance; but now have not, and cannot
have; in kneeling at the Sacrament, in bowing to the Altar, in the cross in
Baptisin, and all ceremonious observances, more than what are naturally decent,
such as being uncovered, and kneeling, or at least standing at prayer, etc. As
for Image Worship, or Daemon-worship. I call that rather Idolatry, then
Superstition: For Superstition I take to be a vice in the lesser things of
worship; and I am sure if they will not allow us this word to signify this
vice, we must have another word to call it by, for such a vice there is; Ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years, I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4.10, 11. Let no man judge you in
meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day; or of the new Moon, or of the
Sabbath-dayes, Col. 2.16. and in Mark 7.2, 3, 4. we find, that the Pharisees,
and ALL the Jews, except they wash their heads often, eat not, holding the
TRADITIONS OF THE ELDERS, and when they come from the Market, except they wash,
they eat not; and many other things there be which they have RECEIVED TO HOLD,
as the washing of Cups and Pots, brazen Vessels, and of Tables, in these
Scriptures is such a vice taxed, as I call superstition, that is, the placing
Religion where God has not placed it, and would not have it placed. And I
could never yet learn that there was so much significancy in the Etymology of
that word, that they need be so curious, and I may say superstitious in keeping
it from this hone use that the late ages would have put it to; and as I have
observed Mr. Smith makes bold to carp at Cicero for translating (...) by it,
for so Tully (says he) frequently translatos that word, though not so fitly
and emphatically as he has done some others. Now since Cicero seems to have
translated it unfitly, and the late ages have made perhaps a more fit, at least
a sitting use of the word; why may not their using it recommend it to us,
especially when it is so well understood in their use of it; but let become of
the word what will, taking it for granted that there is such a vice as placing
Religion in things where it ought not. I shall only show how this arises from
an over-timorous apprehension of the Deity; superstitious men wanting the right
notion of God, that he is a Spirit, and looks chiefly at the heart, and that he
is good and merciful, and requires no more of his crevture then what he can
well and comfortably perform; they are apt to think that God is upon the catch
(as we say) with them, and stands upon punctilio's, and therefore they must be
very exact and ceremonious in every thing that they do for him; and hence seem
to have sprung all these useless ceremonies, and superstitious observations in
the service of God. The Pharisees must be so clean and pure, that they must
wash often; when they fast, they must dis-figure their very faces. The
Colossians must be so observant, that they must not touch, taste or handle,
Col. 2.22. The Laity amongst the Papists must not taste the Wine, it is too
good for them; nor touch the Wafer (which is superstitiously invented instead
of Bread) with their unhallowed hands, but receive it into their mouths from
the hand of the Priest, and that upon their knees; yea, when the Host is
carried in the streets, they must fall down upon their knees.

Thus I have dispatched this observation about superstitious men's shiness of
God in his Worship, that they have not that holy boldness they ought to have,
but a spirit of bondage and of slaves in the presence of God. Superstitious men
under any of the three notions of Superstition, are under a spirit of bondage
in the service of God. I come now to the application of the Character.

And in this I shall proceed (as I have done in other Characters) first
endeavoring hence to discover Predominant, The application of the Character.
then Partial Legality, or the mixtures of Legality in the Saints.

Now for Predominant Legality, as the notions of Superstition have been
severally given and explained, Superstition alone may serve to discover where
this great evil is. As Mr. Smith gives the notion of Superstition, it seems to
me to be no other then the spirit of Bondage it self; and I dare say, if thou
art superstitious in his sense, thou art under a spirit of bondage
Predominantly, and so under Legality Predominant. If thou look upon God as a
Tyrant, and yet servest him, and that as such, what higher description can
there be of a spirit of Bondage.

Hither I might refer all the too-severe penances which the Papists inflict
upon themselves, in watching, fastings, and scourging of themselves; as if the
merciful God were taken with such crueties instead of true worship and
devotion. But because I have often touched upon these things already, I shall
forbear, though this be the most proper head of this matter: Neither yet am I
an enemy to prudent penances (if I may so call them) that is means and trials
of one's mortification and repentance, so they be wisely directed to an end; as
for the Intemperate to fast, to afflict his soul and body before God; for those
that are apt to be proud in apparel, to deny themselves sometimes the
ordinaryliberties of apparel, and perhaps to wear very mean clothes, that they
may break themselves of their proud humor. I make no doubt if Saint Paul
should give us the instances of his mortification, when he kept under his body
(that is, his whole self, though it may be his body in especial manner) and
brought it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. (the words are (...). D^. H^r^moad.
I give my self black, and blew eyes with beating my self, and make my self a
servant) I say, if he should tell us what courses he took in his mortification,
what liberties he denied himself, what tasks he might possibly impose upon
himself, I doubt it would make most of us condemn our selves severely for
dastardly and effeminate Christians; but yet still (I doubt not but his
abstinencies and impositions were rational, wisely directed to an end, viz. to
subdue or keep under some passion, or the like end) he did not (sure) satisfy
himself, or reckon that God was pleased with his sufferings, further then as
they were a reasonable service.

So again for the second notion of Superstition, thou Idolater, thou Papist,
that can not come to the great God without a false Mediator, through a fear
and shiness, I have no comfort for thee; only that I know not how merciful God
may be to an erroneous Conscience, whenas the persons otherwise (setting aside
their error) are sincere and cordial in their obedience, and hold the Head,
that is, Christ, as the Apostles phrase is, 2 Col. 19.

Again, for them that are superstitious in the last and lowest, though (I
should think) properest notion of the Word, and are grossly so, I take it as a
very shrewd sign of a Spirit of Bondage, and Legality predominant, not only
for this reason, that they plainly discover themselves to be very ignorant of
the Gospel, by which all the Ceremonial Law was at once laid aside, and no
other substituted by the Apostles, nor (as I should think) left to be invented
by their corrupter successors; but for that other reason which I mentioned, for
that such men that are so much for invented Ceremonies, which I reckon
superstitious, are not only de facto, strangers to a Spirit of Prayer, (which
is all one with the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.16. Gal. 4.6.) but must needs
set upon the inventing or embraciag these superstitions, for that they think
certainly the great God observes as much the little circumstances (which are not
indeed to be despised) as the substance of every action; and that if you are
not mighty exact in every punctilio, the Lord will not accept the most sincere
devotion; and hence they came to serve out every action with so much pomp and
ceremony as must needs hinder the performance of some other necessary duties,
besides that the inventions are many times sinful in themselves: Or else there
must be another reason of these superstitious inventions, which Mr. Smith
suggests, and thereby methinks, brings down his high notion of Superstition
somewhat toward this last that we have given; his words are, That
superstitious men think, though God is apt to be angry, yet that he is easily
to be appeased again by some FLATTERING DEVOTIONS, especially if performed with
sanctimonious shows, and a solemn sadness of mind; and therefore (says he)
Superstition will always abound in these things, whereby this Deity of their
own, made after the similitude of men, may be most gratified, slasishly
crouching to it: And then quotes Plutarch taxing the Jews with their (...),
their wallowings in the dust, tumblings in the mire, prosternations, uncouth
gestures, and strange rites of worship; the very things which we call
Superstition, bowing to the high Altar, etc. And again he tells us, That this
root of Superstition diversely brancheth forth it self sometimes into
poedantical rites, and idle observations of things and times: What is it that
the lave ages have called Superstition, but this, which here Mr. Smith
acknowledges to be the effects or branches of Superstition?

But to let pass this criterion of Superstition, as to the word, but yet
retaining the thing intended by it, which is an over-timorous fear of God, we
may find out predominant Legality by this that follows: Art thou engaged in the
service of God ONLY through the fear of Hell? What say thou to that
Scripture, The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness harh surprised the
hypocrites: Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? Who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. Not as if this principle were in it
self unlawful; no, it is a Gospel-principle; and the Apostle Paul himself, (as
I have showed) makes use of it, when he says, I beat down my body, lest after
I have preached the Gospel to others, I myself should be a castaway: But the
Apostle Paul had other principles in conjunction with it; The love of Christ
constrains us, (says he) 2 Cor. 5.14.

I showed before, that fear of Hell, acting for the reward, or from a principle
of natural conscience, these are not Legal principles in themselves, and in
their own nature; so that he that acts by them, should be far judged to be
Legal; but only, they are such as may want the company of other principles not
to make themselves pass for Evangelical, but to make the person that acts by
them, enough Evangelical; they are a lower sort of good principles, which, let
them have as great influence as they will, can do no hurt; only there must be
somewhat more, ask showed above; and indeed here is the proper place to show
the necessity of some further principle; and I accordingly promised in that
particular to show it in this. Now I suppose this is is the great reason why
there is need of a further principle besides those three, for that a man may
act by all those three principles, and yet be under a Spirit of Bondage. Now
there must be some principle to free the soul from this bondage, or else the
soul can never serve God acceptably: This Principle must be Love; Perfect love
casts out fear; first, all slavish fear of God, then the fear of men; he that
fears, is not made perfect in love: Look to what degree the love of God is in
the soul, to such degree is the slavish fear of God, and the cowardly fear of
men abated.

But yet take two cautions in examining thy self by this Character, as to
predominant Legality. 1. Be not too rash in concluding thou have no love to
God. 2. If thou think thou have reason to conclude that hitherto thou have
no other principle of action toward God, but those three, which do not
necessarily exclude a spirit of Bondage; yet be not discouraged as to the
future; thou may have a further principle; thou art in the fairest way
toward it that any other is; A spirit of Bondage is far better than a profane
spirit: Many Divines hold (and I think rightly) that the Lord in the work of
Conversion, does usually lead men through a spirit of bondage, into a spirit of
adoption; though thou should be at present (as to thy state) under the Law,
yet the Law is a Schoolmaster unto Christ: And Mr. Smith in that so often
quoted Discourse of Superstition, tells us, after having quoted that very place
in Isa. 33. The sinners in Zion are afraid; who shall dwell with the devouring
fire? as an argument of men under the power of Superstition: though I should
not dislike (says he) these dreadful and astonishing thoughts of future
torment, which I doubt GOOD MEN may have cause to press home upon their own
spirits, whilst they find INGENUITY less active. Thou see there may be good
use of such principles even in good men, therefore they are not bad in thee.

But I come to the discovery of partial Legaity, or the mixtures of Legality
which may be found in the service and spirits of good men, from this Character.
And this is indeed the Character by which the Legality of good men is usually
discovered, There are many Saints (as I have intimated already several times)
who, though they walk very exactly, are not conscious to themselves of living
in any known sin; nay, it is known by all that know them intimately, that they
are very strict in their lives, yet these are still in doubts and fears
touching their condition; they are sorely afraid that the Lord is angry and
displeased with them; though they have no reason from the Scriptures, or from
the judgment of other Christians and Ministers, nor from any revelation within
them, but only through Satan's temptations: Now these men cannot gather their
fears from any other occasion or reason, then from their unreasonable
conceptions, their over-timorous and dreadful apprehensions of God. They have
some secret fears and doubts of his goodness, that he will never be pleased,
though they make their way never so perfect before him; though they humble
themselves, though they acknowledge their vileness in never so great
debasements and abhorrencies of themselves. The truth is, they are secretly
afraid, and it must be so (or else their jealousies must be without so much as
the least show of reason) that they shall never please God, unless they keep
the Law to a tittle; and what is Legality if this be not? that is, they think
so at some times (and this occasions their fears and doubts) not that they
think so always, for if they should think so always, they were perfect
Legallists. Or else if they do not think so high as this, that they must keep
the whole law, yet they think at least, that they must do some very great thing
which is beyond their strength; And so accordingly for instance, they think
they must do so many duties in a day, let what business come that can come; and
they must do it so well, be they in never so ill a temper or frame of heart,
(not as if our ill temper excuses the ill performance of an action, where that
distemper is brought upon us by ourselves) and that they perhaps must do as
much, when they are sick, as when they are well; that though they be weak in
grace, or weak in parts, that yet they must do as much as those that are strong
in both. All this now, together with the fears and troubles that attend these
thoughts, I call Legality; and it proceeds from a false and overtimorous
apprehension of the Deity. And they are not enough sensible, that the condition
of man is altered from perfect to imperfect; nor that the terms betwixt the
great God and his creature Man are altered from Legal to Evangelical: And I say
once for all, he that thinks God requires any thing of the Creature above its
strength; nay beyond what the creature can (through the grace of God) well and
comfortably perform, is a Legallist, and under the spirit of bondage so far.
That is certainly a general Gospel-maxime, though made use of upon a particular
occasion of contribution to the necessity of the Saints, which we have 2 Cor.
8.12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not. And nothing is plainer in the
Scripture then this, That the Lord will proceed in his taking account of us
according to the proportion of Talents that he put into our hands. As many as
have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law; and as many as have
sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2.12. The Lord will not
expect more then four talents from him to whom he gave but two, nor more then
two from him to whom he gave but one, Matthew. 25. ver. 14, 15, 20, 21, 22. and
from the same person sick he expects not the same that he does from him when he
is in health; nor from a married man the same, as to acts of devotion, that he
does from the unmarried Person, 1 Cor. 7.32.33.

Now this I dare not let pass without these cautions. 1. That I have delivered
this only for the comfort of those that are apt to accuse and censure
themselves unreasonably; not for any loose-principled people, who are ready to
say, They do all they can, and God is merciful. 2. That this Doctrine, that God
proceeds according to the proportions of talents entrusted with us, is not more
comfortable to some, than terrible to others. You that have great parts, and
great opportunities, cannot be saved with the same improvements that others
may; if he that had five talents, had brought in but six or seven to his
Master, he could no more have entered into the joy of his Lord, then he that
laid up his one talent in a Napkin, Matt. 25.20, 21. Or at least he should
enter difficultly, and with great loss, 1 Cor. 3.15.

Now as there may be these unreasonable fears and doubts about their ESTATE in
the hearts of the Saints, which is so much of a spirit of bondage, for that all
unreasonable fears of God are the effects and univocal proper productions of a
spirit of bondage: I say, as there may be these fears as to their state and
condition, so there may be as to PARTICULAR ACTIONS, an absurd fear that we may
not do them, and a guilt after we have done them, when indeed they were lawful
to be done; which usually argues a spirit of bondage, and so a legal spirit in
these actions: Yet I will acknowledge, that to do actions, though lawful, with
a doubting mind makes them sins, and may justly affect us with a guiltiness.
But many times one does an action freely, and without doubting, and afterward
with a scrupulosity reflects upon the action, and then has a fear and a guilt:
Now I say, if this action upon which we reflect thus, was a lawful action, then
is our guilt and fear which we have impressed upon us, an argument of Legality,
or a Spirit of Bondage, for the reason above given.

But yet there is something more to be said as to the clearing of this matter;
for I will not dare to call all cautious, wary proceeding, in searchingout what
may, or may not be the will of God, and my duty in such or such an action, to
call call this Legality, and the effect of a spirit of bondage: God forbid!
this were Doctrine for a Ranter to vent, not for any sober person. But this is
that which I affirm, That we ought to enquire faithfully and seriously what may
be our duty, and what may be our liberty in such or such an action, before we
adventure upon it; and if we cannot understand such a thing to be our liberty,
as for instance, to take usury-money, to take an oath, etc. we ought not to do
it; but yet I say, (and that is the chief thing I intend in this particular)
that if we determine against our own liberty, it not only argues a weakness of
judgment, but usually a spirit of bondage, for that our very determination
proceeds from a false opinion, and an over-timorous apprehension of God: We
think that he will not allow his servants such liberties as indeed he does; we
think him an hard Master, as it is Matthew. 24.25.

There are some men whom I dare not but think good men, that yet think a
Christian, a Saint of God, should be so exact, so circumspect in things that
are of no consideration; so superstitious (I may say) in gestures, habits,
language, as if a Christian, when once such, were not to converse with other
men, but must go out of the world, as the Apostles phrase is, speaking in such
a case as this, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. And these men I make no doubt, have done much
prejudice to Religion by their great reservedness and narrowness of principles,
which I shall take liberty here to call Legality, and a spirit of bondage, for
that it usually proceeds from a wrong apprehension of God, as if he were hard
and austere, and cruel to his creatures. And this narrowness of spirit and
scrupulosity, has been a common and powerful principle in people, so long,
till at last it has issued out in a party and faction amongst us; and it is
(as I conceive) one of the most considerable ingredients in their Religion whom
we call Quakers.

I have done with this third Character: I come now to a fourth, which is this:

A Legal spirit is a persecuting spirit, and that especially of those that are
the true Gospel-Saints and Worshippers of God; I shall presently give my
Scripture for this, it is in Gal. 4.28, 29. Now we, Brethren, as Isaac was, are
children of the promise; but as then, he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it is now. He that is
born after the flesh was the son of the Bond woman, from Mount Sinai, for
justification by works, as all the Allegory will witness, especially ver. 23. he
that is born after the spirit, is the son of the promise, that rests upon the
promise in the Gospel-way for Justification. Now as there have always been from
the beginning these two seeds, these two sorts of Worshippers; so there was
always an enmity between them; and they that are after the flesh, and for the
Law, always persecuted them that are for the Gospel; those that are for the
Law, are full of persecuting principles against all that differ from them; they
would fain have all forced to be of their way; but yet their persecution is
most fiercely directed against the true Worshippers; they cannot endure that
they should live upon the face of the earth.

Cain was a right Legallist; he brings of the fruit of the ground an offering
unto the Lord; but never minds with what heart he offers it; yet takes it for
granted that God would accept of it, and like it very well: And when he finds
that his offering is not accepted, and that his younger Brother's is, he cannot
bear it, he hates his Brother, and longs for the blood of his Brother; and
wherefore flew he him? says the Scripture; Alas! for no other reason is the
answer made in the same place, but for that his own works were evil, and
rejected, and his Brothers righteous and accepted, 1 John 3.12. not that his
Brother had done him the least wrong imaginable.

Wherefore did Ishmael (the son of the bondwoman) persecute Isaac, (which
persecution we find not to be other than scoffing at him, Genesis 21.9.) but only
because he was the son of the promise? mocking him perhaps with some such taunt
as this, There goes a young Puritan, a young Precisian, the Son of the promise.

But come we down to the New Testament; and who (there) are the great
persecutors of our Savior and his Apostles, but the Jews? yet who greater
Legallists then they? They at Lystra that would have worshipped Paul and
Barnabus for gods to day, are by to morrow persuaded by some Jews that came
down thither from Antioch and Iconium, to stone them, Acts 14.11.19. They were
the Jews who were so zealous for the Law, that cried out against Paul, Away
with such a fellow from the earth, it is not fit that he should live, Acts
22.22. Might not he justly therefore, as he does, (not by way of revenge, but
of right appellation) call them Dogs, Phil. 3.2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil
workers, beware of the concision; those that yet have their great confidences
in the flesh, ver. 3.4. And as it was then in Abraham's time, and in the
Apostles days, so it is now; they that are for Ceremonies and Superstitions, or
merely for an external way of serving God, cannot endure the true spiritual
Worshippers.

I shall now in a word endeavor to show how this spirit of persecution
proceeds from their Legality; not that the Law teaches them any such thing
directly; but that the corruption of their spirits incited occasionally from
the Law, puts them upon it. Now I suppose it comes to pass thus, that seeing
they are in such a way of serving God, as brings them in no true peace, but
puts the most of them into great horrors, fears, and troubles of spirit, as is
manifested in the former particular, and indeed into a secret hatred of God;
they cannot vent their hatred against God directly, that would be too gross;
and therefore they find out some pretense or other of venting it against his
truest and most faithful servants: They Will accuse them of being too strict, that
they are the troublers of their Israel, as Elijah was accused by Ahab. 1 King.
18.17. though indeed Elijah there sets the Saddle upon the right Horse, (as the
proverb is) when he tells Ahab, ver. 10. I have not troubled Israel; but thou
and thy fathers House, in that ye have forfaken the Commandments of the Lord,
and thou have followed Baalim. So was his successor Elisha served by the King
of Israel in his time, 2 King. 6. where is a most pertinent story to this
purpose, which I have somewhat touched at above. There was indeed a sore Famine
in Samaria, perhaps upon the prayer of Elisha (as before there was upon the
prayer of Elijah, as appears from 1 King. 18.1. compared with James 5.17, 18.)
or at least the King of Israel suspected that he was the cause of it, and upon
this bears him a grudge; but yet Elisha promising, or giving some hopes at
least that there should be a plenty in some very short time (as Commentators
say) the King thinks fit to wait a while, which he in the 33. ver. calls
waiting on the Lord; and he waits with some signs of humiliation; for it is
said, ver. 30 that at the story of the woman's eating her child, he rent his
clothes, and the people looked, and behold he had sackcloath within upon his
flesh: And he has some Religious words for those that came to make their
complaint to him, ver. 26.27. Then cried a woman unto him saying, Help my Lord,
O King; And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee?
Hitherto all things look pretty well; but alas! this was all but an external
religiousness, an external humiliation, like that of wicked Ahab; See thou
Ahab humbles himself? And therefore this King's forced patience has an end,
and he breaks out into the highest impatience against God; and where has it
its chiefest vent? Why in persecuting the Prophet Elisha: God do so to me
(says he) and more also, if the Head of Elisha the son of Shaphat, shall stand
on him this day; and he senta man from before him to be the Executioner, whom
Elisha calls the son of a murderer, ver. 31, 32. Now alas, what an absurd and
impertinent revenge was this? For suppose Elisha had prayed for this punishment
of Famine upon the wicked Samaritans, what reason had this foolish
falsly-religious Wretch to think that there was any sault in Elisha? Could he
bind up the clouds from raining? Or would the Lord have answered a Prayer which
had been guilty of cruelty and inhumanity? It was God who had sent the Famine,
not Elisha; yea this wicked Prince acknowledged so much, This evil is of the
Lord, says he, ver. 33. but here is the my sterie of this iniquity, he could
not revenge himself upon Heaven; and therefore he lets out his rage upon the
best man that was upon earth.

All legal Worshippers have at the bottom of their heart a deep hatred against
God and his people.

In the last place, there is in the heart of every Legallist a spirit of envy
and emulation. They are all sensible more or less, at one time or another, that
they are not acceptable to God, and that these Puritans, these holy men are;
and therefore they cannot endure them, they envy them for their greatest
excellencies, and for that they are the favorites of heaven; and they cannot
endure, that seeing they take so much pains as they do in their wrong way (as
indeed many of them are at great cost and pains in their way) they cannot
endure that any should be preferred before them. Legallists and Spiritual
Worshippers are (as I may say) Rivals for the favor of God. Now the spiritual
Worshippers take the right way, the Legallists take the wrong way to obtain it;
therefore the first ^^e received, the latter are rejected and cast out: What
says the Scriptures? Cast out the bondwoman and her son -- Now there can be
no greater ^ud than that which is between Rivals. This was the very case bet
wixt Cain and Abel, which I have several times explained. And Cain (as I have
said) had no other quarrel against Abel, but for that God accepted of his
offering.

But now whereas a legal spirit is thus wrathful, revengeful, envious; and
murtherous, the Spirit of the Gospel, and of all Saints, so far as they are
baptized into a Gospel Spirit, is a micable, peaceable, meek, gentle, and easy
to be entreated, James 3.17. Hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, envyings, murders, are all fruits of the flesh, and of those that
are BORN AFTER THE FLESH; but the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
LONG-SUFFERING, GENTLENESS, GOODNESS; What excellent virtues are these for
humane Society! The Legallist he cries, It is not fit to suffer such Wretches
to live; away with such an Heretic from the earth. Now for the Gospel-spirited
man, he could wish indeed St. Paul's wish in Acts 26.29. I would to God (says
he) that not only thou, but all that hear me this day, were not only almost,
but altogether such as I am, except these Bonds; he does not wish them his
Bonds, that was his GOODNESS, that last Gospel-virtue mentioned; but he wishes
that all his persecutors were of his persuasion; so does every good man; else
he could not be a friend to the truth that he professes: But how to make them
such, he pretends to no other means but earnest prayers, strong arguments, and
meek persuasions. Thou almo^^ perswadest me to be a Christian, says Agrippa; I
would to God I could do it altogether, says St. Paul.

And when he comes to deal with his legal-Galathians, first he uses the
strongest arguments that can be to convince them; afterward the kindest
appellations, and sweetest infinuations to get an interest in their affections:
I have spoken to the arguments at large, the appellations and insinuations I
might insist upon, such as these; Brethren, I beseech you be as I am, for I am
as you are, ye have not injured me at all; ye know how through infirmity of
the flesh I preached the Gospel unto you at the first, and my temptation which
was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of
God, even as Christ Jesus, chap. 4. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. and ver. 19. My little
children, of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you, I
desire to be present with you, etc.

And as St. Paul practiced, so he advised Timothy to do, in dealing with men of
a contrary persuasion to him; yea, with such as opposed themselves to him, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. IN MEEKNESS INSTRUCTING THEM WHO OPPOSE THE MSELVES; if
peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.
And so he advises his Philippians, Chap. 3.15, 16. Whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing: and if in
any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

The application is only this: So far as any are of a persecuting spirit, so
far they are Legal; and I fear there are great mixtures of this in the hearts
of many good men; but I dare make this guess concerning them, that when they
have well smarted (themselves) by impositions and persecutions for their
consciences, they will be heartily glad of a TOLERATION, which yet they would
not have allowed to others, if they had had the power in their own hand; and I
fear they will feel the smart as much as any sort of men, (and perhaps more)
for all that are good shall be sure to feel the sting of the Serpent; and those
most especially that stand next him, hoping to make some accommodation, but yet
are true enemies to him. I have done with this fourth Character.

I have one more considerable Character to add unto the former; but before I
proceed to the mention of it, I shall add some few quotations out of Dr. Moore,
and Mr. Smith of Cambridge, for confirmation of those things that I have
asserted as Characters, because I am loath to goalone without some restimony
from others, in such a considerable subject as I have here adventured (through
the assistance of God) to treat upon. Dr. Moore in his Mystery of Godliness,
I^^ 9. cap. 7. page 470. tells us, That a MERE LEGALLIST is even a stranger to
those things he pra^^ses and imitates under the Law, Upon the (...) Cha^acter
that the service of the Legallist consists only in extemals
and acts so as a Pa^^^ speaks, by external imitation, not from a due inwa^^
faculty: and so again in the same page The Law (says he) not giving life,
there is no principle of life and natural genuine compliance of the soul of man
wi^^ the SPIRITUALITY of the Law under the first C^venant. Now if it cannot
reach the spirituality o^ the Law, its service must consist only in external
conformities: I shall produce somewhat (...) the like nature out of Mr. Smith
of Cambridge, in that Discourse of his of the difference betwixt a Legal and
Evangelical Righteousness, he hath^ these words; That Righteousness of Faith
which the Apostle sets up against the Law, and compare with it, is indeed in
its own nature a VITAL and SPIRITUAL Administration, wherein God converseth
with men; whereas the Law was merely an EXTERNAL or dead thing in it self, not
able to beget any true Divine Life in the souls of men. All that LEGAL
RIGHTEOUSNESS which the Jews boasted so much of, was but from the earth,
earthly; consisting MERELY IN EXTERNAL PERFORMANCES, and so falling extremely
short of that internal and God-like frame of spirit which is necessary for a
true conjunction and union with God, etc. Again in the same Discourse he tells
us, That the most proper and formal difference between the Law and the Gospel,
is this, That the one is considered only as an external Administration, and
the other as an internal; and that therefore the Apostle calls the Law (...), a
Ministration of the Letter; but on the other side he calls the Gospel (...),
the Ministration of the Spirit. Once more in the same fourth chapter, p. 323.
Under the old Covenant, This reaches the first and third characters.
and in the time of the Law, there were amongst the Jews some that were
Evangelized, that were re non nomine Christiani, as under the Gospel there are
many that do Judaize, are of as LEGAL and SERVILE SPIRITS as the Jews, children
of the Bondwoman, resting in mere external observances of Religion, in an
outward seeming purity, in a form of godliness, as did the Scribes and
Pharisees of old.

Another out of Doctor Moore his Mystery of Godliness, page 387. The holiness
of the Gospel is far transcending the holiness of either the ancient or MODERN
SCRIBES and PHARISEES, and Zelotical Ceremonialists; for all outward Ceremonies
of time, and place, of gestures, or vestments, rites, or orders, they are all
but signs and shows, but the body is Christ.

Some passages out of Mr. Smith's Discourse of the shortness of a Pharisaical
Righteousness, That Love is an absolutely necessary principle of
Gospel-obedience.
to show that love is absolutely necessary to a Gospel Spirit; page 364. says
he, The spirit of true Religion is of a free, noble, ingenuous, and generous
nature, arising out of the warm beams of the Divine Love, which first hatched
it, and brought it forth; and therefore it is afterward perpetually bathing it
self in that sweetest love that first begot it, and is always refreshed and
nourished by it. This Love casts out fear, fear which has torment in it, and
is therefore more apt to chase away souls once wound^^ with it from God, rather
then to allure them to God, with much more to the same purpose.

One more out of the learned Doctor, concerning the last Character mentioned,
Upon the fourth Character.
viz. a spirit of Persecution, and it is this; That Ishmael, Hagar's son, had
his hand against every man: Upon which he quotes a descant of Philo. that it
might signify thus much, That the Legallist is a great and fierce Disputer
upon the Letter, a notable Polemical Divine; and his ignorance and untamedness
of his carnal heart, makes him very hold and troublesome. I shall need
transcribe no more; but if the proof of these Propositions, that the Legallist
is for^ external conformities only in the service of God; that he has aflat
and dead spirit in his service; that he is proud and conceited, and yet under a
spirit of Bondage, etc. I say, if the proof of these rested upon authority, I
might be furnished with abundant testimonies out of these Authors, and I shall
name no more: hitherto therefore it is evident that I go not alone, either in
words, or matter and design.

I proceed now to speak to the last character, The last Character.
which is this: A man is so far Legal, as he is affectedly ignorant of Christ,
or acts to God without Christ in the days of the Gospel, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. when
the Apostle had there rekoned up his external fleshly privileges (which if he
would have had a trust and confidence in the flesh, he might have boasted of
with any Pharisee of them all) these (says he) were once gain to me; I
accounted them my riches, and my treasure; but now, What things were gain to
me, these I counted loss for Christ: yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, NOT HAVING MY OWN RIGHTEOUSNESS WHICH IS OF THE
LAW, but THAT WHICH IS THROUGH THE FAITH OF CHRIST, the righteousness which is
of God by Faith. That I may know him, etc. This which I have produced is
evidently to the purpose: for that the Apostle is opposing the two
righteousnesses, of the Law and Faith; and the righteousness which is of God by
Faith is all one with the righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ;
and therefore that which he presses forward unto, is to be found in him, and
to know him in the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto him in his death, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15.

But here I will mark (before I go any further) that there is an inseparable
connection betwixt the righteousness of Faith, There is an inseparable connection
betwixt the righteousness of Faith, and true holiness.
and the righteousness of Sanctification; nay, they seem in this place to be
put one for the other; for when the Apostle interprets his own expressions of
counting all things loss and dung that he may win Christ, and that he may be
sound in him not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law; he speaks
it in words that signify sanctification immediately and properly; But which is
(says he) through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
Faith: What is that? it follows; that I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death: These are expressions of sanctification; so it follows, ver. 11. If
by any means I might obtain to the resurrection of the dead: Which is the
highest expression of Sanctification in the whole Scripture, or at least one of
the highest; and so to the same purpose it follows ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. Unless,
we will say that the Apostle speaks of Justification in the 7, 8 9. verand then,
without any formal transition, passes on to speak of sanctification in the
following verses.
Not but that there must still be a proper difference held betwixt
Justification and Sanctification, for they have proper, different notions and
conceptions: Justification is an act of God without us; Sanctification is an
act of the Spirit within us: Sanctification denominates the Person good;
Justification denominates the person accepted and well-pleasing to God. But for
any contradiction that there should be in this, to say that the same inward
holiness which is called our Sanctification, may be the very condition of our
Justification, I profess I know of none; not that I affirm that it is so, for
indeed I am somewhat shye of affirming in those very words, though I shall
afterward have occasion to say something to the like purpose; but if I should,
I were not alone in the opinion, those two Authors abovenamed would abundantly
supply me with testimonies; for they frequently and strenuously assert, That
the great (...), the RIGHTEOUSNESS OF FAITH, mentioned so often in Paul's
Epistles, is only an INTERNAL HOLINESS; for which I shall give you several
quotations out of them, and so proceed.

Mr. Smith in his discourse of the difference betwixt the Old and New Covenant,
he comes to speak unto this very Scripture, Phil. 3. Where, says he, The
Apostle amongst his other Jewish privileges, having reckoned up his
blamelesness in all points touching the Law, he undervalues them all, and
counts all but loss, (...), for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus: in which place the Apostle does not mean to disparage a real inward
righteousness, and the strict observance of the Law; but his meaning is to show
how poor and worthless a thing all outward observances of the Law are in
comparison of a true internal conformity to Christ, in the renovation of the
mind and soul according to his image and likeness, as is manifest from ver. 9
10, etc. in which he thus delivers his own meaning of the knowledge of Christ,
which he so much extolled, very emphatically: That I may be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. Where by the
way we may further take notice, what this (...) and (...), the righteousness
of Faith, and the righteousness of God is according to his own true meaning, as
he expounds himself; viz. A CHRIST-LIKE NATURE IN A MAN'S SOUL; or, Christ
appearing in the minds of men, by the mighty power of his divine Spirit, and
thereby deriving a true participation of himself to them; so we have it ver.
10. That I may know the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death: So far Mr. Smith.

I shall give now the same observation out of Dr. More, and so proceed. Page
387. of his Mystery of Godliness, It is plain (says he) from the constant
scope of the Apostle both in his Epistle to the Gal. and every where else in
extolling the righteousness of Faith, that he does not vilify true virtue and
morality, but drives at an higher pitch and perfection thereof, and that the
righteousness of Faith which he prefers to the righteousness of works IS NOT BY
WAY OF EXCLUSION OF GOOD WORKS OUT OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF FAITH, but of urging
us to exacter and more perfect works of righteousness than could be performed
under the dispensation of the Law. And in page 379, where the Doctor professes
to explain the great term (...), he tells us, That (...) signifies any virtue
or goodness in a man whatsoever, and that (...) is nothing else but to be
approved as a good man; or, A doer of what is righteous and good, and that
BECAUSE he does that which is good and righteous.

Having made this great observation, of which I shall make more use anon. I
shall proceed with my Character; That an affected ignorance of Christ, is an
infallible Character of a Legal Spirit. I have given a Scripture for it, viz.
Phil. 3.7.8. to the 15. upon which I have so long insisted; I shall give now
the reason of it, which is this: For that all pardon of sins (which is the
greatest thing in Gospel-justification) was ever by virtue of the death of
Christ. All the symbolical and vailed-Gospel of the old Testament pointed
(though darkly) unto Christ: The rock in the Wilderness was Christ, the Serpent
was Christ, the Manna was Christ, the Scapegoat was Christ, the Paschal Lamb
was Christ; and in the fullness of time Grace and the Truth (of these types)
came by Jesus Christ. Therefore those that are affectedly ignorant of Christ,
are affectedly ignorant of all that looked like Gospel, and so of Gospel Grace
it self; and nothing can be a plainer argument of Legality then this. And
indeed we may almost adventure to say, That most men so far as they are
ignorant of Christ in these days of the Gospel, they are affectedly ignorant.

I deferred this Character till the last, because I would first put all those
Characters together, in which the faith of all the Old-Testament-believers and
ours did agree. All the Old Testament Saints were more for spiritual
heart-worship, than for the externals of Religion; they were all in their
degree humble and patient; they were all in their degree quick, lively and
vigorous; they had all a spirit of adoption in their measure; they were all of
a sweet, meek, and kind heart and spirit, not of a persecuting principle; but I
cannot say they all knew Christ in his death, resurrection, ascension and
intercession; nay, I should lie if I should say it; these things are peculiar
to faith under the days of the Gospel; St. Peter and the other Apostles were
all ignorant of these things, Luke 18. from verse 31. to 35.

Now I shall show briefly the peculiar additionals of a Gospel-faith, or rather
a New Testament Faith, without which, ours cannot be Evangelical enough, and so
not justifying and saving: And without performing this part of my Work, I
should be guilty of a great absurdity for taking up so many pages in describing
the Faith of the Old Testament Saints, or of justifying-faith, which was common
to us and them, and in the mean time to pass by that which is proper to our
selves, and as necessary as any thing which has been spoken to.

I affirm therefore, that we are to know and believe in Christ, as the
PROCURING CAUSE of all our mercies, and the DISPENSER of all good things to us;
These are the two great things which we are to know and believe concerning
Christ; to which we must add the meditation and imitation of our Savior, as a
pattern in his Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension; in all which our Faith
has a great usefulness and necessity; and unless our Faith has a great and
very considerable respect unto Christ in all these three particulars, we cannot
justly put on the name of Christians.

That old Faith of Abraham and all the Saints of the Old Testament, which St.
Paul disputes for, and proves they were justified by it, has now a further
Name, and is called the Christian Faith, having taken up that great Object
Christ, more explicitly and plainly then ever they received it. I shall say
somewhat, (but as briefly as I may) unto all the three generals, wherein our
Faith is now necessarily to eye Jesus Christ, that it may be of a right Gospel
strain.

1. We must believe in Christ as the great procuring cause of all our mercies.
1. By his blood and offering.
Therefore a right New Testament Faith eyes Christ as the procuring-cause of
all our mercies, and this in two respects, viz. by his offering up himself a
sacrifice, and by his intercessions. 1. By his dying for us, and offering up
himself, he has bought us, Ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6 20. Thou have
redeemed us unto God by thy blood, Rev. 5.9. His blood was the price of our
redemption; by shedding of this, and offering it up to God, he became a
propitiation for our sins, and we our selves are the purchase of this Price.
Acts 20.28. -- The Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. We
are purchased and redeemed from the world, Gal. 1.4. From our vain
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Yea, Heaven it self is purchased by his blood for
us; for I doubt not but that is it which is called the purchased possession,
Ephesians. 1.14. Now see if we have not reason, nay if there be not absolute
necessity (if we would be right Christians) to know Christ, and believe in him,
as the procuring-cause of all our Mercies, and that by his Death, and Blood,
and offering himself; He has by one offering perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14.

Now our Faith as it eyes thus the death of Christ, is called faith in his
blood; and Justification follows upon this Faith only, Romans 3.24, 25. Being
justified freely by his Grace, THROUGH THE REDEMPTION THAT IS IN CHRIST, whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation THROUGH FAITH IN HIS BLOOD, to declare
his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God, Romans 5.8, 9. But God commends his love toward us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more then BEING NOW
JUSTIFIED BY HIS BLOOD, we shall be saved from wrath to come. I shall mention
no more Scriptures to prove that Christ is the procuring-cause of all our
mercies by his death and blood; only I shall describe what this faith in his
blood is; and I shall express it thus: It is a judging the death and offering
of Christ (either upon the Cross, or in the holy of holies, into which he
entered by his own blood, Heb. 9.12.) to be the great propitiation of God (who
without this offering had decreed no^ to pardon sins) by which he became
propitious and appeased, and for it receives all true penitents into his
favor; that is, for the judgment or assent of faith to the dogmatical truth
in this matter, then for its affiance, faith in the blood of Christ, it is a
not doubting but whilst I have the Gospel-condition of Justification (what ever
it be) this blood will procure my pardon; or thus, in the way of holiness to
rest upon God for pardon, for the sake of Christ's bloodshedding, and offering
it to God. Now this faith in the blood of Christ I look upon as an essential
branch of a New-Testament-faith.

2ly His Intercession.
Secondly we are to look upon Christ as the procuring cause of all our mercies
by his intercessions, whereby he reaps the benefit of the purchase of his
blood. His Blood was the foundation of all his Intercession, and his
Intercession is as the harvest to that seed-time, when he sowed in tears of
blood. He entered into the holy of holies by his own blood; if he had not had
that blood with him, I conceive there had been no entrance for him there as a
Priest; but now that he is there entered and entertained as an High Priest for
ever, and ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. We are to look
upon him as the great procuring-cause of all our mercies by his intercessions:
If when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the DEATH of his Son,
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his LIFE, Rom 5.10. 1 John
2.1. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; and if
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous,
and he is the propitiation for our sins, ( HE IS to this very day, upon
occasion of any failing of the Saints, he interposeth to make God propitious to
them, and not only to them, says the Apostle) not only for our sins, who are
the Saints of God, but for the sins of the whole world: He does now, as he did
at his death, and first entering into Heaven, (though not in the same form of
offering, which was but ONCE) make use of his blood with his Father, to prevail
with him, that he may be ready to pardon, and receive into favor all that come
unto God by him; all that are come in upon any of their failings, and all that
shall come in with unfeigned repentance for their wicked lives past.

And as I showed in the former particular of his death and blood, that he did
not only procure pardon of sin by it, but redeemed us from our vain
conversation, and purchased heaven it self for us; so in this particular I
might show, that he does not only procure pardon of sins for us by his
intercession, as our Advocate, but every thing else that we stand in need of: I
am going to my Father, says our Savior when he was leaving the World) and
there I will povide Mansions for you; and whatsoever ye ask the Fther in my
Name, I will do it, Joh. 14.2, 3, 13. Thus therefore our Faith, if we would
have it a right New Testament Faith, must eye Christ in his intercession; and
whatever we desire of God, we must ask it in his Name, and then believe that
Christ as an Advocate with the Father, will take the care of it. So much for the
first Head, or general Rule of a New-Testament-Faith: We are to eye Christ as
the great procuring cause of all our mercies.

2dly, Gospel-faith eyes Christ as the great d^spenser of all good things to us.
We are to look upon Christ as the great Dispenser of all our good things to
us. Our Savior Christ has the distribution and disposal of all things
committed to him, as Joseph had in Egypt: The Father judges no man, but all
judgment is committed by the Father to the Son, John 5.22. Jesus Christ is not
only represented unto us in the Scripture, as standing at the right hand of
God, Act. 5.55, 56. which may signify his Advocatship and Priestly Office, but
much oftener as sitting at the right hand of God, whch is a sign of his Kingly
Office and Authority; for this see Heb. 10, 11, 12, 13. where sitting is
opposed to standing, as Majesty is to Ministering. And every Priest STANDS
daily, MINISTERING, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never
take away sins: But this man, after he had offered one Sacrisice for sins for
ever, SAT DOWN at the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his
Enemies be made his footstool. Our Savior obtained of his Father by his death
and offering, not only that sinners might be pardoned, but that he might have
the gift of pardon, yea, and of repentance too, which is as great a gift as
pardon it self, Acts 5.30, 31, 32. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus whom
ye slew and hanged on a Tree, him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and sorgiveness of
sins; and we are his witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Ghost whom
God has given to them that obey him. In a word, Christ has all power both in
heaven and in earth: So our Savior came and told his Disciples after he was
risen, Matthew. 28.18, 19. Jesus came, and spoke unto them (the eleven) saying,
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: Go ye THEREFORE, and teach
all Nations. This is the form of the Commission which makes an Apostle (I have
received power, therefore go teach) they are not the Apostles of God
immediately, but of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.1.
Ephesians. 1.1.

To instance in the several branches of this power in heaven and earth, would
be too much for me in this place; there is the power of pardoning sins, raising
the dead, judging the world, destroying the wicked: These, with many other, I
could prove by plain Scripture to be all deposited and be-trusted in the hand
of Jesus Christ.

Now what is the Faith that belongs to Christ as the Dispenser of all good
things to us? (for that is my proper business to enquire after) Why, even the
Faith that we place in God the Father: This Christ taught his Disciples when he
was about to leave them, Joh. 14.1. Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe
in God, believe also in me: As much as to say, Ye have been used hitherto (by
your Old-Testament-Faith) to believe in God, and you have found comfort and
support in it, and yet you do not see that God you believe in: Why so now for
my self, I am going in deed out of your sight, and at this you are troubled,
but believe in me when I am out of your sight, as ye have hitherto beheved in
an invisible God, and ye shall find the same comfort and support in this Faith,
as ever ye found from Faith in God.

None so common a New Testament phrase, as believing in Christ; He that
believes in me, though he weee dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives
and believes in me, shall never dye; Joh. 11.25.26. and our Savior there
gives a very satisfactory reason, The difference betwixt faith in Christ, and
in God the Father
which is this, I am the resurrection and the life; therefore he that believes
on the Son, has life, and shall have a resurrection unto lise. Our Faith ought
to be the same in the person of Christ, as it is in God the Father, only with
this difference, that it must not be terminated in Christ as the ultimate
object of our Faith, but only as he is the Mediator and great Dispenser of all
things to us by a Power derived from the Father; For this take that eminent
place, 1 Pet. 1.21. Who BY HIM (that is Christ) DO BELIEVE IN GOD, that raised
him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in
God. This I do but touch upon here; it would require a large Treatise to speak
unto it as the subject deserves, viz: how we are to direct our Faith and
applications to Jesus Christ in a different manner then to God the Father; but
this is that which I am upon, That in the general we are to six our Faith upon
Christ as the great Dispenser of all good things unto us, if we would have it
of a right Gospel-strain, nay if we expect to be justified by our faith; for if
God set up a Mediator, a Dispenser of all his bentsits, (as Pharaoh (pardon the
allusion) set up Joseph, and required that all men should go to him for what
they wanted) will he (think you) take it well that you should take no notice of
his Joseph, his dearly beloved, and only begotten Son? But come to himself
immediately; dare you do it! Can you ever hope for acceptance in this way of
addressing your selves to God? Might you not justly fear that God will prove a
consuming fire to you in in such approaches? So much for the second; general
head, in which our Faith is to respect Jesus Christ.

But 3dly, there is something more requisite yet to be done by our Faith, with
respect to Christ, than merely to look upon him as the procuring-cause, and the
dispensing-cause of all our mercies, if we would have it a right
New-Testament-faith, or a Justifying-Faith in the days of the Gospel, our
Faith must conform us unto Christ as a pattern and example: Now there is a
twofold conformity unto Christ which our Faith effects, one Proper, the other
Analogical; that which is proper, is to put us upon doing as he did, to be as
he was, humble, meek, lowly, etc. Learn of me (says Christ) these things, and
ye shall receive rest unto your souls, Matthew. 11.29. Phil. 25.6. Let the same
mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who made himself of no reputation,
etc. Looking unto Jesus, who -- Heb. 12.2. But then there is an Analogical
conformity which Faith effects, and that is an answerableness to some things in
Christ, which it is not our duty to imitate in a proper sense, as now to be
conformable unto Christ in his death, burial, and resurrection; these we cannot
in a proper sense be conformable unto him in, except we be hanged upon a cross
till we are dead; then laid in our graves, then raised by the power of God,
etc. Now these things are not our duty to go about to imitate properly, but
only in some resemblance and likeness. Our Faith must bring us to the cross of
Christ, and teach us the crucisixion and mortification of our old man, with the
affections and lusts of it; it must bring us to the grave of Christ, and we
must be there buried with him, Romans 6.1.4. We are buried with him by baptism
into death; and by this death and burial we must reckon our selves to be dead
unto sin, ver. 11. He that is dead, is sreed from sin, ver. 7. How shall we
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein, ver. 2. Yea our Faith must earry
us yet further beyond death and the grave, into heaven it self; we must rise
with him into newness of life; For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.
Ver. 5. And as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of life. Ver. 4. And we must sit
together with him in heavenly places, in our affections at least. If ye be
riser with Christ, seek these things that are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God. Set your assections on things above, not on things on
the earth, for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.1,
2, 3. Faith in the days of the Gospel carries us to the example and pattern of
Christ, and conforms us to it, both in a proper and Analogical conformity; so
that we have something in us that bears some Analogy and likeness to every
thing that is to be found in Christ.

But because this third respect, wherein our says eyes Jesus Christ, looks
more like obedience then faith, more like sanctification, than that by which
most expect justification: and seeing this is not the proper place to show how
far obedience, and holiness, and good works have an influence upon
Justification, I shall not insist more upon this; contenting my self with the
two other respects in which faith eyes Jesus Christ, viz. As the procurer and
dispencer of all good things unto us, which none can with any fair pretense
deny to be necessary to our faith as justifying, in the days of the
New Covenant.

Now to quicken, and so to end this Character, viz. That so far as we leave out
Christ, we are Legal in the business of Justication; I shall represent the
Reader with the example of St. Paul (which I have glanced at already) who was
once highly legal, end afterward as eminently evangelical, and that in the
days of the Gospel. And I should think Solomon himself was not a fitter person
to give an account of the vanity of worldly comforts, than St. Paul was to
acquaint us with that vanity and vexation of spirit that there is in pretended
legal righteousness, as also with that perfect satisfaction which the
Evangelical righteousness brings into the soul: and it is from him indeed, and
from his Epistles (no doubt indicted by the Spirit of God) that this whole
discouse has been raised. He was as to his descent, (...), an Hebrew, born of
Hebrew parents both father and mother, and of a special and beloved tribe, and
circumcised the eighth day exactly according to the Law: for his profession, of
the strictest sect (...), in observation of the Law a Phaisee: for his zeal in
his profession it was exceeding great, I prosited (says he, Gal. 1.14.) in the
Jew's Religion above many my equals in mine own nation; being more exceeding
zealous of the traditions of my fathers. And there was no greater argument of
his being an high Legal list than this, That he was a bitter persecutor of the
way of the Gospel, as he tells us in three several Epistles, Gal. 2.13. Beyond
measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it. Phil. 3.6. concerning
Zeal persecuting the Church. 1 Timothy 1.13. You have his catalogue of privileges
altogether, Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, and there he makes a challenge to any Jew, any
Pharisee of them all to show the same grounds and reasons of fleshly considence
and boasting that he could show for himself; If any other man thinks that he
has whereof he might boast in the flesh, I MORE. Now if there had been any
goodness in that way of a Pharisaical righteousuess, which S Paul with his
utmost zeal pursued after, cectainly he must have fonnd it. But as soon as ever
the Lord was pleased to call him by his grace, and to REVEAL HIS SON IN HIM,
Gal. 1.15, 16, he casts away all his riches and treasures of a legal
righteousness, as dross, dung, and dog's-meat, not fit for children to feed
upon: and what is it that he embraces? what is it that can thus metamorphose
and transpose him? what does he see? what has he espied in the Gospel? Why, it
is Christ; a single Christ: He sells all that he had to buy this Pearl, and
thinks himself made for ever if he can but compass such a purchase. Yea
doubtless (says he) I count all these but dung that I may WIN Christ, or gain
Christ; (...), and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9.

So we have seen the metamorphosis, the transformation of this man, his leaving
all his Pharisaical Legal Righteousness for a single Christ, we will see a
little further what use he makes of Christ now that he has chosen him, and
thus centred his soul upon him. Why, he will needs know more of him; I count
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord, Phil. 3.8. and says he, I count them but dung that I may win Christ, and
that I may know him, ver. 8.10. There are indeed all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge hid in him, as St. Paul tells us, Col. 2.3. and therefore well
might he press after the knowledge of him. Again he will love him: If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed, 1 Cor. 16. ver. 22. He
will believe in him: I would be found in him, not having mine own righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through THE FAITH OF CHRIST. Lastly, he
will make his glorying and boast of him, and that is the highest honor we can
do to God: for men glory in that which they account their excellency; yea, St.
Paul chooses out that in Christ to glory in, which is most contemptible in the
eyes of the world, and that is the cross of Christ; which shows what an high
esteem he had of him: God forbid (says he) that I should glory in any thing
save in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14 And though the blind world could see
nothing in this Cross that they should rejoice or glory in, yet St. Paul saw
these great things in the Cross of Christ, that upon it he vanquished
Principalities and Powers, Col. 2.15. that he removed all that from off us,
that was contrary to us, nailing it to his cross; so that he might well say as
he does, Gal: 2.19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live to
God; that is, through what the Law has done to my Savior, it has nothing to
do with me, I am dead to it, and that is dead to me. Again, see another great
efficacy that St. Paul espied in the Cross of Christ, and that was, that it
helped him to conquer the World; God forbid that I should glory in any thing
save in the Cross of Christ, by which the world is crucified to me, and I unto
the world: No wouder therefore if he chooses the cross of Christ to glory in.
Once more we find him in another Scripture choosing his infirmities to glory in,
2 Cor. 12.5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. I take pleasure in insirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecution, in distresses for Christ's sake: And what is the
reason, why not only for that these are a part of Christ's Cross, but because
when these things did press him down, then did the arm of Christ support him,
and the Power of Christ rest upon him. Most gladly therefore will I rather
glory in my infirmities, that the POWER OF CHRIST MAY REST UPON ME; for when I
am weak, then am I strong; that is, with the strength which is in Christ Jesus;
and therefore hedoth not only desire that he himself might thus know, love,
believe, and glory in Jesus Christ, but he begs for others, that they might
have a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 1.16,
17. It were almost an infinite Work to trace St: Paul in all the ways of his
treating Christ, and using of him; take therefore one place for all, Gal. 2.20.
I am crucified with Christ, (says he) nevertheless I live; that is one Riddle.
I live, yet not I; there is another Riddle: But whence arise these Mysteries?
Why from his conversing with, and possessing of Christ. I live; but (says he)
it is not I any longer; (...), but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now
live in the flesh, (the whole of my life) it is by the faith of the Son of God,
(that is, Faith in the Son of God) who loved me, and gave himself for me: Paul
is dead, he lives no longer; but Christ lives in Paul (if you will) and then no
wonder St. Paul can do all things, as he tells us he can, when such a person
lives in him, Phil. 4.12, 13. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound, every where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to
the hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need; I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me.

Thus the whole of a Christians lise when he is like himself, is a life of
Faith upon Christ immediately; his Flesh and Blood is his food; his Grace and
Spirit is his strength; the living of Christ in him (which is a Mystical
expression) is his life; For you are dead, and YOUR LIFE IS HID WITH CHRIST in
God, Col. 3.3. That Christian therefore that is not intimately acquainted with
Christ, is so far legal: The truth of this assertion is clear from this
example, for that as soon as ever St. Paul had Christ revealed in him, he left
all his legal righteousness, and fastened upon Christ altogether in this manner,
which we have partly declared.

And indeed, this is the Character of Characters; all the other Characters
before given, signify but little without this: It is by means of Christ's
coming that we call God Father, that we are freed from that slavish fear of
God, which even the Saints of the Old Testament were under in a great measure;
the Heir before was kept in fear; but when the fullness of the time was come,
God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons; and
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the SPIRIT of his SON into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4 3, 4, 5, 6. It is by Christ's coming that
we are freed from that external, fleshly way of serving God in a worldly
Sanctuary, and by carnal Ordinances: It was almost impossible, whilst it was
the duty of the people of God to worship God with so much ceremonial service,
but they should dote too much upon those externals of worship* But says our
Savior, ^he hour comes, and NOW is; that is, in the days of the Gospel, that
neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem, shall men worship the Father, but
in spirit and truth, John 6.21.23, and the reason was this, for that Christ was
the substance of those shadows which therefore vanished at his coming.

The truth is, the great thing that we have to mind as Christians, is the
knowledge of Christ; the (...), the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord. And I have often thought, that they who would study the Gospel
aright, should endeavor to find out what there is peculiar in the Gospel,
above whatever was before revealed; for they shall find that in the Gospel
there is the hidden wisdom of God revealed, such mysteries of wisdom as were
before hidden from ages and generations, and I believe there is no greater
prejudice to the advance of knowledge in Theology, or the knowledge of God,
than that it is so generally presumed, yea and assertedthat there is nothing in
a manner new in the Go, spel, neither precepts nor promises; but that the Faith
of the Saints in all ages was the same that it is now, only they appreheuded
the same things somewhat more obscurely then we do, and so for the Precepts,
that they were always the same Now this presumption will unavoidably hinder all
further enquiry, and the New Testament shall signify no more to us then the
old will do; and so we shall necessarily put our selves again under the Legal,
instead of the Evangelical Administration, serving God in the OLDNESS OF THE
LETTER, which is the Law; and not in the NEWNESS OF THE SPIRIT, which is the
Gospel, Romans 7.6. Whereas to any diligent and unprejudiced enquirer it will
appear, that there are a thousand new things in the Gospel, and all of them
referring more or less to Christ. I shall give but two Scriptures for this, and
so come to the application of the character: The first is this, in Col. 1.26,
27. I am made a Minister (says the Apostle) to fulfill the Word of God, even
the Mystery which has been hid FROM AGES AND GENEEATIONS, but NOW IS MADE
MANIFEST TO HIS SAINTS, to whom God would make known the riches of this Mystery
amongst the Gentiles, which is, CHRIST IN YOU, the hope of Glory. Christ is all
the Mystery; all the mysterious things of the Gospel are to be more or less
referred to Christ. The second Scripture is Ephesians 3. of which I might transcribe
more then half the chapter; see ver. 9. To make all men see what is the
fellowship of the Mystery which from the beginning of the world has been HID
IN GOD, See Marlorat in loc.
who CREATED ALL THINGS BY JESUS CHRIST: This (says Calvin) Non tam de prima
creatione interpretari libet, quam de instauratione spirituali; circumstantia
enim loci postulat ut de renovatione intelligamus, quae continetur in beneficio
redemptionis: That is, This creation of all things by Jesus Christ, is not so
much to be understood of the first creation of the world, as of the
instauration and renovation, or new Gospel-state of things, into which God has
put them by Jesus Christ. So the next verse unavoidably carries the sense, ver.
10, 11. To the intent that NOW unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places, MIGHT BE MADE KNOWN by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, according
to the eternal purpose which he PURPOSED IN CHRIST JESUS our Lord What, did not
the Angels know the Mysteries of the first creation till the days of the
Gospel? O^ are they instructed by the Church in the Mysteries of the first
Creation? Are Christians (as such) so great natural Philosophers, as that
Angels may come and learn of them? The sense therefore is plainly thus; That in
the days of the Gospel there is a quite new Model, and new constitution of
things, by virtue of the Mediatorial Kingdom which Jesus Christ has received
of his Father; and much of this the Angels learn from the Church: Who
therefore, but a rank Legallist, will study Jesus Christ.

I come now to the application of the Character. The application of the
Character first to the discovery of partial Legality.


And here I shall somewhat alter my method which I used in the application of
the other Characters; for here I shall begin with the discovery of partial
Legality, which may be found in the Saints from this Character, and afterward
come to predominant Legality from it. First of all then, Is our
New-Testament-Faith to act so much upon Jesus Christ, yea upon him immediately
for all things, for pardon, for strength of Grace, for temporal deliverances,
etc? Then these Saints are much too blame, and greatly guilty of Legality, that
go to God without Christ in any measure: If men go to God in the daves of the
Gospel, and where the Gospel has been preached (...) for I have to do with
none other at this time) I say, if such men go to God without Christ
altogether, they are not Saints at all, cannot be Saints, (of these I shall
speak ^non.) But there are a generation of Saints, and perhaps the greatest
number, who do truly believe in Christ, that yet go to God without Christ in a
great measure; they are Christians Doctrinally, but yet they are not well
versed, nor practiced enough in treating with Christ, and with God through
Christ: but make their immediate applications to God almost in every prayer, in
every act of Faith; they cannot speak in a Gospel Dialect; but are as if they
were still living in the days of the Old Testament, where, that a man feared
and believed in God, was his great character of Saintship. Nay, I would
adventure to make this censure of hundreds of Christians, that are good and
holy men; that, were it not for the doctrine of satisfaction to the Justice of
God which has an hold upon them, they do not discover wherein they have any
need or use of Jesus Christ at all either as King, or Prophet of his people,
though indeed they will consent unto all these things when they are preached;
and therefore in charity must be conceived to have that respect unto Christ which
is necessary, even in these particulars also; and I think many Ministers are
greatly to blame (who are otherwise good men) in that they preach no more of
Christ unto their people: That this is Legality where it is found, I think
there is no need of further proof, this character sufficiently convinces of
it; yet I shall in searching out this distemper, viz. Ignorance, and neglect of
Christ, both in Ministers and People, prove it to be a symptom of Legality
from another character mentioned.

And truly I cannot guess what should be the reason of this ignorance and
neglect of Christ so general and common, even amongst those that are good, but
from a listlesness and irksomness to, and weariness of the ways and knowledge
of God. Good people may (chance) think that they know a great deal of God
already, they know enough for their converse between man and man, and for many
duties of worship to God, and they find this as much as they can attend,
together with their businesses and employments in the world, and so much they
know of Christ that he died for their sins, and intercedes with his Father for
them, and this is enough to satisfy them; what should they trouble themselves
any more about any Gospel Mysteries concerning Jesus Christ, as his Mediatorial
Kingdom and the like, how God the Father orders and disposes of all things by
him, how they are to make their applications to him. Now this listlesness and
carelessness, I made before a plain symtom of Legality; for the more Evangelical
we are, the more cheerful we are in the service of God; the more attentive to,
and inquisitive about any thing that he makes known to us, especially
concerning Jesus Christ; every dust of this Pearl is precious.

I come in the second place to condemn predominant Legality from this
Character; Predominant Legality discovered from this Character 1. In the Jews.
and this will convince two or three sorts of men of predominant Legality: And
first of all, to be sure this convinces the Jews of predominant Legality, both
those that were at the time of Christ's coming, and have been ever since unto
this day, for that they denied then, and still deny to receive Christ at all:
If they had been Evangelical under the Old Testament, they would gladly have
received Christ, who is the substance and spirit of all that Gospel which they
had but darkly discovered in their dispensation. They that love the dawnings of
the daylight, how much more would they be in love with the Sun of
Righteousness? but because their hearts were set upon the Law before Christ
came, therefore were they such enemies to Christ when he was come; and there is
no clearer proof of the charge which the Apostle oftentimes draws up against
them, viz. That they were legal, than this, that they are the great enemies of
the cross of Christ; and the same may be all applied to the present Jews that
are enemies to Christ.

2dly, This discovers the Legality of the Modern Scribes and Pharisees, and
Zelotical Ceremonialists (as Dr. Moore calls them; those that are so much for
the externals of Religion in the days of the Gospel; that would set up a
ceremonial Law again of their own inventing; these argue their great affected
ignorance of Christ, and the Gospel, by which these shadows are certainly done
away, for that the Body is come; and this I look upon as a very shrewd sign
(though perhaps not absolutely concluding) of predominant Legality. But of
these I have spoken largely already, and therefore shall not enlarge further
about them, though they come here upon a new account to be convinced and
reproved.

Lastly, (and so I shall end my Characters as I begun them, vide page 117. the
second observation premised to the Characters) All those that have a zeal for
God in the days of the Gospel, and yet are not for a single Christ, and for
the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, are legal; for that all Religion which
is not the right Religion, is Legal. The Jews corrupted the Gospel by adding
the observations of the Law to it: The Greeks and Philosophers destroyed the
Gospel by inventions of worshipping Angels, and other voluntary humilities,
Col. 2.8.18. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and NOT AFTER
CHRIST, ver. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility,
and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
NOT HOLDING THE HEAD; both these forts the Apostle sets himself vigorously
against in several places of his Epistles. Now whosoever shall in a likeness to
either Jew or Grecian Philosopher, go about to destroy the simplieity of the
Gospel, or the simplicity that is in Christ, as it is called, 2 Cor. 11.3. let
him have never so much zeal in his way, is legal; and the reason is this, for
that whosoever goes about to establish his own righteousness, is legal, Romans
10.1, 2, 3. Now all those that destroy the simplicity of the Gospel, and yet
have a zeal for God, go to establish their own righteousness. I have now done
with the Characters

Having discharged now after a sort, these several great parts of my Work;
shown first that the Law could not justify, and that yet men will needs seek
Justification by the Law, and having given the description of their Legality,
what it is formally in it self, as also by the several characters of a Legal
Spirit, wherein it discovers that distemper which is otherwise many times
unsearchable; I hold my self now to be a little at leisure to speak unto some
things in general touching Justification, which I had no sitter place to speak
unto, then this, and will yet (I hope) further conduce unto the clearing and
explaining of the great subject that is before us.

There may be therefore these several questions spoken to about Justification:
1. At what time or times a person is ustified, 2. For what act or acts a person
is ustified. These two questions (the first of which contains several questions
in it) I shall first dispatch, and then speak unto some others that will arise
to be spoken to.

The first Question is this; The first question about justification. At what
time or times is a finner justified?
At what time or times is a sinner justified? This contains these two
questions: 1. Whether or no a sinner be justified from eternity? 2. Whether (if
he be only justified in time) Justification, considered as God's act, be one
or more, that is, be done once for all at his strst Justification, or else
repeated often upon the person justified, according to the exigency of the
person.

For the first Q. Whether Justification be from eternity, or in time?

Now to answer and resolve this Question, 1. I should not have made this
Question at all, but for that some have asserted that we are justified from
Eternity; and I have heard it openly affirmed several times, that Justification
is an immanent act in God, like the eternal generation of the Son. 2. Now for
the actions or acts which we may conceive in Eternity, they either respect God
himself or the Creatures; Those that respect himself, are such as whereby he
understood, loved, and enjoyed himself; and what other soever actions or acts
can be certainly ascribed unto God, with relation to his own Essence, but with
relation to his creatures, no other can be conceived, but in the way of
purposing and decreeing what he would be pleased to do in time; it is very true,
what that Scripture assirms, that known unto God are all his works from the
beginning of he world, Acts 15.18. that is, which he intended to work: But that
God should be said to do any action adextra, that is, without himself, such as
Justification is, which is terminated upon another person, without the compass
of his own Essence, when yet there was nothing but himself in being, is to me a
contradiction. God might indeed in the eternal counsel of his own
uncontrollable Will and Pleasure, PURPOSE to juscifie such and such persons
after he had made them; but what is this to actual Justification? It may be as
well said (in my mind) that the World was created faom eternity, because God
purposed in his Eternal Counsels to create the World, as it can be said that
any were justified from eternity, because God purposed from all eternity to
justify them. Purpose and Decree is one thing, Acting and Performance is
another. 3. I cannot understand any countenance which this opinion has from
Scripture; when the Scripture comes to speak of Justification, it expresses it
self as of an action done in time only, Romans 4.3. What says the Scripture?
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: Ver. 10. How
was it thon reckoned? WHEN he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision; that is, in the time of his
uncircumcision. Abraham is not said to have been justified from eternity, but
upon his actual believing; and this actual believing was in the time of his
uncircumcision. 4. Seeing justification follows only upon Faith, (as the
Scripture tells us) Justification cannot be before Faith: Now Faith is only in
time, therefore Justification was not in Eternity, which was before all time. I
shall trouble my self with no more as to the answer of the first question,
Whether Justification be in Eternity, or in Time?

Now follows the second question; If it be in time, at what time is it? And how
often is it? Once only, or oftener?

Here are two questions more in one, 1. At what time is it? Now for answer;
Seeing that the righteousness of Faith is the righteousness which God alone
accepts unto Justification, therefore Justification commenceth only from the
time of our believing: When was Abraham justified? Why when he believed; that
therefore is the time of Justification, its beginning.

The Question therefore now before us, is only this, Whether this one act of
Justification, which presently follows upon our act of believing, serves for
the justification of our persons as long as we live; or whether there be any
repetition of God's act of Justification upon our persons afterward?

Now for answer to this, which is indeed no contemptible Quest. I say, 1. That
indeed the first act of Justification (when Divine approbation comes upon us,
according to the Law and Statute of the New Covenant, Acts 13.39. That by him
all that believe are justified) putsi us into a state of favor; and (if there
be no intercision in the state, which the Arminians hold there may be) this
first act is the great and famous act that makes us happy and blessed.

But yet 2dly, I hold, that seeing Justification chiefly consists in pardoning
of sins, (according to that Scripture, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you
therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are JUSTIFIED FROM ALL THINGS
FROM WHICH YE COULD NOT BE JUSTIFIED by the Law of Moses) every renewed act of
Pardon is a renewed act of Justification; for though the first act of God's
justifying us, upon our turning to God, do acquit us from all our sins till
that moment; yet every new sin brings a new guilt for which we might justly be
condemned without a new act of justifying grace; and though every new sin does
not put us out of the state of justification, yet it requires a new act of
justifying grace for the continuing the state; and this makes the Advocateship
of Christ necessary to be continued, who, when any Saint commits a sin, he
interposeth with his Father, that, upon his repentance, a pardon may be issued
forth in the Court of heaven for that soul, as to that sin: This I hold
necessary even for every sinful infirmity of any Saint of God; that is, I hold
Christ's intercession and our habitual repentance at least and faith necessary,
chough many times there cannot be actual repentance and faith for pardon, as in
the case of secret and unobserved sins. But yet even in such cases our habitual
and general repentance is necessary, together with Christ's intercession, and a
renewed act of pardon unto our justification I would not be thought to make
this continued justification, which consists in continued pardon, to be of like
cons^teration with the first act of pardouing and justifying grace at first
believing; I only contend for this, That it is true and necessary justification.
And in extraordinary cases the truth of my assertion will be much more
visible; for when any Saint commits such a great sin as (according to the
doctrine of the Remonstrants) makes him no Saint for the time; here must
certainly be repeated a new famous act of Justification (according to their
doctrine as famous as the first was) as well as a new act of conversion, Luke
22.32.

But I need not go to this Supposition of a Saints falling away; for I can show
that this is no absonous or unheard of thing in the Scripture, that
Justification may be repeated even upon a Saint of God that keeps his standing.
See that Scripture in James 2.21. Was not Abraham our father justified by
works, when he had offered up Isaac his son upon the Altar? ver. 22. And the
Scripture was (then) fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness. Now when was this Justification of Abraham
which is here mentioned? Why it was at least thirteen years after Abraham's
first famous Justification; for that was upon his believing that God would give
him a Son; this was upon his offering up the Son after he was given, when he
was grown up to be a stout Lad, and could carry the wood for his father up the
hill. That first act of Justification passed upon him when Abraham himself was
in uncircumoision; this after he and all his family were circumcised: therefore
the act of Justification may be repeated over several times upon the same
person.

And for a little countenance for this from the authority of Authors, Mr Baxter
in his Aphorisms makes mention of a threefold Justification, inchoate,
continued, and sinall, Thesis 59. page 233. Justification is not a momentaneous
act begun and ended immediately upon our believing; but a continued act, which
though it be in its kind complete from the first, yet is it still in doing
till the final Justification at the Judgment day. Page 303. Abraham was
justified long before Isaac was offered; yet Justification being a continued
act, God is still justifying, and the Gospel still justifying, and Abraham's
Justification was not ended before Isaac was offered (nor then neither) and
therefore was then in a proper sense said to be justified when he offered up
Isaac: these latter expressions which I add are full to Mr Baxter's sense in
that place. It is all one in my mind whether we use the word repeated or
continued when we apply them to Justification; for I think an act can be no
otherwise continued but by repetition. The best sim^le of an act continued is a
mathematical Line, which they say is fluxus punctorum, and yet points have no
other continuity but by repetition.

I know a learned man that answers this by distinguishing upon Justification,
telling us that Justification may be taken either for Universal pardon of sins,
which is done at first believing; or else it is taken for divine approbation:
the first (he says) viz. General pardon, is done but once; but acts of
approbation may be frequented, as here they were upon Abraham, and so he said
to be justified twice, though he kept his standing in grace betwixt the two
acts of his Justification. Now I do not deny that there are these two things in
Justification, viz. Pardon and Approbation; but since pardon of particular sins
is often repeated as well as acts of Approbation, therefore methinks
Justification may well be said to be repeated in both these parts of it, though
I always hold that the first act of Universal pardon is the most famous.
Quest. 2. about Iu^ification; For what ^cts wear justified.
So much for the first Question about the time of Justification.

Now for the second Question proposed, which was this: For what act or acts is
a person justified? I answer first generally, for the acts of faith primarily;
for the other good actions or good works secondarily; but more particularly I
shall answer first negatively: Negatively. A man is not justified only for that
act of faith which respects the death and blood of Christ.
A man is not justified only for that act of faith which respects the death and
blood of Christ; and the reason is evident, for that Justification in the
Scripture is applied to other acts of faith besides this. Abraham was justified
for his faith in the power of God, that he would give him a Son when he and
Sarah were both old. Romans 4.16, 17, 18. Who against hope believed in hope, that
he might become the Father of many Nations; ver. 21. Being fully persuaded that
what he had promised he was ABLE also to perform; and THEREFORE it was imputed
to him for Righteousness. So again, there was another justifying act of his
faith, when he being commanded of God offered up his son Isaac, that is, did as
good as offer him up; showed his true willingness and readiness to it, the
knise was at his Son's throat, and this act of faith is said to be imputed to
him for righteousness, Jam. 2.23. Now neither of these acts of faith are said
to be in the blood of Christ, and yet are said by the Scripture to be
justifying acts.

If it be objected that these acts of Abraham's faith had respect to Christ who
was the promised seed, as well as Isaac; Object. Abraham's faith had respect to
Christ.
and that his sacrificing Isaac showed his faith in the sacrifice of Christ.

I answer: 1. I deny not but Abraham saw Christ's day by faith and rejoiced. 2.
How far Abraham saw Chrift's death and offering I cannot say: But 3. whatever
was the knowledge or faith of Abraham concerning Christ, these answers are ^at
trivial in the present case: for the Scriptures lay the stress of Gods
approving or justifying Abraham, upon his faith in the power of God, at least
they do openly referr Justification to this faith of his, that God could give
him a Son notwithstanding the deadness of his own body and the deadness of
Sarah 's womb; and then that he was able to raise him from the dead after that
he had offered him up, and so to raise a great Nation out of him. Heb. 19.11.
compared with James 2.21, 23. which was only or especially an act of faith in
the power of God; and these men impertinently carry it to somewhat else, which
is uncertain, if not untrue.

I shall insist only upon one more act of faith which was justifying, and yet
was not chiefly consisting of a respect unto the blood of Christ, if it had
that at all in it; and it is the faith of Noah, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear prepared an Ark to the
saving of his house, BY WHICH he condemned the world and BECAME HEIR OF THE RIG
HTEOUSNESS WHICH IS BY FAITH. Here was a work of Faith in the threatening of a
Flood, and precept of building of an Ark; and the stress of his Justification
is chiefly laid upon his fear of Gods judgments and faithful obedience to the
command of building an Ark, (which proceeded from a firm belief of the
threatening) and BY IT is said to become an heir of the righteousness which is by
faith

I might likewise instance in the act of Rahab's faith, which is said to be
justifying, James 2.8^ seems to have been only this, as appears by the story,
that she received the Spies, and trusted in Gods power for their and her
deliverance; and in the faith of Phineas, who had such a courageous zealous
faith, that he killed a Prince and a Princess at once with his own hand for
committing lewdness; and this is said to be accounted unto him for
righteousness unto all generations for evermore, Psalm. 6.31. but I shall
mention no more. But thus you see that there are other acts of faith unto which
justification is imputed as well as the act of faith in Christ's blood;
therefore that is not the only act of justifying faith as such.

If it be objected, as it may well be, that these are instances of justifying
faith in the days of the Old Testament, when faith in the blood of Christ was
not so necessary, but now that faith in the blood of Christ is necessary, that
is the only justifying act;

I answer, 1. That for those men that are most zealous for the opinion That
faith as directed to the death and blood of Christ is the only act of faith as
justifying, they hold that faith in Christ was as necessary under the Old
Testament unto salvation as it is now; and unto these, I suppose, the instances
of faith as justifying, in other acts prove pertinently enough That faith in
the blood of Christ is not the only act of justifying faith.

2. I affirm, that even in the days of the Gospel other acts of faith justify
besides that by which we have immediate respect to the blood of Christ. I shall
prove this second Assertion by Argument and Scripture: 1. By Argument;

Certainly in the times of the Old Testament, though (I verily believe that)
says in the death and blood of Christ was not necessary to Justification, yet
they had something in their faith that did answer our faith in the blood of
Christ, as perhaps a respect to the mercies of God, and Gods readiness to be
appeased; which readiness in God was manifested by the Sacrifices which he had
appointed. Now I will argue by analogy; If the Jews had some such like object
for their faith as the blood of Christ is to us, and yet were not justified
only by their fixing upon that object, but for other acts of faith, as is
evident in the instances given, then nothing hinders but we may be justified by
other acts of our faith, as well as that in the blood of Christ. I will give
another argument to prove my Assertion somewhat like this: We are commanded in
the Gospel, John 5.23. That all men should honor the Son as they honor the
Father; and wherein did Abraham glorify God, so much as by his strong faith,
Romans 4.20. If therefore our duty be to honor Christ by believing, as ever any
of the ancient Saints honored God the Father, why will not the same faith in
the power of Christ justify, as did when it was placed in the power of God?
which yet I have proved that it did justify.

Now for Scriptures, etc. I shall give several instances of faith in the power
of Christ, or at least in some attribute and excellency of Christ besides his
blood, which justified; Luke 5.18, 19, 20. There was a great faith of the
paralytick man, and his friends, that if he could but come to Christ he should
be healed; and therefore they opened the roof of the house, and let him down
through the tiling in his Couch; and when Jesus saw cheir faith, (that is, of
the sick man and those that brought him) he said unto him, Man, thy sins are
forgiven thee. Here is forgiveness of sins, which is Justification, upon a
faith only to be healed; whether it were in the goodness, or power of Christ,
it was not faith in his blood, for this man was as ignorant of that mystery
(sure) as the Disciples of Christ were, who yet understood little or nothing of
it. Luke 18.33, 34. I shall give but two instances more of this, and they are
expressly of faith in the power of Christ, as doubtless the former instance had
much of this faith in it; it is in Math. 9.28, 29, 30. There are two blind men
healed, and restored to their sight, and that purely upon their faith; which
great mercy coming in upon their faith, was certainly a great token of divine
approbation, though indeed it be not then said that their sins were forgiven
them. Now what is the proper object of their faith at this time? It is the
power of Christ to help them. Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I am able
to do this? They said unto him, Yea Lord; then touched he their eyes, saying,
According to your faith so be it unto you, and their eyes were opened. The last
instance is of the Centurion's faith, which I must needs say I think as
pertinent an instance as either of the two former, for his faith is highly
approved of Christ, I have not found so great faith no not in Israel, as in
this stranger to Israel; and upon it speaks of him and others, that are none of
the children of the Kingdom, that is, not natural Jews, that yet shall go to
heaven before these that are; therefore I doubt not but this was a justifying
faith in the Centurion. Now let us see the compass of this Faith, or wherein it
chiefly manifested it self: Why it was only in this, that Christ was able to
cure his servant of the Palsy, nay he thought that diseases were as much under
the power of Christ to cure, as the Centurions servants were under him to
command; he could make Diseases come and go, as his servants would at his
command, Mat. 8, from the 5. to the 14.

Having given instances of Faith in Christ which justifies, besides Faith in
his blood, I shall give one general proof from a most remarkable Scripture out
of the New Testament, for faith as justifying, which only carries in it a
dependence upon God and Christ in straits, and persecutions, and distresses:
And indeed I must confess, the former instances are not of so full proof to my
particular, (though they are of good use) because til Christ's death, faith in
his blood was not so necessary (if at all necessary) to Justification, as
afterward; but this place which I shall now give, will be beyond all exception;
it is Heb. 10.36, 37, 38. For ye have need of patience -- for yet a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: Now the just
shall live by faith, and if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him. The Hebrews here were under great persecutions for the profession of
the Gospel, and they were somewhat inclined to Apostasy, which here the Author
of this Epistle endeavors to prevent by promises and threatenings; it is but a
little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; it is not
long (says he) ere deliverance will come one way or other, either by the coming
of Christ to judgment, or some temporal deliverance. In Habbakkuk it is, The
Vision is yet for an appointed time, though it tarry, wait for it: And in the
mean time (says the Author of this Epistle) while the Vision tarries, whilst
he that is coming, tarries, wait his coming, and endeavor to support your
selves by faith, for the just shall live by faith; that is, Faith will keep him
alive in straits: The life that I live in the stesh, (says Paul) I live by the
faith of the Son of God: And says Habakkuk, Although the Fig Tree should not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine, etc. (when he describes a Famine)
yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation, Hab.
3.17, 18. This could be done only by such a Faith as the Hebrews are provoked
to live by: This faith (you see therefore) by which the just live, may be as
well a dependence upon the goodness, and providence, and power of God to support
us in, or deliver us out of straits and difficulties, as resting upon the blood
of Christ; and that this living by Faith upon the Power of God, and goodness of
God here spoken of, is an act of justifying-Faith, nothing is plainer, for that
this is the great sentence the Apostle quotes to prove Justification by Faith
out of the Old Testament, Rom 1.17. Gal. 3.11. when yet the occasion upon which
it is delivered by Habbakkuk, chapter 2,4. was much like that of the Hebrews, and
therefore there is more of that place quoted in the Hobrews, than in the Romans
or Galatians. Therefore if the Apostle would prove Justification by Faith out
of this Scripture, he must at least allow it as justifying in that case, in
which it is particularly used in the original place, which was resting upon the
providence of God in a time of danger; therefore resting upon the providence of
God in a time of danger, is an act of Faith as justifying, even in the days of
the Gospel; therefore there are other acts of Justifying-Faith even in the days
of the Gospel, besides that of resting upon the blood of Christ.

2dly, Therefore my great Assertion is, That all acts of true Faith justify,
though there is (I believe) some special excellency in that act which respects
the blood of Christ; but if our Faith be but a right New-Testament-Faith, every
act of it justifies: As under the Old Testament they that had all things that
were essential to an Old Testament Faith, were justified over and over, by
every renewed act of Faith, whether in one kind, or another, in one case, or
another: One man's Faith shows it self in a time of Famine, as Habbakkuk's;
another in imprisonment, as Jonah's and Jeremy's; a third in leaving his
Country when God calls him out, as Abraham's; or in believing he should have a
son born, when it was very unlikely; in believing he should have him again from
the dead after he had killed him with his own hand, which was more improbable;
another's Faith in building an Ark, as Noah's; another in hiding of Spies, etc.
So now (I say) as it was then in the acts of an Old. Testament-Faith, it is in
an answerableness in the days of the New Testament; he whosoever has all the
essentials of a New-Testament-Faith, is justified over and over a thousand
times, according to the renewed acts of Faith, if he believe as the Centurion
did for his servant, or as the woman of Canaan did for her daughter, Matthew.
16.28. or as the blind men did for themselves; as the Hebrews were to do in the
power and goodness of God for their deliverance; or as the Galatians should
have done more in the death and blood of Christ, for they did evacuate the
death of Christ in the way that they went, Gal 2.21. I say, they that exercise
faith in any of these acts, their faith is justifying in every of these acts;
only provided that the Faith be a true New-Testament-Faith, though I may
affirm once for all, That there is no true faith in God, but in the days of
the New Testament (after sufficient information) will prove a Faith in Christ,
and of a right New Covenant strain. We see this proved by the event in the
Apostles days, Acts 13.48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad,
and glorified the Word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed; That is, (says Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase) all they of the
Gentiles that had any care or pursuit of the life to come, the
Gentile-Proselytes, or that were fitly disposed and qualified for the Gospel to
take root in, received the Doctrine of Christ thus preached to them. In his
Annotations upon this verse he tells us, That this was Mr. Mede's conjecture
and that they were already believers. So that their conversion was only this,
That their Faith which before was a Faith in God, now (through that disposition
and readiness that it had in it to embrace all further discoveries of the Grace
of God) turned into a Faith in Christ. Therefore I may say, wherever there is
any act of Faith in God, that act is justifying; and the reason now why every
act of Faith exercised upon one occasion or another, does justify, is this,
for that it is faith in us that is our Gospel-Righteousness; therefore whenever
there is an act of this righteousness exerted, there must echo an act of
Justification from heaven, according to the Law of the New Covenant, which is
sealed with the blood of Christ, that whosoever believes on God that
justifies the ungodly, or on Christ his Son, his Faith is counted to him for
righteousness, Romans 4.5. or he shall not be ashamed, Rom 10.11. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life, John 3.36

As often therefore as thou do any action that does demonstrate this Faith in
God, or Faith in Christ, so often are all thy fins pardoned, so often art thou
highly approved of God, for there are these two things in justification: We see
Abraham was justified twice according to the express words of Scripture; and
there is a third act of his Faith recorded, his going out of his own Country,
to which I doubt not might be accommodated that Scripture (which St. James
only accommodates unto a latter act of Faith, though it was in the original
place spoken upon occasion of a former) that then that Scripture was fulfilled,
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness: And as Abraham was justified twice, yea thrice, and that for
several sorts of acts of faith; and the other instances given both out of the
Old and New-Testaments, for their various acts of Faith upon very different
occasions, yet all because they agreed in the general nature of faith; so thou
Saint, whosoever thou art, do but live in the actings of faith, and thou art an
haypy, pardoned, approved, and juscified person. All our life therefore should
be a life of faith; St. Paul lived no other life; The life (says he) which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the says of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. That distinguishing character, one or more
(says Mr. John Goodwin in his Banner of Justification displayed, p. 37.) of
justifying-saith which we are at present inquiring after, respects not the
object, but the intrinsic nature or complexion of it; for at to the object, it
is variously expressed in the Scripture; sometimes it is called a believing God,
Romans 43. sometimes a believing on God, Joh. 12.44. sometimes a believing on
Christ, or on the Son of God, or on the Lord, Act. 11.17. Ioh 3.18. 1 Ioh.
5.10. So the object is various, only it must be for the intrinsic nature of
it, a believing in the heart, Romans 10.9. a believing with the heart, ver. 10. a
believing with all the heart, Act. 8.37. a faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5^ a faith
working by love; and such a faith justifies in all the acts of it, though
exercised upon disferent, yet proper objects.

Now I find one Caution necessary to be given upon what I have delivered, which
is this; That what I have said of faith, that it justifies in every act of it,
to the procuring pardon of sins, and Divine Approbation, does not at all
confound the acts of Faith, as if there were not a distinctness to be kept and
observed in the actings of Faith; as some may have such a gross conception as
this, because I have said that the Centurion was justified for his faith in
Christ for the healing of his servant, and the woman of Canaan for faith for
her daughter; Abraham for ^ffering his son, and so every man for any act of
true Faith; therefore if a man be to seek for the justification of his person,
let him find out but any thing in which Faith may act, and he shall be
justified.

As for instance, I think it the duty of any that are enlightened concerning the
corruptions of the Church of Chrise, to believe that God will destroy the Papal
Hierarchy, and all the superstitious innovations which the Church of Rome has
introduced into the Worship of God; yea, and I think to believe it strongly at
this time, when there is so great improbability of it, is mighty acceptable to
God, and perhaps another such act of Faith as Abraham's was, that he should
have a son, and as justifying. But now if one that has lived wickedly, but now
is greatly convinced of his danger, as the Jailer was, should ask what he
should do to besaved and justified, it were a strange thing to put him upon
this act of Faith, That God would destroy the Pope of Rome, which yet may be an
act of justifying-faith to another man; We would say to him, as Paul and Silas
did to the Jailer when he asked this question, They said, Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16.30, 31 Believe that the blood of Christ
can wash out as great stains as any of thy sins have made; believe that Christ
is willing to receive thee, cast thy self upon his mercy and goodness. Though
every act of Faith juscifie, yet there is a season for every act of Faith: When
the Centurion had a servant sick, his act of Faith in the power of Christ was
seasonable; the woman's faith for her daughter was seasonable; the blind men's
was seasonable; Abraham's three acts were feasonable; Noah's, and Rahab's, and
that of Phineas, were all seasonable.

Faith is a Divine faculty in the soul, which has great variety of operations,
even as many as the sight has objects, which are commended by the several
seasons and occasions of acting: Faith in famine seeds us, in prison it sets us
at liberty, in weakness of nature it strengthens us, yea and in weakness of
Grace too. Faith sometimes ^ixeth upon the Power of God, sometimes upon the
Wisdom, sometimes upon the Faithfulness of God; sometimes upon one attribute,
sometimes upon another: We may see in Heb. 11. throughout the whole chap. what
variety of glorious operations and effects Faith has had; Through Faith they
subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths
of lions, quenched the violence of fire, out of weakness were made strong,
women received their dead raised to life again, etc. ver. 33. to the end. All
which were justifying acts of Faith, only they were seasonable, and prudent;
he that was cast to the Lions, did not believe to have the sire quenched; and
they that were cast into the fire, did not believe to have the mouths of the
Lions stopped: Every act of faith is justifying; but then faith is as an
universal faculty, which acts according to all the particular occasions of the
soul, and so it justifies:

I shall now add something of testimony out of Dr. More upon this second
question, What acts of Faith justify? because I am very sensible that my
answer to it may seem very strange, and sound very harshly unto some good men;
and I shall prove out of him, so far as his Authority will prove it, That
Abraham's act or acts of faith, which were justifying to him, were acts of
faith in the Power, Justice, and Goodness of God, and that they justify by
such their respect had unto these Attributes, as also, That our Gospel-Faith,
which indeed has many new objects and encouragements offered to it, does
justify only by agreeing with Abraham's faith in the general nature of faith,
or (to use Mr. Goodwins words) in the intrinsic nature and complexion of
Faith, which is ready to lay hold of all occasions of discovering our true and
hearty dependence upon God, acknowledging our own weakness, renouncing all
carnal confidence in any thing short of the omnipotent Power and Goodness of
God. And after these quotations out of him, I shall proceed to some other
questions. In his Mystery of Godliness, p. 379. Faith (says he) which is so
highly commended by the Apostle, I say, it signifies nothing else but this in
general, viz. An high sense of, and considence in the Power, Justice and
Goodness of God, and a firm belief that he will assuredly bring to pass
whatsoever he has promised, seem it never so unlikely and dissicult to flesh
and blood: And this is that which is so highly commended in Abraham, as it is
plain in the 4th. to the Romans, who against hope believed in hope, that he
might become the father of many Nations; and being not weak in faith, he
considered not his own body, now dead, when he was about an hundred years old,
nor yet the deadness of Sardah's womb, being fully persuaded, that what God had
promised, he was ABLE to perform; and therefore (says the Apostle) it was
imputed to him for righteousness. That is to say, God approved of him.

In all this Justification of Abraham, there is not a word of the blood of
Christ; for though I believe it was the blood of Christ that procured Abraham's
pardon (as a price) yet I doubt not but it was Abraham's faith in the power and
faithfulness of God that justified him. Again, page 380: near the end of it:
Thus (says he) from the example of Abraham would the Apostle commend the
CHRISTIAN FAITH unto the World, and in particular to the Jews, the offspring
of Abraham: For at the end of the fourth Chapter he makes this use of Abraham's
faith being imputed to him for righteousness, that we might also be brought
(...) TO BELIEVE IN HIM THAT RAISED UP JESUS CHRIST FROM THE DEAD, who was
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. As Abraham's
faith in the Power of God to give him a son, was justifying; so is our faith in
the Power and Mercy of God (as having raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, who
was delivered for our offenses) justifying. Our faith, viz. the Christian
faith, has somewhat more in it, than was in Abraham's faith; yet Abraham's faith
proving Justification to him, we may well be encouraged to expect Justification
in the way of a Gospelsaith.

And page 381. he gives us another instance of a Gospel-faith, which he
parallels with the faith of Abraham; and that is, A faith in the power of God
to raise up Christ within us by his living Spirit, from the 11th. ver. of Romans
8. which I think is indeed rightly interpreted, though (with the favor of that
great man) not so happily applied; but that I shall speak unto, viz. wherein I
differ from the Dr. upon the next question: The words are these; But if the
Spirit of him that raised up jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit
which dwells in you; and if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of
sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness, ver. 10. His
interpretation of the verse is excellent in my mind, and it is to this sense as
I apprehend it: That when we are Christians, and have the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in us, and the presence of Christ by his Spirit, we shall be sensible
how far yet we remain unsanctified, and that unsanctified part in us which the
Apostle calls the body of death, and desires to be delivered from, will appear
as ghastly and deadly a thing to us, as the dead body tied by Mezentius to the
living, did to him, because Christ is living in us: But yet now our Christian
faith teaches us to believe, that though the body be dead because of sin, that
is, there be a great part of us yet unsanctified and dead because of sinful
remainders in it, and by reason of this unsanctified part or body of death in
us, we are exceeding heavy and indisposed to all holiness and goodness, yet
that the Spirit of Christ in us is life and righteousness, and will by degrees
qvicken those very dead, unsanctified parts that are yet within us; for if the
Spirit of him that raised up Christ from the dead, dwell in us, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal hodies (that is, that
unsanctified part that is at present dead in sin) by his Spirit which dwells
in us. Dr. More's words are, We finding a comfortable warmth in the grateful
arrivals of the holy Spirit, do believe, That he that raised up Christ from the
dead, will in due time even quicken these our mortal bodies, or these dead
bodies of ours, and make them conspire and come along with ease and
cheerfulness, and be ready, and active complying instruments in alll things
with the Spirit of Righteousness. Which belief, viz. that God will thus by his
Spirit quicken our mortal bodies, is (says he) a chief point in the Christian
faith and most of all parallel to that of Abraham's, who believing in the
goodness, and power, and faithfulness of God, had, when both himself and his
Wife Saraah were dry and dead, as to natural generation, and so hopeless of
ever seeing any frui^ of her Womb, who had, I say, Isaac born to him who bears
joy and laughter in the very Name o^ him, and was undoubtedly a type of Christ
according to the spirit. For Isaac is the wisdom, power, and righteousness of
God, flowing our and effectually branching it self so through all the faculties
both of man's soul and body, that the whole man is carried away with joy and
triumph to the acting all whatsoever is really and substantially good, even
with as much satisfaction and pleasure as he eats when he is hungry, and drinks
when he is dry. And these now (according to the design of the Dis Discourse)
are acts of a Gospel-faith, which justify us, as Abraham's believing in the
power of God for a Son did justify him. I come now to another Question, which
is this:

How does Faith justify? The fifth question of Justification
or under what notion and consideration does faith justify?

Now to this I answer, that Faith justifies as our Righteousness. It does not
justify, as some affirm, only by relying upon the blood of Christ, or
apprehending the righteousness of Christ; for I have given instances of several
acts of faith which were justifying acts, that had not this respect at all unto
the blood of Christ, at least not visibly, and the reward of Justification was
reckoned to them upon other accounts. Abraham was fully persuaded that God was
ABLE TO PERFORM, and THEREFORE it was imputed to him for righteousness, Romans
4.21, 22. Yea, I have given instances of a faith in Christ that was justifying,
and yet was not directed to the blood of Christ, by any thing that appears in
the Scriptures quoted. No, faith it self is our righteousness; faith in the
power of God was Abraham's righteousness; and faith in the power of God,
according as our necessities at any time require, will be our righteousness.
But more especially, faith in the power of Christ, or in the blood of Christ,
is our Gospelrighteousness; though, as I affirmed before, there cannot be true
faith in God now in the days of the Gospel, but it will turn into a faith in
Christ as well as in God.

And for this Assertion, that Faith is our Righteousness, I shall give several
Scriptures; Romans 4.3. What says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it
was counted to him for righteousness: that is, his believing in God, and
relying upon his power and faithfulness for the fulfilling of his promise; this
faith of his was accepted so far, was so highly pleasing to God, that God made
him his friend, Jam. 2.22, 23. and reputed and reckoned him (through grace) as
righteous as if he had kept the whole Law. So Romans 4. ver. 5. To him that
believes in God, that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness; What plainer expression can there be than this for our
Assertion? his faith is counted for righteousness to him, or for his
righteousness.

And for a little proof from the testimony of others, for this Assertion (I
reckon) is somewhat harsh, see what Mr Baxter and Mr John Goodwin say upon it.

In his Aphorisms of Justification, Thesis 20. page 108. says Mr Baxter, Our
Evangelical righteousness is not without us in Christ, as our Legal
righteousness is, but consists in our own actions of Faich and
Gospel-obedience. Thesis 23. page 125. In this sense also, it is so far from
being an error, to affirm that faith it self is our righteousness, that it is
a truth necessary for every Christian to know; that is, Faith is out
Evangelical righteousness in the sense before explained, as Christ is our Legal
righteousness. And in the explication of this Thesis, page 128. he has these
words: Our Evangelical righteousness, or Faith, is imputed to us for as real
righteousness, as perfect obedience, not that it is as much in true value, yet
it is so accepted because of the value of Christ's satisfaction. Thesis 57.
page 225. It is the act of faith which justifies men at age, and not the habit;
yet not as it is a good work, or as it has in it self any excellency above
other graces: But 1. in the nearest sense, directly and properly as it is the
fulfilling the condition of the new Covenant: in the remote and more improper
sense, as it is the receiving of Christ, and his satisfactory righteousness.

Mr John Goodwin likewise declares himself not to be of their mind, who
conceive or teach, That faith justifies as it is an instrument receiving
Christ's righteousness, page 38. ult. Banner of Justification: therefore it
must justify as an act, which by God's ordination investeth us in the
privileges of Justification; therefore in his judgment faith it self is our
righteousness.

But I shall add no more in answer to those men that hold, That Faith
justifies only as it applies the righteousness or blood of Christ unto the
soul; for I have shown at large above, That faith justifies in other acts of
it, besides resting upon the blood of Christ. I shall have only here to do with
Dr More his Notion (and it is Mr Smith's too) of the righteousness of Faith, or
Faith its being reckoned or imputed for righteousness: and indeed I am very
sorry that I should have a word to say against the opinion of so worthy a man,
and one that labor; so vigorously and successfully against all that effeminacy
of notion in Religion which is found amongst the Antinomians, or others.
Neither yet do I much differ from him in design; only I cannot be faithful to
my present subject, if I should not take notice of his unhappy mis-interpreting
those phrases of the Righteousness of faith, Justification, and Faith's being
impu^^td for Righteousness. I shall first give an account of the Doctor's
opinion, and expressions in this business, and then show the reasons of my
dissent from him herein. [In the 380 page of that book, which I have so often
quoted, to borrow some authority and assistance from in this Discourse, I mean
his Mystery of Godliness, at the end of that page the Doctor commenting upon
Romans 4.24, 25. To believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification,
has these words: In this verse are contained the two grand Privileges of the
Gospel; that is, Forgiveness of sins upon the satisfaction of Christ's death,
and the Justifying of us, that is, THE MAKING OF US JUST AND HOLY, THROUGH A
SOUND FAITH IN HIM THAT RAISED JESUS FROM THE DEAD. I need quote no more to
show the Doctor's notion, and apprehension of the whole business; but yet I
shall ex abundanti quote some other passages. The Doctor you see is of opinion,
That Justification signifies making us just, holy, and righteous; and when we
are made so, then God looks upon us as so, because he judges of things aright;
and because Faith makes us truly holy, inwardly just and righteous, therefore
this righteousness, by which we are thus inherently righteous, is called The
Righceousness of Faith. For this see page 379. about the middle of it: Abraham
being not weak in faith, considered not his own body now dead, being fully
persuaded that what God had promised him he was able also to perform; and
therefore (says the Apostle) it was imputed to him for righteousness, that is
to say. God approved of him FOR A GOOD AND PIOUS MAN, who not confulting with
the natural improbability of the thing, but giving firm credence to the promise
of God, did that which was due to the goodness and power of God, and BECOMEING
A GOOD AND RIGHTEOUS MAN. So that (...), is NOTHING ELSE but to be approved as
a good man, or a doer of that which is righteous and good, and that because he
does that which is good and righteous. And afterward in the same page, (...)
signifies any virtue or goodness in a man whatsoever, with much more to the
same purpose. And at last adds in page 372. Sect. 9. This is the only
warrantable notion that I can find of being justisied by faith.

So, Mr Smith of Cambridge (as I show above) page 220. says, that (...) and
(...), the Righteousness of Faith and the Righteousness of God is only a
Christ-like nature in man's soul, etc.

Having given an account of the Doctor's judgment, I shall now show in how many
things I agree with the Doctor as to this business, and then where I conceive
there needs some rectification of the Doctor's notion: And first of all, I
confess these are two GRAND PRIVILEGES of the Gospel (as the Doctor says)
viz. The forgiveness of sins and The sanctification of our natures; which
latter the Doctor (as I doubt not) mistakes to be meant by the word
Justification in Romans 4.25.

2. I acknowledge, that true Sanctification is produced only by faith;
purifying their hearts by faith, Acts 15 9. no other principle will work
holiness in the soul. The Law made nothing perfect, as to inward holiness.

3. I grant, that if true Sanctification should be wanting from Faith, that
Faith would not be a righteousness, would not justify; Faith without works is
dead.

4. I allow that Works have some share, perhaps a second place, in the matter
of Justification continued; so says Mr Baxter often, and I think so says St
James, Jam. 2.24. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only.

5. I allow that Justification is attributed several times in Scripture to a
Work, the Faith not mentioned, though the Faith is understood, nay the chief
honor belongs to faith, and the crown is to be set upon Faith's head, if we
wili make a strict and right interpretation of that Scripture whatever it be.
Thus the act of Phineas in killing Zimri and Cosbi is reckoned for
righteousness, and yet no mention of his faith, Psalm. 6.30, 31. Then stood up
Phineas and EXECUTED JUDGMENT, and so the plague was stayed, and IHAT was
counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore. So very
many of the actions in Hebr. 11. which are there by the author of that Epistle
reckoned to be the actions of Faith, and in several places of that Chapter said
to be imputed for righteousness, verses 4, 5, 7. yet in the original places,
where their stories are recorded, not a word mentioned of their faith: Compare
Abel's history, Genesis 4.4. with Heb. 11.4. compare Enoch's, Genesis 5.24. with Heb.
11.5. Noah's, Genesis 6.13, 22. with Heb. 11.7, etc. There is not a word mentioned
of their faith in Genesis, but only of their works, and yet their faith in
those works is plainly said by the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews to be
a justifying faith; Justification is indeed attributed to works, the faith not
mentioned. And so sometimes pardon of sins and eternal life are promised to
other graces besides faith, Acts 3.19. Math. 5. from ver. 3. to ver. 11. for
these two reasons: 1. For that they have a share, or a second place in the
matter of Justification; but 2. and especially, For that they necessarily
suppose faith as being the fruits and issues of a true and lively faith.

Yea. 6. I will allow that (...) Righteousness, in the New Testament, yea and
in St Paul's Epistles signifies Holiness, Romans 6.13 18, 20. and that (...)
signifies to be just, Rev. 22.11. (...), He that is righteous let him be
righteous still: which two places the Doctor makes use of for proof. But that
(...) or (...) should have these significations, where the Apostle is strictly
speaking to the business of Justification, I can by no means allow, yea I think
it most abhorrent from the Apostles design: in this business, what says the
Apostle, Romans 3.11. (...) there is none righteous, no not one: here the
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. There is no
other righteousness takes place here.

And to rip up the whole business again, which here I am put upon by the
Doctor's assertion; and interpretations, though otherwise I might have gone on
smoothly in my way.

First of all, surely the Doctor will not deny that Justification and
Sanctification have different proper conceptions and notions, which they are to
be understood by; that Justification is God's pardoning our sins, and receiving
our persons into special love and favor, that Sanctification is a man's
likeness to God in his heart and life; or if the Doctor should deny this, there
are several places will evidence it. I shall name but two; Acts 13.38, 39. Be
it know: unto you therefore, Men and Brethren, that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and by him all that BELIEVE are
justified FROM ALL THINGS, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses: That is, (says Dr Hammond) shall certainly be freed and purged from the
wrath of God, and the punishments attending sin in another world, from which
the Law of Moses could not by all its Ceremonies, Washings, and Sacrifices,
purge or cleanse us. The other Scripture shall be that in Janes 12.24. Ye see
then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only. Take
Justification here for sanctification, and let any one see if he can make sense
of it; nay it is plain in that Chapter that Justification is taken for being
highly approved of God, and being made the friend of God, ver. 25. And the
Scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness; and then (as it were exegetical of that expression)
it is added, he was called the friend of God: But I know the Dr will allow of
the particular without this proof, That Justification and Sanctification have
these different and proper conceptions mentioned.

2dly, Certainly the Dr. will allow that the Apostle Paul has a mighty
vigorous and curious Discourse concerning Justification, in its proper notion,
or its foreusal acception, as the Dr himself expresses it page 379. ad finem.
The Apostle forms a professed Discourse, nay a Dispute with the Jew and
Judaizing-Gentile, upon the business of Justification, taken for Divine
approbation; they thought to obtain the favor of God one way, but he shows
them another. These two particulars I shall take for granted. Now I proceed.

3dly, The Apostle therefore being to remove one way of Justification, viz.
that of the Legallist, and to set up another, he makes mention of two
Righteousnesses, one of the Law, the other of Faith: That of the Law, as I have
showed in the beginning of this Treatise, is a perfect conformity to the Law,
perfect inherent righteousness, unerring obedience; this (says the Apostle) no
man has, (...), there is none righteous, no not one; and the Apostle in that
third chap. of the Romans by enumerating all sorts of sins which we are all more
or less guilty of, proves that no man can be jus^^ed by the Law; this
righteousness therefore the Apostle having fully removed, as an impossible
unattainable thing, he (as a Messenger from heaven, substitutes another
righteousness, which he calls Gods Righteousness, in opposition to our own; the
righteousness of God is revealed, that is, that righteousness which God will
accept; and what is that? why it is Faith: The righteousness of God is revealed
from Faith to Faith; as it is written, The Just shall (...) ^aith, Romans 1.16.17.

The scope of the Apostles Discourse (I doubt not) is this, That God has
designed and determined, that, seeing men have lost their Original purity, and
to can no longer stand upon their own bottom, he will take them off from it
altogether, and make them live a life of pure dependence upon himself, and that
is by faith, which must have holiness of life attending it; and those that come
off to do this, renounce themselves, their own righteousness, and all
creature-dependencies, and roll themselves, and all their concerns, upon him,
and upon his Son, though their imperfections may be (...), yet this their faith
shall be imputed to them ^^r righteousness, which they may plead for their
^^tilication, according to the Law of the new Covenant, and they shall pass for
righteous men, as truly justified and approved, as if they had perfectly kept
the whole Law, under which they were created, especially since God had made
provision otherways, how the honor of that Law might receive r^^^ation, viz. by
the death of his Son upon the Cross.

And this I suppose is no santastical notion of Justification by Faith, which I
suppose the Dr. is chiefly set against; and seeing how many wayer men had
corrupted the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, after he had solidly confuted
their opinions, betakes himself to that of his own, which I dare say had no
evil intention, though I still affirm that it is most unhappily expressed, and I
cannot but read it with a great displeasure and indignation.

For to think that the Apostle should make so much to do to decry the design of
a legal Righteousness, which in truth was no other in it self but true and
real, only it must be) perfect holiness, (however the Legallists all along in
their pursuit after the Righteousness of the Law, minded nothing less) I say,
for the Apostle to dispute so vigorously against a Righteousness by perfect
unerring obedience, under the name of one's own righteousness, and to set up
Faith as Gods righteousness, and yet that this righteousness of says should
signify nothing else but those poor inconsiderable effects of Faith in
holiness of life, which the greatest part of Christians attain unto only, this
seems a mean business for the Apostle to labor about: Alas, it is true, Faith
works holiness, and all the great Legallists shall never attain by all their
stir and ado, to so much true holiness as the meanest believer attains unto;
but yet this which we attain, though by faith, is nothing to give name to a
righteousness in the sight of God, for Justification; to be justified by, or
for our holiness of faith, is a low and base expression of
Gospel-Justification. The righteousness of Faith is an higher thing, when a man
comes off from himself, and from all Creature-dependencies, and professes to
live upon the Power, and Goodness, and Faithfulness of God, and the blood and
spirit of Christ alone, such a man has made God himself his righteousness, and
Christ his righteousness; and this is a glorious righteousness indeed, far
beyond the righteousness of a perfect and unerring obedience, if a man had it;
for this see one proof out of the Old Testament, and one or two out of the New;
Isa. 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and
strength, even to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him,
shall be ashamed, in the Lord shall all the Seed of Isral be JUSTIFIED, and
SHALL GLORY. For the New Testament I have often mentioned already that place,
Gal. 2.20. yet it can never be too often repeated: I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live; yet not I (or no longer!) but Christ lives in me, and the
(...) that I now l^ve in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
lived me, and gave himself for me. Here St. ^aul had a glorious righteousness
indeed, for Christ was his riches and righteousness, and dwelt in him by Faith;
that is, he lived upon Christ by faith; it is true, he had a Christ-like nature
in his soul, but this Christ-like nature was not the righteousness of faith, or
the righteousness of God, or his Gospel-righteousness, but a fruit of that
Faith which was his righteousness. All other glorying is excluded in the
Gospel, save cr^ely to glory in the Lord, Rom 3.27. 2 Cor. 1.30, 31. Of him are
ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousnes^y --
that according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

Now this making God and Christ a man's righteousness, is that alone which
commends the Gospel so highly above the Law, sets up he second Adam above the
first, and gives a just account of all those Elogies which the Apostle gives of
the Gospel, and the way of believing, above the first way of works, which I
suppose out of Dr Moor's notion would not arise at all; For though the Drs
notion should be true, which I confess there is no contradiction in, and I have
delivered some things above, p 218 and 219. but a little too much in favor of
it I would have that expression p. 219. (...) shall say something to the like
purpose; understood only thus: Tha sanctification is the condition of our
justification only in the second place, faith in the first.
I say, suppose the D^^ notion should be true, That faith justifies us purely,
because it sanctifies us; and that the holiness which arises from faith, should
be that which is called the Righteousness of Faith; yet how could this ever
advance the Gospel above the Law in the business of Justification: If we take
the Law, not in the mistaken sense of the Legallist, but in the proper sense of
it? For so the righteousness of the Law is unerring obedience, and the
righteousness of Faith: in the D^s sense) is obedience full of defects: Now
comparing obedience with obedience, and the righteousness of Faith with the
righteousness of the Law, how can the righteousness of Faith be preferred to
the righteousness of the Law? How can the second Adam in the holiness which he
causes, be advanced above the first in his earthly righteousness? That
therefore which make the excellency and precedence of the Gospel to the Law, is
this, that the righteousness of the Law was one's own, this of Faith makes God
himself, and Christ himself our righteousness, by our living wholly upon them.
I have said as much as I intend, to the Dr.s notion of the righteousness of
says; and I do cordially profess, That what I have spoken has been merely out
of love to the truth; and if the truth had not engaged and enforced me to
deliver what I have, I should not have presumed to encounter counter such a
great man, being my self not worthy to carry the Doctors books after him. And I
know the Doctors candor and ingenuity to be so great, that he will give others
leave as freely to differ from him as he takes to differ from others.

I shall shut up this Question with a grave admonition out of Mr John Goodwin,
in his Banner of Justification displaied, page 32. That Faith justifies (says
he) is the constant assertion of the Scripture, and the Architectonical
doctrine of the Gospel, Romans 5.1, 3, 28. Gal. 2.15.16. By the way, upon
occasion of these (with many the like passages in the New Testament, wherein
Justification by faith is (...) expressly affirmed) I cannot but mention my
dislike of their strein in teaching, who lay down and deliver it to the people
for a doctrine positively and plainly, That men are not justified by says or
by believing. Douotless it is not convenient or comely, positively to deliver
or assert that for a doctrine of truth, which is so diametrally opposite to
(...) frequent, clear, and express words of the Scripture. And again, I judge
it very incongruous for any Minister of the Gospel to se^ up a doctrine as it
were, in defiance of, or in con^^st against any thing so frequently and so
directly in terminis affirmed in the Scriptures, as Justification by faith. I
do not ^^^^uce this quotation to infirmate, as if the Doctor did not hold that
we are justified by the acts of faith as well as by any other good actions, but
for that I am sensible the Doctor intends that we are not more justified by the
acts of faith than by any other good actions; which if it were true, I could
not see how faith could be worthy of so famous attributious of justification to
it, in such an eminent manner, when the Apostle is silent about other graces,
only here and there in some places, where there is no such professed dispute,
he speaks word^ in Tayor of other graces and good works in the matter of
justification.

I tome now to a fifth Question, which is this:

How do good works justify?

And in answer to this I must first premise, That seeing the Scripture is so
express in it, that works to justify, Jam. 2.25. Ye see then how that by works
a man is justified, and (...) by says only; I dare not pass over this Question
without speaking to it. But I shall need to speak the less to this, because Mr
Baxter and others have delivered so much upon it. I shall first show the
agreement which there is betwixt St Paul and St James in this business, and
then show how works justify.

It Is true, St Paul assirms Romans 3.28. chat we are justified by faith without
the deeds or works of the Law. St James says, that we are justified by works
and not by faith only; here seems to be a jarring and disagreement. But they
are to be reconciled by the observation of the several sorts of works that
these two Apostles speak of. St Paul speaks of legal works or works of the Law,
which contain in them an opinion of merit or debt, as I have shown above, page
97, 98. and a man is justified without these, nay he cannot be justified if he
but pretend to these. Therefore the Apostle James must speak of another sort of
works, which, whilst a man does he yet renounces merit in them; and these
works a man may be in part justified by, without any prejudice to the doctrine
of Justification by faith. This is fully asserted by Mr Baxter, Thesis 76. page
292. Neither is there (says he) the least appearance of a contradiction
betwixt this and Paul's doctrine Romans 3.28. if men did not through prejudice,
negligence, or wilfulness overlook this; that in that and all other the like
places the Apostle does professedly exclude THE WORKS OF THE LAW ONLY from
Justification, but never at all THE WORKS OF GOSPEL as they are the condition
of the New Covenant.

Works therefore justify as a less principal part of the condition of the New
Covenant: I am not shy to speak in Mr Baxter's words, since I intend much the
same thing; they do not justify from their own merit; so only legal works
justify, but from divine promise and acceptance. For proof of this that it is
so, that works do justify in the second place, besides the express words of
the Apostle James, I find the same thing asserted by the Apostle Paul in three
several Scriptures. Dr Hammond Par. All that is required to our justification
is faith, not all that is called by that name, but such as is made perfect by
addition of those duties which we owe to God and our brethren.
Gal. 5^ In Jesus Christ, (that is, in the doctrine of Jesus Christ) neither
circumcision avails any thing (that is, unto Justification) (...)
uncircumcision, but faith whi^^ works by Love. Here faith indeed is said to
justify, but it is a faith which works by love, a working faith. But yet
more plainly the same expression is used in two places to our present purpose;
Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature; that is, (says Dr Hammond) the renewed
regenerate heart, and it may be added a new life. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in
Christ he is a now creature; old things are past away, behold all things are
become new; that is, he lives a perfect new life, and this new life only
avails, unto Justification beyond circumcision or uncircumcision which are
mere external Privileges. The third Scripture where the same expression is
used is beyond all exception to our present purpose: 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision
is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing, these are of no consideration in the
matter of pleasing God, and obtaining his favor; What then is? why the keeping
the commandments of God; this is beyond all these considerations of bond and
free, circumcised and uncircumcised. But these are the things with which he
compares the new creature and good works: he does not set these above all, when
he compares them with faith; in that place where he mentions faith, that is set
above works and other graces, as the cause above the effect, the principal
agent above the instrument; Neither circumcision avails any thing nor
unc^r^umb^sion, but faith which WORKS BY LOVE. But in these Scriptures we see
plainly that work have an influence upon our Justification; they are of great
avail in order unto it.

If it be objected that the first Justification passes upon believing before
works, I answer, with many others, that there is in the first faith a rooted
disposition unto an universal obedience, there is the new creature or new man
of the heart there, and in continued justification there is the new man of the
life and conversation.

Now the reasons why the Lord would have works in the condition of
Justification, though he does not justify for works only or chiefly, may be
gathered out of the Scripture to be these:

The first reason is this, Reas. Why works are in the condition of Gospel
justification.
For that without works faith it self cannot be accounted a perfect says. Now
certainly if faith justify, it must be a perfect complete faith, not a maimed
imperfect faith. That without works faith is imperfect, and by works it is
perfected, are the assertions of the Apostle James, Faith without works is
dead. James 2.20, 26 and ver. 22. See th^^ how faith wrought with his works,
and by works was his faith made perfect. What an uselets imperfect dead thing
is a power or faculty for action without operation? What an useless thing would
it be for a man to have eyes able to see, only the man has a continual blind
put before his eyes that he never does see in all his life? Why just such a
thing were faith withour action, of no worth or use: What an imperfect faith
had Abraham's been if his works and actions had not attended it? Suppose we
that when God commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac, he had refused, and said,
Lord how then shall there arise of him a great Nation? his faith had been
exceedingly discredited: But when he resolves with himself, I will offer him
up, for I know that God that raised him out of Sarah's dead womb can as well
raise him from the dead after I have killed him and offered him up, here was a
noble faith indeed, his faith was perfected by this work; here that grace
showed what it could carry men unto; When any thing attains its end it receives
its perfection: Here faith attained its end in carrying Abraham to do so great
a work, and therein was perfected, and so obtained the complete reward of
Justification; then the Scripture was fulfilled which says Abraham believed
God: if works had not accompanied his faith, it had proved but an imperfect
dead faith, the Scripture had not been fulfilled which faith Abraham believed
God. No artificer will own any thing to be a true and perfect piece of work
which will not attain it is end, serve the use it is made for; so will not God
own that to be faith which will not put us upon acts of confidence in himself,
and obedience to his commands be they never so difficult. For though God knows
the heart, and so can see into the very principle of our actions, yet the Lord
is pleased to keep that distance of State and Majesty, that he will not seem to
know what he does know, till the outward man express what is in the inward man.
God knew before what was in Abraham's heart, but yet he will not seem to know
that he was so great a believer, till he had put him upon this trial of
offering up his son; Gen 22.12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou
have not with-he^^ ^hy son thine only son from me. Now I confess, what is here
said of works in this reason, That faith receives it is perfection from them,
can only, properly and immediately be applied to the works of faith, to other
works only remotely, as faith may have some kind of influence even upon all
good works, but however we see that faith is not perfect without some kind of
works. That is the first reason, Faith it self would be an imperfect thing
without works, and so could not justify.

The second reason why works are taken into the condition of Justification is,
Reason 2.
For that it were neither comely no nor possible for divine approbation (which
I have often affirmed to be contained in Justification) to pass upon any man
without them. I put these two into one: 1. It were not comely; What a strange
thing would it be in the apprehensions of men, if the great and holy God should
own a company of persons in the world for his (for certainly whom he justifies
he will own for his) that should only be (though they really were) believers,
but never do any service for him? Neither plead for his honor when he is
blasphemed, nor own his servants when they are in reproach and distressed? Not
to mention their negative holiness, which lies in avoiding the corruptions of
the world; without which negative holiness, if God should own them, he would be
thought the Patron of all Vice, etc. but I dare not express the uncomly
consequences that would follow. Now besides the impossibility that arises from
this uncomliness, there is also an impossibility that arises from the nature
of the thing, and that was the second thing I intended in this reason. I say
therefore it is impossible that God should approve of any person as just, or
take him into his favor and delights (all which the Lord does in the great
business of Justification) that is not a good and a righteous man. God cannot
justify the ungodly whilst he remains ungodly; he cannot love him, nor
delight in him, nor approve of him, because then he should approve of and
delight in that which were contrary to his own nature, viz. in a sinful wicked
person, being himself an holy God.

3. Reason 3.
Good works do not justify only negatively, as without which faith would not
be perfect, and without which the object could not be beloved; but good works
do help justify, as that which (after the intervention of mercy and pardon) do
render the object lovely to the holy God, and do naturally conciliate the
divine love and approbation. It Is true, all our obedience, while it is any way
defective, cannot constrain approbation and love from God, nay our defects must
needs bring a guilt upon our best actions, if we are considered as under the
law of our creation. But now, after that the good and merciful God has found
out a comely way how he may show favor to sinners, it is certain that all
their good actions (though they are not immediate acts of Faith, but of Love or
Patience, Justice or Temperance) must needs be exceeding pleasing to him, Gal.
5.22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meckness, Temperance, against such there is no
law; that is, against such graces and actions or persons adorned with them
there is no law. This is but a meiosis; for indeed such graces and gracious
persons, though but imperfectly furnished with them, are yet for these things
sake (through his gracious acceptance of them) highly pleasing to God. For this
see Heb. 13.16. Acts 10.4.

And this is that w^^^^ Mr John Goodwin acknowledges, who y^^ denies that
works procure Justification, as Justification signifies remission of sins, in
the Fanner of Justification displayed, page 48. and 49. When Abraham is said to
have been justified by works when he had offered, etc. the meaning is, that
upon this great testimony given by Abraham of the truth and effectualness of
his faith God highly APPROVED of him, and DEAL^ BY HIM AS BY A PERSON RIGHTEOUS
AND JUST, and CALLED HIM HIS FRIEND, with much more to the same purpose; by
this you see how good works do highly please God, so as to justify us with an
high approbation at least, and I should think too even unto remission of sins;
so that if such a man that does these works thus highly pleasing to God have
sins upon him lately committed they should be forgiven him, according to these
Scriptures, Dan. 4.27. Break, off thy sins by righteousness and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Iam 5.15. If he have committed s^^s
they shall be forgiven him.
if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity or an healing of thine error, as
the margin has it. So Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that
your iniquities may be blotted out. -- Isai. 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, seck judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason together, says
the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as while asnow, though
they be red like crimson they shall be as wool. So lizek. 18 21, 22. Here you
see that part of Justification which consists in the remission of sins is
promised to good works as the Gospel reward of them; and indeed I do not see
how these two parts of Justification can be separated, viz. Approbation and
Pardon, so as Faith should obtain the one, and Good Works the other, though
indeed they may well be conceived as distinct parts of Justification. I crave
the pardon of that reverend person mentioned in that I take this liberty to
express my self, I shall conclude this Question with those words of Mr Baxter
in his Aphorisms, Thesis 73. page 289. and 290. Faith ONLY does not justify
in opposition to the works of the Gospel, but those works do also justify as
the secoadary less-principal parts of the condition of the New Covenant. I come
now to the last Question, which is this,

How comes faith thus eminently to intitule us to justification?. I have
asserted, Quest. 6.
that though works do justify, yet faith does it so eminently, as that gets
the chiefest name of righteousness, and works are never called our
righteousness, much less are they the righteousness of faith; though it must be
allowed as a good consequence, that if we are said to be justified by works, in
a sense works are our righteousness, because all Justification is by a
righteousness. But to let pass that, that works are a partial, secondary, less
principal righteousness. The Question remains, How comes faith to be so
eminently our righteousness, as to bear away the name, so that our
righteousness by which we are now said to be justified should be called the
righteousness of faith, in opposition to works, (that is) legal works.

Now to this I answer: in the general, that the great reason of this must be
the divine ordination and appointment. It could not be merely from the nature
of the thing: nothing in its own nature can justify a rational creature but
perfect righteousness, unerring obedience. Now the highest faith in the world
can never deserve to be accounted unerring obedience; faith was but a part of
our duty which we owed to God under the first Covenant, that is, relying upon
the power, goodness, and veracity of God; and therefore wherever faith comes
to be our righteousness, or our chief righteousness, it argues that there is a
great deficiency in the creature that is so to be justified; and accordingly
the Apostle often glances upon this, that glorying is in this way excluded, not
by the law of works, but by the law of faith.

Faith therefore cannot justify by any natural excellency that it has in it,
for though all the men in the world being now sinners and obnoxious to
punishment by the law of their creation, should resolve of their own accord to
believe that there is so much goodness in God that he will not destroy the work
of his own hands, so depending upon his mercy, and therefore they will
endeavor to do all those things which they think may be pleasing and
acceptable to him, why all this faith and confidence, attended with the most
sincere obedience, will not extort a Justification from Almighty God, except it
be in his good pleasure to justify such believers, and such obedient persons;
because they were all obnoxious to punishment for the breach of his law. Faith
therefore cannot justify but by reason of divine ordination and constitution
that has passed upon it, such as this, The just shall live by faith; and, That
if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10.9. and for this
reason I suppose it is so often called Gods righteousness, Romans 10.3. because
it was a righteousness not in its own nature as works were, but a righteousness
purely of divine appointment: This is Mr John Goodwin's notion of it, Page 34.
of the Banner of Justification displayed. God was pleased to decree, or make
this for a law (which the Apostle calls the law of faith, Romans 3.27) that
faith or believing in him through Christ should interesse men in the benefit or
blessing of the death and blood shed of Christ; that is, in that remission of
sins which was purchased by his death. And in this consideration faith
justifies, viz. by virtue of the Sovereign authority of that most gracious
Decree or Law of God, wherein he has said or decreed, that it shall entitle
men unto, or inright them in part and fellowship of that benefit of the death
of Christ which consists in the forgiveness of sins; or (which comes much to
the same) as it is a qualification or condition, ordained, covenanted or
appointed by God to bring upon those in whom it shall be found the great
blessing of that pardon of sin which Christ has obtained for men by his blood.
This is Mr Baxter's opinion too; that is, That says justifies as it is made
the chief condition of the N. Covenant. Page 225 of his Aphorisms, Thesis 57.
It is the act of faith which justifies men at age, and not the habit, yet NOT
AS IT IS A GOOD WORK; (this is directly against Dr Moor's affirmation, who
faith, that (...) is nothing else but to be approved as a good man, or a doer
of that which is righteous and good, and that BECAUSE he does that which is
good and righteous; methinks here is a Justification for good works purely,
and, if faith comes in here to justify, it does it only as it is a good work.
Mr Baxter is of another mind, viz. That faith does not justify only under
that qua^enus or reduplication AS a good work. Faith (says Mr Baxter in the
Thesis quoted) does not justlfie AS it is a good work, or as it has in it self
any excellency above other graces: But in the NEAREST SENSE DIRECTLY AND
PROPERLY as it is the fulfilling the condition of the New Covenant, etc.

But now though I have affirmed that it does not justify purely from its own
nature, Though faith does not justisie purely from it is own nature, yet it has
a great excellency in it self which might somewhat recommend it to this service.
but chiefly from the ordination of God, and that it could not have justified
without this ordination, yet I shall add, that it had in its own nature a
great fitness to be chosen of God for this eminent service to justify men by.
It was the fittest medium that we can imagine, when the first natural way of
works failed, to promote the honor of God and the good of the creature in
Justification; which consideration commends highly the wisdom of God in setting
it apart for this use, as the chief condition of our Justification. To evince
the truth of this, let us consider a little the natural excellencyes that there
are in faith.

And first of all faith takes in all spiritual objects, Excellency of Faith.
and represents them to the soul, so that all other graces are beholden to
faith for their objects. Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen; hope could not be if faith did not give a
real and evident being and subsistence to the things that we hope for, as also
to all other the invisible and unseen things which a Christian, a Saint, as
such converseth with and lives upon. Again, ver. 6. of that chap. 11. Without
faith, it is impossible to please God; For he that comes unto God must believe
that he is -- Now it is by faith that we believe and know that God is; ver. 27.
by faith Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King; for he
endured, as seeing him who is invisible; by faith Moses saw him that is
invisible. I will acknowledge that reason may find out that there is a God,
but if a man's ways please God, his reason delivers over this observation to
his faith, which is an higher thing, an higher principle in the soul then
reason; though it never contradicts true reason, yet it is somewhat above mere
reason If any one here will say that faith in such a case (as the belief that
there is a God) is much the same with reason or a rational conviction of the
truth of such a Proposition I will not much contend, only because here the
divine Penman says it is by says we believe there is a God, and his assertion
must have a truth in it, we may distinguish Reason and Faith thus, That Faith
is a more particular faculty or habit of divine principles, such as respect
God, and Religion; but Reason is a more general faculty conversant about all
objects whatsoever; and this consideration must come in, That mere Reason only
makes one a man, but Faith makes a man a Saint: and therefore this Faith must
have a divine afflatus and spirit in it beyond mere reason.
. It is by faith that we believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of all
them that diligently seek him. And these two Propositions thoroughly believed,
are the foundation of all true Religion. By faith we receive the notion of God
rootedly in our fouls, and then all the discoveries of God in any the effects
of his wisdom, power and goodness, in his Works, or in his Word; in his Works,
Heb. 11.3. By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of
God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.
Whether faith takes this Proposition, That the worlds were made by the word of
God out of the Scriptures, or merely by observation from the works themselves,
it comes all to one, as to my present purpose, which is this, to prove that it
is faith that strongly and effectually in us ownes the being of God and the
works of God. Again, it is faith receives all the revelations of God by any
messengers that he sends unto us at any time And indeed this is the most proper
notion of faith, viz. an asfent to testimony.
. Who has BELIEVED our report (says Isaias) and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed, Isai, 53.1. If the arm of the Lord be not revealed to men in the
preaching of the word, it is because they do not rightly believe the report.
The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with says in the
hearing of it, Heb. 4.2, 3. and hence it is, for that faith is the proper
instrument of receiving the word of God, that the Saints in the New Testament
are called as often by the name of BELIEVERS as by any other name, Acts 5.14. 1 Timothy 4.12. and the word of the Gospel is called the word of Faith, Romans 10.8.

Nay, faith does not only in the first place receive God into the soul, then
all the discoveries of God in his Works and Word, but it pitches upon all the
particular objects that are there discovered in the Word, and brings them
particularly into the soul; faith does not only receive the doctrine of the
Gospel as true in the general, and from God, but because Christ is there
revealed, it receives Christ himself, and brings Christ into the soul, and so
Christ comes to dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. which is indeed a
figurative expression; there is faith in Christ as well as faith in God the
Father, and there is faith in the blood of Christ, etc. but of these things I
have spoken largely above in the last character, I bring them in only here as
proofs of the excellency of faith, in that it brings all spiritual objects home
unto the soul, that so the soul may converse with them in the exercise of all
its graces and virtues. In one word, our whole life here at a distance from God
must necessarily be a life of faith, We walk by faith not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.
for till we come to the beatifical Vision of God, we must see him and all his
glories and excellencies by faith; and our treatings with God the Father and
the Son must be by faith: I have a long time dearly loved that Scripture, 1
Pet. 1.8 Whom speaking of Christ) having not seen ye love, in whom though now
you see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with ^oy unspeakable and full of
glory. Faith must come into set love on work upon an unseen Christ, or else
none of that glorious and unspeakable joy could arise to a Christian; so that
by what has been said in this first particular, Faith is the root-grace in
this present state of things. Excellency of Faith.


But secondly, Faith is not only the first grace in order and a root-grace, but
it is certainly productive and efficacious in the actuating all other graces,
and setting them on work; when once says has brought all these glorious
objects into the soul, first God and all his glorious Attributes, then his
Revelations, and especially Christ and his Blood, and realized them all unto
the soul, it is almost impossible but all other graces should in their several
courses and respects which they have to these objects move and work regularly
and intensly. Love we know is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. in
rational creatures it is the fulfilling of the Law perfectly even in degrees;
in broken creatures it is the fulfilling of the Law sincerely in its desires
and endeavors. Now this faith makes its great instrument to work by. Faith
works by love, Gal. 5.6. and I showed above how faith sets hope on work; now
these three Faith, Hope, and Charity are the three great graces, 1 Cor. 13.13.
all other graces are reducible to these three, and of these three faith is the
rootgrace. And therefore we find often in the Scriptures that all Religion is
put upon the bare assent of faith. Romans 10.9. If thou confess; with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the
dead thou shall be saved. 1 John 4.2. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every
spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come into the flesh is of God. Not
as if a mere confession or profession of Christ were saving, for there are many
that do profess themseves Christians that shall go to hell. But according to
that in the Romans, if they did believe with their heart that God had raised
Christ from the dead, together with the ends of his death and resurrection,
certainly all those other things which accompany salvation, or have salvation
annexed to them, would follow; because true says, hearty, unseigned faith is a
working faith; it works by love to the making a man a new creature, and to the
keeping of all the commandments of God. And according to this positio^ I make
no doubt that place in James is to be under stood, Jam. 2. where there is a
supposition of a superation betwixt Faith and Works; that either that place
speaks only of a false and only pretended faith, and then indeed there may be
such a Faith without Works, a dead and unactive Faith, that is the resemblance
and appearance of Faith; or else ^t speaks of a true Faith, and then it is
only by, way of supposition that the Apostle there speaks, that upon
supposition any one's Faith (though it were the highest and truest Faith in the
World) should not be accompanied by Works, it would not justify, and it is
very true upon that supposition: Because Works are as well required as Faith;
not but that wherever there is a true and lively Faith, there will be Works
necessarily attending it; and this I believe all will readily acknowledge.

Mr. Baxter is so much of this opinion that Faith is an operative Grace; and
puts the soul, where it is, upon gracious actions toward God, that be puts
works and obedience into the desinition or description of Faith. In his
Aphorisms, page 279* Thesis 70. Faith (says he) in the largest sense, as it
comprehends all the condition of the New Covenant, may be thus defined: It
is, when a sinner by the Word and Spirit of Christ being thoroughly convinced of
the righteousness of the Law, the truth of its threatening -- the Nature and
Offices, Sufficiency and Excellency of Jesus Christ -- his free offer to all
that will accept of him for their Lord and Savior, does hereupon believe the
truth of this Gospel, and accept of Christ as his only Lord and Savior to
bring him to God his chiefest good -- and does accordingly rest on him as his
Savior, and SINCERELY, (though imperfectly) OBEY him as his Lord; FORGIVING
OYHERS, LOVING HIS PEOPLE, BEARING WHAT SUFFERINGS ARE IMPOSED, etc. and all
this sincerely, and to the end. This is part of his desinition of Faith. Again,
Mr. Baxter in another place, page 238. Thesis 62. according to this definition
of Faith tells us, That Faith may be called the only condition of the
New Covenant for two reasons; 1. Because it is the principal condition, and the
other but the less principal; and so as an whole Country has ost its Name
from a chief City, so may the conditions of this Covenant from Faith. 2.
Because all the rest are reducible to it, either being presupposed as necessary
antecedents or means, or contained in it as its parts, properties, or
modifications, or else employed as its immediate product, or necessary
subservient means or consequents. And so full to the same purpose, Thesis 73.
page 280. Thus we see by Scripture, and according to the opinion of a very
learned and good man, that Faith is not only the first Grace in order, but a
very operative Grace, and was in its own nature exceedingly sitted for that
service which God has in much Wisdom and Prudence appointed it unto.

But thirdly, (...).
there is yet a more proper reason then either of these, why Faith should be
chosen for this uses and that is, for that Faith is a self-emrying Grace; to
live by Faith, is to live purely in dependence upon God and Christ for every
thing; and what fitter instrument or condition of Justification could be chosen
after the fall of man, when it was most reasonable that if God would save a
man, he should have all the glory? Does not the Apostle insist mightily upon
this, both in his Doctrine and particular practice? Justification now (says
he) is not of works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9. But by Grace are ye
saved through Faith. So Nom. 3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By
what Law? Of works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. This is St. Paul's Doctrine.
Then for his practice; For my part (says he) I am crucified with Christ, I am
a poor dead thing; Nevertheless I live, yet not I, or no longer I, (...), but
Christ lives in me; and the life that I live, is by Faith in Christ, Gal.
2.20. Now that St. Paul is come to live the life of Faith, he is nothing,
Christ is all; he is dead, and lives not, Christ only lives in him. So that
you see Faith, besides all its other excellencies, has a peculiar fitness for
this service of justifying a sinner; and yet notwithstanding all these
excellent qualities that are to be found in Faith, it could not have justified
without a Divine ordination and appointment. Now for any to say (as some do)
that Love justifies as much as Faith; nay that God does rather approve of a man
for his Love, then for his Faith, is (methinks) very bold and unscriptural
Divinity.

I shall only add a word of testimony out of Mr. Baxter to this last
particular, and so conclude the question, and all the questions which I have to
propose about Justification. Page 231. of his Aphorisms he has these words: If
God had seen meet to have stamped any thing else to pass for Justification, it
would have passed currantly; yet take this, Faith is, even to our own
apprehension, the most apt and suitable condition that GOD COULD have chosen
(for as far as we can reach to know) there cannot be a more apt or rational
condition -- page 232. This is the most self-denying and Christ-advancing Work.
Nothing could be more proportionable to our poverty, who have nothing to buy
with, than thus freely to receive, etc.

I have now done with all the Questions which I thought any ways necessary to
be spoken to for the more particular and distinct unfolding of the Doctrine of
Justification; and I might here shut up the Discourse with the Uses of the
whole. But before I come to the Uses, I judge it convenient to add somewhat by
way of Appendix; concerning the means or way how Justification came to be
transferred from the Law to the Gospel, or from Works to Faith, for that I have
acknowledged that Works and the Law were the first natural way of justifying
men, but now that it is altogether brought about by Grace and Faith. That which
I have to say, I shall introduce with this objection.

If we were all born under the Law, Object.
and bound to obey it to a tittle, upon which obedience it should have
justified us, but upon the least breach was armed with this threatening, That we
should dye the death; and that we have all broken it, how comes it to pass that
we are not all the Laws Captives and Prisoners, and condemned by it? How came
there such easy gracious terms to be offered us for our justification, as
Faith and sincere obedience, that these shall be accepted instead of perfect
unerring obedience? How will this way be for the honor of God's veracity in the
threatening, or his holiness, to take imperfect sinful creatures into favor?

Now in answer to this objection I shall not need to meddle with that question,
Answ.
whether it were inconsistent with the natural Justice or Holiness of God,
considered as antecedent to his threatening, or Decree of punishing sinners with
death, for him to have pardoned sinners by an absolute Power and Sovereign
Grace, and so to have received them into favor upon their repentance, without
the intervention of a Savior.

But in the first place, In the day that thon eatest, thou shall dye the death,
Genesis 2.17. I see not how it was consistent with the veracity of God to remit
the sinner without any consideration at all, without a very considerable
fulfilling of this threatening.

2dly,

1. That Christ in his own person here upon earth, undertook the Law, and
answered it in all that it had to say against us: And whereas it was a killing
letter, he took out this condemning power of it for all believers.

2. That this was done by Christ for all ages of the Church; and so it was, and
is the great foundation of that Justification by faith which the Apostle Paul
contends to have been in all ages, before the Law, under the Law, and in the
days of the Gospel to the end of the world; so that the way of Justification
by faith comes in kindly, and in a comely manner, without any neglect or
violation of the Law: I begin with the first assertion.

That Christ in his own person here upon earth undertook and answered the Law,
The first assertion, That Christ undertook and answered the law for us.
etc. Now to prove and illustrate this assertion, it will be useful to us, 1.
To consider in what condition the Lord Christ found us when he came into the
world as a Savior.

We were therefore all of us Jews and Gentiles, We were all under the law when
Christ came to save us.
prisoners to the Law. I shall give the account of this in the Apostle's
expressions (which are somewhat mystical) to which I hope I shall add some
light by laying them together, and comparing them one with another. Before
Christ came, and before faith came, and so at the time when Christ came, and
when faith came in the doctrinal discovery, or at any time does come to us in
the hearty closing with it, We were kept under the Law, Gal. 3.23. the words
are (...), the Law had set a guard upon us, and as it follows, we were shut up
unto the faith, (...), we were all shut up as so many prisoners unto the Law,
and under its guard and custody; and in Romans 7.6. (speaking of the Law) the
Apostle says, We were held by it, that being dead (that is, the Law) wherein
we were HELD, or by which we were detained, (...). For though these places in
the Galatians and Romans may referr to the different dispensations of the Old
Testament and New, that before the days of the Gospel when faith came to be
preached men were under a legal dispensation, they were kept under the Law, and
shut up to the faith that was to be revealed, yet I dare affirm, that there is
a deeper meaning then that, at least a deeper truth then that, if not in those
places, which is this, That till Christ and the way of Justification by faith
be made known to the soul, the soul must needs be under a legal frame ^f heart
toward God, under fear and bondage; ^ay, and a further sense then this yet,
and that ^s this, That till the virtue of the blood of Christ ^e applied to the
soul, till actual Justification ^y or upon faith, every man lies under the
curse and threatening and wrath of the Law: the Law ^ath taken hold of us all,
an evident sign of which is this, That death has passed upon all; and that is
the reason? why, for that all have sinned, ^om. 5.12.

And if any could plead exemption from this abnoxiousness to the Law, it must
be either the ^^ntiles that had not the Law, as the expression is, ^^m. 2.14.
that is, had not the Law given to ^^em; or those that lived before the Law was
^ven by Moses; now neither of these can plead ^is exemption, therefore all
mankind were ^ptives to the Law when Christ undertook the ^ork of Redemption,
or rather until the desig^ation of Christ by the Father to this work.

For the first, viz. the Gentiles, the Apostle tells us that he had proved them
under sin, which is the transgression of the Law, therefore under the Law; and
their thoughts within them did accuse for their breach of the Law, which was
written in their hearts, Romans 2.14.

Neither were they free from this arrest of the Law, who lived before the
delivery of the Law by Moses; for the Apostle tells us plainly, Romans 5.13. That
until the Law sin was in the world; that is, from Adam till the time that the
Law was solemnly given by Moses sin was in the world: now sin is the
transgression of the Law, and accordingly, as sin was in the world all that
space of time from Adam to Moses, so Death reigned from Adam to Moses: Now we
know that death (...) the wages of sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. 1
Cor. 15.56. Sin could never have brought in death but by the Law, which binds
sin upon the sinner, and with sin the punishment due to it; therefore all that
space of time from Ada^ to Moses, sin and death being in the world ((...) they
were) to be sure there was the Law in its power and energy; it was there in
effect, as sure (...) it was in the hearts and consciences of Heathens and the
Grave was the Law's Prison, Death it is Arrest, Sin it is great Charge and
Accusation, by and upon which Death entered. Sin entered in the world and death
by sin, upon the threatning^ the Law, Romans 5.12. This was the state and
condition therefore that Christ found us in; w^ were all under the Law as
Prisoners and Captives, therefore when the Father sent fort Christ upon the
work of Redemption, it is sa^ Gal. 4.4. God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
m^^ under the Law; to redeem them that were under (...) Law. This was written
to the Galatians, who were Gentiles, That we (putting himself and the Galatians
together) might receive the adoption of Sons; therefore the Gentiles were under
the Law when Christ was sent forth for their redemption.

And our Savior tells us what he was commissionated to by his Father; Luke
4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach
the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach
DELIVERANCE TO THE CAPTIVES, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised (or bound, as it is in Isai. 61.1.) to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord; that is the Year of Jubilee, when all servants
were set free: thus Christ's coming was to proclaim a Year of Jubilee to the
whole world, that the Law's Captives should be delivered, and those that served
God under the tyranny of the Law might receive a spirit of Adoption.

So now thus far we are gone in our proof of the first assertion, that when
Christ came as a Savior and Redeemer of his people, he found them all under
the Law, as the lawful Captives and Prisoners unto it by reason of their sins,
which were transgressions of the Law. Now therefore what remains but this, that
if Jesus will save his people from their sins, if he will deliver the Law's
Captives, he must make satisfaction to the Law?

The Law was such a thing as must not be dealt with in a way of violence: it is
true, when our Savior came to redeem us from the power of Satan, he did that
by an holy violence, he fought with all the powers of hell upon his Cross, and
conquered them by force of arms (as I may speak) and triumphed over them in
himself, or in his Cross; but now the Law must be taken off in a more
honorable way: for the Law had an authority in it, the Law was nothing but the
will of God revealed for man's life, with a reward and threatenings annexed; so
that the great God himself stood up in vindication of his own Law, that if the
Prisoners of it were rescued, it must be upon such terms as these, which appear
what they were by the event.

That he that is the Savior of the Law's Captives must first be made under the
Law himself. The terms upon which the Law's captives be delivered.
God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law.

And secondly, That he must pass thorough a legal Justification himself, before
he can take others off from the Laws condemnation; for being made under it, the
Law must either justify him or condemn him, which latter it did not for any
personal breach that he made of it, therefore it must and did acquit him.

But then for us who were under the curse of the Law, if he will deliver us
from it, he must be made a curse, Gal. 3.13. if he will save us from our sins,
which were invigorated by the Law, with a sentence of condemnation (all the
strength of sin for condemnation being in the Law) he himself must be made sin
(that is, as much as an immaculate Lamb could be) viz. a sin-offering, 2 Cor.
5.21. he was made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him; that is, that we might be made righteous by Gods
accepting Gospel conditions, instead of legal, for our Justification.

If Christ will redeem us from the wrath of the Law, which is the wrath of God
(the Law works wrath, Romans 4 15.) truly he must come under that wrath so
far as it was possible for such an innocent person to be under it; and we know
that he was under as horrible a desertion as ever any that trusted in God was
under; and that at such a time when he needed the greatest supports, even when
he hung upon the Cross, crying, My God, My God, (words of an high says) why
have thou forsaken me? words expressing a most dreadful desertion, Math. 27
46. Not to mention his agony in the Garden, which was but a fore-taste of that
Cup which he was afterward to drink off. And methinks there is an eminent
place for this in Zech. chap. 13. ver. 7. says the Lord there, as it were
stirring up his wrath against Christ, Awake O Sword against my Shepherd, and
against the man that is my Fellow, says the Lord of Hosts: As much as to say,
there is a man upon earth that is my Fellow, and he has undertaken to rescue
the Law's Captives, to redeem them from under the Law, Curse, and Wrath, now
awake my Sword against him: Here the great God the Lord of Hosts does, as it
were, set himself in battle array against Christ; but what does Christ now?
Does he make resistance? does he redeem his Captives from the Law by force^?
No; though he were equal with God, though he were God's Fellow (as here the
Lord calls him) yet he made it not a prey or a robbery to be equal with God, so
as to hold it fast, and stand it out, but gave way; he knew what he had
undertaken, to redeem Captives indeed, but it was from under the Law, the
righteous and holy and pure law of God, and this must not be violated, this
must not be resisted. He had to do with his Father, and there must be no
resisting him; The Cup which my Father has given me shall I not drink it? John
18.11. Though he were God's Fellow, though he were equal to God, as it is Phil.
2.6, 7, 8. Yet he made himself of no reputation, he laid aside his equality,
took upon him the form of a Servant, and hum^^ed himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross: And this was the utmost that the Law
could do to him; here the Law ended it is rage, the Law brought Christ to the
Cross, and when he ascended the Cross, he bare our sins in his own body, 1 Pet.
2.24 and being as yet under the Law, (for the Law pressed him with our sins) he
carried up the Law (as Sampson did the gates of the City upon his shoulders,
Judges 16.3.) he carried up the Law upon the Cross, and he nailed the Law to
the Cross, (both Moral and Ceremonial) as to all it is condemning power, as to
all that wherein it was a against us, wherein it was contrary unto us, he
answerit fully, cancelled it, and left it behind him upon the Cross to this
very day. Christ came down again, but the Law could never come down since. Col
2.14. Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was AGAINST US, THAT WAS
CONTRARY UNTO US, and took it out of the way, ^ailing it to his Cross. Now this
was the manner of Christ's enervating the Law, and leaving it without strength,
or obligation upon us to punishment, as the expression is, Rom 76. (...), the
Law is made of no strength against us, so it might be rendered, though the
Translation is this, we are delivered fram the Law, the Law can hold us
captives no longer, it is made a weak, and a vain thing to us, having spent all
it is rage and fury upon Christ; for the Law could do no more then it did upon
Christ; what can the Law do more to a debtor, nay to any malefactor, then
arrest him, bring him to trial and execution? and all this the Law, did upon
Christ, as our surety, and so left no strength, or vigor in it self against
those whose Surety he was.

The Law when it fell upon us it left us without strength, Romans 5.6. When we
were yet without strength in due time Christ died for the ungodly; but when
Christ comes to deal with the Law, he leaves the Law without strength; nay,
though he offered no affront or violence to the Law, yet he left it for dead,
as it is Romans 7 6. Now we are delivered from the Law, THAT BEING DEAD WHEREIN
WE WERE HELD. The Law that fell upon us when we were weak was taken by the
Captain of our salvation, and left for dead; nay, he made it suffer the same
death that it put him to. The Law nailed Christ to the Cross, and Christ nailed
the Law to the Cross, and all this without violence or affront offered to the
Law, it being but naturally consequent upon what the Law did first to Christ;
for if the Law set upon Christ as our Surety, and do the utmost to him that it
can, it must needs follow that it has no strength left against those for whom
he undertook, and so must die and expire by the same death that our Savior
dyed, it being nailed to the Cross, which is but a sigurative expression.

And yet I shall carry the Allegory a little further, herein still following
the Apostle Paul, Is it any wonder now, is it any unreasonable thing, now that
the Law is dead, and taken out of the way, that we should be married to another
husband? that we should reckon our selves to be no longer under the Law. The
woman which has an husband (says the Apostle, Romans 7.23.) is bound by the Law
to her husband so long as he lives, but if the husband be dead she is loosed
from the Law of her husband; So then, if while her husband lives she be
married to another man, she shall be called an adulteress; but if her husband
be dead, she is free from that Law, so that she is no adulteress though she be
married to another man, ver. 4. Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead
to the Law, or the Law is become dead to you, BY THE BODY OF CHRIST, that ye
should be warried to another, even to him that is raised from the dead, that we
should bring forth fruit unto God. The Law is every soul's first Husband, and
since the fall, and so every one's actual sin, the Law is an intolerable
husband, there is no living with it, it so sets on guilt and presses the soul
with terrors; nay, instead of producing good works, (the natural fruit of this
Marriage-relation of the Soul to the Law whilst in innocence) it now produces
all manner of lusts, according to the 5. ver. of that 7. chap. When we were in
the flesh, the MOTIONS OF SINS WHICH WERE BY THE LAW did work in our members to
bring forth fruit unto death. Now God, in much mercy to mankind, finding that
if the Law and the conscience or soul of man keep together, his creature will
be lost, and himself lose those fruits of good works which the soul was first
created for, he provides another husband for the soul which is Jesus Christ;
only Christ must redeem his Spouse from that tyrannical Husband which now it
lives with, else the Soul shall be but an Adulteress to pretend marriage to
Christ, that is, the way of grace, whilst the Law can make a just claim to her
as a wife, which it might have done as long as it lived. The manner of the
rescue I have before declared, it was by suffering and yielding to the Law, yet
so as in it the Law destroyed it self, and then is it lawful for the Soul,
that was before wife to the Law, to be married to another husband, and who so
fit as he that redeemed her? Now the Soul shall have it is forbearance under
failings, which the Law would not endure, and God shall have a kindly and
ingenuous Service; there will be fruits unto God: and this is the passage from
Works to Faith, from the Law to Grace.

I though the Law (says the Apostle) am dead to the Law, that I might live to
God, Gal. 2.19. that is, through what the Law has done to Christ it has
nothing to do with me. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead
wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit and not in the
oldness of the Letter, Romans 7.6.

One Scripture more to this purpose, it is Romans 8.1. and 23.4. There is
therefore now no condemnation to ohem which are in Christ Jesus (who are
married to Christ and have accepted the terms of the Gospel) who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death: this chiefly relates to
sanctification, that the inward law or power of corruption, which was
occasionally and accidentally strenghtned by the Law of God, was now broken by
that inward power, spirit, and life which is conveyed by the Gospel of Christ,
and is called the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, ver. 3. for what the
Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, (that is, it could
neither justify nor sanctify) both these did God bring to pass by sending his
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, when for sin, that is, Christ's making
himself a Sin-offering, and so answering the Law, God condemned Christ in the
flesh: that is, destroyed it, both in the guilt and power of it, out of us that
were sinners; so it follows, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit; that is,
that the Law might no longer accuse us being answered by our Savior, and that
we might attain to that which is the chief design of the Law, to wit,
righteousness and holiness, which if we had continued under the Law we could
never have attained unto.

What so common now with the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans, as to tell
them, that now they are not under the Law, but under grace by this means,
namely, the BODY OF CHRIST offered; and that therefore there shall be no
condemnation, and that therefore sin shall not have dominion over them, which
are the two great effects of the death of Christ, though the first chiefly
belongs to that subject which I am upon; viz. Justification?

Having given now all these things in an allegorical and mystical dress, (yet
herein only following the Apostle) I shall deliver the same thing somewhat
plainly, and so conclude this first particular.

The sum of all this is, Man was made holy, had a Law to live by, to which
there was a threatening annexed, In the day thou eatest thou shall die the
death, or shall surely die This threatening (I take it) is due by the Law to and
intended against all sins, according to that of the Apostle, The wages of sin
is death, To. 6.23. speaking of sin indefinitly, besides wise Adam might have
committed any other sin and not have dyed.
. Man did eat, and so was to die, death accordingly entered by this sin into the
world, that is a natural death, and for eternal death hereafter, and the
spiritual death of the soul here, which consist's in alienations from God;
(both which all men at age are obnoxious unto being sinners, as for children, I
neither affirm nor deny any thing) the Lord in mercy designing to deliver men
from, provided a Savior, who should first live a perfect life, that so he
might be the more acceptable Sacrifice; and his terms of saving men must be
these, that he must freely offer himself up to God a Sacrifice for our sins,
give his life a ransom, etc. and though the Father loved him all the while (as
I cannot admit that the Father was really angry with Christ, or that he tasted
the Fathers wrath, for God could never be angry with one that never displeased
him) yet undertaking such a load as our sins, the Father would deal with him
much like as with a sinner, leave him to men and devils upon the Cross, and
withdraw the light of his countenance, which forced those sad outcries upon
the Cross. Now upon condition of Christ's performing this great service (which
was, as I verily believe, the chiefest design of his coming into the world,
for this cause came I to this hour, John 12.27. though there were diverse other
great designs of his coming) I say upon condition of performing this great
service the great God of heaven would reckon that his word of threatening was
fulfilled, and the holiness of his Law satisfied in this eminent signification
of his displeasure against sin shown upon his own Son, (whom he would not spare
when he had taken our sins upon him) and for ever after would grant this new
and living way of Justification unto the world, THAT WHOSOEVER SHOULD BELIEVE
AND OBEY SINCEREEY should be justified and saved; and that for all such, they
should be no longer under the Law for their Justification, but under Grace. And
I can understand no other sense of the Law's being dead, and Grace it is
reigning through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ.

I shall only need to mind one thing before I go off from this particular, The
subjects of the great Privilege of freedom from the Law.
and that is the subjects of this privilege of freedom from the Law. And they
are only so many as put themselves upon the way of believing for Justification;
all others are really under the Law still; When we were in the flesh the
motions of sins which were by the Law did work in our members, etc. Romans 7.5.
All that are in the flesh are under the Law still; But now (says the Apostle)
we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held. The Law
was alive before to their conscience, whilst they were in the flesh, and out
of Christ, but now the Law was become dead to them; which plainly argues that
the Law is dead or alive to men in the condemning power of it, according to the
state that a man is in, either of sin or holiness: So Romans 6.14. For sin shall
not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law but under Grace;
plainly implying, that if they were under the Law sin would have dominion over
them, an also that if sin had dominion over them, it were a plain sign that
they were under the law. This being a great truth in this matter, That all that
are not serving God in the way of faith are under the law; for that the law is
the natural way which a man is born under, and the way of faith and grace a
superadded dispensation upon consideration of the death of Christ for all those
that should believe and obey sincerely; therefore, till they get into the way
of believing, they must be in that state which men are naturally born under,
that is, under the law. I shall conclude this particular with a passage about
Dr Preston, I have heard it affirmed by one that was contemporary with Dr
Preston in Cambridge, a person of credit and worth, that he heard him preach to
this purpose, That Christ dyed to make this Proposition true, that, WHOSOEVER
BELIEVES SHALL BE SAVED. Now this I suppose is full to the purpose for proof
of what I am upon, That Christ dyed to buy a people off from the law, that they
might be justified by faith; he dyed to buy those off from the law that should
prove believers; as for all others he leaves them to the law still. For Christ
did not dye to get the law annihilated, or made utterly void; Do we make void
the law? God forbid, says the Apostle, Romans 3.31. but he laid down his life
for HIS SHEEP, and to save HIS PEOPLE from their sins; he bought them off from
the law, such as St Paul, I through the law am dead to the law; but not for
wicked men, that is, such, as continue so, they shall find the law alive to
them, and full charged with wrath against them; it being nothing else but the
holy will of the great God, unto which all his creatures owe an exact
conformity.

Now by what has been said, I suppose is plainly and fully proved that which I
made my first assertion, viz. That Christ Jesus in his own person here upon
earth underlook and answered the law for all believers, so that they may be
justified, for any accusation that the law has to charge them with; and thus
they come under grace and into this easier and sweeter way of Justification in
a comely manner, the law being honorably taken off; So that now God may be
just, that is, merciful (says Dr Hammond upon the place) and the justifier of
every one that believes in Jesus, Romans 3 24, 25, 26. He may now justify the
ungodly, Romans 4.5. which by the law, if that had not been taken off by Christ,
he could not (I think) have done. Methinks what I have said should be a clear
proof of this assertion, seeing I have not only proved that it is so, but shown
out of the Scripture the very manner how the law was taken off.

All that I can apprehend to remain any whit doubtful or questionable is this,
How does it appear that what Christ did in suffering under the law, being under
the curse, etc. did reach to the times that were before Christ's coming into
the world? it may be easily conceived how it makes clear way for our
Justification by faith, who have lived since his death; for if he bare our
sins, the law will not charge them upon us; if he dyed for us, or in our stead,
we are not by the law to die; if Christ were sacrificed for us as our Passover,
we need not fear (if we have the Gospel-conditions of Covenant Relation to God
in Christ) but the destroying law will pass over us; see how the word Passover
comes from passing over, Exodus 12.21, 23, 27. But how does it appear that this
death of Christ had this influence upon the times of the Old Testament, to
bring in the way of Justification by faith to them? for that you have asserted
that the way of Justification by faith has been in all ages, both before the
law, and under the law, as well as now in the days of the Gospel, and that
none was ever justified in any other way. Now how were they taken off from the
law and brought under Justification by faith? or how does it appear that the
death of Christ was the foundation of this way of Justification by faith even
to them? And unto the assoiling of this difficulty I shall now address my self,
that is to the proof of my second assertion, which was this. What was done by
Christ, viz. Assertion.
his undertaking and answering the law, was done for all ages of the Church;
and so it was, and is the great foundation of that Justification by faith,
which the Apostle Paul contends to have been the only way of Justification in
all ages. And for proof of this I offer these things to consideration:

1. The Saines in all ages before the death of Christ had this way of Grace
then as well as we have it now (that I have proved at large in the beginning of
this Treatise) therefore whence had it they but from this death of Christ which
was certainly to follow at a prefixed time?

If it be said they had their way of Grace purely from the goodness of God, I
oppose, 1. That if so many thousands were saved before by mere grace without
the consideration of a Savior, why had not the Lord continued the same grace
unto the end of the world, which we see he has not continued? Why are the
vouchsafements of Gods Grace in pardon of two such quite different kinds, so as
to save his people for 4000. years without a Savior, and the rest by a
Savior! Nay, to save them without a Savior, whom yet he had by multitudes of
Promises, Prophesies and Prefigurations made to hope for a Savior!

2dly, If the Lord could in a consistency with his veracity in threatening death
to sin, pardon sin without either the sinners death or his sureties, and that
the law would be (so) well enough contented and satisfied, why would the Lord
put our Savior to so much trouble in suffering a death which he might as well
have escaped, and which he so earnestly desired, if it were possible, that he
might escape, and all this to take off the Law from being our Head and Husband?

3dly, It is said expressly, That the Covenant was confirmed to Abraham of God
in Christ, Gal. 3.17. which methinks must necessarily imply thus much, that the
consideration of Christ went into the confirmation of this Covenant, whether
Abraham or any of the Saints under the Old Testament knew it or no, as it is
plain Abraham did; He rejoiced to see my day, and saw it and was glad, John
8.56. Now this Covenant with Abraham is that which the Apostle does mightily
insist upon, to prove Justification by Faith to be antecedent to the giving of
the Law, and therefore not to be nulled by the coming of the Law; and yet this
Covenant was confirmed of God in Christ, that is, as I think, was sounded upon
this consideration, that Christ should afterward come into the World, and pay
that price which God would accept for the redemption of all believers 1 Cor.
10.1, 2, 3, 4. All the Fathers did drink of the some spiritual drink, for the
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them; and that rock was Christ.
.

Again 4thly, Christ is said to be the Lamb of God slain from the foundation of
the World, Rev. 13.8. which to me signifies thus much, that though he were
not actually slain, yet he was reckoned by God as slain then, and so God was
attoned for all the Saints of all ages ensuing; or to follovv the other reading
of the Words in Rev. 13.8. so that from the foundation of the world, should
refer to the vvriting the Saints Names in the Lamb's Book of Life, and not to
the Lamb's being slain, this will make more for my purpose; for if they that
were elected from the foundation of the World, were all enrolled in the Lambs
Book of life, how should this come to pass, but because they were all to be
redeemed to God by the Lambs blood? And if this opinion of personal Election be
true, that Scripture would serve to countenance this interpretation, which
we have, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him (that is Christ)
before the foundation of the world, ver. 5. Having predestined us unto the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ, etc. And methinks Mr. Biddle, who (in a
late Book of his which he calls, An Essay to the explaining of the Revelations,
page 64.) lays so much weight upon this passage in Rev. 13.8. for proof of
personal Election, (as to say, That this alone in his judgment seems
sufficient to decide the so much agitated Controversy about Predestination)
might very well have gone one step further in his alteration of his mind, by
acknowledging the reason why all the Elect should be said to be written in the
Lamb's Book of life to be this, namely, Because he was to pay the price of
their Redemption, as the most proper and pleasing Sacrifice for sins that ever
was offered up to God. But to proceed, as Christ was slain in Divine
designation and acceptance from the beginning of the world, (for I shall take
liberty to follow that reading) so when he came into the world to be slain
actually, in the fullness of time, Gal. 4 4, 5. WHEN THE FULLNESS OF TIME was
come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, etc. Time
went with this great birth of the Savior of the World, near 4000. years, and
then it was time Christ should be sent into the world to pay that debt which
through the forbearance of God had been contracting for so long a space of time.

But 5thly, Heb. 9.24, 25. 26. For Christ is not entered into the holy place;
made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self,
there to appear in the presence of God for us: Nor yet that he should offer
himself often, as the High Priest enters into the holy place every year, with
blood of others, (for then must he often have suffered SINCE THE FOUNDATION OF
THE WORLD) but now ONCE IN THE END OF THE WORLD has he appeared to put away
fins by the sacrifice of himself. Here are several differences which the Author
of this Epistle observes betwixt Christ out High Priest, and the High Priest
under the law, who was the most eminent type of Christ. The High Priest under
the law entered into the holy places made with hands; ours into heaven it self.
The High Priest under the law entered into the holy place often, that is, though
but once in the year, yet every year once, which is often in many years, ours
but once in all. Again, the High Priest entered with the blood of others. ours
by his own blood, or the sacrifice of himself. But yet herein there is a
correspondence between our High Priest, and the legal High Priest, that as
theirs went into the holy of Holies once in the end of the year for to make
reconciliation for the sins of the year past so our High Priest entered into
Heaven with his own blood, ONCE IN THE END OF THE WORLD, to make atonement for
the sins of the ages past: I think there is this allusion in the words once in
the end of the world, for that the High Priest offered but once in the year,
ver. 7 of this chap. ours once in all, and their once was in the end of the
year, nay about the same distance of time from the years end as our Savior
from the worlds end, as is to be seen Lev. 16.29. it was in the seventh month,
seven bearing the same proportion to 12 (or very near it) that 4 does to 7.
taking it for granted that the world should last but about 7000 years:
therefore I would infer this allusion to be in the words, that as theirs want,
etc. Besides, there is that in this Scripture which will enforce this Analogy
of the end of the year to the fore-past year, and the end of the world to the
fore-past ages, and it is this; That if our Savior through the excellency of
his person and offering, had not had this high honor from God that his once
offering should serve instead of offering a hundred times over, which the
Priests under the law were fain to do, and yet could never hereby purge away
sin as to the Conscience: I say, if this once offering of our Savior had not
bin so highly acceptable to God as it was, he must (as the Highpriests did
offer often) have suffered often since the foundation of the world, if he would
have obtained pardon of sins for those for whom he obtained it; he must have
come into the World, and suffered once a year, or once in an age, or else at
the end of some certain term of years prefixed to him by his Father. This is
the argumentation of the holy Penman of the Epistle to the Heb. ch 9 25. Dr
Hammond in his Par. upon these words, For then must he often have suffered
since the foundation of the world, has it thus, For then he should from time
to time ever since the BEGINNING the world have dyed many times.
Now upon what ground does this argumentation proceed, other then this, That
when he suffered and offered himself, it was as a propitiation to God for the
sins of all the ages since the Foundation of the World? For else whence would
it follow at all, though our Savior should have been ranked by his Father
amongst the common Highpriests, and his offering of himself no more accepted
for pardon, than their offering the blood of Bulls and Goats was: I say, whence
would it follow that he must have offered himself often since the foundation of
the World (which certainly respects the ages past) if he was not at all to make
atonement for the sins of those past ages? The Author of that Epistle would
rather have said (if he had not gone upon this supposition, that Christ offered
for the sins of the ages past before his suffering, but had only thought that
he offered for the ages to come after his suffering) I say, he would rather
have expressed himself thus: If out High Priest Jesus Christ had not been
accepted for us under the Gospel, more highly than the legal Highpriests were
for their people under the law, he must often offer as they did SINCE his first
offering: he must come and suffer death once in the year, and then be raised to
offer himself to God: or at least once in an age or some set-period of time;
and this he must do to the end of the World; he would never have expressed
himself thus; then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
world. But whereas now the Apostle loo^ing upon the world as it were at an end,
or drawing toward its end, (for suppose the World last 70 o^ years, yet after
4000. years the Skale of Time is turned, and Time in its declining) he speaks
of the world, and the continuance of it, as you would do of a year and the
continuance of it, and faith he as the High Priest amongst the Jews, did enter
into the Holy of Holies once in the end of the year for to make an atonement
for the sins of the year past, so has our Savior once in the end of the world
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

Again, for I have somewhat yet further which this phrase now once in the end
of the world will afford us, and that is this, That indeed, though it be true
(and I think I have sufficiently proved it above) that this death and offering
of Christ frees US from sin that live after it as well as THOSE that went before
it; yet I verily believe that his death has a more obvious respect to them
that lived in the ages before he suffered than to us who came into the world
after he suffered, though it has indeed an influence upon us too; and the
reason is this, for that the use of a Sacrifice is to make atonement for sin
after it is committed. When did you ever read of a Sacrifice for sins slain and
offered before the sin was committed? The Sacrifices that should be made thus,
would rather look like a bribing the Deity to get liberty to sin, then to make
atonement for sin. Therefore all the particular Sacrifices that were appointed,
they were appointed to be used after the legal uncleanness was contracted; and
accordingly the High Priest that went but once into the Holy of Holyes, it was
at the end of the year not at the beginning of the year. And thus our Savior
being to take away the sins of the world, John 1.29. he came once in the end of
the world to take away sin; so that his appearing thus in the end of the world
seems more plainly to respect the ages past, than the ages which were to come;
and I verily believe, if Christ had dyed only for the sins of those ages that
have been since his death, or shall be yet to the end of the world, he would
have forborne his death till the end of the world, or the times that were near
it, from this very reason of decency, That it is not proper to offer Sacrifice
for sin till the sin be committed; it rather looks like the dispensation to sin
than making atonement for sin.

But now that Christ was to dye for the sins of all the Saints in all ages
before him, and that he stayed till the fullness of time, even till the
declining of time toward its end, (there being so many transgressions already
committed that were to be removed out of the way) it was no uncomely thing at
all that our Savior should come and die, and offer himself to God when he did,
though the value of the same Sacrifice was to reach all ages after to the
world's end; and that especially, for that there were many other ends of his
coming, besides the offering himself thus to God; he was to take upon him the
Mediatorial Kingdom, Several other ends of Christ's coming besides offering
himself a Sacrifice for sin.
to set up a spiritual Worship of God, by pulling down all the Jewish
Ceremonies, making Jew and Gentile one, and revealing all the mysteries that
were concealed in Moses his dispensation; nay, his very Sacrifice is one of the
greatest Mysteries of all, by which we are informed of God's performing his
threatenings, that the threatenings of heaven are not as claps of thunder without
a thunderbolt in them; we see God's hatred of sin, punishing it so severely in
his own Son; we see God's love to the world, that he would give his Son for the
life of it, though he gave him up to the death, we have in his life a pattern
of perfect holiness, which is more than all precepts alone; and we see in our
Savior an instance of the Resurrection and heavenly glory; and all these
things have been of mighty instruction to the Saints of all ages since the
death of Christ, If this phrase, the end of the world, should be understood of
the end of the Jewish state, this will not at all prejudice my ieference from
it, that Christ's death had respect unto the ages before his coming, but rather
strengthen it.
and will be to all Saints unto the end of the world; and therefore I say,
these other great ends of his coming being considered, there is no undecency at
all in his coming so early in the end of the world, and offering a Sacrifice
that should serve for many ages that were then to come. It was at the end of
the world that he came, and therefore might very well serve for those fewer
succeeding ages, though it had the first respect unto the ages going before.

In the sixth and last place, I shall bring plain Scripture to prove that
Christ dyed for the Saints of the ages that were past before his death. There
are two Scriptures that speak to this purpose; the first that I shall name is
in that 9th of the Hebrews, the chapter out of which I have been arguing, ver.
15. And for this cause he (speaking of Christ) is the Mediator of the New
Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the First Testament they which are called, etc. Here it is said
that Christ by the means of his death redeemed or expiated the transgressions
that were under the First Testament, therefore he dyed for the fins of those
that lived under the Old Testament. But I shall deal so faithfully with my
Reader as to acquaint him with another interpretation (which is not
contemptible) that others give of these words, and that is this, That our
Savior Christ, the Mediator of the New Testament or Covenant, by his most
excellent Offering redeemed and expiated those sins which could not be expiated
by any Sacrifices that were appointed under the First Covenant, according to
that in Acts 13.39. By him (speaking of Christ) all that believe are justified
from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses.
There being in Moses no Sacrifices for adulteries, thefts, murders, etc.
whereas in the Christian Religion there is pardon for all sorts of sinners by
means of the death of Christ, if they have but the Gospel-conditions of pardon.
So that this interpretation makes the place to speak of the kinds of sins, and
not of the individual or particular sins which were committed under the first
Covenant, that Christ by the means of his death has made redemption of those
kind of fins which there was no redemption for under the first Covenant: But I
have something to ask of those that make this interpretation yet taking it for
passable, and it is this; I would fain know if any of those sins were pardoned
under the Old Testament which here are said to be redeemed by Christ for his
followers; if they say they were not, then all that committed any such kind of
sins were damned for ever, which was untrue, witness David and Manasseh: if
they were pardoned, as they were, then either they were expiated by some
Sacrifice, or they were not; if those that own this interpretation say they
were not expiated by some Sacrifice, and yet pardoned, I oppose, (not to
mention that great argument again. That they could not be pardoned without
expiation in any consistency with the veracity of God in his threatening) this
seems a strange rarity in the dealings of God with us, that under the New
Testament no sin is pardoned but what is expiated by the death of Christ, and
yet under the Old Testament, (which was certainly a dispensation more severe
than ours) there the greatest sins should be pardoned without the intervention
of any Sacrifice; nay, what a strange thing was it in their very dispensation
that legal uncleanness (such as Leprosy and Issues, etc. must be purged by
sacrifice See Lev. 14, 15. chapters. yet the greatest sins of all should be
pardoned without a sacrifice; if therefore those great sins of Murder,
Adultery, Witchcraft, Idolatry, etc. were pardoned by expiation, it must be by
this death of Christ to ensue in the end of the world, for there was no
sacrifice so much as appointed for these sins; and those that were appointed
could never reach to the purging and cleansing of the conscience, they only
purged the flesh from a fleshly uncleanness, Heb 9.13. the blood of Christ
alone hitherto has had a virtue in it to cleanse the conscience; therefore I
conclude, that the blood of Christ made expiation even for those individual
sins for which there was no expiatory sacrifice appointed under the Old
Testament.

But to let pass that Scripture, what will be said to that in Romans 3.25, 26.
where we have these words, Whom (speaking of Christ) God has set forth (or
foreordained, as it is in the margin) to be a propitiation, through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the REMISSION OF SINS THAT ARE
PAST, through the forbearance of God, to declare (I say) AT THIS TIME his
righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus? Now I suppose there may be this sense contained in these words, That
God in the days of the Gospel has set forth clearly what that is by which he
was always propitiated and atoned for sins, even those sins that were
fore-past and fore-committed in the days of his forbearance and
long-suffering, that is, the darker times of the world, which times we have
otherwise expressed in Acts 17.30. to be the days of ignorance which God
winked at, (they were the days of God's forbearance) it was and is the blood
of Christ, by which God alone always was, and still is propitiated for sins;
only then it was not so well known, but now God has declared (...), in the
Acts it is (...), that the forepast sins, the (...), as well as these that are
committed under the Gospel, were all redeemed and expiated by the blood of
Christ. As for any other sense that is given of these words, I find it only
this, That the sins that are past should be meant of the sins of a man's life
past, before he comes to believe; which is a good honest sense, for it is very
true, That when a man comes to believe in Christ and in his blood, all the sins
of his past life shall be forgiven him: but that this is not meant by the
(...), sins that are past, seems clear to me from that term of opposition,
(...), at this time, which is certainly meant of the times of the Gospel, in
opposition to a former time in which those sins past were committed, and
therefore that former time was the time before the Gospel-dayes: which
observation is strengthened by that parallel place in the Acts, where (...) is
opposed in the very same case to the times of Ignorance and Forbearance which
God winked at. I have now finished my proof of the second Assertion, and so I
have done with what I thought necessary to add by way of Appendix to the
former treatise, the design of which was to show how the great business of
Justification came to be transferred from Works to Grace, from the Law to
Faith; in which (I must needs say) I reckon is contained the most: considerable
piece of Gospel-mystery in the whole Book of God. The Lord give Me and thee
(Reader) a spirit of Illumination rightly to understand it and relish it. I
come now to the Uses of the whole Discourse foregoing; and here I need not be
so large as otherwise I might be, having inserted applications in several
places of the body of the Discourse; and for that the very Discourse it self is
altogether practical, but most especially, for that the chief end of the
Discourse was the discovery of Legality, and this I have so done my endeavor
unto in the characters and their applications, that I shall have nothing at all
of that to do in the Uses. Yet something I shall add by way of application:
And first of all,

Is it so (as I have above evinced) that the Law was our natural way of
Justification which we were born under, Use of Inso mation.
that we had all made our selves obnoxious to the wrath and curse of it, that
that had seized of us as Prisoners and M^lefactors, and that yet
notvvithstanding all this we are all of us now either under the tender of
Grace, or in the state of Grace and Favor with God, and all this in a comely
and honorable way for the Law. Then this gives us matter of Information of
or rather Admiration at the several Attributes of Goodness, Wisdom and
Holiness in God. I shall be as brief as I may be in this Use, because these
things are obvious.

But here is certainly eminent goodness and grace to mankind shevvn in this
vvonderfull change of Justification from Works to Faith, Of the grace and
goodness of God in this Gospel-way.
What? that when we had undone our selves as to the Law, had not only
weakened our own strengths (when we were weak Christ died for the ungodly) but
weakened the Law it self (for the Law was made weak through our Flesh) so as it
could not justify us, that then the Lord should not only seek out a way to
support us from falling and sinking, but set us into a better, a more easy,
and more glorious way of salvation than we were in before; this is a wonder
of Grace and Mercy.

1. For the glory of this way; When an earthly Adam had betrayed all his trust
for his posterity, and undone us, that then we should have a second Adam, who
is the Lord from heaven, and who is infinitely to be preferred before the
first, we have a glorious representation of him in his similitude unto and
dissimilitude from the first Adam, in Romans 5. from the 14. ver. to the end.

2. For the easiness of this way; That when we had made (not found) the Law,
not only difficult but impossible to be kept by us, so that the going about to
fulfill that now would be like climbing up to heaven, descending down to
hell, and getting up again, nay raising a Savior thence, or like compassing
the whole world, that instead of this now we should have a way set before
us so plain, That wayfaring men though fools shall not err therein, Esaias
38.5. so near us that we need not go out of our selves for it, (if I may so
express it) the word is nigh thee even in thine heart and in thy mouth that
thou may do it, even the word of Faith, Romans 10.8. so easy that we may run
in it; I will run the way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. His Commandments
are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. My yoke is easy and my bur-then is light, Math.
11.29, 30. This way of salvation is so easy to every honest soul, that it is
but Ask and have, seek and find, knock and it shall be opened, Math. 7.7. And
Romans 10.13. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: though
this easiness be not found by wicked men, Knowledge is easy TO HIM THAT
UNDERST ANDETH, and to him only, Prove. 14.6. Neither is it easy to us without
the assistances of the Spirit, but these assistances are at hand to good men,
and therefore the way of Gospel-Justification and Salvation is wonderful easy
and delightsom; and this is a very great argument of the goodness of God.

If God had proposed the highest difficulties imaginable, and made it our duty
to overcome them, if we would obtain the Crown of Glory proposed to us, we
should have had no reason to complain; but when he has taken us off from a
difficult, nay an impossible way, (though once the true way) that we were upon,
and set us upon an easier way, that that is pleasant and delightsom, and still
proposes the same or a greater reward, this is grace and mercy indeed, here
are riches of Mercies. Mic. 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and
what does the Lord REQUIRE of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God? What can thou do less? What would thou do else?
Thy very work is reward enough, and yet thou shall have a reward infinitely
more glorious than thy work deserves.

Besides, in this way the holiness of God, Of the Holiness of God.
that is, his hatred of and displeasure against sin is made very illustrious;
in that his Law must be taken off honorably before the way of Grace must
enter. I am sure this is so for us under the Gospel, and if under the Old
Testament men were saved another way, I should think it very strange: but of
this above.

Lastly, Of the Wisdom of God.
(not to mention the power of God discovered in this way in the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, raising Christ from the dead, etc.) The Wisdom of God
is exceedingly manifested in this way of Gospel-Justification. I shall show how
it appears from what has been said by and by: A little proof first that so it
is this the Apostle Paul often insists upon: God has made Christ unto us
Wisdom and Righteousness; unto them which are called Christ the Wisdom of God,
and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 30. The Gospel is called the Wisdom of God
in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8. In whom (that is,
Christ) we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according
to the riches of his GRACE, WHEREIN he has abounded toward us in all wisdom
and prudence. One place more, it is Col. 2.3. In whom, (speaking of Christ) are
hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; That is, (says Dr Hammond,
paraphrasing the second and third verses) In this course which has more
obscurely been taken by God the Father under the Old Testament (and therefore
in the second verse is called The Mystery of God the Father) and more clearly
now by God in Christ under the New (and therefore called The Mystery of Christ)
to bring sinners to salvation; in this course is wrapped up all the depth of
divine Wisdom imaginable.

That there is great wisdom shown herein is usually demonstrated thus, which
is a good way, that herein the wisdom of God in saving flnners by Jesus Christ
discovers it self, in that so many Attributes are honored altogether, the
Mercy, Holiness, and Power of God. I shall instance further only in this, that
certainly the Wisdom of God as well as his Grace does mightily appear in this
way, for that herein God has graciously accommodated himself to the reason and
nature of a man, and has taken that course, Hos. 11.3, 4. of saving men in
this way of Grace, which is most likely to prevail; I taught Ephraim also to
go, taking them by the arms, I drew them with cords of a man with bands of
love, and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I
laid meat unto them. This Scripture may well be applied to Gods way of saving
men upon Gospel terms; he takes off the yoke of the Law from our jaws, sets
meat before us, whereas the Law afforded us nothing but stones instead of
bread, and for fish gave us scorpions. The Lord here draws us with the cords of
a man and with the bands of Love; in that true winning way which is suited to
the nature of a man. Thou have destroyed thy self (says the Lord to a poor
soul) but in me is thine help, ^os 13.9. Thou art weak, rely upon me who am
the Rock of Ages; if thou have committed sins, repent and turn unto me and
they shall be forgiven thee, only thou must set thy self faithfully to obey my
commands; and whereas thou failest through weakness, I am ready to pardon, and
now that thou may have life upon these terms, upon these rational terms, Cast
away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make
ye a new heart and a new spirit, for why will ye dye O house of Israel; for I
have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore
turn your selves and live ye, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. The Lord obviates all the
objections that we can make; if we say it is hard to walk with God in the
obedience to his commands, he promises strength; if we say, But what if I
should fail in such and such instances of obedience? why (says the Lord)
whilst there remains a sincerity I will pardon; if any man does sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.

Thus the way of God in the Gospel is highly rational; there is a variety of
strong arguments in the way of Grace, especially in the Gospel dispensation, to
persuade our faith, and as many to persuade our obedience. Dr Moor in his
Mystery of Godliness makes mention of and insifts upon seven several
Gospel-powers, by which the Gospel becomes effectual to the bringing of man
into a state of salvation, and so as certainly of justification, all which he
reckons up page 392, sect. 2. the two first he makes, The evidence that we are
to be inwardly and really righteous; and not only so, but in an extraordinary
manner; the five last are, the promise of the Spirit through Christ's
intercession, the example of Christ, the meditation on his Passion, on his
Resurrection and Ascension, and on the last Judgment. Most of which (as it is
evident) work morally, that is, upon a man's reason; and he tells us, p. 410.
ad sin. That God in his infinite Wisdom has traced out such a method in
Christian Religion as is most accommodate to gain souls to himself. And this
certainly all those Divines will acknowledge that are for conversion to be
ordinarily effected by moral suasion; for though the Holy Ghost himself should
represent the arguments to our souls which we are to be moved by, yet if it be
only represented in order to prevailing upon us in a way of persuasion, it is
only the reason of a man that is to close with them, and therefore they will
never prevail except they be accommodated and suited to a man's reason; nay,
the more lively and truly they are represented unto a man's soul, the less
affecting will they be by how much the less rational they are. And what Dr Moor
afferts of the Christian Religion, that it is so accommodated to man's nature
to prevail upon it, has been always true in the way of grace and faith in
that measure in which it was at any time intelligible. And therefore for these
men that speak against reason in Religion, they do but go about to unman us
whilst they pretend to make us Christians; and they rob God of the glory of
his Wisdom, the honor of which, as it is given by us, cannot be otherwise
rightly and acceptably ascribed, then as we understand how this Wisdom
discovers it self in the several designs and effects of it; which
understanding is by no other faculty in us but that of our Reason, though it
need be elevated and strengthened by the spirit of God in such acts of our
understanding. The Wisdom of God therefore in this Gospel-way of Justification
is very conspicuous, not only in that God has in this way made many Attributes
illustrious together, but in that the way it self is such as is most apposite
to attain the end; viz. to justify men, which is the highest commendation of
the prudence of any design. Let us therefore be persuaded to admire the
Wisdom and Prudence wherein God has abounded toward us in this way of Faith,
which certainly if we studied more, we should be abundantly more affected with,
even from our own convictions of the wisdom of it, and made to cry out with
the Apostle Paul, (...), O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out! Romans 11.33.

2. Use of Information; of the perverseness of man.
This discourse informs us of the strange unreasonable perverseness of the sons
of men, That when God has, in so much mercy and wisdom, found out and
appointed such a glorious easy way of saving sinners, they should yet
generally dislike this way, and take to a more ignoble way, to wit, their own
righteousness, and an impossible way, to wit, the keeping of the Law, which I
have proved above at large that they do; and it acquaints us with the strange
infatuations which pride leads us into, for that is by the Apostle chiefly
glanced at as the reason of so many men's adhering to the way of Works, because
they would establish their own righteousness, which they prefer far before the
righteousess of God, that is, that righteousness which he has sufficiently
manifested he will alone accept. They that are for the Law are for boasting and
glorying, and this humor of self-confidence and fleshly boasting does so besot
them, that they run upon the most absurd and irrational designs in the whole
world; but of this enough above.

3. Use of Consolation.
There is great matter of consolation which offers it self unto us from what
has been discoursed above. Is it so, that the Lord has remitted of the rigor
of his Law, nay, that he has taken off the Law wholly from requiring an
account of those that are married unto Christ, as being their Husband no
longer? Is the condition of Justification altered from unerring obedience to
faith and sincerity in obedience? then here is comfort for all faithful
sincere hearts. Art thou honest to God? have thou no Delilah in thy bosom? art
thou faithful to the interest of Christ and his Saints? thou art safe, thou art
secure; it is not necessary that thou be in the highest form of Christians;
it is true it were well if thou were there, and it is thy duty to endeavor it,
but it is not absolutely necessary to thy being a Saint or in favor with God.

There are of all sorts and sizes, See more of this page 202, 203. above
of all ranks and ages that are accepted with God. There are babes, and young
men, and strong men, and fathers; there are lambs, and there are sheep that are
with young; only without sincerity, without a lively faith they cannot be so
much as Christ's little ones. Now this is a matter of comfort which we may
often reflect upon; it is ready at hand unto us. Art thou in any distress or
trouble at any time, either from without, from men; or from within, by the
bufferings of Satan? turn in presently upon thy soul, and examine, see how thou
have lived, and what thy present frame of heart is. 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing
is this, the testimony of our conscience, that IN SIMPLICITY and GODLY
SINCERITY, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our
conversation in the world. Now if thou have such a testimony as this from thine
own conscience, thou may conclude thou art in the favor of God, and that
therefore all things shall work together unto thee for good; but herein do not
deceive thy self with an imagined honesty of heart to God, as many do, but deal
faithfully with thy self in the examination whether thou have a sincerity or
no. If I should here give all the marks of sincerity that I could find
throughout the Scripture, I should not be impertinent in so doing, but yet
seeing that has been done well by many, I shall forbear; I shall only say
this, that if thou set thy self any boundary or stint to thy seize in
holiness, short of perfection thou art so far insincere; or if thou avoidest
any opportunity (which thou can by any means certainly understand to be an
opportunity) of honoring God, thou art so far insincere. Lastly, if thou
give way to sin in the little degrees or appearances of it, thou art so far
insincere; and if the interest of the flesh or of the world prevail in thy
heart above the interest of God and Christ, thou art altogether infincere,
whatever good desire; and good affections thou may have in thy heart.

I might here mention the other more principal condition of
Gospel-justification, viz. Faith, and bid thee if thou would have comfort
enquire if thou have faith; this St James tells thee how thou may know
whether thou have it o^ no, even by thy works; thou may discover it both unto
thy self and others by these. Jam. 2.18. Show me thy faith without thy works,
and I will show thee my faith by my works. For though I affirm that the Apostle
James does not speak only in that Chapter of the demonstration of Faith by
Works (but also of real Justification before God by Works, as they are a part
of the condition of Gospel-justification, according to the 14. ver. of that
Chap. If a man say he has faith and not works, SHALL FAITH SAVE HIM?) yet it
is certain that he speaks there also of the demonstration of Faith by Works;
and both these designs (I think) may be as we understood in that chap. of
James, as in the 24 of Mat. we may understand our Savior speaking of the
destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the World.

But instead of giving marks and signs of true faith, I shall rather proceed
to an use of Exhortation unto the high and frequent exercise of Faith, which
when we are engaged in, we shall have marks and signs enough to discover our
faith by.

In the next place therefore I come to an use of Exhortation. Use, of
Exhortation.
Is it so that Faith is made the great and principal condition of our
Justification? that Faith bears so great a stroke in the business of
Gospel-justification, that the whole way should receive denomination from it^
(Romans 4.14. If they which are of the Law be heirs, FAITH is made void) Is the
righteousness of God in the Gospel said to be revealed from faith to faith? Is
the Gospel-righteousness called the righteousness of faith? nay, is faith it
self accepted as our righteousness? then let this provoke us to the constant
lively exercise of all the various and excellent acts of Faith, Let us do as
all the Saints of old have done, and if it be possible let us outdo them in
believing. By faith (says says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews) the
Elders obtained a good report, so he begins the chap. ver. 2. These all (says
he) obtained a good report through faith, so he ends it, ver. 39. What that
great good report which they obtained was, he tells you ver. 33, 34, 35.
Through faith they subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire; etc.

My first motive that I shall begin with to quicken this Exhortation shall be
from the wonderful things that faith has wrought and can work. M^tive.
Faith has a virtue in it that has wrought and can work wonderful things.
Witness but these three verses quoted, Heb. 11.33, 34.35. It was faith made the
walls of Jericho fall down; by faith in prayer Elijah (that was otherwise a
weak frail man as we are) stopped the bottles of heaven for three years and six
months, that it rained not; and by faith again he opened these bottles, and
the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit, Jam. 5.17, 18.
Faith enabled the Apostles to do miracles; when the Disciples could not cast
out a devil of one that was possessed, our Savior tells them the reason was from
their un^elief, and that if they had faith but as a grain of mustard seed, they
should be able to say unto a mountain, Be removed hence into yonder place, and
it shall remove, and nothing should be impossible to them, Mat. 17.19, 20. What
then would a strong faith do, if a small faith would do so much? It was by
faith that persons obtained miracles to be done for themselves and others,
Math. 9.29, 30. Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith ^e
it unto you, and their eyes were opened: and in Math. 15.28. Jesus answered and
said unto her, (the woman of Canaan) O woman great is thy faith, be it unto
thee even as thou will; (a large grant indeed!) and her daughter (its said) was
made whole from that very hour. This is commonly known by this name the Faith
of Miracles; and is plainly expressed what it is, Mark 11.23. For verily I say
unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be
thou cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe
that these things which he says shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever
he says. So again, 1 Cor. 13.2. If I had all faith so as to remove mountains.
-- Now if Faith will remove mountains, even all mountains of difficulties, and
procure any thing from heaven that we need, who would not endeavor to be
strong in faith, to be rich in faith? as the several expressions are, Romans
4.20. Jam. 2 5.

2ly, Faith will serve all occasions whatsoever; Motive:
(and no wonder if it will work all miraculous effects) therefore be rich in
faith. In famine it will feed thee, as it did Elijah and the Widow of
Zareptha, 1 King. 17. and our Savior in the Wilderness, who lived not by
bread, but by the word of God for 40 days together, Math. 4.4. In prison it
will enlarge thee, as it did Peter, Acts 12. or at least enlarge thy heart, as
it did the hearts of Paul and Silas, Acts 16.25. If thy children, servants,
friends are sick, it will heal them, Mat. 15.28. Mat. 8.6. Jam. 5.14, 15. There
is no case but faith will reach it. We may oppose this shield to all the fiery
darts of Satan, Ephesians 6.16 ABOVE ALL taking the shield of Faith, whereby we shall
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. This I have spoken largely
to above, and therefore shall not enlarge here.

Faith and that alone will free thy mind of all cares and burdens; Motive.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall sustain thee, Psalm. 55.22. casting
all your care upon him. for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5 7. Now this is to be
done only by faith; who would not have a mind quiet and free from cares? and
who can be careful, when he really believes that the only wise and omnipotent
Jehovah takes all his cares upon himself? This is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4.

4. This will quicken all thy graces; Motive.
this you may see likewise above upon the last Question, There is no thriving
Christian but a believing Christian.

This is the highest way of honoring God that can be taken; Motive.
Abraham was strong in faith, and so gave glory to God; if thou do not make
it thy chiefest design in the world to honor God, thou art no Saint of God;
now if thou would study all the ways imaginable to honor God, thou can
not do it so effectually as by this one only way of believing. How is God
known in the world in any way with such an honorable reflection as by men's
trusting in him? To trust our own wit, and co^ntrivance, and endeavors only in
what we do, is as much as in us lies to put God out of the world; I am sure it
is a living without God in the world; whereas trusting in him for all is the
only advancing the Lord upon his Throne of Sovereignty and Goodness.

This is the only way of pleasing God; Motive.
Without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes unto God must
believe that he is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. Men cannot
more highly displease God than to believe that he is not good, yea, that he is
not good to ALL that diligently seek him (let them look to it that confine and
set limits to his Goodness:) yea, God is so highly pleased that men should
trust in him, that he has made this the principal condition of the pardon of
all our sins, and receiving us into his special love and favor. Abraham was
therefore called the FRIEND OF GOD, which is the highest honor in the whole
world; by this Enoch obtained this testimony taat he PLEASED GOD, Heb. 11.5.
which was an honorable testimony indeed. Yea, (to conclude this Motive, and
all the Motives in this Use) that the Lord might give us a testimony how highly
he is pleased that we should trust in him, and how fain he would have us rely
upon him, he has at this time, (...), in these blessed days of the Gospel,
set forth Christ a propitiation, to show how ready he is to be reconciled to
all the world; in a word, one of the greatest ends of the economy by Christ
seems to be this, that in him representing his Father, being the express Image
of his Person, yet partaking of Flesh and Blood like us, we might have a fit
instrument and help, or mediate object for our faith to work upon: first upon
him and by him, upon God himself, according to that place once already
mentioned. 1 Pet. 1.21. Who by him (that is, Christ) do believe in God that
raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might
be in God. I come now to the matter of the Exhortation it self.

Be exhorted therefore to be strong in faith, that is, in the acts of assent
and the acts of affiance; for these (as I take it) are the two chief proper
acts of faith, though after I have ended the Exhortation unto these two, I
shall give one notion of faith more under which we are to be exhorted to
exercise faith:

1. For Assent; so faith is taken, Isai. 53.1. Who has believed our report?
and Mark 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel, that is, the doctrine of the
Gospel; and (to mention but one place more) Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of
faith is sin; This notion of faith, viz. dogmatical faith, where the word faith
signifies an act, is the most common notion of faith in the New Testament.
that is, (as the former part of the verse, he that doubts is damned if he
eat, because he eats not of faith, carries it) whatsoever a man does without
a sound persuasion in his mind that it is lawful to do it, he sins in that
action. This is the first notion therefore of faith, namely, the assent to any
Proposition, though more accurately the assent to a testimony; but yet you see
the Scripture-notion of faith is somewhat larger than that of the Schools,
namely, the persuasion of or assent unto the truth of a Proposition.

First therefore if thou will be rich in faith, be thou rich in truth, in thy
assent unto truths, that is, truths in Religion; for though it be faith to
believe there is such a place as Rome, or Constantinople, yet my design
confines me here to truths in Religion: Be thou rich therefore in assent to
divine truths, and that, whether they be clear by the light of nature, or
revelation; for assent to truths that are clear even by the light of Nature is
called Faith by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.6. where to
believe that God is, (which certainly is clear by the light of Nature) is
called Faith, as I have shown above, page 291. I say, be rich in thy assent
unto all truths as near as thou can, whether they be clear by the light of
Nature or only by Revelation. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, Col. 3.16. So Christ shall dwell in your hearts by faith; for
according to thy light and knowledge and assent unto truths, so will be thy
heart, affections, and conversation: he that has a large light may have a
large heart; whereas those that have but a narrow light, and a scanty
knowledge, can have but a lower and a more limited sphere and compass to act in
for God. And if it happen (as often it does) that they that know little yet do
more than many that know a great deal; this comes not from any advantage of the
honest man's ignorance, but from the folly and carelessness of those persons
that are knowing, and their want of firm assent to the notions of truth which
float in their brains. I am but a little careful here of distinguishing
betwixt Knowledge and Assent, being confined with in the narrow limits of an
Use.
Enlarge thy mind with knowledge, and thou gettest a larger field of action
and service than otherwise thou can possibly have: for thou must first know
thy duty before thou can do it rightly; for he that does the best actions in
the world, not knowing that they are good, pleases neither God nor man; they
are only the actions of the man, they are not humane or manly actions, as the
Schools distinguish. Yea, though thou do a good action, yet if thou doubtest
whether it be good or no, thou sinnest in doing this good action; because,
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. For this largeness of faith by assent, see
that last character where I show how we should endeavor to know much of Christ.

2. But then withal take this advice too in thy faith of assent, do not only
endeavor to get a true light and persuasion of the truth and goodness of
things or actions, but get it as firmly rooted and as clear as ever thou can,
this will be a mighty advantage to thee; for if thou have only a glimmering
light, a little cloud will soon darken it; if thou gettest but a faint
persuasion, a small objection will quickly turn it into doubting: therefore get
thy faith firmly built, that thou may be firm and stable in thy faith and
persuasion; Be not like children tossed to and fro with every wind of
doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Be not children in understanding; in malice be ye
children, but in understanding be ye men, 1 Cor. 14.20. I think we have
sufficient experience in these times of of the sore evil of a weak persuasion
about matters of Religion, by the running up and down of so many from one party
to another, till at last they have made shipwreck of their faith, (that is,
says doctrinal) as well as of their consciences, 1 Timothy 1.19.

3ly; As to this part of faith which lies in assent, as we ought to endeavor
that it be large and strong, so we must especially be wary that we fail not in
our assent, and that a firm assent to those truths that are most important.
Though it were to be wished, yet it cannot be expected, that all Saints should
be so well acquainted with all truths, even those of less weight, as it may be
justly expected their guid^ should be; yet all must look to it that they be
well established in foundation-truths, such as the Death of Christ and his
Expiation of sins, the Resurrection of the body and the last Judgment; we must
be sure to continue in this faith, grounded and settled, and not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. Rooted and built up in him (that is,
Christ) and stablished in the faith as we have been taught, (that is, Faith
doctrinal) especially in that great Foundation of Jesus Christ, Col. 2.7. And
truly I think there has been no greater weakening of our faith in
foundation-truths than the multiplying of Fundamentals; for taking off that
weight and stress which we should lay upon those few fundamentals of the Faith
of Christ that are really so, and laying it upon things non-funnamental, must
needs make us unsettled from the foundation. So much for the first part of
Faith which lies in assent, and the directions about it.

2ly, For that part of Faith which lies in Affiance. I need not quote many
Scriptures to evince this notion of Faith, I shall give but one or two; John
14.1. Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me,
(...): there is a credere Deo, which is to believe what the Lord says to be
truth, and a credere in Deum, which is a resting and relying upon God,
committing all my cares and concernments to him: He that believes in the Son
has everlasting life, John 3.36. So that phrase of Scripture, (to cite no more
places) of faith in the blood of Christ, Romans 3.25. can be understood of no
other than some kind of affiance; such as this, that for that blood sake the
Lord is ready to be propitious to me if I have the Gospel-conditions of
Justification: and in this sense (namely) of affiance, I have generally taken
faith throughout this Treatise; and the reason is this, For that this is the
end of a dogmatical faith or a faith of assent, and cannot be conceived without
it, as that may without this; not that I think there can be a thorough
dogmatical faith without this of Faith of affiance is known in the Old
Testament by the name of trusting, as faith of Assent is known in the New
Testament by the name of believing; it it also expressed by staying one's self,
leaning upon confidence in God. See Ball of Faith, page 24, 25, 26. who is large
and clear upon it.
Affiance: but yet, seeing one may conceive them apart, though they are never
separated, I took the surest course in using the word Faith in this sense,
namely, for the faith of Affiance, so including both unavoidably.

Look well therefore to this part of your faith, this makes use of all the
truths and promises which you assent unto for true, and brings them down to
your particular case: as now for instance; Do thou assent to this for a
truth, that God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart? Psalm.
73.1. why then do thou believe for the Israel of God, that God will preserve
it, and do it good, notwithstanding all the sufferings that are brought upon
it; and do thou cleanse thy heart, and believe that God will be good to thee.
The former ( viz. to believe the Promise true) is a faith of Assent, this a
faith of Affiance; so again, for any particular trouble that the people of God
may be under, or that thou may be under, believe, and doubt not but God will
with this trouble make a way to escape, that they and thou may be able to
bear it, and that it shall work for good. When thou prayest in any case of
public calamity, as of Famine, or of Pestilence, etc. thou must pray in faith,
and then thou have no other way but to apply general promises (which thou
believe true by a faith of Assent) to the particular case by a faith of
Affiance, so expecting the accomplishment of them. When thou prayest for any
sick person, or for thy self, upon any occasion, it is the general promise must
give thee encouragement to expect the mercy in the performance of it; which
expectation certainly must be understood to be affiance, or at least some other
act than merely assent to the promise as from God.

In this part of Faith therefore, namely Affiance, 1. Endeavor to be rich and
abundant; 2. Be strong and intense. 1. Be abundant; extend your faith as far as
you can unto all the cases of the Church, or any particular persons whose cases
you may have occasion to know.

St Paul had upon him the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28. but think you
he could sustain it without casting this care upon God by faith? See an act of
faith for his beloved Romans, Romans 16 20. God shall bruise or tread Satan under
your feet shortly; and we find how every Church to whom he wrote did partake
of his most ardent prayers, (as we may see in the beginning of every Epistle)
which without faith would have been utterly ineffectual. Nay, the Apostle Paul
was of so noble a spirit, that he did not only interesse himself in the
concernments of whole Churches, but of every particular person that he could
come to know of, Who is offended, and I burn not? and could he ease himself of
this trouble but by faith? Daniel he understood by books the number of the
weeks wherein the Jews were to suffer Captivity, and the time of their
Deliverance, and did he not add prayers to his knowledge, and faith to his
prayers? Dan. 9.2, 3. Was it not for his prayers of faith, looking toward
Jerusalem, Dan. 6.10. that he was cast into the Lions Den? and did not the same
faith that set him a praying, and opened his mouth, stop the mouths of the
Lions? Heb. 11.33.

Again, for faith for particular persons, I have often observed already, that
the Centurion believed for his Servant, the Woman of Canaan for her Daughter,
the Palsie-man's friends for him, Abraham's servant for his Master's Son, Genesis
24.14. and it is said, The prayer of faith shall save the sick, Jam. 5.15.
Therefore enlarge your faith and bowels of mercies for as many as you can.

2ly, Or if you cannot concern your faith so largely or universally as a
Daniel, or a Paul might do, (as some men and some Saints are of a more noble
spirit and faith than other men, then other Saints) yet be sure look to it,
that whatever you do you mix faith in the doing of it. Whether you pray for
your selves, or others, for Churches or particular persons, you must pray in
faith; if you hear the Word, you must mix faith in the hearing of it; if thou
art under temptations, and find great weakness and infirmity, thou must
glory in it by faith, that here is an opportunity for the power of Christ to
rest upon thee: When I am weak (says the Apostle) then am I strong; which
could not be true in the same sense in which he was weak, but only thus, that
when he was weak in himself, then he found Christ most ready at at hand to help
him, as he explains himself in that Scripture, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. If any of you
lack wisdom let him ask it of God, says the Apostle James, Jam. 1.5. But let
him ask in faith, nothing wavering, as it follows in ver 6. But I shall not
need to instance in particular cases wherein faith will stead us after so many
reckoned together by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 11.33, 34,
35: there are cases personal and national, in prosperity as victories,
adversity as imprisonments, mockings, scourgings, death; there are cases of
Kings, Judges, Prophets, private men, and even of women; only in the general
therefore be sure whatever you do, do it in faith, let your whole life be a
life of faith; perhaps you may not have such a large sphere of action as some
other more eminent Saints, you may not be of such a large soul as some others,
but for what comes through your hands to do, it must be done in faith; in this
we must all imitate the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.20. The life that I now live in
the flesh (says he) I live by the faith of the Son of God, etc. the life that
I live, the words are, (...), THAT WHICH I now live in the flesh, all this that
I live, and wherein I may be said to live, is by the faith of the Son of God.
Manage all thihe affairs, perform all thy actions in faith; whatsoever action
thou have to transact, whether it be of a spiritual, or a more secular
concernment, expect wisdom, and strength, and success from God.

And endeavor to be strong, intense, and vigorous in all the actions of thy
faith, as it is said Abraham was, Romans 4.20. and or a direction herein, that
your faith may be strong as Abraham's was, take the course that he did; if
there be great difficulties appear in the way that thou art in, yet knowing
that thou art in Gods way, look away from the difficulties that offer
themselves, and consult only with the power and goodness and faithfulness of
God, and this shield of Faith (which above all the pieces of our spiritual
armor we are cautioned to make use of) will quench all the fiery darts of
discouraging temptations. Abraham was put upon as difficult acts of faith as
ever any man was, and if he would have considered all difficulties, he might
easily have been discouraged; but it is said, He CONSIDERED NOT his own body
now dead, nor yet the deadness of Sarah's womb, ver. 19. and therefore
staggered not at the promise through unbelief.

The third Notion in which Faith is taken in Scripture, Faith taken for
fidelity or faithfulness to God.
and in which thou art to be exhorted to the exercise of faith, is that of
Fidelity or Faithfulness to God, as it stands opposed to wavering and
unfixedness of heart in the profession of his name and Gospel; thus it is taken
in James 15.6. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God who gives to all
men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in
faith, nothing wavering: If a man think to receive any thing of God, (wisdom
or any such thing) let him ask in faith. What is this faith? It is not meant of
a particular certain expectation of that which we ask, for that is understood
in the phrase think to receive, ver. 7. but it is meant of trustiness and
fixedness of heart to God without wavering, as all the three verses 6, 7, 8.
carry it; for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind
and tossed: A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways; now this
double-mindedness and wavering cannot be meant of the want only of a certain
expectation of that particular thing which we ask in prayer; for though we
should be wanting in this particular and sin in it, yet it would not follow,
that we were unstable in all our ways, that we were like a wave of the sea
driven with the wind and tossed, or that we were double-minded, for that is a
word that plainly signifies hypocrisy. Besides, as I have intimated, it is
plainly said in the 7 verse, that such a man that is a waverer, a double-minded
man, must not think to receive any thing of the Lord; now if double-mindedness
and wavering here, which are made the opposites of faith, were taken for
misdoubting to receive that thing which we pray for; the paraphrase would be
thus, Let not him that doubts whether he shall receive his petition think to
receive his petition, which were needless admiration; for that while he
doubts whether he shall receive what he prays for, he cannot think he shall
receive it. But now there is a full and strong sense in the other exposition,
That if a man pray for wisdom, or for any other thing, and at the same time is
unfixed in his heart to the profession of the name and Gospel of Christ (as it
is known many of the Jews, to whom the Apostle James directs this Ep stle,
were) let not that man think to receive any thing of the Lord. If thou
expectest or but desire that the Lord should hear thy prayer at any time, do
thou come to him with thorough purpose of heart to cleave close to him; do not
bring with thee an heart and an heart, a double mind into his presence; for he
hates a lukewarm soul, that is neither for God nor for the world, worse than he
does one that is stark cold, Rev. 3.15, 16. if thou come with such an
instability, wavering, and unfixedness of heart to God, never think to receive
any thing from him; thou may pray and pray thy heart out, and do by thy self
as Baal's Priests did by themselves to make their God to hear them, 1 Kings
18.26, 28. but thou shall not be heard.

And what the Apostle James says here in the matter of Prayer, I may say in
the matter of faith of Assent and Affiance, both before mentioned, That though
you had the largest and strongest assent to divine truths that ever any in the
world had, or as the Apostle makes the supposition, 1 Cor. 13.2. Though you had
the gift of Prophecy, and understood all Mysteries and all Knowledge; you,
though for affiance you had ALL FAITH (that is, says Dr Hammond, the highest
degree of that faith by which Miracles are wrought) so as to remove mountains;
nay, I will add, though thou had the strongest affiance and trust in the
mercies of God for the pardon of sins that ever any man had, yet imagine all
this but separated from that integrity and honesty of faith which is here
required in this place of James, and it is all worth nothing. Thou must be a
man fixed to God in thy resolutions to walk with him and serve him, or else
never think to fasten upon any of his promises, nor to receive any answer to
thy prayers.

Here you see is a notion of faith which signifies sincerity, or faithfulness;
and this Conradus Bergius Professor at Breme in his Praxis Catholica, page 15,
16, 17. asserts and proves to be the first notion of Faith, page 17. Ad hanc
quidem fidei significationem, qua fidelitatem significat, omnes caeterae
revocari possunt; that is, Unto this signification or notion of faith wherein
it signifies Fidelity or Faithfulness, all the other significations of faith
may be reduced. Yet because (as the same Author acknowledges in the same page)
Assensio, quam adhibemus dicenti, ita usu invaluit pro significatione fidei, ut
propria habeatur, nihilque cedat illi quae ex prima impositione videtur
descendere; that is, Assent to the authority and truth of the speaker is so
commonly used to express the notion of faith, that it is taken for the most
proper notion of faith, as also for that fiducia or affiance ad differentiam
sicque ad dignitatem and consequenter ad essentiam fidei pertinet, as the same
Author speaks, page 44. that is, affiance or trust belongs to the difference
and so to the definition and consequently to the essence of faith, for this
reason that the firm assent to any testimony, even that of God himself,
requires an affection in him that assents; and therefore is Faith defined (as
he says) by Paraus, assensum fiducialem, a fiducial assent. I say, for these
reasons, from the notation of the word partly, but especially for that, (though
this fidelity and faithfulness be a Scripture-notion of faith, as is to be seen
in this place of James, yet) it is rarely used in this sense in the Scripture;
I have taken faith as justifying in that sense as it signifies assent or
affiance, and chiefly for affiance, for the reasons given above, page 346. But
however having urged the practice of faith, as you see from the Scripture in
this 3 Notion likewise (which Bergius says is the first) as it signifies
Sincerity or Fidelity, I shall not need to make any new exhortation (which
otherwise I should be engaged to do from the foregoing discourse) unto
sincerity or sincere obedience, which is the other part of the condition of
Gospel justification. I might add as a great particular of the Exhortation to
the exercise of faith, that you must be sure to exercise frequent and vigorous
acts upon Christ and his blood; but of this I have spoken at large in the last
Character.

To conclude therefore this use, and so the whole Treatise, if thou be rich in
knowledge, and firm in thy assent unto divine truths, copious and strong in
acts of affiance upon the divine power and goodness exhibited in the gracious
promises of the Word, and to this addest, or rather make to precede a
sincerity of heart in the service of God; that is, in sum, if thou be a great
believer, (thou may not perhaps work Miracles, but) thou shall be a
wonderful Christian, and shall be able to do greater things than it was to do
Miracles when they were in use, for wicked men could work Miracles, Math. 7.22.
Thou shall be eminently useful unto the Church, to thy Friends and Relations
and Acquaintance, and unto thine own soul; thou shall be fit to stand in the
gap upon all occasions for others; and for thy self, thou shall free thy mind
of all thy cares, all thy businesses shall succeed; thou shall have all thy
graces flourishing and vigorous; thou shall by thy frequent actings of faith in
prayer at last get such liberty of access to the throne of Grace, such
fellowship and communion with the Father and the Son as to be unto God and
Christ in the quality of a Friend, as Abraham was, Jam. 2.23. which we know
occasioned intimate communications from God to him as well as from him to God.
Genesis 18.17. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? So our Savior
says to his Disciples; Henceforth I call you not servants but friends, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does, John 15.15. The secret of the Lord,
both of his Covenant and Providence shall be with thee, Psalm. 25.14. In a word,
be but much in the exercise of faith, and you shall need but little more to
enquire into your selves what evidences you have of the favor of God to you,
than one at noonday needs evidence that the Sun shines; be but much in
believing, and ordinarily (I speak not of extraordinary dispensations) ye shall
have joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. this you may see at large
above in the third Character, page 187. But I do not pretend here in the narrow
compass of a Use to speak to all that may be said of the life of Faith, either
to the kinds of its acts, the blessed effects of it, all the cases about it,
motives to it, or directions in it, this would fill a large Treatise; See Ball
of the Life of Faith. I shall conclude all with that of the Psalmist 37.3.
Trust in the Lord and do good; be large and firm in thy assent to divine
truths, be strong and vigorous in thy acts of Trust and Affiance, and be
faithful to thy God, and thou shall dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall
be fed; verily thou shall be justified, verily thou shall be saved.

FINIS.
THere being here some empty Pages, I thought good to translate one place more
out of Luthers Commentary upon the Galatians, which I have a great esteem for;
I would have it referred to page 112. or rather to the 183. because it shows
how apt even good men are to fall into a legal frame of heart; it is in the 53
page his words are these, Deinde quoque causa Justificationis lubrica est, etc.
besides also the business of Justification is a slippery, tickle thing, not
indeed in it self, or in its own nature, for in it self it is most firm and
certain: sed quoad nos, but as to us, and in our management of it: That which I
my self have often experienced. Novi enim in quibus horis tenebrarum nonnunquam
lucter; for I know in what hours of darkness I sometimes struggle and wrestle.
I know how often, or, how that oftentimes I lose of a sudden the rays and
light of the Gospel and of Grace as it were in certain thick clouds; novi
denique quam versentur ibi in lubrico etiam exercitati, and qui pedem
firmissime figunt, in the last place, I well know how that the most experienced
Saints and those that have best footing stand here ( viz. in the business of
Justification) as in a slippery place, and their foot is ready to slip ever now
and then, and they are apt to let go their hold: habemus quidem cognitionem
hujus causae, we know indeed this matter in a doctrinal way, because we can
teach it to others, and this is a certain sign that we understand it; for none
can teach others that which he knows, not himself. It is a sign of a knowing
person (as he said) to be able to teach. Verum eum jam in praesenti agone uti
debemus Evangelio, etc. But when we come to practice this doctrine, when we are
in a strait and pressure of spirit, and need to use Gospel (which is the word
of Grace, consolation, and life) then and there, the Law, the word of wrath,
sadness, and death gets before the Gospel, seiseth of us before the Gospel can
come, praevenit Evangelium, and begins to make a tumult within us, and stirs up
no less terrors in the conscience than that terrible and horrible sight upon
Mount Sinai did. Sic ut vel unus locus comminationis in Scriptura omnes obruat
and obnubilat consolationes -- So that, though but one place of threatening in
the Scripture come to our mind, it will over-whelm and darken all our
comforts, and will put all our inward parts into such a shaking and trembling,
adecque omnia interiora nostra concuti^t, that we shall quite forget the right
state of the matter of Justification, we shall quite forget grace, Christ, and
the Gospel; ut plane obliviscam^r causae Justificationis, Gratiae, Christi, and
Evangelii; therefore, as to us, the business or cause of Justification is a
very sl ppery tickle thing, because we are slippery and unconstant in it. Ides
quantum ad nos attinetr, es valde lubrica est, quia nos lubrici sumus.

FINIS.

