A DEFENSE OF THE ANTIQUITY OF THE Royal Line OF SCOTLAND.

WITH A true Account when the Scots were governed by Kings in the Isle of
Britain.

By Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE His Majesty's Advocate in Scotland.

London, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

To the KING.
SIR,
DIvine Providence having suffered these Kingdoms to destroy one another for
many Ages, in divided Monarchies; reserved their happy Union for the Merciful
Royal Family, of which Your Majesty is now the Head: and mingled lawfully in
their Veins, V. The last four pages of the Book.
all those many and different Bloods-Royal, which pretended to any Sovereignty
in these your Dominions: designing thereby at once to reward the Virtue of Your
Majesty's Predecessors, and to endear that Union to us, in preventing future
Debates. In King James, Your Royal Grandfather, these Nations got a Monarch,
who was acknowledged to be the Solomon of His Age: who excelled all His
Contemporary Princes in His own word.
King-Craft; all his Ministers in Prudence; and all His Doctors in Learning.
None of his Subjects understood the Law better, or observed it more: and who
knew as well all that was done at Council-Tables abroad, as they who sat at
them. To Him succeeded Your Majesty's Royal Father, whose Life was the best Law
a King could make: who knew no use of Power, save to do good by it: who was
less careful of His own Blood, than of that of his Subjects: And I may justly
say, that Heaven only was governed by a better King. After we had shown our
selves unworthy of such Monarchs, the Divine Goodness, to try us once more,
gave us Your Gracious Brother, whose Clemency (after so many and so great
Injuries) was as great a Miracle as His Restoration: who knew every thing save
to be severe; and could bear every thing, save to see His People in trouble:
who after the abuse of His Goodness, had made his Enemies so insolent, that His
Servants concluded all was lost; did, by His extraordinary parts, with a gentle
easiness, peculiar to Himself, dissipate those execrable Combinations, to our
great satisfaction and amazement. But, Sir, the Conscience of His Enemies, will
far exceed in His Praises, the Eloquence of His Servants; and so my trembling
Hand leaves this Melancholy Subject.

His Throne is now filled with Your Sacred Majesty, whose Abilities Your Royal
Brother esteemed so much, that He shared with You the Exercise of the
Government, before His Death gave you the Possession of the Crown. In You, Sir,
Your People have a General to their Armies, an Admiral to their Fleet, a
Treasurer to their Money: whose Courage can lead them as far as theirs can
follow; and raise the Glory of these Kingdoms as high as they can wish: So that
if they be not happy, they will have this Addition to their Misfortunes, that
the World will see, that they themselves are only to be blamed for it.

Our Country, Sir, does not boast of a rich Soil, or a hot Sun: but it may,
that it has given these happy Islands those Gracious and Glorious Kings. In
return whereof, we might have expected kinder Rewards, than that any of their
Natives should debate its Antiquity, and the Veracity of those Histories
wherein the great Actions of Your Royal Predecessors were recorded. And since
the Honor of the Ancient and Royal Race of our Sovereigns is the chief thing
wherein we Glory; it is hard to deny us a Favor, so just on our part, and so
easy on theirs. However, Sir, since I presume, that those of Your other
Subjects, who controvert this, do so, rather from want of information, than
from unkindness; I, who am resolved to make the defense of Your meanest
Privileges my greatest Honor, have thought it incumbent to me, as Your
Advocate, to undertake the defense of that Antiquity, which makes Your Majesty
the most Ancient Monarch upon Earth. Which Argument, I hope, I have managed
with that Candor, which becomes an honest Man, and that Zeal which is the Duty
of,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Dutiful, Loyal, and Obedient Subject and Servant,
Geo. Mackenzie.

A LETTER to the EARL of PERTH, Lord High Chancellor of SCOTLAND, Upon his
having sent to the Author the Bishop of St. Asaph's Book. With some Reflections
upon the Design of that Book.
My Lord,
I Have read the Book you sent me, with that delight I did of old a Play; which
one may think it resembles more, than our Histories do a Romance: For what is
truly related, is so disguised and transposed, as may best suit with the
Author's Design; and with a Rhetoric so Polite and Comical, that if the
Reasons do not convince, yet the Humor and Style may charm, and please, even
some of those against whom it is designed. This made me unwilling at first to
undertake to answer a Book, which I suppose might have more Admirers than
Proselytes: but finding, upon a second perusal, that the Author had not fully
examined the Grounds upon which our Historians proceeded, or had suffered
himself to be biased by Zeal for his Order, or Partiality to his Country; And
that this whole Kingdom take it as an Injury done, not only to the Antiquity of
the Royal Family, but to this our Nation in general; I was at last prevailed
with to enter the Lists, with a kind Design, by a sober and candid Information,
rather to convince and satisfy the Author, and those he may have misled, than
to acquire the vain glory of such a Victory, especially over one who bears the
Character of a Bishop, for which I have so great a Veneration: Although, for the
Reasons following, I cannot but dislike his unnecessary Undertaking, and
unseasonable and partial Management of a National Debate, which Ja. 6. Par. 20.
c. 9.
we are prohibited to enter upon under pain of a Sedition.

1. I am sorry, that while these Kingdoms are unhappily divided, not in
Nations, but Opinions; the old Animosities amongst Scots, English, and Irish,
being forgot and buried, and the modern Differences between the Episcopal and
Fanatic, and Cavalier and Republican, or, as some term it, Whig and Tory, are
so violent and turbulent; the Author should have diverted our just and dutiful
Zeal, by employing it in defense of an important right of State, unkindly, as
well as unnecessarily invaded: so as the other, of near concern to the Church,
may in some measure come to be neglected.

2. The pretext for writing this Book, wherein the Antiquity of our Kings and
Nation is so much disparaged, being, that the Presbyterians, and particularly
Blondel, urged from our Historians, that we had a Church for some Years without
Bishops: it seemed neither just nor fit, that any Episcopal Author should have
magnified so highly the meanest Argument that ever was used by a Presbyterian;
as for it, to cut off 44 Kings (all preceding Coranus, who began his Reign anno
501) and to expose on a Pillory as Forgers, our many and grave Historians. And
that it is a weak Argument, appears from this, that I have met with very few
Laics in all our Country, who had heard of it; nor with one, even of these
few, who had valued it: and so this Author may be said, rather to have
suggested a new Argument, than to have answered an old One: For they urge now
nothing to us, save places of Scripture; resolving to have their Presbytery,
Iuris Divini: knowing that nothing less can secure them, in opposing the Laws
of the Kingdom. And what can the Presbyterians think of their other Arguments,
which they value much. Since this, which they valued so little, is thought of
such force, by a learned Bishop, as to deserve a whole Book, the cutting off of
44 Kings, and the offending a Nation of Friends. It is also very remarkable,
that the learned Doctor Hammond, a great Champion of Episcopacy, owns the
Antiquity of our Nation; and answers fully that Argument, without overturning
the truth of our History, or wronging the Antiquity of our Royal-Line: whereas
Baxter the Presbyterian urges this Citation, and yet agrees with this Author in
opposing the Antiquity of our History; approving what is said by Cambden and
Usher; and in a Letter to the Duke of Lauderdale asserting the lateness of our
settlement here. Which shows, that there is no necessity lying upon such as own
Episcopacy, to wrong the Antiquity of our Kings and Nation. But how the
necessity of a private corner of a remote Country in Ecclesia constituenda,
could wrong the general practice of the Church; is as little to be understood,
as it is undeniable, that many thousands in Iapan, and China, were converted by
Presbyters, before Bishops were sent thither. And since it cannot be denied,
but that those who ordained our Presbyters were Bishops; it necessarily
follows, that Episcopacy was settled in the Christian Church before we had
Presbyters or Culdees: or else, if these who ordained our Presbyters were not
Bishops, the practice of that Church, whereby our Presbyters were ordained,
should have been impugn'd, and not the Authority of our Histories, and the
Antiquity of our Royal-Line overturned. And though this Reverend and Learned
Author could prove, that we were not settled here, before the Year 503, yet that
could not answer the Argument: for the Culdees might have been settled before
that time in this Country, where we now live, though amongst the Picts; for it
cannot be denied but the Picts were settled in this Country before that time.
And when our Historians say that the Abbots of Icolm-kill had Jurisdiction over
all the Bishops of the Province; that is to be understood, as Beda observes,
more inusitato; and my Lord St. Asaph himself well remarks these words, and
gives a full and clear vindication of the passages of Beda in the 173, and
following Pages; and might have rested therein, and needed not to have been
driven to seek a new Answer in overturning the Antiquity of our Nation. Many
examples can be given of Jurisdiction of Presbyters, and even of Deacons over
Bishops in the Canon Law and History. So that this instance from our Historians
makes nothing against Episcopacy. And latter Historians meeting with these
ambiguous words in our Annals, De signatus, Electus, Ordinatus, were by a
mistake induced to appropriate these words to the formal Ceremony of Ordination
and Imposition of Hands. And I find, by the Bishop's Concession, Page 169, 170.
171.
that the Abbess Hilda did elect and send forth such of her Monks, as she
thought fit to be ordained: which is all that our Guldees, and ancient Monks
did. Thus a King may be said to make one a Bishop, or a Mother to have made one
of her Sons a Churchman; which answer, the learned Nicol, a zealous friend to
Episcopacy, thought sufficient to elide Blondel's Arguments from our
Historians, without denying the Antiquity of our Nation, or troubling himself
with our See his late Book, entitled, Les pretendus reformees convanious du
Schism, p. 547. 548, 549, 550.
Culdees. And if Beda had heard that the Presbyters did ordain Bishops, he had
remarked it as a most unusal thing, having marked that the Abbots had
jurisdiction over Bishops, they being but Presbyters; such an Ordination being
much more extraordinary, than such a Jurisdiction. And might not my Lord St.
Asaph as well have inveighed against Gildas and the British Historians, because
he says Page 89.
that Churchmen were ordained by the consent of the Bishops and the rest of
the Presbyters, from which Presbyterians, and particularly the same, Blondel
Page 72, 73.
infers a parity betwixt Bishops and Presbyters. And from which it appears,
that dangerous Consequences should not be drawn from the dubious and heedless
expressions of old Authors, living in rude Times and Places: and from all which
we might have been secure, that my Lord St. Asaph would have concurred with the
wise answer, which Spotswood, Archbishop of St. Andrews (with whom the learned
Hammond agrees) gave to that silly Argument, without affronting him as a
betrayer of the Episcopal Cause; and caressing our Fanatics by that
unwarrantable and dangerous assertion; that in consequence thereof they might
reasonably conclude, that when they covenanted against Episcopacy, they had
only used their own right; and thrown out that, which was a confessed
innovation; in order to the restoring of that, which was their primitive
Government. For it does not follow, that because our Church in its infancy and
necessity was without Bishops for some Years; that therefore it was reasonable
for Subjects, to enter into a Solemn League and Covenant, without, and against
the consent of their Monarch; and to extirpate Episcopacy settled then by Law,
and by an old prescription of 1200 Years at least.

3. Precedence being one of the Jewels of the Crown and one of the chief
Glories of Princes; and all who treat on that Subject confessing, that the King
of Great Britain, as King of Scotland, is the most ancient Monarch in Europe,
the Line of other Kingdoms having been often interrupted, whereas ours never
was; it seems a great injury to our Kings, to have their Line shortened, so as
thereby to postpone them, to many others; and if this Author's Arguments prove
any thing, they must prove that our Kings cannot instruct their Antiquity, till
Malcolm the 3d's Time: and so our Kings will be amongst the last of all
Crowned-Heads. Nor is it one of the least Arguments, which prevail with us, to
hazard all for our Royal-Line, that we have been so long Subjects to it, and
happy under it: and therefore whoever shortens it, lessens (though without
design) the influence of our Kings, and endangers the Succession. And since
Page 2.
Luddus owns, that he durst not deny the British Descent from Brutus, lest he
might thereby wrong the Majesty of the English Nation; I admire, that any of
the Subjects of Great Britain did not think it a degree of Lese-Majesty, to
injure and shorten the Royal-Line of their Kings.

4. If this injury had been done to Kings, or to a Nation, when they were
Enemies to Episcopacy, as the Obligation was, so the fault had been less. But
to inveigh against our Royal-Line, after King James had made the settlement of
Episcopacy his business; King Charles had died for it; and our late Sovereign
of Glorious Memory, had been more disquieted by the Schismatical opposition
made to it, than by all his other concerns, seems very unkind. And tho this
learned and worthy Author, upon design to make us sit down quietly under these
Injuries, seems to gratify us, by the Complement, That we, since the Writing
of our Histories, needed not such helps, as old and fabulous Romances: telling
us, that we have excelled most other Nations, in Arts, and Arms; and especially
in the Purity of Religion, abating only the blemish, which we have contracted
by too easy a belief of these Fictions, which he designs to Refute. Yet, since
no Peer in England, though a Subject, would have allowed this Author to tell
him, that albeit, he be now a brave and generous Person; his Predecessors were
lately pilfering barbarous Robbers and Vagabonds, and the History of his Family
a fabulous Romance. How should he have imagined, that our Kings and Nation (how
gentle soever) would have thought, that the Justice done them in this Age (and
for which we thank the Bishop of St. Asaph) should have compens'd the Injuries
done to their Predecessors?

But it is probable, that my Lord St. Asaph has not, on the one hand, known the
Grounds which we here urge for our Antiquity, and that our nice Jealousy for
our Honor, on the other hand, magnifies too much to us such injuries, of which
we are naturally very sensible: and therefore, I hope, by his Lordship's
aquiescence, the result of the Debate will be, that he will see that our
Royal-Line and Nation are more ancient than he imagined them to have been: and
that we will remain convinced, that his Book was not dictated by malice, and
National Humor.

My Design is not to convince my Readers, that I am Learned, but that my Cause
is just: and therefore I use no more Citations, even from the Books I know,
than may prove or illustrate my Positions. And, not being the first aggressor,
I expect the favor which is due to Self-defence: For of all things, I hate
unnecessary Debates; and I admire St. Paul, for saying, Acts 24. 12.
And they neither found me in the Temple disputing with any Man. Debates
generally starve Charity, feed Self-love, and incline even very good Men to
more partiality, than I hope can be charged in this Debate, upon

Your Lordship's most faithful and humble Servant, Geo. Mackenzie.

King CHARLES the 1st his Speech to the Scottish Parliament at Edinburgh, Aug.
19. 1641.
I Cannot doubt of such real Testimonies of your Affections, for the
maintenance of that Royal Power which I enjoy, after 108 Descents, and which
you profess to maintain, and to which your National Oath does oblige your, etc.

A Defense of the Antiquity OF THE Royal-Line OF SCOTLAND, With a true Account,
when the Scots were governed by Kings in the Isle of Britain.
In Answer to the Bishop of St. Asaph.
ALL the Historians of Scotland unanimously agreeing, that the Royal-Line of
the Kings of Scotland did begin in King Fergus the First: and that the Scots
now inhabiting it, were settled here, under one Sovereign, about 330 years
before Christ. And their Histories being received with great applause for many
hundreds of years, by Historians, Antiquaries, and Critics of other Nations,
who had any occasion to take notice of our Affairs; Luddus affecting
Singularity, did, Anno 1572, controvert both these Points: for which, he having
been refuted with just severity by Buchannan; the Bishop of St. Asaph, upon
pretext of answering a very silly an inconsequential Argument against
Episcopacy, has undertaken the Defense of Luddus his Kinsman, contending, that
the Scots did not settle in Britain till the year of our Lord 503, and that
they had no King, who governed in this Island till that time.

Albeit there be other unwarrantable assertions and positions in that Book, yet
being unwilling to enter upon any Argument, which may, by the remotest
Consequence, be urged against that Episcopacy, which I so much reverence; I, as
his Majesty's Advocate, design only to prove, that in both these Points the
Bishop has (though I hope without design) injured our Kings and Nation. For
proving whereof,

The first thing I shall clear, shall be, That History requires, nor admits no
Mathematieal, nor Legal Proof, but is satisfied with such Moral Certainty, as
is inferred from probable Tradition, old Manuscripts, credible Historians, the
Testimony of Foreign Authors, and probable Reasons.

Secondly; That our Histories being already acquiesced in, and received by the
generality of Mankind, and especially by Critics, Antiquaries, and Historians,
the best Judges in such cases, need no Confirmation, nor further Proof.

Thirdly; That albeit we are not obliged to prove, or confirm our History, yet
we are able to do it by all the former Grounds, which is all that needs be done
for the Credit of any History.

Fourthly; I shall answer the Arguments brought by the Bishop against our
Histories. And I must entreat my Readers to lay all these together, and not to
judge by parcels, which is not to be done, especially in cases of this nature.

For clearing the first of these Points, SECT. 1. What Proofs are necessary in
History.
it is fit to consider, that right Reason requires only in all cases, such
Proofs, as the nature of the Subject can allow: and therefore, though
Mathematicians rest only upon infallible Demonstrations; and the Law requires
strict and solemn Proofs; Yet the Law it self remits its ordinary Exactness, to
comply with the necessity of Human Affairs, allowing Domestic Witnesses, where
others cannot be had, and strong presumptive Grounds as equal to Witnesses,
where the Subject Matter can admit of no other Proofs: Morality convinces by
probable Reasons, and History allows Moral Certainty for a sufficient Probation
in matters of Fact, because the matters treated of in it, can generally admit
no exacter Proofs: Which Proposition as to History, will very easily appear, if
we consider, that even the Historians of this present Age, cannot themselves
see every thing they relate; nor can all be proved by the Testimony of
Witnesses. Reason likewise has obliged Men to presume, that a Nation ought as
much to be believed in these cases, as two Witnesses are in any single one: for
even in the case of Witnesses, our belief is founded upon the presumption, that
they will not lie, and damn themselves; and that both the one, and the other,
do at last resolve in presumptive and probable Grounds: So that Men satisfy
themselves in most things, with the general Belief and Tradition of those among
whom they live, founded upon probable Reasons. Manuscripts also written by
others, infer no Mathematical nor Legal Certainty: For the Author of the
Manuscript might have been mistaken, or biased; and at best, one Witness
proves not. Nor are Strangers obliged to believe the exactest History of those
who write in favor of the Antiquity of their own Nation, upon any other
account, than because History is satisfied with probable Grounds. Domestic
Testimonies infer only a probable Belief; and tho an Oath were interposed, that
could creat no more than a moral Certainty.

As the former Proposition is founded upon just Reason, so all Historians have
been believed, and the Histories of all Nations have been received upon
probable Grounds and Warrants, though they were not written by those who saw
and heard what they wrote. Amongst many Instances of which, I shall only name
that of the Romans, written by Rarae per eadem tempora literae f^ere una
custodia fidelis memoriae rerum g^starum: and quod etiamsi quae in commentariis
Pontificum, aliisque publicis privatisque erant Monumentis, incensa urbe
pleraque periere. Live. I^it. lib. 6.
Livius; In which Commonwealth, he tells us that the use of Letters was not
then ordinary, and that the best Records were the faithful Remembrance of
things past; and if some few Memorials were left by the Priests in succeeding
Ages, they perished at the burning of the Town. And no History was collected
till the year 485, after the building of Rome, Fabius Pictor, their first
Historian, writing in that Year, as Vossius de Hist. Lat. lib. 1. cap. 44. and
lib. 2.
Vossius informs us. The Jewish History also had no Historical Warrant for the
first 2000 years, but Tradition, and after that time, their Transactions were
mentioned in very few Foreign Histories: And the Annals of their own Priests
were thought good Historical Foundations, in the opinion of Lib. 1. against
Appion.
Josephus, even for the Sacred History. I need not mention the Histories of the
Greeks, who could have no Records for many hundreds of years before they wrote;
and much less those of the French, and Spaniards, whose Histories might much
more justly be questioned upon the Grounds that ours are.

The surest Foundation then of all Histories, is the common belief and consent
of the Natives: For Strangers cannot know but from them, and this consent and
belief may be founded upon credible Tradition, Manuscripts, Domestic
Witnesses, but especially when these are fortified by the concurring
Testimonies of Foreign Authors, probable Reasons, and the acquiescence of
Mankind. And tho less accepted for fortifying an Ancient, than Modern History,
and that even a part of these would be sufficient to confirm a Modern one; yet
I hope to make them all concur for supporting ours, tho very ancient.

It would appear then by this, that as the Bishop of St. Asaph has undertaken
to defame our History without any necessity, so he does it without any shadow
of Reason: and we will at least have the satisfaction to see our Histories
subsist as long as any Histories can do.

I conceive also, that in Reason, Historians already received in the World with
Applause, need not show their Warrants whereupon they proceed; No more than a
Man that is in possession needs prove or confirm his Right, except the same be
proved to be false, or a clearer, or stronger Right be produced by him who
challenges the former. Nor are Men curious to preserve old Manuscripts and
Records, after they have formed their Histories by them: for else no Historian
could ever be secure, if the not being able to show their Warrants, after many
Ages, might discredit their History. And I desire to know, where are these few
Historians, whom Herodotus, Livius, and others do cite in their Histories? Or,
these whom Josephus did cite to confirm that of the Jews, when it was
challenged by Appion the Grammarian, upon the same grounds that ours is now
quarreled by the Bishop of St. Asaph? And albeit the authority of a single
Historian, might be suspected after his History is written, and that then his
Warrants might be called for; especially if other Manuscripts could be found,
written in the time controverted, by which that History might be contradicted:
Or if the History controverted did report things inconsistent with the whole
Tract of other Historians, or the Principles of common Sense and Reason, as
Ieffrey of Monmouth, and some British Historians do, in the opinion of the
Bishop of St. Asaph, and their own best Critiques. Yet, this cannot at all be
extended to our case, who have many Histories written by Men of great
Reputation, all agreeing very well with one another, and relating things
probable in themselves, and very agreeable to Foreign Histories, and which they
declare, they did draw from Warrants cited by them, and which have for many
Years, been read with great pleasure, and cited with great honor by Critiques,
Antiquaries, and Historians, and contradicted by the authority of no positive
History or Manuscript, written by any in the Ages controverted, asserting, that
the Scottish Nation now inhabiting this Isle, did first plant themselves here,
about such a year of God, under such a King, or adducing some such solid Ground
against us; all that is objected against our positive and applauded Histories,
being the vain scruples of an obscure Author, Luddus, who being confuted by
Buchannan, made no more noise in the World, till Brittann. cap. Scoti passim,
but especially Page 242. These are the Points, I say, which I would wish the
Scottish Men diligently to think upon; but let them remember, that in the mean
time, I have affirmed nothing, but only given an inkling of certain things,
which may seem in some sort material, whence if the Original of the Scots have
received no Light, let them seek it elsewhere; and I have in vain searched, but
with that circumspect care, that I hope I have not given the least offense to
any whatsoever.
Cambden raised some Conjectures with submission to us, after which Learned
Praefat. de primord. Eccl. Brit. In nostra autem ex omni Scriptorum genere
promiscue congesta farragine, siquis obscuriorum Authorum citata mirabitur
testimonia; Cogitare illum velim, aliud esse Historiam scribere aliud materiam
hinc inde conve^ere, unde delectu adhibito, etc.
Bishop Usher (picqu'd by Dempster's Severity, to his Uncle Stanihurst) gathered
together, an undigested, and formless lump of all Writers, good and bad, from
which, he says, that Discretion being used, a History might be formed. And from
these, the Bishop of St. Asaph, impatient of Buchannan's severity to Luddus,
under the pretext of respect to Episcopacy, has drawn a new Model, without
bringing new Materials, putting that confused Rabble in Rank and File, with
some pleasant Reflections.

I might then forbear to trouble my self any further, SECT. 2. What Proofs we
can adduce for our History, and first of our Tradition.
than in answering those few, and ill-founded Objections, mustered up by the
Bishop against us, which being removed, leave our History in its former luster
and splendour. But for serving my King and Country, and satisfying my Reader
more entirely, I am resolved to clear, that our Historians have proceeded upon
sufficient Warrants, according to the former uncontrovertible Propositions,
which I at first laid down in relation to History in general. And this I will
endeavor to do, 1. By showing that our Tradition is very well founded. 2. By
showing, that we had ancient Annals, and that our Historians were Men of great
Reputation, and that they founded their Histories on those ancient Annals. 3.
That the best Historians among the Britains, do concur to assert our Antiquity;
and that such as oppose it, are Men of so little authority, as that their
Testimony should not be put in the Balance with those who stand for us. 4.
That our Histories are confirmed by the authority of ancient Foreign Authors.
5. That our Histories have been believed and applauded by the best of late
Historians, Critiques, and Antiquaries, the best Judges in such cases. 6. That
the antiquity of our History is founded upon solid Reason, and great
Probability as well as upon the Testimony of Authors, both within and without
the Isle: Which is all that can be done, or is requisite for asserting and
proving the Truth of any History.

For clearing whereof I must inform my Reader, that whilst this Isle was Pagan,
it had for its Priests, the Druids, who taught them Sciences, and Letters, and
who were so famous, That Disciplina in Britannia Reperta, atque inde in Galliam
translata esse existimatur: Caes. Bell. Gall. Lib. 6. multa de ex eorum motu,
de mundi ac terrarum magnitudine de rerum natura, de Deorum immortalium vi and
potestate disputant and juventute tradunt. Ibid. Cum in publicis rationibus and
privivatis, Graecis literis utantur. Ibid. By publicae rations, are probably
meant their Histories, at least it is most reasonable to think, that since they
had the use of Letters, they would have written Histories, or some short
Memorials.
Caesar tells us, That the Gauls derived their first Learning from them. And
all Histories acknowledge, That these used to transmit the Histories of their
own times in Verses, which were taught by them to their Scholars: and it is
probable, that some of these Druids having been converted from the Pagan
Religion, whereof they were the Priests, became our first Monks; being thereto
much inclined by the severity of their former Discipline: as the Therapeutae
did for the same Reason become the first Anchorits in Egypt; and so it was
easy for them to inform the Monasteries of what they knew so well. And this
Hint is confirmed by a very clear passage in Leslies Preface to his History,
who being a Bishop himself, should be believed by another of the same Character
in a probable matter of Fact. Nor can there be a clearer Confirmation of our
having had the Druids amongst us, than that in several places of the Irish
Version of the New Testament, the wise Men, or Priests, are translated Druids:
and so, where the English Translation says, That the Wise Men from the East
came to worship our Savior: Our Irish Translation has the Druids, etc. Our
Predecessors also being descended from the Spanish Gallicks, or Galicians, as
is acknowledged by Historians; and they having had the use of Letters, and of
Grammar, long before this time, as Page 96. Edit. Casaubon.
Strabo confesses, it cannot be imagined, but that we as a Colony of them,
would have likewise a part of their Art and Learning. Our Predecessors also had
their Sanachies and Bards; The first whereof were the Historians, and the
latter the Poets of their Traditions, as Luddus himself acknowledges, and by
either of these means, the Memory of our Kings and their Actions, might have
been preserved until the 5th Century; at which time we got Monasteries; in
which (as I shall hereafter prove) were written and preserved the Annals of our
Nation. And since nothing but great Improbabilities, and fundamental
Inconsistencies, should be allowed to refute a History already received. I
shall offer these Considerations for clearing, that this way of preserving the
Memory of our Kings, is as probable a mean as any can be in History.

1. It is probable that our Nation, as all the rest of Mankind, who are
warlike, and in constant action, would be desirous to preserve the memory of
those Actions, for which they had hazarded their Lives, and by which they
designed to preserve that Fame, which they preferred to Life it self: And that
the Kings likewise, whose Authority and Right was much reverenced for its
Antiquity, would be as careful to preserve those Marks of their ancient
Dominion.

2. We do not in this serious Debate, pretend to such ancient Originations, and
Descents, as might through Vanity tempt Men to lie, as those do, who endeavor
to derive themselves from the Trojans. All that we pretend to in this Debate,
being only, that we are a Colony, who probably came first from Greece to Spain,
but settled certainly in Ireland for some time: and that we came from them,
after the time, in which Cambden, and Usher acknowledge that the Nation of the
Scots (whose Name we only now bear) were long settled there. Would not our
Accusers have us trust the British Antiquities for 2500 years? and the Irish
for a longer time than our own, without any written History, or Manuscript now
extant before Gilda's time? And tho Lycurgus would not suffer his Laws to be
written, yet they were preserved in the Memories of Men, for more than 600
Years, as Plutarch observes; and we and other Nations have preserved some Laws
for much longer time, without the help of writing. And the only Points here
controverted, being the first Settlement of our Nation, and that we continue
Subjects to the same race of Kings; these are matters so remarkable, that most
Nations know when such Changes happened to one another. As for instance, tho
there were no History yet extant, we should easily have known that the Saxons,
Danes, and Normans conquered the Britons, and altered the Race of their Kings.
That Ireland had many little Monarchs, till they were swallowed up by Henry the
2d of England. And that Edward Bruce, Brother to our glorious King Robert the
first, was chosen King of Ireland, with universal Consent there, and might have
continued in that Government, if from too great a love to Fame, and to gain a
Victory without his Brother, he had not lost it, and himself. And though all
these controverted Points, fell out in a time after the use of Letters was
known to most Nations, and particularly to the Druids and Romans, the one
whereof were our Priests, and the other our Neighbors very long, yet there
remains not the least vestige of a doubt, that our Scepter was ever swayed by
any other Race.

3. Though we had wanted the use of Letters, as most probably we did not; Yet
the Tradition controverted, is at most of about 800 years. For, after that
time, it shall be proved, that we had Records and Annals: And the things said
of our Kings, during that time, are so few, and so remarkable, that Men might
have taught the same to their Children in a weeks time: And Men lived so long
at that time, that ten or twelve Men might have transmitted the Tradition to
one another. As also, since private Families do preserve to this day their
Tradition for as long time as this; it was much more easy for a Nation, and
their Kings, to preserve theirs. Nor can I tell why my Lord St. Asaph, in his
Preface, can controvert our Tradition, though we could not produce Writers who
lived in those Times, wherein these Actions are said to be done: since Page 71.
he thinks it reasonable to judge that there was the same Government here in
Britain, though for want of Ancient Writings, there could be produced no plain
Instances of it. And if this be allowed to Episcopacy in these times, why
should he not have allowed the same favor to his Monarch's Predecessors, in
the same and more ancient Ages.

4. It was much easier for us to preserve our Traditions, than for the English,
we being all descended from the same Race, and being still the same People,
living under the uninterrupted succession of the same Royal-Line; Whereas they
were obliged to suppress the Traditions and Memorials of the People whom they
had conquered.

5. As no Man is presumed to lie, or cheat, without some great Temptation; so
the most glorious things that are said of us, are true beyond debate. As our
having defended the Ground in which we settled, against all opposition to this
very day: Our having put the first stop to the Roman Greatness; our having beat
the far more numerous Britans, though defended by strong Walls, and stronger
Romans: All which cannot be denied to have been done by us, and are equally
noble, whether we were settled here or not, when we did them. After those
controverted Times, it cannot be denied, that we carried our Conquests further
into Britain than formerly: That we fought long with success against the Saxons
and Picts, and did at last extirpate the latter: And when we were alone, we
continued, and extended our former Conquests against the Danes and Normans;
which proves also, that in the Wars which we had against the Romans in
conjunction with the Picts, the Victories we then got, are chiefly to be
ascribed to us. And to crown all, we have generously contributed all that was
in our power, to support that Ancient and Royal Family (so unparalleled for
its antiquity) by which we were animated, and instructed to do all those great
Actions, till they are now become the Monarchs of the whole Isle; having by a
happier way extinguished those Wars and Animosities, and may he be unhappy who
revives them.

For clearing how this Tradition might have been, and was preserved; Our
History tells us of a probable way among many others, which was, That at the
Coronation of our Kings, one appeared and recited his whole Genealogy. I shall
trouble my Reader only with a proof of this Custom, which is such as confirms
also the Genealogy of King Alexander the 3d, in the year 1249, prior to
Fordon's time, or to the view of any such Debate, and is related by Fordon and
Major in the Life of that King; and being so memorable a Fact, and so near
Fordon's own time, his Relation cannot but be credited. His words are, That the
King being placed in the Marble-Chair, the Crown upon his Head, and the Scepter
in his Hand, and the Nobility being set below Him, a Venerable old High-landed
Gentleman stepped out, and bowing the Knee, expressed himself to the King in the
High-land Language thus; God bless you King Alexander, Son of Alexander, Son of
William, etc. And so carried up the Genealogy to Fergus the First: Which Custom
was most solemnly used at the Coronation of King Charles the Martyr, at which
time their Pictures were exposed, and noblest Actions recited.

As also the reciting of their Genealogy was usual at the Burial of ours Kings,
a written Proof of which Tradition, is to be seen in a Manuscript of Baldredus
Abbas Rynalis; (for that which is the Abbacy of Melros, was so called before
King David's time, who designs them so in the Foundations of the Lands of
Melros, which he gives to them) and is related verbatim by Fordon, consisting
of eighteen Chapters, mentioning the memorable Actions of King David, upon whom
the Lamentation is made, who died 1151; and running up the Genealogy of the
said St. David to Fergus the First, dedicated to Henry Prince of England, Grand
Nephew to St. David, who came to the Crown of England, Anno 1154, under the
name of Henry the Second: In both which at least Fordon is to be believed,
having sufficient Vouchers. This also being ordinary in our High-land Families
to this very day, not only at Burials, but Baptisms and Marriages: and in which
Families, Men continue still to be designed from their Fathers, Grandfathers,
and very many Generations upwards; as is a sufficient Historical Proof of
Tradition, tho we had no other Warrant for those few Ages.

Before I come to clear that we had Manuscripts and Records, SECT. 3.
it is fit to consider that is very probable, Proofs from Manuscripts and
Records.
that as the History of most Nations was preserved by their Priests and
Churchmen: so ours would be very ready to oblige the Kings, under whom, and
the People among whom they lived, by writing their Annals. And therefore we may
reasonably conclude, that since we were very early Christians, we had therefore
ancient Histories written by our Churchmen, besides those which we may pretend
to have been transmitted to them by the Druids. And the Bishop himself
acknowledges that the Monastery of Hy, called by us Icolm-kill, (that is Hy,
the Cell of Columba) was founded about the year 560; and it is undeniable, that
48 of our old Kings were buried, and our Records were kept there since its
Foundation, until the Reign of Malcolm Canmore: and it is also certain, that
our Annals were written in our Monasteries, such as Scoon, Pasley, Pluscardin,
and Lindesfern Beda passim.
governed by three Scotish-Bishops, Aidan, Finan, and Colman; and Abercorn,
mentioned by Lib. 4. cap. 26.
Beda; and Melross, the Chronicle whereof begins where Beda ends, as their
History now printed shows: though certainly that English Manuscript is very
unfaithful, for most of the things relating to our Nation are omitted, as
particularly about the beginning, in the year 844. Our Manuscript observes
(which the English has not) That Alpin King of the Scots died, to whom
succeeded his Son Kenneth, who beat the Picts, and was declared first King of
all Scotland, to the Water of Tine; and after it expresses in his Epitaph,
Primus in Albania fertur Regnasse Kenedhus
Filius Alpini, praelia multa gerens.


And it observes that he was called the first King of Albany, not because he
was the first who made the Scottish Laws, but because he was the first King of
all Scotland. And each of our Monasteries had two Books, the one called their
Register, or Chartulary, containing the Records relating to their private
securities; and another called their Black-book, containing an account of the
memorable things which occurred in every Year. And as it is strongly presumable,
that our Historians would have compiled our Histories from those: So this being
a matter of Fact, is probable by Witnesses: and I thus prove it in such a way
and manner as is sufficient to maintain any History. Verimundns a Spaniard,
Archdeacon of St. Andrews, in Anno 1076, (as is remarked by Page 229.
Chambers of Ormond) declares in the Epistle to his Book of the Historians of
Scotland, dedicated to King Malcolm, called Can-more; That, albeit there are
many things in the said Histories, which may seem to the Readers to be a little
difficult to be believed, because they are not totally confirmed by Foreign
Historians: Yet after have they heard how the Scots were settled in the North
Part of the Isle of Albion, separated by the Sea from the firm Land, and so
seldom troubled by Strangers, to whom they give no occasions to write their
Actions; and also that they have not been less happy in having almost always
among them the Druids, Religious People, and diligent Chroniclers, before the
Reception of the Christian Faith, and continually since Monks, faithful
Historians in the Isles of Man, and Icomkill; where they kept securely their
Monuments and Antiquities, without giving a sight, or Copy of them to
strangers; they will cease to wonder. This Chambers was a Learned Man, and a
Lord of Session, who wrote anno 1572, and in his Page 13.
Preface, says, That he had those principal Authors, Verimund a Spaniard,
Turgot Bishop of St. Andrews, John Swenton, John Campbel, and Bishop
Elphinstoun, etc. and many great Histories of the Abbacies of Scoon, called the
Black-book, and of other like Chronicles of Abbacies, as that of Inch-colm, and
Icolmkill, the most part whereof he took pains to consider as much as was
possible for him. He Page 24.
cites Verimund for an account of the Scots and Picts, and after he also Page 94.
cites him for the Miracle of St. Andrews in Hungus's time; and he Page 95, and
96.
gives an account of the tenor of the League betwixt Charles the Great, and
Achaius, and asserts that the same was extracted out of the Registers and Books
he mentioned, and particularly, out of the second Book of Verimund. Sir Richard
Baker cites this Verimund, among the Authors out of whom he compiled his
History; and with him he cites Ioannes Campbellus, who (he says) wrote the
History of the Scots from the Origin of the Nation till the Year 1260, in
which he lived: And also Turgot, who (he says) wrote our Annals from the
beginning till the Year 1098, in which he lived, (and him likewise Hollinshed
cites); as also Aluredus Rivallensis, who wrote the History of King David, and
died Anno 1166; and Bartholomeus Anglicus, who wrote a Chronicle of the Scots,
and lived in the Year 1360. Two of which three last, we have reason to think
were Scots-men, and have been called Englishmen, only because they lived in
the Counties which now belong to England, but then certainly belonged to us;
and if they be Englishmen, they are yet the more credible Witnesses for us. And
as the worthy Baker says, he compiled his History out of these Books, which he
neither would nor could have said, if he had not seen them: So it is very
probable that he did see them; our Records and Manuscripts having been
industriously carried to England by Edward the First, as shall be hereafter
observed: Nor can it be answered, that he cited them at second-hand from Boeth,
or Buchannan, for else he had cited the other Authors whom they cite, such as
Richardus de sancto victore, Fordon, Major, etc. All this does evidently
demonstrate that we had such Historians as Verimund, and the others
above cited, who asserted before Fordon what he has related: so that it was
most unwarrantable to say, that these things were dreamed by Fordon and
Boethius, but that Verimund was seen and considered by others, and cited in a
particular part of his Book, which could not be copied from Boethius, because
he does not cite Verimund for all those Transactions; and upon this Part Post.
Balaeus, a Learned Englishman, has rested. And Page 100, and page 460.
Holinshed says, that Verimund wrote a Book, De Regibus Scotorum. Nor can it be
denied that Gesner in verbo Verimund, and other famous Strangers, cite him as
one who has written our History ab exordio Scoticae gentis, usque ad Malcolmi
tempora. And it is incredible to think so good and grave a Man as Boethius could
have been so impudent to assert in Et Lib. 7.
his Dedication to King James the 5th, That these Books were sent to him by the
Earl of Argile, and his Brother the Thesaurer from Icolmkill, and that, he had
followed them in writing his History: Especially since he is by Erasmus that
great Critic, admired as a most Learned Man, they having studied together at
Paris, where he remembers that he was in great esteem. And in a Letter
concerning him, Anno 1530, inserted in the Life of Erasmuus, he remarks, that
Boethius was a Person who could not lie. How can it then be imagined, that he
would have adventured to have printed a whole Romance, and have told his King
and the World, that he had the Manuscripts by him? Nor is this asserted only by
Boethius, and our own Historians, but by Paulus Iovius, a very famous Foreign
Historian, who in his Description of Scotland, says, Asservantur in arcanis
templi armariis vetustissimorum Annalium Codices atque item latae membranae,
ipsorum Regum subscriptae manibus aureisque vel cereis sigillorum imaginibus
obsignatae; quibus antiquae leges edictaque and finium ac Civitatum Iura
publica continentur.
That in Iona (which we call Icolmkill) are kept the ancient Annals and
Manuscripts in hidden Presses of the Church, and large Parchments asigned by
the King's own hands, and sealed either with Seals of Gold, or Wax. By which
also it appears how nice we have been in securing the Faith of our History, the
Seals of our Kings being put to what was written by our devout Churchmen. And
whereas the Bishop of St. Asaph, to lessen the Credit of Boethius Page 38. Pref.
, relates, that Bishop Gavin Douglas advised Polidor Virgil not to follow his
History. Polidor Virgil himself is appealed to, where there is no mention of
Boethius at all, nor could it be; for Polidor regrates that Gavin Douglas died
Anno 1520, whereas Boethius was not published till 1526, and Lib. 7.
Boethius himself informs us, That the Records from which he formed his
History, were sent him from Icolmkill Anno 1525, and no sooner; neither did he
see those Warrants from which he wrote his History, till that Year. And it
appears by that passage, that Gavin Douglas believed our account, and produced
a Manuscript for it, which I now cite, and use as an accessory Argument, and
prove it by the Bishop of St. Asaph, and Polidor: and whereas the Bishop of St.
Asaph pretends that the Relation given by Gavin Douglas agreed with Nennius,
but contradicted Boethius; the contrary is probable by Polidor's own Relation
of what Gavin Douglas writ to him, which agrees with Boethius in every thing
relating to our Antiquity. The Bishop of St. Asaph is also most unjust to
Boethius, in alleging that Vossius considers him as a fabulous Author: For
Vossius commends him from what Erasmus and Buchannan say of him, and in the end
taxes him only a little for having believed too many Miracles, a fault incident
to most Popish Writers in those times, but to none more than to the Bishop's
own obscure Authors, for which, among many other Testimonies, I refer my Reader
to them who writ the Preface to the Histories of Matthew of Westminster, and to
the Life of King Alfred, and Walsingham's History. It can also be proved by
many famous Gentlemen, that the Black Book of Scoon, containing our Histories
from the beginning, was among President Spotwood's Books, and was given by
Lewis Cant to Major General Lambert, and by him to Colonel Fairfax; which Book
King Charles the first had ransomed from Rome by a considerable Sum of Money.
And it is certain that Spotswood had it, and the Black Book of Pasley, signed
by the hands of three Abbots, when he compiled his History: Which Book of
Pasley, together with the famous Book of Pluscardin, Buchannan says he had, and
frequently cites: and that there were such Books is known to the whole Nation.
And I my self have seen in the Learned Sir Robert Sibbald's Library (to whom
this Nation owes very much) a very old Abridgment of the Book of Pasley (which
Book Bp Usher himself also cites) agreeing in every thing with our Histories,
and which was extracted per venerabilem virum Ioannem Gibson Canonicum
Glasguensem, and Rectorem de Renfrew, Anno 1501. And two other old Manuscripts,
the one called, Excerpta de Chronicis Scotiae, and Scoti-chronico, which comes
to the Reign of King James the 2d. and belonged to Doctor Arbuthnot Physician
to King James the 5th; and this proves that there were Chronica different from
Fordon's. And the other, Extracta de Registro prioratus Sancti-Andreae, giving
the Irish Names of our Kings. As also I have seen a Manuscript written by a
Brother of the minores Observants of Iedburgh, in Anno 1533, containing an
Abridgment of our History, and whereof Doctor Sibbald has another Copy. And
there is another old Manuscript written by Ventonius yet extant, which
Buchannan also cites, and follows.

Since the Writing of these Sheets, I have seen a very old Manuscript brought
from Icolmkill, written by Carbre Lifachair, who lived six Centuries before St.
Patrick, and so about our Saviors time; wherein is given a full account of the
Irish Kings: By which I conclude, that since the Irish had Manuscripts then,
certainly we must also be allowed to have had them, having greater occasion of
learning Sciences, and writing Histories; because of our Commerce with the
Romans, and polite Britans. In this Book also there are many Additions by the
Druids of those times: from which I likewise may confirm that the Priests in
our old Monasteries learned our Ancient History from the Druids who preceded
them.

I have seen also an old Genealogy of the Kings of the Albanian Scots, agreeing
with that mentioned in our History at the Coronation of King Alexander the 2d,
and which has still been preserved as Sacred there.

I have also seen another old Manuscript, wherein the Dalreudini Albanach are
considered as settled here six Generations before Eric, whom Usher calls the
Father of our Kings. I find also in it, that Angus Tuerteampher reigned in
Ireland five Generations before our Fergus the First; and that in his time the
Irish and Albanians divided, and separated from one another. Which agrees with
our Histories, which say, that the Scots were in this Country long before King
Fergus and his Race settled here. And these our Irish Manuscripts agree in every
thing with the abovecited History of Corbre', and are in effect Additions to
his Book by our old Sanachies.

Having thus cleared, that there were sufficient Warrants upon which our
Authors might have founded their Histories; I shall in the next place say
something of our Historians, and make appear that they deserved the credit and
applause they met with, and that they founded their History on those good
Warrants, from which Verimund, Boethius, and Chambers are formerly proved to
have drawn theirs, viz. our ancient Annals and Registers.

Fordon was no Monk, as the Page 26. Pref.
Bishop is pleased to call him, and we had no such Monastery as Fordon: but he
was venerabilis vir dominus Johannes Fordon Presbyter, and is called a Monk by
the Bishop (who studies still his own convenience) to make the World believe he
was inclined to lie, as the Monks are said to have been in that Age; and to
show him interested for the Independency of Monks and Culdees from Bishops.
This Author began at least to write before the Year 1341; for, in his Book he
speaks of that as a present Year. This Book was so esteemed, that there were
Copies of it in most of our Monasteries, and one of them we have in very old,
but in fair Characters, continued by Arelat; another continued by a Reverend
Man, Walter Bowmaker, Abbot of Icolmkill, and found in the custody of one, who
had preserved several of the Manuscripts of that Monastery: And both these
Continuations have drawn out our Histories to the Reign of King James the 2d.
And it is not to be imagined that the Monasteries would have esteemed it so
much; or that the Abbot of that Monastery, where our chief Annals were kept,
would have continued it, if they and he had not known it to agree with their
Annals. And Fordon cites frequently through his Book Chronica, and alia
Chronica, and Beda, and follows him exactly: he cites also Adamnanus, who lived
before the Year 700; and Turgot Archbishop of St. Andrews, who lived anno 1098,
and Alvared, (who dedicated his Book to King Malcom the 3d, about the year
1057.) He cites also other foreign Authors, such as Sigisbert, and Isidor, and
so has done all that the Bishop requires, and all that the best Historians can
do: Neither does he follow Ieffrey, but contradicts him, even in the instance
of Bassianus, as shall be cleared to conviction, in answering the Bishop's
Objections. He has in him also Baldredus or Ethelredus, and the Process before
the Pope, containing the Copies of the authentic Letters, Objections,
Apologies, and Answers made and signed by Edward 1. and his Parliament, and the
Scottish Nobility, produced before the Pope, about the year 1300, whereof the
Copies are not only extant from Fordon, but the Bishop also insinuates that the
Originals themselves are extant in England, and certainly they were at Rome.
And Fordon cites many other considerable old Records: He writes in a good
Style, and with good Judgment: and the reason why this Work was not printed,
was not because it deserved not the Press, but because Boethius, Buchannan, and
Lesly having printed their Histories in their own time, and there being no
printing in his, it was thought we had Histories enough; which also occasioned
the perishing of many of our excellent Manuscripts. But why should the Bishop
object to us Fordon his not being printed, since he cites against us
Manuscripts never cited by any, and which have been left unprinted in a Country
where every thing is printed: and I dare say, after exact perusal of the
Bishops Book, and of the Authors cited by him, that Fordon is preferable to all
those old Legends, and most of those Authors which he cites against us,
venerable Beda only excepted, who is still on our side.

Ioannes Major was Rector of the famous Divinity-School of Paris, and was a Man
of such Reputation in that University, as that he is yet remembered with esteem,
and a Man of too innocent a life, to have written a Romance for a History; and
he likewise relates to Beda, and our Annals. Of John Major a full account and
Elogium is given by the Learned Launoy Academiae Parisionsis illustrata, Tom.
2. page 652, 653. and sequent.

One of the most accurate Writers in this Age Vicfort memoirs des Ambassadeurs.
says, That the talent of writing History has not been found on this side of
the Alps in any, save in Buchannan, who has written the History of Scotland,
better than Livius did that of Rome. The Bishop of Condom also, and the famous
Rapin, in their exact Essays concerning History, have preferred none to him,
save Mariana the Jesuit, whom all Men know to be far inferior; but they prefer
Mariana, because Buchannan was a Protestant. Joseph Scaliger says of Buchannan
and Us, Imperii fuerat Romani Scotia limes,
Romani Eloquii, Scotia finis erit.
And Pref. new Translat. of Plutarch's Lives.
Mr. Dryden also my Friend, whom I esteem a great Critic, as well as Poet,
prefers Buchannan to all the Historians that ever wrote in Britain. And tho I
approve as little of Buchannan's Politics as the Bishop of St. Asaph does, yet
I will not be so unjust to him as he is, Page 30. Pref.
in saying, That Buchannan in the Life of Fergus the First, refers to our old
Annals, but he cites them not; for there is no such thing in the Life of that
King: And he was not so much a favourer of Monarchy, to have allowed it the
advantage of so singular an Antiquity, if he had not found the same due to it,
from our Manuscripts and Records, beyond all contradiction.

Bishop Lesly, and Archbishop Spotswood are Men who have written our History
with great judgment and truth, and it cannot be imagined that they who were
indeed banished for Loyalty, and suffered the loss of all for their Persuasion,
would have asserted a whole bundle of Lies, or a continued Romance, as the
Author calls our History, especially since they had both seen Luddus, and knew
that their History would be enquired into. And Ia quibus scribendis ne Historia
lex violaretur, illae quae prius scripta sunt, non solum exegimus ad veritatem
annalium, qui in publico Regni nostri archivo, aliisque antiquissimis codicibus
quos majores nostri Pasleti, Sconae, ac in aliis Monasteriis religiose
servarunt, continebantur. Lesl. paraen. ad nobil. populumque Scot. Page 29.
Lesly has the confidence to tell in his Preface to the Nobility, That his
History had been drawn with all the exactness that the truth of History
requires from the ancient Records of the Kingdom, and the Monasteries, and he
was then at Rome, whither they were carried. It is also very pleasant to hear
the Bishop of St. Asaph inveigh against Dempster the Jesuit, one of our
Antiquaries, whose Book certainly he had never seen, else he would never have
called him a Jesuit as he Page 153.
does. For the very Title of his Book bears that he was Baro de Muiresk, and a
Lawyer, and he was indeed Professor honorarius of the Civil Law at Bolognia in
Italy, and died married, as the History of his Life, writ by Peteraces, bears:
and we may know by the Elogies of the greatest Wits in Italy, how much they
esteemed him for his extraordinary Learning, and Parts. I may add to these,
David Camerarius de fortitudine, etc. Scotorum, besides Richardus de sancto
victore, and Cornelius Hibernicus, both which wrote our ancient Histories, the
last of them lived in the year 1140. And they are both followed by Boethius,
and cited by Vossius, Baleus, Sixtus Senensis, and others; and also Adamnanus
that wrote St. Columba's Life.

From all which it appears, that our Historians have been Men of great credit
and esteem, and have founded their History upon more authentic Documents, than
almost any other Historians in the World, viz. the Records of many Monasteries
in the time when Monasteries were very devout, and upon the universal Tradition
of the times, both ancient and modern; and that before there was any
competition or controversy concerning our Antiquity; and that what they have
said, has been universally believed by all the learned World. To which I shall
add that our Clerk of Registers, Skeen, the great Antiquary, had added from
those ancient Records a Chronology of our Kings, and which he has inserted
amongst our Acts of Parliament. Is not then the Bishop of St. Asaph much to
blame, when he would have all this pass for a Romance, and all those Authors to
be reputed only as one? Because, as he says, they followed one another from
Fordon, and he followed Ieffrey; neither of which is so. Tho I confess the
contrivance of this untruth was pretty, but happily disappointed, by their
asserting that they founded their Histories upon the old Records of our
Monasteries, and on Turgot, Verimund, and others; all which they had seen, and
who are elder than Fordon. And it might be as well objected against Witnesses,
that they came in and deposed one after another, giving for the reason of their
knowledge, that they had seen what they deposed.

If all these Manuscripts, which I have cited were extant, I doubt not but the
Author himself would acknowledge our Histories to be instructed beyond debate;
and therefore if I can instruct them to have once been, they must be reputed as
good as extant still. For both Law, and common Reason having considered that
Papers are very subject to be lost, and to perish; have therefore allowed, that
if it can be proved, that there were such Papers, and that they were lost by
accident, that this probation shall supply the loss. And I desire to know if
the Warrants of Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation had been burnt, would
not the Bishop of St. Asaph have been angry, if his Testimony and Dr.
Stillingfleet's had not been sufficient to prove the tenor of them? And what
have we for many Authors, whom Livy, Josephus, and Herodot cite besides their
own Testimony? And what probation did ever Mankind see stronger, than that
which we adduce in this case? For first, that all our Monasteries did write our
Annals, is beside common Fame, and universal and late Tradition, which passes
over all our Country, proved by the other Authorities above cited: If then two
ordinary Witnesses be sufficient to prove a matter of Fact, we must much more
allow, that this matter may be proved by very many Persons, considerable for
their Devotion and Quality. 2. There are other Manuscripts yet extant, some
whereof I my self have seen, and have formerly named, all agreeing with the
tenor of our History, and long prior to Luddus's starting of this Debate, in
Anno 1572. And so must prove sufficient to support our Histories, and those
Witnesses; especially seeing they have nothing in them contrary to Reason, or
other credible Histories; but on the contrary, are supported by both, and
written by Authors of great Integrity and Knowledge, and have been received with
great applause in the World, and are also confirmed by the English Historians
themselves. And therefore I must conclude with the Learned Vossius, De Hist.
Lat. page 4.
That albeit the old Monuments of Rome perished, that therefore the Faith of
their History should not perish with them.

Lest it might be thought that we our selves caused to destroy those Records we
now cite, to prevent further inquiry, and to show how much harder it is for us
than other Nations, to be called to such an account: I shall desire Strangers
to be informed as a casus omissionis, that our ancient Records were destroyed
in three remarkable occasions; 1. When Edward the First took away all our
Records that he could find, having, as all Historians declare, resolved to
abolish all memory of our Nation: and of which we accused him before the Pope,
and he did not deny it. 2. When our Monks flying to Rome at the Reformation,
carried with them their Records. 3. By Cromwell, who carried our Records into
England, and many of which were lost at Sea in their return.

But if our Historians are to be rejected, SECT. 4.
I hope it must be by the Authority of far more, The other Historians of this
Isle cited against us, examined.
and far more credible Authors, agreeable to a Principle of Dr.
Stillingfleet's, the Patron of our Bishop's Book, who Orig. Sac. p. 114. Sect.
5.
says, Certainly they who undertake to contradict that which is received by
common Consent, must bring stronger and clearer Evidence, than that on which
that Consent is grounded, or else their Exceptions ought to be rejected with
the highest Indignation. Which Principle, as it seems to be recommended by
Reason, so it is founded upon the express Law of all Nations; by which it is
acknowledged, that the Testimonies of Witnesses are not to be reprobated but by
others in a double number, and who are of far greater Authority. And from this
Principle it is, that if a Jury of fifteen has absolved a Man unjustly, though
that Jury consisted of the meanest Men of the Nation, yet their Verdict cannot
be questioned for error, otherways than by twenty five, whereof most part must
be Persons of Quality, who must proceed upon most infallible grounds and
evidences. By this rule then, our Historians cannot be redargu'd, otherways
than by the Testimonies of far more unsuspected Historians, who agree in what
they assert against us, and who are received with greater applause in the World
than ours, and proceed upon far stronger Evidences. Let us then examine if
these Qualifications can be found in those Historians, by whom the faith of
ours is to be overturned. And first, as to the old British Historians, it might
be objected by us, that they are too much interested, both because the Subject
Matter is an emulation for Antiquity between the two Nations, and because they
were overrun by our Countrymen at that time to a degree to make them
passionate enough for disabling a Witness: And as it is very remarkable that
Florentius Wigorniensis, Malmesburiensis, Huntingdonensis, and Hoveden wrote
about the Reign of Henry the Second; and Tho. Walsingham, and Matthew of
Westminster, in the Reigns of Edward the Third, and Henry the Sixth; at all
which times there were Wars and Animosities betwixt the Nations. So if any Man
will read the sad Lamentations that are in Gilda's, and the rage with which he
cries out against us, no Man can allow him to be an unsuspected Judge or Witness
in what concerns our Honor. Polidor Virgil suspects, Page 16.
that there are some things supposititious in the History of Gildas; and if any
thing, certainly we may suspect most what is added concerning us; since the
design of detracting from our History, possessed too much those who were Masters
of that Manuscript, and printed the same. And yet Gildas says very little that
can be wrested against us in the Points controverted; being, as Beda interprets
him, clearly for us, as shall hereafter appear. 2. As our Writers are not
inferior in number, so most of theirs deserve no credit, and they agree not so
well against us in the Points controverted, as our Authors do in what they
assert, viz. when we settled here, and who were our first Kings: For Cap. 3. as
cited by S. Asaph, page 14. Pref.
Nennius Britannus does positively say, that the Scots came here in the time of
Brutus. Matthew of Westminster says, that we settled here the eleventh year
after Christ. And Baker Page 2.
acknowledges that Severus built his Wall against the Scots and Picts, without
mentioning this to be the first incursion; and this at least confutes the
Bishop of St. Asaph, who asserts that we were not come to this Isle even by way
of incursion, till after the year 300. As they thus differ remarkably as to our
Origination, and most of them follow Ieffreys ridiculous Inventions, as our
Author himself acknowledges: So Page 16.
Holinshed, speaking of those ancient times, says, That Scotland had in those
days two Kingdoms, the one whereof consisted of the Picts, called Pictland; and
the other of the Irish Race, called Scotland: which I hope (says he) no wise
Man will readily deny. And Caixton in his old Chronicle of England, tells, that
the King of the Scots assisted Cassibelan King of the Britains against Julius
Caesar: which shows that our Antiquity was believed. And Balaeus, a most famous
English Chronologist, says, that Bal. Pref. part post.
the Scots wrote, etc. ex incorrupta annalium Fide. 3. That our settlement was
so ancient, as not only to have been contemporary with their Historians, but
even to be higher than their Chronology could reach to, appears from this, that
Gildas declares De excid. Brit.
he knew nothing of us, but what he was forced to borrow from beyond Sea. Cap.
1. Beda.
Beda places us amongst the old Inhabitants of this Isle, without condescending
upon the particular time, which he had given us, if he had known it himself, as
he did in all other occasions. Nennius their next Author to Beda owns, that the
most skillful amongst the Scots, affirmed in his time, that we were descended
from Scota, as our Authors now do. St. Asaph, p. 10.
And the eldest after him affirm, that we are descended from Albanactus, second
Sond to Brutus. And this is so far acknowledged by succeeding Ages, that Edward
the First did upon that account claim the superiority to England over us, as
younger Brother to Locrinus the eldest Son of Brutus. And we may see in
Hollinshed, Lib. 2. Descript. Britan. cap. 8. and 9.
where he brings in many Scottish Kings doing Homage to the Kings of Britain,
long before this year 502, and in which several of their Authors agree with
him. And the Bishop foreseeing the unanswerable strength of this Argument,
acknowledges this Superiority to be a most unjust Pretension, as indeed it is;
especially seeing it is undeniable, that there was any such thing known in the
World then, as that Feudol Homage which the English Historians contend for;
there being no Vestige thereof in any part of Europe, till the 800 year of God,
and we having had no such Kings as some of those whom they name in that ancient
Homage. But yet even all these Forgeries prove clearly, that we were considered
by those Writers, as Inhabitants here past all Memory, and as ancient as
themselves. Girald. Camb. Distinct. 3. cap. 7.
Giraldus Cambrensis also considers us as descended from Gathelus and Scota,
which proves not only that this old Tradition was believed, but that Fordon was
not the inventer of it. For Girald lived about 200 years before Fordon. But how
any Historian in this also can controvert this Antiquity after Seldom has
asserted it, Lib. 2. cap. 8. I understand not. There is likewise a very full
and well written Manuscript in the hands of the Lord Maitland, which makes us
to come from Spain, about the year of the World 3242, and to have been first
governed by Captains, and thereafter governed by the Kings mentioned in our
History. 4. There are no positive Authorities produced against us,
condescending expressly when our Royal Line did begin, save three Legendary
Stories written with design, in whom no Protestant Bishop can find any
considerable Passages worthy to be cited; the easiest thing in them being, Vita
St. Pat. Cap. 5.
That a Child made a Fire of Ice; Vita Columb. Adamn. lib. 3. c. 16.
and that when St. Columba was sick, his Mare wept.

The first is a nameless Author of St. Patrick's Life, cited by De Eccl. Brit.
primord. p. 587.
Usher, who affirms, that when Neil Neilialagh was King of Ireland, and
Constantius was Emperor, Muredus King of Ulster had six Sons, who possessed
themselves of the Northern Parts of Britain, and the Nation sprung from them
(as Giraldus repeating this passage, says) was by a special name called
Scotland. And it may be, says the Bishop, Reuda mentioned by Beda, was one of
these six Sons. Joceline, another Author of St. Patrick's Life, Cap. 137.
tells, that the twelve Sons of the King of Dalrieda in Ireland, having
despised their youngest Brother Fergus, he complained of them to St. Patrick,
and he prophesied to him, that from him should descend Kings, who should reign
in many Foreign Kingdoms; and accordingly Fergus became King of all Dalrieda,
and after his Successors had for many Generations reigned there, Aidanus the
Son of Gabranus conquered Albania, now called Scotland, and the other Isles, in
which his Posterity by due Succession reign to this day. But an elder Author
cited by Cambden (and whom Page 160.
Usher calls the writer of the Tigernack Annals) brings the Scottish Kings from
another Origin, to which Usher himself is inclined. Fergus (says that Author)
the Son of Eric, was the first of the offspring of Chonar, who obtained the
Kingdom of Albania from Brown-Albain, to the Irish Sea and Inchgall, whom he
places Anno 503, and from him the Kings of Fergus' s race reigned in
Brun-Albain, or Brun-heir to Alphin the Son of Eochal, and with this (as the
Bishop says) the Irish Genealogies agree. And thus our approved History must be
overturned by Legends, and Genealogies.

Upon which passages I beg leave to make these few Reflections. First, that
(besides, that these Authors lived not within 600 years of the times of which
they wrote (which the Bishop of St. Asaph objects to ours) they do also
contradict not only our Story, but the Roman, who place us here much sooner).
All these three Authors contradict one another in the most remarkable part of
our History, and in so late a matter of Fact, as that of Fergus the Second,
which shows them neither faithful nor learned Chronologists. The first nameless
Author, writer of the Life of S. Patrick, makes our King to have been one of
the Sons of Mured, whom Usher conjectures to have been Reuther, and he must
have lived in 360; for Constantius reigned then, and Mured's Son lived in his
Reign. Iocelin makes Aidan to be the first, and to have sprung from Fergus
after many Generations: And this agrees well with ours, but not with the other
Writers of St. Patrick's Life. For we place the beginning of Aidan's Reign in
570, and it could be no sooner, according to Iocelin. The third is the Author
of the Tigernack Annals, or an ancienter Writer cited by Cambden, who places
our first King in 503, and there he is called Fergus; and so they neither agree
in the name of our first King, nor in the time of their entry to this Kingdom.
Which dreaming Glances have risen from an imperfect notion of our History, the
first having borrowed his from Beda, who brings us here sub duce Reuda: the
second has been invented to fulfill the Prophecy of St. Patrick, who promised
the Kingdom not to Fergus himself, but to one of his Succession, and therefore
finding none of our Kings named in Beda, save Reuther and Aidan; he fixes on
Aidan as the latest. And the third of these, finding that Fergus was
uncontrovertedly the name of our first King, will rather contradict the rest,
and go back from Aidan to Fergus. And thus they clensh here, making the the
first Fergus the second, as they do elsewhere, in making Scotia to be Ireland,
or Scotia major.

2. Since the Bishop's Authors are so irreconcilable, what Warrants can he or
they have to contradict our positive History? De Primord. page 611.
And Bishop Usher cites another Author of St. Patrick's Life, Meyerus, who
tells us that after St. Patrick' s Voyage about this Isle, he turned his Boat
to an Isle which bears to this day the name of St. Patrick; out of which Isle I
believe the Accusers of our Historians got their best Intelligence.

3. That this Reuda could not be one of Mureda's six Sons, is most clear, both
because Beda speaks of the Scots coming to this Isle, as very ancient, even in
his time, which could not be if this had happened in Anno 360; for Beda lived
in Anno 730, and how can it be imagined that Beda could not have known the
whole Series of a Royal Descent that was so recent. Nor do our Historians,
whose Faith is not controverted, after Fergus the Second, mention any Reuda
after his Reign: and so he behooved to be an elder King, and consequently we had
King's before Fergus the Second, which the Authors denies. Nor could any of
these Sons of Mured have been Fergus the Second, whom these late Inventors call
our first King; for no Author makes Fergus the Second to have reigned within
more than 40 Years after Constantius. Luddus and Cambden assert us to have
settled here, under Fergus the Second, in the Reign of Honorius, at which time
Fergus the Second did reign. Usher relates only the three Authorities of those
ridiculous Legends; and the Bishop of St. Asaph fixes on the year 503, and so
contradicts not only our Historians, but Page 62.
Luddus and Cap. Scoti.
Cambden in making Fergus the Second near 100 years later, than truly he was.

As these few prime and late Authors who controvert our Antiquity, differ thus
in the names of our first Kings, and the time of their settlement in Scotland;
so they differ in these following cardinal Points of their new invented
Hypothesis. The Bishop of Cap. 1.
St. Asaph thinks it necessary for maintaining that the Scots settled not till
the year 503, to assert that the Picts filled all the Northern Parts of
Britain, and that those Picts were a ruder sort of Britains, divided in South
and North Picts; in which he follows Camb. Cap. Pict.
Cambden, yet with this difference, implying a contradiction, that Cambden
makes these Deucaledones and Vecturiones, to signify by a British derivation,
Picts, to the East and West: Whereas the Bishop of St. Asaph, from a British
derivation of the same words, calls them Southern and Northern Picts. But
Cambden does acknowledge plainly that in this Derivation, he differs from the
venerable Beda, whose Authority he truly foretells will weigh down the Reasons
he brings for his Conjecture. And as he, contrary to the universally received
opinion, denies the Picts to be Schythians, tho they were really so, he makes
the Scots to be Schythians, though really they were not so.

De Primord. cap. 11. init.
Usher not having considered all the Scheme and Consequences of this new
Hypothesis (as the Bishop of St. Asaph has done with more cunning) follows Beda
in bringing the Picts from Schythia, but he differs from Beda in that he brings
them hither after our Savior's Birth, and produces such Authors as he uses in
our occasions, who assign three different Periods of time for their settlement;
the last whereof, and to which he inclines, is said to be under the Emperors
Gratian and Valentinian; and so makes the Scots and Picts to have come in
together about the year 400, and yet he finds no inconveniency in bringing us
to Scotland under Gathelus and Scota, and in asserting that we settled first in
Galloway, whereas none of our Historians do say that Gathelus and Scota came to
Scotland, and the Bishop of St. Asaph and Cambden assert our descent from Scota
to be a Fiction; and the Bishop of St. Asaph Cap. 1.
confesses us to have first fixed in Argile.

Another material difference amongst them is, that the Bishop of St. Asaph Cap.
1. Sect. 12, and 13.
confines us and the Picts, for 1000 years be-north Grahams Dike, called
Severus Wall, beyond Clyde and Forth. Whereas Cambden Cap. Pict.
asserts that Edinburgh was the chief Seat of the Kings of the Picts, and
derives the names of Louthian, Edingburgh, and Pictland, from Pictish words.

From all which it clearly appears, that no weight is to be laid on such
irreconcilable Authors; and yet by these only, is the Antiquity of of our
Kings and Nation controverted. But to confirm fully our History from Julius
Caesar's time, and to show that the British Historians do not only contradict
one another, but do contradict the two only ancient Historians, who could
understand any thing of our Origin, as being the eldest and most deserving of
all their own Authors, viz. Gildas and Beda; I do appeal to them. And I begin
with Beda, because he is most full, and interprets the other. The venerable
Beda, tho a Saxon himself, and so an Enemy to us, having written an exact
Chronology, according to the periods of time; does in his first cap. de Quinque
gentium linguis unam eandemque summoe veritatis, and verae sublimitatis
scientiam scrutatur, confitetur Anglorum, viz. Britonum, Scotorum, etc. Bed. l.
1. cap. 1. Eccl. Hist.
priscis incolis, tell us, that God was praised in five languages in this Isle,
that of the English, Britains, Scots, Picts, and Latins: and then proceeds to
tell, that the Britains were the first possessors, and possessed the south parts,
after which came the Picts to the northern parts, and the Scots under Reuda,
thereafter made a third Nation, in that part belonging to the Picts, getting
the western part of Scotland, North from the Picts, called Dumbriton, or
Alcluith. And he inculcates their fixing here, by three several, but concuring
Expressions. 1. Progressi ex Hibernia, they left Ireland. 2. Seeds vindicarunt
in Britannia, they settled in Britain. 3. In Britannia Britonibus and Pict is
gentem tertiam addiderunt, they added a third Nation to the Britains and Picts.
And that this was very ancient is clear; for he fixes them in Britain in that
Chapter wherein he treats de priscis incolis; and having thus settled the Scots
and Picts in his first Chapter with the Britains; he proceeds in the second
Chapter to settle the fourth Nation, viz. the Latins or Romans, beginning with
these words, Verum eadem Britannia Romany usque ad Caium Jul. Caes. inaccessa
atque in cognita fuit Beda Hist. Eccles. l. 1. cap. 2.
But this Britain was unknown, and not entered upon by the Romans, till Julius
Caesar' s time. And having described the Wars betwixt these three Nations and
the Roman Emperors, in a due gradation, marking every period of time through
the Reign of their consecutive Emperors; and how at last the Romans had
abandoned the Island, and Aetius the Roman Consul, had refused the Petition of
the miserable Britains, so often defeated by the Scots and Picts: he in the 14
Cap. relates how the Britains upon deep consultation, brought in the Saxons,
and from thence continues the Saxon History. This being the tract of Beda's
History; Is there any place to doubt but that the Scots were settled before the
Saxons? For the Wars betwixt the Romans and Scots are related exactly before
any mention is made of the Saxons; and at last they are only brought in to
assist the Britains against the Scots and Picts, because the Britains were
deserted by the Romans, and consequently the Saxons having been brought in Anno
449, it unanswerably follows, that the Scots were settled here, and made a third
Nation, long before the 503, as the Bishop of St. Asaph alleges, at which time
he makes us to have settled here very cunningly, but not sincerely, upon design
to make us later than the English. As also it appears very clearly that the
Scots settled here even before Julius Caesar's time, for after Beda (who
proceeds exactly according to the Periods of Time) had settled us in Britain, he
tells, Verum eadem Britannia Romany usque ad Caium Julius Caes. inaccessa
atque incognita fuit. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. cap. 2.
that this Britain was unknown to the Romans, and described what these Romans
did in the Isle, and how they fought with the Picts and Us under their
subsequent Emperors, without ever speaking again of the entry of the Scots, as
having settled them in the first Chapter, before Caesar's time. Nor is the time
altered in any other Period; and he is so careful of the Period of time, that
he subjoyns to his Work a Chronological Recapitulation, which is very exact.
And he being a Saxon, had certainly told (as the Bishop now does) that the
Saxons were elder than we, if this had been true; which is a demonstration
according to the Rules of Chronology, against the Bishop of St. Asaph. It may
be some may wonder why Beda mentions not our coming under Fergus the first; and
some may object, that in this we go higher than Beda. To which it is answered,
That our History confesses, that the Scots came over from Ireland at several
times: Once under Fergus the first, but not being numerous enough, Reutherus
brought over another recruit, and thereafter Fergus the second brought over
others after his Predecessor Eugenius was expelled by the Romans and Britains.
And in so old Antiquity, it is much for Beda, even to know the Descent under
Reuda. And whereas the Bishop quarrels Beda, that he gives no Authority for
this: The Reply is, that if it were requisite, then one Author behooved to give
another, and he a third, and sic in infinitum. Nor did ever any Man before him
require an Authority in so ancient an Author: and this Answer is a full proof
of the Bishop's Conviction, who being absolutely gravel'd here, he grows as
angry at Beda, as at our Historians, and tells, disdainfully, that this might
be true for ought Beda knew, and adds, that the Scots were indeed here in
Beda's time, and he speaks according to his own time, which were to make Beda
speak great nonsense. For Beda speaks here of the preterit, and not the
present time, viz. The first Vastations spoke of by Gildas, and we shall see
that others, who lived in the time agree with him.

The second Citation I shall bring from Beda, shall be from the 5th cap. l. 1.
Eccl. Hist. where he says, that Bed. lib. 1. cap. 5. Eccl. Hist. Itaque Severus
magnam fossam firmissimumque vallum crebris in super turribus communitum a mari
ad mare duxit.
Severus built a Wall to defend against the other unconquered Nations, and in
the 12 cap. he tells that Bed. lib. 1. cap. 12. Eccl. Hist. Denique subito
duabus gentibus transmarinis vehementer saevis, Scotorum a circio, Pictorum ab
Aquilone multos stupet gemitque per annos.
Britain was vexed by the Scots and Picts, two over-Sea, or Transmarine
Nations; and thereafter, as if he had been afraid that this word Transmarine,
might have been mistaken, he adds, Transmarinas autem diicimus ^as gentes, non
quod exraa Britanniam essent positae, sed quia a part Britonum erant remotae,
duobus finibus marl interjacentibus, quorum unus ab orientali mari, alter ab
occidentali, Britanniae terras long lateque irrumpit quamvis ad se invicem
pertinere possunt.
that they were not called Transmarine, because they lived, and were settled out
of Britain; but because they were separated from that part of Britain by the
two Seas, which did almost meet. And in this he agrees exactly with Tacitus,
who in the Life of Agricola, says, that there being a Wall built betwixt these
two Seas, the Roman Enemies were closed up as in an Isle. By this place of Beda
it is also very clear, that the Scots were settled in Britain whilst the Romans
fought against the Picts and Scots, and consequently before they were called by
the Picts to defend them against the Saxons, as is alleged by the Bishop. If
the Scots had not been living in this Isle at that time, the explication of
Transmarine had been both ridiculous and untrue. And as it is not presumable
that the venerable Beda would have asserted this, if he had not certainly known
it; so it was very easy for him to know it, that being so public a thing,
which concerned his own, as well as his Neighbor Nation. But if the Scots had
settled in anno 503, Beda could not have called them Cap. 1.
Prisci incolae, and reckoned them amongst the ancient Inhabitants. For a Man
living in his time, might have told him, that his Father saw the Scots called
over by the Picts, and that they settled here in his time. Beda being thus
clear to a Demonstration, as far as Chronology and History can allow: I desire
to know how what Gildas says, can contradict our History, since he copies
Gildas, and lived within 200 years of him? and since both wrote the same
Actions in almost the same words? Or how can it be imagined, that if Gildas had
known our Origin to be so late, he would not have told it to our disadvantage?
whereas on the contrary, he speaks of Scots and Picts as living in this Isle,
after the same manner as Transmarine, in the same sense, in which Beda
interprets it; which is, because they lived not without the Isle, but on the
other side of the Wall, which made an Isle. From which it follows necessarily
that in Gildas's time, the Scots dwelt not without the Isle of Britain; and
Gildas having been born in Anno 493, as is said in the Calculation prefixed to
that Page 120. ^um. edit. Heidelberg.
Edition, which himself relates, it is clear that he was born 10 Years before
that Year, in which the Bishop of St. Asaph pretends we first settled here; and
so certainly he could not but have taken notice of the settlement of a Nation,
in which he was so much concerned. And albeit he says once, speaking of us,
that Hiberni revertuntur domum. Yet that was spoke of us as settled here, and
as being Irish by extraction, as shall be hereafter cleared. Nor must our
Histories which are so positive and unanimous, be overturned by Clenshes and
Equivocations, and remote weak Consequences, without Authors living at the
time, and mentioning expressly so remarkable an Accident.

Before I enter upon Foreign Citations without the Isle, SECT. 5. Proofs from
Foreign Authors.
I must observe, that we having kept the Romans (the only writing Nation that
had any knowledge of these our Isles) from entering our Kingdom; they could not
know our Antiquities, as they did those of England or France, whom they had
conquered. But our being engaged in a constant War with them, is so universally
related by all their Historians; that to deny our being a Nation, and in
Britain, when they so frequently and unanimously writ of us, as Gens, and Gens
etiam Britannica, fighting here, cannot but seem Railery to any Serious Man:
and the being able to controvert it, is rather a mark of nimbleness of Wit,
than skill in Antiquity. But however I shall produce some few Foreign Authors,
whose Testimonies seem to me unanswerable, being joined with, and illustrated
by what I formerly said from the venerable Beda, and the Historians within this
Isle.

My first Author is Eumenius in his Panegyric to Constantine in praise of his
Father Constantius: Eumenius.
who preferring the Victory Constantius had over the Britains, to that which
Julius Caesar had over them; says, Page 258.
that the Britains at the time Caesar conquered them, were a rude Nation, being
only used to fight against the Picts, and Irish of the British Country, Enemies
half naked, and so easily yielded to the Roman Arms and Ensigns. By which
Citation, we contend that it is proved, that in the time of Julius Caesar,
there was another Nation beside the Picts, who then inhabited Britain, and were
a Colony of the Irish; and these must certainly have been the Scots. For it
cannot be pretended, that ever there was another Colony of the Irish in
Britain, besides us. And it is uncontroverted on all hands, that we are that
Colony of the Irish, who only used to fight with the Picts, against the
Britains, and therefore that answer made by the Bishop, that this place relates
only to the Irish, and not to the Scots, is of no moment. But he has another
Answer, which his Lordship insists more upon; and for clearing whereof, I must
cite the Latin; Ad hoc natio etiam tunc rudis, and soli Britanni Pictis modo,
and Hibernis assueta hostibus, adhuc seminudis, facile Romany armis signisque
cesserunt. His Answer is, that the words, Soli Britanni, are the Nominative,
and not the Genitive, and his Lordship confesses, Page 11.
that if the words be in the Genitive, they are clear of Buchannan's side. And
that they are of the Genitive, all disinterested Men, who understand the Latin,
will confess. And Cambden himself, tho a learned Schoolmaster, and in other
Citations about our Antiquity, somewhat more humourous, than so worthy a Man
needed to be, trusts to no other Answer, but that the Panegyrist spoke here,
according to the Conception of the Age wherein he lived. But, as any Citation
may be thus answered; so if he had not spoken with relation to the time of
Julius Caesar, the Comparison and Complement had no great force. The Learned
Usher likewise objects not this to Buchannan, which shows also his
Acquiescence. 2. If this, Natio Rudis, had been the same thing with Soli
Britanni; and if the sense must be, as his Lordship says, a Rude Nation, the
Britains; then not only it had been superfluous, but inconsistent with true
sense. For how can the same thing be copulated with itself? and tho it may be
said, Natio rudis Soli Britanni, assueta hostibus; yet certainly assueti had
been more elegant for an Orator, if Soli Britanni had been the Nominative. And
the great In not. in lib. 4. Tibull.
Joseph Scaliger, one of the best Judges both for that kind of Learning and
Disinteressedness, exclaims against Luddus, for misconstructing so the words;
and therefore the Bishop might have spared the saying, Page 11.
that Cambden ought to have given Buchannan correction; for the great Joseph
Scaliger, and Buchannan, that incomparable Humanist, are fitter to give, than
receive Correction from any in the Isle, or Age.

I must also observe, that the Bishop has pointed these words otherways than
they are in the Author: for in the Author (of Paulus Stephanus, and Plantins
Editions, who were the most learned and exact of all Printers) there is no
Comma immediately after tthe words, Soli Britanni, and it is pointed as I have
set it down here, and even Page 37.
Luddus is just here. But the Bishop has very wittily added the Comma after
these words. Now without the Comma, it is clear, that the Panegyrist meant
Pictis and Hibernis Soli Britanni; and if the Panegyrist had designed his words
should have been construed, as the Bishop has construed them; so great an
Orator would certainly have said, Soli Britanni Natio ad hoc etiam tunc rudis,
etc. And in this case the words had been clear, and the ingenious Bishop needed
not, in translating them, to have been forced to use the word Page 12.
Nation twice, because the sense was hard and unnatural, according to his
Construction. And whereas the Bishop pretends, Page ibia.
that the words construed according to Buchannan, would not have run so strong
in the Comparison: for the strength of the Comparison lies, says he, in that
Julius Caesar' s Victory was not so great, as that of Constantius, because
Caesar overcame a Nation, yet rude and unskilful of War, and only Britains, a
Nation used to no other Enemies but Picts and Irish: Whereas Constantius
overcame Carausius, who had got a Roman Legion on his side, etc. But by his
Lordship's favor, the Comparison runs strong enough thus, according to
Buchannan's Construction. Caesar overcame the Britains when they were yet a
rude Nation, used only to fight against the Picts and Irish who lived upon the
Land, or Isle of Britain: but Constantius overcame them after they had been
long trained up in War. And certainly a Nation is a far more formidable Enemy
after their being long trained up in War, than when yet rude, and
unexperienced; tho they had had the accession of a Roman Legion; which could
signify nothing against a whole Roman Army. Nor does it follow, that the words
must be ill construed; if so, the Comparison would be stronger: for it is
sufficient to sustain the Construction, that in the Comparison Constantius was
to be preferred in the way I have mentioned. 4. If there were any doubtfulness
in these words, as there is none; yet they ought to be interpreted so, as to
consist with other Authors and Histories, and especially with Beda: for in our
sense, they confirm his Chronological Account, of our being in this Isle before
Julius Caesar's time: And the Bishop must still remember, that he cannot
overturn our received Histories, except he produce Arguments which infallibly
conclude against them: It being a Rule in Law, that, Verba semper sunt
interpretanda potius, ut scriptura, vel actus subsistat; quam ut destruatur.
This shows also that in Constantius's time, which was about the Year 300, the
Britains were assueti, used to fight with the Scots and Picts: and this use
must imply a long time. And so it is very probable, that we had frequent Wars
with the Britains long before this time, and consequently the Bishop errs,
Sect. 5, 6. cap. 1.
asserting, We were not in Britain even by way of incursion, till the year 300.
If it be objected, that in the Phrase Soli Britanni, Britanni is a Substantive;
Britannici being still the Adjective; and therefore these words must be
construed to be the Nominative Case, as the Bp of St. Asaph alleges. I prove
the contrary by Lucretius. Nam quid Britannum Coelum differ putamus, etc.
Claudianus de quarto consulatu Honorii
Terribilis Mauro, debellatorque Britanni Littoris.


A further Confirmation of this arises from the same Eumenius, in this same
Panegyric; where speaking of Constantius's Victory over this Island, he says,
Neque enim ille, tot tantisque rebus gestis, non dico Caledonum aliorumque
Pictorum silvas and paludes, sed nec Hiberniam proximam, nec Thulen ultimam,
nec ipsae si quae sunt, fortunatarum Insulas, dignabitur acquirere. And tho
Usher foreseeing the force of this Argument, endeavors to elude it by
contending, that by the Caledonii, are here meant the Picts, because the words
aliorumque Pictorum, had else been impertinent. Yet to make the Scots not to be
Caledonians in ancient Authors, were too great a Task even for Usher; that
being contrary to the universally received opinion of all the Learned, Guidus
pancirollus coment. ad notitiam imperii occident. p. 159. where he cites for
this Dion. Eusebius and Spartianus, and says that Caledonia apud eos nunc
Scotia dicitur Dion. in vita Severi Imp. Anno 207, Berg^^r l. 1. c. 10.
some of which I have cited in the Margin: but for a further Proof, I shall
here cite a Roman that lived very near Eumenius's time, and who almost speaks
in the same words with him, Latinus Pacatius Drepanius, who in his Panegyric
to Theodosius the elder, who lived Anno 367, complements him upon Page 248.
Edit. Plantin. Redactum ad paludes suas Scotum.
having reduced the Scots to their Marshes, showing that the Sylvae, and
Paludes Caledonum, were the Scotorum Sylvae: though Strangers in those ancient
times, could little distinguish Picts from Scots. And from which I further
evince, that the Scots before the year 400, dwelt in in Scotland, as their own
Country; else it had been impertinent and untrue to say, that the Scots were
reduced to their own Marshes.

Having thus shown that the Scots were Caledonians: It clearly follows, that
all the ancient Authors who write of the Caledonii, prove the Antiquity of the
Scots; and therefore Valerius Flaccus proves our Antiquity, who writing to
Domitian, in praise of his Father Vespasian, who was known to have made War
with us about the year 70 after Christ, says, -- Caledonius, postquam tua
Carbasa vexit.
Oceanus Phrygios prius indignatus Iulos.


And Lib. 10. Epig. 44.
Martial, who lived also in Domitian's time, says, Quinte Caledonios, Ovide
visure Britannos,
Et viridem Tethyn Oceanumque Patrem.


Next to these I cite Tacitus, who in the Life of Agricola, brings in that
famous Galgacus, who fought with the Romans, near to the Grampian Hills. And
that he was a Scottish King, or Leader, is confirmed from Comment. ad vitam
Agricolae.
Lipsius, who calls him Galgacus Scotus. This is also confirmed by the exact
and noble French Manuscript foresaid; which says, that Dardan was chosen,
because Galdus was not of Age: Alluding to our old Law, appointing that the
immediate Heir of the Crown, being by his Infancy unable to govern, the
Government should in that case be devolved upon the next, who was able to
govern: which Law was so ancient, that it is said to be enacted immediately
upon the Death of Fergus the First. And by Bergier, afterward the King's
Advocate of France, who in his learned History of the Highways of Rome, Lib.
1. cap. 10. numb. 9. Prince des Caledoniens. ou Escossois.
calls him Prince of the Caledonians, or the Scots. And to what better Judges
can we appeal, in a matter concerning Roman Antiquities, and the sense of a
Roman Author, than to those two, who are the most famous of all the Roman
Antiquaries: the one having written a Book concerning the Roman Greatness,
Petruccio Vbaldini, also in descritt. dela Scotia, p. 4. and 5. asserts the
Scots to be Caledonians.
and the other concerning the Magnificence of the Romans in their Highways.
Nor could he be an Irish King; for what had an Irish King to do with an Army in
the midst of Scotland, and against the Romans, with whom no Irish King ever
fought. And that he was no Britain, is clear from the Speech he made to his
Soldiers, telling them that they had never been conquered, servitutis
expertes, and nullae ultra terrae. Nor can any thing agree better with our
being still called one of the two unconquered Nations, by Gildas, Beda, and
others. This is yet further cleared by another Passage in this same Life of
Agricola; wherein Tit. vit. Agric. c. 22. Tertius expeditionis annus novas
gentes aperuit: vastatis usque ad Tuam (aestuarit nomen est) nationibus
Agricola in fines Horestorum exercitum deducit: ibi acceptis obsidibus
praefecto Classis (...) Britanniam praecepit, etc.
Tacitus says, The third Year of the War discovered new Nations, which Agricola
conquered, even to the River Tay. And after this he adds, Agricola having beat
Galgacus near to the Grampian Hills, brought back the Roman Army to the Borders
of the Horesti; and having received Hostages from them, he ordered the
Commander of the Roman Fleet to sail about the Isle. From which I deduce,
first, that Galgacus was no Britan: For Tacitus says, that the third Year
opened new Nations: whereas Agricola knew the Britans before; and these must
have been the Scots and Picts: for they could not be any other, being beyond
the River Tay. And Galgacus could be no Pictish King; for we have a Manuscript,
bearing all the Names of the Pictish Kings. 2. From this passage it is clear,
that Cambden does err grossly, in making the Horesti to be a People in Eskdale,
which is a Scottish Country on the Borders of England. For (beside that all
Authors agree, that they are known to be the Inhabitants of Angus, and Merns)
it is here demonstrated by Tacitus, that after the Romans past Forth, they came
to Tay, (which is known to be the Marches or Boundary of Angus) and from thence
they marched to the Grampian Hills, where they fought with Galgacus: And from
which he returned to the Borders of the Horesti, where finding the Fleet in the
Frith of Tay, where he had left it, he Embarked the Hostages, and sent the
Fleet back to that part of Britain whence they came. And how could all this be
in Eskdale? That being very remote from the place of Battle; and Eskdale an
inland Country, very remote from all Sea. 3. Tacitus writing of us, under the
name of Caledonians, mentions the Marshes of those who fought, which were
appropriated to us by Eumenius and Pacatius, as I formerly observed. By all
which we may observe, how little English Writers are to be credited, when they
write upon design to lessen our Country, or magnify their own. And all this is
confirmed by the learned Lex. Geograph. verb. Horresti.
Ferrarius a stranger. And to this I may add, that we have to this day, a
Barony, called Galdgirth, or the Girth of Galdus; and ten great Stones in
Galloway, called King Galdus's Monument: Marks of Antiquity far preferable to
any Manuscript; as the testimony or consent of a whole Nation, is to that of
one private Person. Two of which Arguments are used by Chambers, in the Life of
Galdus: and he had seen Verimund, and our old Manuscripts: And should he not
then be our King Galdus, who reigned at that time, and who (as all our
Histories relate) fought against the Romans, in this place, which was within
the Scottish Territories? SENEC A.


The third Citation, shall be from Seneca; and is a clear testimony for us in
the judgment of the great Scalig. ad lib. 4. Tibul. ad. Messal. And in his
Notes on Eusebius ad Annum MMLX, Where there is a most learned and full proof
of our Antiquity, too long to be inserted here, and too learned to be answered
by any Adversary.
Scaliger.

Ille Britannos ultra noti littora ponti,
Et caeruleos Scoto-Brigantes dare Romuleis,
Colla catenis jussit, and ipsum nova Romanae,
Iura securis tremere oceanum.
Ovid. Salmas^ in Solin.
To which Cambden answers, That for Scoto-Brigantes, we should read
Scuta-Brigantes. But this is very ridiculous; for we read, that the Picts were
called Picti, for painting their Bodies; but never for painting their Shields.
I know likewise, that Hadrianus Iunius reads Cute-Brigantes; but this would be
ill verse: for the first syllable in Cute, is by it is own nature, short; but
according to this reading it would be long. I might to this add that Answer
made by Florus, the Poet, to Adrian in Spartianus.

Ego nolo Caesar esse,
Ambulare per Britannos,
Scoticas pati pruinas.
For why should we read, Scythicas? since Adrian was never in Scythia; but did
fight against the Scots: and caused make the vallum Adriani.

2. Why should not rather Scotia, than Scythia be joined to Britannia? as Cap.
p. 723. de primord.
Usher argues most justly upon the like occasion. 3. the Pruinae Scoticae were
famous about that time: for Claudian has, C. 16. p. 728.
Ille Caledoniis posuit qui castra pruinis.

And Claudian does so expressly and so frequently speak of the Scots as settled
here, and describes them to be those People, who constantly fought against the
Romans, with the Picts; that the citing him against us, may convince the
Reader, that our Adversaries are not serious. Which will appear when I have
cited and illustrated him.

In his Panegyric, upon the third consulat. of Honorius, he complements him
upon the victory of his Gandfather Theodosius, who behooved to come into Britain
long before the Year 382, wherein Theodosius his Father was chosen Emperor.

Facta tui numerabat avi, quem littus adusti
Horrescit Lybii, ratibusque impervia Thule.
Ille leves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos,
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mucrone secutus.
Fregit hyperboreas remis audacibus undas.
And in the fourth Consulat of the same Honorius. Ille Caledoniis posuit qui
castra pruinis.
-- maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule.
Scotoru^ cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.


And de bello Getico, he speaks of the Roman Legion that returned from fighting
with the Picts, and us; (of which Bed. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 12.
Beda makes express mention.) Venit and extremis legio praetenta Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, ferroque notatas
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras.


That all this is applicable to us, is clear: because, 1. We had War with the
Romans, and the Irish had not. And all these Verses in Claudian, are spoke to
magnify the Roman man Conquest. 2. Since we have proved, by other Authors, that
the Scots were settled here, it is proper and suitable to common sense, to apply
the same to us only, as being the only Persons concerned in those Battles; and
to the Isle, in which it is known that the same were fought. And these Passages
are attributed to us by Seldom, l. 2. c. 8. Mar. Claus.

3. Have the Irish made any mention of this War, in any of their Histories? and
consequently, though Scotia had been a common Name to Scotland and Ireland in
those days; yet the Circumstances of the Action, related by the Poet, determine
which of the two is here meant.

This is yet further clear from the Panegyric of Sidonius Appollinaris. --
Victricia Caesar
Signa Caledonios transvexit adusque Britannos.
Fuderit and quamquam Scotum, and cum Saxone Pictum.


As to which, all that cambden (much better acquainted with citing, than
reasoning) can answer; is, 1. That the Poet here wrote a Complement according
to the vulgar Opinion of his own Times, which cannot be true, (as he says)
because the Saxons were not then come to Britain. But he should have
considered, that, 1. If this was the Opinion in Sidonius's Age, who lived Anno
480, Gesner in verb. Sidonius.
as Gesner affirms, which was very near to Claudian's Time, who lived in 497,
as the Bishop of Page 8.
St. Asaph calculates: we must conclude, that it is the rather to be believed,
that then the Scots lived here, for that is not inconsistent with History as
the other is, and so should be believed, though the other be not. 2. There were
Saxons living then in Zetland or Orknes, tho they were not settled in Britain;
as is clear by Claudian himself, who says -- Maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades.

And whereas it is said, that -- Flevit glacialis Ierne,

Does make the same applicable to Ireland, since Ierna is called Ireland. To
this it is answered, that, 1. It is clear, that there is a Country in Scotland,
called Ierna, near to which the Romans had a noble Camp, and whereof the
Vestiges are very remarkable to this day; and in which, there are Stones found
with Roman Inscriptions, designing the Stations of the Legions. And certainly
it is more proper to say, the loss was lamented in that Country where the
Battle was fought, than in that Kingdom where the Romans never fought any. And
why did the Poet join Ierna in the same lamentation with Caledonia? if he had
not designed by it, to express Ierna, as a part of our Scotland. And this is
more proper, than to make the Poet join part of one, to another different, and
remote Kingdom. As also Starthern in Scotland, is indeed a place, where the
Frost is strong, and continues long, as being very near the Hills. But Ireland
was known to be, and is yet a Country much freer from Storms and Ice; and was
believed by the Ancients to be so, as is most clear by Lib. 1. cap. 1.
Beda. 2. Though the Poet had understood Ireland, by Ierne; yet it does not
follow, that because Ireland lamented the loss of the Scots who were killed
here; that therefore the Scots that were killed, were not the Scots that were
planted in Scotland: since certainly, Ireland could not but have lamented even
the death of Scots, who were settled here; as Scotland, and as the Scots here
did lament very much the death of the Scots who were killed in Ireland in the
late Massacre. And as the Bishop himself argues in the Case of the Panegyric
abovecited, I may far more justly argue here, that this sense agrees better
with the Poet's noble flight, who makes the loss that the Scots sustained to be
so great, that it was lamented even in Ireland. Seldom also, l. 2. c. 8. Mar.
Claus. applys this to us, and not to the Irish. And these Verses in the same
Author, designed likewise to the praise of the same Theodosius, -- Pictos
Edomuit, Scotumque vaga mucrone secutus,
Fregit hyperboreas remis audacibus andas.


Are only applicable to the Scottish Colony settled in Ireland. For he magnifies
Theodosius, Grandfather to Honorius, for having pursued so far his Victory,
that he beat the Northern Seas with his bold Oars. Now, beside all the other
Arguments formerly used, can it be said, that Theodosius's Soldiers ever went
to Ireland? that Ireland lies North-west from Clyde, or Severus Wall? Whereas
it is certain they were in Scotland; and it is very probable that they would
follow the Scottish Colony into the North-west Isles, or over Clyde, where it is
formerly proved the Scottish Plantation first settled.

The Third Testimony, shall be that of Lib. 1. cap. 1. Hegesippus de excidio
Hierosol. 5. Cap. 15. Quid vobis cum victoribus universae terrae? quibus
secreta Oceani, and extrema Indiae parent. Quid attexam Britannias interfuso
mari toto orb divisas, and a Romany in orbem terrarum redactas. Tremit hos
Scotia qua terris nihil debet.
Hegisippus, where he brings in Ben-gorion dissuading the Jews to fight against
the Romans, the Conquerors of all the Earth, whom the unsearchable Places of
the Ocean, and the furthest places of India, obey. What shall I say of the
Isles of Britain, divided from the rest of the World by Sea, and reduced by the
Romans to be a part of the World; who makes Scotland to tremble, which owes
nothing to any part of the Earth? To which Cambden answers, That this must be
interpreted of Ireland, because the words, Quae terris nihil debet, must be
interpreted, as if the Scotia here spoke of, were joined to no other place; and
that is only applicable to Ireland, and not to Scotland. But what a hard shift
is he here driven to: for none can interpret, Quae terris nihil debet, in that
sense, there being nothing more different, than these two expressions, which is
not joined to the other Parts of the Earth, as Cambden would interpet it; and,
which owes nothing to any part of the Earth, as the Author expresses it. There
is nothing more ordinary, than for one who thinks he depends not upon another,
to say, I owe you nothing. And certainly it agrees much more with the Author's
Intention, to interpret these words so, Scotland, which owed homage to no
place, does tremble at the Roman Arms. 2. It cannot be said that ever the
Romans did attack Ireland. And to clear this, beyond answer, in the same
harangue, cited out of Ben-gorion himself by Usher, P. 726, and 727. Ad quos
cum venisses dua exercitus Romani, opposuerant se il^i, nec voluerunt ei
subditi esse: Cum autem Reges Romanorum venerunt, subegerunt eos ut servirent
ipsis.
Ben gorion says to the Jews, that when the General of the Nations only came,
these Nations resisted them; but when the Roman Emperors themselves came, they
submitted to them. And I desire to know, if ever Ireland was invaded by the
Romans? So that what is said in the harangue, is not applicable to the Scotia
Hibernica, as they pretend; but to that Country wherein we now live. As also,
by the same Ben-gorion, it is clear, that Nero being discouraged upon the
rebellion of the Jews, and Vespasian coming to him, comforted him, by
remembering him that some of his Captains had conquered all the Western World,
France, Scotland, and the land of Tubal. And whereas, Usher, to lessen this
Authority, is forced to allege, that Hegesippus's Works were spurious. This
contradicts Vid. cap. 27. l. 4. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
Eusebius, who makes him to have lived, Anno Christi 160. And tho Usher
contends, that both these Authors must be late, because Hegesippus, who only
cites Ben-gorion, names Constantinople, which changed not the name of Bizantium
till about the beginning of the 4th Century. Yet the Answer is easy, viz. That
this being a Translation from the Greek, the Translator has used the name that
was best known in his own Time. And the English, and other Nations have
acknowledged this to be the Work of Hegesippus, and translate it as such. Usher
himself indeed is inclined to think, that this was the Work of St. Ambrose: but
even that is sufficient for us, for not only is St. Ambrose himself older than
the 503 Year, and so proves that our Country was before that time called
Scotland; but St. Ambrose relating this Speech made in Vespasian's Time, must
prove, that this Country was called Scotland in Vespasian's Time, who was
elected Emperor 72 Years after Christ.

Tertullian.
Tertullian, who died in the Year 202, and so must have written some time
before that, and could not have written of us as Christians, and a Nation, if
we had not been so, for a considerable time: for Informations did spread slowly
in that Age, when there was so little Commerce, and at so great a distance,
This great Doctor of the Primitive Church, writing against the Jews, who he
knew would examine the truth of the matter of Fact alleged against them, says,
Tertul. l. advers. Iudeos, c. 7. Et Britannorum Romany in accessa loca,
Christo vero subdita: which Baronius applys to us, Tom. 5. p. 537. St. Asaph.
Pres. page 2.
for the honor of the Christian Religion, which he was defending, That those
Inhabitants of Britain, which could not be subdued by the Romans, yet willingly
yielded to the Yoke of Christ. From which it is urged, that in Tertullian's
Time, there were Nations in Britain which had never submitted to the Roman
Yoke, but yet submitted to the Yoke of Christ. But so it is that could not be
meant of the Britains, for all the World knows, and the Bishop confesses, that
long before that Time, they had submitted to the Romans. And therefore it is
plain, that there were other Nations in the Isle; and that could not be true,
except the Scots, as well as the Picts, had been settled in the Isle at that
Time. For a vagrant Company of Robbers, could not be called a Nation, or
esteemed a Church: And this Author writes of British Nations; we must therefore
have been a Nation and Church, as the rest were; and therefore, since they were
settled, so must we have been. Nor can this be meant of the North and South
Picts, though it were proved, that the Picts were distinguished into Northern
and Southern. For these could no more be considered as different People, than
the Northern and Southern English can now be said to be different Nations. 2.
That sense was not so much for the honor and extent of the Christian Religion:
And the Jews might have looked upon Tertullian as a Jugler, for making one
Nation appear two. 3. Our sense agrees better with Beda, who asserts
positively, that from Reudas's Time, the Scots made a third Nation in the Isle
of Britain, with the Britans and Picts. 4. Seldom, l. 2. c. 8. confesses, that
the Scoti Pictique, were the Gentes non subjacentes Romano Imperio.

Ammianus l. 20 Consulatu vero Constantii decies terque Juliani in Britanniis
cum Scotorum Pictorumque Gentium ferarum excursu rupta quiet condicta loca
limitibus vicina vastarentur, and implicaret formido provincias praeteritarum
cladium congerie fessas.
Ammianus Marcellinus, who wrote about the Year 360, tells us, That the Scots
and Picts harrased the Country. But the Bishop unjustly adds, that then they
first harrassed it. But this cannot be, for Ammianus speaks of their Fear, as
occasioned by a Tract of bygon Defeats; and this he elegantly expresses by the
words, congerie praeteritarum Cladium; which shows, that these he speaks of in
the 360, were not the first of many overthrows that the Britains had got from
the Scots and Picts. And so our being here, must be much ancienter than the
360; which agrees well with the word assueti in Eumenius. And our having fixed
and known Limits, demonstrates to all who understand the Roman Antiquities,
that we were then a fixed and settled Nation, in the same Island with the Roman
Provinces of the Britans; the Sea, or any part of it, being never signified by
their word Limes.

Lib. 2. ad Jovian.
St. Jerome, in his Epistle to Iovian, cites Porphire, who lived in the third
Century, under Dioclesian, and so above 200 Years before the 503. His words
are, Neither Britain a Province fertile of Tyrants, and the Scottish Nation, and
all the Barbarous Nations, dwelling around the Ocean, knew Moses, and the
Prophets. By the Scottish Nations C. 16. p. 728. de Primord.
Usher understands not the Scythians, but the Scots, because they are in this
place joined to Britain: but tho both he, and the Bishop of St. Asaph would
apply this citation to Ireland, yet this Gloss is most absurd; for by the
former Argument, the word Scots should be applied to us, for we are joined to
Britain; but Ireland is no more joined to Britain, than Scythia. And the same
Jerome, in the next Citation, calls the Scots a Nation of Britain; where he
says, Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus, cum ipse adolescentulis in Gallia,
Scotos Gentem Britannicam humanis vesci carnibus. Vidi l. 2. ad Jov.
That when he was young, he saw the Scots, a Nation of Britain, feed upon Man's
Flesh. From which it is clear, that the Scots at that time dwelt in Britain,
which agrees very well with Beda, who calls the Scots the third Britannick
Nation. Pref. L. in Iren.
And Seldom calls the Scots and Picts, Gentes Britannicas, l. 2. c. 8. And this
is further cleared, by his asserting, that Pelagius was of a Scottish Race, in
the Neighbour-head of Britain; which proves clearly, as the learned Tom. 5. p.
537.
Baronius observes, that there were Scots then in Britain, who were Christians,
else how could they have been Pelagians? Nor can this eating Man's Flesh, be
thought any just reflection on the Nation; for certainly these had been some
Rogues, who had fled out of the Nation, because they knew they would have been
punished for this Crime. Nor can their eating Man's Flesh in France be charged
on us, but on the French, where this is said to be so publicly done, that St.
Jerome could have seen it; and there is no Historian that ever charged this on
our Nation, nor any part of the Isle, even in our most barbarous Times. And if
it had been any ways common, there would have been a Law made against it. And
Boethius relates, that there was one mean Man guilty of it, who was thereupon
executed examplarly. And in what Nation are there not some Monsters?

Another of the Reverend Epiphanius in auchorato. P. 117. ad par. Britanni,
Scoti, quorum insula est Britannia.
Fathers of the Primitive Church, enumerating the Nations, which were descended
from Iaphet, mentions the Britons and Scots, whose Isle is Britain. This shows,
that there were Scots living in Britain in Epiphanius's Time, and so he proves
not only our Antiquity, by his own Authority, but confirms and explains what
was formerly urged from Jerome, in whose Time he lived, and to whom he wrote
Letters.

Receptam partem insulae a caeteris indomitis gentibus vallo distinguendam
putavit.
Orosius, who in Anno 417, says, That Severus thought fit to secure that part
of the Isle which he had, by a Wall, from the other unconquered Nations. And
that We, and the Picts were these unconquered Nations, appears from Cap. 5, and
12.
Beda, wherein he describes those very Actions, in those very words. And all
these Authors agreeing with Beda, and writing of the Times wherein themselves
lived, are sufficient Testimonies, according to the Bishop's own strictest
Rules. And they prove how unkind the Bishop is in lessening Beda's Testimony,
when it makes for us; by saying, he spoke then according to the Times wherein
these Actions happn'd: for we see, that they who wrote, and lived in the Time
of those Actions, agree fully with him, as they speak clearly for us.

Having thus made plain the Antiquity of our Kings and Nation from SECT. 6.
Proofs from Reason.
the Historians both within and without the Isle. I now proceed to clear these
from the Principles of sound Reason: As to which, let us consider, That it
being acknowledged by Usher, and the Authors he cites, that Ireland was peopled
by the Scots, before Julius Caesar's Time; and by their own Authors, whom that
Bishop cites, they are said to have been so anciently there, that we do not
know how many Ages they possessed that Isle before Julius Caesar. And they
being a very broody People, as all Northen Nations, and particularly they, and
we are, could not but have multiplied so exceedingly, as to need relief, and
evacuation by Colonies. And it can never be pretended, that the Irish did
settle any other Colony save in Britain: though it be undeniable, that all
those Northen Nations were very desirous and concerned to extend, by Colonies,
the Empire of their whole Nation, and thereby the Possession and Property of
every particular Man in it. Nor do we ever read, that the Irish had any Wars
with Strangers, whereby they might have either wanted Men to send into Foreign
Colonies, or have been forced to keep them at home, for their own defense.
Whether then are our Histories more probable, which make this Colony to have
come over before Julius Caesar? or the Bishop of St. Asaph's account, who makes
us not to have settled here, till 503 Years after Christ. And tho I esteem the
Irish, yet I must remark, that our humor differs so much from theirs, that it
may from thence appear, that we stayed not long amongst them, but that we came
from thence very early.

2. By all the tract of the Roman Histories, as well as by Beda's, Gildas's and
ours, it is clear, that the Scots and Picts fought jointly against the Romans
in this Country which we now possess: That the Walls built by Adrian, and
Severus, were built here, to defend them against them: That Complaints were
made to the Romans by the Britons of them, and that Succors were craved
against them: That the Saxons were called in, to defend the Britons, from the
Scottish and Pictish Incursions: That they were called jointly, unconquered
Nations. All which points prove, that they were equal in every thing; and why
not then in their being equally settled here? And therefore, except it were
clearly proved that the Scots were not settled and fixed here, as the Picts
were; and that there were Authors produced, who living in these Times,
declared, that in the Year 503, the Scots were first called to defend the
Picts, as the Saxons are clearly proved to have been called in, against the
Scots, and Picts, in the Year 449, very near to the Year 503; which is said by
the Bishop to be our Entry: It must be necessarily concluded, that the Scots
were here at the time, wherein all these things are told of them jointly, with
the Picts.

The third Argument shall be, that it is undeniable, that the Scots and Picts
were such constant and formidable Enemies, that the Romans, and Britans, who
then possessed the Southern part of this Isle, were forced to build two Fences
against them: The first betwixt Tyne and Solloway, which was called Adrian's
Wall: And the second, by Severus, who having enlarged the Roman Conquest, built
a second, betwixt Forth and Clyde, and called it by his own name. How then can
it be imagined, that the Scots did not live on the other side of that Wall? for
if they had lived in Ireland, the Wall had not been necessary, or useful,
against them. This common sense would declare to a Stranger, upon first reading
the Story; and much more ought it to be believed, if we consider, that if the
Scots came from Ireland, in Corroughs, as the Bishop of St. Asaph alleges,
from Gildas; then they might have landed upon the Britons side of the Wall;
nay, and which is more, they could not conveniently have landed on the other
side, except they had gone too far about, and crossed a very broad and
dangerous Sea.

4. Tho People come once, or twice, from a Foreign Nation, by Sea, to rob and
pillage, yet it is against sense to think, that for many hundreds of Years, the
Irish would have come over, to make War against such powerful Enemies, and
return once a Year. And it appers clearly, that this was a constant War, from
before Julius Caesar's Time, for above 600 Years: and in those Ages, it is
known, that there were not very convenient means fallen upon, for transporting
Men, much less Armies; they having only Corroughs, as the Bishop of St. Asaph
himself acknowledges: And these are a miserable little kind of shapeless Boats,
made of Leather, streatch upon Timber, as we find them, and the Irish Sea,
described by Page 352.
Solinus, who lived near those Times, and writes, that Mare quod Iuvernam and
Britanniam interfluit, undosum and inquietum toto in anno, nisi aestivis
pauculis diebus, est navigabile: navigant autem viminiis alviis, quos
circumdant ambitu tergorum bubulorum. And how these could transport an Army
every Year to fight against such powerful Enemies as the Romans and Britons?
And how they could carry back in them the great Booty worthy to be fought for?
especially over such broken Seas, that are yet terrible in the best Season, to
the best of our Boats, and the stoutest of Seamen, is left to be considered by
Men judicious, or disinterested in any measure: Especially, seeing they behooved
to return in the Wintertime, for it is presumed, they fought all Summer; and
even then, they had not the choosing of their own fair Weather, but had just
reason to be afraid that they would be chased away, as Robbers usually are; and
as the Bishop of St. Asaph asserts they oftentimes were. But as all this is
absurd, and incredible, according to the Bishop of St. Asaph's Hypothesis; so
it is most consistent with ours; in which we assert, that the Scots settled on
the other side of Clyde, from which they might come every Year; which agrees
also well with Beda's saying, That the Scots settled ad partem septentrionalem
sinus Acluith, or Dumbriton; a narrow Sea, and called one part of the Mare
Scoticum by the English Authors, and particularly by Page 16. desc. Brit.
Holinshed, and In initio.
Polidore, as by our Page 6.
Major; and was so designed in the forms of holding Circuits, as is clear by
the 4 Chap. of the Laws of King Malcom 2. and by 5th. Act P. 3. I. 2d. And
since in the said Laws of Malcom 2. who reigned Anno 1004. The Frith of Forth
is called Mare Scotiae, the Sea of Scotland, and that is mentioned as a Law in
old observance; it must be concluded, that this Country where we live, was
called Scotland, long before the Year 1000, as Bishop Usher asserts. For since
Tacitus and Beda say, That we were enclosed by that Sea, and the Wall, as in an
Isle; it seems that this was called the Sea of Scotland then, it being our
March at that time. Nor are these Friths improperly called Seas, being 40 miles
broad in some places. And this also agrees with our being transmarini, or on
the other side of the Sea, (which are the words used in the said Statute) but
not out of the Isle; and it is strange, that the Visigoths should have settled
in France and Spain; the Ostrogoths in Italy, shortly after they had made their
inroads; and yet we should have returned yearly for above 600 Years,
notwithstanding of the former difficulty.

4ly, The Scots coming over to this Isle, could not but know, that the southern
Parts of it were very rich, and the People there very cowardly, even to
admiration; as the Bishop of St. Asaph himself relates, from all their
Historians: and there was place enough for a Colony of them in this Isle, or
else how could they have planted themselves after, when the Picts became more
numerous; and both the Scots and the Picts had good reason to expect every Year
new additions of Land: and it is probable, that our Ancestors, being a Colony
of a more southern Nation, strangers in Ireland, and but lately settled there,
left their confinement in the Irish Isle as soon as they could, to enlarge
their Victories and Possessions in this larger one, which afforded greater
Glory. How then can it be imagined, that they would not have settled a Colony
here, which was far less dangerous, and more noble and advantageous, than to be
constantly robbing for small Booty, to the danger of their Lives? But that they
fought for Land, and not for Booty, is very clear; not only from the practice
of others, but from Sabellicus, Aeneid. l. 9. c. 1.
gliscere indies id malum augebatur duarum gentium audacia: apparebatque brevi
totam insulam alienatam iri, nisi ejusmodi conatibus mature iretur obviam.

5. How it is imaginable, that the Picts (finding themselves in so great danger
from the Romans and Britons, the one very considerable for their Valor, and
the other for their great Numbers) would not have entreated the Scots to stay
constantly with them? for tho they had been equal to their Enemies, when the
Scots and they were together, yet they could not be but much more inferior to
them, when the Scots left them once every Year.

6. If the Irish had constantly sent in Auxiliaries to assist against the
Romans, it is not to be believed but the Romans would have resentted this
Injury against the Kingdom of Ireland; which they never did, except once,
Buchan. p. 128.
when the Irish gave the Scots Supplies, endeavoring to re-establish
themselves after the expulsion of Eugenius. And if this War had been carried on
by the Kingdom of Ireland, and not by the Scots in Scotland; we had certainly
heard, that the Kings of Ireland had been mentioned, both in the Roman,
English, and our Histories: for it is not to be imagined, that so long, and so
great Wars could have been carried on by the Subjects, without the consent of
the King and Kingdom.

7. If they never had been called in by the Picts, to stay as a Colony, till
the Saxons had beat the Britons, who had lately called them in to their
Assistance: How is it imaginable to think, that the Picts would have called
them in as Auxiliaries at that time? having so lately seen, how dangerous
Auxiliaries might prove, especially considering, that the Scots had been used
many hundred Years to robbing, as the Bishop of St. Asaph would have us
believe; and that they were part of a numerous near Nation, from whom they
might expect suddenly great Supply: or that they would have not only run this
risque, but have divided with them their little Country; and yet not have
employed their Assistance for the Ends for which they called them in. For the
Bishop Page 37.
tells us, that the Scots did nothing for 100 Years after they were called in.

8. It cannot be denied, but that about the Year 792, Chambers particularly, p.
9, and 96; also from p. 229 to the end of the Treatise.
there was a League entered into betwixt Charles the Great, called Charle-Maigne
King of France, and Emperor of the West, and Achaius King of Scotland, called
by all the French Historians, the Famous Alliance. In which the King of
Scotland did send over 4000 Men to the assistance of Charles the Great. And
this is testified by Scotorum quoque reges sic habuit ad suam voluntatem, per
suam munificentiam inclinatos, ut eum nunquam aliter quam dominum
pronunciarent: extant epistolae ab iis ad eum missae, quibus hujusmodi affectus
eorum erga illum judicatur. Aeginard. vita Caroli magni ad annum 791.
Aeginardus who wrote the History of those Times, and was Secretary to Charles
the Great; and who is cited by Usher, at which time the King of Scotland sent
over very many famous learned Men, who founded the incomparable University of
Paris. All which is clear by Lib. 5. page 80. Aeginard. Secretary to
Charle-maigne, makes an enumeration of strange Princes, who embraced the Amity
of that puissant Monarch. The Emperors of Constantinople, Persia; the Kings of
India and Gallicia, with the Kings of Scotland. Favin. l. 5. p. 8. The Scots
joyful of this Alliance, as the most famous in Christendom, delegated for their
Ambassours, William Brother to their King Achatus, assisted with the counsel of
four Persons, renowned for Learning, Clemens, Ioannes, Rabanus, and Alcuinus,
with 4000 Men of War sent to the succor of Charle-maigne. The two worthy
Doctors who staid with Charle-maign at Paris and Padua, were John sirnam'd
Scotus, a Scottish-man, both by Nation and Surname, and Claudius Clemens.
Favin, in his Theater of Honor; and Paulus Aemilius in vita Caroli magni.
Caeterum ut paulatim extingueret Saxonum nomen; honores magistratusque gentibus
aliegiuis and in primis Scotis mandabat, quorum egregia fide virtuteque
utebatur.
Paulus Aemilius in that King's Life. From which I raise two Arguments; 1. How
can it be imagined, that if the Scots had not settled in a Colony till the 503,
that their King could have been so famous, that in about 280 Years time, this
small Colony, which the Bishop of St. Asaph represents to have been but
pilfering barbarous Robbers, would have become so famous, that Charles the
Great, then Emperor of all the Western World, would have entered into a League
with them, especially since they had not for 100 Years after their settlement,
done any memorable Action, Page 34, and 38.
as the Bishop of St. Asaph alleges? 2. If our Kings, and Nation, had only
then Dalrieda, or the Kingdom of Argile, as the Bishop contends, how could this
Prince of Argile (which is, after all improvement but an Earldom) have been
worthy, not only of the Alliance of the great Emperor of the West, but to be
able to send 4000 Men, especially having such dangerous Enemies at Home, and
being himself but a Stranger, newly entered into a Foreign Island, and living in
a small part of the Isle, with the Picts, the more powerful and ancient
possessors. And that there were 4000 Men sent by virtue of that League, is
clear, not only from Verimundus, out of whose 2d Book Chambers cites the whole
League; Vid. Sansovino delle origin delle Case illustri d' Italici. p. 111.
Edit. in 40. An. 1609.
but by Sansovin an Italian, who writes the History of the Douglassii, or
Scoti, whom he derives from William Douglas, who was Lieutenant at that Time to
Prince William, Brother to Achaius. For which Sansovin cites another, viz.
Vmberto Locato, more ancient than himself. Nella Cr^nica di piacenza.
And this is so far acknowledged by the French Kings, that upon it we got very
great Privileges in France, and all the Heralds in Europe acknowledge, that the
double Tressure, was the Badg of that Alliance.

9. How can it be conceived, that the Scots could in so short a time, after
their Settlement, have been able, without any help, to extirpate the Picts, who
must be presumed to have been very strong, having been so long settled in this
Isle; and having possessed in effect all that we have now, benorth Forth, except
the Shire of Argyle, if we believe the Bishop of St. Asaph.

Our Tradition is fortified, and the former Authorities cited by us, are
cleared, from the received Laws of our Nation; for first, all our Histories
bear, Lesl. page 80, Buchan. p. 97.
That after King Fergus' s death, the Nobility finding his Son too young, and
the Wars in which they were engaged very dangerous; they declared, that the
Uncle should govern. Which Custom continued, till it occasioned many bloody
Civil Wars betwixt the Uncles and Nephews: and therefore I^sl. p. 188. Buchan.
p. 190.
was justly abrogated by a Parliament holden by Kenneth the Third, which
Kenneth the Third reigned, Anno 970. And it were very ridiculous to think, that
since these Matters of Fact are true, viz. That there were bloody Civil Wars
betwixt the Uncles and the Nephews; and that all this has been much debated in
posterior Parliaments, betwixt such as were for the Crown, and such as were for
popular Elections; without ever controverting the Truth of the Matter of Fact;
and long before we could have any apprehension of such a debate as this, and so
that all this was a mere fiction, calculated for maintaining an Antiquity,
which was never controverted.

It can as little be denied, that there were Laws relating to the merchetae
mulierum; since many of our old Charters relate to them, and discharges of them
are incorporated in our Charters; and which Styles are a part of our old and
Traditional Law: These merchetae mulierum were thereafter abrogated by King
Malcom Canmor's Laws, many hundred Years before the starting of this Debate:
And that there were such Laws, is also acknowledged, not only by Baker, and
others within the Isle, but even by Solinus and Jerome, etc. Lib. 2. ad
Iovianum, who seems to point at this, when he says, that Scoti nullas proprias
habens uxoret.
And that these Laws were made by Evenus the Third, who lived twelve Years
before Christ, is a part of the same Tradition; and so cannot but be believed,
since Laws are one of the probablest Means imaginable, Solin. cap. 25. de
Britannia.
for preserving Tradition. By the Laws likewise of Malcom the 2d, who reigned
in the Year 1004. The Frith of Forth is called Mare Scotiae, or the Sea of
Scotland; which demonstrates, that before the Year 1000, our Country was called
Scotia, or Scotland: and confirms and clears all that is said out of Beda; and
as this designation of the Scottish Sea is looked upon there, as a thing very
old and acknowledged; so it is continued in our Laws for many Ages, as is
evident by K. I. 2d, his Laws above cited.

I had resolved not to mention the Bishop's Objections, against our early
Conversion: But I find it so clear, that we were converted to the Christian
Faith before the Year 503, that there results this concluding Argument from it,
to prove that we were settled before that time. For if we were a Christian
Nation converted here, before that time; it follows necessarily, that we were a
Nation settled here before that Time: Since a Nation is said no where to be
converted, but where it is settled, albeit some Persons of that Nation may be
said to be converted abroad. And that this part of the Isle which we now
inhabit, and that people from which we are descended, were Christians before
that time; seems to me very evident, from the former testimony of Tertullian,
who wrote in the end of the second Century, to which I refer my Reader: And tho
Tertullian lived a little before King Donald, yet the Answer is apparent, viz.
that the Nations were ordinarily converted before the Kings or Magistrates. And
it is indeed very probable that the Christians who were persecuted in the
Southern Nations, would flee from their Persecutors, the Roman Emperors: And
where could they seek refuge so reasonably, as in that Country, and amongst
that People which had never submitted to the Roman Empire? And it being
acknowledged by the learned Usher, and my Lord St. Asaph, that Britain was
converted in the first Century; it is very reasonable to think, that the
Christians, who had fled to this Isle, from the persecution of the Romans,
would have very probably sheltered themselves here, where the Romans had no
power: for though it be not proved, that the Roman Persecution reached to
Britain so early; yet certainly they who fled so far from the Persecution,
would not think themselves very secure within the Dominions of the Persecutors,
and would have secured themselves by a few more Miles from so dreaded a danger.
As also, it seems very improbable, that since the Christian Religion spread
from Jerusalem to Britain in less than 100 Years, that it would have taken
above 300 Years more, to reach so few Miles, as are betwixt the British part of
the Isle, and Scotland. It is also presumable that the Druids having been so
prepared to receive Christianity, by their excellent Principles of Philosophy,
and their severity of Life formerly mentioned, which did not contradict, but
illuminate the Christian Doctrine, they would have both been easy to be
converted themselves, and ready to have converted their former Disciples, and
the People who admired them. I might here cite many Authors; but I fix upon
Lib. 1. c. 13.
Beda, who asserts positively, That Palladius was sent in the 8th Year of
Theodosius junior; that is to say, in the 431 ad Scotos in Christum credentes,
by Pope Caelestine, as their first Bishop: And that Beda wrote of us, as the
Scots, is formerly proved; and this Mission of Palladius falling in the Tract
and Series of the Actions ascribed by Beda to us only, it is inconsistent with
common Reason, that the things before and after, and the things related in the
very Chapter, should be only applicable to us, and yet only this should not:
albeit our own and Foreign Histories apply the same to us. As to Foreign
Histories, I shall only cite Baronius, who, because he made Ecclesiastic
History more his business than my Lord St. Asaph, and was more disinterested,
is therefore more to be believed as to this point.

This great Antiquary Tom. 5. edit. col. p. 586, and 589. number. 5. Qui igitur
Evangelium primo a victore Pontifice maxim^ accepere, and a Celestino Papa
primum Episcopum, a quo sunt omnes pe^itus redditi Christiani, eate^us Christi
gratia pro^ecere, qui oli^ gentilitio ritu viventes, ob feriaos mores, ut
portentum ostentui erant humano generi praestantissi^i eveneri^t Christiani,
etc.
tells, That the Scots who had first received the Christian Faith from Pope
Victor, and their first Bishop from Pope Caelestine, were become the chief of
all Christians, from being amongst the most barbarous of all Nations, having
formerly said, Number. 4.
That all consent that Palladius was their first Bishop; and for which he cites
Prosper, as he does Tertullian, Jerome, Sedulius, and others, for our being
Christians under Pope Victor, saying, That Quia Victore Romano Pontifice,
Scotos evangelium accepisse, majorum traditione scripsere, haud sunt refellendi.
they are not to be refuted who assert our conversion under Pope Victor: but is
most positive as to Palladius. And whereas it is Usher. p. 79^ de prim.
pretended that Prosper's words are not applicable to us, since he says, that
Palladius made the barbarous Island Christian; and our Scotland is not an
Island.

To this it is answered, That our part of Britain was by Tacitus, and Beda,
said to be reduced into an Island, by the Roman Wall from Sea to Sea: and Lib.
1. c. 12. ac Tusculani, etc. L. 4. c. 26. Eccl.
Beda in other places of his History calls us therefore Islanders. Baronius
also applies this to us, and so this gloss is to be preferred, to that
unwarrantable gloss or reading cited by the Bishop of St. Asaph, from the copy
of a Manuscript of Nenius, Missus est Palladius Episcopus, primitus a
Caelestino ad Scotos in Christum convertendos: for that not only differs from
Beda, the far more learned, ancient, and credible Author: But it is improbable
to say, that a Bishop was sent to those, which were to be converted, seeing
Conversion uses to be by Presbyters, and Missionars; and when the Church is
gathered, the Bishop is sent: and this gloss contradicts not only common sense,
but Stat. 6.
Ado Viennen, and Page 340.
Marian, who both use Beda's own words, Ad Scotos in Christum credentes: and
what is said of the conversion of the Scots and Picts by St. Ninian, Palladius,
and Columba, to make our conversion to be later than Tertullian made it, viz.
in the 2d Century, must be interpreted of our fuller and sounder conversion
from Paganism, and Pelagianism; and of our being conformed to the Romish
Church, and Rites, which the Authors of those Times considered as the only true
conversion. But to make this our first conversion, were to contradict
Tertullian, Jerome, the learned Baronius, as well as all our Histores. And the
Edit. Basil. 1624. 2d. Cent. p. 1.
Magdeburgian Centuriators do positively agree with Baronius, and our History,
in this our Antiquity: and so having for us the greatest Ecclesiastic
Antiquaries, both Protestant and Papist, we need not condescend upon particular
Authors: these being the Standards of Ecclesiastic History to the Professors
of both Religions: and it is strange after all this, that a Churchman should
so positively contradict, what the Antiquaries of both Churches have so
positively asserted; tho if there had been any thing, wherein they could have
contradicted one another, they would certainly have differed.

That Donald then was our first Christian King, in Anno 203, and Palladius our
first Bishop, in Anno 431, seems most fully proved: for these being Matters of
Fact, may be proved by Witnesses; and who are better Witnesses, than the many
Historians of the Country where the things were transacted; especially since
these were Matters of great importance, and Notoriety; which the Monasteries,
whose Faith is followed by our Historians, could not but know best of all
others, and in which they durst not cheat or forge, because the Annals of other
Churches would have contradicted them, whereas they are confirmed by them; and
these things fell out, when we had the help of Letters, and are agreeable to
the sound Reasons above-related: Tho the conversion of a Kingdom be a matter
that could not be unknown, and no other King but Donald was ever recorded to
have been the first Christian King here.

That Palladius was sent to the Scots in Britain, and not to the Scots in
Ireland, appears further from these undeniable matters of Fact; viz. That Pope
Caelestine did ordain, and send Palladius, in Anno 431: That the same Pope
Caelestine sent St. Patrick to Ireland: That St. Patrick's Mission must have
been before the 6th of April 432, is also clear, because Prosper tells, that
Caelestine died that Year. And the Roman Pontifical tells, it was on the 6th of
April that Year. From all which, the Bishop did see that Palladius's mission
must have been to the Scots in Scotland; else Palladius had been first Bishop
of Ireland, and St. Patrick needed not have been sent into Ireland, since
Palladius was sent there but the Year before. To reconcile which real
Contradictions, the Bp of St. Asaph makes up a laborious Hypothesis, and says,
that Palladius was indeed in Ireland, but finding he could not succeed, he was
upon his return to Rome, but died in, or near the bounds of the Picts, the 15th
of December, 431. So that St. Patrick, who lived in Britain, could not but have
known his death, and had time enough to go to Rome, and be ordained Bishop for
Ireland, and go to that Kingdom, and there finish their Conversion, which
Palladius had only begun: and so St. Patrick was called the first Bishop. All
this Hypothesis is almost impossible, though good Palladius had sooner, and
deeplier despaired, than a Saint should have done, especially in the Conversion
of a whole Nation: and though both had posted faster for a Benefice, than
Holy-Church-men did in those Primitive Times. Yet all this is founded upon
Palladius's having died December. 15. 431. And the only proofs produced for this
by my Lord St. Asaph, is Baleus de 14. scrip. 6. near the end; and yet in that
same Citation it is positively said, that Palladius was sent to Scotland, and
the particular Scottish King is named; and Baleus adds, That Palladius claruit
Anno virginei partus, 434; he flourished in the Year 434, and so he died not in
the 431. And not content with this, Baleus goes on, telling, that post multos
pios tandem sudores and religiosa exercitia in Fordono vico Merniae foelicem
hujus vitae sortius est exitum. Which is in our Scotland, and in the North part
thereof, very far out of the Road from Ireland to Rome; and where we have St.
Padies Church and Fair; and with us he is named our first Bishop to this day:
but was never named an Irish Bishop, until the Bishop of St. Asaph made him by
a strange word first, in omination of success, as he says, tho not he, but St.
Patrick had this success. If then he died not so soon, and if the time of his
death is not proved, why might he not have baptized Tarvanus? And why should
our Boethius be hectored for saying, that Palladius baptized Tarvan? Yet I
impute not this to my Lord St. Asaph's mistake or ignorance; but it is an
elaborate contrivance, to divert all the unanswerable Authorities, proving that
Palladius was sent to us in Scotland, in the Year 431, and so before the Year
503; in which my Lord St. Asaph says we settled first in Britain. I shall
conclude this concerning Palladius, with the suffrage of Dr. Hammond, a learned
and Episcopal English Divine, Page 162.
who in his vindication of the dissertations concerning Episcopacy, reconciling
the seeming Differences between Beda, who asserts, that Palladius was sent to
the Scots believing in Christ: And Prosper, who speaking of the same Mission,
says, That Palladius made also the Barbarous Island Christian; lays down these
three Conclusions; 1. That Christianity was planted in Scotland, before
Caelestine's Time, derived to them most probably from their Neighbor Britons
here, with whom they are known to have agreed in the keeping of Easter,
contrary to the Custom of the Roman Church, as Lib. 3.
Beda says. 2. That this Plantation was very imperfect, differing little from
Barbarism, and so reputed by Prosper, till the coming of Bishop Palladius among
them. 3. That even after that, they retained the use of Easter, contrary to the
Roman custom, which still refers to some rude conversion of theirs before
Palladius; and so it is evident, that in the learned Doctor's opinion, the
Scotland to which Palladius was sent, was ours; and that we were Christians
before his coming, tho rude and barbarous. The Bishop of St. Asaph having thus
spirited from us, into Ireland, Palladius our first Bishop, he proceeds to
translate Amphibalus our first Churchman upon Record, unto a Shag-Cloak;
designing likewise thereby to prove, that Boethius our Historian is not to be
credited, because he followed their fabulous Ieffrey: Who finding that St.
Alban had, to save his pious Guest, taken the holy Man's Habit, to the end he
might be martyred for him; and as Beda expresses it, Caracalla ejus indutus;
Ieffrey concludes, as my Lord St. Asaph alleges, that the Vestiment was
Amphibalus; and Ieffrey having made the Cloak a Man, Boethius made him a Bishop
of the Isle of Man: and so this Cloak was fitly ordained to be a proper Bishop
for the Chapter of the Culdees: But this is ludere in sacris, and to expose
Episcopacy it self upon the Stage. In answer to which, I shall only offer these
few thoughts, First, What Interest had Ieffrey (who was a Briton) to oblige the
Scots, or the Isle of Man, in making so horrid a lie? 2. It is against sense,
to think that any Man, much less a Scholar, could have been so gross, as to
take a Shag Cloak for a Bishop. 3. If the Shag Cloak had been mistaken for the
name of a Man, he should have been called Caracalla, and not Amphibalus; for
the Legend being written in Latin, Ieffrey had certainly chosen the word
Caracalla, because that was the Latin word, and was the word used by Beda, and
because there was a Roman Emperor truly of that name, before Beda and Ieffrey's
Time. 4. Beda relating to that passage, tells us, that in the Dioclesian
Persecution, St. Alban, Aron, Julius, and many others suffered: And why might
not Amphibalus be one of these many that suffered? And why ought Boethius to
have been taxed, for mentioning Amphibalus, since this was done long before
him, by a multitude of English Writers, cited by Bishop Usher, who derived his
birth from Greece, and describes the particular Actions of his Life, and his
Martyrdom; with which also the modern English Writers agree, as Page 28, and 58.
Baleus, Holinshed, Speed, all which English, and thousands of other
Testimonies do far weigh down Bishop Usher's Conjectures, that Amphibalus was
not a Man, but a Vestiment, from the silence of Gildas, Beda, the Martyrologies
and Breviaries of Salisbury, and Ieffrey, who do not mention him: for Gildas
could not mention him, writing concerning the Conquest, and Destruction of
Britain; Beda tells the Passage relative to St. Alban; and albeit he names him
not in the Dioclesian Persecution, yet he tells, that many more suffered than
the three he names. We have not seen the Martyrologies, and Breviaries, nor
does it import whether they mention him or not; and it is not so much to be
wondered at, that some English Writers do not mention him, as that he is
mentioned by so many, seeing he was a Greek, and a Bishop in the remote Isles
of Britain, and in all likelihood would have been buried under silence, had it
not been for that Passage with St. Alban.

My last Argument for confirming our History, shall be, that the best
Critiques, Historians, and Antiquaries of other Nations, who had occasion to
mention our Histories, and particularly the great Baronius, Scaliger,
Salmasius, Lipsius, Carolus Sigonius, Favinus, Seldom, and others of the first
Rank, (too many to be named) have passionately defended our Antiquity, and not
only sustained, but praised our Histories: and so the Arguments and Grounds
whereupon I have proceeded, are already asserted by the best Judges, and that
too after Luddus published his Objections against the same, and almost the very
same Objections which are now urged, and which are treated with great contempt
by Page in Eusebius.
Scaliger. Since then there is nothing now urged, that could have escaped the
observation of these learned and curious Authors, who could not but have
discovered, as soon as the Bishop of St. Asaph, that our Historians did not
mention any Warrants which were written in the Time, or did contradict the
Roman History or one another. I admire why now these our Histories should be
controverted. And tho something might be pretended, if my Lord St. Asaph did in
this Book, produce Manuscripts unknown to those learned Critics; yet could
they have been so blind and ignorant (especially in that subtle and laborious
Age, wherein all Men were by a noble emulation contending, who should discover
most) as not to have seen defects? which if they had been real, they had been
obvious. It is also very remarkable, that since all Nations are emulous of one
another in Matters of Antiquity; yet they, by yielding to ours, have thereby
acknowledged, that ours was beyond all debate; and to this day, none controvert
it, (notwithstanding of all the pains taken by Luddus, Cambden, and Usher)
further than to gratify their own Country. And therefore, as Cicero argues,
that the Romans were the bravest, because every Nation commended them next to
their own: I may contend, that we are the most ancient, because every Nation
confesses us to be next to themselves in Antiquity. I shall cite, for
confirming this, some few Instances. Saxo Gram. Swaningius, Albertus Krantzius,
own our Name and Nation to have been before Christ, though after the Danes.
Mezeray shortly after Pharamond: and my Lord St. Asaph himself, who brings us
in but 50 Years after the English.

Since it is probable that the Bishop of St. Asaph and I will not agree well in
the decision of this Debate; were it not just that we should both rest in the
decision of learned Strangers, who understood Antiquities exactly, these being
the subject Matter of our Controversy? And where can we find more qualified
Judges than those great Antiquaries whom I have named? But yet to show how much
I trust to the strength of that Truth which I assert, I dare appeal to Seldom,
that Englishman, who was so affectionate to his Country, and that Antiquary
who understood best of all Mankind the Antiquities of his own Nation, and even
to him also in his Mare Clausum, written for the Defense and Glory of his
Country; who, lib. 2. cap. 8. Maris Clausi, has these words, speaking of those
famous Lines in Claudian, to the praise of Stilicho, Inde Caledonio velata
Britannia monstro
-- Totam cum Scotus Jernam
Movit and infesto spumavit remige Tethys.
As the Palms, and the River Tagus were peculiar to Spain, as the Ears of Corn
and Ivory to Africa; so he would have it understood, that the Province of
Britain had the Sea of the same name peculiar thereto. But yet it is to be
conceived, that the Dominion of the Romans was so limited in this Sea,
according to their possession of the Shore, that they had little power in that
part of the British Sea, which bordered upon the Shores of those British
Nations who were not under their Obedience. This is to be taken chiefly of the
Irish Sea, and the rest that lies North-west; for when the Roman Empire began
to decline, not only in Ireland, but in the Isle of Man also, and the other
Isles of the Western Sea, and a great portion of the more Northerly parts of
Britain was possessed by the Scots and Picts, so that we have sufficient ground
to conceive, that they also had an ancient Dominion of their own in the
neighboring Sea.

From which Passage I argue thus,

1. That Seldom considered the Scots and Picts, as Nations not subject to the
Romans; Gentes iis (viz. Romany) minime subjacentes, No manner of way subject
to the Romans; and looks on us as the most considerable of these two Nations:
for the words run, A Scotis, tenebatur Pictisque; and very justly, for we were
able to defend them while they were just to us, and to extirpate them when they
became Enemies.

2. This great Antiquary asserts, that the Scots and Picts possessed not only in
Stilicho's Time, who was Guardian to Honorius, and so lived about Anno 400, a
great portion of the Northern part of Britain, as well as the Isle of Man, and
the rest of the Western Isles; and consequently if we possessed them then, it
cannot be said that we were only here by way of incursion, till the Year 500;
or were confined to Argile, till after the Year 500, as my Lord St. Asaph
contends.

3. That we were not only possessed then, but that we had avitum Dominium,
ancient Dominion, and had right prisco jure; and nothing is so inconsistent
with the being Proprietors, as to be Robbers, coming only by way of Incursion;
and if we had the Dominion of our Seas, jure prisco, and per Dominium avitum;
we were certainly ancient Possessors before the Year 400, and so must have been
not only far older than the Year 500, but even to have been prisci incolae, as
Beda (l. 1. c. 1.) says, before the Romans entered this Isle, and so before
Christ.

Seldom also, in the transition from that 2d to the 3d Chapter, tells, after
that he had spoke of the Scots Dominion of their own Sea, that he will treat of
the succeeding Ages, and so proceeds to the Saxons, which demonstrates, that we
were settled here before the Saxons, though my Lord St. Asaph makes their
settlement here more ancient than ours. And in this Beda agrees with Seldom,
but both contradict the Bishop. And lastly, this passage clears, that the
Testimonies, not only of Claudian concerning Ierna, but even of Tertullian,
when speaking of the Inhabitants of Britain not conquered by the Romans, and of
Ierom speaking of the Britannick Nations, are only applicable to us: And
therefore I hope my Lord St. Asaph will not take it ill, if we, in a Matter of
Antiquity, prefer an impartial Antiquary, to an interested Divine, as I would
not be offended, if the Bishop of St. Asaph were preferred to me in a
Theological Controversy.

The first general Objection against our Histories, SECT. 7.
is, Answers to the Bishop's Objections.
that they were not written by those who lived in the Time, but more than 1400
Years after the things happened, of which they wrote. And it were strange, that
if Gild^s, who lived 500 Years before the eldest of them, could find no
sufficient Instructions, save from Foreigners, that our Historians should have
found sufficient Warrants for a History after so long a time.

To which my Answer is, That our Histories giving only an account of one
Nation, it was easier to find the true and sincere Tradition as to us, than it
was in other Nations, where the Conquerors were not concerned to preserve the
Traditions and Records: and though I have made it very probable, that this Isle
had the use of Letters before, or at least soon after we settled in it, and so
might have preserved the Story. Yet albeit our History were only founded on
Tradition, until about 600 Years after Christ, before which the Monastery of
Iona or Icolm-kill was founded, that Tradition might have been sufficiently
preserved, for so few Generations, by the means and methods that I have
formerly condescended upon. Nor can I see, how the Origin of a Nation could not
have been preserved by those who were of it, or how, being established it could
have vanished when People became more polite and curious. And after the Year
600, I have proved, that our Historians might have been, and were sufficiently
warranted in what they have said, by old Manuscripts, and Records: nor is there
any thing urged in this Objection against us, but what might as unanswerably be
urged against the Greek and Latin Historians. A received History cannot be
overturned, from what I have formerly represented, without Arguments, which
necessarily conclude that the History impugn'd must be false; which cannot be
alleged here, where the Warrants of the History controverted, not only might
have been, but probably were true; and are so far from contradicting other
Histories, that they are confirmed by them.

I desire also to know, what old Manuscripts and Records Luddus, the Antiquary
so far preferred to ours, had for proving, that much elder Succession of
History from Brutus to his own Time: And whereas St. Asaph says, that Buchannan
should not have taxed Luddus for deriving the Britons from Brutus, since he
owned a Succession of our Kings from Fergus, there being as few Documents to
support the one, as the other.

To this my Answer is, That there have been very solid grounds brought for
sustaining the one, which cannot be alleged for the other: and ours are
adminiculated by the Roman History, whereas theirs is inconsistent with it: for
it is palpably inconsistent with the Roman History, to say, that Brutus was the
Son of Ascanius whom he killed, for which being banished from Italy, he came
over to Britain: and that Britain was governed by Consuls: which should rather
be laughed at, than confuted.

The Bishop is most unjust to us, in asserting, that we have no Author of our
own before Fordon; and that no Author mentions our Antiquity, but such as have
followed Fordon, who wrote about 300 Years ago. For Fordon cites his Vouchers,
many of which are extant, and those who are lost, are proved to have been
extant. Within the Isle we could have no Authors till there were Writers, and
Gildas and Beda, the eldest in the Isle, prove our Antiquity. Without the Isle
none could know us, being so remote, but either by the Wars they had with us,
or the Christianity that was common to them and us. As to our Wars, all the
Roman Authors above-related speak of us; Orosius about the Year 417. Claudian
397. Ammianus before the Year 360. Beda and Eumenius speak of us, as before
Julius Caesar, as has been proved. All which we have collaterally supported,
by a gradation of Ecclesiastic Historians abroad, and all our own Historians
at home. Beda brings us to Reutherus, who was the 6th King from Fergus the
first: and he living within 150 Years of Fergus, this short step may be trusted
to Tradition, though we had wanted the help of the Druids, and Phaenician
Letters: for a Father might have informed his Son of so near a Time; nor was
this worthy of a fiction. And I may modestly say of the foregoing Citations
from foreign Authors, that if they be not strong enough to overturn the
Bishop's Hypothesis, yet they are at least as strong as those produced by
Josephus in defense of the Jewish History; and yet all the learned World has
acquiesc'd in them. Nor is there any thing to be concluded from the silence of
Adamnanus, and Marianus, the eldest of our Historians: though, as the Bishop
alleadges, they had certainly mentioned our Antiquitiy, if they had known it.
For Adamnanus wrote no History save of Columba; and Marianus going to Germany,
when he was very young, could know little of us, and mentions only the three
Kings of Scotland, in whose time he lived: and so if this Argument proved any
thing, it would prove too much. For certainly we had Kings before those three,
whom he mentions; and these negative Arguments are of no moment in Matters of
History, and are justly reprobated by the learned Scaliger, in his Notes on
Eusebius, and by De Hist. La^. p. 4.
Vossius.

The second Objection is, That our Historians contradict one another concerning
the Origin of the Picts; which ought to lessen their credit. But to this it is
answered, That our Historians were not concerned to consider the Origin of the
Picts as they were to consider their own. And this Objection subsumes not what
is true in Matter of Fact. For our Historians generally agree in the Origin of
the Picts, whom all of them make to be Scythians: and though Fordon relates
three different accounts of them, yet he does not settle upon any thing that is
different from our other Historians Cap. 30, and 37. ^ 1.
as is fully to be seen.

The third Objection is, That our Historians are contradicted by our own
Antecessors; for our Historians assert that King Donald the first was our first
Christian King; whereas in our Apology against Edward the first of England,
about the Year 1300, we assert the Tradition of a wonderful Victory obtained by
our King Hungus, against the Saxons, by the Relicts of St. Andrew the Apostle,
by virtue whereof the Scots first received the Faith of Christ.

To which it is shortly answered, that every Contradiction does not overturn
the Truth of a whole History; otherwise we need not be troubled to give any
other answer to the Bishop's own Book: nor is this pretended to be a
Contradiction amongst our Historians, for they all agree, that King Donald was
our first Christian King; but in that Apology, which is alleged to contradict
our Histories, our Predecessors designed, as most Pleaders do (and this
Eloquent Author does in his Book) to gain their Point at any rate. For
understanding whereof, it is fit to know, that King Edward the first, having
upon the Competition betwixt Bruce and Baliol, interposed with design to make
himself Lord Paramount of Scotland; he caused his Parliament write to the Pope,
to whom afterward he wrote himself; in which Letter of his, it is pretended,
that we were Vassals to England, as descended from Albanactus the second Son to
Brutus. 2. Because several of our Kings had become Vassals to his Predecessors,
in the Times of the British, Saxon, and Norman Kings. To which we answer in our
Apology, That without debating, whether the first Inhabitants of the Isle were
descended from Albanactus, or his Albanians, it is asserted, that we came from
Spain by Ireland, and conquered the first Inhabitans (for which we cite Bed.
Ec. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Beda) and so, tho they had been Vassals, we were free; not being liable to the
Conditions of the People we conquered; and as such, fought constantly against
the Britons, who were forced to build Severus's Wall against us. And as to any
homage made by our Kings, it was either for the Three Northen Countries of
Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Northumberland, confirmed to us by the Britons,
to defend them against the Saxons; and thereafter again St. Asaph, p. 45.
confirmed by both Saxons and Britons to assist them against the Danes. Or was
extorted by force, from one or two young Captive Kings; upon which heads the
Popes had declared us free: which Bulls, Edward himself had robbed unjustly out
of our Treasure, with other Records, which he could not deny: but to cajole the
Pope their Judge, they insinuate, that though they were not Tributaries to his
Holiness, as England was; yet they ought to be protected by the Pope, because
they had been converted by St. Andrew his Predecessors Brother-german: St.
Andrew having in Hungus's reign obtained for them a Victory over the Saxons;
and so became subject, and subservient to the Pope, in having converted the
Saxons by Aidan, Finan, and Colman. From this Matter of Fact, I observe, 1.
That we owned the same origination there, that our Historians do to this day:
and so our Ancestors differed not from our Historians, much less are they
irreconcilable, as St. Asaph alleadges. 2. That the English acknowledged us to
be as ancient as the Britons, they and we being descended from two Brothers. 3.
That what we said of St. Andrew, must needs be upon design, to have obliged
the Pope, meaning certainly, either that we were then first effectually
converted to the Church of Rome, from the Oriental Observations, in which we
were very long very obstinate, and that Rome considered that, as the true
Conversion; or that after that time we first became subject, tho not feudatary
to the Pope, as these forecited words subjoined do insinuate. But that our
conversion from Paganism, was more than 400 Years before the Saxons, is
positively asserted in that same Apology. Nor can this have another meaning,
for it is undeniable, that we were Christians long before the reign of Hungus,
who reigned 800 Years after Christ: and Colman, etc. lived long before that
King. Nor was Hungus our King, we being only Auxiliaries to him then, as King
of the Picts: after which Apology, King Robert the 1st being crowned, and
having defeated King Edward at Banock-burn, where he gained a most signal
Victory over the English, they then being low, made application to the Pope;
and he having discharged us, by a formal Interdiction, to pursue the Victory
into England; the Nobility, to pacify that Pope, and to remove the
Interdiction, at the desire of the King, wrote Letter, wherein they own the
Antiquity of our Nation, and Religion, and Royal-Line, mentioning when we came
from Spain, as our Historians do, with whom they agree exactly, Vt ex
antiquorum gestis, and libris, collegimus, says the Letter: which being prior
to Fordon, proves that all this was not Fordon's Dream, and that our History is
well founded on old Records, prior to Fordon. And lastly, it appears, that our
Kings were not Vassals to England for their Crown, but only for these
Provinces, as Page 46.
my Lord St. Asaph confesses, and as I have proved in my Treatise of
Precedence; albeit our Independency was as much controverted of old, as our
Antiquity is now: and I hope that the one will shortly appear as unjust a
Pretense, as the other is already confessed to be. From this it appears, that
there is rather a Harmony than real Contradiction here, and that any seeming
Contradiction is far less, than the real ones, betwixt Beda, and the Bishop of
St. Asaph, and the following Contradictions, wherein he differs from himself.
For clearing whereof, observe, That the Bishop says Page 8.
he questions not the truth of any thing that is said to have been within 800,
nay within 1400 Years; but so it is, that this would bring us to be settled
here, before the Year 300 after Christ: for substract 1400 out of 1684, (which
is the Year in which the Bishop prints his Book) his Lordship can controvert
nothing except what was done within 284 Years after Christ: And yet he decryes
our Historians, for saying, that we were settled here before the Year 503; and
denies our being Christians for many Years after the Year 300; and to improve
this learned Bishop's just Concession, I must remark, that all our Historians
agree, that Gregory the great King of Scotland, who died Anno, 892, added
Northumberland to the Merse; and having defeated the Britons at Lochmaben, he
forced them to renew their ancient League, and to confirm to him the former
Right, his Predecessors got from them to Cumberland, and Westmorland, for
assisting them against the Picts and Saxons; which shows also, what great
things we could do, not only alone without, but even against the Picts. All
which being said by our Historians, not only within the 1400 Years, but the
800, are not controvertible by the Bishop's concession: and therefore I
understand not why he asserts Page 42.
that we had nothing but the Kingdom of Argyle before the beating and
extirpating of the Picts, who gave us their possession beyond Drumalbain. Nor
can I reconcile, how the Bishop asserts all along, and particularly, Cap. 1.
Paragraph 2, 3, and 12.
that the Picts had nothing besouth Grahams-dyke, or the Frith of Forth and
Clyde: and yet he confesses Page 156.
that amongst the South-Picts, there was a Monastery of St. Martin at Whit-horn
founded by St. Ninian, in honor of that Saint; and Whit-horn is in Galloway,
in the furthest south point of our Scotland, near eighty miles besouth Forth;
and himself also confesses Page 83.
Whit-horn to be in Galloway.

The fourth Objection being, that our Historians have followed Ieffrey of
Monmoth, in many rediculous inventions, which were purely his own; and
particularly in the History of Bassianus, who being Emperor, is by him
pretended to have been killed in Britain, by Fulgentius; which, tho Buchannan
does not exactly follow, yet he still makes Bassianus to have been a Roman
Lieutenant, and to have been killed in Britain; whereas it appears not from any
Roman Authors, that there was any Roman Lieutenant here. To this it is
answered, That no Man comparing our Histories with Ieffrey of Monmouth, can
think so: for we bring not our Nation from Brutus, as he does against common
sense; and tho Ieffrey tells a story of Bassianus the Emperor being killed in
Britain, which contradicts the Roman Story; yet Fordon does expressly say (...)
Bassianus Caracalla, qui (...) non pa^cis (...) Severo (...) l. 2. c. 45.
it was not that Bassianus who was Emperor, but a Captain sent here: and so
does not follow, but contradict Ieffrey. And Buchannan, to show that he does
not follow him (and he understood too well the Roman Story to do so) only
relates that there was a Bassianus killed, which no Roman History contradicts;
and which is not to be presumed Buchannan would have made, since there is
nothing in it for the advantage of his Nation: and as it is probable, the
Emperor would not have suffered Carausius to make such great preparations,
without sending a considerable Captain; especially since Eutropius tells, that
after many Wars attempted with Carausius, he at last concluded to send a
Captain against him, without naming who that Captain was. It were a hard thing
therefore to conclude so great Authors were forgers, because they condescend
not upon an Author for every indifferent Circumstance; and the Vid. Instit. ad
Senatus. Co^. Trebell.
Notitia Imperii is so far from having taken notice of every Lieutenant in a
Legion, that I can prove by many Texts of the Civil Law, that even Consuls
themselves have been forgot, when they were only chosen to succeed to those,
who died during their Consulship.

But the great Objection used by the Bishop, against our Antiquity, lies in the
4th of the Bishop's first Chapter, wherein he asserts, That Ireland was peopled
by the Scots, and was the only Scotland before these times, viz. before the
Year 503: And in the 5th, That there were no Scots in Britain before the said
Year 300. And in the 6th and 8th; That the Scots, betwixt the 300 and 500
Years, were indeed here, but not settled, and only by way of Incursion. And in
the 9th, he asserts, That about the Year 500 they first settled here, and
erected the Kingdom of Argile. And in the 12th and 13th, he asserts, That after
the Year 900, we got the rest of the Country, and then only it came to be
called Scotland.

For clearing all these Mistakes, without partiality or humor, I shall sum up
my Answers in these distinct Propositions.

First, It is undeniable in it self, and acknowledged by our Adversaries, that
the first special Names, under which Ireland was known, were Ierna among the
Ptolom. Geog. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Greeks, and Hibernia among the Latins: both of which are, as I said,
acknowledged by P. 722, 723, and particularly 724. Hanc insulam Britannidem
olim a Julio Caesare vocatam Fabius Ethelwardus haud recte retulit: non alio
enim quam Hiberniae nomine, a Caesare, uti post eum a Plinio, Solino, and
Tacito illam invenimus.
Bishop Usher himself.

My second Position is, That before the Year 300, there is no Foreign Author
produced by either Nation, that mentions Scotia, Scoti, or Scoticae gentes,
except Seneca, who mentions the Scoto-brigantes: and Florus the Scoticae
pruinae: and Hegisippus, who mentions Scotia: and Porphyrie, who mentions
Scoticae gentes. And tho I have proved formerly all these Authors and Passages
to be genuine, and applicable to us alone: yet, tho they were only spurious
Authors, or the conjectural Readings of new Critics, as Bishop P. 725, 726,
727, 728.
Usher (whom my Lord St. Asaph follows) alleges, Cap. 1.. 4.
Porphyrie only excepted, whose Testimony is admitted by him to be in the third
Century. It clearly follows, that my Lord St. Asaph has, without sufficient
Warrant, asserted in the forementioned place, that Ireland was called Scotland
before the Year 300: he admitting no Author for this, save Porphyrie, whose
Book he acknowledges not to be extant, but to be only cited by Ierom, who lived
long after the Year 300.

3. My chief Design in this Book, is not to debate the Antiquity of the Names
of Scotia, or Scoti, but only when we first settled under Kings in this Isle.
And consequently though Archbishop Usher, and the Bishop of St. Asaph could
prove, that the words Scotia, and Scoti, were not known the first 300 Years,
except in Porphyrie; yet that cannot prove that we were not settled here before
that Time. For it is undeniable, that many Nations have had peculiar Names,
before those Names can be found in History, as Scaliger very well proves: and
they could not be known in Histories, till other Nations had commerce with
them, and wrote of them, which was a thing very accidental. And Foreigners do
oft-times design Nations by Appellatives, which they themselves invent. And it
is asserted by Bp Usher, that the Scots inhabited Ireland long before the Year
300, tho till then he cannot give an Author for that word. And who can deny
that the Picts lived long here before Eumenius, who first mentioned them, and
lived long after Porphyrie who mentions the Scots? And it is very observable
that to this day, neither the Irish nor we are called Scots in the true Irish
Language; for they call their own Countrymen Erenach, from the word Ierna, or
Ibernia, and us Albanach, from Albion, and Albania: Which also clears, that we
got that name long before Julius Caesar's Time; since before that time, the
word Albian was run into desuetude, and was succeeded to by the more known name
of Britannia: And these Originations are the more confirmed, that to this day
the same Irish, and our Highlanders, know no other names to the English, save
Sassanach, because of Saxony from which they came; as they called us Albanach
(to distinguish us from themselves) from the Country to which we came. Which
may give us likewise a hint, how by Names, without Histories, most ancient
Monuments of Antiquity may be preserved: And it is fully proved before that
time, we were known in this Country, under the name of Beda l. 1. c. 1.
Dalreudini, and Tacit. in vita Agricol.
Caledonii.

4. All those uncontroverted Testimonies, that make first mention of the Scots,
and of Scotland, are only applicable to us: such as Claudian, Pacatius,
Ammianus, etc. as has formerly been fully proved. And since Hegesippus is the
first Author produced by the Bp of St. Asaph, who mentions Scotia; and that it
has been formerly proved, that these Passages relate to Us, and not to Ireland;
it follows clearly, that the name Scotia was given to Us, before it was given
to Ireland, or that the Irish were called Scoti: Albeit it were admitted that
the Works ascribed to Hegesippus, were really St. Ambroses, who flourished
before the Year 400. And Cambden acknowledges that the Name of Scotland came
over with the Scots to Britain, cap. 1. Hibernia. And therefore since I have
proved, that the Scots came over before Julius Caesar's Time; it follows from
Cambden, that the name of Scotland was ascribed to us before them.

5. Tho it be true, and acknowledged on all hands, that Ireland was inhabited
by the Nation of the Scots, as is written by Orosius in the Year 417; and that
it be true that our Colony came from Ireland, as Beda and our Historians
commonly assert, and that thence it may be said, that Hibernia est proprie
Scotorum Patria. It will not follow that either We, or the Irish were called
Scots before that Time; or that because We have derived our Colony from the
Irish, that therefore We have derived the Name of Scoti from them. But on the
contrary, supposing with Usher, that the Nomen Scoticum had been first given in
the third Century, then the Name behooved to have been ours originally, who were
more known and considered in the World than they, because of the honor we had
in the Roman Wars (whose Authors do first mention Scoti, and Scotia) and our
early conversion to the Christian Faith: And by our frequent intercourse of
Colonies with the Irish (as about the time of Fergus the second). It is
probable we did communicate the Name of Scoti to these Inhabitants in Ireland,
from whose Ancestors we were descended, and among whom our Colonies, that were
returned, settled; as at this day, the Scots in the North of Ireland do retain
the Name, and as we had the name of Hibernia communicated to us from them;
which is abundantly cleared from what is said out of Eumenius and Gildas. So
that these names of Hiberni and Scoti have become common to both People; but
with this difference, that as the Irish were originally called Hiberni; so our
Scots were originally Scoti. For of all the Passages produced by Archbishop
Usher, or Bishop of St. Asaph, to prove the Irish to be called Scoti, that of
Orosius is the first that is applicable to them: for those from Claudian,
Ammianus, Pacatius, and Hegisippus do not at all agree with them; nor yet that
Passage from Prosper, as has been proved; nor these from Gildas: for tho he
calls those People, who are said to return home, Hiberni, or Irish; yet Page
117, 118. inter Orthodoxogr.
he calls the same People who returned home, Scots, and not Irish. And the
Actions to which these Passages cited against us relate, are uncontrovertedly
by Beda, Gildas, and all the Roman Authors, applicable to Us, and not to the
Irish: being the three Vastations made by the Picts, and Us in the British
Territories. And Marianus (whom the Bishop likewise cites against us) Page 347.
Edit. Basu.
does expressly apply this to the Scots; for he uses the word Scoti, in
speaking of all the three Vastations. And whereas Gildas uses the word Scoti,
speaking of the first two Vastations, and says, Hiberni revertuntur domum,
speaking of the last: Marianus, repeating the same passage, says, Scoti
revertuntur domum. By which also I infer by a far better Consequence, that the
Scots must be said to return to the place where they were formerly settled; but
so it is, that the place where the Scots were formerly settled was the West of
Scotland, and therefore when they returned home, they returned not to Ireland,
as the Bp of St. Asaph alleges, but to our North-west Country, as we contend:
for the word in Gildas, is a Gircio, which signifies North-West; and Ireland
lies South-West from Grahams-Dyke, near which these Actions were done: But
Argile, and those Isles which We possessed, lies indeed North-West from it. And
if they had returned to Ireland, they had been Trans-marine, as living in
another Isle, contrary to Gildas's own express assertion, as it is interpreted
by Beda, cap. 12. lib. 2.

2. Why should the Picts and Scots (being spoke of as to their going home
together, the one to the North, and the other to the West) not be thought to
have gone home to the same Isle, since different Isles are not mentioned? and
if I said, I were going to the West, that in common sense could only be
understood, of the West of that Kingdom or Island where I then were; and not of
any other Kingdom lying to the West thereof. And both the Picts and Scots being
equally called Trans-marine Nations, if the Scots went out of the Isle, it must
follow that the Picts left it also, which never any was so ridiculous as to
allege. By all which it clearly follows, that the words Scoti and Hiberni
were, before these Times, promiscuously ascribed to us. And tho Beda may speak
of the Scots coming from Ireland, and settling a third Colony in Britain long
before Julius Caesar's time, yet that does only prove the Antiquity of the
Settlement of the People that are called Scoti, but not the Antiquity of their
Name, concerning which Beda was not treating: for he rather seems to insinuate
the contrary, when Lib. 1. cap. 1.
he says, Aquo (viz. duce Reuda) usque hodie Dalreudini vocantur.

6. The Passages produced by the Bp of St. Asaph and Usher, for proving that
Ireland was called Scotia, after the Age that Hegisippus or Ambrose lived in,
and within the 1000 Years, are very few: and many of them from Legendary
Writers. But I shall glance at the most material. The first is Isidor
Hispalensis, who lived in the 7th Century, and who says Lib. 14. cap. d^
insulis.
Scotia eadem and Hibernia, proxima Britanniae Insula, spatio terrarum
angustior, sed situ faecundior. The same words are used by Orosius, whom he
follows, except that Orosius calls the Inhabitans Scoti, but does not call the
Country Scotia, but Hibernia: so that Orosius having first called the
Inhabitants of Ireland, Scoti, in the Year 417; Isidor by an ordinary
derivation calls their Country Scotia, and is the first that Archbishop Usher,
or the Bishop of Saint Asaph, does produce to prove Hibernia to be called
Scotia? and is in the Year 620, and so is too late to prove their Design, since
it is clearly proved that our Country was called Scotia in St. Ambrose's Time,
even by their own concession. And whereas the same Isidor, speaking of Ireland
says, haec est proprie Scotorum patria; beside what has been formerly urged, it
is observable that the word proprie does imply as if it might have been justly
doubted, and that it was not true in all senses: especially since Cap. 1. lib.
1.
Beda uses the very same expression, after that he has fully cleared that we
were settled here long before that time: and therefore it does necessarly
follow that these words are consistent with our being settled here; and
consequently that they must not be so interpreted, as to infer that Ireland was
the place where We then lived but only the place from which We came: And such
as understand the Civil Law, (the best Standard of the Latin Language) must
acknowled, that there is, Cujac. lib. 14. Obs. 12. and ad legem 6. parag.
gramatici ff. de excus. mum.
Patria Originis, as well as Incolatus and domicilii: And it may be justly said
of those of Virgina and other English Plantations, that, Anglia est proprie
illorum patria: And generally it is observable, that the Authors relating both
to us and them, do first call the People Scoti, and then the Country Scotia:
but still the more ancient Authors call us Scoti before them, and our Country
Scotia before theirs.

As to the Citations out of Adamnanus in vita Columbae, and Beda: It is certain
that Adamnanus is lately published by an Irish Hand, as appears by the Marginal
Notes, the Publisher still adding Hibernia in the Magin, where Scotia is in the
Text. But however it is certain that Adamnanus was Abbot of Hy, which is
Ikolmkil among the Scottish West Islands: so that in dubio he is presumed to be
a Scots-man, and not an Irish; and Balaeus and others positively assert him to
be a Scots-man. Nor is there any reason for their calling him an Irishman; but
because all Authors who speak of him, call him Scotus; and to assert a Man to
be an Irishman, because he is called Scots-man, is rather a Bull than a
Reason. But because he is mentioned by Beda, who lived shortly after him, and
is an Author of far greater Authority. What I shall observe from Beda, will
serve to clear the Citations out of both.

And first, Beda Ecgfridus Rex Nordanhumbrorum misso in Hiberniam cum exercitu
duce Berto, vastavit misere gentem innoxiam and Anglorum genti semper
amicissimam. Bed. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 26.
relates, That Ecgfrid King of Northumberland, having sent an Army into Ireland
under Bertus, he wasted the Country, and the innocent People. And the next
Year, having sent an Army to waste the Province of the Picts, contrary to the
advice of his Friends, and of St. Cuthbert, God suffered that Army to be
destroyed, because the former Year he had rejected their Advice; Ne Scotiam
nihil se Laedentem impugnaret. I id.
That he should not invade Scotland, which did not wrong him. And to clear that
the Scotia here expressed was not Ireland, he adds, Angli and Scoti qui extant
in Britannia. Ibid.
The English and Scots who abide in Britain. This Passage (as well as the
others which I have cited, and shall cite) proves, 1. That Scotland then was
promiscuously expressed by the names of Hibernia and Scotia: For the same thing
is said first to have been done in Hibernia, and thereafter it is said to have
been done in Scotia: And this answers the Objection, Hiberni revertuntur domum;
and where could their Home be but in Ireland? 2. It proves that this our
Country was called Scotia in Beda's Time; and so long before the Year 1000,
which the Bishop denies. Nor can it be proved that the King of Northumberland
went to make War in Ireland; nor speaks Beda of any War with Ireland.

The next Passage from Beda is, where he says, Columbanus qui anno
incarnationis 565. Abbas and Presbyter venit de Hibernia in Britanniam
praedicaturus Verbum Dei provinciis septentrionalium Pictorum. Et gentem illam
convertit, Vnde and praefatam insulam ab eis in possessionem monasterii
faciendi accepit; ubi sepultus est. Ex quo Monasterio, and Monasterio de
Daermach perplurima Monasteria propagata sunt in Hibernia and Britannia, in
quibus omnibus idem Monasterium insulanum, principatum tenet. Bed. lib. 3. cap.
4.
That Columbanus an Abbot and Presbyter, came in the year 565, from Ireland to
Britain, to preach the Word of God to the Provinces of the North-picts: and
converted them; and got from them possession of the former Island for founding
a Monastery, where he was buried. Out of which Monastery (meaning Hy) many
other Monasteries were propagated in Ireland and Britain; in all which the same
Island-Monastery was the chief. And he takes notice, that the Successors of
this Abbot differed in the Observation of Easter from the Church of Rome, till
the Year 716. And thereafter he says, That Ab hac ergo insula, ad Provinciam
Anglorum instituendam in Christo, missus est Aidanus. Lib. 3. c. 5.
Aidan was sent from this Island for instructing the Province of the English.
Now he had said before, Aidanus de insula quae vocatur Hy destinatus, quae
arcem tenet monasteriorum Scotorum and Pictorum, and ad jus Britanniae
pertinet. l. 3. c. 3.
Aidan who was sent from the Isle which is called Hy, which is the chief of the
Scottish and Pictish Monasteries, and belongs to Britain. And thereafter he
Colman videns spretam suam doctrinam, sectamque esse despectam; Scotiam
regressus est. l. 3. c. 26.
says, That Colman seeing his Doctrine slighted, and his Adherents despised,
returned to Scotland. So that we see, that that which at the first is called
Cap. 4.
Ireland; afterward is called Ibid.
the said Island, and the Monastery in it, the Ibid.
Island-Monastery; and thereafter it is Cap. 3.
called the Isle of Hy; and thereafter it is Cap. 26.
called Scotland.

I shall cite a third Passage from Beda, where speaking of a great Plague in
Britain, he adds, Haec autem plaga Hiberniam insulam, pariclade premebat: Erant
ibidem eodem tempore multi Nobilium simul and mediocrium de gente Anglorum, qui
tempore Finani and Colmanni Episcoporum, relicta insula patria, vel divinae
lectionis, vel continentioris vitae gratia, illo secesserunt. -- Quos omnes
Scoti libentissime suspicientes victum eis quotidianum sine praetio, libros
quoque ad legendum, and magisterium gratuitum praebere c^rabant. l. 3. c. 27.
This Plague also wasted Ireland with the same destruction; at which time there
were there many of the Nobility and Commons of England, who in the time of the
Bishops, Finan and Colman having left their own Native Island for the greater
convenience, either of Divine Studies, or a more strict Life, had retired
thither. -- All whom the Scots kindly entertained, and furnished with all
things necessary, and gave them freely Meat, and Books to read, and Learning,
And thereafter speaking of Egbert, who was among them, he adds, Vnde and genti
suae, and illis in quibus exulabat nationibus Scororum sive Pictorum exemplo
fuit. Ibid.
That he was a good Example to his own Nation, and to the Nations of the Picts
and Scots among whom he lived retiredly; by which passages it is evident, that
that which is here called Ireland, is really our Scotland; first, because it is
said, they came from England upon the occasion of Finan and Colman, who were
our Countrymen, and whose chief residence was the Isle of Hy, or Icolm-kill,
(from which they came) which did then, and does still belong to us only, and
which the Bishop of St. Asaph also Cap. 5. generally, and specially, p. 109.
confesses: and then because in their Monastic Life, it is said, they resided
among the Scots and Picts, and Lib. 3. cap. 3. and ad jus Britanniae pertinet.
it is said before that the Island where the Monastery was, belonged to Britain.

But for further clearing the former Citations, from Beda I shall offer these
following Considerations. 1. That Beda treats only the Actions of these five
Nations that did inhabit Britain: and if he do speak of France or Ireland, it
is but upon occasion of them; as of the situation of Ireland from whence the
Scots came, or of some Monasteries depending upon Icolm-kill, which perhaps
were situated near us, in the North of Ireland: and therefore unless all these
passages were clearly applicable to Ireland, they must be understood of
Scotland. 2. It being certain, that Beda, in the beginning of his Book, treats
concerning the Scots in Britain, the Roman Wars with them, and Palladius's
being sent to them, it necessarily follows, that the rest of the Book
mentioning the Scots, or that part of the Isle possessed by them, is to be
understood of us, whether the Country be called Hibernia or Scotia, or We
Hiberni or Scoti: especially since Beda mentions a King called Aidan; and Buch.
p. 152.
we had a King of that Name in that time, which the Irish cannot pretend. Beda
treats also concerning the Abbots of Hy, which is Icolm-kill, as is clear by
that passage, Columba fundator monasterii quod in Hy ins^la, venerabile Scotis
and Pictis, and composito nomine a Cella and Columba Collum-celli vocatur. lib.
5. c. 10.
where he says, Columba, Founder of the Monastery in the Isle of Hy, venerable
to the Scots and Picts, which by a compounded name from Columba and Cell is
called Icolm-kill. And that the Monks sent from this Monastery, or Island, were
the Converters of the North-Saxons, and the first Bishops of Lindasfern or
Holy-Island? Predecessors of the Bishop of Durham. 3. He makes frequent mention
of little Islands, which never did belong to Ireland, but to Sotland, and are
still called Hebrides; And so as the chief of these Isles where the Abbot
resided the Records were kept, and the Kings were buried, might probably be
called Insula Hiberniae, or Hibernia, and that Scotia might be the Ordinary
name to all that part of the Isle of Britain benorth the River of Clyde: so
that the going from Hibernia, or Scotia, in Britanniam, is nothing but the
going to the other side of Clyde, Bed. l. 1. c. 12.
by which, and Graham's-Dyke, that part of the Isle was distinguished from the
rest, as if it had been a distinct Island. 4. The great Controversy at that
Time being about the keeping of Easter, Laurentius Mellitus, and Iustus,
Bishops, did write a Letter to us of the following Tenor. Dominis Charissimis
fratribus Episcopis vel Abbatibus per universam Scotiam Laurentius Mellitus,
and Justus, Episcopi servi servorum Dei. Dum nos Seeds Apostolica more suo,
sicut in universo orb terrarum, in his occiduis partibus ad predicandum
gentibus Paganis dirigeret, atque in hanc insula^, qua Britannia nuncupatur,
contigit introisse, antequam cognosceremus credentes, quod juxta morem
universalis Ecclesiae ingrederentur, in magna reverentia sanctitatis tam
Britones quam Scotos venerati sumus. Sed cognoscentes Britones, Scotos meliores
putavimus. Scotos vero per Dagamum Episcopum in hanc quam superius memoravimus
insulam, and Columbanum Abbatum in Galliis venientem, nihil discrepare a
Britonibus in eorum conversatione didicimus. Nam Dagamus Episcopus ad nos
veniens, non solum cibum nobiscum, sed nec in eodem hospitio quo vescebamur
sumere voluit. Bed. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Laurentius Mellitus, and Justus, Bishops, Servants of all the Servants of God,
To our dearest Brethren, the Bishops and Abbots through all Scotland. Whileas
the Apostolic Sea, according to the custom it has observed in the rest of the
World, did send us to preach the Gospel unto the Heathens in these Western
Parts; and that it happened to us to come into this Isle which is called
Britain; we held in religious reverence both the Scots and Britons, believing
that they did walk after the Custom of the Universal Church. But after we had
known the Britons, we judged the Scots to be the better minded: Yet now we
perceive by Dagamus, the Bishop who is come hither, and by Columbanus the Abbot
in France, that the Scots differ nothing in their Observations from the
Britons; for Dagamus being here, refused not only to eat with us, but even to
stay in the same Inn or Lodging. Now that this is only applicable to us, and
not to the Scots in Ireland, the Subject does prove, being Exhortatory Letters,
to conform in the Observation of Easter, wherein the British Scots, who
followed Columba, differed from the Roman Church. 2. The Letter is written to
the Scots, and relates to other Letters written to the Britons in the same
Isle; and who needed the same Exhortation. And it is to be remembered, That
Usher generally concludes, that where the Scots and Britons are mentioned in
Conjunction, by Scots there, are to be understood the British Scots. 3. In
Append. ad l. 3. p. 231. And it is observable that Marianus, p. 175 makes
mention of other two Letters, in the Year 632. The one from Honorius, and the
other from Pope John, upon the same head: both which Marianus says, were sent
to us, and not to the Irish.
Camerarius cites Georgius Newton, who about the Year 1500, being then
Archdeacon of Dumblain, did write the Acts of that Church; and relates that he
had seen the Antographum of that Letter among the Records of that Church; and
so it must necessarily have been written to the Scots in Britain, else it had
not been in the custody of our Churchmen, and at Dumblain.

I could produce many other Citations to prove Scotland to have been called
Hibernia in those Ages: but it is sufficient to add to these unanswerable
Proofs already produced, the authority of the Roman Martyrology; wherein
Sanetus Beanus is designed Episcopus Aberdoniae in Hibernia, at the 16 of
December. To which Vardaeus an Irishman in vita Rumoldi answers, That there
might have been a place in Ireland called Aberdeen, because Aber is an Irish
word, signifying a Marish, and there is a Town called Down in Ireland, situated
near a Marish. A pretty Witticism indeed! especially as he proposes the
Objection, and answers the same, as you may see upon the Margin. Dices in
Martyrologio Romano vulgari legi ad diem 16. Decembris, Aberdone in Hibernia S.
Beani Episcopi: Abredonensis autem seeds Episcopalis est in Scotia Britannica:
Ergo vel in hac est, vel hac aliquando fuit Hibernia. page 379.

Ad nugatorium ergo Sophisma distinguo Minorem: Abredonensis, locus dequo
Martyrologium agit, est in Britannia, Nego Minorem: alius ejusdem nominis,
transeat. Vel absolute, Nego Consequentiam, ob fallaciam figurae dictionis; ut
h^nc, Omnis Canis est latrabilis; sed sidus est canis; Ergo sidus est
latrabile, etc. page 380.


But to take off all Debate, Beanus is named in our Chartularies, as well as
Histories, as the first Bishop of Aberdeen: and the Mortifications granted to
him by our King Malcom 2d, in the Year 1010, of the Lands of Murthlack,
Cloveth, and Dounmeth, are yet extant: and his Tomb is yet to be seen in the
Cathedral of Aberdeen, at the Postern Door of the Church.

To the former Passages I must also add, That albeit our Country was
promiscuously called Scotia, and Hibernia, as has been proved, yet Scotia, even
in that Time, was the more frequent Name of our Country: and which, to keep
close to Beda, appears; for when he speaks of the Isle Hy, (to which the former
Citations chiefly relate, and which was the place of our Country, in which his
History being Ecclesiastic, is chiefly concerned, as being then one of (if
not) the most famous Monastery in the Western World) he expresses it to be in
Scotia: as where he tells, That Ceollach de Natione Scotorum, qui non multo
post Episcopatu^ relicto reversus est ad insulam Hy, ubi plurimorum caput and
arcem Scoti habuere caenobiorum. Bed. l. 3. c. 21.
Ceollach, of the Nation of the Scots, leaving his Bishopric in England,
returned to Hy, where the Scots had their chief Monastery: And thereafter he
tells, That Ceollach qui relicto Episcopatus officio vivens ad Scotiam rediit.
Bed. l. 3. c. 24.
the same Ceollach having left his* Bishopric, returned to Scotland. And the
same Adamnanus Presbyter and Abbas Monachiorum qui erant in insula Hy. Bed. l.
5. c. 16.
Beda, writing of Adamnanus, calls him Abbot and Presbyter of the Monks that
are in the Monastery of Hy. And mentioning the same Adamnanus, Adamnanus
reversus ad Scotiam. Bed. l. 5. c. 22.
he tells, that he returned to Scotland, after his Embassy in England. And how
can it be denied that Hy is in Scotland? since Beda calls it Scotland, and
says, That it belonged to Britain: and is by all Geographers named one of our
Hebrides, and lies locally within our Country; and was one of the first places
which we planted, and far remoter from Ireland, than Kintire and others of our
Islands; and in which our Kings were buried, and our Records kept.

To conclude this Proposition, I shall add these Reflections.

1. That it is not so easy for the Bishop of St. Asaph to explicate himself as
to these Passages concerning Scotia and Scoti, and to make them signify
Ireland and Irish, since the 500 Year, as before: for admitting that the Terms
were anciently applicable to Ireland, and that the Scots when mentioned here,
were but by Invasion from Ireland; Yet it being acknowledged, that after the
Year 500 we were settled here; It follows, that when Scotia and Scoti are
mentioned in relation to British affairs, and in conjuction with the Inhabitans
of Britain, they must be understood of us, and our Country. 2. Beda mentioning
our Country to be called Scotia, as well as Hibernia, from Columba's Time to
his own, it is not only an evidence, that it was so called in that Time, but
that the Name had not been then first given, otherwise he could not have been
ignorant of the Change, nor would he have failed to remark it: so that we may
reasonably conclude in his sense, the Name of Scotia is as ancient in Britain,
as the Time he mentions the Settlement, Wars, and Religion of the Scots there.
3. It is evident, That the Bp of St. Asaph's Cap. 1.. 9*
Proposition is faulty, viz. That, when we settled here after the Year 500, our
Kingdom was called Argyle, or Dalrieda: for if this had been true, this name
being so recent, could not but have been noticed and used by Gildas and Beda,
and yet it is never so much as once mentioned by either of them; tho Beda, upon
the occasion of the Monastery of Hy, or Icolm-kill, and of the Bishops sent
thence to England, does frequently mention the Names Hibernia and Scotia, and
that St. Asaph Cap. 5.. 4* 5, 6, 7, 8.
does not controvert, but that these Bishops were sent from our Isle of
Icolm-kill to England. 4. We may observe how warrantable Page 734.
Archbishop Usher's Position (repeated by the Bishop of St. Asaph) is, That no
Author mentions our Country by the name of Scotia for the first 1000 years;
whereas most of all the former Authors, both within and without the Isle, prove
Scotia to have been the name of our Country: and the whole Tract of Beda's
History proves, that since the year 560, this Country was generally so called:
Whereas neither Gildas, nor Beda, who lived near that Time, and wrote whole
Books of us, do once call it Dalrieda, or Argyle: and consequently (as I
observed before) the Bishop of St. Asaph's whole Sect. 9. of the first Chapter,
wherein he asserts, that about the Year 500, the Scots erected the Kingdom of
Argile, or Dalrieda, is most unwarrantable; for though Beda calls us once
Dalreudini, yet this is spoken of us by him, in the Time of our King Reuda, and
so near 70 Years before the 503 after Christ. And from this also arises a clear
confutation of what the Bishop of St. Asaph asserts, that no Author writing
within the 1000 Years, and naming Scotia, means Us; which is so far from being
so, that no Author of Credit ( Isidore only excepted) did then by Scotia mean
Ireland. And the best Authority that Archbishop Usher gives us for Dalrieda,
is Iocelin; which my Lord St. Asaph has improved by a new authority out of a
Manuscript of the Lord Burghlie's, where the Author thinks that Dalrieda, and
the Kingdom of Argile, are the same. Authors not to be once mentioned with
those whom we cite.

7. The distinction of Scotia Major, and Minor, is lately invented; for either
Ireland was called Scotia Major before the Year 1000, or only since: if the
first, then it necessarily implies, that at that Time our Country was also
called Scotia Minor, there being no other place assignable. But this is
contrary to Archbishop Usher, and my Lord St. Asaph's Position, who deny our
Country was called Scotia at all for the first 1000 Years. If it be asserted
that this distinction was after the 1000 Years, then there was little or no use
for it: For Page 734.
Usher tells us, that Nubiensis Geographus, about the Year 1150, describes
Ireland by the name of Hibernia, and describes our Country by the name of
Scotia: and so it seems at that time Ireland had lost the name in our favor;
and it is not to be imagined that Nubiensis remarked the first Periods of the
change of the Name; and Geographers do describe Countries by their ordinary
Names. Nor does Usher Page 724, and 737.
produce any other Testimony, save a Letter of Dovenaldus Oneil Prince of
Vlster to Pope John 22d, wherein there is this passage, Quod praeter Reges
minoris Scotiae, qui omnes de nostra majore Scotia originem sumpsero.
Beside the Kings of lesser Scotland, who all came originally from our greater
Scotland. And a Patent of Sigismund the Emperor, Conventus Scotorum and
Hibernorum de majore Scotia Monasterii ia Ratisbona.
To the Convent of the Scots and Irish of Greater Scotland of a Monastery in
Ratisbone. Now Usher acknowledges the eldest of these two Citations, were in
the 14th or 15th Century; when I hope no body will assert, that Ireland was
called Scotia Major, or that ever the Kings of England, who were Lords of
Ireland, were ever called Lords Majoris Scotiae; and it is probable they would
have very much affected that Title (if the Country had had that name) although
they could never make themselves Masters Scotiae Minoris. But it is no wonder,
that the Irish should be glad to tell Foreigners, that they were our Chief, and
so their Country ought to be called Scotia Major; notwithstanding that our
Nation was then become great and glorious: and that Usher can find no better
authority for his distinction of Scotia Major and Minor, than these borrowed
and magnifying Names, used long after he himself acknowledges that Ireland had
lost the name of Scotia, and that We were only in possession of it.

8. The mistaking of the Names of Scotia and Hibernia, and of that assertion,
Scotia eadem and Hibernia, and applying these Names still to Ireland, and not
to our Country, has been the Ground whereupon we have been injured, as to the
antiquity of our Kings and Country, Saints and learned Men, Monasteries, and
greatness Abroad. For admitting it to be true, that we were not settled here
till the Year 500, yet we have been so happy, as to have such excellent Men,
and to have done so considerable Actions, as have been sufficient to tempt our
Neighbors, and particularly the Irish, to take great pains to have both pass
for their own. In order to which the Irish have lately invented the distinction
of Scotia Major and Minor, to the end, that when any considerable Person is
called a Scots-man in History, they might claim him as descended from the
Greater Scotland. But besides, that this distinction is too new to be extended
to ancient Writers, How can it be imagined that our Country, only having passed
under the Name of Scotland before the 300, and after the 1100, as has been
proved, Ireland should have assumed the Name of Scotland in that Interval? Is
it not more reasonable to think that our Country, which alone was designed by
that Name, before the 300, and after 1100, bore it likewise only, or at least
chiefly, during that interval. But to assert that, during that space, another
Country had our old and present designation in a more peculiar manner than we;
and that in dubious Cases it must be appropriated to them, is a piece of
confidence which even eminent Wit and Learning cannot support. And yet we find,
in Malcom the Second's Time, (as was formerly observed) who began to Reign in
the Year 1004, That the Frith of Forth (in his Laws, in the Book of Regiam
Majestatem) is called Mare Scotiae: And it is said there, that the same King
did distribute, omnem Terram Scotiae hominibus suis: and it is not to be
concluded, that this was the first time that our Country was so called. And
about that time Ireland was expressed only by the name of Hibernia; for King
Henry the 2d of England, who began to Reign in the Year 1154, is styled Lord of
Ireland.

And to clear further that Scotia about those times was the ordinary name for
Scotland, and Hebernia for Ireland, I shall only add some few Passages out of
Marianus Scotus, who was born in the Year 1028, and died in the Year 1086,
Brianus Rex Hiberniae necatur. page 423.
who says, that about the Year 1016, Brianus, King of Ireland, was killed; and
a little thereafter, Moelcolium Rex Scotiae obiit, Donchad filius filiae ejus
sibi successit. page 424.
at the Year 1034. Malcolm King of Scotland died, and Duncan the Son of his
Daughter succeeded him. And after that he says, at the Year 1040, Donchad Rex
Scotiae occiditur and Mefinlaech successit in Regnum ejus. p. 425.
Duncan King of Scotland, was killed, and the son of Finlay succeeded in his
Kingdom, whom afterward Page 427.
he calls Mackbeth.
Machetad King of Scotland. All which passages agree exactly with our History,
and the summary of our Kings Lives, as they are recorded in our Acts of
Parliament, and prove that Marianus treats of Scotland, and Ireland, as
different Kingdoms in his Time.

In the last place, I shall make some Remarks upon the most palpable of these
Mistakes, and of the chief Authors thereof: wherein I shall vindicate the Right
and Dignity of our Country, and assert these worthy Persons controverted to be
ours. I shall not insist much against Stanihurst, he being solidly confuted by
Appen. ad l. 3.
Camerarius, and with that severity by Dempster, that his Nephew Bishop Usher
(as the Duke of Lauderdail remarked in some Judicious Reflections of his upon
this occasion) did highly resent it, and in this Matter has exceeded his usual
Temperament and Moderation. And yet Stanihurst never speaks injuriously of our
Nation; for though he mistakes many things, and applys them to his own Country;
yet it appears to be, rather of Design to magnify it, than injure ours: for he
acknowledeth ingenuously, Lib. 1. p. 17. Verum a quo primum initio Scotiae
nomen sit tractum, nondum plane perspectum video.
That he does not clearly see from what time the Name of Scotland commenced.
And though thereafter he taxes Boethius upon the Subject of Gathelus and
Scota, and that he mixeth Fables and Vain glory with his History; yet he
neither disapproves of Buchannan, nor follows he Luddus, both of whom he cites,
and who were immediately before him; his Book being printed at Antwerp, in the
Year 1584. In his Appendix also, Commenting upon Giraldus Cambrensis (a
Welsh-man, and Scretary to King Henry 2d of England, and flourished before the
end of the 12th Century) He translates Cambrensis, who describes Ireland by the
name of Hibernia, and makes frequent mention of our Country under the name of
Scotia; as when he speaks of the extent of Ireland, he says (as Stanihurst
interprets it) that Quantae circumscriptis Wallia and Scotia potior insula
Britannicae pars Regibusque antiquis appropriata. page 223.
it is equal in largeness to Wales and Scotland. And elsewhere he says, that
Scotia quoque pars Insulae Britannic^ dicitur Aquilonaris. p. 245.
Scotland is called the North part of the Isle of Britain. And afterward he
tells the Story of Moreds six Sons, and that from them the Inhabitants of the
North part of Britain, Specificato vocabulo gens Scotica appellatur. cap. 19.
by a specific word, were called the Scottish Nation. And Stanihurst in his
Annotations on these two Chapters contends, that before St. Patrick's time our
Country was called Scotia; and brings for proofs St. Jerome, who asserts that
the Scots were Gens Britannica; but with great concern he vindicates us from
the calumny of eating Men's Flesh: and for our Antiquity he cites Beda, who
says, that Sub duce Renda we made a third Nation in Britain. So that we see
that neither the Welsh in Giraldus's time, nor the Irish in Stanihurst's time,
had the Opinion of our late Settlement, and that our Country was not called
Scotia for 1000 Years after Christ; which their Successors Luddus, Cambden,
Usher and St. Asaph have had. And the Irish in those days took a far better way
for advancing their own interest in doing us justice; since from all the
considerable Actions we did, there did arise a measure of that Honor to them,
from whose Country we came as a Colony: Whereas since they were influenced by
Strangers, they have suffered themselves to be imposed upon, so as to lessen
our true Merit, in appropriating immediately to themselves those devout persons,
who were really our Countrymen: not considering that the material unjustice
was much greater than the imaginary honor: And this Plagiarism and
Man-stealing became easy to them since our Reformation from Popery, because
after that time we became too careless of those eminent Persons both at home
and abroad, who had lived in the Roman Communion, or before that time. But I
will not insist on this, for I hope their native kindness will incline them to
return to their first just methods.

If I had leisure, I would make larger Reflections, Page 789.
to prove how unconsequential Arch Bp Usher is, in making Sedulus and Marianus
Irish: since by all Writers they are both called Scots, and Balaeus an
Englishman tells us, that Page 187. Cent. 14.
Sedulius flourished under Fergus 2d. and Page 210. Cent. 14.
Marianus under Macbeth, both our Kings; and Baronius asserts also this
positively. And Sedulius having lived before St. Patrick's Time (who was the
first Apostle of Ireland) and being Disciple to Hildebert an acknowledged Scot,
and who lived in the 390, must be prior to the Irish Christianity; which
Giraldus and Stanihurst acknowledge to have been first planted by St. Patrick
in the Year 432. Nor can Page 789.
Usher in all his vast reading, find any Christians in Ireland betwixt the Year
400, and 432, which was St. Patrick's Time, but Kiaranus, Ailbeus, Declanus,
Ibarus: Tho if Sedulius had been an Irish, he had been certainly mentioned and
employed, before those obscure Persons; and certainly he would have employed
himself before St. Patrick's Time in the Conversion of his own native Country,
if he had been truly Irish. And as to Marianus Scotus, it is a wonder how it
can be controverted that he was a Scots-man; since our Country was then called
Scotland by the Bp of St. Asaph's own confession; and Ireland was just then
losing that name; and Marianus in his whole Book distinguishes betwixt Scoti
and Hiberni, and mentions the forementioned three Kings of Scotland about whose
Time he lived; and also makes mention of one King of Ireland about that time:
as has been observed already; and particularly, speaking of the Conversions Ad
Scotos in Christum credentes ordinatus a Papa Caelestino Palladius primus
Episcopus missus est. Post ipsum Sanctus Patricius consecratus and ad
Archiepiscopum Hibernensem mittitur, and totam insulam Hiberniam convertit ad
fidem. page 340.
by Palladius and St. Patrick, he expressly distinguishes betwixt Scoti, and
Hibernenses.

But passing these, I confess it is pretty ridiculous to see a whole Book
written by the abovementioned Vardaeus, and glossed by Sirin, and published at
Louvain 1662, to prove that Rumoldus Archbishop of Mechlin was an Irishman:
since the Arms of Scotland (which are, Or, a Lion Rampant Gules, within a
doubles Tressure flowred and counterflowred with Flower de lis of the same) are
placed upon every Window of the Catherdral Church built by him, and are to this
day a part of the Arms of that Archi-Episcopal See, Rumoldus himself being a
younger Brother of the Royal-Family of Scotland: And in which witty Book, the
Author, to confute this, Artic. 4. and page 281.
is forced to maintain that the Scottish Lion is born by several Irish Familes;
And the double Tressure, tho anciently born by Scotland, and which is Blazoned
in that Archi-Episcopal Coat of Arms, might have been born by the Irish,
because that famous League betwixt the Scots and Charlemaigne, was made with
the Kings of Ireland, and not with the Kings of Scotland; and that our Kings
had never any Leagues with the French, till the reign of Charles 7th who was
contemporary with our King James 1st: Whereas the whole French Histories, as
well as ours; and all Foreign Historians, as well as either, the Leagues yet
extant; the Privileges granted thereupon to us, recorded in the French
Registers, and ours; many Decisions in Parliaments, and other Courts; and the
universal consent of all the French who ever lived since that Time, do in all
Humility seem to be sufficient Warrants for laughing at this monstrous
Assertion; as I do at him and others, who pretend that the Scottish Monasteries
in Germany, are Irish: since they were founded in Charle-Maigne's Time, by
William Brother to our King Achaius, and others that went there with him; and
they are to this day governed by Abbots and Priors of our Country: Nor can it
be understood, how the French and Germans could mistake their own Records and
Foundations for so many hundreds of Years togeder, and by this I leave my
Reader to measure the other unjust pretensions of such Authors.

I hope it now at last appears, that I have detected those ingenious Artifices,
which this learned Bishop was forced to use, to supply his want of solid and
just grounds in this his undertaking. As,

1. That, to conciliate respect to this Undertaking, as well as to excuse it,
he pretends that it was necessary for the defense of Episcopacy.

2. He makes a great muster of old Authors in the beginning of his Book, as if
all these were Men of great credit, and did concur with him to refute our
History; and adorns his Margins with formidable numbers of Citations.

3. Knowing that it could be proved, both by British and Foreign Historians,
that we were here very anciently, he confesses this; but by a new and strange
Invention, he asserts that we were not here as settled Inhabitants, but only by
way of Incursion.

4. He defers our Settling here, till the Year 503, and so longer than the first
Inventors of this new Story did; upon design to make our Settlement here, later
then that of the Anglo-Saxons, who settled here in Anno 449.

5. He lessens the reputation of all our Historians, and endeavors also to
make them pass but for one; as if the succeeding Historian had seen no other
Warrants, but the preceding Histories.

6. He treats in ridicule Ieffrey, and some other Historians of his own
Country, whom he knew could not be sustained however; and this he does upon
design, to show his impartiality, and that he spares not his own more than ours.

7. For the same reason he decrys the British descent from Brutus: in which he
loses nothing, because no sober Man could have defended it; and he denies the
Conversion of their own King Lucius, to strike thereby with the greater
authority at the Antiquity of our Royal-Line and Nation, treating King Donald's
Conversion also as a Fable: and thus according to our Proverb, He is content to
let a Friend go with a Foe.

8. He complements our Nation in latter Times, to excuse the Injury he does our
Kings and Antiquity.

9. He uses the Foreign Authors that should be urged for us, to prevent our
using of them as proving Arguments against him.

10. Finding that Ireland has been called Scotia, he transplants our old Saints
thither, and applies to it, all that is said of our Country: nor did ever any
Author improve better a pitiful Clinch.

11. He concurs in another design like to this: for, because it could not be
denied that Fergus was our first King; all the Citations for proving this, are
therefore applied to Fergus the Second, and not to Fergus the First.

Lastly; Whereas Cambden and Archbishop Usher speak doubtingly of their own
Arguments; the Bishop of St. Asaph fearing that his Reader could not be
convinced, of what himself was not, he therefore proposesall these Arguments,
with a confidence, which would seem to argue that full conviction in himself,
which he wishes in others.

If any Person then would know how that Scotland, which was but a small Colony,
grew up to a Kingdom that deserved so well: my thoughts of this are, that, 1.
The constant defense that we were obliged to make against the Romans and
Britons at first, and English thereafter, Nations wise, brave, and polished,
living in the same Isle with us, and the Picts within us, did force us to think
and fight; and the observing the Actions and Conduct of such Enemies could not
leave the observers rude or ignorant: and it is like that the Glory of such
Noble Adversaries, raised our Wit and Courage above the pitch of a Northen and
confined Nation. 2. Our Country having had the happiness to stop the Roman
Conquest, this gave Strangers a value for us; and therefore when any of the
gallant Britons scorned to submit to the slavery and drudgery of a Conquest,
they fled unto us from the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans; and being
passionate lovers of Liberty, they animated us by their Assistance and Example.
This likewise brought in brave Strangers amongst us, as all gallant Spirits did
lately run to Holland in its first rise: and (as our Historians probably
relate) very many of those returned with Fergus the Second from the Wars in
Italy, whither that generous young Prince went to assist Alarick against the
Romans, in a just resentment of the injury done by them to his Predecessors,
and with whom he was present at the sacking of Rome. 3. We have been very happy
in so Heroic and Wife a Race of Kings, whose Blood being refined by a long
Royal Descent, has been thereby purifiy'd from all meanness, and elevated to
that Love for glory, which is ordinary in those, who never knew what it was to
obey. 4. Our Country having entered early into a remarkable League with France,
in the Reign of Charle-Maigne; our Countrymen got excellent Breeding, under so
Wise and Valiant a Prince; and have ever since, by being constantly employed in
the French, and other Wars, attained to a degree of Merit, beyond what was to
be expected in this Climate. 5. Our Country having neither Bogs nor Fogs, our
Ground being Rocky and Gravelly, and our Air fanned by Winds; this preserves us
from the dullness and phlegm of the Northern Climats; and the want of that
superfluous Plenty, and bewitching Pleasure, which softened even Hannibal when
he came to Capua, preserves us against the Delicacy and Effeminateness of
Southern Nations. And whereas (Heroic Virtue being still attended by Envy)
some in railery pretend, that we were unconquered, because we deserved not the
pains and trouble of a War. I need not seriously answer, what no Historian can
urge: For it is ridiculous to think, that the Romans would not have rather
conquered us, than built two strong and expensive Walls against us, which
bounded their Fame, as well as their Conquest. And England has taken too much
pains to gain us, either by Conquest or Alliance, to have undervalued us. And
though when we were divided by the differences betwixt the Bruce and Barliol of
old, and betwixt the Royalists and Covenanters of late; the half of our Country
having only defended its Liberties, whilst the other half joined with its
Enemies; we were rather betrayed than overcome: And yet we soon recovered our
former Liberty. Albeit, to be overcome by England had been no great affront to
us: England being a greater and richer Nation than we are. And therefore I
hope, all honest Men will, with Judicious Samuel Daniel in his History, at the
Year 1296, confess, that it had been a pity, we had not had a better Country,
to be the Theater of so many worthy and heroic Actions.

Having thus cleared how our Nation arrived at its present consistence, I am to
finish this Discourse, with a representation of the many Rights which our Kings
have to the Imperial Throne of these Kingdoms; and to show how they succeed to
all who ever pretended to Monarchy in any of them.

As to the British part of the Isle, Aurelius Ambrosius was, by common consent,
chosen sole Prince of all the Britons: And he had no other Succession, save two
Daughters, Anna married to the King of the Picts, and Ada married to the King
of the Scots. Mordredus King of the Picts, Grandchild to the foresaid
Aurelius, finding himself debarred from the Succession of the British Crown,
employed the Scots, who fought for him against the Britons. But the Britons
having called in the Saxons, after a bloody Battle, both Parties were forced to
withdraw; and the King of the Picts was induced to desist from his Pretentions
at that time. But thereafter Hungus, King of the Picts, and the direct Heir of
the same Mordredus, and consequently of Ambrosius King of the Britons, gave his
Sister Fergusiana to Achaius King of the Scots; and in her Right, Alpin King of
Scotland succeeded both to the British and Pictish Crowns; Hungus having died
without any Children, Kenneth the 2d, Son to Alpin, was forced to conquer the
Picts, who refused unjustly to receive him as their lawful King.

Our Kings are likewise Lineal Heirs of the Danish-Race, who were Kings of
England for 27, or as others say, 29 Years; they being the only Lineal
Successors of Canutus King of the Danes in Britain: for Margaret, Wife to King
Malcolm the 3d, was Sister to Edgar, which Edgar was Grandchild to St. Edward,
who was Brother to Hardiknut, Son to Canutus.

After this the Kingdom of England returned to the old Stock in King Edward's
Time; to whom succeeded Edgar, whose Sister the pious Queen Margaret married
King Malcolm the 3d of Scotland, by whom he came to have right to the Crown of
England; there being none extant of the old Royal-Saxon-Line besides her self:
And with her came very many of the Nobility, who fled from William the
Conqueror, after he conquered England, and with whom King Malcolm would not
make Peace, till such of them as resolved to return were restored to their
Estates.

The next Royal-Race which flourished in England, was the Norman: and to that
Race our Kings succeeded thus.

The Line of William the Conqueror was branched out in the Houses of Lancaster
and York. To the House of Lancaster, they succeed as Heirs by the marriage
betwixt Joan Daughter to the Duke of Somerset, and undoubted Successor of the
Family of Lancaster. And to both Lancaster and York they succeed, by being
Heirs to Henry the 7th; in whom these Successions were again happily
reconciled; he having married Elizabeth eldest Daughter to Edward the 4th, who
had transferred the Succession of the Crown from the House of Lancaster, to
that of York, or at least had united the two in one. For clearing whereof, it
is fit to know, that Henry the 7th had only four Children, Arthur, Henry,
Margaret, and Mary. Arthur, and Henry dying without Succession, the Right of
the Crown was certainly devolved upon the Children of Margaret the Daughter;
who did bear King James the 5th, in a first Marriage with King James the 4th;
and Margaret Douglas, by a second Marriage with the Earl of Angus: which
Margaret being married to Matthew Earl of Lenox, had two Sons; the eldest
whereof was Henry, who thereafter married Queen Mary Daughter to King James the
5th; and begot upon her King James the 6th: and thus King James the 6th was
upon all sides Heir to William the Conqueror, and to Henry the 7th.

The Histories also of both Nations confess, that our King is the undoubted
Successor of the Blood Royal of Wales: for Walter Stuart, from whom our Kings
are descended, was Grandchild to the King of Wales, by his Daughter, Lesl. in
vita Dav. 2.
who married Fleanchus Son to Baker, p. 159. Edit. 1643.
Banqhuo: and Henry the 7th (to whom King James the 6th was the true Successor)
was also the righteous Heir of Cadwallader the last Prince of Wales.

The Histories both of Scotland and Ireland do acknowledge, that our Kings are
undoubtedly descended from the Royal Race of the Kings of Ireland; and all the
debate that can be, is only whether they be desended from King Ferquhard,
Father to King Fergus the first, or from Eeric Father to King Fergus the
second; or from some other Irish Kings, as Usher pretends.

From all which I may draw two Conclusions; First, that God has, from an
extraordinary kindness to those Kingdoms, lodged in the Person of our present
Sovereign, King James the 7th (whom GOD Almighty long preseve) all those
opposite, and different Rights, by which our Peace might have been formerly
disturbed. 2. That His Majesty who now Reigns, has derived from His Royal
Ancestors, a just and legal Right by Law, to all those Crowns, without needing
to found upon the Right of Conquest: so that the very endeavor, to exclude him
from all those Legal Rights, by Arbitrary Insolence, under a Mask of Law, was
the height of Injustice, as well as Imprudence.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2 Vol.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time.

Bp Wilkins real Character, or Philosophical Language.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity.

Guillim's Display of Heraldry, with large Additions.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2 Vol.

-- Account of the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn.

Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion.

Herodoti Historia, Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments and Resolutions
of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon. By William Cawley Esquire.

Sanford's Genealogical Hist. of the Kings of England.

Modern Reports of select Cases, in the reign of King Charles the 2d.

Sir Tho. Murray's Collection of the Laws of Scotland.

Dr. Towerson's Explication on the Creed, the Commandments, and Lord's Prayer,
in 3 Vol.

The History of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Illustrated with
Copper Figures; and an exact Map of the Island. By Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive
there near 20 Years.

QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English.

Bp Nicholson on the Church-Catechism.

History of the late Wars of New England.

Atwell's Faithful Surveyer.

Mr. John Cave's seven occasional Sermons.

Dr. Crawford's Serious Expostulation with the Whigs in Scotland.

Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authothority of the Law of Nature,
and the Christian Religion.

Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections.

Bibliotheca Norfolciana.

OCTAVO.
BIshop Wilkin's Natural Religion.

-- His Fifteen Sermons.

Mr. Tanner's Primordia: Or, the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described.

Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers, in the Case
of Skinner.

-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals.

-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions.

-- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.

Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice.

Dr. Sympson's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws: With a Discourse of
the Original of hot Springs and other Fountains.

Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts.

Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness.

The Trials of the Regicides, in 1660.

Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural,
etc. with a large account of all his Works. By Dr. Tho. Tennison.

Dr. Puller of the Moderation of the Church of England.

Sir John Mounson of Supreme Power and Common Right.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw Discourse on select Texts.

Mr. Seller's State of the Church in the three first Centuries.

The Country-mans Physician.

Dr. Burnet's Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

-- Vindication of the Ordination of the Church of England.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical
benefices and Church Lands.

-- Relation of the present state of the difference between the French King and
the Court of Rome; to which is added, the Pope's Brief to the Assembly of the
Clergy, and their Protestation, published by Dr. Burnet.

-- Abridgment of the History of the Reformation. Ogleby's Aesops Fables
paraphrased in Verse, and adorned with Sculptures and Annotations, in 2 Vol.

Dr. Cumber's Companion to the Altar.

Galliard's two Discourse of private Settlement at Home after Travel, and of
Him who is in Public Employments.

Markham's Perfect Horseman.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Discourse of Religious Assemblies.

-- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation.

-- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, in answer to Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion.

The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York, now
Queen of England.

Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or natural Power of Kings.

Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans.

Lawrence's Interest of Ireland, in its Trade and Wealth, stated.

DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arthmetick.

An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason. Written by M. Cliford Esquire.

Queen-like-Closet, both Parts.

Bishop Wettenhalls Method and Order for Private Devotion.

VICESSIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine's Private Devotions.

Crumbs of Comfort.

Books lately printed for Ri. Chiswell.
FOLIO.
DR. Spencer de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus and earum Rationibus.

Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military Essays of the Ancient Grecian,
Roman, and Modern Art of War.

Dr. John Lightfoot's Works in English, in 2 Vol.

Mr. Selden's Ianus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his
Epinomis, concerning the ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never
before extant. Also two other Treatises written by the same Author: One of the
Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of Testaments; the other of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods; Now the first time published.

QVARTO.
PAtris Simonii Disquisitiones Criticae de Variis per diversa Loca and Tempora
Bibliorum Editionibus. Accedunt Castigat. Opusc. Is. Vossii de Sibyllinis
Oraculis.

Dr. Falkner's two Treatises of Reproaching and Censure: with his Answer to
Serjeant's Surefooting: Also several occasional Sermons.

The Case of Lay-Communion with the Church of England considered.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.

A Discourse of the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

OCTAVO.
DR. William Cave's Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient
Church by Bishops, Metropolitans and Patriarchs.

Two Letters betwixt Mr. R. Smith, and Dr. Hen. Hammond, about Christ's Descent
into Hell.

Dean Stratford's Disswasive from Revenge.

The Life of Bishop Bedel.

Dr. Harris his rational Discourse of Remedies.

Sir George Mackenzy's Just Right of Monarchy.

Dr. Hez. Burton's first Volume of Discourses, of Purity and Charity; of
Repentaace, and of seeking the Kingdom of God. Published by Dean Tillotson.

-- His second Vol. of Discourses upon diverse other Practical Subjects.

Sir Thomas More's Vtopia, newly made English.

Bishop Iewel's Apology for the Church of England; with his Life. By a Person
of Quality.


