A BRIEF ANSWER UNTO THE CAMBRIDGE MODDEL. Which is to go to the two
Universities to be read by all the Doctors and Students, Vice Chancellor, and
Fellows, as they will answer it to GOD. And likewise this is to go to all those
they call Gentlemen of the Countries to whom this Moddel is directed, from the
DOCTORS, for money to maintain the STUDENTS. And is to go amongst all the
Priests that are, and have been heretofore made Ministers by the same Doctors
of Colleges, now planted themselves in the Countries. And this is to go
amongst all the Countrymen, that they may see the fruits of the Learning from
these Doctors, which Fruits is PERSECUTION. And also that they and all people
might come to learn of Christ the Prophet, which is raised up, which does
enlighten every man which comes into the world, high and low, rich and poor,
Bond and free, Male and Female, that all through him might believe, who is the
Covenant of God, the leader of the people, whom they should hear, who
reconciles in one, things in heaven, and things on earth, who brings into
Unity, which is in the light which every man which comes into the world is
lightened withal, which is Christ, that Abraham and the Prophets, and Moses
spoke of, he being enjoyed, the end is seen. By E. M.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

John Worthington, John Arrowsmith, Anthony Tuckney, Benjamin Wichcot, Ralph
Cudworth, William Dillingham, Priest Baxter, and Matthew Poole. Some of their
Principles, as follows in a Moddel for the maintaining of Students, for the
making of Ministers, and is presented to the Gentlemen of the Country, whereby
these Ministers when they are made, may be sent out into Ireland and Wales, and
into the dark places of England.
OH shame! Cover your faces, you chief Doctors and Teachers; was this the work
of the Apostles? and is this the end of your so many thousands of pounds a a
year you have out of the Nation? and hundred pounds a year stipends? Does not
your gold and silver begin to burn in your flesh and your bones? Has it not
cankered your flesh yet? Is it not rusted in your flesh yet? Will you make
Ministers and young Students for money? Did the Apostles go begging up and down
to Gentlemen (as you call them) for money to make Students, to make Ministers?
Did Christ set forth such a way? Now this is the way to make Ministers of the
Letter, who are persecutors of the Ministers of the Spirit, for maintenance,
and the people of God: and you are more for the maintenance, and they both,
when you have made them, then for the glory of God; and you are quite out of
the steps of them that Christ sent forth, that what was set before them they
might eat: And the foundation of your work lies in your natural parts, and in
your abilities, buying and selling Parishes, and begging Parishes, and changing
one from another. Nay, I know you Priests, Black-coats, and Doctors, would eat
up one another, who are the worst of men, and the worst of flesh, which is
become as the carrion, fit for nothing but the wild Beasts, and wild
Creatures, and Fowls, and your fruits in all the Gaols in the Nation, of the
Ministers you have made, declares it, in prisoning, and the Courts suing and
prisoning them, you do no work for; a shameless company of men, they are so
ill bred at Oxford and Cambridge, such a place of ill breeding, that you bring
a Nation and People into confusion: But praised be the Lord God you are all
measured, and comprehended, unlike the Ministers of the Gospel, unlike the
Church; but your hearts (appears) are seared with a hot iron, when you have
made your Ministers, both maker, and made destroy people for dishonest gain,
who pretend to people that you are Ministers of Christ, and be not, which comes
out of the two dross houses, Oxford and Cambridge, and sends forth your
Ministers you have made, makes a trade of the Scriptures, and sells their
preaching and praying by the hour-glasse, and tells the people when the glass
is run, the time is spent. Does not all the sober people in the Nation behold
here your folly? and you sing David's quaking, and Prayers, and Praises, and
prophecies for money? For what Priest will come in the Steeple-house, and sing
without money? Away with your abominations, is this your Moddell for money?
Come sing freely, and praise the Lord freely, yea all Nations to the free God
of heaven and earth: and preach freely, if ye have received freely.

But then scrubs the Priest, and says, It has cost me money, and murmurs;
Come pray freely without money for the people to the Lord, then he will hear
your prayers without your wrath, for your polluted hands is so full of blood
and persecution for your bellies, as your Courts and Gaols may witness, and
houses of Correction, and stocks, and whipping posts, for the servants of the
Lord God: But I will arise and be eased of mine adversaries says the Lord. And
you are far off the Mount and Sions Hill, who are thus choked up with Stipends
and Augmentations, Gleab Lands, Midsomer dues, and Easter reckonings, and tithe
Pigs and Geese, etc. gifts and rewards, and hands so full of blood,
persecution, wrath and doubting of ever overcoming sin and imperfection. For
what good (when you have made them Ministers by money, and send them forth to
preach for money) what good do they do for it? you tell your hearers they shall
never be made free from the body of sin, nor imperfection, they shall always
carry the body of sin about them, while they are upon earth, and that they can
never be perfect, so denies the new Covenant that blots out sin and
transgression, in which men have peace with God. You deny the blood of Jesus
Christ which cleanses from all sin. You deny the one offering Christ Jesus,
who has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: And so in this state you
deny Christ that died at Jerusalem, and so you are in a worse state then the
first Priest hood, which the comers to it was not made perfect, and the first
Covenant, and so you are such as are crept into houses, and have the form of
godliness, but denies the power, and keeps people always learning, laden with
sin and diverse lusts, never able to come to the knowledge of truth, like unto
Jannes and Jambres, that would have kept the children of Israel in temporal
Egypt, and so you keep them in spiritual Egypt, Sodom and Gomorrah, where
Christ is crucified, though it be in the Land of Canaan, and you voluptuous
Professors and Teachers, and called Ministers, and makers of them, consider
this, for the fire of the jealousy of the Almighty is entering into your bones,
and your flesh, and the dread of the Lord God Almighty will find you out. Take
counsel never so much together against the Lords anointed, and the just, he
will break you to pieces like potters vessels: And light will break forth,
though you be in never such great houses of darkness, though you swell like
the Sea, and rage like the waves, and yell like the Lions, who want their prey,
and roar like the Bear bereaved of her whelps, and raven like Wolves, and carry
the Lambs and Sheep into houses of Correction for your prey, because you cannot
get meat of them, whom the Lord is their Shepherd, who follows Christ, and
hears his voice; who has put his sheep forth from you to whom he has given
eternal life. Though you roar in your Pulpits, and make the ignorant people
like a raging sea, all of a fire against the Lambs and little ones, the Lord
will still the waves and lay the tempests, and has put the hook in the jaws of
the great Leviathan in the Sea. Come ye Babes and little ones, and rejoice over
them in the Lord, who is causing light to break forth out of darkness.

The two places, Oxford and Cambridge, which makes Ministers: the things which
is seen concerning them is, they are like two Woods, full of black trees, which
are blackned with smoke, and a few leaves hangs dropping on the Tops of them,
like unto trees at the fall of the leaf, and they stand as it were in a
quagmire, which is made up with the fat of the Nation, and the exacting of poor
people, and wringing of them, like a great heap of myery soft earth, and when
the wind blows the quagmire puffs at the bottom of it, and there is but little
moss grows on the trees, because of the smoke, and these trees bears no
fruit, but a few dropping leaves as it were in the end of Summer, so they stand
as the shaking off with a great wind, whose leaf fades, and so as they are
carried out of that quagmire and wood and bank, undressed, they are planted in
the Countries like starved trees in the Forest, beaten with winds and
weathers, dried with bark on, and some Moss on them, and scarce leaves. Now
these be the fuel for the fire, which cumbers the ground, fruitless trees, and
the Nations and the earth has layen like a Wilderness, and these trees have
not born fruit, and their leaves fades and falls; And the fruitful trees of
the field begins to clap their hands who bears the fruit, whose leaf never
fades nor falls, that is by the River, and the smoke of these two woods before
mentioned has almost smoaked off the barks of them, for they have scarcely the
outside of them nor leaves, but they are droping down continually, and they
must all drop off and appear bare, for they have not any to cover them, and all
your works and the intent of your Moddel, is to get money that you might make
Ministers, are you like the Apostles in this? have you thrust out Christ, and
denied the faith, will you let Christ have no Room, but in your mouths to talk
of him? had ever Christ any place but in the manger amongst the Professors, and
them that lived in lip service, their hearts far off from God? had not the
great professors Hebrew, Greek and Latin in the days of old, the great Talkers
of Christ? and he had no place amongst them but in the manger in the stable,
are not you making Ministers, and begging money of the Gentry, and frighting
their evil consciences if they will not give it you? and the highest when you
have made them is but Hebrew, Greek and Latin; which is but natural, and so is
but a natural man, and the natural man receives not the things of God though he
has Hebrew, Greek and Latin, though he can talk of all Scripture in those
languages, and will put Christ in the stable and in the manger, and let him
have no Room in the Synagogues as the Jews would not, but was all full of
wrath, and rose up against him, and put him out of the Synagogue; and do not
you and your Ministers put him out of your Synagogues, and put him in prison?
is not this the fruits of your Ministers, and your makers of them? sure people
will be wise, and not spend their money for that which is not bread; where was
there such degrees amongst the Apostles as is amongst you and the Papists,
Batchelors and Masters of Arts, and so forth? and where did the Apostle choose
boys, out of Schools, and send them to a place to learn Hebrew, Greek and
Latin 7 or 8 years, and that such should be made Ministers, is not this by men
and of men? does not all this come out of your own names? let the wise in heart
judge; so if one come in his own name, the world receives him, but who comes in
the name of the Lord the world will not receive him.

And whereas you say some have been but four years at the University, they are
through poverty forced to go away, to enter into the Ministry while they are
raw, which should have stayed four years more, having been provided for.

Are you not ashamed, does money make your Ministers? was it not money that
made all the false Prophets and the selfish ends? how are you like Ravens, and
the Lilies, and the grass, are you not all comprehended here amongst the
Heathen? and your rawness both Ministers and Makers has sufficiently appeared,
and declared it self to the whole Nation, and when you have made them at 8
years standing and 7 and 4, and has gotten all his learning, Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, and other Languages which the Gentry of the Country must maintain them,
and poor people besides, when he has gotten all his carnal weapons, and armed
himself with them, and got up into his steeple-house, one of them, the poor
despised people, a woman, a lad, or a girl, come and but look this Priest in
the face, as he is in his pulpit with all his Goliahs weapons, carnal
languages, he falls before them, him or her the said Quaker, and cries take
them away, they disturb me, to the house of correction with them, to the
Prison; and thus the Student and Minister shames both Count^y and Gentry, and
they are ashamed of him; have we given our money, cry they, and has he had
fifteen pounds and 20l. and 30l. a year for 7. or 8. years together, and now
there comes a poor simple Quaker, and bids him fear God, and his mouth is
stopped; he would have them prisoned, surely cries the Gentry and the Country,
these fellows mind nothing but their bellies, and have made a prey of us, and
it is true what Quakers says, we have spent our money for that which is not
bread, and we will even turn to Christ who is that bread which comes down from
above, and know the Ministers that are made by his will, which he and the
Father sends forth, for these are all below, and are made by men, and by
learning, and serve Apprentiships like Prentise* boys, and we have given our
money to them, and now they are not able to stand before such as cannot read
letters, but will have them to be prisoned, and we have been partakers with
them, and so uphold the Priest, which some have smarted for, Let others take
warning. And you say, your aim is to bring up Scholars with parts and
learning to supply the Church with choice Ministers, that they may be pillars
of the Church. Was ever they made pillars of the Church that came in their own
names? are not the Heathen and Papists and Jesuits your example in this, and
will they not over-wit you in this? were not they the first Authors of it of
making Ministers by their learning? and did ever that in all ages do good, to
make a Minister of Christ Jesus, to give him the spirit, to give him the gift
of God? was not all the earth of one language before Babel? and did not Nimrod
the mighty hunter before the Lord, who came out of cursed Cams stock, begin to
build Babel whom God did confound into many languages? and is not that the
confounded language your Original? was not all this from the spirit, did God
confound his spirit? and had not Pilate which crucified Christ Hebrew, Greek
and Latin? did not he set this up a top of Christ when he crucified him? so
Babel is the beginning of it, a top of Christ it stands, Pilate set it a top of
Him, a top of life, a top of Truth, and could Pilate open the scripture or the
Jews that had Hebrew Greek and Latin, and not the life? did not they prison
and persecute and kill as you do, and could not open scripture? no more cannot
you without the life of Christ: did not the false Prophets, Antichrist inwardly
ravening, who got the sheeps clothing, that Christ said should come, Mat. 7.
and 24. which John said was come, in his first Epistle, Chap. 2. and Chap. 4.
which went forth from them, which in the Revelations, All that dwelt upon the
earth went after them. Which after a while they killed the Saints that kept the
testimony of Jesus the spirit of prophecy. They inwardly ravened from the
spirit of God: and when they had killed the Saints, power was given unto them,
the Beast and false Prophet over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations. Now has
the Beast power over Tongues? what, the Orthodox men? what, Tongues which is
the original? as you may read, Rev. 13. And must these open Christ's words the
Beast has power over? Is that the Original which the Beast has power over?
Are those the Orthodox men the Beast has power over, which has got the
Tongues? Oh shame! you may deceive the Nations, but you cannot the Elect: And
the whore which inwardly ravened from the spirit of God, all Nations have drunk
the cup of fornication, before they could come to Christ the husband; And she
has corrupted the earth, and made the Inhabitants of it drunk: and the Kings
of the earth has committed fornication with her, who has ravened from the
spirit of God: So the Kings of the earth has made the Nations to bend before
ever they could come to the husband, and here Nations have had the form from
her which ravened from the spirit of God, before ever they could come to the
power, with that they have been drunk, and so the whore sits upon the Nations,
and Multitudes, and People, and Tongues, and these are waters on whom the whore
sits. Now what is the whore, or the Original, and Orthodox men? and is the
Original waters? and the Orthodox men waters? and Schools? Is the whore on
them? Read the Scriptures, Rev. 18. 17. chapter And can these waters which are
Tongues, which the whore is upon, which drinks the blood of the Saints, can
these open the Scriptures that are waters? is the Orthodox men waters? and is
the original waters? Now if these could have opened Scripture, how chance they
are no better then waters? These tongues John calls them waters, and says, The
beast has power over them, and Pilato sets them on top of Christ, and Babel is
the beginning of them. Are you pillars of the Church, or of Antichrist? of the
Beast, of the Whore, and Babylon, and members of fallen Babylon? here begins
your original; and when they crucified Christ, they set your Original a top of
Him which the Beast and Whore has power over that sits upon them, and John
calls them waters. And you will go make pillars of waters for the Church, and
you call that the Original, for tongues are waters: oh shameless Babylon! who
are setting your Tongues a top of Christ like Pilate, and denies the light; for
the light is risen, and has discovered you all, and Christ is risen, which was
before Babell was, which Pilate set the many Languages over him, when he
crucified him: He is risen over that which was set over him, and over them that
set it over him; and you that have ravened from the spirit of God which sets up
your Tongues to be the original, and by it your Orthodox men made at your
Schools and Colleges, came up by the Papists since the days of the Apostles,
which tongues the beasts power was given unto him over, and the whore sits upon
them, which John in the Revelation calls them waters, and these are them which
has established your Church, and the Pope which has been your pillar, which
he calls waters: so you and the Papists, which be your. Tongues and Original,
have set up your false Church, and killed the life, and set up your Tongues over
it, as Pilate did, and so have drunk the blood of the Martyrs, and the
Prophets, and the Saints, which are made by the will of God, and then sets your
many Languages and Original over them amongst the ignorant and simple people:
but the life is risen, Christ Jesus the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world over you and your Original, who will be avenged of you all his enemies,
who is the foundation of God, and the original himself, and he will stain
your pride, and deface your glory and beauty; You have had a glory, and a
beauty, and a pride, the natural Tongues which John calls waters, which you
call your original; for the life is risen, which was before Babel was, and
remains when Pilate is not, and when Babylon is not neither, who is risen to
confound it: He who had your Original set over him which makes your Orthodox
men, which have killed the Prophets and Saints which had the original, that
you might reign with your false conceptions; but the Prophets, and the Saints,
and the Lamb now reigns over you, and it is in vain now for you to set up your
waters, to make pillars of your Church, for Tongues are waters, says John,
that had the Original, and was in it, and so all that be in the Original, sees
you, and is a top of your waters and Tongues, and is come to the Rock, and
tramples upon all your Buildings and Tongues, which at the best makes men but
natural men; for tongues are natural, and not spiritual: and your sending out
your Lads, after admitted in writing, to Wales and Ireland, and other places.
This is like unto them that Jeremiah cries out against, that run when the Lord
never sent them, that are using their tongues, and speak when the Lord never
spoke to them, and these are them that runs from you Waters; And them that be
friends of Christ and of the Gospel, and love their Country, the souls and
good of people, will see that you have not the bread to feed the hungry, and
you do not bind up, but you make rents, and you do not visit in prison, but you
cast into prison them that will not put into your mouths; and you do not bring
people from under the law, but bring people under the law into Courts, and
Sessions, and Assizes, and you cast them into prison for tithes, and tenths,
and so you are unlike the Ministers of the Gospel, which brought people out of
ninths and tenths both, redeemed out of the earth up to God, but you are gone
amongst the Papists, inwardly ravenous, into the earth, and there sets up
tenths, and keeps people in the ninths of the earth, unlike the Ministers of
the Gospel, which is the power of God, which opens the hearts of the people,
whereby they come out of the ninths and tenths both, to Christ, who redeems out
of the earth to God, whereby they come to reign upon the earth. Does the tenths
serve all the widows, fatherless, and strangers, and the Priest? Does it give
them all enough? Now man transgressing, and being drove from God into the
earth, Abraham before the Law paid the tenths of the spoil to Melchisedech
King of Righteousness, in the Law of the Lord, required the tenths of the
earth, and he made these tenths to serve widows, fatherless, strangers, and
Levi, that there might not be a beggar amongst them. Now Christ the end of the
Law, and of Wars, the Redeemer and the Savior out of the earth, brings from
out of the ninths and tenths, and so comes to reign upon the earth, and these
are of the royal Priesthood, and the family of the faithful, which was of
Abraham, of which Christ came according to the flesh, which lives out of ninths
and tenths both of the earth up to God, whose the earth is. Now apostatized
Papists and sects since the days of the Apostles, and false Prophets, and
Antichrist that had the sheeps clothing, that ravened from the spirit of God
into the earth, drew the world after them, set up ninths and tenths: so they
get tenths of the earth, and keep people in the ninths of it. Oh! how unlike
the Ministers of the Gospel are you, that brought people out of the ninth and
tenth both to God to reign a top of it, glory to the highest: And such brought
back that which was driven away; but you that keeps in the ninths and tenths,
keeps people under the curse, there to labor for you in the sweat of their
brows, toyling and tugging for you in the transgression: But some are redeemed
from you, and cannot put into your mouths, and such you have your dens for, you
that be in the transgression, that be under the curse, and keep people under
the curse with ninths and tenths of the earth, which now many is coming out of:
and woe will be your portion and misery, and all them that be come into the
life of the Prophets of Christ.

Now it is not their work to put in the mouths of the false Prophets, but they
that did so was the ignorant and foolish people, and foolish Gentry of the
country, which they were deceived by; and the Saints know that the love of the
false Prophets was all after money, and themselves and such blinds the eye of
the mind of many both great and small, and they are them that cries give, give,
and they that will not put into their mouths, they prepare war against them:
And you wrest many Scriptures which is spoken of for giving to the poor, for
your own ends, which poor it is manifest you do not regard, therefore is there
so many widows and fatherless begging abroad in your streets, and at your
Steeple Houses, and at your doors, and cast so many widows and poor men into
prison that have many children, because they cannot give you tithes, and put
into your mouths.

And whereas you say in the ninth page, He is likest to God that does good, you
show your selves the most unlike to God, as the Courts, Gaols, Prisons, and
houses of Correction witness, and death, persecuting till death; so shows you
your selves are reprobate concerning the faith, and the Ministers of Christ,
and has not learned the lesson of Christ, to learn mercy and not sacrifice,
for your sacrifice is Cains, for you kill and murder, and are in envying your
brethren, and so you have forgotten to do good, and so lost the blessing, and
lost the savor of rest where the mercy is, which is to show mercy; but you
will give people Sermons, and pray, and sing to them, and tell them letter is
light, and Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John is the Gospel, and Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin is the Original, and Letter is the Word, and it is the ground of men's
faith, and the old Mass-house, with the cross at the end of it is the Church;
stop into your mouths, you will give them as much talk as you can speak by the
glass, till the glass be run, then time is past Neighbors. If a Quaker comes
and look at you, he disturbs me, take him away. Now the Scripture says, The
power of God is the Gospel, and the power of God the cross of Christ, and
Christ is the Author of Faith, who is the Original, and the Scriptures of truth
are the words of God, and Christ is the Word, before the Scriptures was given
forth, who comes to fulfill the words, in whom they end. Christ, the Word, and
the Church is in God, and your old Mass-houses and Sacraments, the Papists was
the Author of them, and they gave to them their names, and your Schools, as
Trinity College, and Christ's College, and Jesus, and Emanuel, etc. And St.
Paul's, and St. Peter's, and St. John's, and All* souls, and St. Gregory, and St.
Austins the old Monk. What Jesuits are wiser men then you, fain to name your
houses for you? Here is popes marks and names, and most of the old Masse-houses
of England, there stands the Cross on the end of them, or has been, which is
the Popes mark, who sets up all your tithes, and Easter reckonings, Midsommer
dues, and gleab lands, and your bells and glasses, and your naming Saints
days, your Christmas, and Candlemas, and Michaelmas. Now if you did not love
Popery, and hold up Popery, you would deny his authority, and deny his
Doctrine. Alack for you poor striplings, Catterpillars, crawling Frogs; talk of
soldiers of Christ! it is nothing but your Bellies you fight for; for you are
casting into prison, you have not Christ's soldiers weapons, you are made by
men; and so you must acknowledge the Pope has more wit then you, that cannot
name your Houses and Colleges, and days, and sets you out your Tithes, Easter
reckonings, and Midsomer dues* and so you are them that destroy the pure
understanding of the people, and stops the way whereby the souls of the people
might come up, and so are destroyers of the true Ministers, and keeping people
from the true foundation Christ Jesus the Prophet, which is to be heard. It is
not your Languages that feeds souls, and keep people from being seduced, nor
makes people witty in the things of the spirit of God, as you simple Doctors
think in the tenth page. your Ministry would wear out If you should loose your
Tongues and Sciences: And when do we see a Priest dare to venture upon a Papist
Priest without a carnal sword, and confound him, and stop his mouth; but your
and the Papists Original, are your Languages, so easy to be confounded by them
that be in the spirit of God, before Tongues was. So you who are killing and
prisoning one another about your sacrifices, piety is lost and charity amongst
you, and you are unfurnished with spiritual weapons; and the Quakers who are of
the royal elect seed of God, before the foundation of the world was, has
sounded you allarm, and all your forefathers the Papists, which your fathers
since the days of the Apostles, the Allarm is gone out, that all the Sects and
Apostates, and Heathen which know not God, upon the earth: And the Trumpet
sounds out of the holy Mountain, that you and all the Inhabitants of the earth
should tremble; and you, and all you who be in the ninths and tenths of the
earth, and the Trumpet sounds out to you all, Allarm, that you may come to the
battle of the great God of heaven and earth. And the Lambs war is begun, who
will kill with the sword, and slay with the sword, which is the word of his
mouth; and the Devil, and Beast, and false Prophet shall be taken and cast
alive into the lake of fire. He that worships the Beast shall be tormented day
and night; And the Lamb and the Saints shall reign, and the everlasting
Gospel shall be preached to all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, which is the
power of God.

And you and the Papists have been made up by the Heretics, which went forth
from the Apostles, as you may read in Timothy, in Jude, and Peter, and John,
and the rest of the Epistles: and you all dry, drossie, dark Doctors, who are
training up your poor silly ignorant sottish Students; which when they come out
from you, will speak a few words for a cock of Barley, tithe Eggs and pigs.
Away you poor young Students, lay aside all your pretenses, and turn to the
Lord God from your old Doctors, for they are never able to make you Ministers:
For that which they do is but for money, and you are but plain Naturalists when
they have done the utmost to you, and then you go forth and teach for money,
when as you had been better to have kept Flocks and Herds, and turned
Husbandmen, that would bring more honor to God. You see the people are
profane, and you do them no good, and you see that you begin to be a shame to
the Nation; and what uncharitable lives they have, and hard hearts, and seared
consciences, and will cast men into prison, and bring them before Courts, and
prison them for speaking to them; and yet you have been learning seven and
eight years at Oxford and Cambridge, and one that has never been there shall
confound 20 of them in the things of God; and how unlike the Apostles are they
which was in the power of God, whereby their hearers sold all, and laid at the
Apostles feet. Now you see the Apostles would not cumber themselves with it,
they might have set up great benefits.

And again you may see how you Priests and Ministers destroy the true Church
amongst you, and the true Authority and comforter and edification and limit the
holy one, and dispiseth prophesy, and quenches the spirit, if any thing be
revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace: And this
practice you get a law against, take him away he disturbes me; and so you are
the crucifiers in the world, and the world that crucifies, and are not them
that are crucified from the world with Christ.

And the Lord has given many both rich and poor, an unspeakable happiness and
freely of his grace, that stands for the glory of his Church, which Christ is
in the midst of, and is the head who are come into the lively faith and the
fervent love to the brethren that are persecuted by you, and evilly entreated,
and their bodies are offered up sacrifices to the Lord, and many have been
sacrificed in your prisons, and there died, to whom the love of God has flowed
and abounded, and carried through all their sufferings, with joy unspeakable
and love unfaigned, whose Souls are in their rest, (Christ) whose comfort is in
Christ the hope, the mystery, whose Crown of glory fades not, whose love is to
the world, whether they will receive it for no; now you Teachers and called
Ministers have impoverished many in the Nation, whom you do no work for, many
families, many fatherless, many widows, many you keep in prison to this day,
many has died in prison; you have kept till death; is it not blood their you
drink? will nothing serve you, but the Saints blood, there bodies, and their
lives? you have taken and caused to be taken the very bibs and the childrens
clothes, and plough-gear and Oxen and Horses that men should till their ground
with, you have taken the beds away from people, and left them none to lie on;
taken away their corn, sheep and hay, and threshed their corn in their Barnes,
and carried it away by loads, as witness Thomas Aldam; you drive away their fat
Beasts, provided for their own families against Winter; you take away the Cows
from the poor people that have half a dozen children to give them milk, and
take the men from their wives, and cast them into prison, that they shall not
maintain their familes, Oh! lamentable cries is entered into the Lord of the
Sabbath of rest for his people; and you are speaking of learning, and defending
of the Truth, and building up the Church of Christ by your Languages; you six
Doctors, Alas, did not Pilate with his Learning and Languages turn against
Christ and the Church, and the Greek, and the Hebrew, and the Latin both? And
so Mahomet and the Infidels fruits could not be worse then yours, who will not
suffer the Saints to live upon the Earth, except they live in the ninths to
give you the tenths, and bury the seed of God in their ninths, that part
pertains to shadows that holds the ninths, that is a mystery, and they that
hold you up cannot honor Christ* The priests name is Cain, the first birth,
and that sacrificer offered of the earth, and wrestled with the flesh and blood
of Abel, and killed him, which did not Abel, he wrestled not with the flesh and
blood of Cain the Priests, and the blood of Abel cries for vengeance upon Cain.

THE END*

