THE Mystery of Curing Comprehensively.

Explained and Confirmed, by Exemplar of The Catholic Medicine.

Powerfully Impregnated, and accuratly Formed; to Assist the Regent Principle,
Disabled, or Impeded in Vital Government.

Enabled hereby; more Vigorously, and constantly to Execute; the Functions and
daily Operations; necessary to Health, and Life.

For Support of Human Bodies, variously Declining; and Recovery out of a
Diseased State.

The most useful, efficacious, and comprehensive Expedient; ( Preventive and
Curative) against the painful Diseases, and Decays of Human Nature.

By E. Maynwaringe. M. D.

Spes adhuc Spirantibus. Jan. 11. 1692/3. Imprimatur. Edm. Bohun.

LONDON, Printed for the Booksellers. MDCXCIII.

THE MYSTERY of CURING Comprehensively, etc.
FIRST, give me leave to Premise this necessary Information, That the Primitive
Professors, and Fathers of Medical Science; were all diligent Preparers of
their own Medicines: And their Successors likewise for many Hundred Years
after, continued Industrious in that Work; many urgent Reasons requiring that
most necessary Duty; which I forbear to recite: waving also the great
Imprudence, in exposing Patients to Hazards; by revolting from that secure,
knowing, and most hopeful Practice.

Physicians then of the greatest Repute; were ambitious of acquiring, some
Medicine extraordinary; most useful and advantageous to the Public; and it was
their Glory account^d; to have their Names Celebrated thereby; as Promoters of
a general good. But of latter times, the Learned making an unhappy Defection;
and changing that laudable Custom, for the vanity of Pen Practice: Illiterate
bold Quacks have stepped in, and personating the Physician; have imposed their
Cheats, and Trifles upon unwary People; which has brought a Scandal upon
publishing any thing of this kind; and thereby barred the Public from the
benefit of Successful Labors, of some Learned and most Ingenious Artists.

Thus much to obviate the Censure of undiscerning weak Heads; and stop the
mouths of malevolent men, of opposite Interests. I proceed now to the matter
proposed, and satisfaction promised.

That a single Medicine may be endowed with a Power of Universality; properly
and efficaciously to oppose many and various Diseases, in diverse Persons, is
what I have undertaken to prove: The Possibility, and rational Probability
whereof, will fairly appear; if you rightly understand as follows.

I am now going out of the common beaten Road of Physic; and the vulgar
Methods of Physicians; into unknown Paths, but leading a nearer and safer way:
you must not therefore expect my Discourse to comport with the common Notions,
and Opinions of Writers; yet consentaneous with Reason, and justifiable
thereby; confirmed also by matters of Fact.

For your clearer Apprehension, I have digested the Discourse methodically into
three Parts: wherein three things presents principally to be considered.

The Agent; the Works; and the Instrument!

The First Part sets forth the Capacity of the Agent. The Second, contains the
Difficulty, and Facility of the Work. The Third, shows the Hability, or Fitness
of the Instrument.
The First Part.
THE Capacity, Power, and Dexterity of this Agent, (the vital Principle)
eminently appears: First, in the wonderful Draught, and Portraiture of
Formation.

Secondly, in the daily course of Conservation.

Thirdly, in the Exigencies, and Attempts of Curation.

In the first Performance of this Plastic and Architectonic Principle, take
notice; that simple Spermatic Humor, was the single matter out of which, and
of which only, the Stamina or rudiments of the Stately Fabric of Human Body,
was formed and framed, with different Spermatick Parts: Bones, Cartilages,
Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, Fibers, etc. From thence proceeding to Organize,
and complete this wonderful Machine.

The Second, and continual Operation of this governing vital Spirit; is
maintaining and supplying, the many different Parts of Human Body, with various
suitable Liquors, derived from a simple alimentary Juice, wrought in the
Stomach, called Chyle.

The third Performance of this diligent, and dextrous Operator; is repairing,
mending, and reducing into order, this Workmanship; when decaying, or
discomposed: By the Instrumental means of Medicine.

The first, and second Operations of this Agent are wonderful; in producing
such various strange effects, out of single and simple matter, as Sperm and
Chyle; by a transmuting and transubstantiating Power.

Now to make some Remarks from hence; and reduce these considerables to our
Purpose.

Here is the wonder of Fabrication.

And the daily wonder of Nutrition, and Conservation; by single matter.

Then why not the wonder of Curation and Reparation by single Medicine? which
last Operation is not so wonderful, as the two former; when I come to show you
the rational Possibility. and fair Probability thereof; by comparing the
Efficient, and the Instrument; with the Work to be done.

The first, and second Performance of this great Architect, and Conservator; no
Reason can demonstrate or explain: yet Fact proves them both, and undeniably
are confessed by all.

Why then is the third Performance so incredible, and difficult to be admitted;
that may be comprehended by our Reason? as the sequel of the Discourse will
make manifest.

This curious Architect that built the Fabric of Human Body; and formed all
the various materials thereof by Transmutation of single matter, with no
Instrument: can probably, and with facility; repair and mend this Workmanship,
when out of Order; with one exquisite Instrument, egregiously contrived for
Catholic use.

This vital Principle (called Nature sometimes) is a Catholic free Agent; daily
performing various offices, and contrary motions in Human Body; yet all
conspiring harmoniously, for the use, and welfare of vital Government.

This Governor and Supporter of the Microcosme; operates universally,
variously, and contrarily: yet consentaneously, usefully, and necessarily.
Binds and loosens; opens, and shuts; moves upward, and downward; liquifies, and
coagulates, rarifies and condenseth; transmits, and retains; transmutes, and
transubstantiates, alimentary Matter into various forms, and Substances.

And all these different, and contrary Actions; are performed (efficienter) by
the vital, ruling Principle: (materialiter,) with a single alimentary Juice,
digested in the Stomach, to supply, and enable every Part of the Body;
differing in Organization, Temperature, Texture, and Office, to execute their
various Functions.

If this supreme Agent, can perform various and contrary Actions with single
Aliment: Then probably that same power may cure various, and contrary Diseases,
with single Medicament.

Can the Vital transmuting Spirit, of Bread and Water; make Chyle, Blood,
Nervous Juice, Sperme, and Milk; various Liquors for diverse uses, of the same
alimental matter?

Can this transubstantiating Principle, make Blood here, Flesh there, and Bones
in another place, of the same Food?

If this vital Spirit can maintain and feed, all the different Parts of the
Body with one alimentary Juice, Chyle: Then probably, and very reasonably, it
may mend and Cure, all those Parts with one Medicine.

If Nature can do wonders with single Aliment; very likely she can do wonders
with single Medicament.

It Is undeniable that Wonders are wrought in Man 's Body every Day, tho in
Health: But you are hard to believe that Wonders may be wrought by a Medicine
in Sickness, or a diseased State. And yet these Wonders will not seem so great;
when I come to set forth the Nature, and Qualifications of a Catholic Medicine;
and the Reasons of its Comprehension, and Adaptness for Curing many and various
Diseases.

As Nature (the Life) does distribute Aliment from the Stomach to all Parts of
the Body; She can as easily convey ( Materialiter vel Virtualiter) a Catholic
Instrument, into all Parts, to set them right.

And this you must believe; that no Medicine directs or moves it self here or
there in the Body; but Nature disposes of it, to this Part, or that, as she
stands in need; conveying both Nutriment, and Medicament at her Pleasure; at
least to her Power; and there is no Power else.

This vital Principle, is a dextrous and industrious Agent; that can do
wonderfully for relief; if the Physician (Ministers Naturae) can provide such a
Medical Instrument, as is comodious for management; and generally useful.

Mechanic or manual Artists, that work externally upon their subject (Circa
quod) have need of many Materials and Implements, to effect what they design,
and are about: But the vital Principle is Seated more advantagiously; has its
Residence in every part of the Body, operating internally all the Functions;
and therefore stands not in need of such variety of Instruments to work with.

You may understand from hence; the possibility to be very fair and reasonable
on Nature's Side; that she can manage a Catholic Medicine very well, to serve
all the operations and intentions of Curing; is willing to recieve, and ready
to operate with such an Expedient: But the possibility of contriving and
forming this Catholic Instrument, lies not so easy and probable on the
Physitian's part: It is not to be done by guess, with Pen and Ink, upon a piece
of Paper, in the prescribing Mode.

Thus much shall suffice, to show the Promptness, Energy, and Industry of the
Efficient or vital Agent; in complying and operating with a Catholic Medicine.
I pass on to the next Stage; to set forth the difficulty of the Work to be
done; and probability of performing it.

The Second Part.
HERE presents to me a prodigious Company of Diseases; of different kinds; and
seated in various Parts of the Body, preying upon the Life of Man; if not
subdued, or prevented by powerful means: So many, and so variously assaulting;
that in your Reason may well require a vast number of Medicines to oppose them:
And without such combined force, and ready Assistance, you do believe, it is
folly to attempt, and expect Success in the undertaking of so great a work.

To remove this Difficulty, and seeming Impossibility that lies in our way; and
to render a Catholic Medicine sufficient and a fit Instrument to perform
Comprehensively, against this great Company: I shall make two Strict Inquiries.

First, into the Number of Diseases: Then Secondly, into the Nature of them.

As to their Number, I find them Fictitiously multiplied; seemingly but such,
not really so many; which in another Tract, I have denoted and corrected that
Error. (Inquire into the General Catalogue of Diseases) where for sufficient
Reasons, I Struck out the first general Division, out of that List; as not
being properly called Diseases, but are Symptoms only: whereby a great
Abatement is made and the Superfluous Number reduced to fewer by a third Part.
I shall not repeat here the warrantable and sufficient motives for so Doing;
but refer you thither for Satisfaction.

Secondly; examining the Nature, and essential difference of Diseases; I find
most of them, at least many; not to differ so much in Nature, as in Name; from
Circumstances attending them, and making the Variegation: Therefore Diseases;
though very numerous as commonly denominated; yet will reasonably, and
advantagiously admit of a Reducement: By Contracting and associating them into
Company's of Affinity; from their Humoral causes, issuing from one and the same
Fountain: And then, Diseases will not require such variety of peculiar
appropriated Medicines; nor such distinct Methods of Cure, as commonly is now
Practiced, and appointed by Authors.

Diseases are unnecessarily, and extravagantly multiplied by Denomination: But
they are not a quarter so many in their Radication: For, although Diseases are
made thus numerous and different by their Names; yet they have great Alliance,
and are near of Kin, by their Origin, in their Causes of Production, and
Continuation.

Circumstances attending Diseases, do often give, or are the occasion of
different Names: From different Parts affected, as Pleurisy; From the manner of
Invasion, as Epilepsy. Apoplexy; From their Continuation, and Intermissions: As
Fevers. From the manner of afflicting; as Convulsions. From Functions
abolished, or depraved, as Palsy, and Tremor, etc. Many such differences.

The same Morbific Humor, roving up and down; infesting and afflicting diverse
Parts of the Body, has begot various nominal Diseases: Rheumatism, Gout,
Colic, Iliac Passion, Stitches, Cramps, Convulsions, Fluxes, Inflammations,
Apostems, etc.

The same Humoral matter that now makes the Gout; at another time produces the
Celic; some times a Flux; another time the Head Ach, or Tooth Ach, or something
else. And thus it happens in one single Person.

So likewise in diverse Persons; the same Morbific Humor (in specie) in kind,
does make various Diseases, and different Symptomatical appearances, according
to the difference of Parts, in situation and office; that this peccant matter
shall molest and deprave.

Thus producing Several Diseases, from the same Humoral Cause; but seemingly to
vulgar understandings so distinct, as having no relation to each other: yet all
these being bred, and fed from one degenerate matter, will admit of one and the
same Cure, by a true radical Catholic Medicine, which applying to the Spring
and Rise of all these; does fitly perform the Cure of those many Diseases;
having their Causation and dependence from one Original.

So that Multiplicity of Diseases in Appearance, does not necessarily require,
Multiplicity of Medicines, and methods; as some undiscerning Heads may think;
being deceived by various Names given to Diseases, from Parts affected, and
Functions depraved, or other Circumstances attending.

From hence you may Judge; that various Names, do not always make such various
Diseases; not so different, and distinct in their Causes, as Commonly
represented, and Supposed to be. They are many, if you Judge of them by their
Spreading Ramifications; but they are few (comparative) in their Radication.

And now you may plainly understand, this new Method of Curing Comprehensively
by a Catholic Medicine; to be rational, and probable to effect what many
Diseased People may desire; and their various Complaints answered, by an
Extraordinary single Medicine.

Morbi multi unico Remedio curantur; Cujuslibet enim Membri plaga, non habet
peculiarem semper Causam; sed ab uno eodemque, exiguo licet semine, plures
surgunt affectus. Says a good Author. But most People must have a different
Medicine, for every complaint that they have a Name for; else they think it not
possible to cure them, and ridiculous to attempt it.

Medicine is not to be appropriated to Names; and to vary, as Names are varyed;
but to the Nature and Condition of Diseases, in their Causes: many of them
being of the same kind, may be linked together under one Denomination; and will
admit of the s me Medicine, and Method of Curing.

Hereby the Practice of Physic, will not be so extravagantly large; but
reduced into a much lesser compass, and easily comprehensible: The Intentions
of curing but few; and the Number of Medicines not many: Success therein more
hopeful; with the Charge, and trouble more easy to Patients, in their courses
of Physic.

Nominal multiplicity of Diseases, have amused the People; puzzled young
Practisers to adapt Medicines differently to each: And the elder sort, I doubt,
are sometimes misled thereby.

Diversity of Diseases by Names only, or chiefly have begot Diversity of
Methods; and Diversity of Medicines: The which have created much Business;
employed more Hands; and consumed more Drugs than was necessary.

To illustrate and prove what has been said; I shall give you some Examples.
Take a Hundred Sick or Diseased Persons; examine them where their several
Complaints do lie; what Parts are affected or grieved: Some complain of their
Head; others their Breast, or Lungs: Some of the Stomach; others about the
Region of the Liver; many of the Spleen; some the Guts; others the Limbs, etc.

And for all these several Parts complaining; your Physician will give you
various Names to distinguish them by; and peculiar Medicines, and different
Methods of Curing: as in practical Authors, you may find such like forms of
Medicines, and Methods

Then Inquire of the same Authors, and see what Judgment they pass, as touching
the Causes of all those Diseases, differently seated, and variously named: And
you will find, that depraved Humors, and Obstructions; are the general, and
principal Causes assigned, for all those Diseases; though commonly reputed, as
different in their Nature, as they are in their Names: From which mistake, or
Delusion intended, the Recipe's have superabounded.

If so, as true it is; then what shall hinder the Catholic Medicine, from being
a proper and fit Instrument, to unbar and unbolt all these Obstructions; and
cleanse away all such degenerate and depraved Humors, in this or that Part
wherever they be? Then this Catholic Expedient stands as fair, and probable to
cure a Hundred, or a Thousand thus variously complaining; as the Hundreds, and
Thousands of Medicines, designed by appropriation, to every particular Person.

And farther I must add: That this often tried, and long proved Medicine; in
many such difficult and different cases, with laudable Operation, and Success:
must needs be more hopeful, than appropriated Medicines to every ones
particular cases, that never was tried before; but every Sick or Diseased
Person, must make the Experiment, of their new invented Medicines.

People being thus greatly mistaken; yet think themselves very wise and wary,
and well provided for; when they have purchased some conjectural appropriated
Recipes, devised for their particular case; which particularity lies chiefly in
Name; and not much different from the Diseases of other Persons. But for your
further satisfaction in this point; as to the certainty and worth of Catholic
and Appropriated Medicines; I refer you to another Tract (The Practice of
Physic Reformed) which Informs you fully.

To Answer the Nominal and unnecessary multiplicity of Diseases; there are
Thousands of Medicines invented, and daily more are inventing. And for this
purpose, we fetch in all the Venomous Weeds, Shrubs, and Minerals out of
Foreign Countries, to make variety of uncouth and unlucky Medicines; which you
must think to be proper, for the many several Diseases variously denominated;
and peculiar for diverse Persons differently affected.

So that after it is Rate, of appropriating Medicines to Diseases; and to
Individual Persons; Millions of Medicines, (for Millions of People) will be but
sufficient to supply the Practice of Physic, after this unreasonable Mode.

And here I might upbraid and laugh at the World for their Folly; having lost
their understanding in this matter; and being imposed upon beyond all Reason.
But I Will wave the Subject at this time; hoping to see (tandem al quando) some
Champton come forth; in Defense of this beloved Practice, so much do ed upon.

By what has been said, you may plainly perceive; that the great work of
curing, many and diverse Diseases (such as are Curable; and Persons rightly
endeavoring to be cured) lies fair and probable to be effected, by the
Catholic Medicine: The superfluous Number of Diseases being reduced; and the
Nature of them being explained.

The Vital Catholic Agent (called Nature) having a true Catholic Instrument to
act with; operates universally and powerfully against a Multitude of Diseases:
Performs the work of Curing, more readily and safely, with an amicable, well
tried, extraordinary Medicament; by a Physician's Industry, and long labor,
completed under his eye; than with a Number of Compositions conjecturally
devised: Prescripts transmitted to the Shops, to be made at a venture; who then
can tell, what they may prove?

The Third Part.
IN the First Part; having set forth the Power, and wonderful Operations of the
Agent, or Efficient.

In the Second Part; the Difficulty, and seeming Impossibility of the work;
made probable and likely to be effected.

I come now in the last Place; to lay before you the Qualifications, and
fitness of the Instrument, to apply exquisitely in this undertaking.

The Catholic Medicine eminently declares its Universality; and properly bears
that Title, in these two Respects.

First, as having a general Amity with Mankind; being most agreeable with Human
Nature: Operating friendly, pleasantly, and hopefully with All; disgusting, or
disagreeing with none: But promoting all the necessary Operations; and aiding
all the Functions, daily to be performed in Vital Government. Secondly, as
having Enmity with all the Diseases, of seminal and humoral Production in Man's
Body: Allways, and in all cases, showing opposition there^o; and prosecutes
such inbred secret Enemies to Human Life; constantly, and efficatiously.
The Reasons why; and manner how; appears evidently; First, by these two
insignal Properties; Aperitive, and Abstersive, wherewith it is primely
endowed: which two grand Virtues, operating so clearly and fully; gives two
such killing Strokes, at the very Root of all the Seminal and Humoral Diseases;
that the Buds, Blossoms, and Branches fed from thence, appearing variously, and
in diverse Parts of the Body; do soon wither, decay and Dye.

Apertion, and Abstersion; are the two principal Operations, both preventive
and curative; against a multitude of Diseases; if performed by such due means,
as is required to do that work, as it ought to be done.

The common reputed Purgatives (venenous Stimulators) they do open the back
Door; they rake and empty the Body; and sometimes alleviation does follow: But
what then? they carry a Sting in the Tail; they leave some ill impressions
behind them, that stain and vitiate the Body, which lies breeding for another
production; and in a little time you must Purge again for that; and this is
laboring in a Circle, and find no end. If you Purge, and not Purify; much of
your labor is lost.

The Catholic Medicine is no such Deceiver; but a faithful Servant, that keeps
sweet and clean all the Apartments, Canals, and Offices in the Body: Opens all
the August Obstructed Dictures, and private Recesses; lets no Filth abide in
any place to annoy, or impede the Vital Spirit in diradiating its Influence, to
all the Regions and Parts thereof; which will save the daily labor of dressing
stinking Issues, that many are constrained to, for a discharge of putrid
Humors. And farther; we may rationally expect from thence; a more Sound, and
Healthful Progeny in the World, than these latter Days do produce, from Parents
of degenerate, and corrupt habit of Body.

There can no better Expedient in Physic be contrived, to Preserve Bodies from
Diseases; and to Help them out of Diseases; than this secure wholesome Medicine;
that so truly and effectually, performs the two grand offices of Apertion, and
Abstertion.

For these two eminent Virtues, purely united in one wholesome Composition; they
always are attended, and adorned with other Consorts of great worth; which
follow one another inseparably; the one, making way for the other.

Apertion leads foremost; Abstersion follows, and introduces Purity; this
ushers in Healing, and soundness to come after; then Roboration and vital
Vigor, follows at the heels of these Praecursors; And after this manner Infirm
Diseased Bodies, and Parts thereof; are restored to their Natural State; and
made able to execute their Functions; by the strength of this Chain of Virtues,
linked together in dependency, to produce great effects.

Thus the Catholic Medicine assists the Life, to perform many and various
Operations; and rationally it may be expected, that many and various Diseases
should be corrected, and conquered thereby. And therefore it is not so
improbable as some do imagine; that a single Medicine, should have so large a
capacity and comprehensive Power, to command and subdue, many different
Diseases, in diverse Persons; since it is endowed with such a complication of
the choicest Physical Virtues.

The Vital Principle being thus disintangled, and freed from obstructing
matter, and humoral Impurity; recovers Strength and Vigor thereby, and
conquers the many various Diseases, arising from Debility, laxation of Parts;
and Stimulating matter: which includes a great number of Diseases; if by Name
particularly they were reckoned.

Wherefore it is not so strange; that a Medicine should be designed Catholic,
for curing diverse and contrary Diseases; since the same Causes (in specie) do
produce different and Contrary effects in several Persons, or Subjects they
operate upon: that which begets Obstruction, and Astriction in some; produces
Debility of Retention, and Laxation in others. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur
per modum recipientis: The Sun hardens the Clay, but softens the Wax. This
Radical Instrument applying to Causes, for their removal in all Bodies; which
being subtracted; their various effects do vanish also; whether they be
contrary, or consimilar: Which unfolds the Mystery of curing comprehensively;
Diseases being the product effects, are multifarious; when causes producing,
are not half so various.

Consider also; that the variety, or multiplicity and difformity of Diseases;
do not proceed so much different and dissimilar, from the diversity of fluxile
humoral, and degenerate Matter; as from Structure and Fabrication; from the
Diversity of Organs, and the Difference of their Offices. Therefore one and the
same depraved matter, as it perambulates, or lodges; infesting several Parts
of the Body; does thereby beget Diseases of various Names, differently
appearing, and differently molesting: what then shall hinder the Catholic
Medicine, from performing its universal Office in Curing?

Now observe who it is that manageth this comprehensive Instrument: The Vital
Principle; A Cathosic Agent; of ubiquitary Presence, in the Machine of Human
Body: That operates variously, and contrarily, at one and the same time, in
several places; yet consentaneously for the whole: Opens and Shuts; expels and
retains; Liquifies and Coagulates, etc. in the daily Course, and Administration
of Government.

Consider also the multifarious Qualifications of this Physical Expedient: Not
forcing and compelling; but flexible and gentle, complacent and complying with
the Regent Principle; to be conveyed here or there (materialiter vel
virtualiter) and is made useful, as the Case requires: yielding up such Virtue,
as Nature (Morborum Medicatrix) stands in need of: In like manner as the same
Aliment is converted to various uses; so one Catholic Medicament, is applied to
various purposes. Nature directs, and hands the Medicine here and there; to
work what and how she pleases.

And now I have proved sufficiently, and explained this Mystery: that Catholic
Adaptation, rightly instituted for Diversity of Persons; and Diversity of
Diseases; is the safety of the Catholic above the Appropriate; that it is a
Tried, and well proved Medicine with many: But the Appropriated to a single
Person and Case; is an uncertain Chance Medicine; because not experimented by
any; but conjecturally presumed at a Venture; being designed and formed for the
occasion presenting. And yet this is esteemed a safe and learned Invention; for
the great and the rich, to trust their Lives with.

Let the World dote on; and the Sham be their Help when they need: Let
Ignorance and Error manage their Cures; sic Populus vult decipi, and
decipiatur.

I need not tell you now all the Diseases by Name; that this Medicine is proper
for, and effectual: Sufficient it is, and more satisfactory that I have showed
you how it opposes the most of them, in their Nature and Causes: whereby you
may trust your own Reason, and not my bare assertion. But some sort of People,
that know nothing of Diseases, but their Names, will say, you have not told us
what Diseases, this Catholic Medicine will Cure.

To gratify the Desire of those weaker understandings, I shall give in a
particular Account of many, by their Names commonly so called.

For the Vertigo, Epilepsy, Apoplexy, and Convulsions; a proper effectual
Remedy applying to their Causes.

Allays Pains of the Head, or Limbs; Rheumatism and Gout: And is the most
secure Anodyne, because it draws off morbific matter; and frees the Body from,
acrid, sharp, and corroding Humors.

Corrects and amends ill Digestion of the Stomach; sharpens a blunt Appetite;
removes Nauseousness, and fullness.

For Asthma's, Coughs, Wheesing and short Breathing: very prevalent.

Against unweldy Corpulency, Dropsys, Scurvy, Jaundice, inflation of the
Spleen, Hypochondriac Melancholy, hard and big Bellyes: approved and applauded
herein: Takes away fullness, and foulness of Body; discharges gradually,
safely, and cleanses effectually.

A certain Preventive against the Production of Worms in Human Bodies: By
purifying and evacuating Verminous, putrid matter of which they are bred. Also
the best curative Remedy, to kill Worms already generated; and to bring them
forth. They often being the cause of dangerous Sickness.

Gives speedy ease in the Colic, and Gripes of the Guts. Restrains all violent
and contumacious Fluxes: The most certain Help above all Methods, and Medicines
in this Case: For if any Physical means, may deserve the Title of Infallible
against Gripes and Fluxes; this Remedy may bear that Character. And had this
Medicine gone over with the Army in the late expedition for Ireland (as was
endeavored) it had preserved many Hundred Lives, that perished miserably, for
want thereof: This single Medicine, would have done more service; than all the
Medicines (for internal use) that were sent over to supply the Army: But
private interests, and particular favor* too often stifles a public Good.

Epidemical depopulating Fluxes, have infested Armies in all Countries; both in
their Camps, and Marches: (the Reasons why; are many; and Causes unavoidable)
which have so weakened the strength of the surviving; and shrunk their Number by
Mortallity; that their present Designs and Enterprises have been checked and
frustrated. The only expedient to be fought for; is a certain Preservative, to
stop the beginning, and prevent the Mortality: which to perform; I do believe,
nothing in Nature and Art (grounded upon Experience) is equivalent to this
Catholic Arcanum: And doubtless would readily be accepted, and much esteemed
by Foreign Princes, (if only for this case) though perhaps may not so much be
regarded here at Home, as it justly merits: But many Lives are lost, by the
want of such a Remedy.

It Is the best Help for weak Backs, Loins, or Genitals: for Strains, and over-
Reaches; for Spermatic wasting, and Seminal issuing: To stay the Whites safely,
by cleansing, purifying, and roborating.

To purge ^oul Reins, Vreters, and Bladder; that send forth strong scented,
thick or muddy Urine. This purifyer, restores the Parts to cleanness, and
soundness, and corrects the former ill effects.

For Claps and Venereal Taints, producing hot and sharp Urine, or running of
the Reins: nothing Cures more certainly and safely; and may be managed with
great Privacy. This tells no Tales; but smothers such misfortunes, by speedy
ease and Help.

Very useful to promote external Chirurgical Cures; by drawing off, and
evacuating all humoral offending matter; thereby disposing Nature to Heal; else
external applications avail little: But for curing Wounds, Contusions,
Apostems, Ulcers, etc. internal; this Medicine alone does all the Work; and
acts a dexterous Surgeons part, in such secret places, where neither his Eye
can Discern, nor his Hand come to Dress you: then this Sovereign Remedy is more
helpful, and more to be depended on, than all the Practisers in Physic and
Surgery: And is therefore the most necessary and important Medicament, to serve
in Navies, Armies and Hospitals; most commodious and ready; easily managed by
the meanest Capacities; performing singly and securely; above all the uncertain
Methods, and multiplicity of Medicines, appointed by Authors, or used by
Practicers: Experto Creed.

For all sorts of Fevers; of various and obscure dependencyes; this is the most
confiding means to rely on; as radically applying to their several Causes, and
Parts primarily affected. Fevers known to the World, but by Name only;
therefore blindly and perniciously prosecuted, by Juleping, Blistering, etc. of
fatal consequence to many Thousands of Sick People. The Fleet Fevers, and Camp
Fevers; that slays more Men sometimes than the Enemy, by such erroneous
Methods, and injurious means, or insufficient means, which is their best Help.
But of this in another Tract. Ignota Febris, Fevers mistaken, etc.

Sir William Hussy, his Majesty's Ambassador to the Port; unfortunatly (to the
Confederats great loss) Dyed at the point of his Negotiating a Peace: And the
report came, that he dyed of a Fever: which is no better Satisfaction to me;
than he Dyed of they knew not what: for none dies of a Fever; though few dies
without a Fever: Febris est Symtoma morbi, Solummodo. Febrile Heat, is no
Disease; but a Symptom dependant thereon. I remark from thence; that his Help,
and his Helpers; were but mean: And if they mistook the State of his Case; that
it was a Fever; and prosecuted upon that Notion, (as reported) then there was a
great Minister lost; and a great Affair miscarryed thereby. And how many brave
Men, have dyed here at Honey; by the great mistake of Physicians, not knowing
what a Fever is? The Account to great for me to Sum up.

This Catholic, is a proper good Medicine for a Disease that has no Name; and
for a Disease that has a wrong Name: This seeks out, and finds out; (ductu
Nature) when the Physician knows not, what the Matter is; nor where it is. When
he groaps in the Dark, and knows not where to aim: This knows the way (by
Natur's guidance) goes readily, and rightly about the business. This will not
be deluded with Fevers, (as Practisers have been) But finds out their
Dependancies; and discharges its virtue there. If you send this Medicine upon
a wrong Errand; it will act, not as you intended; but as it ought to be done.
Nature medicatrix amicably receiving this good Assistance; directs it here or
there, (as the Case requires) and the Giver, has no more Power of the Medicine
afterward.

For various sudden Hamorrhages, Bleedings; issuing from diverse parts of the
Body: This mitigats, retracts, and evacuats their Stimulating Causes.

This is both Physic and Physician; and Surgeon too, in some Cases; ready and
safe Assistance for Travelers by Land or Sea: a great Security to them upon
emergent occasions and accidents

For Country Inhabitants, that live remote from Physic, and Physicians; This
is necessary Provision: The Physician may be long in comeing; and after that,
Medicines may be long in Preparing, and Coming: In the mean time the Patient
may be wrackt with Fain; half spent, or past Recovery; and then the long looked
for Physic, Comes at last.

The Old way of Practice, was the good way; when Physic and Physician lived
together; and went abroad together: but now he is disarmed; and become a naked,
talking Man; able to do nothing, without the Help of a Pothecary.

For Practisers, that are not Prescribers; this Medicine will do them great
Service; and Credit, by effecting what the Common known Medicines cannot do, in
dubious and difficult Cases; which some ingenious men have experienced to their
Advantage; and do make use hereof.

This is a great Help to ancient People; for making their lives more easy and
Comfortable: Age commonly being attended with Infirmities, that does afflict
them: Their Bodies being grown Stale and Sour, producing Rheums, Coughs, short
Breath, sharp Urine, Aches, and other decays of Nature; against which this
Medicine will give them much assistance, and mitagate their Complaints; being
the best expedient immaginable to Repair, and Mend old Bodies; that they may be
serviceable a longer time.

Hability and Soundness of Body; promotes the Durability, and Prolongation of
the Life: For if the vital Spirit labors under corporal impediments, and
unfitness for use in Government; by so much is the Life abbreviated in Duration.

For Admirals, Generals, and great Officers: For Ambassadors, Envoys, and
Residents; whose lives are of great importance to Princes, and public Safety;
upon their Enterprises, and Negotiations: This is Cabinet Help, above all they
can procure in foreign Country's; or what they can purchase at Home, to carry
with them, as Extraordinary means when they stand in need. There may be a good
Physician ready at Hand; but so good and secure a Medicine, may be too far
off: And then some sudden devised Compositions; hasty, new made, untryed
Medicines; must be trusted with the Patient's Life at a venture, and it is all
but venture: In the Patient's good Fate, is the greatest Hope of Recovery. And
this is the general common Case, in the new Mode of Prescribing; The
uncertainties whereof, I have fully proved elsewhere. The Practice of Physic
Reformed, etc.

I am not a stranger to Methods, or courses of Physic, and do use them, when
the Patient will, and can conform thereto: But some are averse to variety of
Medicines in a Method; others cannot spare time to be confined; and some cannot
bear the Charge: To such this Expedient is most commodious Help; and gives the
greatest liberty in the use thereof; except great weakness, or extremity of
weather, forbids that freedom.

I Hope no Person has such mean thoughts of me, as to think, I would put a
Sham upon the world; with the loss of Reputation irrecoverably. This Medicine
begs no Favor; and fears no Frowns: stabit examini Cuicunqe. But I will rather
think (what I may deserve) that I shall have many thanks, and well wishes for
this Labor, from diverse Diseased, and Sick Persons; that will find the Benefit
and great Advantage, by this Health preserving; and Health recovering Medicine;
as others have happily received before them: Some eminent Cures whereof; are
related in an Appendix to Monarchia Microcosmi; which I shall not repeat here,
but referr you thither for Satisfaction.

I have veiwed thousands of Medicines in Pharmacopoeia's, practical Authors,
and Manuscripts, Chemical and Galenic; and took observations upon their
failings. But I never met with any Designment of that latitude and
Comprehension; so Congruously and regularly Composed: so wholesome, innocent,
and agreeable to Human Nature; so efficatious and powerful, against the various
Radications, and Surprising assaults of Diseases: of such certainty and safety
in Operation; so Commodious for use, ready, and durable; as this Catholic
Extract: Not easily and fortunatly found by Reading; but by Designing and
working. The perfection whereof, was not the work of a Day, nor a Year; to
prove, and improve this Medical Instrument: But Studious thoughts, and constant
labor in various trials, for many Years Proscecution; has endowed it with
such Sovereign virtues, and excelling Properties; as justly Claims Supremacy in
Physic: And until Nature produces a new Materia Medica; I believe we shall
not be Blessed with a better Medicine; and perhaps not so good, as this; in all
respects.

This hopeful, and helpful Medicine; puts a stop to the latent, dangerous
Progress of Pain, to Inflammations, Tumors, Apostems, etc. Internal: The most
frequent ^^ain of mortal Diseases; which has brought more to the Grave than
any Complication, or Commutation of Diseases what ever; because rarely
discovered or Sought after, but when too late; by Dissection of the Dead. Of
which more at large, I have Treated, peculiarly upon this important Subject:
Showing the Causes of Inadvertency; and fatal Consequents, of not discerning
that lurking Series.

This Catholic Expedient being so necessary, and useful for Public Help; ought
not to be confined within a Private Practice; which occasions this Publication:
And may be received from the Author, upon Application: or from the Hands of
some other Persons, with whom it is entrusted for convenience; with
Inst^^^^^^ns for the use thereof. The Quantity Containing about half a Score
Doses; to give a sufficient, and Satisfactory Trial of its Virtue in any
contumatious Disease: And may be Continued, or intermitted, as every one's Case
shall require; for a longer, or shorter time; as common Reason will dictate and
inform; from the Benefit daily received; and what shall remain to be perfected.

Great is the Mystery of Curing Comprehensively: And great is the Expedient to
answer that Projection. And greatly to be esteemed, for the extraordinary
Benefits, accruing to People, of all Conditions, and Quality; that shall have
the good Fortune to Experience the various Properties thereof; adapt for their
several Complaints, and Exigencies. So easy to be managed; so safe, gentle and
pleasant in Operation; that nothing hitherto, has performed like it.

If any Learned Man; Physician or Other, will offer Objections to any Truth
herein asserted: The Author promises an Argumentative fair Reply of
Conviction; by traversing and clearing such Doubts, and Difficulties that may
be Started, out of the Common known Learning; to which this Discourse is
Foreign, and Independent; being founded upon Sounder Principles: That the
World may be Satisfied of the Verity, and Usefulness, of this Work; for an
establishment to Perpetuity: Not as a Remedy from Dying; but as the best of
Physical Means; for well, and long Living. Experience and Trials whereof; will
silence all Reasoning that shall be brought against it.

London, Grays Inn Lane, by Kings-Gate. E.M.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Monarchia Microcosmi. The Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period, of Vital
Government in Man. The frequent and dangerous Transition of Pains, to
Inflammation, Tumors, Apostems, Ulcers, Cancers, Gangrens, and Mortifications,
Internal, etc. with a Tract of Fontanels or Issues. A Treatise of the Scurvey:
Showing the various Nature, and Cure thereof. The History and Mystery of the
Venereal Lues, Gonorrhaea's, etc. Resolving the Doubts and Fears of such as are
perplexed with that Surprising Malady. A Treatise of Consumptions; Scorbutic
Atrophies, Hectic Fevers, Phthisick, Spermatic wasting, etc. The Complete
Physician; Setting forth the Rise and Progress of Physic, etc. The Method and
Means, of enjoying Health, Vigor and long Life. Inquiries into the general
Catalogue of Diseases: Showing the Errors and Contradictions of that
Establishment. The Ancient and Modern Practice of Physic, examined and
compared. Ignota Febris. Fevers mistaken in Doctrine and Practice, etc. The
Practice of Physic Reformed; By Elaborate, Catholic, and Specific Medicines:
Excelling Appropriated Conjectural Prescripts, in Certainty and Safety.
All writ by the Author hereof.

Errata. P. 5. read Inquirys. P. 6. read this.


