Vita Sana and Longa.

THE Preservation of Health, AND Prolongation of Life. Proposed and proved. In
the due observance of Remarkable Praecautions. And daily practicable Rules,
Relating to Body and Mind, compendiously abstracted from the Institutions and
Law of Nature.

By E. Maynwaringe, Dr. in Physic.

Non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus.

Senec. LONDON, Printed by J. D. Sold by the Booksellers, 1669.

EVERARDUS ^ MAYNWARINGE ^ MEDICINAE ^ DOCTOR. ^ AETATIS ^ SUAE ^ 38 ^ 1668.


The Preface.
HAving some Years since put forth a rough draught, or indigested Notions, upon
this Subject: with intentions then to revise and finish at more leisure, when
opportunity was afforded me: yet other Subjects and business so put me by, as I
thought not at all to reassume this matter again, nor make any farther
prosecution. But being informed by several, that this Subject, and the managing
of it, was acceptable to many; and that no Copies was remaining with the
Booksellers, but clear sold off, and yet inquired for, but not to be had: I
was solicited and desired to reprint it, for the public good and satisfaction
of those that desire to be regulated in the course of their lives, and to be
informed the right way for preserving of Health, and prolonging of Life.

Considering then that Health and long-life, are the two great desiderable
enjoyments, and perfection of Humane Nature; coveted and aimed at by all: and
that I might not be taxed as refractory and obstinate, refusing to gratify
such reasonable Desires, for the acquiring those laudable ends: I was hereby
moved to set upon the Work again, for improvement and finishing what I had left
imperfect and defective in the former Tract. But upon revising those sheets,
much came in my mind to add and to alter; so that little of the old stock would
remain: I then thought it best to lay a new foundation or Platform of Title;
that I might not be engaged to the Order, Rule, or Matter of the old Structure;
but have full liberty to manage the Work as my genius should lead me.

Accordingly, and with this freedom, I have here proceeded, to draw forth and
present to you this delectable Theme of Health and Long-life, with the most
profitable advantages the Subject imports, and ease of acquiring, your
capacities will admit.

Whosoever therefore desires to live long, to see their Childrens Children; to
preserve their youth, strength and beauty; to be free from molesting pains and
loathsome Diseases; to preserve their senses, and enjoy the perfection of mind
to the extremity of Age; let them conform and be obedient to the Hygiastick
Laws and Rules hereafter prescribed; and they may expect what is here proposed
for their reward. Nor shall I exact and require of you an irksome strictness,
or Lessian preciseness to eat and drink by weight and measure: but a reasonable
observance, suitable and well agreeing with a sober rational person, not
restraining convenient liberty, and the lawful pleasure of life. Nor can a
regular course of life be thought troublesome, as a difficult and hard
restraint; but most pleasant and free, Quod assuescenti primum difficile; non
erit assueto.
except to those accustomed to the contrary; and the leaving of those ill
customs is the difficulty; but the Rules enjoined be facile and easy to
observe.

And having once acquired a good habit and constant use; to return to an
irregular intemperate living, would be a far greater burden and irksome, if
enjoined and imposed, then the declining and deserting a destructive course,
for a laudable wholesome regimen, most consonant to a rational Creature.

Qui medice vivit, sine medicis diu vivet:
Qui non medice vivit, cum medicis saepe, sed non diu erit.
He that lives by Rule and wholesome Precepts; takes the best course of
Preventing Physic: he is a Physician to himself, and needs not the help of
others: but they that live carelessly and irregularly, contemning Physical Rules
as unnecessary Observations; shall be constrained to Physical Remedies, as
necessary helps; and must often resign into the hands of Physicians.

E. M.
LONDON, From my House in Clarkenwell-Close.
Licensed,

August the 4th, 1669. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 19. read illae. p. 21. l. 17. immethodically. p. 27. positive, in
the Margent. p. 39. l. 13. parts. p. 36. l. 17. aromatical. p. 72. inimicum in
the Margent. p. 151. l. 29. quis.

In the second Part.

Page 24. line 27. read eradicate. p. 30. l. 14. radiant. p. 32. l. 15.
deobstruct.

Long Life, AND Means to attain it.
Section, I.
IN the Primitive Age of the World, man's life was accounted to be about 1000
Years: but after the Flood, the Life of Man was abreviated half; Man's Age
shortened.
and none then attained to the term of the first Age, except Noah, who lived
950 Years: and after three Generations from the Flood, their lives were reduced
to a fourth of the Primitive Age; and their lives ordinarily exceeded not two
hundred Years.

About Moses his time, the Age of Man was yet shorter, commonly not exceeding
120 Years, Man's Age 120 years.
which also was his Age when he died: yet we find upon Record in Sacred Writ,
and from Ecclesiastical Writers, that after Moses some lived 240 and 260, yet
that was rare; but more frequently 120, which was then the common Age.

Now the Age of Man is reduced to half that: Man's Age 60 years.
60 or 70 years we count upon. But although in general we find this gradual
declension and abreviation of man's Life, in the several Ages of the World; yet
must understand it was not equally so in all parts of the World together; but
places and climates, and manner of living of a people, cause much difference in
the protraction of their lives, Age of man differ in several places.
that at the same time some people of peculiar places, were longer lived, by a
third or fourth part, then others of another Climate or Region, as the Northern
People: and in colder Countries, they are longer lived then in the hot
Climates, and this by reason of the heat that opens the Pores, and causes so
great a transpiration, that exsiccates and enervates the body: but a cooler Air
prohibits and restrains such immoderate transpiration and exhaustion; keeps the
spirits vigorous and united, and preserves the alimentory Juyces of the body
from too frequent and immoderate exsudation.

If we examine into the Ages of other Creatures, we find little difference in
their durations, Other Creatares keep their Age.
to what they were in the Primitive Times, and infancy of the World; who
keeping to the Rule of Nature implanted in them, do preserve their Beings, and
degenerate little from the integrity of their durations, allotted to them from
the beginning. Now why man's days should be thus abreviated and shortened from
what they were and the term of his life reduced to so short a continuance,
gradually declining in the several Ages of the World, is fit matter to inquire
into.

The causes of the abreviation of man's life will appear, Why man's life is
shortened.
if we compare the manner of our living now with that of the first Age of the
World; and from thence, how every generation, have worsted themselves by a
degenerate condition of life, unsuitable to the institutions of Nature. And
since we must of necessity allow and admit of hereditary infirmities, and
traductive debilities of Nature; we cannot but expect (unless by great
reformation of the injurious customs and vices of these latter Ages) but that
we and our posterity shall degenerate yet still into a worse and sooner fading
state of life. Man's life likely to be yet shorter.
For, as the principles of our Nature are more infirm, tainted, and debauched
from our Parents and Progenitors, then those of former Ages, of more vigor,
soundness and integrity; are likewise more propense, and liable worse to be
depraved and degenerate, and consequently of shorter duration and continuance.

Now if we inquire into the condition and manner of living of the Ancients,
comparing with the customs and fashion of this Age; Different living now to
that of former times.
we shall find so much difference and irregularity from the appointment and
injunction of Nature, that may give full satisfaction to the quaery and matter
in hand.

In the infancy of the World, man provided and sought after the necessary
requisites for his Being, and was contented with a competent subsistence which
Nature did purely require: but in process of time, Man was not satisfied with
the bare reparations, and necessary props of Nature, most wholesome and
conservative of his Being; but hunted after variety and excess, to please and
gratify his sensitive Appetite. Thus one Age taught another to be irregular
and disordered; and still dictated novel inventions to the succeeding
Generation, to fill up and perfect what their Predecessors had prompted and
begun; whose lives were not long enough to lay a complete platform of debauched
Nature, but must transmit their ruining practices to the following Ages to
immitate and complete.

Hinc illaec lachrymae, -- Thus, and after this manner, by such means, is man's
life beset with many cruciating maladies, which have shortened the days of his
abode here; and of latter Ages acts but a short part upon the stage of the
World.

And this is procured by the variety and excess in meat and drink: Brevity of
man's life how procured.
by unseasonable and immoderate sleeping and watching; turning day into night,
and night into day: by sluggish and unwholesome ease, instead of due exercise
and motion: or toyling unseasonably, and wearing out the body when it requires
natural rest and refreshment: by living in unwholesome places, sucking in
noisome destructive Air; preferring profit and by interests, before health and
long life; indulging Venus too much, by immoderate and too frequent repeated
acts, thereby enervating all the faculties, dispiriting and wasting the body:
by wearing and fretting the mind with various passions, changing from one
excess to another, and wracking the body with several disturbing moods, and
passionate humors: by exhausting the strength, in a prodigal expense of the
vital stream, with frequent and unnecessary Phlebotomies: by infecting the
body, and stamping exotic impressions, too frequently, with the common
virulent purgatives, that alienate the crases or ferments of the parts; and
such like injurious Drugs, not rightly corrected, and ill prepared Medicines,
that bring detriment and damage to the body by their use. To these may be added
the injurious mannagement of Infants, by careless or ignorant Nurses; and fond
Mothers greatly injuring their Children by a destructive indulgence, and
erroneous affectionate usage, in the ordering and educating them, who for the
most part live not so long as others.

Having set forth how man's Life has declined and shortened in the several Ages
of the World, and pointed at the chief procuring Causes, of such abreviation
and change, (which hereafter we shall prosecute more fully) it remains to tell
you how this evil may in part be remedied, and something regained that has
been lost, and is still upon the losing side, except recovered by a more
diligent and prudent course. And here I must premise a few things before I come
to the point, prescribing the Rule to walk by, and means for attaining long
life.

All the Creatures have their definite times of duration allotted them by
Nature, some longer, others a shorter term: Creatures differ in their term of
being.
and this from the principles of their composition and seminality from whence
they spring. In the Mineral Family, we find the longest durations, being solid,
dense bodies, of more simple natures, and homogenious, do preserve their Beings
longest from ruin and dissolution.

Vegetables are of a shorter duration, yet not all alike; some preserve their
beings hundreds of years, as the Cedar and Oak. Others continue but a few
years; some a year. Amongst the sensitive Creatures, we find that serveral
species have their peculiar durations, which in the common course of nature are
observed to continue; some a longer Age, others a shorter. The Mineral is
slowest in rising to maturity and perfection, but continues longest in that
state. The Vegetable (in the generality) is quickest in the ascent to the top
of perfection, but keeps not its station long: some whereof fade and wither
every year, but renew their verdure again at the Spring, until a few years has
spent that seminal power and fertile blooming virtue. The Sensitive Creatures
and perfect Animals, are slower in their rise to perfection, which having
attained, stay but a while in that full strength, do gradually descend again,
decline and perish.

So that all living Creatures by nature have their risings and settings, and
definite times fixed for their growth and duration: from their beginning they
have a gradual ascent, until they have attained the vigor and exaltation of
their Natures; and having gained the top of their perfection, they stay not
long there, but gradually descend again, and are degraded of the honor and
perfection of their Natures, and tend to their ruin and dissolution: nor are
the Creatures limited alike to the same duration, but do extend, and are
shortened variously, according to their Principles and Foundation of Being, as
Nature has furnished them with a provision permanent and suitable for such a
duration and subsistence.

Now of all the Creatures, we find Man most uncertain in his being and
continuance, (although the Age of Man be limited to sixty years) and is most
liable to alteration and a perishing state, upon these four accounts.

First, Because Man derives from his Parents by a seminal propagation, and
inherits the Diseases of their vicious depraved Natures radicated in him: to
which his own enormous acts being added, does multiply and heighten the
corruption of his Nature; hence the succeeding Generations becomes more
degenerated, infirm, diseased, and consequently of shorter duration then the
former.

Secondly, For that the structure of his body, is the most wonderfully
contrived of all the Creatures; contains the greatest curiosity and variety of
machination; such admirable Conduits and Contrivances; such Offices and places
of elaboration, subservient to each other, and communicable: that therefore
this Machine, is most difficult to keep in order, and soonest put out of frame.

Thirdly, Does require and use more variety of supports and necessary
requisites to preserve and supply him; and therefore more subject to errors,
failings and discomposure.

Fourthly, Because Man wilfully, carelessly, or ignorantly, does not regulate
and govern himself, according to the Law of Nature dictated to him; but
deviating from those rules of preservation, does discompose the regular
Economy of his body, and introduce various Diseases and disorders, which
precipitates Nature in the current and course of life, which otherwise more
equally and evenly would glide on: and sometimes by violence offered to Nature,
in some strange unnatural actions and exorbitancies, the life is forced out,
and death often procured.

Now other Creatures are so tied up to the rule of Nature, Creatures conformity
to Nature.
which they cannot but observe for their preservation both individual and
specisick; and have not a power of electing good and evil to themselves; but
naturally and spontaneously do prosecute that which is proper and conservative,
and avoid what is noxious: but Man having a greater liberty by the prerogative
of his rational Soul, does make his choice, and wanders amongst varieties both
good and evil, and often deceives himself, choosing what is destructive to his
Being: So that breaking the Law of Nature, which he ought to observe as bounds
and Rules to his actions, making them sanative and preservative; does on the
contrary alter and change those necessary appointments and supports; renders
them destructive by his irregular incongruous use, vicious customs, and
imprudent choice.

The most considerable things to be observed by Man, as conducing and tending
to the lengthening or shortning of his life, according to their mannagement and
procurement, well or ill, do fall under these Heads. Diaetetick regiment to be
observed.
Meat and drink; place of abode; sleep and watching; exercise and rest;
excretions and retentions; passions of mind. In the moderation, use and choice
of these (which particularly hereafter shall be handled) consists the length
and brevity of life, per modum asistentiae, and as causae sine qua non, being
auxiliary requisites, and necessary supports of life, appointed by Nature for
the continuation, assistance and preservation thereof. But the length and
brevity of life, fontaliter and radicaliter, consists in the fundamental
Principles, and vital powers variously radicated and planted ab ortus in man's
generation and fabrication. But this being not in the choice and power of man
to alter or change, we shall prosecute upon the former Heads.

Man consisting of Soul and Body, and this body compounded of heterogeneous and
dissimilar parts, destinated to various actions and offices, dependent in Being
and conservation; will necessarily require variety of assistance and supply,
proportionable and suiting to their several purposes, faculties, properties,
and temperatures; in matter, manner, times, and order; for their maintenance
and sustentation in the integrity of their actions, offices and duties,
constitutional dispositions and Crases, peculiarly conservative of themselves,
respectively and consequently of the whole: And by the Law of Nature (being
subject to corruption and dissolution, through the fragility of constitutive
parts, connection and fabrication) is bound to observe Rules, Orders and Customs
most consonant for preservation and continuance in Being. Now if there be a
disproportion or unfitness, in the matter or quantum; or irregularity in the
manner, times or order of the auxiliary requisites and conservatives, contrary
to what the Law or necessity of his Nature requires and commands; there arises
Distempers, Ataxies and discord, the praeludiums to ruin and dissolution. And
this body being in a continual flux and reflux, conversant in vicissitudes and
variations of opposites, dissimilars, contraries and privations, as heat and
cold, siccity and humidity, filling and emptying, rest and motion, sleeping and
waking, inspiration and expiration, and the like; could not subsist amidst
these various subalter nations and changes, if they were not bounded and
regulated by due order of succession to fit and convenient times, that they
might not clash interfere, and encroach upon each others privileges, due times
and proprieties.

If heat exceeds; the natural moisture dries up, the spirits evaporate, and the
body withers.

If cold; the faculties are torpid and benumbed, the spirits being frozen up to
a cessation from their duties.

If moisture prevails; the spirits are clogged, suffocated and drowned in the
channels of the body.

If siccity and dryness; the organical parts are stubborn, unpliable and
incapable of their regular motions and due actions; the vital streams being
drank up that should irrigate, refresh and supple them.

Were the body always taking in and sending nothing forth, it would either
increase to a monstrous and vast magnitude; or fill up, suffocate and stifle
the soul: were it always in excretion and emission, the body would waste away
and be reduced to nothing.

Nor is the receiving in of any thing, sufficient and satisfactory to the body
for its preservation; but that which is appointed by Nature, proper and
suitable: nor emission or ejection of any thing, but that which is superfluous
and unnecessary to be retained.

If sleep prevails contrary to the Law of Nature, the body in a lethargick
soporiferous inactivity, stupefied and senseless, lies at the gates of death.

If watching exceeds the limits, transgresses and steals away the due time for
sleep; the faculties are debilitated and enervated, the spirits tired, worn out
and impoverished.

If inspiration were constant without intermission, the body would puff up and
be blown like a Bladder.

If expiration were continual, the soul and spirits would soon quit their
habitation and come forth.

If always exercised in motion, the body would pine and wear away: if always
at rest, it would corrupt and stink.

There is a rule therefore, proportion, measure and season to be observed, in
all the requisite supports and auxiliary helps, belonging to our preservation;
and by how much, or often, any of these necessary alternative successions are
extravagant and irregular, exceeding the bounds and limits prescribed by
Nature, justling out the successive appointed action, duty, or custom, from its
seasonable exercise and due execution; by so much is the harmony of Nature
disturbed, vigor abated, and duration shortened, by these jars, discords and
encroachments.

The thwarting and crossing of Nature in any thing she has enjoined, either in
the substance or circumstance, is violence offered to Nature; and is
destructive more or less according to the dignity or quality of the thing
appointed: For, Nature was not so indifferent in the institution of these
duties and customs, that they might be done or not done; or so careless and
irregular, to leave them at your pleasure, when and how; or to be used
promiscuously and preposterously without order, at the liberty of your will,
fancy and occasions: for, as you may see in all other creatures, exactness of
rule, method and constant order impressed upon, and radicated in their natures,
by which they act always suitable, regular, and constant: you may not imagine
so choice and exquisite a piece as Man, to be left without a Law and Rule to
guide and steer him in the necessary actions concerning Life; and that he
should rove in uncertain, unconstant, unlimited quantities, times, orders,
manners, and the like; but is bounded and restrained upon penalties and
forfeitures of Being, well being, and long being, to the nice and strict
observance of these laws and customs necessary for the tuition of Life, and
defense of humane frailty.

As moral good actions are placed in a mediocrity between two vicious extremes;
so natural actions and auxiliary requisites conservative of life, have their
golden mean digression from which, on either side, leads to ruin and
destruction.

Too much sleep, or too little; too much meat and drink, or too little; too
much rest, or too much motion; too much Air, or always close pent up; too
great excretions, or too long retentions; too much heat, or too much cold;
either of the extremes lead to ruin. And as Nature has not appointed any
thing, or every thing to be food, but this and that; so likewise not at any
time to be received, not in any quantity, after any manner prepared, or in what
order you please, but proportionable, suitable and convenient.

As there is variety of dispositions and inclinations of mind agreeing with,
and likeing one thing, but disagreeing, resisting, and disliking another: so is
it in the variety of bodies and food: one body is of this constitutional
propriety, temper and appetite; will suit and agree well with this meat, and
disagree with another; for if all meats were convenient for all bodies, to be
used promiscuously without choice, how comes it to pass the antipathy,
resistance, and abhorrency of some bodies against some particular meats? And
this not from a fancy and conceit, but radicated in the constitution; that if
it be eaten, though unknown, shall produce Fluxes, Vomitings, Swoonings, and
such like effects: here is manifested the opposition, disagreement, and
distance between this constitution and this kind of meat; which being so great,
that the dislike and discordancy appears presently: other disagreements which
are in a lower degree of opposition, do not manifest themselves immediately,
yet they produce ill effects in the body, plus minus, pro viribus; which
discover themselves gradually, at times, and seasons, and occasions. If you
acknowledge the former, you must admit of the latter, the reason is, a majori
ad minus.

As sleep is appointed by Nature, to refresh the spirits, and repair lost
strength: so the time for sleep is appointed and limited; not when you please:
the Sun, that glorious Light, was not made for you to sleep by, nor the night
for sports, and revells, or business, but for rest. Nature does not only
command what to be done, but when, how much, how long, after what manner, in
what order; the modification, circumstances and requisite qualifications, as
well as the thing it self, are to be regarded. And therefore by a diligent
inquisition, and curious speculation into the works of Nature, you may as much
admire the manner of preservation, government, order, weight, and measure,
regular vicissitudes, alternations and successions, as the excellency and
contrivance of the things themselves in their creation and generation.

Whatever is appointed by Nature as necessary for conservation and support of
Being, though never so good; yet if it be unseasonable, out of course,
immoderate in quantity, quality or duration; alters the property and intention
of Nature; converts good purposes to bad effects.

We say every thing is best in its own kind; and of continuance in its own
Element: and Nature is most cheerful, vigorous and durable in the course and
method of her own injunctions: but being put by, thrust out of her own way, is
not of long duration: the Birds cannot live in the Sea, nor the Fish upon the
Land; nor your Nature continue long in an unnatural way against her self. Are
you composed of natural principles, and will you not live conformable to what
you are? Do you not live by Natures assistance and natural means, and do you
think to continue long in a Counter-motion against the nature of your
Composition? They that invert natures course, preposterously, promiscuously,
and incongruously using the necessary conservatives of life; not only are
deprived of their benefit, but also receive a positive hurt; disordering the
constant regular motions in the body, and discomposing the harmonious and
sociable assistance of the parts in their Offices.

There is a rule therefore, method, measure and season, in all the requisite
supports and auxiliary helps belonging and necessary unto life, or natural
actions and customs whatsoever; which duly observed, are of much advantage for
the preservation of the body in its true natural state, vigor and prolongation
of Being: but otherwise, a methodically and inordinately used, disturbs Natures
course, uniformity and regularity of operations, raises unnatural motions,
commotions and cessations; introduces disorders, and disjoynes the frame of
nature, accelerates and hastens the dissolution of the body.

The Impediments of long Life, are, An infirm and weak constitution from the
Womb; derived from tender, imbecile and infirm Parents. Irregular and unfit
tractation of Infants, whose tender bodies are soon discomposed and disordered
by bad Nurses, their erroneous customs, and the ill properties of their Milk.
Noxious and intemperate Air. Irregular eating and drinking. Immoderate and
unseasonable exercise, motion or labor. Too much; or unfit rest, in the
circumstances attending. Sleeping and waking in extremes. Immoderate Venus.
Undue excretion and retention of Excrements. Inordinate passions, and
perturbations of mind. All unnecessary and bad customs, as virulent Purgations;
frequent and unnecessary Phlebotomies; immoderate use of Tobaco.


SECT. II. The Preservation of Health.
DIu and been Valere; To live long and in health, said Plato, is the best thing
in the World: and Thales Milesius, one of the seven Greek Sages, being asked
who was the happy Man? Answered, He that has a healthy body: preferring health
before riches and honors, or any earthly enjoyment. The truth of this Opinion
will best be discovered and proved, by consulting with the sick man, who is
best able to judge of health, and knows rightly the value of it. Experimentally
he has found, that a Crown and Scepter, gives no content nor ease to a pained
languishing body: The excellency of Health.
and beauty brings no pleasure to a sick Bed: and dainty Dishes affect not the
distempered Palate with delight. Nor the sweetest Music can recreate a
restless faint-sick-man: but the enjoyment of health alone is more sweet and
pleasant, and far more desirable then all these without it.

Yet who is he that values health at the rate it is worth? Not he that has it;
he reckons it amongst the common ordinary enjoyments; and takes as little
notice of it, or less regards it, then his long worn Clothes: perhaps more
careful of his Garments, remembering their price; but thinks his health cost him
nothing; and coming to him at so easy a rate, values it accordingly, and has
little regard to keep it; is never truly sensible of what he enjoyed, until he
finds the want of it by sickness; then hoc unum (...), health above all things
is earnestly desired and wished for.

This great concernment Health, falls under a threefold consideration: First,
In its causes from whence it does immediately arise in the body. Secondly, In
its effects, the consequents and benefits that accrue to us by it, and what is
the state of a healthy man. Thirdly, The right course to obtain, and means to
preserve this invaluable treasure, so long as the capacity of humane nature
will admit.

And first, Here we must distinguish of Health, which may be taken either
strictly or largely: Health distinguished.
health in the strictest acceptance, admits of no organical indisposition,
morbous effect, or morbifick Seminary to abide in the body; that although no
sensible injury, or inconvenient alteration may appear; yet notwithstanding a
person may be said not to be in perfect health: as when the latent seminaries
of Diseases are not budded, do not sprout forth so as to be dolorous, impedite
any faculty, or make some disturbance or alteration; yet they are planted in
the body, and have a real Being: as haereditary Diseases, whose seminaries are
obscured, do not come to maturity of production until such an Age of the
Person, or some irritating occasion given to produce it sooner or later, as the
person is ordered well or ill in the diaetetick regiment. So likewise the first
groundwork and foundation of the stone is not perceptible, until some time and
progress give it perfection; during which time that person is not in a state of
health in a strict sense. So likewise some Diseases do lie dormant for a time,
and discover nothing during that season, and have their periodick motions,
wherein they awake, and are stirred up to show themselves, upon some irritating
provocations and occasions given: as the epilepsie, the Gout, Hysterical
passions, and such like, that have their times of cessation and returns: yet
these during their intermissions and cessations from hostility, are in being,
although they do not act so as to injure and deprave any function sensibly.

Secondly, Health may be taken largely, and in the common acceptance: as when
no function is impedited, or sensible alteration from a good state does appear:
we say then, such a man is in health. In the first and strictest sense, few can
be said to be in health; but in the latter, many are to be accounted healthful.
And this is the state of health understood by Galen, Avicen, and Averrboes, in
their definitions of it. Which imports thus much.

Health what it is.
Health is a due power and aptitude for the exercise and discharge of all the
faculties in the body. So that when every part and faculty perform their duty
regularly and vigorously, that man is said to be in health: but when any
faculty is impedited, ill affected, or depraved in its function, the man then
is not in perfect health. So that the actions of the body and mind are the
chief discoverers of health and sickness: And here we see that health is seated
in the faculties, and does assurge or result from the regular discharge of
their functions.

As when the appetite is sharp; Signs of Health.
the digestion not sluggish and heavy: the belly soluble; the senses perfect,
free from pain in all parts: the mind pleasant; quiet sleeps; the spirits brisk
and lively; the whole body strong, nimble and vigorous in motion; these are
signs of Health: so that examining all parts and faculties, we find nothing
preternatural or irregular; but in every part and faculty we find a good
discharge of their Office: then that person is to be accounted in a right state
of health, so far as is discoverable by any manifest or conjectural sign.

The benefits and excellencies of this health is best known to those that have
lost it; Carendo magis quam fruendo, Excellency of Health positive.
quid valeat cognoscimus: You that have it and know not how to prize it, I Will
tell you what it is, that you may love it better, put a higher value upon it,
and endeavor to preserve it with a more serious, strict observance and tuition.

Health is that which makes your meat and drink both savory and pleasant; else
Natures injunction of eating and drinking, were a hard task and slavish custom.

Health is that which makes your bed easy, and your sleep refreshing: that
renews your strength with the rising Sun; and makes you cheerful at the light
of another day: it is that which fills up the hollow and uneven places of your
Carcass, and makes your body plump and comely: it is that which dresseth you up
in Natures richest Attire, and adorns your face with her choicest colors.

It Is that which makes exercise a sport; and walking abroad, the enjoyment of
your Liberty.

It Is that which makes fertile, and increases the natural endowments of your
mind, and preserves them long from decay; makes your wit acute, and your memory
retentive.

It Is that which supports the fragility of a corruptible body, and preserves
the verdure, vigor and beauty of youth.

It Is that which makes the soul take delight in her mansion; sporting her self
at the casements of your eyes.

It Is that which makes pleasure to be pleasure, and delights delightful;
without which you can solace your self in nothing of terrene felicities and
enjoyments.

Having cursorily glanced at the excellencies of Health, in this short
Narrative and Epitome of its worth; it remains we should next draw forth and
present to your view, the ways and means to obtain and preserve this
invaluable enjoyment.

Health, as it is the result of Nature in her integrity and perfection; is
maintained and kept in that order and due Economy, by the regular and right
use of those natural supports that our bodies daily require and do depend on in
Being: as Air, Food, Sleep, Exercise, etc. Now those things that do necessarily
belong and daily attend us, ought so to be chosen and managed, as does best
conduce and suit with the institution of Nature, to which they are appointed;
but if otherwise, unseasonably, disorderly or immoderately used; they then
prove pernicious and destructive, more or less, according to the degree and
continuance of their irregularity and incongruousness. Nature has appointed
both times and order, and set a regular course, how and when every thing should
be used in its proper mode and season: There is a moderation also enjoined, and
limits prescribed by Nature in the use of these things, which if we exceed and
run into excess, we then put Nature out of her mediocrity and equality, in
which course she cannot long continue; and that also with much trouble to us,
by bodily diseases and infirmities, the necessary consequents of such
irregularities.

The body of Man is as a curious Engine or Clook-work, moving with diverse
Wheels, and various internal motions, subordinate to each other, and conducing
to the general design of the whole; in a complete order and exquisite method of
contrivance, promoting and moving one another in their distinct Offices. Now if
one Wheel goes too fast, too slow, or stops, the rest that depend upon that
motion also, are disordered and move irregular. So is it in the body of Man: If
the Stomach be clogged, and the digestion sluggish; the supply from thence will
not come in due time to the other faculties to operate upon: and if the
Chyliferous matter sent from the Stomach be not well transmuted and qualified,
the rest of the digestive faculties cannot so well perform their task, because
the alimentary matter is not transmitted to them proper and suitable, but
imperfect, aliene and degenerate.

The most experimentally and sensibly know; that meat and drink transgressing
either in quantity or quality, or unseasonably taken, does abate and injure a
good Stomach, and depraves the digestion: which defect redounds to the
detriment of the whole, and all the body suffers by it, and every faculty in
time will share in the prejudice: So that of necessity there must be rules
observed, and bounds set in the use of these things, without which man's body is
soon put out of frame, and the regular Economy thereof discomposed and
disordered.

To prove and illustrate this farther by instance: fresh Air is necessary to
ventilate the body, and cheer the spirits of man; and he that is pent up within
doors, is deprived of that great enlivener and refresher of Nature: but on the
contrary, he that is exposed abroad to the night Air, is as much dammaged as
the other; and both prove injurious and destructive: So that although the open
Air be good and necessary for the healthful being of Man, yet not at all times,
not in any condition, and upon any terms, but suitable and convenient with the
state of our bodies, as Nature has appointed for you, and not otherwise.

So likewise for Exercise and Rest, Method and Rule is to be observed: for if
there be not seasons allotted, and a moderation used in these, they both are
destructive, though in a contrary way, and by different mediums.

The order of Nature to be observed.
To sleep when you should wake, or wake when you should sleep, are both
injurious and impairing of health: to invert the order of Nature, by sleeping
in the day, and watching in the night, is incongruous and unsuteable with your
bodies; because it crosses the designment of Nature. When the Sun rises, the
spirits of Men are then most apt and fit for Action; are then most lively,
brisk and cheerful in their functions: but when the Sun sets, and the Air
clothed with darkness; the spirits then begin to droop, grow more dull and
heavy, incline to rest, retirement and a cessation. Now to spur up and rouse
the spirits, when they naturally would be taking their ease and respite; or
laying a clog upon them, by your sluggishness and somnolent postures, when
Nature calls upon them for action, (by darting the glittering light through the
Air, with which they are affected and raised up) these are great injuries and
affronts to Nature, in acting counter to her commands and institutions; for
which you must suffer the penalty; and that is the forfeiting your health, for
this unnatural disobedience, and irrational courses.

These Precautions and Rules I will assure you are not the inventions of man,
to curb your darling inclinations, and restrain you of your just liberty; but
they are the Institutions and Law of Nature, enjoined to be observed, for your
own preservation and well- being; and as bounds set to check your extravagant
pernicious actions; and all for the tuition and safety of your life and health;
and to preserve the regular harmony through the whole course of Nature. And
although it be an old saying, as foolish as common; Qui Medice vivit, misere
vivit; He that lives strictly by rule, lives miserably: yet I must affirm the
contrary, grounded upon pure reason, and the preceding discourse; The penalty
of an irregular life.
that he which does not observe the injunctions, the due method and regular
course of Nature; does both shorten his life, and takes away much of the
pleasure of it, by procuring an uncomfortable and unhealthy body.

I know every of you would live long; but especially in health: you would fain
continue and prolong your youth; your beauty and ability of parts: you are
frighted at the thoughts of a wrinkled face, or a restless bed; an unwholsom
diseased body, and a decrepid loathsome old Age: But yet you will not avoid
these evils that you so much fear: you will not take the pains to prevent them,
and secure your self: you rather take more pains; undergo more trouble to
procure them, then there can be in avoiding them: nay, you lose the true
pleasure of your life to purchase these inconveniences. Now what those things
are, which so warily and choicely you are to observe, (wherein consists your
health and well-being) have been hinted before: the due method, course, and
cautions, you are to take in the use of them, particularly shall be handled in
their due place and order. But first we must briefly treat of Sickness, and a
valitudinary life; and show you the great difference between that decaying
condition, and a state of health; which Antithesis will prepare and stir you up
to the strictness of duty; make you more cautious, and sollicitous for the
preservation of your health, and prize it as the summum bonum, your greatest
enjoyment in this life.

SECT. III. Of Sickness, and a Valetudinary State.
IN the preceding Section, having taken a brief survey of natural life in the
best estate; graced and adorned with the society of health, and its great
attendants; the concomitant benefits, privileges and enjoyments: now take a
view of your self when health has turned its back upon you, and deserts your
company; see then how the Scene is changed; how you are robbed and spoiled of
all your comforts and enjoyments.

The want of health makes food to lose its wonted relish, and is become
disgustful and unsavory: the stomach now refuses to receive its daily charge;
no longer able to perform the task, but desires a quietus est, from the office.

Sleep that was stretched out from evening to the fair bright day, is now broken
into pieces, and subdivided, not worth the accounting: the night that before
seemed short, is now too long; and the downy bed presses hard against the
bones.

Exercise now is toyling, and walking abroad the carrying of a burden.

The body that moved so light, and readily obeyed the steerage of the Pilot; is
now over- ballac'd with its own weight, and slowly tugs as against the stream.

Conjugal embraces are now but the faint offers of love; the shadows and
representations of former kindness.

The body that had the magnatism and secret attraction of souls; may now be
approached without loss; or danger of being snared and fettered as a bondslave.

The Lilly and the Rose that Nature planted in the highest Mount, to show the
World her pride and glory; is now blasted and withered like long blown flowers.

The eye that flasht as lightning, is now like the opacous body of a thick
Cloud, that roled from East to West swifter then a Celestial Orb; is now tired
and weary, but standing still; that penetrated the Center of another microcosm;
has lost its Planetary influence, and is become obtuse and dull.

The hollow sounding breast that echoed to the chanting Bird; and warbled forth
delightful tunes; now runs divisions with coughing strains, and pauses with a
deep fetched sigh for breath, to repeat those notes again.

The Venal and Arterial Rivulets that ran with vital streams, bedewing the
adjacent parts with fruitful moisture, is now drunk up with parching heat; or
muddied and defiled with an inundation of excremental humors.

The want of health converts your House into a Prison; and confines you to the
narrow compass of a Chamber; it is that which sowers the sweetest and most
beloved enjoyments: it is that which disunites and breaks the league of
copartnership between soul and body; alienates and makes them at jars;
discomposeth their harmony, and weary of their wonted sweet society.

A sick man is like a Clock out of order and due motion; which is of little
worth or use, so long as it continues in that condition; so is man useless both
to himself and others in such a state: one Wheel being faulty or defective,
puts the rest out of order and regularity, that depend upon that motion: and
one part or faculty of Man's body being disordered and irregular; several others
consent with, or share in the discomposure more or fewer; as the part is more
noble and principal, commanding some chief Region of the Body; or inferior, and
of a lower orb, or private station. The reason of this sympathy and consent of
patts is; first, From the general agent and principle of life, which is one and
the same throughout the whole: Secondly, Because all the parts of man's body,
though they have their peculiar and different motions to themselves and special
properties; yet they are all concurrent and cooperating; coordinately or
subordinately, serving to the general design of Nature, and maintenance of the
whole body; and are so concatenated and linked together, in the Economy of
office, that their motions are dependant, and of mutual concern for each others
welfare.

Humane bodies being in a fluxible state, and apt for mutation and changing,
are not long in a through state of health; but some part or other, by some
accident, natural debility, or disorderly living; is discomposed and jarring,
whereby the Oeconomical harmony is disturbed. The signs of such defections, and
a preternatural change of the body approaching, is discovered by the senses,
our own, or others, making observation. And these signal marks are very
apparent to reasonable discerning persons; that every one may have some
apprehensions (if they will be cautilous) of sickness coming upon them, and a
discrasyed body.

As a state of Health is known by all parts acting in their Offices
unblameably; that viewing and examining from head to foot, nothing appears
unwonted or disordered: So on the contrary, when any part declines its duty, or
appears any way unwonted from its natural condition; declares the beginning of
a degenerate valetudinary state; which in time will damage and disorder the
whole; if not prevented in that particular part, and a stop given to that
defection. Now what this part is, whether principal or inferior; of a general
or more private use; and how the prejudice does arise, is necessary to be
considered; which will discover whether the infirmity be of greater or lesser
concern; of speedy or slower danger: So that by noting such signs, which are
the forerunners, and warnings of great diseases coming on, every one may in
time look out for means to check the present evil, and avoid the greater
threatened.

If the Body which was fat, or plump and fleshy; afterward grows lean and
thin: or if lean and spare bodies grow big and corpulent; here is just cause of
suspicion, that all is not right, although no great prejudice at present, or
sensible injury by the alteration: yet these cases require due examination,
from whence they do proceed. If the Appetite abate; or unwonted heaviness and
fullness follow eating, argues the digestion not good, and the Stomach falling
from the due discharge of its duty and office. The Consequents of which are
very considerable. If sleepiness exceed the Custom and Age of the Person; or
watchfulness and indisposition to rest; both presage no good. So likewise in
other particulars, which for brevity sake I shall not instance. In general
therefore, whatever alterations happens in any part or faculty of the body,
unusual and contrary to the custom of Nature in her integrity; does not only
declare for its self, as a particular infirmity of that part where it buds
forth; but does presage (upon the continuance) something worse to come: and
that the root from whence it springs is of a spreading Nature, able to bring
forth more then what is manifest at present: in as much as the parts are
dependant upon each other, in office, and use; and damage to one, brings
detriment to the rest.

Precautions and Rules for the preservation of Health, and Prolongation of
Life; In the choice of Air, and places of abode.
AIR is so necessary to Life, that without it we cannot subsist: which
surrounding us about, and being continually sucked and drawn in, must needs
affect the body with its conditions and properties; and by observation you may
find the body, by the various constitutions and changes in the Air; to be
variously affected, well and ill disposed; of which, infirm parts are most
sensible, that they prognosticate before an alteration come: the mind also by
the mediation of the spirits is drawn into consent, and has its dispositions
and variations: when the Air is close, thick and moist, the spirits are more
dull, heavy, and indisposed; but at the appearance of the Sun, and a serene
Sky; the Spirits are unfettered, vigorous and active; the mind more cheerful,
airy and pleasant.

The Spirits are of an aetherial Nature; and therefore do much sympathize with
the present constitution, and change of Air: for of the Air drawn in by the
motion of the vital parts, are the vital spirits ventilated, and the blood
volatised; therefore the pureness of the Air, makes much for the purity of the
spirits and mass of blood.

A gross impure and noysom Air, obtunds and deads the spirits; makes a slow
pulse, obstructs the Pores, and hinders ventilation; generates superfluous
humors, and causes putrefaction.

A serene sweet thin Air perfumes and purifies an unwholesome body, cherishes
the heart, makes a lively pulse, and much enliveneth the vital spirits;
rarifies and volatizeth a gross coagulate blood; opens the pores for
transpiration of putrid and offensive vapors, acuates and sharpens the
Appetite, and helps digestion.

The best Air, and most agreeable to temperate bodies, is in temperate
Climates, for heat, cold, wet, and dry; not subject to sudden and violent
changes, as in some parts of America, and other Countries very frequent; not
gross and turbulent, infected with putrid vapors and noxious exhalations; from
stinking Ditches, Lakes, Boggs, Carrions, Dunghills, Sinks and Vaults; for
which causes great Cities, and the adjacent places are not so healthful, nor
the people so long lived.

Change of Air sometimes is very necessary for the conservation of health, and
the recovery of it declining and lost: for, temperate bodies by an intemperate
Air, shall gradually and in time become intemperate: intemperate bodies, by the
contrary intemperate Air shall be reduced to temperature; at least, shall
conduce much, and be very Auxiliary for the reduction. Therefore bodies
declining from exact temperature, are best preserved in that Air opposite to
their declensions; as choleric, hot and dry bodies, in a moist and cool Air;
Phlegmatic, cold and moist bodies, in a dry and warm Air.

It is not therefore of small moment, in what place you live; and more
especially such, who labor of, or are more subject to, any pectoral infirmity:
for the Lungs being of so tender a substance and porous, continually drinking
in the Air, is most apt to receive impressions from it, according to the
properties it is pregnant with and infested; and many diseases of the breast
arise from this sole cause; and many exasperated by it and continued: hence it
is Asthmatick, Phthisical and Consumptive persons shall not be cured in some
places, but may have cure in another.

Be clothed according to the clemency, season and temperature of the Air, your
Age, and habit of body: lean thin bodies, and pervious, (corpora rarae
texturae) and whose skin are loose and lax; may wear thicker clothing, because
such are more perspirable, do magis emittere and transpirare; and are also more
penetrable and subject to injury of the Air. Fat and fleshy people, and whose
bodies are solid, firm and hard; are more impenetrable and impervious, and may
wear thinner Garments. Infants and Children lately cherished in the stove of
the Womb, being of tender soft bodies, are easily exposed to the prejudice of
the Air. Vigorous youth, and middle Age being accustomed to all weathers, whose
spirits abounding, do strongly resist and keep out the assaults and injuries of
an offensive Air, may best endure hardship. Old Age, whose natural heat is
abated, and spirits exhausted; stands in need of good defensatives against
external cold, and to cherish internal heat.

Observe the seasons and changes of the Air, and be then most careful, for at
such times you are in most danger to exchange health for sickness: hence it is
that Spring and Autum abounds most with Diseases; the Air then assuming new
properties opposite to its former constitution; sets new impressions upon our
bodies; which occasions the various aestuations and turgid fermenting of
humors, producing diverse symptoms according to the variety of their nature;
the organical difference, office and constitution of the several parts.

The Sun being risen, and the Air clear, open your Chamber-windows, that the
fresh Air may perfume your Room, and the close Air and enclosed Vapors may go
forth.

Bad smells and putrid vapors being drawn in with the Air, are very injurious
to the Lungs and vital parts; contaminating the spirits, and impressing upon
the Crasis of those parts their tetrid nature, are oftentimes the original of a
Consumption; and if the Lungs be weak and infirm, are more apt to receive the
prejudice then others. But fragrant smells refresh and cheer the vital spirits,
and are very wholesome, breathing forth the virtue of those things from whence
they do proceed.

Be not late abroad, nor very early: before Sun rising, and after setting, the
Air is not so good; being infested with noxious vapors, until the radient
influence of the Sun dispells and purifies: and those whose custom it is to be
often abroad at such times, are most frequently molested with Rheums and
Rheumatick Diseases; which their declining years will more evidently manifest
the prejudice. Likewise in moist, foggy dark weather, it is better being within
then abroad; and if it be a cool season, good fires and fragrant fumes are then
both pleasant and very wholesome.

Be frequent abroad in the Fields when a clear Sky invites you forth, and let
the fresh Air fan you with its sweet breath; but more especially in the
morning; the Air is softer and more pleasant then your Bed, and sure I am, far
more wholesome.

Temperie Coeli corpusque Animusque juvatur. Ovid. In the choice of places to
live in and abide; The choice of places to inhabit.
these things are to be considered principally: First, The Climate; that it be
temperate, and suting with the nature of the person; for some persons may agree
well with one Climate, which another cannot: cold and moist bodies agree best
with a warm and dry Air; hot and dry bodies with a moist and cooler Air.
Secondly, The situation of the place and soil is to be noted; for as much as
low, wet and marrish Lands; is not so wholesome to inhabit, as gravelly Plains,
and dry highland Countries. Thirdly, In relation to Country and City, regard
is to be had; and here the Country does prevail over the City for Health; and
is to be accounted the best place of abode. The continual smoke and anoyances
that are inseparable from great Cities, make those places to abound more with
infirm people. Fourthly, The Waters that supply a place, do make it better or
worse to live in, as they are good or bad; Water being of so constant and
general use, is much to be regarded, though little taken notice of, and
procures many diseases from the variety of its nature; being impregnated
variously from the Earth it passes through; or accidents that happen to change
it from its natural properties; by the admixture of any filth, carrion, or what
else shall fall into it; and therefore River Waters that lie open to such
injuries, are much to be suspected of unwholsomness. And this is a great
procurer of the Scurvy in many places: as Pliny relates, that Caesar's Army, by
drinking of bad Water but a few days, had the symptoms of that Disease.

The commendations of a place, in reason to health and long life, are these: A
^^mperate Air, Best place of abode
dry serene and clear; Champion, or high Lands; a gravelly dry soil; watered
with pure good Springs; remote from the Sea, Lakes, or Marshes: not frequented
with unwholsom Winds and stormy blasts.

So considerable is the Climate and Air in relation to our Being, that it not
only changes and alters our bodies, but also our minds are wrought upon by
it: in as much as the wit, inclinations and manners of a people are different
upon this score. And for long life, we find that in some Countries the people
are longer lived by much then in other; and this from the wholsomness of the
place, and purity of the Air: therefore the choice of places to live in, is of
great concernment, and much to be regarded, by those whose Fortunes permits
them to pitch in any place, for the advantages of health and long life.

SECT. V. Preservation of Health in the choice of Meats; and Regular Eating.
THat which properly may be called Food or Aliment, is of that nature, as may
fitly be transmuted and changed into the substance of the body which receives
it: so that what ever will not be reduced and subdued by the digestions, for
such a transmutation and assimilation, is not proper nor convenient food for
that body: because the intention of eating is to repair the loss that Nature
sustains daily; and if food will not be converted into the substance of the
body, it answers not that intention, and is frustraneous: so that every meat
which enters man's body, is not aliment, does not nourish; but that which yields
obedience to the digestions, and is assimilated. And that which may be
accounted proper food for the species, mankind; may be unfit for some
individuums, this or that man, as common experience shows: the reason of this
is from the peculiar properties of men's bodies that differ; Idiosyn Crasia,
else the choice of Meats need not to be insisted on.

In regular eating, you are to consider; First, The substance and quality of
the food. Secondly, The fit quantity and proportion. Thirdly, Convenient and
due times for eating.

Concerning the first; That every one may be something instructed in the
election of meats, this or that, most proper and suitable: take these
observations for a general guide. First, Paulo peior sed suavior cibus and
potus, meliori, at ingrato praeferendus.
Try by your Palate; eat no meats that does displease the Gust, for a common
food.

Secondly, Examine your Stomach, whether such meats do not oppress, or rise in
the Stomach, and cause a trouble; or is long in passing off, and flatulent: If
any such symptom as these do follow, (and not upon other meats) then such food
is not convenient, because it puts a difficulty upon the Stomach to digest; the
consequents of which are bad.

Thirdly, Inquire into the constitution or condition of your body, and have
some respect to that in the election of meats: for Phlegmatic cold bodies, and
choleric hot and dry bodies, will not well be dieted both alike; but (as
commonly) they have different inclinations to meats; so Nature has appointed,
and is furnished with variety to suit such several bodies and appetitions.
Therefore make choice of such for the most part as is commended to you, suting
(commonly,) and convenient for that constitution you are of; as you will find
prescribed in the several Constitutions or Conditions of body following.

Now by these three Rules, every one may make a good choice of meats in a state
of health; and reasonably instruct himself, for the preservation thereof.

Next the quantity is to be considered; that you do not exceed such a
proportion, as is agreeable to your Nature, for a due supply, and not
overcharge the body. And here I must commend to you temperance and moderation
in eating, as a great preservative of Health; not a Lessian diet to pine and
enfeeble the body; not so precise, but a moderate allowance, proportionable to
the strength and ability of the Stomach to digest; considering also other
conditions of body, and manner of life, whether active and laborious, or
sedentary and idle. Plures gula quam gladius.
The contrary irregular practice has destroyed the lives of many. Some may
think, the more plentifully they eat, the better they shall thrive in body, be
more nourished, and the stronger for it: but it will not prove so; a little
well digested and assimilated, shall maintain the body in a stronger and more
vigorous condition; then being glutted with superfluity; most of which is
turned to excrementitious (not alimentary juice) and must be cast out, else
sickness soon after will follow.

For quantity, your own stomach must measure to you what is convenient; which
is a certain rule of proportion, if you observe not to eat to a satiety and
fullness; but desist with an appetite, being refreshed light and cheerful; not
dulled, heavy and indisposed to operation and action, either of mind or body.

A set quantity or measure of meat or drink, cannot be prescribed as a general
rule and observation for all to follow; in regard of the variety and great
difference of persons, in Constitution, Age, strength of Nature, condition of
Life, and infirmities; that what is convenient for one, is too much for
another, and too little for a third; the strong and healthy cannot conform to
the sickly, weak and infirm in quantity; nor the laboring man to the sedentary
and studious, or the idle: therefore every stomach is to be its own judge: and
every one ought to moderate themselves by the cautions before mentioned.

Indulge not the cravings of an irrational sensitive appetite; but allow such a
supply of daily food, as will support and maintain bodily strength, Quicquid
plus ingeritur, gravat naturam, non juvat.
and not over-load it: thereby the spirits will be vigorous and active; humors
attenuated and abated; crudities and obstructions prevented; many infirmities
checked and kept under; the senses long preserved in their integrity; the
stomach clean, the appetite sharp, and digestion good. But by the surplusage
and over-charge, the stomachical ferment is over-laid, and its incisive
penetrative faculty obtunded; the appetite and digestion abated, the stomach
nauseating, fluctuating, and belching with crudities; from whence Gripes,
Fluxes and Fevers: the spirits clogged, dull and somnolent; by their
indisposition and inactivity, humors subside, degenerate, incrassate, obstruct;
from whence various symptoms and depraved effects throughout the body;
debilitating and decaying the senses, Noxa etsi ad tempus fortasse delitescit;
temporis tamen successu sese exerit.
enervating and stealing away the strength of the body, by defrauding it of
good nutriment, hastening old age, and shortning life.

In Winter you may eat more freely; but in Summer the spirits are dilated,
exhausted and drawn forth by the external heat opening the pores; wherefore the
appetite is not so sharp, nor digestion so quick. And the Rule is true, though
heat be not the principal cause of concoction, yet it is a necessary Agent,
Excitor and Cooperator.

Change your diet according to the seasons of the year, the variation of your
body, and inclination to this or that distemper: in Winter more meat and less
drink; in Summer less meat and more liquids: in Summer meats oftener boiled, in
Winter roasted: a hot and dry body must have a cooling and moist diet; a cold
and moist body, a hot and dry diet: temperate bodies are preserved by temperate
things and their like; distempered bodies are rectified and reduced by
dissimilars.

The more simple and single your diet is, the better and more wholesome: but if
your stomach must have variety, let it be at several meals, and so you may
please your Pallat without prejudice. Accustom not your self to delicacies and
compound dishes, the heterogenity of their nature, begets a discordant
fermentation in the stomach troubling concoction; from whence eructations,
nauseous belchings, and offensive risings in the throat, Aphor.
Quo simplicior victus ratio eo melior.

Of all meats, flesh affords the most nourishment and the strongest.

If your diet sometimes be not so good and proper for you in the quality and
substance; make amends in the quantity, and eat the less.

Of all Sauces, a good stomach is the best; but if you must have other, let it
be acide sharp or biting.

Accustom strong stomachs, to strong meats; the weaker to lighter of digestion:
very light meats in strong stomachs are soon digested, but withal parched and
corrupted, and turn to a bitter and choleric juice: solid hard meats in weak
stomachs lie long and heavy, and pass away crude and undigested.

Meats in respect of their facility and difficulty in digestion, are termed
heavy and light.

Heavy meats be such as are more dry, hard, solid and dense, gross, course and
tough, or over moist, slimy and cold: requiring a longer time in fermentation,
volatization and digestion, before they be fit to pass off the stomach.

And they are either so in their Nature: as all old flesh, Bull-Beef and Ox,
Brawn, Pork, Venison, Hare, Goose, Duck, Swan, Crane, Bittern, Heron, and most
Water Fowl: Eels, Lobster, Lampreys, Tench, Stock Fish: Beans, Pease when they
be something old: brown Bread, Barley and Rye Bread: Also some parts are of
harder digestion then other: as Brains, Hearts, Livers, (except of tame Fowl,
Birds, and some very young flesh) Milts, Kidneys, Skin.

Meats made heavy (or made worse then in their own nature) by preparation,
keeping and dressing: as dried, fried and broyled meats: meats long salted and
kept, as Bacon, hanged Beef, and long powdered; old Ling, salt Cod, Haberdine,
pickled Herrings, red Herrings, pickled Scallops, Sturgion, salt Salmon, hard
Eggs, tosted Cheese, tosted Bread, especially if it be scorched; Crusts,
Pye-crust, Bread not well baked, unleavened: meats over- baked, hard and dry;
long kept, meats roasted dry, or scorched.

Light meats and of quicker digestion, be such as are most soft and tender,
rare as it is opposed to density; therefore sooner penetrated by the
stomachical ferment; succulent, volatile, soon fermenting and yielding to
digestion.

As young tender flesh: of Veal, young Mutton, Lamb, Kid, Pullet, Capon,
Chicken, Conies, Turkey, Pheasant, Partridge, Plover, Woodcock, Snite,
Heath-Cocks, and small Birds: Whiting, Smelt, Oister, Flounder, Soles, Plaise,
Thornback, Turbut, Trout, Carp, Pike, Bream, Perch, and such like: Rere Eggs,
Milk, Wheat Bread, white, light, and well baked; also Oaten Bread well made:
and these may be divided into two sorts: that is, meats very light, as Rere
Eggs, sucking Rabbits, Chickens, Whitings: and meats indifferent light, as
Mutton, Lamb, Veal.

Very light meats are soon digested, Quae facile digeruntur, facile etiam
corrumpuntur.
apt to be corrupted in strong stomachs; breeds tender and effeminate bodies,
soft and loose flesh easily lost: solid strong meats are slower in digestion,
not easily corrupted, slow in distribution, makes strong bodies, firm, hard
flesh and durable.

Use not meats that has any quality in extreme; as very salt, very hot, sower,
binding, or the like, but keep to those that are moderate.

Let your Bread be of Wheat, leavened, well kneaded and baked, light and white;
which you may eat new, but not hot; nor staler then two days old, and choose
the crumb rather then the crust.

Seasonings of meat are used either as preservatives to keep them from
putrefaction and decay; or as correctives, to alter and change some ill
quality, and promote digestion; or for delight to gratify the pallat; as
Sugar, Salt, Vinegar, Mustard, Pepper, Cloves and other Spices.

Meat moderately salted, having time to digest, ferment, volatize, and alter
the crude qualities, is better and wholsomer then fresh: but to eat Salt at the
Table is not so good, if the condition of the meat be such as to allow a
praevious digestion and seasoning. Salt is grateful to the palate and stomach,
excites the appetite, concocts crude phlegmatic matter that lies upon the
stomach, hinders putrefaction, and is abstersive: but immoderately used,
corrodes and frets, causes itching and breakings out; very bad for thin lean
bodies; it heats and dries the blood and natural moisture.

Sugar in a temperate clean body, moderately used, nourishes and is good; but
in a foul body is soon corrupted, degenerates and makes the body more impure;
turns to choler, and inflames choleric hot bodies. The frequent and
immoderate use in any, obtunds and abates the appetite, causes putrid humors,
and makes an unwholesome body.

Vinegar and sower juyces, as of Lemmons, Verjuce, and the like; procure
appetite, and help the stomach in digestion of grosser meats: but the
immoderate and frequent use, cooles, dries, constringeth and binds the body,
hurtful to the Nerves and nervous parts; very bad for Women, and those that are
subject to the Gout, Asthmaes and stoppings in the breast, or in other parts;
and for lean and dry bodies.

Mustard quickens the appetite, warms the stomach, dries up superfluous
moisture, helps the stomach, digesting hard meats, opens stoppings in the
breast and head.

Mace, Ginger, Nutmeg, Pepper and Cloves, they help a cold stomach, comfort the
heart and brain, refresh the spirits by their atomatical odor, are grateful
upon the Palate, and very acceptable to Phlegmatic cold bodies.

In the use of the forementioned, I shall give this caution: that young
stomachs, and strong healthy bodies which need not a spur to their appetite,
nor a help to digestion; that they frequent not the use of these seasonings and
sauces, but reserve them for Age, deficiency of stomach, and other infirmities:
for, if you accustom your self to them in youth and strength, to please your
palate, and entice your stomach, there being no need: when the condition of
your body does require them, you shall not find that benefit and assistance
from them, which otherwise you might have expected and received, had you
forborne the use of them when it was not necessary.

When you come to Meat, leave your care and business; but bring in your friend,
and be as merry as you can: mirth and good company, is a great help to a dull
stomach both for appetite and digestion.

Eat not presently after exercise, and when you are hot, but forbear till the
spirits be retired and settled in their stations.

Eat not hastily, but chew your meat well; it is a good preparation for
concoction, and your stomach will more easily and sooner digest it; but if it
be half chewed, the stomach must have the labor to chew it over again with its
incisive ferment.

Drink a little and often at meat, to macerate and digest, especially if your
meat be dry and solid, and to help distribution of aliment; but great draughts
cause fluctuations.

Hasty motion opens the Orifice of the stomach, precipitates and vitiates
digestion.

Forbear reading, writing, study, or serious cogitations for two hours after
meat; else you draw off from the stomach, abate the strength of digestion, and
injure the brain.

Omit a meal sometimes; it acuates and sharpens the stomach, concocts
indigested matter, and makes the next meal relish better,

Eat no late suppers, nor variety at once; a good stomach may endure it for a
while; but the weaker is more sensible of the injury; the best is prejudiced in
time.

Let not the common custom of meals, Nemo sanitatis suae studiosus aliquid
comedat, nisi ad hoc certo prius invitante desiderio; and ventriculo una cum
reliquis superioribus intestinis a praesumpto cibo vacuatis. Avicen.
invite you to eat; except your appetite concur with those times: and keep a
sufficient distance between your times of eating, that you charge not the
stomach with a new supply, before the former be distributed and passed away:
and in keeping such a distance, your stomach will be very fit and ready to
receive the next meal, the former being wrought off perfectly; no semi-digested
crude matter remaining to commix with the next food: and that is one chief
cause of crudities and a foul stomach; when a new load is cast in before the
former be gone off, which begets much excrements, not much aliment; clogs the
body, and procures Diseases.

The stomach that is empty, receives, closes and embraces food with delight;
will be eager and sharp in digestion, and the body will attract and suck the
aliment strongly; each part as it passes along will perform its office readily
and sufficiently; which they will not do, if often cloyed with depraved and
indigested aliment, but slowly and with reluctance: for although they do not
act by reason, yet they have a natural instinct or endowment to discern their
proper and fit object.

If your body becomes lean, and your flesh looser then formerly; do not pamper
and feed your self highly, expecting to recover and regain the lost flesh: for
in so doing you add more mischief, and make your body fouler then before,
Corpora impura quo plus nutries, eo magis laedes. Hipp.
and miss of your purpose: and unless the former impediments, that hindered and
frustrated nutrition, be removed, in vain it is to expect it from the addition,
and greater supply of food, or high nourishers.

SECT. VI. Preservation of Health in the choice of Drinks, and Regular Drinking.
DRink for necessity, not for bad fellowship; especially soon after meat, which
hinders the due fermentation of the stomach, and washes down before digestion
be finished: but after the first concoction, if you have a hot stomach, a dry
or costive body, you may drink more freely then others: or if thirst importunes
you at any time, to satisfy with a moderate draught is better then to forbear.

Accustom youth and strong stomachs to small drink; but stronger drink, and
Wine, to the infirm and aged: it chears the spirits, quickens the appetite, and
helps digestion, moderately taken: but being used in excess, disturbs the
course of Nature, and procures many Diseases: for corpulent gross and fat
bodies, thin, hungry, abstersive penetrating Wines are best, as White Wind,
Rhenish, and such like.

For lean thin bodies; black, red and yellow Wines, sweet, full bodied and
fragrant, are more fit and agreeable; as Malaga, Muscadel, Tent, Alicant, and
such like.

For Drink, whether it be wholsomer warmed then cold, is much controverted;
some stiffly contending for the one, and some for the other: I shall rather
choose the middle way, with limitation and distinction, then impose it upon all
as a rule to be observed under the penalty of forfeiting their health, the
observations of the one or the other.

There are three sorts of persons, one cannot drink cold Beer, the other cannot
drink warm; the third, either: You that cannot drink cold Beer, to you it is
hurtful, cools the stomach, and checks it much: therefore keep to warm drink as
a wholesome custom: you that cannot drink warm Beer, that is, find no
refreshment, nor thirst satisfied by it, you may drink it cold, nor is it
injurious to you: you that are indifferent and can drink either; drink yours
cold, or warmed, as the company does, since your stomach makes no choice.

That warm drink is no bad custom, but agreeable to Nature in the generality;
first, Because it comes the nearest to the natural temper of the body, and
similia similibus conservantur; every thing is preserved by its like, and
destroyed by its contrary. Secondly, Though I do not hold it the principal
Agent in digestion, yet it does excite, is auxiliary, and a necessary
concomitant of a good digestion, ut signum and causa. Thirdly, Omne frigus per
se, and pro viribus destruit; Cold in its own nature, and according to the
graduation of its power, extinguisheth natural heat, and is destructive; but
per accidens, and as it is in gradu remisso, it may contemperate, allay, and
refresh, where heat abounds, and is exalted.

Therefore as there is variety of Pallates and Stomachs likeing and agreeing
best with such kind of meats and drinks, which to others are utterly
disgustful, disagreeing and injurious, though good in themselves: so is it in
Drink warmed or cold; what one finds a benefit in, the other receives a
prejudice; at least does not find that satisfaction and refreshment, under such
a qualification; because of the various natures, particular appetitions, and
idosyncratical properties of several bodies, one thing will not agree with all:
Therefore he that cannot drink warm, let him take it cold, and it is well to
him; but he that drinks it warm; does better. And this is to be understood in
Winter, when the extremity of cold has congelated and fixed the spirits of the
Liquor in a torpid inactivity; which by a gentle warmth are unfettered,
volatile and brisk; whereby the drink is more agreeable and grateful to the
stomachs fermenting heat; being so prepared, then to be made so by it.

There are three sorts of Drinkers: one drinks to satisfy Nature, and to
support his body; without which he cannot well subsist, and requires it as
necessary to his Being. Another drinks a degree beyond this man, and takes a
larger dose, with this intention, Primum crater ad sitim pertinere, secundum ad
hilaritatem, tertium ad voluptatem, quartum ad insanium dixit. Apuleius.
to exhilerate and cheer his mind, to banish cares and trouble, and help him to
sleep the better; and these two are lawful drinkers. A third drinks neither for
the good of the body, or the mind, but to stupifie and drown both; by exceeding
the former bounds, and running into excess, frustrating those ends for which
drink was appointed by Nature; converting this support of life and health,
making it a procurer of sickness and untimely death.

Many such there are, who drink not to satisfy Nature, but force it down many
times contrary to natural inclination; and when there is a reluctance against
it: as Drunkards, that pour in Liquor, not for love of the drink, or that
Nature requires it by thirst, but only to maintain the mad frollick, and keep
the Company from breaking up. Some to excuse this intemperance, hold it as good
Physic to be drunk once a month, and plead for that liberty as a wholesome
custom, and quote the authority of a famous Physician for it. Whether this
Opinion be allowable, and to be admitted in the due Regiment for preservation
of health, is fit to be examined.

Omne nimium naturae est inimicunt.
It is a Canon established upon good reason; That every thing exceeding its just
bounds, and golden mediocrity, is hurtful to Nature. The best of things are not
excepted in this general rule; but are restrained and limited here to a due
proportion. The supports of life may prove the procurers of death, if not
qualified and made wholesome by this corrective.

Meat and drink is no longer sustinance, but a load and over-charge, if they
exceed the quantum due to each particular person; and then they are not, what
they are properly in themselves, and by the appointment of Nature; the
preservatives of life and health; but the causes of sickness, and consequently
of death.

Drink was not appointed man, to discompose and disorder him in all his
faculties, but to supply, nourish, and strengthen them. Drink exceeding its
measure, is no longer a refreshment, to irrigate and water the thirsty body,
but makes an inundation to drown and suffocate the vital powers. It puts a man
out of the state of health, and represents him in such a degenerate condition
both in respect of body and mind, that we may look upon the man, as going out
of the World, because he is already gone out of himself, and strangely
metamorphosed from what he was.

I never knew sickness or a Disease, to be good preventing Physic; and to be
drunk, is no other then an unsound state, and the whole body out of frame by
this great change. What difference is there between sickness and drunkenness?
Truly I cannot distinguish them otherwise then as genus and species:
Drunkenness being a raging Disease, denominated and distinguished from other
sicknesses, by its procatartick or procuring cause, Drink.

That Drunkenness is a Disease or sickness, will appear in that it has all the
requisites to constitute a Disease, and is far distant from a state of health:
for as health is the free and regular discharge of all the functions of the
body and mind; and sickness, when the functions are not performed, or weakly
and depravedly: then Ebriety may properly be said to be a Disease or sickness,
because it has the symptoms and diagnostick signs, of an acute and great
Disease: for, during the time of drunkenness, and some time after, few of the
faculties perform rightly, but very depravedly and preternaturally: if we
examine the intellectual faculties, we shall find the reason gone, the memory
lost or much abated, and the will strangly perverted: if we look into the
sensitive faculties, they are disordered, and their functions impedited, or
performed very deficiently: the eyes do not see well, nor the ears hear well,
nor the palate relish, etc. The speech faulters and is imperfect; the stomach
perhaps vomits or nauseates; his legs fail: Indeed if we look through the whole
man, we shall see all the faculties depraved, and their functions either not
executed, or very disorderly and with much deficiency.

Now according to these symptoms in other sicknesses, we judge a man not likely
to live long; and that it is very hard he should recover; the danger is so
great from the many threatening symptoms that attend this sickness, and
prognosticate a bad event: here is nothing appears salutary; but from head to
foot, the Disease is prevalent in every part; which being collated, the syndrom
is lethal, and judgment to be given so.

Surely then Drunkenness is a very great disease for the time; but because it
is not usually mortal, nor lasts long; therefore it is slighted, and looked
upon as a trivial matter that will cure it self. But now the question may be
asked; Why is not Drunkenness usually mortal? since the same signs in other
diseases are accounted mortal, and the event proves it so. To which I answer;
All the hopes we have that a man drunk should live, is; first, From common
experience that it is not deadly: Secondly, From the nature of the primitive or
procuring Cause, strong Drink or Wine; which although it rage, and strangely
discompose the man for a time, yet it lasts not long, nor is mortal. The
inebriating spirits of the liquor, flowing in so fast, and joining with the
spirits of man's body, make so high a tide, that overflows all the banks and
bounds of order: For, the spirits of man's body, those agents in each faculty,
act smoothly, regularly and constantly, with a moderate supply; but being
overcharged, and forced out of their natural course, and exercise of their
duty, by the large addition of furious spirits; spurs the functions into
strange disorders, as if nature were conflicting with death and dissolution;
but yet it proves not mortal.

And this, first, because these adventitious spirits are amicable and friendly
to our bodies in their own nature, and therefore not so deadly injurious, as
that which is not so familiar or noxious.

Secondly, Because they are very volatile, light, and active; Nature therefore
does much sooner recover her self, transpires and sends forth the overplus
received; then if the morbifick matter were more ponderous and fixed; the
gravamen from thence would be much worse and longer in removing: as an
over-charge of Meat, Bread, Fruit, or such like substances not spirituous; but
dull and heavy (comparative) is of more difficult digestion, and lays a
greater and more dangerous load upon the faculties, having not such volatile
brisk spirits to assist Nature, nor of so liquid a fine substance, of quicker
and easier digestion: So that the symptoms from thence are much more dangerous,
then those peracute distempers arising from Liquors. So likewise those bad
symptoms in other diseases are more to be feared and accounted mortal (then the
like arising from drunkenness) because those perhaps depend upon malignant
causes; or such as by time are radicated in the body; or from the defection of
some principal part: but the storm and discomposure arising from drunkenness,
as it is suddenly raised; so commonly it soon falls, depending upon benign
causes, and a spirituous matter, that lays not so great an oppression; but
inebriates the spirits, that they act very disorderly and unwontedly; or by the
soporiferous virtue, stupefies them for a time, until they recover their
agility again.

But all this while, I do not see, that to be drunk once a month, should prove
good Physic: all I think that can be said in this behalf, is; that by
overcharging the stomach, vomiting is procured; and so carries off something
that was lodged there, which might breed Diseases

This is a bad excuse for good fellows, and a poor plea for drunkenness: for
the gaining of one supposed benefit (which might be obtained otherwise) you
introduce twenty inconveniences by it. I do not like the preventing of one
disease that may be, by procuring of one at the present certainly, and many
hereafter most probably: and if the disease feared, or may be, could be
prevented no otherwise, but by this drunken means; then that might tolerate
and allow it: but there are other ways better and safer to cleanse the body
either upwards or downwards, then by overcharging with strong drink, and making
the man to unman himself; the evil consequents of which are many, the benefit
hoped for, but pretended; or if any, but very small and inconsiderable.

And although, as I said before, the drunken fit is not mortal, and the danger
perhaps not great for the present; yet those drunken bouts being repeated; the
relicts do accumulate, debilitate Nature, and lay the foundation of many
chronick diseases. Nor can it be expected otherwise; but you may justly
conclude from the manifest irregular actions which appears to us externally;
that the functions within also, and their motions are strangely disordered:
for, the outward madness and unwonted actions, proceeds from the internal
impulses, and disordered motions of the faculties: which general disturbance
and discomposure (being frequent) must needs subvert the economy and
government of humane Nature; and consequently ruin the Fabric of man's body.

The ill effects, and more eminent products of ebriety, are; first, A changing
of the natural tone of the stomach, and alienateing the digestive faculty; That
instead of a good transmutation of food, a degenerate Chyle is produced. Common
experience tells, that after a drunken debauch, the stomach loses its
appetite, and acuteness of digestion; as belching, thirst, disrelish,
nauseating, do certainly testify: yet to support nature, and continue the
custom of eating; some food is received; but we cannot expect from such a
stomach that a good digestion should follow: and it is some days before the
stomach recover its eucrasy, and perform its office well: and if these
miscarriages happen but seldom; the injury is the less, and sooner recompensed;
but by the frequent repetition of these ruinous practices, the stomach is
overthrown and alienated from its integrity.

Secondly, An unwholsom corpulency and cachectick plenitude of body does
follow: or a degenerate macilency, and a decayed consumptive constitution.
Great drinkers that continue it long; few of them escape, A Cacotrophy, or
Atrophy.
but fall into one of these conditions and habit of body: for, if the Stomach
discharge not its office aright; the subsequent digestions will also be
defective. So great a consent and dependence is there upon the stomach; that
other parts cannot perform their duty, if this leading principal Part be
perverted and debauched: nor can it be expected otherwise; for, from this
Laboratory and prime office of digestion, all the parts must receive their
supply; which being not suitable but depraved, are drawn into debauchery also,
and a degenerate state; and the whole body fed with a vicious alimentary succus.

Now that different products or habits of body should arise from the same kind
of debauchery, happens upon this score. As there are different properties and
conditions of bodies; so the result from the same procuring causes shall be
much different and various: Quicquid recipitur, recipitur per modum
recipientis. Ax.
one puffs up, fills, and grows hydropical; another pines away, and falls
Consumptive, from excess in drinking; and this proceeds from the different
disposition of parts: for, in some persons, although the stomach be vitiated,
yet the strength of the subsequent digestions is so great, from the integrity
and vigor of those parts destinated to such offices; that they act strenuously,
though their object matter be transmitted to them imperfect and degenerate; and
therefore do keep the body plump and full, although the juyces be foul and of a
depraved nature. Others e contra, whose parts are not so firm and vigorous;
that will not act upon any score, but with their proper object; does not
endeavor a transmutation of such aliene matter, but receiving it with a nice
reluctance, transmits it to be evacuated and sent forth by the next convenient
ducture, or emunctory: and from hence the body is frustrated of nutrition, and
falls away: So that the pouring in of much liquor (although it be good in sua
natura) does not beget much aliment, but washes through the body, and is not
assimilated.

But here some may object and think; That washing of the body through with good
Liquor, should cleanse the body, and make it fit for nourishment, and be like
good Physic for a foul body. But the effect proves the contrary; and it is but
reason it should be so: for, suppose the Liquor (whether Wine, or other) be
pure and good; yet when the spirit is drawn off from it, the remainder is but
dead, flat, thick, and a muddy phlegm. As we find in the destillation of Wine,
or other Liquors; so it is in man's body: the spirit is drawn off first, and all
the parts of man's body are ready Receivers, and do imbibe that limpid
congenerous enlivener, freely and readily: but the remainder, of greatest
proportion; that heavy, dull, phlegmy part, and of a narcotick quality; lies
long fluctuating upon the digestions, and passes but slowly; turns sour, and
vitiates the Crases of the parts: So that this great inundation, and supposed
washing of the body, does but drown the faculties, stupefie or choke the
spirits, and defile all the parts; not purify and cleanse. And although the
more subtle and thinner portion, passes away in some persons pretty freely by
Urine; yet the grosser and worse part stays behind, and clogs in the
percolation.

A third injury, and common, manifest prejudice from intemperate drinking, is;
An imbecility of the Nerves; which is procured from the disorderly motions of
the Animal Spirits; being impulsed and agitated preternaturally by the
inebriating spirits of strong Liquors: which vibration being frequent, begets a
habit, and causes a trepidation of Members.

SECT. VII. Exercise and Rest, regulated and duly appointed.
THat Exercise and due Motion contributes to the preservation of Health, and
prolongation of Life, will appear, if we consider the benefits that are
procured by it.

First, In general exercise it raises the spirits, and puts them upon vigorous
action in all the Faculties.

Secondly, It empties the stomach, and promotes the appetite for the next meal:
the remainders after digestion, that accumulate to clog the stomach, is moved
by Exercise, and excited to pass away; and being thus discharged of those
relicts; the appetite grows sharp, and craves food very strongly.

Thirdly, It provokes expulsion of Excrements, and suffers not any superfluous
matter to lodge in the body: For, by the turgid motion of the spirits, the
common ductures and conveyancies are dilated and expanded; which together with
the agitation of the body, gives a ready and free passage to any feculent or
excremental matter that ought not long to be retained.

Fourthly, Exercise opens the Pores, and gives a free transpiration; which
otherwise by too much rest are occluded and shut up, contrary to the intention
of Nature; having appointed these vents, and secret way of evacuation, to
ventilate and cleanse the habit of the body, which in a short time would be
very foul and impure, by congestion of superfluous humors, if not purified and
transpired by these exhaling ports.

Fifthly, Exercise, promotes, and adds much toward the nutrition of the body.
For this we find generally, that active stirring people, are more fresh in
countenance, more vegete and lively in spirit, more firm and solid in flesh,
and stronger in their limbs; then other persons that live a sedentary, idle and
sluggish life. And that it should be so there is good reason; in as much as
exercise gives a free passage for nutriment to arrive at every member and part
of the body; and also excites the Archeus or ruling principle in each, for a
more vigorous assimilation; and likewise does expedite and send away the
superfluities of every digestion, all which promotes and sets forward a good
nutrition.

Exercises are various, and commonly chosen, as each person phansies, or the
Company invites; as Dancing, Running, Ringing, Tennis, Hand-Ball, Football,
Riding, Fencing; with many others: some whereof are purely pastime, as those
named; others necessary labors, as Digging, Sawing, and such like. Exercise is
to be chosen, such as suits best with the Nature of each persons body: Some
require exercising of upper parts most, others of the lower parts, and some
equally both: those Exercises which generally are advantageous, in using and
stretching all the parts, and which I prefer before others, are Tennis,
Hand-Ball, Fencing and Ringing. Yet I would not impose upon any contrary to
their inclination, for in these cases, that which is most delightful, will
probably prove most beneficial.

Observations and Cautions to be remembered in exercising, are such as these.

1. Exercise daily, in the morning chiefly; with an empty stomach always; and
after excremental evacuation if you can procure it.

2. Vary exercise according to the condition of your body, and season of the
year: the stronger, phlegmatic bodies, and in cold Weather, admit of stronger
and swifter motions: Choleric hot bodies, weak, and the Summer season; more
mild and gentle.

3. Be not violent in exercise; nor continue it longer beyond a pleasure; but
desist with refreshment, not a lassitude and weariness.

4. Put on some loose garment, until your body be cool and settled in its
natural heat and temper; the Pores being opened by exercise, the cold is more
apt to enter; from whence a greater prejudice then you could expect benefit
from your labor or pastime.

5. Walk gently after Exercise, and settle by degrees; no sudden changes are
suitable or profitable to Nature.

6. Eat not, until you be fully reduced to that temper and moderate heat, as
when you began; and when the spirits are retired to their proper stations.

By this rational course the advantages that will accrue to you are these.

Exercise rouseth dull inactive spirits; gives ventilation, opens obstructions
by the motion, attenuation and penetration of the subtle spirits; agitates and
volatiseth feculent subsiding humors; abates superfluous moisture; increases
natural heat; promotes concoction, distribution and conveyance of aliment,
through the narrow Channels and Passages unto the several parts of the body;
procures excremental evacuations; strengthens all the Members, and preserves
Nature long in her vigor and virdure.

Having set out the times for Exercise and Motion; the remainder is allotted
for Rest and Ease, with such refections and repast as Nature requires.

Quod care^ alterna r^quie durabile non est. Ovid.
Rest is as necessary to preserve Health, and continue man's body in strength
and vigor, as Exercise. These two, although much opposite in themselves, yet
both in their order and seasons, are very suitable and agreeable to humane
Nature, and both contribute to the being and long being of Man. Nothing
constant is liking and congruous with our Nature; but vicissitude is most
acceptable and delightful.

When the body is wearied with Labor, then rest is refreshing, and renews its
strength; but when satiated with rest, does then thirst after motion and
pleasant exercise. Interdum quies inquieta est; quoties nos male habet inertia
sui impatiens Sen.
Rest is a burden if forced upon Nature, longer then Nature does require; and
that is but for a short space. So that the due timing of Rest and Motion, and
limiting them to their hours and seasons, most agreeable and delightful to
humane Nature, is that which preserves him in Health, and prolongs his Being.

Avoid idleness, and a sluggish sedentary life: for want of due action and
wholesome motion; the body, like standing Waters, degenerates and corrupts. If
Rest exceeds, the vigor of Nature is abated; digestion not so good;
distribution of aliment to the several parts retarded and impedited, by reason
of an obstructed foul body: excrementitious superfluities not freely
transmitted and emitted; the spirits dulled, and all the faculties of the body
and mind, heavy and slow to action.

Ignavia corpus habetat, labor firmat. SECT. VIII. Sleep and Watching, Limited
and Cautioned.
THE Life of Man being conversant in vicissitudes, spends its whole course in
these two different states, Sleep and Watching: the one appointed for Rest and
Ease, the other for Action and Labor. Nemo dumdormit, alicujus est pretii,
nonmagis quam si non viveret. Quidam.
If he were constant in the first, his life were but the shadow of Death, not
worth the nameing: if in the latter, he could not hold out long, but be tired
and worn out. Therefore Nature has wisely contrived, that he should not
continue long in either, but should be transient from one to the other, and
weave out his life by these short intervals. Watching, Action and Motion;
Sleep, Rest and Cessation; are equally requisite for the well-being of man: So
that these two changes relieving one another, both become a defense and support
of humane life.

Sleep is a placid state of body and mind, bringing refreshment and ease to
both. Sleep takes off the Body from action, and the Mind from care, thought and
business; and gives a cessation and quiet interval from their Labor. That
sleep may prove most advantageous, answering the intentions and designment of
Nature, it must be regulated in these four particulars: the Time, and Limits,
the Place, and the Manner.

The Time most proper and fit for Sleep, and according to the appointment of
Nature, is the Night; when most of the Creatures also do take their rest. At
the shutting up of the day, and the Sun departed from the Horizon; the spirits
are not so active and lively, but incline to a cessation, and then it is fit to
give them their repose and rest, and not constrain them longer upon duty: in
the morning again, at the rising of the Sun, they are fresh, brisk and agile;
and then are no longer to be chained up in somnolent darkness but to be set at
liberty, and enjoy the bright light, which chears the spirits, and is a great
enlivener to them.

Turpis qui alto sole semisomnis jacet,
Cujus vigilia medio die incipit. Sen.
Moderate sleep refreshes the spirits; fortifies and increases vital heat;
helps concoction; gives strength to the body; pacifies anger; calms the
spirits, and gives a relaxation to a troubled mind.

Immoderate sleep dulls the spirits; injurious to a good wit and memory; fills
the head with superfluous moisture, and clouds the brain; retains excrements
beyond their due time to be voided; and infects the body with their noxious
fumes and vapors; an enemy to beauty, and changes the fresh flower of Youth.

Go early to sleep (not with a full stomach) and early from sleep; that you may
rise refreshed, lively and active; not dulled and stupid.

Avoid day sleeps as a bad custom; chiefly fat and corpulent bodies: but if
your spirits be tired with much business and care; or by reason of old age,
debility of Nature, extreme hot weather, So^nus meridianus quibus concedendus.
labor or the like, that dissipates the spirits, and enervates; then a
moderate sleep restores the spirits to their vigor again, and is a good
refreshment; but rather take it sitting then lying down.

Night watching, and late sitting up, tires and wastes the animal spirits, by
keeping them too long upon duty; debilitates Nature; changes Youth, and a
fresh florid countenance; heats and dries the body for the present; in time
abateth natural heat; Vigiliae longioris incommoda.
breeds Rhumes and Crudities; and most injurious to thin lean bodies.

Concerning the place for sleeping, take these cautions: First, That you do not
expose your self to the open Air: for in the time of sleep, Nature is not so
well able to defend the body from external injuries of the Air; but lies more
open to such assaults, being off her guard, and retired to Rest.

Know also that it is a bad custom to sleep upon the ground, as many in the
Summer season do use to their prejudice: and those whose condition of life
necessitate them to it, (as Soldiers) although for the present they escape the
mischief; yet afterward, most are made sensible of the injury, by Aches,
stifness or weakness of Limbs, and many other infirmities that it procures.

Sleep not in any damp place, Vault or Cellar, a ground Chamber, (much worse
unboarded) a new washed Room, or new plaistered; but choose a high Room, dry,
sweet, well aired, free from smoke, and remote from any noise.

Let your Bed be soft, but not to sink in; which sucks from the body, exhausts
and impairs strength: a Quilt upon a Feather-Bed, is both easy and wholesome.

As for the manner or decumbiture, the body must lie easy, or sleep will be
disturbed: the head something elevated; the other parts as best likes every
person; but not upon the back, or constantly upon one side; but by turns: and
be covered according to the Climate and Season of the Year.

The mind also must be in a good posture, well composed and settled when you are
in bed; or that will break off your sleep before due time, and defraud you of
your nights rest: if you lie down with roving troubled thoughts; they commonly
will call you up before it is fit to rise, and your sleep not so placid and
refreshing. Therefore when you lay by your clothes, lay aside also your
business, care and thoughts, and let not a wandering fancy prevent your rest,
or awake you before due time.

SECT. IX. Preservation of Health, by Regular and Requisite Evacuation and
Retention.
ALL that the body receives is not fit to be retained; our food, though
choicely picked, and temperately used, yet all does not turn into the substance
of the body; but some part is to be separated and sent forth, the rest to
supply, nourish, and be assimilated. This regular course being continued, the
body thrives, and is in good order; but if that which should be evacuated and
sent forth, be retained; or that which ought to be retained, be prodigally
wasted, and injuriously emitted; then the body suffers and decays, when the
regular economy thereof is subverted. Hinc ingens morborum turba.

And here we are to consider of the various excretions that Nature does
require, and is beneficial; and of such retentions as are injurious.

Under this Head is comprised excretions by Stool, by Urine, menstrual
Purgations, Venus, by the Pores, Nose and Ears: of which the former are of the
greatest concernment, and special care to be had of them.

Excremental evacuations are various, proceeding from the several digestions;
conveyed out by several Channels and Vents of Natures fabrication: which duly
evacuated, are no small helps to the conservation of health, and are the effects
of a temperate and regular body.

The retention of them beyond due time, argue discrasy of parts, or irregular
living; and brings much detriment to the body, by their noxious inpressions and
putrid vapors, that infect and disturb the body.

If the Belly be costive and bound up; if the Urine be suppressed; the monthly
Courses stopped; the Pores occluded and shut up: the Soul will be stifled in the
Body, and the Body polluted and corrupted with its own Excrements: and as these
are so, more or less in degree, swerving from rectitude; so it fares with the
body better or worse.

And on the contrary, if the Belly let pass too soon and forceably, before the
alimentary part be separated, sweeping down both together; if the Urine flows
too freely, and drains the body; If the Female Courses be immoderately current,
and exhaust the vital stream; If the Sperme be involuntarily issuing, and daily
wasting; If the Texture be too lax and pervious, the Pores patent and
evaporating; the damage is as great as the former, and as much to be feared, as
these evacuations are more or less enormous. So that nothing but moderation,
and an even course between these two extremes are conservative of Health and
longaevity. And that this may be so, all your actions and necessary customs
must be bounded by mediocrity: this is the Golden Chain that ties all together;
one Link whereof being broken, the whole is broken and disunited; having a
dependence and mutual tie upon each other.

As the discharging of Nature moderately and seasonably, in all her requisite
evacuations, preserves the body in health and strength: so contrarily.

Immoderate evacuations causes weakness, debility of Nature by exhaustion, and
procures several Diseases, Cachexies, Consumptions, Dropsies, etc.

To keep the body soluble is very good, that at least once a day you may not
miss to have a stool; else the Faeces are hardened, the body heated, the stomach
molested, the appetite not so good, the head heavy, dull and sometimes pained;
some grosser matter which should go away by seige, is brought by the Urinary
passage; occasioning obstructions, all which are very injurious and destructive
to Health.

Seasonable and moderate Venus, alleviates Nature, and helps digestion: but
immoderate, exhausts the strength by effusion of spirits; exsiccates and dries
the Body, hurts the Brain and Nerves, causes tremblings, dulls the sight,
debilitates all the faculties, hastens old age, and shortens life. But of this
more at large in my Treatise of Spermatick Consumptions.

Cibo vel potu repletis, superflue evacuatis, sive exercitatis, coitus
interdicitur.

Tempus optimum est mane, and post dormias.

Hyeme and vere frequentius permittitur; aestate parcissime.

Juvines sanguinei and pituitosi liberalius; parcius Melancholici, parcissime
biliosi, Senes, emaciati.

Menstrual evacuations are proper to the Female Sex; and come to them at
certain years, to some at fourteen or fifteen, to others at sixteen or
seventeen: and then Nature challenges them monthly as her due; except she has
conceived, nurseth, or being grown old Nature does not require this evacuation:
And this is of such concernment with them, that if this menstrual Flux be not
right in the several requisites, according to times, quantity and quality, the
whole body oftentimes is disturbed; but always some infirmity or complaint
does follow: And therefore it much behooves Women to have a special regard that
this course of Nature be regular, according to each persons propriety of body;
for all have them not alike, nor is it to be expected: and when it happens
otherwise, a due course is to be taken to reduce them into order, and procure
them aright.

This Flux arises from a redundance, and is granted to Women for
conception-sake; that they might both nourish the foetus in the Womb, and have
sufficient to supply their own bodies: Therefore when there is no conception,
Nature has appointed a menstrual evacuation to spend the over- plus this way,
during her capacity of having Children; and when that time is past, Nature taks
up and makes no such provision; and then this evacuation cease.

SECT. X. The different state and variation of Bodies. Commonly distinguished
by four Constitutions.
THat the Condition, Properties, and Habit of Bodies do much differ one from
the other; and also the same by time does vary and alter much from what it was,
is that which I need not insist on the proof; every one almost, will confess
the (...), and is convinced of this truth. But how this comes to pass, and the
reasons of this difference and variation, is not unanimously agreed upon, but
great dissenting about the matter.

The Galenists do comprise the diversity of bodies under four Constitutions,
Sanguine, Phlegmatic, Choleric and Melancholic. And this they will have to
arise from the difference of bodies in mixtion, according to the different
proportions they receive of the four Elements, participating more of some, then
the other.

The Chemical Philosophers; some of them will have the difference of bodies to
assurge out of three Principles, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury: Others increase
that number, and will have have them five, Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water and
Earth. But I must not now engage in the controversy between the Chemists and
Galenists, or make another party to oppose both; but reserve that as more
proper for a Polemical Tract: This Work being not intended controversal, but
Canonical, I therefore pass on to state the Matter.

These four terms of Sanguine, Choleric, etc. although I do not adhere to
them in the common acceptance, and in every point as the Galenists use them;
yet they being so familiar and well known to such for whom chiefly this work is
intended; I shall retain these names with distinction and limitation to serve
our present purpose, rather then impose new words upon you, not so well
understood.

I do not therefore understand by Phlegm, Choler, etc. that every body is
composed of these four humors, as their constitutive parts, resulting from
proportionate and disproportionate mixture and combination of the four
Elements: But that persons may participate of, or abound with a degenerate
humor; and that the succulencies of the body may incline to such a condition,
affine and analogous, or having such properties, as that which is assigned to,
and called, Phlegm, Choler, etc. may be ascerted, and we may call them by such
names. But you must also take notice, that the degenerate matter in man's body
is so various, that you must not think to reduce all such depraved Juices
exactly to these three heads, of Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; and if you
add twice three more, the number would not be sufficient: But since there is
not peculiar appellations to distinguish all precisely by, better have some
general terms then none.

The variation of bodies, in relation to Temperament, Habit, and Constitution;
does arise immediate from the variation of digestions, and the different
products from thence: so that one and the same person shall by time be of
different constitutions, according as the functions of the body are performed
well or ill.

The changing or establishing of Constitutions procatarctice, does depend upon
subjection and obedience to the Diaetitick Rules. As every one is ordered
prudently and regularly, or negligently and incongruously, shall be disposed to
this or that Constitution. If a man live idle, plentifully feeding, indulging
himself in raw Fruits, and sleeps much; this disposes him to be Phlegmatic:
that is, his digestions shall not be so good; and there will be crude relicts
abounding, such as is called Phlegm.

If a man be of an active cogitative spirit, eager in business, giving himself
little rest, accustomed to Wine and high seasoned Meats: This manner of life
fires and heats the body; the Juices then will not be so mild, temperate, and
balsamic: but acrid, bot and sharp; and this person then may be said to be of
a choleric constitution or condition of body.

If a fresh sanguine person, of a pure wholesome body; be oppressed with care and
grief, live a sedentary life, or too much given to study and serious
contemplation, and feed grossly. This course of life shall change and alter the
best constitution; the sanguine brisk airy person shall by these means, be of a
dull heavy disposition, and sad mind; the body also shall degenerate from its
purity, the humors more fixed and feculent. The Soul being the great Spring,
or Wheel that keeps all the functions in motion, upon which they do depend,
primo and principaliter, as the Fountain of all Vital Actions: If this be
dejected and taken off its speed, the functions are then performed very
heavily, as if weights and clogs were hung upon them; and then the elaboration
of food is not well performed, and a pure alimentary Juice produced; but a
degenerate succus of a heavy oppressing nature not duly fermented by the
Spleen (dyscrasyed by the preceding Causes) from whence a melancholy
constitution is begotten, and may so be denominated for distinction.

The diversity of Constitutions being thus understood, we may make use of, and
retain these distinguishing terms, at this time to serve the business in hand;
since they are so familiar by use, and easy to be apprehended, by such for
whom this is intended. But although I can close with them in relation to this
purpose I am now upon, to order and appoint a Diaetetick Regiment for different
bodies; yet I think them not of that concernment, for a Physician to tie
himself strictly to their observance, in the designment of Cures; these notions
being too superficial and remote from the quiddity, essence and spring of the
Disease; are but Characteristical and Signal, to note how, and which way the
vital Powers do deviate and swerve from their integrity; are but the Producta
Morbi, the Products and Effects, separable, and the Disease may remain behind.

Wherefore I cannot allow them, as they are severally enjoined in the Methodus
Medendi for indications, to suit Purgatives elective, and other Medicines to,
by peculiar appropriations; nor concur with some Hypotheses that are founded
upon this Doctrine by the Galenists to steer them in their Therapeuticks; which
indeed runs them upon great errors in the Cure of most Diseases; being so nice
in temperaments, humors and qualities, and eying them so much; that they
neglect the spring from whence they do arise, Natura est morborum medicatrix.
Helm.
and where the greatest stress of Cures do lie. Morbi in initiis vitalibus
radicem habent.

And although I have distinguished food for several constitutions or conditions
of body, as most proper and fit for them, and commonly most agreeable and
appetible; yet I do not thereby strictly enjoin, or restrain any one of a
dissenting appetite, from some things greatly coveted and suitable by
experience, although appointed for another person of a different constitution:
but that every person seeing the general Rule, may something be guided thereby;
and examining his peculiar propriety of Body, undiscernable to others; whether
it will comply freely, or with reluctance. In such case where there is a
refusal of this or that, as not suting, but disgustful; you are not to impose
upon your Nature forcibly, though enjoined by the general Rule: But where you
are at a stand in things indifferent, what to choose when either will comply and
suit your appetite, then follow the Rule as advantageous. Moreover the strong
robust bodies, active and laborious, are not so strictly enjoined to
observance, as tender weak bodies, soon discomposed and altered by ill diet, or
incongruous for their condition of body.

If a person have a cold, waterish, Phlegmatic Stomach; those Meats, and
Drinks, and Sauces, are not so agreeable and requisite for him, as will well
agree and suit with a Choleric, hot, and dry parching Stomach. A Phlegmatic
man most commonly takes no delight in Milk and Whey, cold Meats, and cooling
Drinks, or cooling Sauces: but he loves seasoned hot Meats, strong Drinks,
Spices, and hot Herbs, to make his Meat savory and acceptable to his Stomach:
But the Choleric Man shall delight in the other; and they shall suit best,
being temperately and discretely used. So that a Diaetetick Regiment, well
appointed and observed, is physical to dyscrasyed and distempered bodies, to
contemperate and allay the the luxuriance of some predominant Humor; and
something dispose the faculties to produce the alimentary Juices of another
nature: which by time will alter and change the constitution or condition of
Body from what it was, and reduce it nearer to what it ought to be.

SECT. XI. Praecautions and Rules, Appointed for the Sanguine Constitution; or
purest State and Condition of Body.
THis Constitution does result from the integrity of the faculties, and due
Crases of the Parts, performing their offices rightly: When Food is well
elaborated and transmuted in such manner as is proper for each digestion; then
a good constitution and good habit of body is established. The Mass of blood
then has its pure tincture, and all the liquors of the body their peculiar
properties suitable to the intentions of Nature: But if the Crases of the Parts
be perverted by a spontaneous defection and imbecility of the faculties; or
otherwise procured to irregularity, by bad food, intemperance, and the
Diaetetick Rules not observed; then the alimentary Juices do degenerate from
their purity; the mass of Blood, and nervous liquor are depraved, the
constitution and whole habit of body altered and changed for the worse.

The sanguine person enjoyes the best state and condition of body; does not
abound or is molested with crude, Phlegmatic or acrid Choleric Juices, or
otherwise degenerate; but has the succulencies of body in their right and
proper natures, as is most fit for every vessel and part of the body: hence it
is that this person is more fresh, temperate, lively, and florid; of a more
pleasant mind, and good disposition, having pure blood, and other good Juyces
to supply the Body; from whence the spirits are generated both plentifully, and
of a good extraction.

This State and Constitution of Body is best preserved and continued so from
degeneration, by a good Diaetetick Regiment; disposing all the requisite
supports of Life, Customs and Actions whatsoever; that they be moderate,
seasonable and suitable to such Natures, contributing their assistance wholly,
and not being any ways detrimental, by their ill management.

The Sanguine Person will continue long in that condition and good state of
Body; by a due observance of Diet, Exercise and Rest, Sleep and Watching,
Excretions and Retentions, passions of Mind: For any of these irregular and
unsuteable, will alter and change the best tempered body, into some other
depraved condition answerable to their Causes: as the intemperate Air of a hot
Climate, or sudden change of Weather not regarded; violent and unseasonable
Exercise, night-watchings, ill-dyet, etc. introduces a depraved alteration and
degeneration of the blood: and therefore most commonly sickness soon follows
such injurious Courses. I might here forbid the smoking of Tobacco; the common
Purgatives falsely denominated, but rather and more properly Corruptives; which
stamp an ill impression upon the parts, and vitiate the alimentary Juyces of
the Body: but the injuries procured from Tobacco, and these Drugs, are declared
at large in my Tract of the Scurvy; Therefore I need not repeat here.

For the Election and Choice of Food, for quantities and due times in Eating
and Drinking; for the choice of Air, and place of Abode; for Exercise, Sleep,
etc. consonant and most agreeable to this constitution and best state of Body;
are to be sought in the general Hygiastick Rules before mentioned, which are
most proper and applicable to this state and condition of Body; as being the
Rule or Standard to measure others by: And by how much others vary from this
temperature and good condition of Body; by so much are they to be accounted
intemperate and deviating from integrity; and do therefore require some
particular Rules or Exemptions from the general, to regulate them apart;
because bodies in a right and good state are not to be governed by the same
strictness of Law; but must have some allowance and exceptions, which shall be
observed in the particular constitutions following.

SECT. XII. Diaetetick Regiment, Assigned to the Phlegmatic Constitution.
THE Phlegmatic Person is such whose nature is not so vigorous and acute in
the digestive faculties; and makes a transmutation of food not so perfect as
the Sanguine, but something crude and raw. This Constitution abounding with
superfluous moisture, and being more cool in temperature, (except
preternaturally distempered, and the Archeus disturbed) commonly has a slower
Pulse; not so lively, active and brisk as the Sanguine person; prone to sleep
and ease; of color paler; by hot things benefitted, by cold things prejudiced.
And thus it is by reason the vital powers are remiss and sluggish; the several
functions of the body are not performed vigorously and completely.

Now this Constitution of body being fallen a degree from the integrity of
Nature, and swerving from the best condition and state of body, which is the
Sanguine; and finding by these Characters how Nature is defective, and which
way declining: You ought so to order all your actions and customs, as may tend
to the rectifying of this deficiency, and be auxiliary for a reduction to the
best state; at least prevent what may succeed worse, and stop the increase. And
herein it will be no small advantage, to know what is assisting and helpful to
Nature in this case, and what is injurious.

Meats agreeable and convenient for this condition of body, are such as be
light and digest well, because the Stomachs ferment is not so acute; yet if the
Stomach covets what is not of facil digestion, let it be made savory and
seasoned: And then a Phlegmatic raw stomach may better venture upon such. But
Brawn, Pig, Goose, Duck, water-foul, and such like, are not agreeable to a
Phlegmatic Stomach: Also Eeles, fresh Herrings, Makerel, Lobster, fresh
Salmon, Sturgeon, are injurious and difficult to be digested. But if you must
please your palate, drink Wine with these meats for a corrective.

Let your diet be warm Meats, oftener roast then boiled.

Butter, Oil, and Honey is good for you; Mustard, Salt and Spices are necessary
for your use: especially with meats of slow digestion, and that abound with
much moisture, and are apt to clog the Stomach.

Refuse Milk and Milk Meats, curd new Cheese, Butter-milk and Whey.

Olives, Capers, Broom-buds, Sampire are good Sauce; also Garlic, Onions,
Leeks in Broths, seasonings or Sauces, for a relish, but not raw.

Refrain cold Herbs and Sallads; as Lettice, Purslan, Violet-leaves, etc.
except Sorrel, which although cold, yet a sharpner of the appetite: but freely
use Mint, Sage, Rosemary, Time, Marjerome, Parsley, Pennyroyal, and such hot
Herbs.

Abstain from raw Fruits; Apples, Pears, Plums, Cucumbers, Mellons, Pumpions,
etc. But you eat may Wall-nuts, Filbirds, Almonds blanched, Ches-nuts,
Fistick-nuts, Dates, Figs, Rasins.

Drink strong Beer more frequently then small; and sometimes Sack. Not French
Wine if you be Rheumatick.

Indulge not yourself in lying long in Bed; or afternoon sleeps; and too much
Rest and Ease: they dull the spirits, increase phlegm and superfluous moisture.

But frequent Exercise, and moderate abstinence in Meat and Drink; are great
preservatives of your Health.

Choose a warm Air and dry Soil, remote from Waters; the best place for your
Abode.

Hot Baths are profitable; seasonable and moderate Venus a friend: the former
cherishes the spirits, opens the pores for a transpiration and emission of
superfluous moisture: the latter suffitates and raises the spirits, alleviates
nature, and helps Concoction.

SECT. XIII. The Choleric Constitution Regulated.
THE Choleric Person is more hot and dry than the Phlegmatic; eager and
precipitate in action; froward, hasty and angry; lean of body and slender: the
Veins big, a hard Pulse, and quick: of color pale or swarthy; propense to
waking and short sleeps; subject to Fevers, or febrile aestuation upon small
occasions.

That some bodies are in this state and condition, is apparent and certain: but
whether by innate Principles so disposed, or otherwise procured and
adventitious; we will not controvert here: but shall proceed as granted, that a
Diaetetick Regiment, well or ill managed, shall make this person or condition
of body, better or worse. Wherefore I advise such to these observations.

Use a cool and moistning diet; most frequently boiled meats, rather than roast
or baked; but fried or broiled meats never.

Eat Broths often made with cooling Herbs; Rice-milk, Cock-broth, or
Barly-broths with Rasins, Currants and Prunes.

For flesh, choose young tender and jucy; as young Beef, Veal, Mutton, Lamb,
Kid, Pork, Green-geese, Turkey, Capon, Chickens, and such like.

Observe fish days as good diet: and then you may eat fresh Salmon, Lobster,
fresh Herrings, Crabs, Prauns, fresh Cod, Thornback, Soles, Plaise, Whiting,
Smelt, Oisters, Pike, Trout, Tench, and other fresh fish; Eeles not excepted
which are unwholesome to others.

But refrain salt Meats, and dried; as Bacon, old Ling, Haberdine, salt Cod,
pickled or red Herrings; pickled Scalops, Oysters, Anchoves, Sturgeon, hand
Beef, dried Tongues, and such like.

Milk and Milk meats are pleasant and good; as Custard, White-pots, new Cheese,
fresh Cheese and Cream.

For your Sauces use Verjuce, Sorrel, Orange, Lemmon, Apples, Goosberries,
Currants, Prunes, pickled Cucumbers: as boiled Veal and green-sauce; roast Veal
and Orange; boiled Mutton with Verjuce and its own juce; roast Mutton and
Cucumbers; green-Geese and Goosberries; Stubble Goose and Apples; Pig and
Currants; Pork and green-sauce; boiled Chickens with Goosberries or
Sorrel-sops; Calves feet stewed with Currants and Prunes: And your meat thus
coock'd, is both food and Physic.

Take a lawful freedom, and please your self with these fruits; Citrons,
Pomegranats, Limes, Oranges, Lemmons, Quince, Pearmains, Pippins, Cherries,
Mulberies, Grapes, Damsins, Bullaces, Prunellaes, Respass, Currants, Barberries,
Strawberries: they cool and quench thirst, contemperate and aswage hot
choleric humors, and give a great refreshment to the parched spirits.

Eat Sallads of Lettuce, Sorrel, Purslane, Spinach, and Violet-leaves; they are
medicamental aliment; but be sparing in Mustard, Salt and Spices.

Butter-milk, Whey and Sider allayes preternatural heat; checks the effrenation
of Choler, and are refreshing.

Refuse the fat, and brown outside of meat: also the crust of Bread: and be
sparing in Butter and Oil.

Drink Wine, Spirits, and strong Liquors, but as Physic; to refresh and asist
a weak stomach, and not otherwise.

Fast not, but satisfy the Stomach when it vellicates and calls for meat;
biting choler must have something to feed on, or it will disturb the body.

Cherish and indulge sleep, it cools and moistens; but let it not exceed in
length, which puts Nature by her due times for necessary evacuations.

Too eager and constant in study, or late sitting up: both exasperates this
condition of body, and makes it worse.

Use very gentle Exercise; be not laborious or toyling, but take your ease;
avoid violent motion, for it fires the spirits, and heats the body, which is
very injurious to this Constitution.

Frequent venus is most pernicious.

Cold Baths is profitable, and refreshes much; by cooling the blood, allaying
the spirits, and concentring them.

Bannish anger immoderate care, peevishness and fretting, which discomposeth
the spirits, heats and wastes them; augments Choler, dryes the body, and
hastens old Age.

Refrain Tobacco as a very injurious custom; it exasperates Choler by heating,
drying, and evacuating dulcid Phlegm; which contemperates, bridles and checks
the fury of acrid bilious humors.

SECT. XIV. The Melancholy Constitution, Stated and Cautioned.
BY Melancholy Constitution, I here understand such a condition of body, as is
procured, and most commonly is the consequent of habituated Melancholy, or a
melancholy heavy Soul, and a dyscrasied Spleen.

To pass by the controversies that might arise here from the distinction of
melancholy by the Galenists, as one of the four constituent humors: I shall
take for granted on both sides, as well Chemists as them; that the aforesaid
causes do beget such a constitution or condition of body, as may well require a
peculiar Diaetetick Regiment, as an allay or mitigation of those preternatural
Symptoms that necessarily follow such Causes: at least that they may not be
aggravated by an injurious course of living.

A melancholy, studious and sedentary life, does much abate and suspend the
emanative vigor and activity of the Soul, equally distributed (geometrice)
amongst the several faculties, as the spring of their motion and actions: from
which abatement and depression of their power, the functions are not discharged
so exactly and unblamably; but more or less, according to the agravation or
intention and remission of those Causes. Now as the Spleen is more eminently
the seat of that passion; and commonly a part most apparently injured, leading
the rest into disorder: We shall appoint such a government, or prudent election
and modification of such things comprised in the Diaetetick part of Physic; as
may best suit with such a condition of body.

The melancholy splenetick person, whose digestive faculties are debilitated,
must feed more tenderly and nicely than another; else that flatulency and
oppression (which commonly does attend this condition of body) will be
agravated and much more molesting: For by a gross and plentiful feeding, are
those evils increased.

Let not your common diet be of such Meats as are hard and difficult to digest;
that lie long upon the stomach, and require a strong incising ferment for
separation and transmutation: as Meats long salted, dried, fried, or broyled,
etc. but keep to such as are light and of facil digestion, that soon yields in
fermentation, and is transmuted, without great labor and trouble. Meats thus
distinguished, you will find set down in the 59, 60, and 61 pages preceding,
where you may make election.

If you have a hot and dry costive body, use Barley-broths, with Prunes, Rasins
and Currants: and you may eat sometimes Pippins, Permains, Cherries, Respas,
Straberries, and such like good fruits to cool and moisten.

Take not a full meal at Supper, nor late; but eat sparingly: And if that be
too much, as may easily be discovered, then forbear Suppers wholly.

Capers, Broom-buds and Sampire, are good Sauce; they please the Palate,
quicken the Appetite, open Obstructions and help Digestion: all which are
profitable for this condition of body.

Also Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Cichory, Baum, Fumiterry, Mary-goldflowers,
Violets, Clove-gilliflowers and Saffron, are of good use.

Drink Sider sometimes, and small White Wind; also Whey, if your stomach agrees
with it.

Keep the body soluble; your Head will be more free from pains, fumes, and
heaviness: Also the lower Region of the Body will not so freequently be
disturbed with flatulent rumblings, distention and windy eruptions.

Cherish Sleep; it refreshes the spirits, pacifies a troubled mind, banisheth
cares, and strengthens all the faculties: but tiresome waking in the night, is
a great enemy to a melancholy person.

Fly Idleness, the Nurse of Melancholy; but exercise often, and follow
business, or recreations.

Walk in the green Fields, Orchards, Gardens, Parks, by Rivers and variety of
places.

Change of Air is very good.

Avoid solitariness, and keep merry Company.

Be frequent at Music, Sports and Games.

Recreate the spirits with sweet, fragrant and delightful smells.

Banish all passions as much as in you lies; fear, grief, dispare, revenge,
desire, jealousy, emulation, and such like.

Opus est te Animo valere ut Corpore possis. Give not your self to much study,
nor night-watchings; two great enemies to a melancholy person.

Refrain Tobacco, though a seeming pleasant Companion; the fancy is pleased
but for a short time; and the ill effects are durable.

SECT. XV. The various Dyscrasies or Passions of the Soul in general.
MAN is made up of two grand Parts, Soul and Body: the one Active, ruling and
governing; the other Passive, obeying and instrumental: The one has its due
Crasis, tranquillity and placidness: The other due organization and fabrication:
But both are subject to disorder, discomposure, and inaptitude, for the regular
performance of their Actions and Offices.

Great discoveries have been made of that Part of Man, which presents it self
to the eye: We have viewed his Fabric; and I may say exactly, Witness the
excellent Anatomical pieces that are extant, wherein are discovered and laid
open all the contrivances of this rare Machine: But the Spring that sets all on
work; the intrinsic mover, the Soul, lies much in darkness, and acts as it
were, behind the Curtain. Whose deficiencies and aberrations are little taken
notice of, except in the irregularities of passion; and then only in relation
to divine and moral rectitude: And therefore in our Physical Discourses, I find
the Body to be accused of infirmity and failing throughout the Catalogue of
Diseases; and that the indisposition of Organs to act, is the sole or main
cause of the irregularity and deficiency of the Functions. And that the
hability of the Soul to act ad extra, does depend wholly upon the capacity and
aptitude of the instrumental parts.

But I am otherwise persuaded to believe: That as there is great difference of
Souls in divine and moral goodness; why not then in natural abilities and
integrity, relating to health and sickness? And therefore it is very rational
to assert, that many defects or disorders in the Functions, and ruinous decays
of the Body, does arise and spring forth from the pravity and debility of the
Soul by its lapsid nature: And that the first motions, ab intra, or emanations
of the Soul, are and may be infirm and vicious, when the Organs are in their
rectitude and aptitude for regular motions. But to clear this out, and
prosecute it to the full; I must ravel into the whole Doctrine de Anima, and
assert contrary to the old Philosophy, (which will be found very erroneous) but
that will take up a whole Tract, too big for this place; and must be the work
of another time. Therefore I pass on.

Passions of mind may be considered, either in relation to what is divine,
moral, or natural. Passions respecting the two first, are either good or evil,
as their object does distinguish them: but in the latter they are ill, and
produce bad effects, as they in degree are more or less turbulent, violent and
durable. What concerns the Passions in the two former respects, is not our
business in hand; but as they stand in relation to Health and Sickness; what
disorders they produce in the regular economy of the Body, how the Functions
are depraved, debilitated or suspended by them is our task.

The Diseases or Dyscrasies of the Soul most visible, are the perturbations and
passions, wherein the Soul is put by her genuine state of placidness and
serenity; and that aequanimous distribution of her energy into the Members and
Parts of the Body, from thence disordered and disproportioned. Passions draws
off the Soul from exercising and executing the functions of the Body: For
whereas the power of the Soul is equally or proportionably divided into all the
faculties in her natural placed state and government: On the contrary, when
Passion is predominant, much of that power is drawn away, and expended in the
prosecution and support of this Passion.

Passions puts the spirits upon several motions: sometimes contracts them, as
in Grief, Fear, or Despare: Sometimes dilates them as in Joy, Love, and Desire:
Sometimes drives them furiously, as in Anger: wherein also the humors are
fluctuating sometimes this way, and sometimes that way; according to the nature
of the Passion, which has its peculiar motion and current. And as other
Diseases have their Diagnostick Signs to distinguish them, and whereby they may
be known: So likewise the Passions have their peculiar Characters of
distinction; that it is not difficult to know under what passion a man labors.
We judge of other sicknesses very much by the Face, what alteration there: So
by the Countenance we may know what Passion is predominant; each putting on a
different aspect, and presenting it self in another shape and visage.

Passion in excess, although it be the perturbation and sickness of the mind;
yet it is not confined there, but is communicated to the Body, which partakes
and shares in the morbous effect. If the Mind be distempered and discomposed,
the Body cannot continue in health. The Soul and Body are so interwoven with
each other, and conjunct in their Operations, that they act together, enjoy and
suffer together: They are so linked and conjoined, as Partners of each others
ill and welfare, that the one is not affected, but the other is drawn into
consent; mutually acting, enjoying and suffering until death. Hence it is, a
diseased Body makes a heavy drooping mind; and a wounded, disturbed or restless
mind, makes a youthful healthy body to decay and languish. Who therefore
desires the health and welfare of the body, must procure Ease, Rest, and
Tranquillity of mind.

(...),
(...).
That you may the better know, and rightly understand how passions of the mind,
redound and reflect upon the body to the decay and ruin of it, and
abbreviating man's life.

First, Consider that the Body without the Souls energy, is dead, and moves not
at all: by virtue of the Souls conjunction with it, and informing power; the
Body acts with various motions and opperations; and according to the activity
of the Soul, with organical aptitude and fitness of the Body, is the
exquisiteness and perfection of their operations: The Soul then is Agent, the
Body passive, receiving the influx virtue and power from the Soul, who is
Rectrix and Gubernatrix, to whom the Rule and Government belongs. It is evident
therefore, since the Body cannot act any thing of it self for its conservation,
without the energy and assistance from the Soul, whose care is for the
regulating and moderating the Body in all actions external and internal; then
the distractions, inactivity, wanderings, and neglects of the Soul, does tend to
the subversion of this due order and government; and consequently the ruin and
dissolution of the body, which requires a constant supply of daily reparation,
and a regular tuition for its support and maintenance.

Now the Soul transported by passion from its genuine Crasis of placidness and
tranquillity, and reduced into a turbulent, unquiet and distempered state; is
that condition of incapacity and unfitness for government for the time being;
and many damages arise thereby, as in each passion particularly hereafter will
appear.

In a threefold manner the Soul is put besides her self in the regularity of
rectory, and is incurious of the welfare of the Body.

First, The Soul is either carried away by some delightful object; as for
something vehemently desired; and deserting, as it were, the body to follow
after that thing desired and coveted; extending her power and strength out of
the body, to lay hold, if possibly to obtain, and bring within the Sphere and
Circle of her enjoyment, as in the Passion of Love.

Or secondly, The Soul is in fury and disquieted within, by the apprehension of
something assaulting and disturbing; to which the Soul has a contrariety and
antipathy against: as in the passions of Fear, Hatred, Revenge, Anger: And this
disquietude and disturbance is continued by representations of their causes in
the fantasy; which still present themselves to the Soul, by way of a fresh
assault, which feeds the Passion, and continues the Distemper.

Or thirdly, The Soul is languishing, heavy and inactive, altogether indisposed
to the government and tuition of the body; and perhaps desirous to be
discharged and shake it off, being weary of the burden; taking no delight in
their partnership and society, as in melancholy despair and grief. In all
which cases you shall find the Body to suffer great prejudice and detriment.

In the first Case: When the Soul alienates her self, wanders away with a
vehement desire to procure and obtain any thing most agreeable and delightful,
the Soul, as it were, contracts her self, and unites all her force; stands at
full bent after this beloved; discharges all her thoughts upon it, and spends
her strength in desire and longing; until at last she pines away with a tedious
and starving expectation, if the beloved thing be not obtained. In the interim
the economy and government of her own mansion the Body is neglected; the
spirits, which are accounted the Souls immediate Instruments in every Faculty,
at least a considerable part, is enticed away, and called off from their proper
and peculiar works and duty; perhaps to enlarge and increase the vigor of some
other faculty, more immediately subservient and attending the Souls new design
and business; preferred far before a good concoction, due excretion, nutrition,
seasonable rest, or what else; and those spirits remaining which have the
burden of these duties incumbent on them, have so small and inconsiderable
support and supply of influence from the Soul, to direct and back them in their
performance; that the functions are executed weakly and depravedly, to the
great prejudice and damage of the Body.

Concoction now is not so good, nor the Appetite so quick; the stomach calls
not for a new supply, as yet not being well discharged and quit of yesterdayes
provision: the stomach now is weary of dressing and preparing long Dinners for
the Body; Lenten and fasting days are its vacation from trouble.

Separation now is not so good; the excrementitious and nutritious part walk
hand in hand together, and pass without contradiction or due examination: the
watch now is not so strict at the Ports and privy passages, to discern what is
fit to pass this way, and what the other, or what to reject and keep out; but
promiscuously receive what presents it self.

Distribution now is not so good; Aliment tires by the way, wanting spirits to
convey and bring it to its journeys end; and exercise to jog it on through the
angust Meanders, and more difficult passages.

Sanguification is now degenerated and vitiated; the preceding requisites and
fit praevious disposition in order thereto, being wanting.

Membrification or Assimilation is now changed for a Cachectick and depraved
habit.

Excretion and Evacuation of what is superfluous and unfit longer to be
retained in the body; is not sent away in due time, but stays for a Pass; the
Governess is now taken up with other matters; neglects due orders and commands
to the expulsive faculty for their emission.

All necessary and wholesome Customs are now neglected and disregarded: the
Soul too often is wandering and gadding abroad, and best when she is roving from
home; but neglects the airing of her Cottage, and perfuming it with fresh
aetherian breath. The Soul is now always restless and disturbed; nor shall the
Senses, her Attendants, take their due repose; but keeps an unquiet house at
midnight.

In the second Case: The regular and due order of government in the Body is
subverted and changed; when the Soul in the forementioned passions, of Fear,
Anger, Hatred, and Revenge; is disturbed and alarmed by the assault, approach
or appearance of some evil or injury: the Soul then summons the spirits
together, and commands them from their common duties; calls them to her aid and
assistance, for security from danger, to repulse the violence offered, or
revenge the injury; hurrying them here and there, from one part to another in a
tumultuous manner, if the assault be sudden and surprising: sometimes inward
to support the heart, to give courage and resolution, which by their sudden
concourse and confluence to the Center, causes great palpitations, and almost
suffocation: or else commanding them to the outworks; into the external parts,
to repel the invasion and violence of the evil presenting or approaching, or to
revenge the quarrel: the Hands and Arms then receive a double or trebble
strength; the Muscles being full and distended with agile spirits for their
activity and strength in motion. The Eyes then are staring full, and stretched
forth with a crowd of inflamed spirits, darting forth their fury, and spending
their strength upon the Adversary and Object of their trouble. The Tongue then
is swelled with spirits and big words, that wanting a larger room for vent,
tumbles out broken and imperfect speeches, and scarce can utter whole words.
The Legs and Feet then have an Auxiliary supply, and double portion of spirits
conveyed into their Nerves and Sinews, to increase their agility and
strength, to come on or off. But in the mean time the Heart perhaps is almost
fainting, so long being deprived of, and deserted by, those lively vigorous
spirits, which did inhabit and quarter there for its Lifeguard, protection and
support; but are now called off their Guard and common duties, employed in
Foreign Parts, commanded here and there as the emergent occasions presents it
self to the Governess of this Microcosm.

In the third case mentioned: the due order, government, and necessary
execution of offices belonging to the welfare and maintenance of the body, and
preservation of life, is neglected and weakly performed.

When the Soul being darkened and overspread with a cloud of sadness, betakes
her self to a sullen incurious recumbency and retiredness; willing to resign up
and cast off the government and tuition of the body; and as a burden which she
now delights not to bear about, begins to loose her hold, who before had
embraced and clipped so close; suspending the virtue of her energy and vigorous
emanations; acting faintly and coldly, those necessary mutual performances,
without regard to their former friendship, or their future conjunct
preservation. The Body now begins to sink with its own weight, and press
toward the Earth the natural place from whence it came. That aetherian spirit
which before had boyed it up, and took delight to sport it to and fro; is now
ready to let it fall and grovel downwards, to leave it whether it must go. The
wonted pleasures of their partnership and society, is now disgusted and
rejected: Food now has lost its relish, and is become unsavory: Sleep which
before was pleasant, as a holy day in the fruition of rest and ease, is now
composed of nothing but troublesome unquiet dreams; linked together with some
fighting intervals, to measure out the weary night by. Exercise and sporting
Recreations is now accounted druggery and laborious toyling: unwilling is the
Soul to move her yoak-fellow, farther then the enforcing Law of Nature, and
necessity commands and urges. Their joint operations which before were duly
and unanimously performed; are now ceased, abated or depraved, by the
retraction, reluctance and indisposed sadness of the Soul to act: the wonted
vigorous emanations of the Soul, and her radiant influence upon the spirits is
now suspended, subducted and called back. These ministering attending Spirits
and nimble Agents, which at a beck were always ready, agile and active in the
execution of her commands; now want Commands to stir, and Warrants to act by:
but in a torpid and somnolent disposition, unfit for action, and the exquisite
performance of their duties, and in a sympathizing compliance with the Soul,
the excitrix and rectrix of their motions; are ready to resign their Offices,
and give over working; that what they now do, is faintly and remisly performed,
with much deficiency and depravation. When the Soul is pleased and merry, the
spirits dance and are cheerful at their work; but when she droops and mourns,
the spirits are dull, heavy and tired, the Functions weakly and insufficiently
executed.

From the preceding Discourse may easily be collected; that the Distempers and
Alienations of the Soul from her genuine Crasis of serenety and quietude, is of
great disadvantage to Health; for as much as the necessary Functions of the
Body from hence are disordered and insufficiently performed; these
perturbations also, impressing upon the Body various preternatural effects;
forming the Ideas and Characters of Diseases upon the spirits, are by them
communicated, implanted and propagated in the body: likewise the morbifick
Seeds, and secret Characters of Diseases which lay dead and inactive; are by
the oeconomical disturbance and perturbation of mind, awakened, moved, and
stirred up to hostility and action, which otherwise would have layen dormant:
as by grief, fear, anger; hysterical passions, swoonings, epilepsies, etc. are
often procured: and it is evident, and commonly observed by infirm and diseased
people; how passion agravates and heightens their distempers; and according to
the temper of their mind will their bodily infirmities be agravated or abated.

I shall draw up this Discourse into three Corollaryes; being the Epitome of
what has been asserted and aimed at.

1. There is no perturbation or passion of mind, whether little or great; but
it works a real effect in the Body more or less, according to the nature and
strength of the passion; and by how much the more sudden, great, often, and of
longer duration the passion is, by so much are the impressions and effects
worse, more durable and indeleable. You cannot be angry, or envious, or
melancholy, or give way to any such passion, but you cherish and feed an enemy
that preys upon your life; and you may be assured that passion makes as great,
nay greater alteration within the body, then the change of your countenance
appears to outward view, which is not a little; although but a shadow or
reflection of the inward distemper and disorder: And were it possible by any
perspective to see the alteration and discomposure within made by a passionate
troubled mind; the prospect would be strange, and much different from that
placidness and tranquillity of an indisturbed quiet Soul.

2. Strong and vehement passions or affections of the mind too intent upon this
or that object, whether desirable, and to be enjoyed, or formidable, and to be
avoided; alienates, suspends and draws off the wonted vigor, influence, and
preservative power of the Soul due to the body; whereby the functions and
necessary operations are not duly and sufficiently performed, but
intempestively, remisly, and weakly: Nor is the damage only privative, but
also introduces and impresseth upon the spirits a morbifick Idea, which is ens
reale and seminale, producing this or that effect, according to the nature and
property of the Idea received, and aptitude of the recipient subject. Phansies
and Idea's are let in naked, but they straight are invested and clothed in the
body, have a real existence, and are entia realia; though at first conception
but entia rationis: as the longing of a pregnant Woman, being but the Idea of a
thing in her mind, begets various and real distemprs in her body, if not soon
satisfied; and sometimes charactarized upon the Embryo in the Womb. Likewise a
good stomach is taken off its meat suddenly, by the coming of some unwelcome
bad news; the appetite is gone, now the Soul is disquieted, and the Body really
affected and altered: Let this sad tidings be contradicted, and the Soul
satisfied of the truth to the contrary; it sets a new impression upon the
spirits, they strait are cheared, lively and active; the stomach calls for meat
and drink, and the faculties restored to their wonted operations. Whereby it
appears, the two passions of joy and grief, as they are opposite in their
objects, so are their effects wrought in the Body, as far distant and different.

3. A cogitative or contemplative person to intent always, or unseasonably
employing the mind seriously and eagerly either in real or fictious matters,
fabricating Idea's upon the spirits; disturbs and hinders other necessary
offices and opperations conservative of being, enervates and weakens their
performance in duty, impares Health, and hastens old Age: but those that live
most incurious, and void of studious thoughts, too serious cogitations, and
disqueting passions; preserve the strength of Nature, and integrity of all the
Faculties; protract the verdure and beauty of youth, much longer from
declensions and decay: for by how much the rational faculty is over busy,
disturbed and intempestively exercised; drawing the full vigor of the Soul
into the discharge of that faculty, and robbing other inferior functions of
their necessary influential supply, and emanative power from the Soul; by so
much the other faculties are impoverished and abated; their executions more
languid and depraved: and therefore it is a close Students life, a careful or
passionate mind, disposes to, and introduces many infirmities; enervates and
debilitates nature, abbreviates and shortens her course.

SECT. XVI. Perturbations or Passions of the Soul particularly.
Of Anger.
THis Passion is a great Disease, if we consider the preternatural effects and
alterations it makes: for the functions of the body are disordered and
discomposed by it, and the whole man changed from what he was. In giving
judgment upon Diseases, so much worse is that person to be accounted, whose
alteration is greater from what he was in a state of health; and as the
functions perverted are more in number, and superior in dignity.

This Disease does not take up one particular part for its quarters; but it
seaseth the whole Man. All the Faculties are disordered, and every part is
discomposed and disturbed. Take a view of an angry Man; or rather a Man in the
fury and perturbation of Anger: his Reason is suppressed or suspended; he acts
not rationally, but as a mad man: his face is changed; his eyes stairs and
sparkles; his Tongue stammers; his Heart pants; his Pulse beats high and quick;
his Breath is almost gone; the Blood and all the Humors boil; and the Spirits
are agitated to and fro by gusts like an impetuous Wind; he trembles all over,
and this storm shakes the whole Fabric of man's body.

Surely this is a great Disease, that thus discomposeth, and puts the whole man
out of frame and order: such storms as these do much weaken and enervate the
ability of the Faculties; disorder their regular performance and discharge of
their Offices; but more especially infirm Parts are made sensible of the
prejudice, and choleric lean bodies. An inflammation of any particular part is
a great Disease; but Anger is an inflammation of the whole; and were this
distemper to continue long, a man were in as much danger of life, as in the
highest Fever. Therefore take the Poets counsel.

Principiis obsta --
-- Ne frena animo permit Calenti.
Stat. Fear.
Fear whether sudden and violently seazing, or gradually approaching and
threatening an evil to come: both enervate and debilitate Nature.

Fear suddenly surprising, chaseth the spirits to and fro from their residency
and faculties, sometimes compressing and driving them to the heart, causing
violent palpitations and suffocation: or scattering them from the Fountain of
Life, into the external parts, making a dissolution almost to exanimation.

Such frightful surprises as these, are very dangerous, and seldom happen, but
they leave some sad Characters and Impressions behind. Etiam fortes viri
subitis terrentur. Tacit.
Against this fear there is no remedy, having surprised and seized the Person
before deliberation can interpose to prevent it, or preparation made
courageously to meet, or valiantly to stand against this shock of terror.

Fear that gives warning before the evil comes: and threatens as yet afar off:
that Soul which then yields up her courage and strength of resistance, is
disarmed by her own fancy, and vanquished by her self: is conquered with
nothing in Being, but with the fear of something that may be. The evil,
although to come, and possibly may be prevented and never come; yet it is made
a present calamity: the suggestions being received, and the Soul sinks under
them; make a pressure upon the Soul as really afflicting as the evil it self.

Multos in summa pericula
misit timor ipse mali. Luc.
Such fears as these ought to be chased away, and manfully resisted; that which
may be, is as far from us sometimes as that which never shall be. The fear of
things that never come; are ten to those that come to pass.

Quid juvat dolori suo occurrere?
Satis cito dolebit cum venerit. Sen.
As Anger swells the Soul, and thrusts forward the spirits into the exterior
parts, to oppose and to revenge the ill: On the contrary, Fear makes the Soul
to shrink, and the spirits to give back. By this contraction of the Soul, her
wonted vigorous emanations in all the faculties are suspended; whereby the
functions of the Body are remisly and depravedly performed: the spirits retire
inwards, the face grows pale, wan and thin; and the Soul pines and languisheth
with the apprehension of a seeming future evil, and the prospect of a dubious
impending fate.

Plura sunt quae nos terrent quam quae premunt; and saepius opinione quam re
laboramus.

What if the evil threatened be too great for you to encounter with now: yet
either your power may be enlarged before it comes; or that may be lessened and
reduced within the compass of your ability to resist, and power to contend with.

Quic quid humana open majus est,
Diis permit curandum. Symach.
Care.
Care is a mixed passion, made up of Desire and Fear. There is in Care a desire
of getting, and a fear of losing: the anxiety between these two, enervates and
weakens the strength of the Soul: she spends her self in projection to acquire
and get: and labors continually also under the fear of loss: either of that
already gotten, or of that which is in possibility, and likely to be obtained.

Being thus disquieted, and always in an unsatisfied condition; the Body is
enfeebled and checked from thriving: Meat and Drink will not nourish, if they be
not changed duly, in the digestions, and assimilated into the substance of the
Body, by the energy of a vigorous Soul, in a placid state of government; not
drawn off unseasonably and constantly, with perplexing thoughts. Always
plodding in mind is not good: if your purse gains and thrives by it; I am sure
your body loses and grows worse. The Poet's advice in this condition is good
sometimes, being discreetly used.

Nunc vino pellite curas. Hor. And another well admonishes from perplexing
your selves with future contrivances and provisions: Hodierna cura tantum;
Qui cras futura novit? Anacr.


An indisturbed free mind, not loaded with the thoughts of many years to come,
but bearing only the burden of the day; holds out much longer, and preserves
the faculties in strength and vigor: but immoderate care, and a thoughtful
life, wears out the faculties much sooner; tires the spirits by denying them
their due times for refreshment, rest and ease; disables them from duty, and
the true performance of their Offices; heats and wastes the spirits, and
exsiccates the nutritious juces of the Body; which changes a fresh countenance
into paleness; degenerates a good Constitution, and pines the Body: but most
injurious to thin, lean, and choleric Persons. Those too much thus addicted,
and cumbred with careful thoughts, may sometimes imitate this example for a
Remedy.

Nunc potemus laeti jucunda confabulantes;
Quae vero post erunt, diis sint curae.
Theog. Revenge, Jealousy, and Envy.
These Diseases of the mind are as painful Ulcers, continually lancinating,
corroding or inflaming: they gnaw and eat like a Cancer; they take away the
nourishment from food, and refreshment from sleep: the anguish of these sores,
render every thing unpleasant and unserviceable for the welfare and support of
the Body: so that these sicknesses of the mind, make the Body to pine and
languish, introducing a secret Consumption, wasting the Spirits and nutritious
moisture, and enfeebling all the faculties.

Revenge (besides the trouble and disquietness of spirit) exposes a man to a
greater mischief, Multis ^ injuriis obiicit, dum una dolet. Sen.
then what he has received.

Jealousy is a secret tormentor, that gauls the mind with continual suspicion,
and raises suggestions, that afflict the Soul with anxiety and restlesness.

Envy is a Wolf in the Breast that must be satisfied, or it sucks the blood,
and feeds upon the vitals. This Disease pines and starves a man in the midst of
plenty: and he withers away in the Sunshine of another prosperity.

Invidus alterius rebus marcescit opimis. Hor. These perturbations and Diseases
of the mind, will not let the body thrive; for if that be sick, the Body cannot
be in health.

Love and Desire.
These two, although they seldom go alone; and desire follows close at the
heels of Love: yet they may be separated and distinguished thus. Love is a
delight, complacency and suteableness with the thing loved.

Desire, is the longing for, or stretching forth of the Soul to obtain, procure
and bring into enjoyment. Desire gives wings to the Soul, and seemingly
transports and brings her to the thing desired: so that all her strength is
spent in outgoings and stretchings forth to obtain and join with the object of
desire.

-- Quo non possum Corpore, mente feror. Ovid. Love and Desire, being
inordinate and impetuous, seldom goes alone, but is attended with other
Passions: as Hope, Fear, Melancholy, Despair, one or more for their consorts,
with which the mind is racked and torn, and variously affected as the several
Passions acts their Parts by turns. Sometimes Love is bold and venturous; at
another time cowardly and fearful: sometime hoping, and sometimes despairing;
sometimes brisk, and sometimes sad and heavy. So that the Soul is tossed up and
down, and filled with the disquietness of successive mixed Passions, attending
upon Love and Desire.

Nor is the Soul only disturbed and hurried away by this Passion of Desire;
but the Body also is restless and unquiet: going from one place to another;
being not satisfied Here, turns away, hoping to find more content There. Desire
is very sollicitous and troublesome, and importunate at unseasonable times; so
that the bed does not give rest and quiet sleeps, but is tossing and turning
there from side to side: and when up, cannot stand still, or sit still; this
thorny desire is always spurring on from one place to another; but which way
to take, this giddy Passion cannot well resolve: notwithstanding these
perplexities, the doubts and difficulties of obtaining, the Soul is led away
with an ignis fatuus of fervent zeal; deserts her own mansion, the Body, and
follows after with an eager prosecution of enjoying; never at home but as a
Prisoner; and Prisoners are but bad housekeepers: the body needs must languish
and decay, when the Soul thus delights and strives to run away.

By the continuance of these Passions interfering and complicating with each
other; the regular economy and tuition of the Body is neglected; that decays,
grows lean and consumptive: the face grows pale, the appetite abates, and sleep
departs, or is but short and interrupted with troublesome dreams and wakings:
the vigor and strength of the faculties is spent in desiring, and by the
disquietness of the other attending Passions.

For a remedy and check to the impetuousness of this inordinate affection and
immoderate desire; take these considerations to calm, allay, and regulate your
passion.

First, That you cheat your self in setting too high a price upon the object of
your affections, and lay out more in expectation then the income of your desire
obtained can possibly make a return: that it is far greater in non habendo,
then it will be in fruendo; it will be much less when you have, then it seems
to be now you have it not.

Secondly, That the Delirium and fervency of your desire, does not hasten the
accomplishment of your aims, but rather retards or frustrates: for the
extremity and strength of passion debilitates and suppresseth Reason, the chief
contriver and manager of your design; puts you upon inconsiderate, immature and
rash attempts; and makes you more unfit, incapable, and unable to effect your
purpose; for Passion is always spurring, but Reason has its stops and pauses,
keeps due times for onsets and progress.

Thirdly, That prudent and vigorous action; not innane hungry volition, or
thirsty desire, though ever so great, can acquire the satisfaction of your
hopes.

Fourthly, That the ardency and height of desire, will not imbetter, sweeten,
or add to the height of your enjoyment, but rather abate and lessen it in your
account and esteem: for what thing soever you purchase, and are mistaken and
deceived in, you will not value at that rate you first prized it, but at the
worth you now find it. Vehement and lofty desires screw you up to such a
height of expectation, mountain high; but you must descend into fruition,
that is low as the valley; and when you find your self in a bottom, and your
Sails not so filled and puffed out, as formerly by the fresh gailes and blasts of
a strong desire; your top-fails then begin to flap and flag when you come in to
the still calm of fruition, and your lofty spirits and high thoughts will lower
amain when you Anchor in the Harbor of Enjoyment: for in appearance it was
great, when at a distance seemingly; but now you are come nearer, it is much
less and inconsiderable really; Non ea jam men's res habenti, quae desideranti
erat.
and what swelled you full in the prosecution of attaining; will not fill you
now with satisfaction, but prove aerie when you grasp it, and soon emptied in
enjoyment.

Fifthly, That statutum est, it is appointed you must, or you must not obtain
the thing desired; which to a rational creature, is sufficient without other
Arguments, to qualify, moderate and blunt the keen edge of desire, and curb
the violence of an impetuous affection: but not to cowardice, daunt or stop a
laudible active prosecution, to attain a noble, virtuous and lawful end, with a
moderate submisive desire.

-- quisquis in primo obstitit
Repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor fuit.
Sen. Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum,
Sero recusat far quod subiit jugum.
Melancholy, Grief and Despair.
These Passions being near alied, we may rank them together, as the Companions
and Attendants upon adversity and misfortunes: whose properties are to rob and
steal away from the Soul, that vivacious enlivening power, which roborates and
quickens all the faculties in the Body. When these Passions are predominant,
the energy of the Soul is abated, and all the functions insufficiently, weakly
and depravedly performed.

A dark Cloud of Melancholy overspreading the Soul; suffocates and choaks the
Spirits, retards their motion and agility, darkens their purity and light:
these instruments in each faculty being thus disabled, their offices in every
part of the body are faintly executed, whereby the whole body decays and
languisheth: witness the common symptoms of a dejected sad condition: a pale
thin face, heavy dead eyes, a slow weak pulse, loss of appetite, weakness,
faintness, restlesness; a weight or compression about the region of the heart,
with continual sighing or palpitation: these are the effects wrought in the
Body, by Melancholy and Grief, which are to be avoided as great decayers of
Nature, and great enemies to Beauty, Health, and Strength.

Hope, Joy and Mirth.
But embrace and cherish these, as the supports of your life; which raises the
Soul to the highest pitch, and stretches forth her power to the utmost. These
enlivening affections are the greatest friends to, and preservatives of health
and strength. In this serene state of the Soul, all her endowments and
abilities are advanced, both rational, sensitive and natural: the pleasantness
and delight of the Soul puts the spirits upon activity, and excites them to a
vigorous operation and duty in all the functions: preserves youth and beauty,
makes the body fresh, plump, and fat, by expanding the spirits into the
external parts, and conveighing nutriment to repair and replenish the utmost
borders and confines of the Microcosm.

-- dum fata sinunt vivite laeti. Sen. FINIS.

