USEFUL DISCOVERIES, AND PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS, IN Some Late Remarkable Cures
of the Scurvy.

By E Maynwaringe, Dr. in Physic.

Cognitio Sequitur Curaetiones. LONDON Printed by A. M. for T. Basset under St.
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1668.

To the Diseased.
IN vain it is to Discourse, and have the Notion of Diseases; unless also
efficacious Medicines be found out to answer their Indications for Cure: Which
to do, is the most difficult and laborious part of Physic. And this we may
conclude from the often frustration and disappointment of Medicines in their
effects, after Learned Consultations, and deliberate Determination of the
Disease, Causes, Part affected, etc. rightly stated.

Here is the great Check given to the Physicians Learning; and, until this
trial of the Medicine, he receives no repulse, but goes on smoothly with
Applause and boldly: but, finding his Medicine take little or no effect for the
purpose intended, is then at a stand a while: But, being loath to receive a
baffle from the Disease, does prescribe another, and perhaps another after
that, a fourth and a fifth, and sometimes many more if the Disease be
contumacious and stubborn: and this some will call a Methodical course of
Physic. But I shall not harp upon that string.

This Disappointment is too often observed in the practice of Physic, and this
arising only from ineffectual, languid erroneous Medicines, and how does this
come to pass? but that the care and burden of this work rests upon those that
are unable and unfit to manage it: or by trusting too much the credit of
Authors and their traditional Medicines, either Galenical or Chemical; relying
upon their authority, and the truth of their Writings, which have deluded and
frustrated the expectation of many. And this I have observed in practical
Authors and Pharmacopaeas of both Sects, Medicines collected and borrowed from
one another, and delivered thus from hand to hand, none knows who first
invented them; or whether any of them ever made or tried them, that highly
extolls and gives large encomiums of their virtues.

That many of these are Delusions either in the process, or the efficacy of the
Medicine, to my own cost and Labor, I have experimented, and must say with
Helmont that great Philosopher, Vexatio parit intellectum and therefore do
Caution others, lest they suffer upon this Rock: but he that will purchase to
himself excelling Medicines (being accomplished with literature, with the
groundwork and Canons of the Art,) let him not tie himself up, or credit too
much this or that Author, but follow the dictates of his own reason, confirmed
and guided by collateral experiments; and herein a Physician daily exercised,
shall in time attain to great knowledge and satisfaction in Medicine; and
purchase to himself Medicaments of great worth and value: and this must be
every Physicians proper Labor and daily endeavors, that rationally intends,
and rightly goes about to improve and advance the efficacy and power of
Medicines, that they may have their praise and fame in the World, and the
Physician much satisfaction and content in their wonderful Operation. It is
not, Sitting in his Study alone, and poring upon Books, but his own manual
Operation and Inspection over his Servants, that gives the great stroke to the
business; the other does very little without this, but both, must needs do well:
and I must say, and that justly, he that practices Physic, with a bare
speculative, traeditional, and book-reading knowledge of Medicines, is very
unskilful in the true fundamental knowledge of Medicines; and is as unfit to
prescribe or appoint Medicines in hazardous or difficult cases, as the that by
only reading of Navigation, is unable to manage and conduct a Ship to
East India.

And this is reason to averr: for he knows not what a Medicine is, nor can he
give a good and certain account upon his own knowledge of the Nature of any
Ingredient, but has all upon trust: This or that man says it; the conclusion
will not handsomely follow, Ergo, It is so. No wise man that can gain a certain
knowledge of his own, will borrow at hazard of another; considering the untruths
and Erorrs that are scattered abroad in most Writings; that he which lives only
by borrowing thus, shall run himself out of credit and Reputation in his
Profession, if blind Fortune be not very much his friend.

It Is most certain and true, that the Ingredients of any Medicine are not known
by reading of them, but by their single and compound preparation, and
separation of their constituent parts: and thus by handling, and Chymically
dissecting their bodies, each part lies bare, and presents it self to your
understanding.

And farther; An Ingredient whether of the Animal, Vegetable, or the Mineral
Family, changes its Nature and Effect, according to the variation of its
Consorts, with whom it is joined: that it is not the same compounded with this,
as it is with that; but works a different effect; because many times they act
upon each other, subduing and moderating each others peculiar Nature, that a
median nature does result: And therefore great care and knowledge in the
Physician is required, about the choice and conjunction of Ingredients; that he
be able to look through their several Natures, to find out their similitude and
repugnancy; their concord and discord: for hereby is known what properties will
be advanced, and what depressed: and this an able Chemical Physician can
d^scern, as having a perspective through knowledge, the other is but Exterior and
Partial: and as the composition of Ingredients may alter and change their
Natures; so likewise their various manner of Preparation singly, do change an
Ingredient, that it is made this or that, as a perite Artist pleases,
exalting, or prostrating and killing this or that quality, as his purpose
requires.

And here by the way, I must take notice of the traditional and unprofitable
account of Vegetables that our Herbals give; of which the Chemical Physician
takes little notice, and is a small assistance and guide to him in the Election
of Plants for his several Intentions. Being satisfied long since that
Medicament was the most weighty and considerable part of Physic, and that a
deficiency or error there, is a greater disadvantage and detriment to the
Patient, then in the determination of the Desease; I did eagerly apply my self
to Medicines (according to the ancient custom and general practice of the most
learned and famous Physicians in all places; who were industrious Artists,
diligent in preparing their own Medicines, until this later age) with as much
curiosity as my knowledge could possibly direct. At first I was desirous to make
Experiments, and be fully informed in Galenic Medicines, being grounded upon
those Principles by my Academic Education, and was tenacious enough of that
Doctrine, un^il a clearer prospect of truth did appear, gained by Observations
in practical Philosophy, a serious ratiocination and strict examination of
Principles and received Opinions: but being removed off that Basis, and
confirmed by Chemical Trials relating to Medicine; I deserted the Galenic
Medicines as inferior to that I discovered and was presented to my view; and
ever since have labored in Chemical Pharmacy, as being the most excellent way
of preparing Medicines.

Some Objections are made by the Learned, and by the Ignorant, against Chemical
Medicines; but to v^ndicate them from common slanders, and clearly to determine
the difference between these and other Medicines, will take up more room than
can be afforded in this place, and therefore must of necessity wave it,
expecting an Opportunity hereafter, to ventilate that Subject: Only, by the way
I must no^e that Chemistry suffers much, and is eclipsed in its reputation by
some illiterate pretenders and bold fellows, not qualified Philosophically, but
rudely intruding upon the Art, without a due preparation and legitimate
induction brings scandal upon the learned, deserving Professors, and defamation
to the Art, by Usurping the Title of Doctors and Chimical Phisicians, that many
are deceived by them, which are not able to discern the difference between a
Doctor of Physic, and a crafty Empyric. But the ingenious Phylosophical
Artist, ought to be cherished and encouraged in his Operations and rational
Trials.

But to my purpose intended: in my Treatise of the Scurvy, having traced that
Disease from its Infancy, and Generation, to its full grows and strength, its
chief places of Residence, variety of appearance and monstrous deformity; it
remains, I should now propose some effectual means to check and subdue the
prevailing power of this spreading Disease, that daily growns, and increases
to the ruin and decay of Nature; being possessed and seated in the Vital
Principles, Seducing and Constraining them to enormity and defection from the
regularity in which they were planted by Nature. And having strictly surveighed
the condition and nature of this Disease, with its variety of attendants and
additional strength, being ready to join with any Morbific cause, and be
transformed; I was unwilling to sit down here and rest with a contemplative
knowledge of this Disease, and leave the greatest part of the work undone; the
subduing and vanquishing of it by powerful Medicines: nor being willing to
commit the remaining part to the industry and care of others (for good reason)
I have therefore labored to form Medicinal Instruments to oppose this
Contumacious Herculean Disease: and as fit means for this encounter, I prepared
three Medicines of a different Classis and Operation, to meet with the variety
of Symptoms, and Scorbutic Complications.

In the Cure of the Scurvy, at least in most Scorbutic cases, there are three
intentions of cure to be aimed at: the first is, Purgation or Cleansing, to
carry off that Scorbutic Impurity, or Degenerate Matter lodged in the Stomach
and Bowels, de praving and alienating good food daily received: Secondly,
roborating and strengthening the digestive Faculties which are debilitated and
alienated from the integrity of their Offices; not only the Digestive Office of
the Stomach, but the subsequent Digestions also: Thirdly, Depuration of the
Blood, and cleansing the habit of the Body: Nature discharges her self from
within, and sending daily to the exterior parts, those also must be tainted
more or less, as the Symptoms will manifest; and therefore do require to be
freed from feculency, and the Blood purified.

To answer these three Purposes, I prepared three Principal Medicines, viz.
Scorbutic-Pills, Catholick-Elixir, and a Sudorific-Extract; These Medicines I
have been reforming and improving alwost seven years, to advance their
Efficacious, Dies diem docet.
but most gentle and benign Operations. And, for the better effecting this
endeavor, and aim the constant and daily use of them in diverse Scorbutic
persons, attended with different Symptoms of the Disease, and complicated with
diverse other Diseases, gives great information and satisfaction to me, in the
several accounts I receive of their Operations, both at home, and abroad, by
Letters from remote parts of this Kingdom: whereby I am taught, which way and
wherein it is possible to improve them and to give them as great a Latitude of
Universality and extent of Operation, Nihil est fimul and inventum ac perfectum.
in their peculiar Classes, as long experience and daily use, can dictate to
their several repeated processes and trials of making, and this is my Study and
daily experience in Chemical trials to improve these and all other Medicines I
use in my Practice, that they may attain to such perfection and energy, as
Cito, tuto jucunde, to relieve the Diseased, in the most contumacious Maladies,
and deplorable Cases, remediable: hereby Medicines will gain greater esteem,
and the Art its deserved repute and Fame, if Physicians by their own care and
pains (as they ought) would manage this Work, and be as Industrious and
skillful in this, as in the other parts of their Profession.

But occasions call me off from this Discourse: I must hasten to finish the
remainder, which is a more part cular account of the Operation of Medicines in
the Cure of his Difease; with some remarkable Observations in difficult Ca^es
and dubious Complications, I have met with lately in Practice, of necessary
Consideration to others in like manner Diseased.

London From my House in Clarken-well-Close. E. M. Med. D.

Of such Purgation and proper Purgatives, as is requisite in Curing the Scurvy.
PUrgation or Clensing is praemitted as a regular and due course in the cure of
most Diseases; and it is instituted, chiefly to cleanse the first region of the
body, and to carry off what superfluous or degenerate matter is to be voided by
the gutts: And this operation is necessary in the cure of most Diseases, though
seated in other parts; for, although the infirmity lie not in the first region
of the body, neither in the Stomach, Gall, Gutts, Mesentery, Liver, nor Spleen;
yet it is aggravated, if those parts be foul: and probably may be the original
and foundation of those remote Infirmities, by consent or transmission; nor
shall medicine carry its virtue without impediment and abatement, or food
clearly conveyed to nourish the body; if those parts be foul, clogged and
obstructed.

Now to make choice of a fit and good Medicine, that will cleanse the Stomach,
Gutts, Mesentery, Liver, and Spleen, without offering injury to their peculiar
Crasis or Ferments; that is, not to alienate them from their proper distinct
natures, not to impress and stamp new qualities upon them; this is a Medicine
you may freely use, and expect great relief from, in keeping the forenamed
parts pure and clean; and such a Medicine is to be used in the cure of
scorbutic persons: but if you use Purgers of a deleterious and virulent
quality, that act per modum veneni; they will characterise their virulencies,
and exotic adverse properties upon the parts, alienate and debilitate the
ferments in their Functions and Offices; and the often use of them impairs
Nature very much, though for the present sometimes alleviation does acrue from
the evacuation procured, though by bad means; and of this nature, are most of
the Purgers in use, as Senna, Coloquintida, Rhuhab, Hellebore, etc. having a
laxative venom that stimulates Nature to expulsion.

Since Purgation is thus necessary, and purgatives so choisely to be elected
and chosen, not every medicine that causes stools, but such as is also endowed
with balsamic and amicable properties, no way injurious to nature; I have
therefore been a diligent Searcher and Improver of such a Medicine, that may
answer the intentions proposed: and by degrees of improvement in some years
time, by various alterations and trials, have perfected a purgative vegetable
Extract, that sully satisfies and pleases me, in its manner of operation and
effects: and this Medicine is my Scorbute Pills, so called, because primely
intended and contrived for the most efficacious purgative medicine in all
Scorbutic Cases. Now the Scurvy (as appears in the former part of that Book) is
complicated and joins with all manner of diseases, Scorbutic Dropsies,
Scorbutic Fevers, Asthmaes, Palsies, Gouts, Scorbutic Consumptions, etc. that
a particular medicine for this or that humor, being too narrow, and not
adaequate to the latitude of the disease, will take no effect in many Scorbutic
persons: but such as are radical and graduated in universality, are the
powerful and laudable medicines; I have therefore framed and improved this
Medicine to answer the intents of Purgation, in all Scorbutic persons and
cases, and is the best purgative medicine, both in the manner of operation, and
the effects, that ever I used, or read of.

For farther satisfaction, and proof of this, I shall give you some brief
Account of these Pills from my own experience and observation, in diverse cases
upon several of my Patients.

They are effectually used against the defects and errors of digestion in the
first, second and third office: in the first, namely in all diseases of the
stomach requiring purgation and cleansing downwards, and the bad symptoms
arising from thence; as Oppression, Fullness, Nauseating, Wind, Pain or Griping,
Worms, loss of Appetite; in all these cases this medicine is very proper to
cleanse and discharge the stomach, make it clean and fit for the reception of
wholesome food, and not till then can you expect good nourishment: if the
stomach be soul, the nutriment conveyed from thence to support and maintain the
body, must also be vitiated and impure. And here I must relate to you what
happened to a Gentlewoman that had been long in a Scorbutic Atrophy (a
Consumption arising from the Scurvy) for some years, but not discovered; she
was observed to droop and decline, and her Complexion change, and yet she
complained not of pain in any part; she slept indifferently, but had little or
no appetite to meat. Several conjectures there were concerning the cause of her
langu shing by Physicians, and others her Friends; some said one thing, others
another; tried this medicine, then that; but all this while received no help:
at last, she applied to me, and upon examination of the whole matter, I found
her to be Scorbutical: I gave my judgment of her present state and condition,
how and from what causes procured, and a Prognostic what whould follow if not
prevented: whereupon she willingly resigned her self to my care, and to do what
I thought fit, to restore her.

At first I appointed her to lay aside her Dyet-drinks, Restaurative
Electuaries and Potions (with which she had been loaded again and again) and to
rest Ten days before I would give her any thing of Physic; in the interim to
cat such meat as her stomach did like and best agree with, which pleased her
well, she having been strictly tied up to a Diet: at Ten days end I gave her a
Dose of these Scorbute Pills, one over night, and two next morning, which workt
six times very-gently with her that day; the night following she slept well,
and the next morning I appointed her to take a Dose of my Catholic Elixir
sixteen drops in a spoonful of Sack, and likewise three mornings following, but
increasing two drops every morning: her stomach now was something better, and
she more lively: The fifth day I ordered her a Dose of the same Pills, which
operated much as the former: and brought away two worms; fourdays following she
took the Elixir, and the fifth, a dose of the Scorbute Pills; and thus
intermittingly she used these two medicines for the space of six weeks. At a
fortnights end, her stomach was much better both for appetite and digestion; at
the months end she was stronger and well able to go, very cheerful, and eat her
meat with delight; her Complexion altered much for the better, and about the
sixth week she improved in flesh, and began to be something plump and full;
then I bad her desist from her Pills, but continue the Elixir, which so
strengthened the digestive faculties, that she daily improved, grew strong, and
in a short time obtained perfect health.

To reflect upon this Story: Here was a latent Scorbutic Impurity that deaded
the appetite, and what was forced down the stomach, did not digest, but
degenerate; so that the body could not thrive, nor had the benefit of that
little food received; but this vicious matter being carried off by a proper
medicine, and the loaded tired parts refreshed and relieved by a generous
spirituous Medicine; nature then revives and returns to her wonted duties, with
that strength and regularity as formerly. I might instance in many cases
parallel to this that I have met with in Scorbutic Patients; but I must be
brief and proceed.

Not only in Diseases of the stomach, but also in the subsequent Digestions; I
have found these Pills most effectually Abstersive and Aperitive, opening
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Mesentery and Gutts; exonerating and
discharging those parts of crude, coagulated, depraved fermenting matter, from
whence arise pains and flatulent humors of those parts, Cachexies, or ill
habits of body, Fluxes, Colicks, Hypochondriac Melancholy, etc. and here I must
relate the case of a Patient, pertinent to this place, worth your observation,
which was thus. A Gentleman, aged between Thirty and Forty, something studious
and melancholy, complaining of pain sometimes in his left side under the short
Ribs, sometimes in the other side opposite to it; sometimes he was Costive, a
stool once in two or three days; sometimes Laxative, two or three stools in a
day with some gripes and wind, his Belly often puffed up and distended, at
which times he complained of a shortness of breath, streightness over his
Breast, and difficulty of breathing like one that is Asthmatick: in the night
often afflicted with frightful dreams and Palpitations of the heart; after this
manner (with other Circumstances which I omit) he continued for the space of
four years or there abouts; all which time he was not negligent in procuring
help, nor sparing of his Purse (having wherewith to do it) but applied himself
here and there for advice; some was of one opinion, another of a different
judgment; and having tried variety of medicines with little success, was tired,
and resolved to sit down contented with his infirmities, and gave over Physic
nere six months: But meeting with one, formerly a Patient of mine that I had
cured, (though a different case) encouraged him to come to me, or acquaint me
by Letter first with his condition: whereupon he wrote to me (living at a great
distance) and gave me a full Relation of his case, defiring my advice and
assistance the ein, submitting to what course I should appoint him: I
considering the whole story, I was sufficiently satisfied of the Disease, that
he was deeply seized with the Scurvy, as the Syndrome and Concurrence of
symptoms did certainly discover. Whereupon I sent him my Treatise of the
Scurvy, to contemplate his Difease at large, and to be useful to him as a
Guide, with a Box of Scorbute Pills and an Elixir; and bad him proceed in the
use of them according to Directions; which he did for Three weeks, then gave me
an account, that the violence of his Disease was much abated, the Symptoms more
mild and easy, and not so frequent: those nights he took a Pill, he slept more
quietly then at other times; in his stools came away little lumps of a slimy
jelly of a dark color, or blackish, after which he was much at ease; his Belly
and Hypochonders were more flat and soft; that since his Physic, some dark
spots appeared in several parts of his body, with a moisture upon his skin as
enclining to sweat some nights, but chiefly toward morning: This I liked well;
and farther, appointed him the Sudorisick Medicine hereafter mentioned, to help
forward and procure breathing Sweats twice in the week, which I judged to be of
great advantage to him: this he diligently performed seven or eight times,
until the spots vanished; and then his spirits were more brisk and cheerful,
and more fit for business, having thrown off that impure matter, and dispersed
the Cloud of Scorbutic vapors that clogged and darkened his spirits; his sleep
now was quiet, and (to be short) the symptoms that formerly molested him did
not appear, but was reduced beyond expectation. I gave him some cautions and
advice, lest he might relapse, which he punctually observed, and stood firm for
seven or eight months after: Since, I hear nothing of him, but suppose him to
be well, for which he was not ungrateful.

I might Comment largely upon this case, and illustrate the Scurvy in the
several Symptoms, though disguised by various names usually given, not
respecting the causes: but I pass on.

I have yet a farther Account of these Pills, how, and in what principal Cases
I have used them successfully; for diseases and infirmities of the Head, so
accounted though arising from inferior parts most often; as Apoplexy,
Epilepsies, Convulsion, Palsies, Vertigoes, Soporiferous and drowsy
Infirmities, Rheums, Headaches, etc. This Medicine is profitably used, by
Eradicating their causes, that require Abstersion and Evacuation in the lower
Regions of the Body. Diseases ascribed to the Head, though appearing there, yet
for the most part do arise from inferior parts, occasioned by their
Impurities, Obstructions, and Disorder; for one that is Idiopathically
Afflicted, ten are Sympathically affected by consent of parts, and transmission
of some Morbifick matter thither: the Disease appears in one part, but the
foundation and cause is Radicated in another, and to that part must the cure be
directed.

And therefore, if well observed, we frequently meet with Scorbutic Palsies,
Scorbutic Convulsions Apoplexies, Sleepy Diseases, pains of the head
Giddiness, trembling of the Nervs, Deafness, dull Sight and Blindness; and all
these arising from the Scurvy or Scorbutic impurity of the body oftentimes,
and these are not cured but by Anti-scorbutic Medicines; and those that
endeavor otherwise with their Specificks and appropriate Medicines, to the
parts where such Symptoms and Diseases do appear, labor in vain, and are
frustrated in their intended Cures.

I might instance in many more cases wherein this Medicine has done me good
service, but that would be too tedious to relate: therefore in general I must
say, for Sorbutic persons, and the various Symptoms that attend that Disease,
whether in this part, or that part; these Pills are the best Abstersive and
Purgative Medicine I ever made use of, being so amicable and friendly to
nature, in their Operation, performing with so much ease and gentleness, that I
have given them to the weakest bodies with good success, proportioning the dose
according to the ability of the body.

I shall here set down the Dose and Circumstances that belong to the taking of
these Pills.

The ordinary Dose for man, or woman, is three Pills; some Bodies (though very
seldom) require four: and sometimes two Pills is sufficient, for weak bodies,
and such as work freely with a small matter.

So much difference there is in bodies for purging, that two of these Pills are
sufficient for some; but most commonly three Pills are required, seldom four:
therefore try your body first, with a lesser Dose then, if it require more, you
may add to the next; and in so doing you will not err: For example, If you have
a stubborn body, difficult and hard to purge, and the first Dose works but
little, Tutius est peccare in defectu, qua^ in excessu.
the next Dose you may take one Pill more: but if you have a lax gentle body
freer in Operation than you expected, then abate a Pill, if the first work too
nimbly with you. The difference of bodies is such in Operation, (especially
purging) that they require a different Dose, or quantity for their proportion,
which cannot so exactly be determined and appointed by the praescience of the
most skilful Physician, but by a rational Conjecture; until the first
experiment and trial of their bodies, (which uncertainty, is not in the
Medicine, but in the diversity of bodies); and after the first Dose taken, your
own reason then, considering the condition of your body with the former, will
prompt you in the next, whether to keep to the same, to augment, or abate.
Solutiva enim fortia cum succis texuperanibus magnam spirituum faciunt
solutionem.
And remember this as a necessary caution, that you covet not strong Purges and
large Evacuations, to have many stools in a day (a common error) which offers
violence to Nature, and forceably sweeping down both good and bad together;
Eradicativa evacuatio optime perplures per sicitur eva cuationes minorativas.
but rather choose to draw away the offending matter gently by degrees, giving
Nature time for separation, the pure from the impure and noxious: four or five
Stools in a day is sufficient, but not to exceed six; and that number I intend
you to aim at and no more; and thus doing, you will find Physic much more
beneficial, nature more kindly assisting, and not at all weakened.

Some there are, who, unless their Physic work half a score or a dozen times,
think they have kept House for nothing, and their Money cast away, accounting
the goodness of their Physic by the number of Stools; but they deceive
themselves very much in desiring strong Purgations, which weaken and impair
Nature, and thereby you protract your Cure and not hasten it.

Concerning preparation before Purging, much talked of; take this Advice: that
soluble bodies, readily yiedling obedience to gentle Purging Medicines, need no
other preparation than what nature has provided in the disposition of their
own bodies; but for those bodies that are more hot, dry, costive and very
stubborn in Operation, it will be advantageous to facilitate their Purgation,
by eating stewed prunes, water grewel, or barley broth with raisins and
currants, or by drinking whey, or sider, two or three days before, which will
prepare, moisten, cool, and open your body, and make it more soluble and easy
in purging.

The times for taking these Pills generally is thus, (except good reason, in
some bodies, persuade the contrary:) Take one Pill over night going to bed,
having eaten but a light Supper at six of the clock before; the next morning
early in bed, take the remaining part of the Dose; and you may sleep an hour
after if you be disposed, but not longer; nor like long in bed after, lest you
check the Operation of the Medicine, and thereby cause you to be sickish at
Stomach in your rising: when you are up, drink a little warm posset drink, made
of small bear, or small Ale, or thin broth for this purpose, and forbear eating
until noon: but although these Pills are appointed to be taken, one over night,
the other in the morning; yet if you find any inconvenience thereby, you may
take the whole Dose in the morning very early, and lie two hours after: But if
you have not a just cause for alteration observe the Prescription.

These Pills take thus every fourth or fifth day, and you will find it best to
give such intermission: Chronick or old Diseases must have time to be
Eradicated, and you must reduce nature from an ill habit by degrees, Semper
expedit paulatim ducere quam subito.
better than hastily; As diseases come on, gradually prevailing upon and
seducing nature from her Integrity; so nature by degrees, must be brought off
and restored again to her power and regularity. Cum natura male sustinet
repentinas mutationes.

For going abroad after your Pills that day, if you desire it, or occasions
require, take this advice; if your body be indifferent strong, not apt upon
small occasions to take cold, the season temperate and fair weather, having
moderated the Dose of your Pills, so as to work but three, or four times at
most; you may then go abroad without prejudice: but if it fall out to be
otherwise, then it is better to keep in, that day.

If any ask, At what times of the year these Pills are to be taken; I answer,
you may safely and with benefit, at any time of the year, provided you order
your self suitable to the season; that is, in Winter-weather, a warm Chamber
and good fire; in Summer-hot weather, a cool Room free from the Sun; be
moderate in Clothing, and gentle in Motion not to heat your self.

For the Mornings in the midst of Summer, they are temperate and fit for
Physic, and the Operation will be done before the heat of the day; so that in
this temperate Climate, you may take Physic (with discretion) at any season of
the year, the Dog-daies not excepted, although it is an opinion among the
vulgar, that that time is dangerous; but that is a vulgar error, easy to be
refuted.

Of Restoring and Rectifying the Digestions, necessary in Curing the SCURVY.
IN the preceding Discourse of that Treatise where the Scurvy is manifested and
laid open in the causes and manner of Generation; you find it planted and
Radicated in the Digestions, or Digestive Offices; by whose Aberrations from
Integrity, and frustrations of performing their Duties as they ought, this
Disease is begotten: in the Cure therefore, we must have an eye to their
Deficiency in Vigor, and Deviation from the Rectitude and manner of their
performance being Alienated and Depraved.

The former Medicine viz. the Scorbute-Pills was designed, to cleanse and carry
off the Producted Scorbutic matter; another Medicine also must necessarily be
invented to Roborate and strengthen the Faculties, to restore and confirm them
in the performance of their Functions; or else the like Scorbutic matter will
be generated again, and nature will soon relapse into the Former state; In vain
it is to pump, except you stop the Leak; Purging, carries off the Degenerate
matter, and does a necessary work; but that does not Vigorate, reinforce and
give new strength to the Digestive Faculties, that were tired and alienated in
their Principles: that must be done by another Medicine, whose property is to
excite, unite and join with the Principal agent in each faculty.

To make this more plain and easy to be apprehended by indifferent Capacities;
first I shall show you how nature does perform her daily work; Then I shall
show, how she declines and falls off; and Thirdly, I shall manifest how she is
to be assisted and restored.

So soon as food is received into the body, nature presently falls about her
business, to digest, to dissolve, and separate the parts of it, to volatise, to
distribute and transmit from one digestive office to another, to sequester and
throw aside the unprofitable and excrementitious part, to attract and suck in
the alimentary, to refine and alter it by several elaborations, to extract and
draw out the pure spirituous part for supply of spirits, the rest assimilated
into the humoral and solid parts; from hence the body is preserved, and
maintained in strength and vigor: and this is Natural Chemistry, performed
every day in man's body in the regular course of nature; but when nature
declines and fails in the ordinary and daily work of her own preservation,
whether by intemperance, improper food, irregular and injurious customs or
accidents, or Spontaneosly from an Imbecile Radication of principles, and bad
Crasis of parts; the body then decays apace, when the principle functions are
weakly and depravedly exercised; necessarily then an Auxiliary means and
Assistant must be applied to restore nature to her strength and regular course
again; something that must accuate and vigorate nature, that must excite and
cooperate in Conjunction with the movent principle; that as a new Spring, will
give power and force to the faculties. Considering this so necessary and useful
in the cure of most Infirmities, as also to establish and confirm a Cure
wrought from Recidivation and Relapse; I thought it a principal work to find
out and form such a medicine as may answer the intentions proposed, and
therefore have by several trials and improvements effected and wrought such a
medicine to that degree and competent power, as is very efficacious in the
deficienties and enervation of the digestive faculties, to Restore and Roborate
them in their functions; which medicine is called, and known by the name of
Cathelic Elixir (now altered and improved)

And this was the custom and manner of the ancient and most famous Physicians,
to acquire by their proper labor and sedulous industry, some great Arcana's,
secret and choice medicines of excelling virtue, which they esteemed as a
treasure, and gave them peculiar names to be distinguished and known by: and
that such medicines might be known to the world, for the good and benefit of
the Diseased; they did publish their virtues, as Angelus Sala in the Preface to
his Precious Antidote, does apologize for himself in doing the like: Etiam
magninominis medicis solenne olim fuit, medicamenti alicujus particularis
virtutes, quas quisque accurata observatione annotaverat peculiari quodum
tractatu literis consignare. Oper: Med: Chym. page 420. says he, It has been
the ancient custom of Physicians, and those men of great fame, to write a
Treatise of the virtues of some particular medicine, which they had noted by
strict observation; then he extols the efficacy and worth of his medicine, and
excuses the concealment of the preparation.

Helmont also, that great Philosopher and Physician, had his private medicines
which he highly valued; so also in the Writings of the most Eminent Physicians,
we find they had their Arcana's, secret medicines which they would not
discover, save only their virtues and manner of use; therefore I may say as
Angelus Sala, Quod si illis hoc vitio non fuit datum, neque mihi, qui eorum ad
exemplum. --

But since the late fashion of Prescribing came up in use, some ignorant
buzzards which I could name, that have objected this against me, (perhaps of
our own Faculty) think this an empirical way; but therein they discover their
ignorance, not knowing the ancient and most legitimate way of Practice, and
what is the whole duty of a Physician: See what Famous Quercetan says upon the
Question, An medicum deceat (...)? Quer: Rediviv: page 218. Whether a Physician
ought to make medicines; He will tell you, you are Pseudomedicus, a Counterfeit
Physician, if you do not make medicines. Pray look there, and then you will
say, it is a shame for a Physician not to be expert in making medicines.

As a duty, and following the Example of the most Eminent Physicians. I have
been and am a constant labourer in Pharmacy, thereby to acquire and purchase
the choicest Medicines that Art and pains can procure; and by continual making,
and altering upon trials, I have purchased as noble Medicines I think, as any
man can procure; not but that other Physicians that have been thus diligent in
Preparation of Medicines, as I have been, may have as good; but without this
Labor and Industry, no man can be master of such. In particular, the forenamed
Elixir, as it is now improved and advanced, I have a great esteem for, and is a
great assistant to the Stomach in the office of Digestion, for it mainly
fortifies and roborates that Faculty, so that the bad effects of a weak or
depraved Digestion, are notably Corrected and amended; as crudity and
indigestion, flatulency or wind, Nausiousness or Vomiting, Fullness or
Opression, Loss of Appetite, Eructation or Belching; and this it performs by
asisting the Stomack's Digestive Ferment, being deficient and decayed by Age,
Intemperance, Incongruous Diet, Disorder, or Natural Infirmities.

One Case amongst the rest, relating hither, I well remember, which I think
good to relate: A woman that had been troubled with the Scurvy for some years
though scarce taken notice of, but supposed to be from other causes, what
symptoms did appear; amongst the rest, for some time she was molested,
especially in a morning with a dryness in her mouth, and an ill taste;
afterward her stomach would nauseate sometimes, and soon after did begin to
vomit: whereupon she took several medicines to stay vomiting, and to strengthen
the stomach, but all in vain, and rather aggravated her Griefs, straining to
Vomit with more violence, and little or nothing came away: when I was made
acquainted with it, and understanding the Symptoms to arise from the Scurvy;
upon examination of the whole matter, I sent her this Elixir with directions;
and at the third or fourth Dose, her Vomiting and nauseating was gone, and much
at ease: then I appointed her the Scorbute-Pills, to be used intermittingly
with this Elixir for some time; and soon after, the other Scorbune Symptoms
which molested her, vanished, and she regained her former health: Whereby you
may observe that the Scurvy will not be tamed but by Anti-scorbutic Medicines:
and although some Symptoms of the Scurvy be common and like with those from
other diseases, whereby many are deceived in their causes; yet, if they arise
from a Scorbutic Root, they will not be cure but by Anti-scorbutic Medicines;
and therefore whar Symptoms of Sickness do appear in any person, ought strictly
and nicely to be examined by a discerning judgment, to know the right spring
and foundation of their Rise.

But to proceed, Not only the Stomach and first Digestion is benefited and
assisted by this Elixir, but the subsequent Digestions are promoted, and their
defects corrected hereby; and this Medicine I use successfully against many
Infirmities seated in the Mesentery, Guts, Liver, or Spleen; as when they are
languid and weak, degenerating and falling off from their duties, are
obstructed with crude depraved Matter; wanting Spirit and Vigor, and acuteness
of Ferment fit for their proper works; from whence Hypocondriack Melancholy,
Stitches, Pains, Tumors, and flatulent Distensions of the Hypoconders and
Belly: In such cases, this Medicine penetrates atteneates opens, and
discusseth, roborates and gives great relief; and likewise for Melancholy
drooping Spirits, and Palpitations of the Heart, Angustness and Compression
about that Region, arising from a Scorbutic Feculency and Impurity; an
ill-affected Spleen, or Matrix, from whence Vapors do assurge to afflict the
heart and vital Spirit; this Elixir is a proper help, and also effectual in
Scorbutic Asthmaes, difficult and short Breathing, Coughs and Scorbutic
Consumptions. But of these you may read at large, in my Treatise of
Consumptions, and I have there appropriated two excellent and highly graduated
Medicines for Consumptive persons; a Restaurative Essence, and Balsamic
Extract, with which I have recovered some, beyond expectation.

That you may be the more cautious in examining the Symptoms of Diseases, what
foundation they have, and whence they do proceed, that you may not labor in
vain for a cure; I have noted a remarkable Case in a Patient of mine, worth
your Observation, which was thus: A young man about thirty years of Age, a
Student and tenderly bred, was subject to short and difficult breathing, but
without a Cough, or very little; he was advised to many Pectoral Medicines to
open and strengthen the Lungs, which he used, but with little effect: his
Disease by time increased upon him, and he was troubled with palpitation of the
Heart, and stoppage of Breath, in his Sleep, that he was afraid of
Suffocation; he then unhappily fell into the hands of an Emperick, who purged
him with violent Medicines so, that he began to be Hydropical, did puff up, and
limbs Swell, nor did the other Symptoms abate. After this and other passages
(too long to relate) I was sent for, and examined the Patient; found his
complaint was chiefly under the Diaphgrama toward the Orifice of the Stomach,
that his Lungs were good, and the Cause of his short and difficult breathing
was not in the Breast, but by Compression of the Diaphragma, from a turgid
aestuation of Scorbutic matter, which threatened Suffocation sometimes: (And
upon this very cause, I knew a very Learned Doctor of Physic, that died
suddenly in his bed): I perused and made inspection into the Urine, and
examined his Pulse, as now and formerly; both which consented to, and confirmed
the Scurvy: Then I examined, what Medicines had been given him; and those were
most Pectoral, except some churlish Purges, after which he was much worse, and
began to swell; and now he was about to take a Dyet-drink for the Dropsy, which
was like to prove as the rest: but the Patient committing himself into my
hands, I bad him desist from all Medicines but what I appointed; and first I
gave him this Elixir (he being very weak) which as a Cordial did revive him,
and after a few days was much altered for the better, and slept more quietly,
with a greater freedom in breathing: he continued this alone, for ten days; in
which time he gained strength and had a stomach to his meat: then I directed
him the use of the Scorbute-Pills, which abated the swelling of his Limbs at
twice taking, and proceeded in the use of these two Medicines. Lastly, I
appointed him the Sudorific Medicine hereafter mentioned; and in a short time,
he was reduced by this course to good health and free from his former
Complaints. By the whole Story you may observe, First, that the Scurvy is
disguised, and appears in the shape of other Diseases. Secondly, that those
Diseases so counterfeited, are not cured but by Radical Medicines which are
Anti-scorbutic: and therefore it much concerns the Sick, that their Diseases be
rightly stated and determined by one that can make a true internal Discovery;
and not according to external Appearance, and common Symptoms, which is very
Fallacious.

But I proceed to let you know farther, How and wherein this Elixir is useful
to me in Practice; and that in sudden emergent cases of fainting: as also in
Languishing Diseases, and Cases of Extremity when the Patient is spent and
brought so low that no Physic can be Administered; this, as a relief and
support to the Languishing decayed Faculties, may daily be exhibited; and this
I have frequently proved: particularly, a Person of Honor, given over by his
Physicians, being spent and decayed and highly swollen in a Scorbutic Asthma and
Dropsy, was gasping for breath, when I came to him; but exhibiting this Elixir,
he did wonderfully revive, and his difficult and short breathing was much
enlarged and eased for a few days, for which he did Extol the Medicine: but,
being past the possibility of Recovery, and incapable of other Medicines,
requisite or Cure, he dyed.

But some may object: This possibly may be a good Medicine in desperate Cases,
and approaches of Death; but how can it be proper and fit for a man that can
eat his meat well, and walk abroad, only inclining to the Scurvy, and some
small Impediments from thence? I answer: That Medicine which is endowed with so
much Virtue, to bring relief to a decayed or dying man; must needs be of great
power and efficacy, to give Vigor and strength to all the Faculties: Now
Scorbutic Infirmities, or impedimens of what sort soever, do arise from the
Imbecility, Aberration, or Declining of some Faculty in the Body, injured or
decayed which requires a generous and noble Medicine to Rectify and Vigorate,
(at least, it will better be performed by such) not a languid dull Medicine;
and therefore this Objection is vain; for the greater power a Medicine has,
the more likely and better to do the business be it little or much: and
therefore if your Case require help, do it by an acute Vigorous Medicine, and
you may expect your Infirmities to be removed, Citius tu^ius jucundius, in a
shorter time, with more safety and certainty, with less disgust in taking or
trouble in Operation.

Now the main Scope and Intention of this Medicine, is, to relieve the Spirits
Oppressed or Exhausted, to Discuss Flatulent Vapors, to open Obstructions, and
to Rectify and Roborate the Digestive Faculties, from whence Scorbutic
Symptoms do arise; and such a Medicine is necessarily required in the cure of
the Scurvy, and its Complicated effects.

I have briefly showed you the power and properties belonging to an
Anti-scorbutic Medicine, requisite to be used in curing the Scurvy: such a
Medicine I say is required; it is not Purging alone will do it, but other
Operations must join to effect the purpose. For advice and rules to those that
use this Catholic Elixir (living far distant from me) that they may not Err
in the taking of it, let them observe as follows.

That in the use of this Elixir with the Scorbute-Pills, it is best to begin
with the Pills; except the person be very weak, or spent, and first require
some strengthening and reviving Medicine, then you may first begin with the
Elixir.

Also that this Elixir is not to be taken those days you Purge, but every
Intermitting day between Purging.

That this Elixir is not to be taken or tasted alone but mixed with some good
Liquor, and that ought to be the best Canary; for bad Wine alters and abates
the Virtue of the Medecin. It may be taken in Frenchwine, if the Patient
cannot agreee with Sack.

The Dose for man or woman, is thirty drops: for ten years old, twenty drops;
for five years, ten drops.

And observe this; that at the first taking you begin but with half the Dose
that is appointed for your age; as thus: thirty drops is appointed for a man,
let him begin with fifteen or sixteen drops, and then augment two or three
drops every day after, until he ascend to thirty, and then there continue that
Dose afterward.

Take it (in Bed if you be weak) in a spoonful of Sack, every morning, fasting
an hour and half after; and at five of the Clock Afternoon; but you are not so
strictly to observe the after-noons, but, if that your occasions do not well
permit (as when you must be abroad or the like,) you may omit.

In keeping this Elixir, let it be well stopped; for dropping of it exactly, a
Cruet is best. Some may ask, What time of the year this Medicine may, or may
not be used; I answer, No time of the year forbids the use of it; but it is
profitably taken at any season of the year: nor may women forbear the use of it
at such times of the month, when all other Physic is forbidden; but is helpful
to Nature at such a time, in procuring them with more ease and freedom.

Of Curing the Scurvy by Transpiration, and the necessary use of a good
Sudorific Medicine.
THe Scurvy is not a particular Disease limited to this or that part of the
Body, but extends it self throughout the whole as appears by the variety of
Symptoms, in several parts of the Body; and being of this extent, Medicine also
must have the same Latitude of Operation to prosecute and reach into its utmost
and farthest quarters: Purgation that cleanses the Central and more inward
parts, as the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery, Liver and Spleen: Transpiration that
respects chiefly the habit of the Body and external parts, purifying the Mass
of Blood, and vital streams.

These two Operations are necessary for Cure in most Scorbutic cases, as the
following discourses and observations in Practice recited, does manifest.

Some there are that deceive themselves, and lay the whole stress of the Cure
upon Purging, and that they prosecute very often (and it were well if the
purgatives be proper) but the effects may inform and tell them, that there is
something else requisite; and they find it so. The Scurvy is not so easily
dislodged and thrown out by a single Operation of Medicine; but requires
rectifying and strengthening of the Digestive Faculties also, and depuration of
the Blood.

The Body of man is perspirable, and in his due state of health continually
more or less does transpire and breath out humid vapors and a superfluous
moisture by the Pores of the Body; hereby the Mass of Blood and habit of the
Body is cleansed and discharged of that which is superfluous or impure and
unfit to be retained; and this insensible Evacuation is so requisite, that
without transpiration the Mass of Blood cannot be depurated, but remains muddy
and defiled, which forces Nature to a distempered fermentation and morbific
Eruption: Proper and amicable Purgation does well, acts a good part, and ought
to be praemitted in most cases, which alone do check a Disease and lessen it,
by carrying off a I morbific matter in the lower Region of the Body; but if the
Mass of Blood, and habit of the Body be tainted and corrupted, the vital stream
and those parts irrigated and fed from thence, are not purified as they ought,
but by Exsudation and Transpiration; and the Spirits that are clogged and
infested by impure matter, which darkens their light, causing Melancholy and
indisposed heaviness, are hereby relieved and unfettered, become brisk, aerie,
and lively as before.

And in promoting this Operation we imitate and assist Nature which continually
does Emittere and Transpirare per Poros, at least ought so to breathe forth
superfluous vapors and humidity, and when this is cohibited and restrained, by
occlusion and shutting up the pores by cold or otherwise; or Nature unable thus
to relieve and discharge her self by reason of debility and insufficiency in
separating and protruding; it is not long but some Disease, or many, arises
from the course of Nature thus impedited: either a sudden febril aestuation; or
erratic pains in this or that part; or a slow eruption of grosser matter
sticking in the skin discoloring and spotting of it; or bringing forth Scurf,
Pustules, or other Extretions.

By this you may understand the benefit that does arise by the regular course
of Nature in her daily Operations and Excretions, and the profitable assistance
of Art in promoting them when impeded, as also the prejudice and damage by the
contrary.

And here I shall relate to you the Case of a Scorbutic Patient, pertinent to
the proceeding Discourse.

A Gentlewoman, aged between Forty and Fifty, formerly fatt and fleshy, but
reduced to a lean state; being troubled for some years with a lassitude or
weariness in her Limbs, and Indisposition to Action, and with pains at some
times: afterward in Autumn, a weakness and numbness possessed her Limbs, that
disabled her in going: All this while she was not negligent to seek for help,
had such Advice as the Country did afford, and used many Medicines; but her
Disease prevailed still, each Spring and Autumn being worse than the former: it
happened that a Relation of her case was sent to me, (she living a great distance
from London) what was wanting in the first Relation, I interrogated in my
Answer, and the next Account I received, did fully satisfy me: I found the
Scurvy disguised to act in several Scenes, after a different manner: the
Medicines she had used were proper for the Symptoms that did appear, barely
considered; but not as they had a Relation and were grounded upon the Scurvy,
which being undiscerned did frustrate all the Endeavors for Cure: Letting of
her blood was injurious, and she grew worse upon it; soon after, a Stupor or
Paralytic numbness seized her: To be short, she was committed to my care and
management; I sent her three Anti-scorbutick Medicines, namely, my
Scorbute-Pills, Elixir, and Sudorific Extract to be used in that order and
method as the Medicines and her Condition required: at the months end she
gained the use of her Limbs, but were something weak; yet no pains as formerly:
and upon the use of the Sudorific Extract, some spots were driven forth, and
the Latent Scurvy did appear and satisfied them more fully, what I had
determined of her disease: The Winter being very sharp, did sometimes interrupt
her Course, and retarded the completing of a Cure, which else might have been
finished in a shorter time. At the beginning of March I set her into the same
Course again, which was diligently observed; and in April following she was
perfectly restored: In the Course of these Medicines (according to the Account
received) I observed her pains to lessen and cease upon the use of the
Sudorific Extract, and not before; which Medicine chiefly restored her the use
of her Limbs; and it was reason to expect, the greatest benefit, as to that
particular in the Case, should acrue from a Diaphoretic Medicine; that
searching and penetrating the habit of the Body, by transpiration and
breathing Sweats should dissodg and discuss the Scorbutic Matter which
infested the Nerves and Muscles, impeding and disabling the parts in their
Motion and Action.

By such Examples as this, and other different Cases as to the Symptoms, yet
parallel with it as to the parts affected and Morbisic Cause; I was fully
satisfi^d that a Sudorific Medicine was of necessary use in many Scorbutic
Cases, and without which, a Cure could not be performed; I therefore prepared a
Medicine that might effectually answer the scope of that intention, which might
operate by Transpiration and gentle sweating, and, by a kindly assisting of
Nature in that operation, might depurate the whole Mass of blood, and free the
habit of the body from any Scorbutic Impurity and Degenerate Matter, which at
certain seasons of the year, and by accidental promoting Causes, ferments, and
produces various internal Distempers and Diseases, Scorbutic Fevers,
continual and intermitting Quotidian, Tertian and Quartan, Headaches, and
Pains in several parts, Pleurisies, Asthma's, etc. or external and
Cutany-Difedations; as Spots, Scurff, Scabs, Pustul's, Tettars, Ringworms,
Tumors, etc. And because our blood, especially in these Northern Climates, does
abound with a serosa Colluvies, a Serosity or Superfluous watery humor; a good
Sudorisic Medicine is of great use; for when this serous matter abounds and
increase the there by the insufficient Attraction and Separation of the Reins,
that should expend and drain it; or the Pores shut up, and Trauspiration
denied, that should insensibly exhaust it, does then by Preternatural Retention
degenerate and change its Nature and Properties; that which was mild turns
acid, sharp and molesting; and variously degenerating does cause several
Diseases and Pains in diverse parts of the Body as it Circulates in the Vessels;
or extravasated and wandering about being expulsed from part to part as hostile
and injurious) by the strength and fortitude of the Archeus or innate spirit
that inhabits as the Lifeguard in each part of the body.

This Sudorisic Medicine prepared for the purposes aforesaid. I appoint in all
Scorbutic Cases, requiring Transpiration or Sweating; and I find great success
in the use of it (especially being now much altered and improved) Many Diseases
are expulsed by Sudorificks, that purgatives cannot prevail against; the reason
is this; First, because some Diseases do arise, and depend upon a flatulent
Spirit or Meteor that is generated in the body; and these Diseases are more
accute and dangerous, than others, because their matter is more active,
subtle, and of sudden motions, being of the Nature of a Spirit, is more
penetrative and irresistible in its motion; as Apoplexy, Epilepsy, histerical
Passions, Pestilential Seminaries, sudden Swooning, etc. Which do not yield
Obedience to Purgatives, being of a more subtle spirituous nature, is not
ejected by Vomit, or Stool as grosser Morbific Humors are; but requires a
Medicine equivalent and proportionate to their Nature; that is, penetrative,
subtle and acute in Operation, proper to discuss, evaporate, and transpire.
Secondly, many Diseases though arising from grosser and humoral causes, that
would obey the Power and Virtue of Purgatives; yet by reason they are lodged in
the habit of the body and more exterior parts, are out of distance and beyond
the reach and sphere of their activity: but a good Sudorific penetrates and
searches all parts, raises the Seminaries, and enters the secret Dormitories
of lurking Diseases, and gives them expulsion by its subtle Operation and acute
Power: and here I remember the condition of a Patient which I will relate to
you, pertinent to the present discourse. A young gentlewoman of a fair
Complexion and very clear skin, by Melancholy (and other causes) was much
altered and become brown, muddy, and discolored in particular places;
afterward a Scurf did arise and some Pimples here and there, which was
troublesome by itching: this Gentlewoman was let blood and purged often, but
still her trouble remained: then she was advised to a Wash to clear the skin,
and to take away the heat and pimples; which did take effect in a few days,
but upon retiring of this humor inwards, she fell desperately sick, with
violent pains in her head, and ready to faint away often. Hereupon I was sent
for, and examined the whole matter; and finding the acuteness of her sickness
to arise from an imprudent repelling of a humor, and forcing it back upon
Nature, which she had brought forth to the skin; I immediately appointed her a
Dose of my sudorific Extract to be given her, which put her into a breathing
Sweat; and when the Medicine had done its Operation, her pains and sickness
were almost gone: the next day I appointed another Dose to be given her, to
sweat gently for two or three hours, and before the Operation of the Medicine
was spent, her pain and sickness quite left her; and then appeared some of the
former Symptoms again upon the skin, but without itching. The present danger of
her sickness being over, I caused her to rest two or three days, and gave her
an Elixir to take every day, to cherish Nature and recover her strength: then
she fell to the Sudorific Extract again, to cleanse the Blood, and to breathe
out that impurity which was lodged under the skin; with convenient intermssion
she repeated this Sudorific Medicine three or four times more, and then the
former Symptoms quite left her, and she regained her former beauty and
clearness of skin. By this you may understand, that a Sudorific Medicin some
times is effectual, when Purgatives cannot prevail; yet it is injurious to
Nature, to draw back again what she has protruded and brought forth to the
Circumference of the Body: and therefore they that rely and insist too much upon
Purging, thinking to cleanse the whole Body by that Operation only, are much
deceived: Purging is good but not always; other Medicines must come in and
take their place, according as the case requires: Purging cleanses the Center,
but Sudorificks purify the exterior parts.

That you may know when a Sudorific Medicine is required as necessary, and
advantageous to the Cure, I Will tell you in what cases I appoint this Sudorific
Medicine to be taken: In curing the Scurvy, I find good success thereby, to
cleanse and purify the Blood that is degenerate and vitiated with a Scorbutic
taint and impurity: or when the Pores are occluded and imperspirable, the Body
tumified and puffed up for want of transpiration and ventilation; when pricking
pains or itching in the flesh molest and trouble, by a saline or acrid Serosity
extravasated, and erratick; when spots, tumors, pustul's, scurfe, pimples, or
such like appear upon any part of the Body: This Sudorific Medicine discusseth
and discipates the confluence of Humors tesorting to any part, opens the
Pores, transpires and drives out the extrementions matter, congested and lodged
under the skin: also when a Lassitude or weariness possess the Limbs; when the
spirits are torpid, dull heavy (as it is the case of many Scorbutic persons)
being alienated from their purity and wonted vigor, by a degenerate and
depraved alimentary succus, cloging and settering them, that should support and
maintain them with an addisional supply of a congenerous extraction; in this
case a good Sudorific is the best relief, to depurate the Vital stream, and
alimentary liquors of the Body, from whence the Spirits receive strength and
vigor again.

The Dose, and Circumstances that attend the taking of this Sudoific Extract is
thus: to a man or woman of a weak tender body; at first I give a dram and half,
the next time two drams, but stronger bodies give two drams at the first dose,
then two drams and half, almayes beginning with a lesser dose; and increase the
quantity, as from the quantity of a Nutmeg to a Chestunt, according to the
condition and strength of the body after trial: First, because there is great
difference in bodies, some require more; as hard, dry bodies and thicker
skinns, being more difficult to transpire; and some less, as tender, moist
bodies, of a rare Texture, and open Pores, more apt to breath out. Secondly,
Nature is better pleased to receive some Medicines gradually, then imposing a
full dose at first; if Nature takes a disgust to a Medicine, she seldom agrees
with it after, a levioribus incipere, and procedere ad fortiora, est ordo
Sapientum.
though it be never so good: therefore at the first begin with a little dose
(for trial) though the Medicine be very amicable, and the next time you may
increase, and take a little more.

The manner of taking is thus, Roll it in a little Sugar, and swallow it down.

Take it at Night (having eaten but a little Spoon-meat for your Supper) in Bed
covered warm; and a quarter of an hour after, drink a draught of
Rosemary-Posset, or Mace-Ale, then you may sleep as you find your self
disposed. Or you may take this Medicine in a Morning very early, after the same
manner, and lie in Bed half that day, sleep if you will, that does not check
the Medicine, you will have the benefit of Transpiration in your sleep: Somnus
Cohibet omnem evacuationem preter Sudorem aph. nor are you to expect great
Sweats, but only moist Breathings, not at all troublesome.

Some perhaps being too hasty and desirous to effect their Cure, may think one
or two great Sweats may do as much good as half a dozen gentle breathings,
Saepius mediocriter Sudomovere, melius est quam Semel modum excedando
viresprosternere.
and so shorten the time of their Cure; but I cannot approve that Course, to
impair Nature by violent and large Exhaustions; you thereby frustrate the
benefit of the Medicine, which rightly used, will prove very succesfull for the
purposes appointed. This Sudorific Extract may be taken twice in a week, on the
intermitting days when you do not purge, having first taken three doses of the
Scorbute Pills to cleanse the stomach and bowels, before you begin to Sweat,
that the grosser matter and impurity of those parts be not driven into the
habit of the body. For going abroad, observe this, if you take the Sudorific in
the Morning, you must not go out that day, the Pores being open: but if you
take it over night, the weather not cold and searching, but temperate or hot;
you may go forth next day, if your disease, strength, and condition of body
admit.

Those persons that use the three Antiscorbutic Medicines before mentioned, do
observe this order, except in some special Cases, and complicated Diseases, by
particular advice: First, they begin with the Scorbute-Pills to cleanse the
Center of the Body, as the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery, Liver, and Spleen: The
next day and all the intermitting days between Purging, they use the Elixir, to
strengthen the declining Faculties and rectify the Digestions: and after three
doses of Purging Pills taken, they begin with the Sudorifick Medicine, to
purify the Blood, and cleanse the habit of the Body; and these are to be used
twice in a week, proceeding also with the other Medicines in their turns as
before. But now you are come to use the Sudorifick Extract, you may take the
Scorbutic Pills but once in the week, whereas before you took them once in four
or five days; this is my course and practice in curing the Scurvy and (...) it
is a (...) according to the Canons of Art, is also verified by much experience
to be most effectual.

The chief reason why I am so large here, in the general use of these Medicines
is to avoid the daily trouble of directions in writing to each particular
Patient, except there be good cause.

I have now finished what I proposed in my self to make Public: The Nature, of
this spreading Disease the Scurvy; its variety of Symptoms and appearance, that
it may be known though in a various dress and disguise; the usual complicated
affects that associate and attend it; its internal essential Causes, manner of
Generation, and seat of Radication in the Body, the external procuring and
promoting Causes; the chief indications so Cure; three Anti-scorbutic Medicines
laid down as exemplars, answering the scope of those curative intentions; and
some remarkable Observations in Practice; And this is the sum of the whole
Work.

FINIS

