THE Frequent, but unsuspected PROGRESS OF Pains, Inflammations, Tumors,
Apostems, Ulcers, Cancers, Gangrenes, and Mortifications, internal.

THEREIN Showing the secret Causes and Course, of many lingering and acute
mortal Diseases, rarely discerned.

Initia Morborum quamvis levia serpunt. WITH A TRACT OF Fontanels or Issues,
and Setons.

By Everard Maynwaringe, M. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

EMMANUEL
Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae



LICENSED, Roger L'Estrange.
September. 16. 1678.
THE DESIGNMENT AND NECESSARY USE OF THIS WORK.
FEW there are that think themselves concerned in this train of dangerous
diseases; because they judge themselves clear at present, and do suppose these
rarely to happen, for that they seldom hear of any to dye upon these accounts;
and therefore do not imagine that such ill Fate should befall them: but Fevers,
Scurvy, Dropsies, Consumption, or such like common diseases they expect to be
their lot: but when you come to understand (as by the discovery following, you
will plainly perceive) that few sicknesses or infirmities you can fall into, if
they be not radicated in, or grounded upon some of these latent or lurking
destroyers; yet there is a tendency toward them for a complication therewith,
and their terminations therein as the last Scene; especially if the disease or
sickness be contumacious, and of long continuance, or acute, dangerous, and
mortal: so that upon a true information, you will find such probability to be
engaged here, when any infirm or sickly state shall alter your present
healthful condition of body.

And for such as have already some warnings by pain, and a valetudinary state,
may seasonably inquire, and consult some sagacious and solid Judgment, from
whence it does arise, whither it tends, what progress probably it will make, if
not prevented; a resolve upon the question very likely will fix here, if the
case be thoroughly examined, and duly searched into.

Considering that pain most frequently either arises from some of these
already begun to act their parts; or that some of them will most likely follow
thereupon, although veiled under the covering of a more known and familiar
Disease; as fully declared in the subsequent Discourse: for whether the
manifest Disease afflicting be the Scurvy, Consumption, Dropsy, Ague, Spleen,
Pox, or other chronic Disease; very often it falls out (though seldom taken
notice of) that some of this train is complicated and joined therewith, if good
Medicines or great Providence stop not the progress. And if the sickness be
acute, malign, pestilential, or other; as small Pox, spotted Fevers, Plague,
or any general Phlogosis and febrile scorching distemper; they come on commonly
by Inflammation in some particular part, and proceed on to tumifie, apostemate,
and gangrene, when such a disease is not checked, but grows desperate, and
becomes fatal to the sick: and thus Pleurisies, Angina's, Peripneumonia's,
Inflammations of the Brain, Ventricle, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, etc. they go
on in this road, by these stages and transitions, from Inflammation to Tumor,
and so forward, finishing the course with a Gangrene and Mortification, if good
means take not good effect to prevent and stop the progress.

Observing therefore in constant Practice, the frequency, latency, and danger
of this association and confederate train, disguised and couched under some
more appearing and known disease; I thought it a Work necessary and grateful to
unmask and lay open such secret destroyers, that in the designments and methods
of Cure, they may strictly be sought after, and aimed at, thereby preventing
the danger threatened, and securing the Patient.

November. 15th 1678. Wine-Office Court in Fleet Street.
The principal Occurrences, and chief Heads treated of.
PAins, Inflammations, etc. their order, connection, commutation, and
transition. The frequency and latency of this train in most Sicknesses or
Diseases. The disguised Progress thereof. The danger and frequent Mortality
from not discerning them. Fevers mistaken; and the common courses for Cure
erroneous. Pains in general; their different nature, causes, and tendency to
farther mischief. Pains of the Head: the causes, and various parts affected.
Pains in the Breast, and the several causes thereof. Pains of the Dugs; of the
intercostal Muscles; of the Pleura, or Pleurisies: pains of the Lungs, of the
Heart, Mediastinum, Diaphragma, and Cartilago mucronata. Pains in the Abdomen
or Belly, and various causes thereof. Pains of the Stomach; of the Guts,
Colic-pains, Dysenteric, and Haemorrhoidal; pains of the Spleen; an eminent
Cure, and how performed: pains of the Liver; pains of the Reins and Bladder.
Gout-pains and Rheumatism; their causes and indications of Cure. Inflammations
internal: what they are; how they arise; what parts they possess; the material
and efficient causes thereof; directions for Cure. Tumors internal: the
occasional causes thereof; the modus generandi; how to know them; their way of
resolution, fixation, and translation: their different state and condition,
scirrhous, apostemate, and cancerous: cautions in Cure. Ulcers internal: the
essential differences; their manner of generation; the continent causes; the
manifesting signs. Gangrenes and Mortification: what they are; the difference
between them: the external and primitive causes of Gangrenes; the internal and
conjunct causes: the Characters declaring a Gangrene: their state of
curability, and incurability: many thousands dye gangrened not taken notice of;
instructions before curing; amputation when, and where to be made. The Result
of the whole matter. Fontanels and Setons: what they are; how made; where to be
placed; for whom beneficial; the due ordering them in several conditions; the
time when to heal them safely.
THE ORDER, AND DEPENDENCE OF Pains, Inflammations, Tumors, etc. internal;
cautioning their proceeding and complication.
THE natural economy and government of humane Bodies, may well be compared to
a body Politic, subjected to State-discipline, Order and Conformity: the
former has a regular course instituted and implanted, by Nature; the latter
has Laws imposed and enjoined by humane Authority to be observed.

In both these Governments so long as Order and Laws are obeyed and kept, the
whole is preserved sound, safe, and in quietness: but when the subjected parts
of either do mutiny, rebel, and shake off the Government, refusing to act in
their stations and subserviency; the whole then is put into disorder, the union
of Community is broken, and the public safety endangered thereby.

If a part of the body decline its office and performance of duty, acts
perversely and inordinately; the mischief stops not there, but other parts also
are perverted thereby, and drawn into consent: likewise if one Member of State
be sick of tranquillity and peace, be disturbed at the Government, and begins
to be dissenting, disobedient or mutinous, ten to one but this infection begets
another of the same mind, and faction, and the second makes a third, and thus
the malignity spreads.

When any part of the body begins to fail and be out of order, it seldom stops
at its first degree of declension, but makes a progress from bad to worse, if
not remedied and prevented: So a Member of State begins to be distempered,
first with discontent, afterward anger and malice arises; and after that
perhaps Rebellion follows, if fear of miscarriage do not choke and deterr the
Plot.

If a finger aches, you will not be much concerned; but if the Head be pained,
or sick at Heart, you then consider of seeking remedy, as not able to bear the
trouble, or run the hazard: So if a mean inconsiderable man be disorderly,
contemptuous and drunken, little notice is taken thereof, as to the public
detriment and injury: but if a great Statesman or Magistrate be corrupt in his
place or office, or be seditious; it is time at the first appearance or
discovery to correct that insolency, and reform the abuse, as of dangerous
consequence.

As the member is in office, dignity and power, greater or less, the care,
inspection and regard thereto is to be had accordingly, being of greater or
less concern; and yet no part so mean as to be contemned or slighted, for a
pain but in the Toe, may tumifie, inflame and gangrene, endangering the whole
body; and a Fisherman of Naples, beginning but with a Tumult of Boys, thereby
subverted the Government, and usurpt the Power.

But to quit the Analogy and prosecute directly the subject proposed; here is
first Pain which most commonly is the leader; a signal or warning of a
defection or disturbance in the part where it is seated; which although
sometimes it vanishes and comes to nothing, yet it is not so always, but often
otherwise; for either by the continuance in a remiss and low degree, or by
speedy advancing to extremity, it ushers in other consequents of great
concernment and fear, and sometimes fatal.

The greatest Diseases have small beginnings and seemingly contemptible; yet by
time and neglect, or by unfit and improper means, or management, they arrive to
a formidable height, and become mortal. Obsta principiis is good counsel; the
beginnings of evil are to be checked, lest they grow too big to be mastered and
become irremediable.

If pain seize a part here or there, you know not what will follow, nor by what
gradual steps it will advance, what progress it will make, and what the issue
and event of all.

If pain begins, Inflammation or Tumor or both may follow, and perhaps not stop
there, except prevented by a prudent course to obviate the mischief.

And further, if a part or member be disabled, or put out of its office and the
rectitude of its function by pain and anguish, the detriment does not rest here
only, but other parts are drawn into consent, they fare the worse for it, and
by time the whole is become a sufferer and made sensible of that prejudice. And
every ones experience by the death or long languishing diseases. of their
Relations, Friends or Acquaintance can testify this truth; how small their
complaints were at first, what little appearance their infirmities did make,
how unsuspected the progress, and such an event, or the arrival to such a
height how unexpected; and therefore not so timely, not so prudently and
carefully applied to for help and remedy.

A small pain begins, greater comes on, and that is a groundwork for
Inflammation, and this most likely to beget a Tumor, which if not discussed in
time, and the anguish of the Archaeus or vital principle appeased, a scirrhous
hardness is fixed there, cancerous or otherwise; or it degenerates into
purulent matter and apostemates: it stays not long in that capacity, but it
breaks forth and presents you with an Ulcer, if the place be in view; but if
not, and the part affected be internal and hid, then there will be a discovery
or discharge of matter by some Emunctory or common vent, or sudden death must
finish the course: thus every Scene more tragical, threatening and more
dangerous than other.

True it is, that Nature by her own struggling and endeavors does quit her self
sometimes without assistance and help, and stops the course and progress of a
disease; but this is hazardous to trust to or rely upon; and Providence usually
works not wonders but where the means is wanting: your presumption therefore
and neglect may justly be chastised with a smarting sense of what you slighted,
and your contempt of means punished with the loss of that, which others by good
means do frequently obtain.

As Nature is regular, and observes her order and course in a state of
integrity; so likewise in a preternatural state of defection, there is
sometimes a Method and Series, or a gradual progress from one disease to
another, or a complication of diseases gradatim brought and linked together;
that a sagacious foresighted and complete Physician, seeing one disease to
present it self, looks beyond that, takes a farther prospect, and discovers the
train that will follow, knowing their connection and dependence upon each other;
and there is much reason for it: for, as the parts and members consent and
comply with each other in sanity and a state of health; so likewise the members
do complain, condole and suffer with each other, and become partners in
disorder, infirmity and a morbous state: for the members having a mutual
commerce, supply and help one from another, of necessity then if one be out of
order and defective, the other will be disordered thereby, wanting the
assistance of its fellow and consort in the common work.

As every part of the body labors to support it self; so each endeavors by the
duty and office imposed by Nature, to maintain the society and harmony of the
whole Corporation: for every part has such dependence upon, and relation to
each other in the common safety, that the good of one is the benefit of
another, and the sufferings of one redound to the prejudice of the rest; and as
the part is more noble and principal in office, the sooner is the whole made
sensible of its grief; and a single Malady becomes the common calamity, and a
public evil.

But to come yet closer to the matter in hand, and to illustrate this Series of
Diseases, the subject proposed in the front of this Work; and that you may know
how common this case is in practice, how rarely discovered, and therefore
erroneously adjudged, and the fatal consequences thereof; which to handle the
more distinctly and clearly, and to prove more convincingly and unanswerably, I
shall part my Discourse into three divisions, and raise Arguments under these
three Hypotheses, comprising the whole story of our design.

1. That this Series of Pain, Inflammation, Tumor, etc. is very common, and the
most frequent train of mortal Diseases incident to man's body. 2. That this
progress and complication is seldom determined and adjudged, except they
present outward and are discovered by the eye. 3. That many curable diseases
or sicknesses become mortal; and many thousands have died for, and upon the
mistake of not discerning this series for the case; but appointing or adapting
a course of Physic by other indications which have proved either very
injurious and destructive, or at best of no advantage to remove the disease, or
retard its course.
To set forth and make evident the truth of our first Position, you must know
that Pain is commonly the first Symptom of most diseases; and if it does not
appear as a leader, yet very frequently it comes in early, or soon after the
disease has discovered it self; and few that complain of sickness, but
complain of some pain that attends it, and this our Practice must own and
confirm: and taking a survey of the Catalogue of Diseases belonging to man's
Body, you will find no Symptom so frequently adjoined and appertaining to them,
as that of pain; and the reason hereof in part may be this: That all the
Symptoms of diseases are the objects of sense; that is, they do come under, or
are discernable by some of the senses; which being compared amongst themselves,
are of greater and lesser latitude: now pain belongs to, and is adjudged by the
sense of feeling only; which sense is of the largest capacity of all the rest;
being extended throughout the body, even through the Organs of all the other
senses; whereas the rest are confined to particular parts, the Eye, the Ear,
etc. and have no larger extent or place of residence, (as hereafter we shall
have further occasion to discourse.) For instance; seeing may discover what is
amiss upon the external parts or superficies of the body, and discern what
comes forth, that it may be adjudged; but feeling takes cognizance of inside
and outside, and what we cannot see we feel, and are sensible of by pain, even
amongst the most secret and hidden parts of the body: so that pain is known to
be, and does manifest it self, whether it be within, or without. Hence it is,
that pain is the most usual and most frequent Symptom amongst diseases.

Pain therefore belonging to this capacious sense, and being an appertainer
thereto, and having admission into all its quarters and confines; no wonder
then if pain so frequently occurs, and is the most usual attendant, or most
troublesome intruder upon the sick.

Having thus proved (and might farther confirm it, if needful) that pain is the
most general and frequent complaint of the diseased; we shall proceed and
inquire farther, how Tumors, Inflammations, etc. do follow thereupon, and how
pain introduces and ushers in the rest of its fellows, and how pain is
introduced sometimes by them; and how they appear very often with their
consorts, having relation to and dependence upon each other by way of
causation; that some of them, and sometimes all, are principal Actors in the
Tragedy of most mortal diseases, though seldom discerned.

Mortal diseases I said; because where diseases are stopped in their progress,
and have not their full course, but are taken off by effectual means, or great
Providence, the links of this chain is broken, and then perhaps pain may
exercise its power singly and alone for a time, and by intervals; or pain may
contract or associate a Tumor, and sometimes an Inflammation, and yet all end
well; these may go off, or be sent off by Medicine, and proceed no farther, and
the Patient recover, or return to a good and sound state of Health: but too
often it proves otherwise, either by neglect and delay, by improper methods and
erroneous proceeding, or for want of exquisite means, the progress goes on
gradually to the last, and ends with Death.

In this train of Diseases, pain for the most part is a leader, and sometimes a
follower; but seldom misseth to be the discoverer.

Pain begins and gives the Alarm, discovering a disorder or disease in this or
that internal and hidden part of the body; gives warning betimes, and implores
aid: but none coming, at least not sufficient and effectual, the pain
continues, as the cause is yet remaining: if the help of Art be wanting, yet
Nature is not wanting to her self, but summoneth all her power and endeavors to
dislodge and expel this morbific cause, and raises all her Spirits, though in
a febrile disturbance and confusion, against this common enemy: to the part
grieved these Spirits resort plentifully, and with them the blood is conveyed,
which flowing in and remaining there, a Tumor is generated, and by this
concourse of Spirits the part grows fiery, and an Inflammation is planted here
and superadded.

The case remaining thus for a while, and this confluence not dispersed,
discussed or drawn off; the Tumor perhaps grows cancerous, afterward gangrenes
and mortifies, then death immediately ensues and concludes all.

But sometimes the Tumor suppurates or apostemates; and then the contained
purulent matter breaks forth and begets an Ulcer, if the Patient survive and
hold it out: and with this the diseased may continue a longer or shorter time,
according to the nature of the Ulcer, and as it is more or less dangerously
seated: for if it be a principal part, or adjacent; or this ulcerous matter
issuing, falls into some inconvenient cavity where it is lodged again, and
finds no Emunctory or passage out, or erodes and rots some choice vessel of
great use, the case is deplorable, and scarce remediable.

Now to comment a little upon this series and progress, consider that where
there is pain, and it continues, especially in a high degree, you may
rationally expect a Tumor, or flux of Humors congregated to be the consequent
(if not prevented) which is brought to pass and effected after this manner, or
upon a threefold account.

First, Because Nature in a time of exigence and need, does endeavor to help
her self, and exerts her power to the utmost; and therefore when pain afflicts
a member, the Spirits resort thither, and with them the blood also to relieve
it.

Secondly, The part pained by reason of this plenitude of blood and confluence
of Spirits, does wax hot, and this heat begets an attraction, and draws more
humors to the part.

Thirdly, Pain debilitates and disables the part, whereby it is become
incapable to defend it self, but lies obnoxious to this flux of humors, which
being out of their proper place, and remaining in a distempered part, they
degenerate variously.

Now upon a survey of the whole matter, although Nature intends well in this
hurry and bustle, being rouzed up and pricked by pain (and success sometimes
happens upon it, or no damage) yet commonly it falls out otherwise, and there
is an oppression and over-charge brought upon the part: The confluence of
Spirits together with the innate, tumultuate and inflame the grieved member;
which being thus discomposed and out of order, cannot moderate and check the
flux and attraction of humors, but is over-loaded, crowded therewith, and
distended: And unless the help of Physic, directed by a prudent hand, steps in
to appease and allay this disturbance, by casting out the morbific seminary or
matter, and reduce this disorder, it goes on from bad to worse frequently, and
from thence to extremity, and perhaps to an irrecoverable state, in manner and
by such gradations as before related.

And besides what pain does thus effect as a leader; Tumors sometimes do take
their rise not from pain, but either by congestion, or a congested matter in an
infirm part, be it never so small, if noxious and preternatural, it is
sufficient to be the groundwork of all this mischief: or else sometimes by
defluxion, from some part mandant; in both which cases pain follows as a
consequent and effect; (as hereafter more at large) but then Tumor and pain
being thus met together, the progress will go on as before, being now in the
same road as formerly, when pain preceded. And although pain does not begin to
raise a Tumor, but the foundation is laid by congested matter there bred, or
defluxed and transmitted thither from some other part; yet rarely but pain
supervenes, and comes in as an associate to hasten and set forward the Tumor:
for matter congested or defluxed, is injurious and a burden upon a part, and
then the vital principle or Archaeus (which has the government and tuition) is
molested and troubled therewith, and seldom lies calm or quiet under that
oppression, but begins to be incensed and enraged (more or less, pro
magnitudine causarum) and this ira Archaei is the ratio formalis of pain, the
very pain it self which is felt.

By the whole current of our Discourse you see, and by your own experience you
may observe, that pain is most frequent with infirm and diseased bodies; so
likewise it is apparent to reason, and experience confirms it, That Tumors,
Inflammations, etc. will often follow thereupon as dependants thence: and e
contra pain does supervene and follow preternatural Tumors. And we see commonly
that external pains continuing, do produce a Tumor or distention of the part,
at least is coadjuvant or concomitant: after the same manner, and by the same
way of causation, internal Tumors are bred also, and we cannot in reason
imagine otherwise: for the course of diseases, having the same radix, and
taking their rise after the same manner, are alike internal and external; for
as pain begets a Tumor externally and in view, so does it produce the like
effect, and makes the same progress in the interior and hidden parts.

And thus much may suffice to prove and confirm our first Thesis or Position,
and to satisfy the rational and unbyassed, of that truth. I proceed now to the
second, viz. That this progress and complication of Pains, Tumors, etc. are
seldom determined and adjudged aright, except they present outward and are
discerned by the eye.

And having remarkt the frequency of this Series among the sick and diseased,
and its manner of progress; we shall now take notice how seldom it is looked
upon and judged for the case in practice, but supposed to be something else,
until dissection sometimes informs their judgment, when too late.

The first discovery of this mistake, and the argument drawn from thence
sufficiently convincing, is from the aims of the Physician, the Method and
Course of Physic, and adaptation of Medicines; which being levelled quite
beside the mark, does plainly show, that this Series of Diseases is not thought
of, when they lie but seemingly obscure, internally; as very frequently they
do, when diseases run to some height of severity, having no check or stop put
upon them.

The second discovery or conviction of error (when too late) is from dissection
after death, and is plain demonstration to the eye: as when Relations are not
satisfied concerning the death of the Patient; and the Physician dubiously or
unsatisfactorily giving in the account; dissection lays open, and presents to
view a Tumor or Ulcer, rottenness or putrid decay of the part, gangrened or
mortified; which makes evident what before was little thought of. Now upon such
miscarriage indemnification is thus framed with a salvo judicio: that when the
Corpse bears any of these characters, the account is given in, as plain to be
seen, that the Patient was in such a desperate condition, as it was impossible
to retrive or recover; and so the blemish is wiped off the Physician, and he
passes for an able man as before; when indeed this funeral conclusion was
brought about for want of a prevision, true notion and due apprehension of this
frequent progress of diseases (our subject) which might have been prevented or
stopped, if the design of Cure had looked that way.

Now the grand occasion of passing over and hiding this Series or commutation
from Practisers, does arise chiefly from the erroneous account in the general
division of Diseases; viz. ranking all Diseases under these three Heads.

Similar. Organical. Common.
In the first rank (and to examine no farther for error) are comprised all
distempers or intemperatures of the first or second qualities: by the first
qualities are understood these four: Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness; so that any
person complaining of sickness, or not being so well, and altered from their
wonted condition, the Physician examines the state of the Patient by this
triple division, Or some part thereof, to find out what rank the Patient comes
under; and according to order and method set down, he first inquires and feels
what temper the sick is of, whether hot or cold, dry or moist: or whether there
be a complication of these, as hot and moist, or hot and dry; cold and moist,
or cold and dry

And finding the Patients case to be one of these, he pronounces straight
accordingly, that he has such a distemper, which must be corrected and reduced
to quality and good temper again. The diseased person being made sensible
hereof, that he is hotter or colder, etc. than formerly, is well satisfied that
the Physician has hit it right; and this distemper being a grand one, must
father all or most of the other ailments, as the offspring from thence; so
that getting but the mastery of this, all will be well.

The organical Diseases internal, being more difficult to be detected, are
passed over as obscure; at least the disquisition is not sufficient, insisting
too much, and relying upon the discovery of a disease or distemper in the first
general division; that what pain there is here or there, it passes for wind,
or obstructions in the part. And as for the third rank, it is rarely thought
of, except something present outward.

All which does appear from the endeavors of Practice, which more especially
and most frequently do aim at, and are bent against diseases of the first
Classis: some of which are so inconsiderable in the design of Curing, as not to
be looked upon for diseases, but only Characters and Signals following and
depending upon diseases per accidens; with whom they appear in such degree, and
vanish again, as diseases do increase or decrease, and go off.

To contract our Discourse into as little room as we can, and yet to prove our
assertions clearly; I shall pitch upon one distemper only, intemperies calida,
a hot constitution, a febrile heat or Fever; the prime and notable distemper
of the first rank, which makes the great bustle in Practice, though to little,
or bad purpose, (and by this you may judge of the error and folly of the
rest:) for by insisting so much upon this heat, the supposed obstacle of Cure,
or the thing to be cured; the opportunity perhaps may be lost; but the Patient
certainly injured by the vain use of Medicines levelled at this mark.

Few diseases there are amongst the Chronic or slow of motion, but some febrile
or preternatural heat, (more than the ordinary and natural temper) does attend
them; especially at such times, if the disease have any manifest intentions of
degrees, or Paroxysms of pain: and scarce any among the acute or swift, but a
brisk and high Fever does always accompany: for in all cases where pain is
continuing, especially if severe, a Fever is adjoined, and they become fratres
in malo; or rather a branch from that stock, and the order of causation runs
thus.

First, there is the morbific cause planted in this or that part, or transient;
which is either some degenerate or peccant humor there infesting, or corruptive
seminary (the fundamental matter of Pains, Tumors, etc.) or some extraordinary
production; as stones, worms, etc. These preternatural causes do seldom lie
dormant but raise pain, by obstruction, by oppression or compression, by
convulsion, distention, corrosion, putrefaction, etc.

The parts being thus affected and grieved, the vital principle residing as
governor there, is hereby excited and irritated, to remove, expel and cast off
the offending cause: this struggling and irritation of the life, is the very
pain and anguish that is felt in the part; for the Organ is not capable of
pain, of it self; but the life inhabiting and inabling the part to perform
vital offices, that does dolere and aestuare.

Now a Fever (which is pain diffused) arises from particular pains thus; As
the members or parts of the body being many, do consent with one another, some
more immediately and peculiarly, than with the rest, by vessels of
communication, partnership in office or vicinity; yet the life being one entity
or common being, extended and expanded throughout the whole fabric of the
body, cannot suffer here or there, but the whole is injured, disturbed and
drawn into consent, more or less, manifestly or secretly; and the Spirits (upon
great occasisions) are raised up in commotion throughout the body, as
instruments to vindicate the public from an enemy invading.

And farther, take notice that particular pains beget (the general) a Fever
greater or less, sooner or flower, upon a double account.

1. From the Nature and Quality of the Part, in formation and office. 2. From
the greatness or inconsider ableness, fierceness or mildness of the morbific
cause.
For example; Sickness (which is pain) at the Heart, or Stomach, raises a
Fever great, and soon; and this by reason of the excellency and necessity of
their offices, whereby the whole body consents forthwith; that what afflicts
these, is a general complaint more immediately: but other parts in a lower
station, subservient and ministerial, whose function being not so general, but
of particular and private use, do not communicate their diseases so soon; nor
the whole body so highly resenting their ill affects, because the public can
spare their offices, and be without their exquisite or complete assistance for
a time, without great complaint, or manifest want.

Secondly, the cause or morbific matted, being greater or less in any part,
does thereby affect more or less, sooner or later: and therefore sand, or small
gravel in the Kidneys, do not afflict the part, nor raise so great a
disturbance in the body, as a stone there, that obstructs the ducture, and
stops the current of the Urine, and is much more difficult to be removed. And
sickness or pain at the Stomach, by little over-drinking of good liquor, Wine
or Beer, etc. is not so lasting, nor molesting, nor preading in the effects
over the whole body; ^s a surfeit of meat, fruit, or an over-charge of bad
liquors; these shall produce not only sickness or pain in the stomach, but
sickness or a hot pain in the whole body, which is called a Fever; and this
sickness may be dangerous, as sometimes it proves mortal.

Pain is fixed in one part, but the Fever is universal, spread throughout the
body; for from this pain of a particular part, the whole life estuates, is
incensed and disquieted: as if a cord be tied or fastened at both ends, of great
length and strait; strike it hard in one place, and it jarrs the whole length;
but at the place struck, the vibration is greater and more manifest: So where
the disease is seated, the pain is more apparent, and that part most sensible:
where the wound is given, where the oppression lies, where the obstruction is
where the humor is corroding, putrefying, etc. there pain is eminenter; limited
or bounded* and to be pointed at particularly, here and not there eminently:
but from hence arises the Fever, which is pain diffused, in a remiss degree,
and seemingly of another nature or quality, a different thing supposed by some,
therefore denominated a Fever.

This Fever, although it be a pain, yet it is not so felt by the Patient, nor
so understood by others, because of the greater particular pain that drowned
it; and because of its expansion and latitude, all parts bearing their
proportion and share; so that where a Fever stands alone without a particular
pain in this or that part; yet the Fever, the general pain, is not so manifest
to the sense of the Patient, because every part has its portion, and therefore
is not so discernable and uneasy: for a Fever is pain expatiated through the
body, and you are not so sensible of it, as when pain is contracted into a
narrow compass, the rest being free and at ease.

That all Fevers are pains, greater or less, examine but the definitions of
Febris, and that of Dolor, Fever and pain, you will be fully informed how they
agree; a Fever being comprised under pain, as a Species of that Genus, being a
hot pain, or the pain of heat.

Dolor est tristis sensatio in tactu.

Gal. Febris est calor contra naturam in cord accensus, and ex eo in totum
corpus diffusus, which is Hippocratic and Galenic Doctrine.

Now where there is heat, higher or exceeding that which is natural, it must
affect the sense of feeling and cause pain: and although I do not like the
definition of Febris, yet it will serve my turn here, being right, in the
opinion of those Galenists with whom I now contend.

From hence we must understand (and be untaught again) that Dolor and Febris do
differ as genus and species; a Fever being contained under, and is one sort of
pain, viz. a hot scorching pain; and sometimes a Fever is a cold pain, as the
rigor of intermitting Fevers (called Agues) do testify. And since that all
Fevers we pains little or great, we shall not need to institute a Method of
Cure different upon the notion of a Fever; but only having respect unto the
cause that raises this feverish or hot pain: and therefore Fevers are to be
cured as other pains are; that is, by adapting Medicines to remove the morbific
matter or cause of pain, and not otherwise.

And here by the way I must observe the error and mistake of Authors,
distinguishing Fevers into essential and symptomatical, whereas no Fevers are
essential, but all dependent upon some disease, morbific Miasm or seminary, and
is a Symptom thereof.

Where the seminary or morbific cause is fixed or seated, there is particular
pain eminenter to be pointed at; and there is a febrile or inflaming heat,
occasioned by this Spina, thorn in the flesh, which provokes the vital
principle to estuation: this heat is carried and spread more remote, and
conveyed by the venal and arterial current through the whole body; so that this
pain being spread or scattered, loses its denomination of pain, and then takes
up the title of a Fever: (as Tradition will have it) which deludes most
Practisers, thinking now they have some new thing to deal with, and another
disease: when indeed Dolor and Febris do not differ at that rate; and we may
say, that pain is a Fever contracted; a Fever is pain diffused.

Now whereas it is vulgarly said sometimes, that the Patient has no pain, but
only sick at the Heart, or the Stomach; this is very improper, and cannot truly
be said; for Stomach-sickness or Heart-sickness is nothing but pain and anguish
of those parts, which is tristis sensatio in tactu; it is feeling that makes
you sensible of sickness at the Heart or Stomach, and by no other sense; and
this is pain, but different from other pains, by reason of the Organ differing
from the rest in structure and office; and also from their causes, which makes
these sick pains to be various and different in themselves: So that all
sickness of this nature and kind, is pain, tending toward and bringing on this
Series of Diseases, the subject and design of our Discourse: but in regard
these sicknesses are often taken off, and checked, the progress is prevented,
and it goes no farther than the attempt.

And farther, the reason why these sick pains do not produce and bring forth
Tumors, Inflammations, etc. more frequently in the parts where they are seated,
is because the humor or matter offending is not always fixed in the Parenchyma,
fleshy substance of the member or any solid containing part thereof; but
floating in some vessel or cavity; so that having no root and solid foundation,
it cannot form a Tumor otherwise than by obstruction and distention of the
cavous part; having no seminary for augmentation planted in the substance of
the Organ. But this may happen, as sometimes it does, that any sharp serosity,
or eroding putrid matter, may excoriate the concave superficies of any ducture
vessel or cavity of a member, planting an Ulcer there, which may produce sad
effects, and complete the course of our Series proposed per saltum; omitting
these gradations of Tumor and Inflammation.

The result of our Discourse upon this second Theorem we shall draw out and sum
up into six Corollaries, for the more distinct and clear understanding of this
Doctrine.

1. That Diseases or Intemperatures of the first Classis, being most
discernable and apparent, do interpose too often, and cover the common Series
of Diseases chiefly to be feared. 2. That hot and cold distempers, generally
attending most diseases, have diverted and biassed Practisers from a true
course against those diseases and causes thereof: for the (...) of distempers
being obvious and manifest to sense; the (...) abstruse upon a general false
notion thereof, the process of Cure necessarily must be erroneous; not
discerning from whence they did arise, nor upon what they do depend. 3. That
these distempers of hot and cold do not arise elementally from any corporal
constitution or composition of the four Elements (so supposed) their variations
and predominations; but only as effects and signals discovering the Crasis and
state of the vital principle, whether vigorous or depressed; whether in a
natural placid condition, or disturbed and forced into a preternatural fiery
temper. 4. That inequal Temperaments or Distempers of the first general Classis
of Diseases, have so engrossed the Practice of Physic, that most endeavors are
spent thereupon, much time lost, and the more considerable and important
overseen; as witness this our frequent Series of Diseases, seldom under
consideration. 5. That where pain is seated in any part, being a warning-piece,
or the first manifest gradation or step of this common Series of Diseases;
regard there is mainly to be had for precaution, to obviate and prevent a
farther progress of Inflammation, Tumor, etc. 6. That this latent and dangerous
progress of diseases, being frequent, but rarely discovered, or sought for,
has brought more to the grave, than any complication or transmutation of
diseases whatever: for although there be a vast number of diseases, whereunto
humane bodies are liable; and many of them do come and go in the course of
life; yet most of them in their height and contumacy, and such as become
mortal, do terminate in this series, as the Catastrophe and last Scene.
Having proved in our first Position the frequency of this dangerous Series; as
also in the second, the latency thereof, and the disguises that cover their
transition from knowledge: I come now to the third and last Thesis, briefly to
declare from thence the fatal consequents of not discerning this lurking train,
but adapting Medicines to other purposes and diseases, supposed the grand
complaint of the sick.

Many people upon the first seizure of sickness, and some a while after,
complain of a pain particularly in the Head, Breast, Bowels, etc. here or
there: this pain (especially if great) takes off the appetite, prevents sleep,
and procures a Fever: for all acute diseases are accompanied with Fevers, and
most of the chronic; at least in their Paroxysms of intension and
exacerbations, have a febrile heat attending them. This is the common road of
diseases that are any thing severe; and such as are acquainted but with the
common road of Practice, have their eyes upon this external appearance, and
general outward garb, by which, as their compass, they steer and direct their
course.

This Fever (a great Bugbear, not known but by its name) a general Symptom of
all sharp distempers and dolorous diseases; being obvious to the standers by,
and confirmed by sentence of the Physician, takes up most of their thoughts in
design how to master and secure this common enemy that stands foremost in view:
and as their eyes are most or chiefly upon the Fever, so their fears are from
thence, and their endeavors are bent to suppress and abate this heat, and their
aims levelled at this mark: and where this preternatural estuation is coming
on, and feared only; or if already raised to a degree, all helps are then
thought of, and used to damp and extinguish this kindling flame, as great and
threatening danger from thence, which byasseth the Physician from his right aims
at the morbific cause.

Hence arises all the inventions of cooling, and so frequently used in most
cases: repeated Phlebotomies, Ptisans, Juleps, Emulsions, cooling Apozems,
Embrocations, Liniments, etc. which make the great clutter of Pots and Glasses
about the sick, and nothing more advantageous to the Apothecary than trifling
away the time thus, with a number of these hazardous, but many times and too
often, pernicious Medicines.

This mode of Practice, and these devices for cooling feverish bodies, I
suppose are taken up in imitation of Galen, a famous Master of this Art, who
appoints exhaustion of blood by Phlebotomy ad animi deliquium, until the
Patient faints: and large draughts of cold water, until the Patient turns pale,
shakes or quivers, and the whole body cooled.

And an Author of our time, in his Writings de Febribus, appoints the casements
to be set open, to cool the sick (upon what design I know not, except to fan
the house, lest the heat of the Fever should fire the chamber.)

And a late Author of great Fame, in his Works de Febribus, supposing Fevers
to arise a sulphur accenso and exaltato, from a sulphurous deflagration of the
blood, prosecutes upon the indication of refrigerating and quenching this fire
by cooling Liquors: and for encouragement herein gives an example (I suppose
his own Patient) of a young man about twenty years old, that by immoderate
drinking of Wine, fell into a Fever, with thirst, and insignal burning about
the Heart; who after Phlebotomy, and plentiful drinking of water ( aquae
fontanae ingentem quantitatem ebibit, the Authors words) he recovered. The
success was good, and I may say, wonderful; but whether from the means or
Providence, judge you: but I shall not imitate the Practice, lest ten dye for
one that lives: but this learned Doctor has highly deserved in some other
parts of his Writings, and therefore I tread softly.

Now to consider all this in gross (for brevity sake) and apply it to our
purpose in hand: these ways truly are very probable (not rational) to cool a
feverish, hot, sick man, and to make him in a short time stone-cold: and the
probability thereof upon good ground does appear thus.

First, Upon the account of this latent Series and progress, Inflammations,
Tumors, etc. ushered in by pain more frequently than discerned (as already
proved) this refrigerating course, the insisting upon, or intermixing these
cooling Medicines now and then, to quench a preternatural heat is destructive;
at best a great delay and impediment in the Cure: and this is the common way of
Practice, which needs no farther confirmation but a review.

Secondly, In all other cases, and from what cause soever a Fever does arise,
this juleping and cooling mode of Practice, is dangerous more or less, as the
case is in it self; but in no wise advantageous; making acute diseases to
commute and terminate in chronic: and chronic or lingering diseases to hold on
their course, and become more contumacious.

To prove the first, we shall compare that series and commutation of diseases,
with the designment and nature of these cooling Medicines; and by that you
shall see what probability and season there is to expect from thence any good
effect; but rather the contrary, promoting of mischief begun, and setting
forward those diseases.

Whatever causes pain, whether it be obstruction in the part, or oppression by
indigested or degenerate incongruous matter; by wind and flatulency, by any
exotic generation, as worms, stones, etc. any Tumor or Apostem breeding,
Inflammation or Ulcer planted, etc. these cooling and cold inventions touch not
the disease, (except to do mischief and exasperate) and remove no morbific
cause: for the nature of these causes and diseases requires Aperitives,
Abstersives, Catharticks, Discussives, Diaphoreticks, Dissolvents, Sarcoticks,
etc. pro re nata, each case requiring some or more Medicaments of these
Operations.

But these Coolers e contra, stand in opposition, and act repugnant to these
properties, and consequently to the Cures of those infirmities: by obstructing
of Ductures and Pores, incrassating what should be attenuated; coagulating what
should be kept fluid; condensing what ought to be rarefied and discussed;
fixing and retaining what should be moved and sent off; impeding transpiration,
but promoting putrefaction: generally, they check and damp the power of Nature,
endeavoring to extricate and quit her self from those encumbrances and growing
evils that assault and beset her.

To make good the second part, that in what other case soever, a Fever or
vehement heat shall arise with ebullition of the blood and preternatural
fermentation; cooling Medicines are very prejudicial, in many cases mortal; for
whether it be a pestilential or other malign Miasm, seminary or taint, or
other impurity and feculency of the blood, that Nature intends by this febrile
disturbance and irritation to throw off and separate, which Nature sometimes
without help does perform and makes a good Crisis: but these Coolers act
counter to, and prevent Natures good work, checking the fermentation, and
thereby hindering the separation of any degenerated or noxious admixture.

And the reason of these ill consequents from Coolers, does mainly lie here:
for as the stomach does preside over, and has great influence upon the other
faculties and subsequent digestions, whose briskness and vigorous performance
depend much thereon; so likewise whatever subverts the tone of the Stomach, and
flats the acuteness of this principal part, and prime office of digestion,
injures, allays and abates the energy of the rest, impedes the fermentation of
the blood for depuration in such cases, as also for conservation and.supply in
the constant daily work.

And although the Patient escapes this Fever and comes off with life; yet by
this male Practice they fall into Dropsies, Scurvies, Jaundies and cachectic
foul habits of body; an obstructed or tumified Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, etc.
Or it breaks out upon the Skin, and some eruption or cutany defedation will
appear in time: or it settles in some Limb, and disables the part.

And it is but reasonable to expect, that Patients thus cured, should soon be
Patients again upon the old account, the relicts of the former sickness; for
that morbific matter and cause of Fever, being retained, by checking and
cooling the febrile fermentation, and not observing Hippoc. advice, Quo natura
vergit -- this morbous impurity and foulness must precipitate and settle
somewhere, and then you may well imagine it will make some appearance or
alteration in time upon some part or other; and then an after-game is to be
played; for not having its due fermentation, secretion and passport formerly,
when it did turgere, and was upon the flight, only wanted the Physician's
direction and guidance, hinted by Hippoc. (...), -- Aphor. 21. Sect. 1. Now a
hole in the skin perhaps is thought on; an Issue for a tedious and troublesome
vent, to discharge the matter, which a good laudable course in due time might
have prevented.

And thus, or by this means the Patient comes into the Physicians hands again,
and the same especially that cured him of the dangerous Fever: and thus the
supposed good Physician drives on, and is thought a very necessary Advisor and
an able Assistant upon all occasions emerging. Truly this is according to the
homely Proverb, but Tinkerly doings, stop a Fever (if it can be this way) and
introduce what is more contumacious, difficult, and worse to be dealt with.

But some may object and say, That Lemons and Oranges are used in Fevers, and
with good effects from their cooling: I answer, That Lemons, Oranges,
Barberries, and such like, are allowable, and what good arises from thence, is
not to be ascribed to their cooling virtue (if any) but to their acidity, which
acuates and sharpens the ferment of the stomach; by whose reinforcement and
strength regained by this means, the whole body is refreshed, fares the better,
and some allay, at least more ability to bear the febrile heat: and therefore
likewise such Liquors are to be granted the Patient for refreshment and
support, as are most agreeable to the stomach and desired; and the dictates of
Nature in these cases are to be marked, who prompts for her own help and
satisfaction: and generally, the Drinks so desired by them are fermented
Liquors (no Juleps) Beer, Ale, Cider, Wine, etc. and such are most agreeable to
the stomach, which discreetly used, are no promoters nor continuers of the
Fever, but beneficial in their kind, and a relief to the sick: but always to
impose medical drinks upon a weak sick man, as if he were to be nourished and
live by Physic, is very absurd and irrational.

And here pertinent to our Discourse, I must recite what I have formerly noted
elsewhere: but by the way I must tell you, wherein I differ from other
Physicians, when I grant my Patients cooling Drinks, as Whey, Cider, or such
like, when desired in Fevers, or hot bodies: they lay a stress upon Coolers,
as principal means against the Disease, and to reduce the distemper; I allow
them not as Physic against the Disease, but as refreshment to Nature, being
delighted therewith and coveted: So that I do not impose them as of necessity,
because the Disease does not require it; but observing the propriety of the
body, being comforted and refreshed with such of such cooling Liquors. So that
these are not given as Medicine (for they cure not, nor is heat to be regarded
otherwise than as signal) but they may be allowed as refreshment. A laboring
man that toils and heats himself, must have drinks to refresh him: even so it
is with a man in a Fever; his Spirits labor more than at another time, and
more thirsty he is, requiring drink more than at another time, and it must be
such as delights him, that Nature does desired; not Barley water, Juleps, and
such slops, that the Patient nauseats, and give him no satisfaction. Tract. Of
the Scurvy, Chap. 11. Edition 4.

And in the same Chapter (controverting with Dr. Willis about Antiscorbutic
Remedies) there is much more to this purpose, showing the indirect proceeding
against Fevers, with repeated Phlebotomy and cooling Medicines, whither I
refer the Reader.

And here I might animadvert and take notice of the strange invention and
irrational use of epispastic or blistering Plasters to draw away a Fever;
showing thereby also that Fevers are wholly mistaken in the notion of them;
but I must wave the Argument as collateral, which otherwise would interrupt our
present occasion, and divert me from the direct prosecution of the business in
hand.

Now in tlje close, to observe the order and dependence of this Discourse, and
to take a review of the whole matter compendiously drawn up; you will find we
have not deviated from the subject proposed, but prosecuted. directly the scope
of this designment, which in short is thus.

That this latent internal Series of Diseases (more frequent than discerned)
their dangerous transition and complication is masked and covered with an
apparent or outside garb of a Fever, or febrile preternatural heat; which
signature and external character, has so engrossed the Physicians endeavors,
and taken up the Practice of this Art, that little has been done in searching
out the radix of diseases, and opportunity neglected for prosecution against
the morbific causes.

And for as much as this Fever being only the estuation of the vital Principle
throughout the body, generally attending these and most other diseases, is no
farther to be taken notice of, than as signal; showing the cause to be greater
or less in provocation, as the heat is more intense or remiss; and does in no
wise divert the Physicians intentions and design of Cure, nor ought to be
applied unto, since it is only a consequent and dependent occasionally, from
the morbific cause: which febrile heat rises and falls, as the said cause
does more or less provoke and irritate; and vanishes quite away when that
cause is removed, or cease to disturb: It necessarily then follows, that
these Coolers generally used and mainly insisted on, are generally noxious,
often mortal: giving great advantage to the train of diseases (our subject)
toward a Cure whereof they contribute nothing; but e contra, promote the
progress.

I might have amplified and enlarged thisDiscourse in several parts thereof;
but this will suffice at present for a dawning and discovering light; which
hereafter may appear with greater luster, as occasion shall be offered by any
opponent to these Truths.

And thus: much in general touching this Series of Diseases; their latency,
their frequency, the danger by in advertency and improper mistaken means, and
too late discovery.

Our next undertaking is, to view more particularly the gradations of this
progress, tracing from stage to stage, and remarking the capital occurrences,
the chief causes antecedent and conjunct: beginning with Pain the common
leader, or warning Sympton.

Pains afflicting humane Bodies, the different Nature and Causes thereof.
OF all Symptoms that attend, or are the consequents of Diseases, Pain is the
most troublesome and irksom to bear. Weakness and languishing are tolerable
evils; but pain is restless, tormenting and full of complaints. And although
this be the worst (in extremity) to abide, and the most mournful accident that
befalls man's Body; yet no part thereof has a privilege by Nature to be exempt,
or protection from this calamity: the reason whereof we will inquire into.

All parts of the Body wherein is the sense of feeling, are liable to pain: and
by virtue of this sense, pain is communicated to this or that part: and
therefore dead Bodies, parts paralytic, benumbed or mortified are not capable
of pain, because in them there is not that sense of feeling: and although the
Organs of the other senses are subject to pain, as the Eyes, Ears, etc. yet
pain is not proper to them (quatenus) as they belong to those senses; but as
the sense of feeling is seated there also, having a greater latitude than the
other; and is extended through the Organs of all those Senses. True it is; the
other senses have their inconvenient and disturbing objects, as the Philosopher
says, Excellens sensibile laedit sen sum: as the light of the Sun, or flame is
troublesome to the Eyes; and great noise, as of a Bell or Gun, if near,
especially sudden and unexpected, does offend the Ears: and a strong or
stinking scent is offensive to the Nose: and an ungrateful taste, as too salt,
too sour, or bitter, is unpleasant to the Palate: but pain affects the sense
of feeling.

Parts therefore that are capable of pain are endowed with the sense of
feeling; and those parts are membranous; that is, they are invested with, or
lined with some Membrane, by which the sense of feeling is communicated; and
hence the Bones are capable of pain, by the Periosteum, that Membrane which
covers them. And this sense as it is more general, extending through all parts,
and more useful than the rest of the senses; so the disturbance arising thence
is more insufferable and grievous to be endured: and better it is to want any
other sense, than this, yea all; for where feeling is departed, the life is
ceased in that part. This sense therefore being supreme, the defections and
disturbances thereof must be of greater importance and concernment than the
rest.

The other Senses are confined to, and exercise their functions in one Organ or
part of the Body, the Eye, the Ear, etc. but feeling is not restrained to so
narrow a compass, but is seated in all parts of the Body, even in the Organs of
those other senses. The great Prerogative of this sense above the rest, having
no limits, but reaching through the whole Body, and exercising its power among
the other senses, and an inseparable consort with the life; were worth
inquiring into the reasons thereof, if time would give leave for that diversion.

What pain is, scarce any one but can tell; and some by woeful Experience;
whereby they will consent with the definition thereof, dolor est tristis
sensatio in tactu: pain is a trouble arising in the sense of feeling: but that
which is so plainly felt, is not very easy to be understood from whence it
does arise.

The Causes of pain are as various as the Objects of the sense of Feeling: for
whatever objects assault that sense violently or extremely, as too hot, cold,
hard, sharp, heavy, etc. are offensive to the Organ of Feeling, and do raise
pain.

Concerning the approximate cause of Pain, there are several opinions; I wave
the more extravagant and improbable, and shall recite those in which the most
Philosophers and eminent Physicians do consent and pitch upon as most agreeable
to reason.

One Party asserts, That a sudden and violent mutation of the active qualities,
or the tactil qualities suddenly and violently acting upon the sense of
feeling, are the approximate cause of pain.

The other Party determines, That solutio continui, a solution or disjunction
of continuity is the immediate cause of all pain.

The third Opinion joins these two together, and will have pain to arise from
them both; according to the definition of Plato: Est itaque dolor tristis in
sensu tactus affectio, a membri intemperie and continuitatis divortio subito
facta. And Hippoc. before him taught the same doctrine: Quae naturam (inquit)
mutant ac corrumpunt, dolores excitant. To which Galen does subscribe.

Now to comment a little upon these different Judgments I cannot but observe
and do own that there is something of probability and reason in these several
sentiments; but not a full satisfaction to the matter queried; nor the whole
truth rightly stated: and for this reason I am the more nice and strict in this
inquiry, because from hence the nature of Anodynes or asswagers of pain are
discovered; and this is the groundwork upon which they are formed and rightly
adapted.

I allow that unity is the perfection of Bodies, and is necessary to perfect
sanity; disjunction or separation dissolves the harmony, and leads or is the
progress to destruction: for whatever tends to disjoyn or make a separation of
parts, does threaten to ruin the whole. And true it is, that the active
qualities or tactil objects, do cause pain as they do make their impulsions
violently upon the Organ of Feeling; which when they do it moderately, placidly
and amicably, they cause pleasure or no pain. But whether the impetuous and
vehement acts of those Agents raising pain, do always cause a solution of
continuity approximately and immediately, is much to be doubted.

I yield that the vehemence of these tactil objects may procure a solution of
continuity sometimes, as we see from pain, that Imposthumes, Ulcers, Gangrenes
and Mortifications do follow; but these are not inseparable and necessary
consequents, for they happen but sometimes: pain may continue for a time, cease
again, and no breach of continuity remain a^ an effect thereof.

To which our Adversaries have this evasion by way of Reply; That pain is
caused a continui solutione, non a soluta unitate: which, as I conceive the
meaning, is as much as to say; solution of continuity in fieri is sufficient,
though it be not in facto esse.

But to pass over this Sophistry, as not worth the expense of time to lay it
open; and if we make appear that the whole matter or controversy is bottomed
upon this error, mistaking the cause for the effect, and the effect for the
cause. Cujus contrarium -- then the pleadings of our Antagonists will be put to
silence as absurd, the doctrine laid aside, and practice grounded upon better
principles.

They affirm solution of continuity to be the approximate cause of pain; the
contrary whereof we will set forth and prove, that pain is the cause of
solution of continuity. And here we must first distinguish between violent
external Agents, as sword, staff, bullet, fire, etc. causing wounds,
contusions, fractures, combustions, etc. and internal causes gradually arising
in the Body, as products of a degenerate state.

In the first cases, solution of continuity causes pain: as when the wound is
given, pain follows as an effect: so likewise upon a sudden fracture, or
rupture in the latter, pain precedes as the approximate cause, solution of
continuity comes after as the product or consequent. For example; some
indigested or degenerate matter lodges or fixes in this or that part of the
Body, Nature not able to subdue or transmit it away, this like a thorn
irritates and provokes the vital principle to a disquietness and disturbance,
which is pain: this pain draws a confluence of humors to the part grieved, and
increases the first offending matter, causing Inflammation and Tumors; this
apostemates, and then breaks forth into an Ulcer.

Observe the Series, first here is peccant matter as the occasional cause
raising pain; this pain attracts humors from other parts, which being
transplanted out of their proper place, they degenerate, corrupt, and then
produce an Imposthume and Ulcer. Thus you see pain goes before, solution of
continuity follows after, and therefore it is plain, as in this, so in all
other cases where separation of unity does happen from an internal cause
arising in the body; that it is the consequent of pain, and not (as those
learned men would have it) the approximate cause of pain.

To illustrate this truth a little farther, and that you may the better
understand and have a clearer satisfaction herein ( practice depending upon it,
I mean the allay or remove of pains) consider and know, that the sense of
Feeling being spread through the whole body, is as the last or inmost covering,
that does inwrap or infold the life; and is as it were the watch or guard upon
the confines thereof. Now any thing that does stir up Feeling, that thus nearly
and intimately approaches the life; if it exceed the bounds of moderation and
is violent, if it be any way unnatural or injurious, it raises a disturbance
in the vital principle of that part, which is pain: so that the assault is
first made upon the life, which governs and preserves unity and continuity of
parts; but that vital principle being fretted, distracted and put by its
placid, regular economy and government, the Organ perishes as the life of the
part decays, or is out of course; being then unable to protect and preserve it.

From hence I am persuaded to believe and must assert, That the approximate
cause of pain is every thing that does intimately and approximately affect and
disgust the vital principle in every part pained; which pain is the estuation,
anguish and fury of the life or vital principle, which does dolere, being
exasperated and provoked by those causes: and if solution of continuity does
happen upon this disturbance, it is wrought and caused by the exorbitance and
enormity of the vital principle, deserting or being put by the charge and due
management of the part.

Moreover, pain sometimes continues long by intervals and remissions to molest
a part, and no separation of unity to be caused thereby; although it is an
interruption and breach of Harmony: so that this ira sive dolor, this pain of
the vital principle does not always arise to the height of producing
discontinuity; and is so far from being the approximate cause of all pain, that
many times it never happens either before or after pain, to be a cause or an
effect.

Now what this vital principle is, residing in and governing every part in
their several functions of vitality, whether it be Anima; or Archaeus according
to Helmonts doctrine; or spiritus impetum faciens, according to Hippocrates; I
shall not enter into the controversy, because it will require a large
discourse, or rather a peculiar Tract to determine this Problem, and clear up
the truth of our novel opinion, disintangling it from the objections and
prejudice of ancient received doctrine; which will disjoyn and delay our matter
chiefly intended, therefore I forbear the digression, and proceed.

Pains are various, or do affect the sense in a different manner; and this
either from the nature of the part grieved, or from the variety of causes, or
both.

Now the nature and condition of parts are different and various these ten
several ways, or may be reduced to these heads: Ducture, Figure, Situation,
Composition, Beginning, Progress, Substance, Temperature, Number and Office.
And as parts are varied by these differences, so pains thereby are made
various, and not only pains, but also all other Symptoms and diseases have a
specification from hence.

Pain sometimes is obtuse or heavy, as if a weight were pressing upon the part
pained; as when the Parenchyma of the Liver, spleen, Lungs or Kidneys is
grieved; and this by reason they hang or depend on Ligaments and Membranes.

Pain sometimes is acute, sharp and punging; as if the part were perforated or
pricked with a Needle; as in a Pleurisy, and this is caused from a thin, acrid
or acrimonious humor penetrating the Pleura; for nothing but what is subtle
and acute can procure this or the like punctures, and invade the dense
substance of a Membrane.

Pain sometimes is with pulsation, that is, a beating pain like to the motion
of the Pulse: and this pain happens commonly upon an Inflammation, and also
where an Artery is seated in the part; for where there is no Artery, there is
no pulsation, it being the office of this Vessel only to make a pulse. From
hence Galen 2. de loc. affect. 3. took notice, that upon an Inflammation of the
Lungs or the Pleura, there was no pulsation or beating pain, because there were
no Arteries in the parts.

Pain sometimes is mordacious or biting, from sharp humors vellicating the
sensible parts.

Pain sometimes is frangitive, as if grinding or bruising, and this is proper
only to the bones, or rather the Periosteum that covers the bone, by which
Membrane the bone is made sensible, and the pain lies deep.

Pain sometimes is tensive or stretching, and this happens from a repletion or
fullness of some humor, wind or vapor, filling and extending the part: if this
stretching pain be cum gravitate and pondere, with heaviness or weight, then
you may conclude it is humoral, or something of more solid substance; but if
the extensive pain be without weight, then it signifies wind or vapor: as very
often such are Colic pains, from a collection of wind between the tunicles of
the guts.

Pain sometimes is convulsive; and this is proper to the Nerves and Tendons;
because the nervous filaments are so united, that they cannot be torn, but are
contracted to their original.

Pain sometimes is lacerating or tearing: and this is proper to the flesh;
because the flesh has Fibers and small Nerves not so united as the Membranes,
and therefore a causa solvente continuum are easily lacerated. And thus much
for the various kinds or different sort of pain: next the situation or
extension, and the duration is to be regarded.

Pain is either universal affecting the whole body, from some general cause; as
in Fevers, Agues, etc. Or else pain is seated in some particular region or
part of the body; as the Head, Breast, Stomach, Belly, etc.

Pain sometimes is more outward ot external upon the superficies of the body,
whose seat is more easily discovered and known, laying hand upon the place, by
the Patients direction. Sometimes pain is internal and deep, with difficulty to
be certainly determined, which part is grieved, and requires good anatomical
judgment to assign the part or member. From hence pains some may be said to be
manifest, others abstruse; as also from their causes, evident and latent.

Pains some are constant as to place, or fixed; others erratic or shifting from
one place to another.

Pains some are constant as to time, or continual; others intermitting and by
intervals, having cessation for a time and returning again.

In all pains there ought to be considered these four things: the Greatness,
the Kind, the Property, the Place.

Greatness and vehemence of pain does arise from the greatness of the offending
cause, and the sensibility called tenderness of the part. All pain spends or
wears and abates the strength of Nature; but violent and vehement pain requires
sudden relief, lest the sick faint or expire. Upon the first assault Nature
does insurge and raises all her strength to bear, resist and overcome the
offending cause, and cooperates vigorously with the means for relief and ease;
but help not coming, strength abates, grows weaker and weaker, as not able to
hold it out long: and this is perceived and known by the Pulse, which at the
first access of great pain, beats high, strong and quick; but afterward falls
off, grows weak, small, slow, or swift, laboring and languishing,

Secondly, The Kind and nature of the pain is to be observed and noted; whether
tensive, heavy, acute, biting, etc. that accordingly fit Remedies may be
adapted to such variations.

Thirdly, The Property is to be regarded; whether pain be moveable or fixed:
continual or constant; or returning by intervals; whereby the fallacy or
certainty of the Cause may be adjudged.

Fourthly, The Place of pain is to be distinguished: for that which will be a
good remedy and proper to one part or member, may prove of little advantage or
injurious to another; because some parts have Antipathy or disgust and dislike
to some remedies, which ratione morbi, in respect of the Disease may be proper
and requisite, but the part will not admit it: as Oil generally is anodyne and
asswaging; but hot in pains of the Eyes, for there it is injurious to the part:
and a puncture of the flesh and a puncture of a Nerve, will require different
remedies. And upon this account Galen 4. Meth. 5. would not allow of
Suppuratives to every wound, and chiefly in the Tendons and Nerves, and
condemns those Chirurgions that make not that distinction.

And here you must diligently search and examine, whether the pain be
idiopathical or sympathical: that is, whether the part pained does suffer per
se, from a cause residing in that part; or whether the cause lies in another
part, and the part pained does complain per sympathiam seu consensum, only by
consent from some other diseased or distempered part.

And this distinction ought strictly to be observed, without which no Cure can
succeed: for if the peccant matter or cause offending lie in one part, and the
remedy be applied to another, you cannot in reason hope for a good effect
thereon. This therefore is to be received as a fundamental Truth, That all
parts of the Body may fail in their office and true performance of their
duties, vel vitio proprio, vel alieno, either by a deficiency of their own, or
depravation and injury from other parts: and this not being duly taken notice
of by some Practisers, no wonder if Patients languish so long under their
hands, waiting in vain for their relief and Cure: for, finding the Patient to
complain of pain in this or that part, they think of nothing but applying to
the part pained; concluding with the common saying: Vbi est dolor, ibi est
morbus, which is oftentimes a great mistake. For example: the Head aches and
complains many times, not from any defect of its own, being firm and sound; but
either from the Stomach being foul or otherwise diseased, whose ill affects
also are communicated to the Head by the Nerves of the sixth conjugation:
sometimes from the Spleen; sometimes from the Womb; and sometimes from other
parts, by reason of the Nerves propagated into all parts of the Body, having
their original from the Brain and spinal Marrow, derived from thence and of the
same nature; from whence the Head does consent with all those parts.

And the Arm may complain, wanting its power of due motion or strength,
although the Arm be sound and well; yet if the Nerves that supply those Muscles
of the Arm with Spirits be hurt, the Muscles are deprived of their use or act
deficiently and depravedly. As by a blow upon the Back (or by other causes
there not so manifest) the Arm may fail in its due motion, the Nerves being
injured: in vain then it is to apply Topical Medicines to the Arm, but
application must be made to the Vertebrae of the Back, from whence the Nerves
are derived and implanted into those Muscles.

And since the several parts of the Body do complain, sometimes by their own
fault or decay in themselves; and sometimes only by injury transferred or
received from other parts; we will conside how many ways there are for parts of
the Body to be ill-affeced and receive prejudice one from the other.

The Sympathy or consent of parts, whereby one suffers from another, may arise
upon a treble account.

1. Per Sympathiam generis. 2. Ob Familiaritatem operis. 3. Propter
Vicinitatem.
First, Per Sympathiam generis, by which we understand that consent and affect
that is communicated by continuity of parts of the same kind: as when the Neck
being hurt, the Hand consents and complains; because the Nerve serving and
coming down to the Hand, is derived from the Neck: and this way of consent may
also be effected, not only by the long Nerves, but also by the long Muscles,
and the Veins in other parts: as sometimes it happens that the Leg is stiff and
wants its flexibility and bending inwards by reason of some disease, not in the
Leg, but in the Hip, where the original of the Muscle is, that serves for this
motion; and therefore erroneously some have applied Fomentations, Unguents and
Plasters to the Leg upon this supposition, Quo ubi est symptoma, ibi sit
morbus; not considering that the Tibia does suffer by consent, and the root of
the disease lies in Coxendice where the Muscle does arise. And thus it falls
out very often, that the Disease is far distant from the Symptoms; and
therefore the original and progress of the Muscles ought diligently to be
observed in such cases as these, that the part primarily affected, and the part
affected by consent may be distinguished, else the designment of Cure will fail
and be insuccessful.

Secondly, Consent of Parts is procured ob Familiaritatem seu per consortium
operis: and this consent is common to all those parts that are ordained by
Nature to concur together in some common office: and thus it is between the
Womb and the Dugs.

Thirdly, Consent of Parts is frequent propter Vicinitatem, by reason of
vicinity and adjacency: when parts are situate near to each other they are
mutually affected, either by some sensible passages or insensible, for totum
corpus est perspirabile, the whole body is perspirable by Pores latent arid
invisible, by which there is conveyance to and reception from each other, and
do thereby sympathize with the good or ill of one another, although the ways of
communication are not manifest: and thus it is between the Stomach and the
Lungs, and is easily perceived by fuch as are Asthmatical, Phthisical or have
Coughs, that by eating or drinking this or that, those infirmities will be
exasperated and made worse, almost presently: and e contra, they will receive
some ease and benefit by that which is good, soon after it is received into the
Stomach; long before it can make a progress the common way out of the stomach.
And this consent likewise is between the Oesophagus, the mouth of the Stomach
and the Heart: and thus it is between the Bladder and the Intestinum rectum the
last Gut; and from hence pains of the Bladder are mitigated and eased by
Clysters, through insensible passages, and not by any manifest ducture or
Vessel of communication.

From hence we may learn by such Examples, that Sympathy and consent of parts
is strictly to be marked, else it is not possible to know where the root of a
Disease is, and from whence pain or other Symptoms do arise: for, one part may
be pained, and the disease lie in another; and if this be not rightly
distinguished, there cannot be a true adaptation of Medicines, nor due
application made where it ought to be, which renders all endeavors frustraneous.

But to descend from generals, and to make our Discourse more profitable and
satisfactory to the particular cases of the Reader, inquiring after his own
peculiar concern and present complaint; we will take notice of some pains
incident to particular and principal parts of the Body remarkable and
frequently occurring, examining their causes.

Pains of the Head.
THat the Head aches, every one can tell that suffers under it; but the causes
and the parts affected distinctly, are known only to the Physician: and he by
questioning and examining the Patient, draws his conclusions by collating the
several answers, and makes Judgment thereupon. All which depends upon a due
observance of these four Particulars, rightly to determine the case.

First, Inquiry is to be made of the Patient concerning his course of life for
some time before, whether regular or irregular; in labor, exercise, or ease;
if thereby any thing has been done to procure or introduce the present
complaint, and of his former state of Health and Sickness.

Secondly, Of his state and condition of Body as it now is.

Thirdly, The place or seat of pain, the compass and extent of it.

Fourthly, The quality or condition of the pain; vehement or moderate,
continual or intermitting, acute or obtuse, etc.

Having made disquisition by these Topics, and traced the Patient through
these grand inquiries; you will then understand something of the rise and
progress of the pain sought after, giving you then occasion to take a farther
prospect and consideration of the various differences of pains in the Head,
wherein your present case will be found, and exhibited to your view, as
follows.

Headaches are either more general and dilated, affecting the whole; or else
one side of the Head; or some particular part, as Forehead, Temples, etc.

2. Head-pains are either internal or external.

3. Idiopathical or Sympathical.

4. Recent and of late standing, or inveterate and of long continuance.

Pain of the whole Head or major part does denote the cause to be more general
and of large extent; as in Fevers and plethoric persons, wherein the whole
body is distempered, and from thence the whole Head or most part therewith
affected.

Pain in particular places; as of the right or left side, forepart or
hind-part, the top or the crown, signifies the cause to be, or act there only;
and does arise from some defect or trouble in the part it self, by some peccant
humor there bred, or by transmission of morbific matter from, or by consent
with some other part diseased, adjacent or remote. As more particularly
hereafter.

Now you must understand, that although every person seems to be equally
disposed alike, and liable to these pains; yet it is much otherwise; for some
are often complaining of Headache, some rarely or never: and this by reason of
the different fabrication and formation of parts, as well within as without the
man; and also by reason of the soundness and strength of parts that some have
above another; by which they endure long, and free from pain or other
infirmities.

Internal pain is seated within the Cranium or Skull, and signifies the Brain
it self, or Membranes investing the Brain; or some Vessel, Vein, Artery or
Nerve to be affected: if the Brain aches, the pain is obtuse and heavy, the
Patient is much inclining to sleep or drowsiness: so likewise when the Veins
are molested, the pain is remiss: but if the Membranes or Nerves be the
complaining parts, the pain is more acute and punging; and then it reaches
commonly to the roots of the Eyes; because these Membranes do cover the Optic
Nerves which lead to the Eyes: and it may be known what Nerve is affected, by
the part consenting, which that Nerve does supply and serve; and thus sometimes
the Ear, or Tongue; sometimes the Shoulders, or Breast complains, by that Nerve
inserted into them for their use: but if an Artery be the place, then the pain
is beating, Pulse-like.

External pain is superficial and without the Skull, showing that the
Pericranium or Membrane covering the Skull is the part grieved: and sometimes
the Cutis or outward skin only, and then the pain is more remiss; but both are
known and aggravated by compressing the part or place: and if the pain be in
the forepart of the Head, and extend to the Eye-brow, the Periosteum is
affected.

Pains of the Head per essentiam or Idiopathical, are when the cause of pain is
seated in the part pained, by reason of debility or dyscrasie and infirm state
thereof: from whence ill matter is congested and accumulated, causing a
disturbance or distemper; and sometimes pains fixed from extraordinary
productions there engendered and bred; as worms, stones, etc. as has been noted
by Authors of repute and credit: Hollerius, Schenkius, Kentman, and others.

Pains of the Head sympathical are when the cause lies remote, and the part
pained suffers by Sympathy, transmission or consent from other members, and not
by any proper defect or disability of its own. And thus the Head is very apt
compati to suffer and condole with most parts of the Body; by reason the Nerves
are branched forth and dispersed in all parts of the Body from the Brain and
spinal Marrow; which being of exquisite sense does affect their original and
fountain by this communication and intercourse with other parts: and not only
by the Nerves coming from the Head is this consent maintained, but also by the
Veins and Arteries going from other parts up to the Head, conveying good or
ill. Hence it is, that very frequently the Head is pained from distempers of
the Stomach; sometimes from the Spleen, Womb, Intestines, etc.

Having given you the various differences of Head-pains as to the quality or
condition of them, and also pointed at the several parts affected per se and
per consensum: I come now to set forth the causes or rise of these pains from
whence they spring; whether generated in the Head, or communicated to it from
other parts.

Causes of. Head-achs or pains are, external and internal.

External Causes may be such as these; as when the Head is exposed to heat or
cold, a strong scent sweet or stinking, Fumes or smoke, a blow or fall, etc.
occasioning disturbance of the Spirits, Obstructions in the Pores and Vessels,
Inflammations, Tumors or Imposthumes.

Internal Causes are, sometimes plenitude or fullness of blood, which then upon
small occasions is ready to estuate and ferment, causing extension of the
Vessels and Membranes: or else depravation and foulness of the blood which may
offend the Brain, or other parts of the Head by its noxious properties.

Now the degeneration of the blood from its due and laudable state, to an evil
and bad condition is various, and does manifest it self by diverse Symptoms in
several parts of the Body; and also when it is let out of the body, by color,
sapor, consistence, heat, etc.

Either the blood is impoverished and deficient in vital Spirits and heat, slow
in motion, feculent, gross or grumous, and thereby apt to be stagnant or
obstruct: or else too hot and fiery, causing inquietude of the Spirits and
irregular motions of that vital stream, disturbing the Head with pain and
watchfulness.

Secondly, The blood degenerates sometimes from its Balsamic qualities, into an
acrid, sharp or acrimonious condition; and then most commonly there is an
abounding serosity, or a superfluous latex or water; which state of the blood,
as very remarkable, causing many diseases, I shall set forth in another Work
(Deo volente) to be made public.

Thirdly, The blood may be contaminated with a contagious, malignant or
virulent Miasm and taint; as in the Plague, small Pox, highly graduate
Scorbute, Venereal Lues, (as more fully appears in my Tracts of the Scurvy and
that of the Venereal Lues.) In all which cases the Head frequently is offended
and suffers pain.

And here: also we must account amongst the internal causes,

Impotency and weakness of some Organical parts of the Head, not performing
their office.

Obstructions of some ducture or porosity, by constriction, compression or
coagulation.

Congested matter infesting any part of the Head raises pain.

Wind or flatulent Spirits roving here and there may produce the like.

Watching unseasonably, which tires the Spirits, causes disturbance in the
Head.

Immoderate study or cogitation weakens the Brain, and renders it liable to
pain.

Violent motion agitating the Spirits furiously, and driving the humoral
currents out of their natural placid course, discomposeth the Head and may
cause pain.

Immoderate Venus, or long forbearance: the first by too great exhaustion and
draining the Nerves; the latter by plenitude, over-charging the Genital
Vessels, reverberating back, or by consent affects the Head.

And now briefly I shall show here, what parts chiefly and frequently the Head
consents with, from whence internal causes of pain are communicated; and as
these parts are well or ill by intervals, so the Head is better or worse
thereby.

The Stomach in the first place, as being the general and grand office of
preparation to supply the whole body with nutriment; so is it the part that
most frequently afflicts the Head by communication, through Vessels of
intercourse conveying to each other.

The Head complains from the Stomach either before meat, when supposed to be
empty; or after meat, when replete and filled.

If the Head complains before eating, it argues the Stomach to have some
remainders or relicts from former digestions not wrought off, that does disturb
the Stomach, and from thence the Head: if after meat the Head aches, it does
declare the Stomachs indisposition to digest, and imbecility to overcome what
is received, and laboring under the burden, the Head suffers also.

Now to know that the Stomach is not in good order or ability for the true
performance of its office in digestion, is manifest by these signs: Vomiting or
nauseating, pain, oppression or heaviness, eructation or belching, want of
appetite, or thirstiness.

But here by way of caution in this consent between the Stomach and the Head,
you must rightly distinguish, lest it happen, as sometimes it does, that the
Stomach suffers from the Head, and not the Head from the Stomach: and since the
consent is reciprocal and mutual, you must nicely observe which is the part
primarily affected, and which the part by consent; else endeavors of relief
will be frustrate, if you begin not with the part primario diseased, to free
and set that right, for then the other spontaneously and of course will be
reduced.

The Spleen being ill-affected, draws the Head into consent sometimes, and
participates of its evil: and this is to be known by examining the Spleen,
whether any Symptom of disorder or distemper is manifest there or from thence.
Now the signs of a diseased Spleen are these; pain, hardness, tumor or
extension, flatulent motions in the left Hypochonder or side under the short
Ribs: And most commonly the Head is affected or pained on the same side, or
else the forepart.

If the Liver occasions the disturbance or pain in the Head; for the most part
the pain is seatted on the right side, and then some Symptoms of a distempered
Liver will appear; as heaviness or fullness in the right side, hardness, pain or
heat, affecting also the Stomach, and causing thirst; also dryness or heat in
the palms of the hands and soles of the feet: and as these signs have their
intention or remission, so the Head is better or worse.

If the Womb be in fault, and cause pain of the Head (as frequently it does by
the great communication and consent between these parts) then either there is a
suppression of the menstrual purgation; or irregular and out of due course, not
keeping the due times; or insufficient in quantity, or abounding: or too long
retension of semen; or too great a profusion and wasting. Some of these causes
are sufficient, not only to disturb the Head, but also diverse other parts of
the body; and these pains of the Head arising by consent from the Womb, do most
commonly affect the top or hind-part of the Head.

If from the Intestines pains of the Head do proceed, then either worms are
bred there; or the Guts are troubled with sharp or corrupt humors; or else
there is costiveness and siccity of the Bowels, whereby the Excrements are
baked and hardened, causing too long retention* and from hence by Vessels of
communication the Head complains also.

If from the Kidneys the Head is grieved; then inquire into the condition of
the Kidneys, and you will find some signals of a Disease there: either stone or
gravel, or a sharp Serum, an Inflammation or preternatural heat, an Ulcer or
Excoriation.

Now as concerning the Cure of Head-achs, and likewise of all pains that arise
by consent from other parts, take this general Rule; That in the first place
application be made to the part primarily affected, to reduce that into a state
of integrity; then consider the part that suffered by communication and
participation, if by continuance or length of time, any impressions remain
there, or debility, that may require help, although the foundation or first
cause of complaint be removed; else you begin at the wrong end: for in vain it
is to endeavor amendment in the part consenting, until the other be in its
rectitude, sublata causa tollitur effectus. For example; if the Head complain
from the Stomach, let the Cure be designed upon the Stomach, and that being
performed, the work is done.

Thus you see plainly, that the Cure of Head-pains by consent, is as various
and different, as the parts of the Body are different in organization,
situation and office; whereby they become liable, and are seized with various
diseases, requiring a different manner or methods of curing, which are to be
treated of in their proper places.

Touching the Cure of Head-pains that are the products or consequents of
essential or idiopathical Diseases seated in the Head; the removing or taking
away those pains depends upon the Cure of those Diseases, whereof they are the
effects and concomitants; and do require their due and regular course of means,
suitable to the nature of the disease: but in cases of extremity, and for
mitigation of pain, and the inconveniences arising thence, as long watching or
want of rest, and prostration of strength; there are such good Remedies, as
Anodynes, prudently to be used for allay and giving ease or respite, until the
causes can be eradicated, and a perfect Cure wrought.

Pains in the Thorax or Breast.
AMongst the several divisions of man's Body into parts, we may observe three
insignal Cavities, each containing principal Members of the Body: the first and
supreme is the Head, and all contained therein: the middle cavity is the
Breast, which contains the Lungs and Heart: the lower region called the Abdomen
or Belly, comprehends the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Guts, Kidneys, etc.

And having taken cognizance of those pains incident to the Head; we now come
to remark what pains happen to the containing and contained parts of the
Breast. Hence we may note, that these pains from their situation and place, may
be distinguished into external and internal.

External pains we may call such as are outward amongst the musculous and
fleshy parts, as the Paps, Dugs and intercostal Muscles.

Internal pains are such as seize the Heart, Lungs, Mediastinum, etc. parts
contained.

The Breast is circumscribed thus; the upper part is from the two Canal-bones
called Claviculae, about the bottom of the Neck; the lower part is bounded by
the Diaphragma or Midriff spread just above the Stomach and Liver from side to
side: the forepart is the Sternon or Breast Bone seated in the middle, which
joins and fastens the Ribs: on the back-part is the Vertebrae or Spine,
consisting of many bones knit together, where also the Ribs have their
articulation: the sides are compassed with Ribs swelling outward, and they
reach from the Spine to the Sternon. And this is the extent or limits of the
Breast.

Pain may fall into the Paps or Dugs of both Sexes, but most commonly it
happens so to women (except from external causes, blows or falls) and thus it
is upon a sixfold account.

First, Because those parts are more capacious and swelling outward in Women,
which being glandulous, spongy, soft and porous, are thereby apt to imbibe or
receive any vagrant humor coming to this part.

Secondly, More liable to the impressions of cold, from its tender soft nature,
and being by them more frequently exposed to the air; which may occasion and
lay a foundation for pain and other Symptoms to follow.

Thirdly, In Women these parts being furnished with more Vessels of use for
lactation or suckling, are thereby more liable and obnoxious to disorder.

Fourthly, From the communication and intercourse between this part and the
Womb, whose diseases and distempers may affect the other by consent.

Fifthly, From the attraction of suckling, ill humors may be drawn and gathered
there, which otherwise would not resort to that part.

Sixthly, Pain seizes this part in Women from the various conditions of their
milk.

Now the variations of milk causing this effect arise upon a double account:
redundance or plenitude, and Cacochymy or alienation. Sometimes by plenitude;
for milk abounding and distending the Vessels causes pain and trouble in the
part. Sometimes by alienation of milk from its natural good condition to a
degenerate state: and this proceeds from a cachectic or vicious habit of
body; for as the blood is good or bad, so likewise the milk, which is sanguis
dealbatus, blood changed white by another digestion.

This milky substance being balsamic, dulcid and pure in its integrity; yet is
very subject to alterations and change from distempers and various dispositions
of the Body: as sometimes from thence, being not so sweet; but saltish, bitter,
acrid and punging; sometimes curdling and coagulating, thereby not flowing
freely in the Vessels, but causing obstructions in those small ductures: hence
arise pains, inflammations, hardness, tumors, etc. if not prevented by a due
course with good means.

And such inconveniences as these are frequent to Women after the birth of
children, when milk flows plentifully into those parts; and this many times or
for the most part does proceed from the imprudent custom of managing Women in
childbed, especially some Nurses, who would be thought more careful, kind and
diligent to their Mistresses; do feed them too plentifully, giving them Caudle
at every (...) or after every short sleep night and day; telling them they are
empty and must fill up again and make up their loss: which after this manner
being done too hastily, and the body changing from a large evacuation to a
sudden ^epletion; the Stomach thereby fails and is clog^^, the blood ferments
into disorder, causing ^^e and dangerous Fevers, of which the milk
^^ticipates, and thereby degenerates, endanger^^g both the Mother and the
infant.

But indeed by experience I have found, and reason urges the same, that
nothing is more safe than a spare diet, which preserves the Stomach quick and
sharp, and keeps the whole body in a moderate temper and a regular condition,
not occasioning such overflowings of milk, or otherwise flouding: and this I
have cautioned and made some Nurses sensible of, who by observance thereof
afterward, found their offices more successful and have given me thanks for my
advice, as being the safest and best way to discharge the trust and care
reposed in them.

In the next place we are to take notice of pains that are seated in the
musculous parts, namely the intercostal Muscles, in number 44; so called from
Costae the Ribs, which these Musc;les do cover, and also are inserted, filling
up the spaces between each Rib. In these parts pains sometimes do fix and
settle, and are most perceived upon drawing in of the breath, when the Muscles
are upon extension and swelling outward. These pains are called by some Bastard
Pleurisies, though improperly and by mistake; for pains of the Pleura are
different. Sometimes these pains are not of continuance as to time; nor
constant as to place, but move here and there; and these are commonly called
Stitches.

Pains are incident to these Muscles from external injuries, as contusions, and
impressions of cold: or else internal causes; and these are, either by
defluxion of humors that may flow in; as most frequently from an abounding
serosity being thin, sharp and extravasated, falls in amongst these Muscles: or
else, by congestion matter is accumulated, which Nature not being able to
discharge, lies there as a burden, impeding the muscular motions, and causes
pain. Sometimes from flatulency and wind, getting into the Interstitia of the
Muscles, thereby causing intercurrent and fleeting pains.

And for remedy in such cases, Fomentations and hot Bags applied are
advantageous; Evacuations being premitted, according to the condition of the
Body requiring.

We come now to consider of Pleurisies or pains in the Pleura; that inward
Membrane that does invest or line the Breast: a disease very eminent and
frequently occurring, that both Hippoc. and Galen often mention it by way of
example.

These pains are acute and sharp like punctures; and have no constant place,
but in some persons they seize the right side, in others the left; in some the
pain is higher, in others lower toward the Hypochonders; sometimes more
backward, and sometimes forward: and although chiefly and more manifestly the
pain be here or there, to be pointed at; yet the whole Membrane by reason of
continuity, is thereby affected, and the parts adjacent do suffer by consent:
from whence various Symptoms, as concomitants and attendants, do inseparably
accompany and consort with this pleuritic pain.

Hence it is, that difficult and short breathing is constantly annexed to it;
and this because the parts for respiration are hereby impeded, and have not
their due motions and liberty of extension, but are restrained and curbed;
which is done in favor, to avoid compressing the grieved part, otherwise would
exasperate and increase the pain: and therefore the sick fetch their breath
short and quick, because they cannot take it fully and largely, and do repeat
it the oftener by way of recompense.

To this (and by consent of parts) is adjoined a short and dry Cough, which
irritates and provokes the pain by moving and straining those parts, and
therefore is very troublesome and grievous to the Patient.

Here also a continual acute Fever does necessarily follow as inseparable: for
the Archaeus or vital Principle being invaded in those parts by something
hostile, does therefore insurge, becomes enraged, grows hot and fiery, raising
a burning distemper throughout the body.

To these we may add another constant Character; namely a hard, swift, but
small Pulse.

And these are the pathognomonical signals that are always attending upon, and
do distinguish Pleurisies from other diseases of adjacency or affinity and
likeness with them: for, when pains fall in amongst the intercostal Muscles,
although there may be some punctures or prickings because of the Membranes
there, yet not so great, the Fever not so high, nor the breath so short, nor
the Cough so troublesome, if any.

If the Lungs be inflamed only, the pain is but little; not punging, but
obtuse; not in the circumference or sides, but in the cavity or middle of the
Breast: yet the difficulty of breathing is greater here than in Pleurisies,
from angustness that seizes the parts of respiration.

Pleurisies differ from Inflammations of the Diaphragma; because in this there
is no pain in the sides, but only at the end of the short Ribs, and the upper
part of the Belly is extended; and with it a Delirium.

Pleurisies also are distinguished from Inflammations of the Liver; in the seat
or place of pain, which always is in the right side, under the short Ribs; the
pain not punging, but heavy and obtuse; the Cough less, difficulty of breathing
less; but the Urine higher-coloured, or tinged red.

And now I see the reason (though very weak) why some Authors have
distinguished Pleurisies or differenced them into legitimate and spurious,
which indeed is a division of Pleurisies into Pleurisies and no Pleurisies; for
I account no disease to challenge that denomination, but such as have their
foundation in the Pleura: else by the same reason all diseases may admit of the
same distinction of legitimate and spurious; for as much as every disease has
some Symptom which is common to other diseases that may give them some
resemblance or affinity with each other, or be affected by consent from
another: but I pass it over and come to examine the causes from whence
pleuritic pains do arise.

These causes are external, and internal.

External causes are such as remotely prepare and dispose the body to a likely
capacity of reception or aptness to this disease, laying the foundation for
internal causes; and they do arise out of, or from the irregular, unfit or
improper use of the Diaetetics, which leads to a morbific or unsound state.

For example: violent exercise or otherwise, raising great heat in the Body and
opening the Pores; by neglect upon it, as not to preserve that warmth for some
time, and suffering it gradually to abate and go off, by keeping on clothes and
forbearing cool drinks; this may introduce a Pleurisy. So likewise in the heat
of Summer to throw off clothes, and be exposed to the wind at a Casement, or
the cool Air in the evening. To over-heat the Body with strong Liquors, and
suddenly endeavor to cool it again with small Beer, may effect the like. Cold
Northwinds after Southerly, and hot weather, does alter the texture of the
blood, and is previous to pleuritic or similar pains.

But here you must take notice and know, that quicquid recipitur, recipitur per
modum recipientis; all Bodies are not alike nor equally disposed for reception;
for in some these causes produce Pleurisies, in others Angina's, in some
Dysenteries, in others Arthritic pains, etc. According to the aptitude and
disposition of Bodies in fabrication or organization, and peculiar properties,
have the same general external causes various and diverse effects; being
determined and specificated by different states of Body, more liable and apt to
this or that disease, rather than another. Hence it is that external causes, as
Diaetetic errors, have heterogeneous effects, and procure dissimilar diseases,
according to various constitutions, purity and impurity, stability or debility,
concurring with or resisting their influence: which consideration brings me
directly to the next stage; being the latter part of the preceding division.

Internal causes, are antecedent or conjunct.

Antecedent; as plethory, being fullness of blood: or Cacochymy, a depraved or
degenerate blood: both which are previous states or conditions of Body,
disposing or rendering more liable to this disease: for, the great Vessels being
full and distended, upon any Effervescence and Superfermentation of the blood,
this impetuously like a torrent is impelled into the smaller Pipes, as those of
the Pleura, where not having a free passage, it does cause pain by distension
and Inflammation. Now this plenitude is brought on, or aggravated and
increased, sometimes by a suppression of some accustomed Evacuation; as those
that are wont to discharge and abate blood by the Nose, by the Haemorrhoids or
Menstrual purgations: sometimes by plentiful feeding, and too much ease; so
that evacuation and transpiration, is not proportionable in abatement and to
balance the imported food.

Conjunct causes are such as more immediately and nearly concur or conspire
actually in forming of these pleuritic pains: and they are either acidity, or
viscidity within the Vessels of the Pleura; or a violent fluxion from the
larger Vessels, too great for the capacity and reception of these exiguous
canals.

2. Acidity or an acrid serosity does sometimes fabricate and finish this
disease by punging and lancinating the Pleura; (for omne acidum extra stomachum
corpori est hostile, says Helmont) thereby irritating and exciting the vital
spirit to estuate and be incensed; and from this focus a febrile heat is
kindled and communicated to the whole Body: and that oftentimes and for the
most part, it is a sharp serous humor predominant in the blood which caused
this disturbance in the Pleura, is confirmed by the manner of solution or
termination of the disease, which most frequently is by a sudorific evacuation,
or insensible transpiration: and therefore Hippoc. in his Predictions says;
Sudores and urinas in Pleuritide probe fieri bonum esse and salutare, Friendly
Sweats and effusion of Urine presageth a good event.

2. Viscidity, or grumosity of the blood does sometimes cause pleuritic pains;
for by obstructing those small ductures of the Pleura and stopping the
Circulation, a Tumor thereby is raised within this double Membrane; for the
Veins, Arteries and Nerves lie between these two Coats of the Pleura.

And that the blood is thus apt to be stagnant (especially in the smaller
Vessels) by coagulation, grossness, or congelation, is confirmed by Phlebotomy;
for being let out of the body, it is sometimes found destitute of its Serum or
Latex, that keeps it fluxile, thin and transient: and also is manifest so to be
when it is in the Vessels; as in Gangrenes, where the blood is fixed and the
part almost mortified: and when Pleurisies do happen upon this cause of
concretion, they commonly tend to suppuration, as not capable of being
discussed, or put into motion for a discharge of the part.

Now the Blood becomes thus incrassated, gross and viscous, from every cause
that does too much exhaust and expend the serosity thereof; as too great
transpiration or sweating, or immoderate making of urine: and sometimes from a
malignant, or a venomous Miasm that curdles or congelates the blood.

3. Fluxion or ebullient and preternatural Fermentation causes pleuritic
pains: and thus it happens when a Pleurisy is the consequent or appendent to a
Fever preceding: for sometimes a Pleurisy does precede and is the cause of a
Fever; as when the dart is felt to strike the Pleura before any febrile
distemper appears: sometimes a Pleurisy does supervene and follow a Fever as
an effect from that general ebullition, the hot spumous blood rushing into the
Pleura.

Having established these causes in their due Series, presenting them in the
method and order of their causation and action; we shall not trouble our selves
with Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy, the supposed materials of every disease; nor
shall I controvert the insufficiency of that doctrine here.

For Indications of Cure, prompting what is to be done, which way, and with
what; they are various as the case presents.

1. Plethory indicates Phlebotomy, and requires a depletion or abatement of the
redundance of blood; that there may be room for the peccant matter to retire,
and for a revulsion and derivation thereof; as also to avert the current and
flux tending toward the pained part. 2. Purgation (by sedate and amicable
Cathartics, if you can procure such; else by Clysters the best substitutes in
that defect) is necessary to absterse and cleanse the whole Body, thereby
subducting fuel from the fire, and for rendering the Patient not so liable to
effervescency and turgid estuation, and for a retraction from the part
affected. 3. Topical Discussives are available and contribute to the remove of
the morbific cause; both as defensatives, giving robor to the grieved part for
resistance of the humors flowing in; and also for a transmission and discharge
of the conjunct matter residing. 4. Diaphoretics to rarifie, dissipate and set
open the Pores, for a free transpiration and exsudation, are not only safe, but
exceeding necessary; thereby to avert the antecedent cause resorting to the
pained place, and to disperse and scatter the morbific conjunct cause from the
part affected; if possible to prevent suppuration, which is very dangerous and
commonly mortal. 5. Anacathartics, or proper and truly expectorating Medicines
are auxiliary and profitable in promoting expectoration, by digesting the
peccant matter, and rendering it more apt and easy to be brought up: and of
these some are attenuating, others incrassating; to be used pro re nata
suitable to the offending cause; which if it yields soon and freely, and Nature
throws it up by cough and spitting, it portends good, promising shortness of
the disease, and a prosperous event: which Hippoc. 1. Aphor. 12. confirms. 6.
Anodynes, elected by a discerning Judgment, and cautiously used, may be of good
advantage in some cases, and at some times, else may prove very pernicious.
Having dispatched these pleuritic pains, we are next to take notice what other
pains are incident to the Thorax or Breast. And here we find pain to arise from
Inflammations of the Lungs, of the Mediastinum, and of the Diaphragma: whereof
an account will be given in their proper places hereafter, when we treat of
Inflammations.

But the Lungs do suffer pain also from other causes, as from Tumors not
inflamed; sometimes from adhesion or sticking of the Lungs to the sides of the
Breast: sometimes from stones and worms that have bred there, observed and
found upon Dissections: and sometimes by Erosions and Ulcers, of which in their
due place following,

Back-pains of the Thorax, are either upon the Spine, between the shoulders: or
upon the Scapulae, the shoulder blades. And these pains do arise from some
impressions of cold lately taken, or from defluxion of a serous humor from the
Head; or sometimes from a malign Miasm Venereal or Scorbutic, that infests
those parts.

Pain sometimes is seated at the bottom of the Sternum, between the short Ribs,
under the Cartilage mucronata; vulgarly called the Pit of the Stomach, but
improperly. This Cartilage hangs down, being as it were a defensative to the
subjacent parts, namely the Stomach and Liver; yet is flexible to give way to
the extensions of the stomach without compression. This place is very tender at
all times, insomuch that a blow here is ready to make a strong man faint: the
part being thus sensible, pain therefore here must be very troublesome. Now this
place is of acute sense or feeling, in regard the upper Orifice of the Stomach
(being very nervous) and almost subjacent to this Cartilage, and the Heart
adjacent; hence it is that a blow or pressure here, raises a fainting pain,
the Cartilage yielding and giving way to any force.

But sometimes a pain is planted here, not always by any external manifest
cause, but from internal, and preternatural state of the parts: and this pain
is rarely taken notice of by Physicians, and mentioned but by a few practical
Authors. Now to examine into the cause of pain, you must know that this
Cartilage is flexible and yielding in its natural condition, being of a middle
nature between a Bone and a Ligament, and therefore may be curvated and bent
inward upon a threefold account.

By Laxation, Exsiccation, and external depression.

1. By Laxation, as when too much moisture resides here mollifying and loosning
the part; from any small occasion the Cartilage may be inflexed and turned
inward, changing its due position and rectitude: and from the like cause
Ligaments are sometimes relaxed, which renders Junctures ready and apt for
dislocation and disjuncture; and upon this score the Vertebrae of the Spine
have been displaced; also the Hip and Ancles. 2. By Exsiccation this Cartilage
may be distorted and wrested from its posture: as sometimes that which was
straight, green and pliable, by drying and shrinking becomes crooked, bent and
drawn aside: So this Cartilage that was a Grisle, tender and pliable, sometimes
becomes dry, hard and bony, and fixed upon distortion or writhing, as not
returning to its rectitude or straightness, and distance from the subjacent
parts, over which and for whose guard it is placed. 3. By external Depression,
as from a blow or fall, any thing too much or too long pressing upon that part,
may pervert and alter the situation and due posture: and those whose business
or employ keeps them bending or pressing forward too much and constant, renders
them liable to this inconvenience; and therefore Students and Clerks that write
much pressing upon this part are injured thereby, and find it upon age, though
youth bears it off for a time.
Now since this Cartilage is thus exposed to depression and bending inward, and
thereby the tender parts subjacent to be pressed upon and molested; the cause
of pain and manner how is made evident: and which most commonly is felt after
eating and upon a full stomach, when the parts are dilated and swelling up to
this Cartilage. And farther, as all parts of the Body in several persons do
vary and differ much in figure, position, magnitude and distance; so thereby
some are more liable and apt for this pain than others, although subject to the
same external procuring, or internal antecedent causes.

And so I dismiss this particular pain and pressure, and must take cognizance
briefly of that which is more general upon the whole Breast.

The Thorax or Breast suffers by compression or constriction, whereby a general
obtuse pain of angustness is perceived, and that chiefly upon inspiration and
drawing in of the breath: and why now more than at another time, is because the
inspired air fills and distends the Breast, which makes opposition to, or
resists the compressing causes.

Now the cause of angustness or coarctation is from the Genus nervosum that
gives motion to the Muscles and other parts of the Breast; which Nerves
sometimes are impedited and contracted, that their functions are not freely
executed: and therefore to this Symptom of compression is commonly adjoined
shortness or difficulty of breathing, upon the same score; and sometimes spasms
or convulsive motions. And this complaint of straitness or contraction of the
Breast: does frequently happen to scorbutic persons, whose nervous juice being
degenerate and tainted, their Organ or Vessels perform not their office duly as
they ought, in giving the full motion and extension or every part: for, this
nervous liquor being fed and supplied from the mass of blood which is
scorbutic, feculent and depauperated in spirit, that also which is extracted
thence must be answerable, and of a degenerate nature: so then this nervous
juice which should be vegete, noble and spirituous, for putting the motive
faculties into action with vigor and briskness, is become dispirited, flat and
depraved, and the Organs acted thereby, move heavily and irregularly: so that
upon inspiration or filling the Breast with Air, the parts do not readily give
way by expansion to let in; hence the Patient feels himself girt or
strait-laced.

It remains now in the last place, that we finish this second division, in
examining and searching into the nature and causes of those pains that more
peculiarly and eminently afflict the Heart.

The Heart being a noble (or the noblest and principal part, is as the Sun of
the Microcosm, whose irradiating luster and beams of vital heat, enlivens and
refreshes all the regions and parts thereof: the Eclipses, storms and clouds
then that happen as the consequents of its distempers and sufferings, must
needs be eminent and remarkable. This supreme Organ that bears the government
of vitality, is so generally concerned in all diseases and discomposures of the
Body, that few there are but the Heart is made sensible thereby, and gives
notice thereof by variation of the Pulse, as a sigrial from thence. And not
only distempers of the Body, or the defect and decay of some particular member
or faculty does affect the Heart; but also the disorders and passions of the
Mind, have influence thereon, that from thence the Heart aches, beats, or
suffers pain and restless disturbance: hence it is that grief, anger, fear,
desire, etc. Changes the regular motion of the Heart, and the Pulse alters as
a token and manifest character of its sufferings.

Now the Heart is made thus sensible of the Bodies infirmities and
preternatural mutations, from the vital government that is planted here; having
commerce and communication with every member, from the circulating afflux and
reflux of the crimson vital stream, continually transmitted through this Organ,
which thereby is affected well or ill, as the blood is better or worse, in the
current and quality thereof. And the Heart is also affected from the mind; for
as much as the Soul exercises her power more eminently here; and if a
particular part may be assigned, this may be said to be the seat or Throne of
Regality.

The Heart being of a solid fibrous flesh, the pain thereof is obtuse, not so
accurately perceptible, so acute and sharp, as those of the nervous parts:
notwithstanding the effects and consequents thereof are impressed upon the
whole Body, and each member is impaired in its vivacity and vigor: and although
this Heart- pain by the nature and substance of the Organ, is not so great
commonly and perceptible, as that of some other parts; yet when this pain does
arise to some degree, a Syncope seizes the, Patient, a deprivation or
cessation of life for a time; that what it wants as to sense is doubled in the
consequents, as threatening and endangering the life: so that extremity of pain
is not perceived here, because sense decays, as the cause of pain increases.

The Heart is molested and suffers pain these several ways: by extension,
constriction, obstruction, inflammation or intemperate heat, Imposthumation, by
erosion, by exotic generation.

1. The Heart is pained by extension, from a sudden ebullition and turgid
fermentation of the blood raised by passion, or otherwise; whereby the Vessels
are suddenly forced upon distension to receive and transmit the inundation and
swelling current of the blood; and from hence pain and trouble arises at the
Heart.

2. By constriction the Heart is pained, and that from external and internal
cause: externally from the Pericardium compressing, whereby the Heart is denied
the full liberty of its Diastole or expansion: and this may arise upon a double
account; either from. the Pericardium being too replete and full; or too much
exhausted and empty. You must understand therefore that this Pericardium or
Capsula cordis, is a Membrane designed by Nature to involve and enclose the
Heart for its defense; as also being a moist Bath to irrigate and keep it
souple, containing a Serum or water; and this Membrane should extend and be
enlarged according to the motions of the Heart being greater or less: now when
this water does abound filling the cavity of this enclosure, the Heart thereby
is prohibited its full expansion: and e contra, when this water is too much
wasted and dried up, the Pericardium cleaves to the Heart, and impedes its
pulsific motion: thus either plenitude or vacuity begets anxiety and trouble at
the Heart.

Internal cause of constriction is, when the Heart it self is seized with a
Tabes or vehement exsiccation, and the fibers so contracted, that it has no
capacity, or less for dilatation, and permission of the transient blood.

3. Obstruction causes pain and trouble at Heart, when the free current of the
blood is impeded from within due Vessels; and this is procured sometimes from a
perturbation of the movent spirits, and sometimes from an indisposition of the
impulsed blood.

First, from a sudden and violent recurrence of Spirits from other parts, and
tumultuous confluence at the Heart, whereby the circulation is checked, and the
blood stopped in the Ventricles, causing a suffocation for a time; and this
happens upon vehement passions, and consternations of the mind.

Secondly, From an inhability and incapacity of the blood being gross,
concreted or grumous, that it hardly or with difficulty passes through this
Organ, causing thereby an obtuse pain, oppression or heaviness at the region of
the Heart, and sometimes a Lipothymy or Syncope, fainting or swooning.

4. By Inflammation or intemperate heat, the Heart is pained; as in most
Fevers where intensness of heat is accompanied: and this heat continuing does
exsiccate, and contract the heart, and brings a Tabes or Consumption upon the
whole Body.

5. By Imposthumation the Heart is pained sometimes, as also by other Tumors
there bred, Which by dissection has appeared after death.

6. By Erosion or Vlceration sometimes the Heart is pained, and suffers by
continual palpitation.

7. By exotic Generations, and strange productions the Heart sometimes is
pained; as when worms, stones or bony substance is bred in the Parenchyma of'
the Heart; which has been found there upon dissection after death: and to
these diseases, and such as most of the forementioned, the Symptom of
Palpitation does necessarily belong; showing the continual molestation and
trouble the Heart lies under, who endeavors to acquit and extricate it self by
laborious, lofty and strong pulsations.

Pains in the Abdomen or lower Region of the Body.
NOW we have done with those pains incident to the middle Cavity, namely the
Thorax or Breast: I come in the next place, and by the order proposed to the
lower Region, called the Abdomen or Belly, containing the Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, Kidneys, etc.

And here first as the principal member we shall inquire into pains belonging
to the Stomach or Ventricle; being the great Office and Laboratory to prepare
Aliment to supply and maintain the whole Body; therefore if this part be pained
and out of order, all the rest must needs fare the worse for it, every part
having a concern from hence.

Pains of the Stomach are various both in respect of their causes; and also
from the different parts of the Ventricle where they do infest, and those are
three; the upper Orifice called Os Ventriculi; the lower Orifice called
Pylorus; and the whole cavity of the Stomach.

The upper Orifice or mouth of the Stomach is subject to great pain, as being
very tender and sensible, in regard it is very nervous, and this pain is the
more eminent and remarkable, for that commonly two principal parts are hereby
affected and drawn into consent, the Brain and the Heart: the former, by the
Nerves of the sixth conjugation derived from the Brain, whose ramifications are
wreathing or twining about this Orifice; and therefore from, hence Headaches,
Vertigoes and Epilepsies do often arise. The Heart also is affected, both in
respect of vicinity as near adjoining to this Orifice; and also for that the
same pair of Nerves does serve both the Heart and Stomach, whereby of necessity
there must be a communication of pain; and therefore it is that this pain in
extremity causes Fainting and Swooning: and hence it is that this pain by a
peculiar distinguishing title is called Cardialgia; and also for that the
ancient Greeks called the mouth of the stomach (...).

As for the causes of this Cardialgia or stomach-pain; sometimes they are
sharp, acrid and hot biting humors, fluctuating and rising up to the Orifice of
the stomach, where they cause an eroding or gnawing pain, and sometimes a
scalding or heat there; and this vulgarly is called the Heart burning.

Sometimes flatulency and wind causes this pain by way of distension and a
swelling fullness; and the Orifice is constringed and shut up so, as denying
vent: in this case the Patient labors and strains to belch, but cannot unlock
or loosen the Orifice of the stomach; but so soon as the Orifice does slacken
and give way, the wind breaks forth, and ease follows.

Sometimes Worms do cause this pain, having gotten up to the mouth of the
Ventricle, where they gnaw and bite.

Sometimes churlish and deleterious or ill prepared Physic; or discordant food
having such properties as may irritate and provoke this tender part: or food
received in too great a quantity, above what the stomach is able to master and
digest, then it rises up to the mouth of the stomach, causing oppression and
pain there, until it be discharged upwards or downwards, by the strength of
Nature, or the assistance of Art.

Besides this Cardialgia, there is also another sort of pain that afflicts the
mouth of the stomach, and that is Singultus a Hicket, or Hickop: and although
the whole Ventricle be molested therewith, yet the chief pain or trouble is at
the Orifice or mouth of the stomach. This Hickop is a convulsive motion of the
stomach, thereby causing pain. The general causes assigned by Hippocrates are
two, repletion and inanition: under repletion is comprehended whatever humor or
vapor is in the stomach and disgustful, to irritate and provoke the expulsive
faculty: but a Singultus by inanition, is a vellication of of the retentive
faculty, and is the effect of exhaustion and large evacuations: and accounted
more dangerous than the former. Therefore Hickops after great vomiting or
purging, Hectic Fevers, and long-wasting sicknesses, are very bad signs.

There is also a pain belonging to the mouth of the stomach, which although it
be a real pain and properly so called (according to the definition of dolor)
yet Physicians have given it another denomination, and that is Nauseousness, or
a nauseating sick pain at the Orifice of the stomach. The causes of this
nauseating pain are various: as whatever is disgustful there, whether it be
meat or drink offending in quantity or quality: or indigested depraved matter,
the relicts after former digestions, floating upon the stomach: or only
imbecility and weakness of the stomach, being not able to close with and
digest, although good food be sent in: and thus it is when the Tone of the
stomach is altered by intemperance and ill usage; by great or long sickness; or
decayed and worn out by age. Sometimes the cause is organical, as when a Tumor
or Apostem is forming there.

And not only thus idiopathically, but also sometimes the stomach complains and
nauseates sympathically, by consent from other parts, by reason of vicinity or
communication: and thus a Tumor of an adjacent part may molest and afflict the
stomach: and other remote parts discharging and emptying themselves into the
stomach by Vessels of intercourse, Veins, Arteries, and Nerves.

In the cavity of the stomach, there is sometimes a pain of oppression or
heaviness, being overcharged or loaded and grieved with something difficult to
be digested and sent off: or a pain of distension and inflation, from wind and
phlegmatic turgid humors: or a punging and pricking pain in this or that part
of the Ventricle, from some acetous, sharp humor: or an eroding and gnawing
pain, from worms, or a mordicant fretting bilious matter.

Pain of the stomach arises sometimes from Inflammation, accompanied with very
severe Symptoms; but of this in its proper place hereafter, where we treat of
Inflammations.

Pain also afflicts the stomach from Apostems and Ulcers, of which in their due
place also.

Pains of the Intestines or Guts.
HAving gone through those Pains belonging to the Stomach or Ventricle, in the
next place and in order, we come to treat of pains incident to the Intestines
or Guts; being derived from the Ventricle, and are one continued body and
passage from the Pylorus to the Anus: notwithstanding for distinction sake, and
because this long cavity is different in several parts thereof, as to
magnitude, substance, figure, place and office; therefore it is divided into
parts, having several names, for a more distinct knowledge, both in relation to
the different formation thereof, as also to point particularly where a disease
is in any part thereof.

The division is made into small and great Guts; the small or thin are three;
Duodenum, jejunum and Ileon; the great or thick are three also, caecum, Colon
and rectum; and in this order they lie from the Ventricle to the Fundament. The
three first are circumvolved about the Vmbilicus or Navel, and take up the
center of the Abdomen, the other are subjacent and circumferential.

Pains do frequently molest the small Guts, but chiefly the Ileon; which when
they arise to extremity, the disease is called Iliaca passio, from that Gut
most affected.

The seat of these pains are above the Navel chiefly, extending to the
Hypochonders.

These pains differ in their causes, and therefore some are weak and transient,
arising from wind and acidities, which cause some punctures, gripes, or
distensions, and continue not: but sometimes these pains are more grievous,
depending upon causes greater and more contumacious; and therefore attended
with other Symptoms in great rigor: as constipation of the Belly, violent heat,
fainting, vomiting and casting up whatever is received; nothing passing
downwards, but moves upwards, that sometimes the excrements are voided by the
mouth.

About the causes of these violent pains Physicians do not concur. The general
opinion (taken from Galen) will have these pains to arise from an Inflammation
of the Guts: others (modern Authors) from a peristaltic motion, or the motion
of the Guts inverted: for whereas in the course of Nature the expulsive faculty
moves downward by a contraction of Fibers from the Ventricle to the Anus e
contra, in this case the Fibers contract below and drive upwards.

But this difference may be reconciled, and neither opinion to be faulted,
being rightly underftood: for Inflammation may begin, and cause the motion of
the Intestines which naturally tends or moves downwards, to be changed upwards,
by a different contraction of Fibers: So that Inflammation causes mediately,
peristaltic motion immediately; and sets forth the order of causation; the one
superior, the other subordinate. Quod est causa causae, est etiam causa causati.

All the Guts are capable of Inflammation; but the small Guts more usually, as
being most liable, for having more Veins and Arteries than the rest.

These Iliac pains from Inflammation are very dangerous, if they arise to a
great height; because the Inflammation is apt to make a mortal transition into
a Gangrene: and indeed all Inflammations of the Guts are difficult and
doubtful, because they easily gangrene and mortify.

And not only Inflammation inverts the motion of the Guts, but also other
causes may beget this Iliac passion, or join with it as partial causes: as an
Apostem or other sort of Tumor; a Rupture, an Exulceration, indurated
Excrements causing great obstruction: also whatever by compression or
constriction of the Guts, constipation or coalescence, may cause contortion,
and turn the natural course and motion thereof: and of these frequent examples
in practice do manifest and confirm.

Pains of affinity and adjacency to the Ileon, and which are often complicated
therewith, are Colic pains, so called from the Gut Colon, the part wholly or
chiefly affected. This Intestine is last but one, and more capacious than any
of the rest; furnished with many little cells or private receptacles, to
receive the excrements and retain them, else they would pass away too
frequently and inconveniently.

This Gut is seated almost round the Abdomen or Belly; so that Colic pains are
not easily distinguished by the place, being sometimes here and sometimes
there; left side, right side, or under the Ventricle; hence it is that Colic
pains do counterfeit sometimes the stone or pain in the Kidneys, left and
right, and sometimes they are supposed to be pains of the spleen: but most
frequently these pains are toward the left side near the flank, where the
Colon is more angust, tortuous and circumflected: and therefore when the
excrements are hardened in the superior and more capacious part of the Colon,
and are then forced down by wind or otherwise, into the narrower, great pain
must needs arise thereupon.

But concerning the causes of Colic-pains they are various, and may be ranked
under these Heads.

1. Obstruction of the Meatus felleus. 2. Wind and flatulent Vapors. 3. Acrid,
punging and sharp Humors. 4. Indurated Excrements. 5. Stones generated in the
Colon. 6. Worms. 7. Compression. 8. Inflammation. 9. Venenous and malignant
Matter. 10. Apostems and other Tumors.
By the first it appears, that Obstruction in the Guts (which produces Colic
pains) does sometimes arise from an antecedent obstruction in another part: as
when the Meatus cysticus, the passage of the Gall into the jejunum is stopped, it
causes also a stoppage in the Guts: for the Gall being naturally discharged
into the Guts does stimulate them to expulsion, and moves the excrements
downwards; but for want of this exciting and provoking matter, the Guts fill
up, are obstructed and distended, thereby raising pain.

Wind and flatulency begets Colic-pains sometimes; and these are not fixed, but
roving here and there; and commonly attended with a rumbling and noise in the
belly: and this is an effect of crudities and weak digestion, rising from a
natural debility, or occasioned by intemperance and a bad diet. And this flatus
is either in the cavity of the Colon involved in a viscous tough phlegm enclosed
as in a Bladder; or sometimes shut up within the Tunicles of the Intestine,
where forcing its way out, does cause great pain in the part.

Sharpness of an humor indigested or degenerate, does sometimes cause Colic
pains; and this is either a mordant biting Choler, or an acid serosity.

Dryness and hardness of Excrements do cause Colic-pains sometimes; for as much
as they stop the passage and extend the Intestines, denying vent to any sudden
fermenting humor, wind, etc. that should freely pase away. This costiveness and
constipation is acquired, by ill diet, in the use of hot, dry, astrictives: by
watching or sleeping too much; immoderate Venus; by heating the body, and
sweating much, through exercise, labor, intemperate Air, etc. These are great
dryers, and take off the lubricity of the Guts, that they perform not their
office as they ought: thus excrements not being transmitted and sent away duly,
they accumulate, fill up, distend and obstruct the Intestines, and give great
occasion to Colic-pains.

Stones sometimes are generated in the Colon, and do cause Colic-pains: also a
clot of worms gathered and twisted together, obstructing the Guts, have raised
Colic pains.

Compression and contraction, by Inflammations and Tumors, in the Guts or parts
adjacent, do sometimes cause Colic pains.

Also malignant and venenate matter has procured the like; as Paulus Aegineta
relates of a pestilential Colic that arose in Italy, and afflicted many of the
Roman Provinces.

Fluxes of the Belly.
HAving spoken something concerning pains of the Guts, Iliac and Colic,
attended with astriction of the Belly and costiveness: I shall briefly set
forth those pains that are accompanied with a Flux or looseness.

There are three sorts of Fluxes of the Belly distinguished by several names;
Lientery, Diarrhoea, and Dysentery.

The first is a Flux of indigested or semidigested food, passing away before
its due time from an imbecility of the digestive faculty. But this not being
dolorous; or painful, we shall pass it by, as not our subjevt in hand.

The Diarrhoea is a flux of humors depraved and injurious, which stimulates
Nature to expulsion; and is for the most part painful and irksom to bear.

1. This kind of Flux is various in the matter of 2. Different in the efficient
cause (as some are of opinion.) 3. Unlike in the manner and circumstances. 4.
Various in respest of place; as issuing from several parts of the body.
Touching the diversity of matter in this flux, physicians have distinguished
it into phlegmatic, choleric, melancholic* and serous or watery: which
distinction is not simply manifest, but a complication and mixture of many
sorts, whereof one may abound and be predominant; yet the denomination and
character of the whole is hard to be given.

The variety of depraved matter that happens in man's body, is not to be reduced
to four Heads, nor three times so many: for this stimulating matter thus sent
forth by a Flux, is the manifold different material cause of hundreds of
diseases: which preternatural variation of humors or juyces are not to be
comprised within so narrow a compass, nor reducible to four Cardinal points:
for admit there were four natural constituent humors in man's body (as common
doctrine teaches) yet these in their sundry variations and complicate
degenerations, would be so variously changed, as not to retain any relict or
smack of their original descent; that a denomination from thence, if possible
to be distinctly given, would no way answer in the similitude or nature
thereof, and consequently of no use in practice.

In respect of the efficient cause, Authors have distinguished these Fluxes
into critical and symptomatical: by critical they understand, when Nature in
due time, and with good success, throws off and expels any peccant matter, and
finds relief by it in any case. A symptomatical Flux they mean, when Nature
irritated untimely or immoderately, is not benefited thereby, but rather
injured and endangered.

The (...) of this is true, and it often falls out thus; but the distinction of
critical and symptomatical, relating to the efficient cause, and the reason
thereof, I do not assent to nor comply with, since every Flux is symptomatical,
whether it produce good or evil: for that which they call Critical, and is
seasonable and duly performed with good effects attending, is but symptoma
morbi, the Symptom of some disease, as well as the other: so that the
difference is in the nature of the disease afflicting, the matter excreted or
voided, the fortitude of Nature, the time where, the way by which it ought or
ought not to pass, which does distinguish these Fluxes in their effects to be
good or ill; but shows no diversity in efficient causes, which is one and the
same: for Nature is efficient, whether irritated unseasonably and frustrated of
her end; or performing these endeavors in due time and to good purpose.

But although the efficient cause of Diarrhoea's be simple and single, yet the
occasional causes are many; for these Fluxes are occasioned sometimes by change
of air or place, and variation of the seasons; by some kind of meats or drinks,
taking cold or other casualties and accidents, which puts Nature upon some
disorderly fermentation and excretion; and this commotion occasions and stirs
up any morbific matter and noxious humors, which before perhaps lay dormant and
still, now to grow turgid and active, contributing to advance and promote the
Flux begun: but this managed by a discreet hand may not prove injurious, but
some advantage gained; which if neglected, and Nature not governed and guided
in this prodigal expense, much detriment may come thereby, an exhaustion of
nutritious Juice, with great debility and weakness.

As this Flux Diarrhoea is various in the matter discharged; so likewise in the
manner and circumstances: as greater and more violent, or moderate and gentle,
making a profitable secretion: without gripes or pains, but for the most part
with these more or less; which by continuance and shaving the guts so thin, at
last do come to the quick, and cause excoriations: and this difference arises
from the nature and quality of the humors or stimulating cause, which sometimes
is so extreme sharp, introducing a Dysentery or bloody Flux.

These Fluxes sometimes produce good effects, when the peccant matter of any
disease, or an exuberant humor is timely and moderately discharged and sent
off; but otherwise not: and therefore says Hippoc. In turbationibus alvi and
vomitibus sponte contingentibus, siquidem qualia purgari oportet, purgentur,
confert and leniter serunt; sin minus, vice versa.

In respect of place, or parts mandant, from whence these Fluxes take their
rise, and the terminus a quo; they proceed sometimes from morbific matter
congregated and concentred, issuing from the whole body: and of this take the
example of Hippoc. giving a Prognostic in this case, 7. Aphor. 29. Si
Leucophlegmatia detento fortis Diarrhoea supervenerit, malum solvit. Which is
to be understood, in the beginning of the disease, strength firm, and the
Viscera sound, else it is commonly mortal.

But sometimes also these Diarrhoea's do emerge from particular parts: as the
Ventricle, Brain, Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, etc. and therefore in the Cure of
these Fluxes, regard must be had to the part principally affected, from whence
as the original and fountain these Diarrhoea's do assurge. And therefore
examination is to be made by the Diagnostic signs of every principal part;
discovering thereby which performs their offices in integrity, and which of
them decline their functions, and are depraved, as being the Authors of this
disturbance.

The third sort of Flux is a Dysentery or bloody Flux: which is a dolorous and
frequent excretion of blood, from an Exulceration of the Guts.

There are several voidings of blood by stool, that are to be distinguished and
know from Dysenteries. Galen mentions four, others add two more.

The first, is a profusion of blood arising from plenitude or fullness of good
blood; Nature over-burdened discharges her self this way by the Guts. The
second, is an evacuation of crude and watery blood, not having its full
tincture. The third, is of a feculent and foul blood. The fourth, of an acrid
and salt blood. The fifth, is of a tabefied blood in acute diseases. The sixth
(which is Galens fourth) is a Dysentery, distinguished from the rest, by
Ulceration and great pain.
To examine this division in the several parts thereof, and to set forth what
truth and error it contains therein, is not our business at this time: I shall
only discourse upon the last, viz. a Dysentery being painful and grievous to
bear; which kind of bloody Flux arises from, and is accompanied with an
Exulceration, and commonly is the consequent of long, or severe; Diarrhoea's;
for those Fluxes not being checked, do sometimes make their transition and
terminate in Dysenteries.

This word Dysentery taking its name from the part affected, imports only a
difficulty of the Intestines; but may as properly be used for other diseases
and pains there: but Authors having fixed it to bloody Fluxes from
Exulceration; its general signification is restrained, and custom amongst
Physicians has fastened it here, as the character of this disease only.

The parts affected are the Guts, either the small or the great, and sometimes
both: but pains of the small are more grievous than those of the great: the
small Guts being of more exquisite sense.

The external and procatarctic causes that predispose and introduce a
dysenterical disposition, or promote and set forwards an inclination already
begun, are

First, the constitution of the Air.

Secondly, a bad Diet conspiring therewith, or some unwonted kind of Meats or
Drinks: and therefore it is that many people upon the change of Climate, and a
new sort of Food, do fall into bloody Fluxes: hence it is also, that these
Fluxes are sometimes epidemical and malignant, infesting many together in a
City or Country, as of late years in London, and some other parts of England,
this disease was raging. These epidemical Dysenteries arise sometimes to to the
height of pestilential, and are very contagious, that it is not safe to
converse with, or be near the diseased, but especially such as attend upon the
sick are in most danger, from the Excrements that send forth a pernicious and
infectious vapor.

For the time of the year, Autumn is most ready, and does more frequently
produce these Fluxes: partly from the change of the season, and partly from the
effects of Summer- fruits, to which many are intemperately given: the
consequents whereof are commonly Diarrhoea's and Dysenteries.

Now the reason why these Fluxes do break out more frequently at this time of
the year is; because the external ambient Air and cool blasts condensing and
incrassating the Juyces of the body, as also occluding and shutting up the
Pores, denying and hindering the former Transpiration (which in the Summer and
hot weather did spend and evaporate that way much superfluous matter) which
vents being stopped, humors accumulate, ferment and grow turgid, and forces a
discharge inwards by the Guts.

And not only this change of Air from hot to cold, or Summer- fruits are
procuring causes; but also some astral and inimical influences, drawn in with
our breath, may deprave and alter the Crasis of the blood and nervous juice, as
to effect this disease, and make it popular in like manner as other Epidemical
diseases are sometimes procured. Also some sorts of Meats in quantity or
quality offending and disagreeing, and for want of good digestion, may
corruption and dispose to these Fluxes. To these we may add as procurers, some
ill prepared Medicines, and medicinal Drugs not well corrected that have, and
will produce a Dysentery.

But concerning the proximate cause and manner of generation of this disease,
we must farther declare: And whereas before we mentioned several sorts of
bloody excretions or fluxes not dolorous, nor depending upon or conjoined with
exulceration of the Intestines, and therefore not denominated nor to be
understood as Dysenteries in the strict and present sense; therefore I must
wave the mentioning of their causes, and only give an account of Dysenteries in
the usual acceptance of the word.

In the forming or generating of this Dysentery you must understand, that
sometimes the Vlceration is planted first and has the priority, and a Flux of
blood follows as the consequent: but sometimes the voiding of blood precedes,
and an Ulcer or Ulcers is procured thereby as the effect: and this
consideration is not of small moment in the designment and intentions of
curing; for both the former and the latter happen in several persons.

Sometimes Vlceration is made by sharp corrosive humors, as in Diarrhoea's,
which ulcerate the guts first, then a Dysentery of blood follows. Or,

Sometimes from an Inflammation of the Intestines, or other Tumor coming to
suppuration, which breaks and makes a Dysentery, sending forth blood and
corrupt matter.

Sometimes a bloody Flux continues a while without Vlceration, and afterward
ulcerates the guts and makes a Dysentery: that is, when this extravasated blood
lodging in the guts degenerates and putrifies, it does thereby erode and plant
an Ulcer, which compleats a Dysentery.

Now this kind of Dysentery arises from an impurity or corruption of the
blood, which causes a preternatural fermentation or effervescence in the whole
mass; but Nature not being able to depurate and separate from this degenerate
admixture, either by Transpiration or Urine, is forced upon this emission by
the Intestines without a secretion, and throws out both the good and bad
together.

In the prosecution of Cure, as these causes are rightly adjudged, and
Medicines adapted thereto, depends the success: and therefore that course and
Method which is advantageous and proper to one, may be injurious and altogether
disagreeing to another.

And here you must take notice, that Dysenteries are sometimes malignant (as
commonly when Epidemical) and then Alexipharmacal Medicines are not to be
omitted.

Now concerning the degrees of Dysenteries, as to a better and worse, curable
or deplorable state, and the signals declaring them; as also several Queries
that might be raised, and satisfaction given to each; the conciseness of this
Work will not admit to enlarge thereon.

In the next place and of great affinity with Dysenteries is a Tenesmus;
agreeing in the causes and Symptoms, but differing in the part affected; a
Tenesmus being seated at the lower end of the right Gut or Fundament.

The Etymology of the word imports something of the nature of the disease,
being a frequent desire and straining downwards to the stool; but instead of
excrements, blood and mucous matter is brought forth, and with great pain. This
arises from an Ulceration of the last Intestine procured from the same causes
as Dysenteries, which we need not repeat.

This disease is most dangerous to women with child, for that it causes
abortion: but to all persons it is very troublesome and painful; and if it
continues long, the Ulcer becomes fistulous, and difficult to be cured.

And now I remember the Cure of an old Ulcer in this part, notwithstanding the
contumacy and difficulty thereof. In the year 1653. when I was but a young
Practiser; yet by the blessing of God upon my endeavors I cured a Gentlewoman
afflicted with an Ulcer in ano for seven years; who could not in all that time
receive help, though she had tried many Physicians and Chirurgions, having a
plentiful Fortune to allow it. She was aged between fifty and sixty, an
Aldermans Wife of Maxfilde in Cheshire, where I happened to stay in that Town
for some time, whereby this Gentlewoman beyond her expectation, received a
perfect Cure.

To finish our Discourse of Pains belonging to the Intestines, we shall
conclude with the Haemorrhoids. A disease frequent, and sometimes of great
complaint.

The word Haemorrhois signifies a Flux of Blood in general; but custom has
restrained it, and amongst Physicians it is used and understood only, that
effusion of blood by the Haemorrhoid Veins, which Veins terminate at the lower
end of the last Intestine, and about the Fundament.

These Haemorrhoid Veins are internal and external; although most of the
Ancients and some modern Authors acknowledge only the internal, but erroneously.

The internal and external Haemorrhoid Veins do differ much.

As first, in their rise or descent: for the external do proceed from the
Hypogastric branch of the Vena cava; and the internal from the Vena portae; and
commonly from the splenical branch thereof.

Secondly, in number; the internal being but one, though orbicularly multiplied
and divided about the Anus. The external are threefold.

Thirdly, in their insertions: the internal being inserted into the membranous
substance of the right Gut: the external into the musculous substance of the
Anus or Fundament.

Fourthly, they differ in their contents: the internal carrying a gross and
blacker blood: the external more thin, and ruddy.

Fifthly, in their office and use: the internal evacuates the Vena porta, and
splenical Arteries, thereby advantageous in some diseases of the Spleen, and
Cacochymies. The external do empty the Vena cava, and correct such diseases
that depend upon Plethory or redundance.

Sixthly, they differ in evacuation: the internal not so copious: the external
commonly large in the profusion, and sometimes very injurious, and to some
mortal.

Seventhly, in pain: the internal for the most part painful; the external not,
in evacuation.

Lastly, they differ in association: the internal descending without Arteries:
the external are adjoined with Arteries to the Anus.

The Haemorrhoid Veins are liable to contrary affects, and the diseased do
suffer in a different way: sometimes these Veins abound with blood and swell
for want of apertion, and a discharge; and this is called the blind
Haemorrhoids: e contra, sometimes the mouths of these Veins do open and pour
out too plentifully, either suddenly, or by too long continuance; and this is
called the open Haemorrhoids. Both these extremes are grievous to suffer.

The swelling of the Haemorrhoid Veins, and pains from thence, have the same
causes as provoke and continue the Haemorrhoidal Flux: viz. blood offending in
quantity or quality, which if it find not vent by the terminations or mouths of
the Veins, they are extended and swell big, and sometimes inflame; which if it
continue is dangerous, lest it become cancerous and gangrene. On the other
side, an immoderate Flux is very pernicious and induces Dropsies,
Consumptions, Cachexies, etc. by exhausting the treasury of life.

These Haemorrhoidal Fluxes continuing unduly and injuriously, argue the blood
to be hot and sharp, or too thin abounding with an acrid serosity, which
provokes the expulsive faculty, and opens the mouths of the Veins. But the
blind swelling Haemorrhoids denote the blood to be gross and thick, or the
coats that cover the extreme ends or mouths of those Veins, to be dense and
impenetrable, not permitting an exsudation.

Here it may be queried, how it comes to pass, that these Haemorrhoid Veins
should be more troubled with blood, and more frequently suffer an apertion,
since many other places of the body receive the extremities or terminations of
the Veins, and so equally capable of effusion.

In answer hereunto you must understand, that although Nature has formed the
like, and planted them in diverse parts of the body, which sometimes, though
more rarely, do issue and send forth blood; yet these Haemorrhoids are placed
more commodiously for voiding of superfluous and feculent blood, being near the
common vent and outlet for excrements to pass away; and their situation being
downwards, together with the straining upon occasions at the stool, the
extremities of these Veins are filled, and sometimes forced to evacuate more
frequently than others.

Now concerning the blind Haemorrhoids you may take notice, and know that there
is this difference: sometimes the Tumor or extension is in the trunk or cavity
of the Veins, and then there is no apertion; and sometimes the extuberance is
out of the Veins: that is, when the extravasated blood is lodged between the
mouths or terminations of the Veins, and the covering coats. In the former
case, and when the external Haemorrhoid Veins be so affected, Phlebotomy may
alleviate, make a revulsion, and draw away the plenitude; but in the latter it
gives no relief; for the extravasated blood will not return into its canal or
pipe again; and besides it soon coagulates and putrifies out of the Vessels,
the proper place, and then suppuration is to be promoted, the Apostem to be
broken, after that abstersion and healing to be designed and endeavored.

And here you may discern the difference between these two Haemorrhoid painful
swellings, that the first kind does abate and retire of its own accord
sometimes, Nature retracting and turning the current of blood to some other
part, at least it sooner yields to means, and is more easily remedied: but the
latter will not revert, nor is easily cured; but proceeds to Apostemation, and
after breaking sends forth corrupt and bloody matter.

From hence you may perceive, that as there are many sorts of Haemorrhoids, so
many questions might here be started, and much more to be said concerning them
to complete the Discourse thereof: as why the Hemorrhoids should swell and not
bleed sometimes? Why they are painful, and sometimes not? Why they appear and
pass away without injury sometimes? What difference between an Inflation and
Inflammation of the Haemorrhoids? etc. But to enlarge hereon and give full
satisfaction, would swell this Work beyond intention and our limits set at this
time.

Pains of the Spleen.
THE Spleen being a principal part, and of great use in the Body, is also
subject to disturbance and great pain.

This member is seated in the left Hypochonder, over against the Liver, below
the Diaphragma and under the short Ribs, hanging downwards, in figure like an
Ox-tongue, inclining rather to the back-parts, and near the left Kidney.

To pass over the different Opinions amongst the ancient and modern Authors,
concerning the office of this Organ, we shall concur with those that assign the
use of this member for a depuration of the blood, transmitted from the Heart,
to receive a farther elaboration there, that the whole mass of blood may be
purified and kept in a due state. From whence it comes to pass, that when the
Spleen is injured, out of order, or decayed, and performs not this office
aright, the blood becomes foul, and many diseases arise from thence, which
causes much alteration in the body: for with the Spleen do many parts consent,
and well or ill as that is in a good or bad condition.

The Brain, though remotely seated, is much affected from hence, causing
sometimes Epileptic fits, Vertigoes, Headaches, mad Melancholy, and many other
Symptoms, which Hippocrates has observed, (...).

The Heart also from a tumified or obstructed Spleen is drawn into consent,
causing palpitations and oppressions. Hence also difficulty of breathing, from
a swelled big Spleen, hindering the free motion of the Diaphragma.

The Liver also seldom stands firm, if the Spleen be diseased.

And the Pancreas for the most part incurs prejudice, being obstructed or
scirrhous, from an ill affected Spleen.

Hence it is, that the Spleen challenges a great share in the production of
diverse Cachexies or ill habits of body, Dropsies, Scorbute, black Jaundice,
Haemorrhoids, Cancers, etc. of which I might give you many examples: but I
shall recite one only, and that very eminent, plainly showing, that the rise
thereof and dependence is sometimes from the Spleen.

In the year 1658. a Cheshire Woman named Elizabeth Swain, a Farmers Wife,
aged 39 years, came to me at Chester, where I then practiced, she living about
a dozen miles off; her complaint was of pain, hardness and Tumor of the Spleen:
before which happened, she had a tertian Ague for some time; but after that had
left her, the left side began to swell, and pain upon the region of the Spleen:
this increasing, and when she came to me the Tumor was raised very high, and
the compass of a penny-loaf, being very hard and scirrhous, not yielding when
it was pressed with a finger. Her desire was to be under my care, and I was
willing to undertake the Cure; but she not having brought conveniences with
her to stay, would go home and return speedily with such necessaries as she
should want; but came not again until three months after; and then not only the
left Hypochonder, but the Abdomen, her whole belly was tumified and extended as
big as if she were ready to be delivered of a child: so that the Tumor of the
Spleen was then hid, the whole belly being equally raised up to it by a Dropsy
Ascites. This neglect of hers, and thereby rendering the Cure much more
difficult and uncertain, made me to refuse meddling with her, since by her folly
she had lost the opportunity; for I was doubtful and feared that the Spleen by
that time was become scirrhous, and the Tumor not to be discussed, or otherwise
decayed and putrified as not be restored: but she having a Sister living in
that City, who had been my Patient before, upon both their importunate
entreaties (though I would give little encouragement) I unwillingly did put her
into a course of Physic; but after I began I endeavored the best I could for
her, which was as follows.

First, I appointed a Preparative to be given: which was this.

R. Radie. utriusque bugloss. gram. cichor. apii, ana j. polypod. quercin. vi.
cort. cappar. median. fraxin. liquirit. ana ss. herb. scolopend. ling. cervin.
chamaed. ana M.j. Tamarisc. Mss. sem. foenic. dulc. iii. passular. maj.
exacinat. M.j. Coq. in aq. and vin. alb. ad lib. ii. colat. iv. add sir. de
pomis magistral. j. rosar. solut. ss. tart. vitriolat. ss. Misce pro dos.

After that I ordered Leeches to be applied to the Haemorrhoids, and much watery
blood came away, and she found her self something better. Then I appointed a
purging Apozem for four doses; and it was this.

R. Rad. filicis mar. cort. cappar. polypod. ireos nostr. liquirit. ana j.
herb. scolopend. M.j. cuscut. tamarisc. ana M. ss. sem. alkekeng. foenic. dulc.
ana iii. stor. bugloss. p. j. Coq. in aq. and vin. alb. ad lib. jss. colat.
infund. sennae opt. mund. jss. epithymi j. agar. troch. ss. rhabarb. opt. iii.
macis, caryophyll. ana ii. calam. aromat. schoenanth. ana j. Fiat colat. pro 4
dos. addendo unicuique dosi sir. rosar. solut. j. aq. cinnam. ss. tart.
vitriolat. ss.

Which being taken, the distension of her belly began to abate. After the
Apozem I gave her a Chalybeate Wine for four days, mornings, and at four a
clock after noon, with exercise; and at nights three aperitive Pills not
purging. The Chalybeat Wine was this.

R. Cort. rad. cappar. polypod. ireos nostr. liquirit. ana ii. herb. scolopend.
cuscut. tamarisc. ana M.j. chalyb. praep. ii. vin. alb. lib. iv. Diger. s^a. in
balneo Mariae per dies iv. colat. duleoret. sir. byzantin. simp.

The aperitive Pills were these following.

R. Gum. ammonias. acet. scillit. solut. ii. myrrhae rub. tart. chalybeat. ana
ss. croci j. ol. foenic. dulc. chym. gut. viii. succi cochlear. q. s. Fiat
massa.

During which time from the beginning, she was anointed with a Liniment all
over her belly, morning and evening. The Liniment was this.

R. Ol. cappar. unguent. e succis aperit. ana j. Misce.

After this, a Cataplasm was applied to the region of the Spleen, every day for
a week. The Cataplasm was made thus.

R. Panis alb. farin. sem. lini. ana iv. farin. hord. jss. lactis vaccin. lib.
jss. Coq. ad exsiccationem, add mucilag. rad. althaeae, foenugr. ana j. ol.
chamaem. cappar. ana j. gum. ammoniac. acet. scillit. solut. iii. galban.
bdellii* styracis liquid. ana ii. croci ss. Misce, f. Cataplasma.

After this the pain was gone, and the Spleen began to be soft and yielding.
Then I appointed the former Apozem to be repeated; which being taken, the
swelling of her belly was much gone down. After this I caused a Fomentation to
be applied, morning and evening, for some days; and then ordered the Chalybeat
Wine to be repeated. The Fomentation was this.

R. Rad. bryon. ireos nostr. ana iv. rad. cyclamin. cucum. agrest. filicis mar.
ana ii. fol. lauri, abrotan. absinth. menthae, salviae, hyssop. ana M.ii. sem.
cymin. foenugr. ana j. flor. chamaemel. melilot. ana M.j. Coq. in aq. fabror.
lib. x. acet. vin. alb. sub finem addit. lib. ii. ad tertiae partis consumpt.
pro Fotu.

After which one purging Potion was given, and an Emplaster applied to the
Spleen, and then both the Spleen and Abdomen, the whole belly as flat and soft
as ever she was, and perfectly cured, and returned home. All which was
performed in the space of about seven weeks: and two months after she conceived
with child, as I was informed by her relations; and she stood firm in health
long after. Notwithstanding the success was very good, and the Medicines well
designed, as such preparations will afford; yet in the like cases I do not use
the same now.

This in short; and I could not rehearse the particulars so exactly (being
twenty years since) but that I have the whole story, with the several
Medicines, in writing now by me: and this I have related to confirm what I
asserted here before, that a diseased Spleen may lay the foundation for, and
introduce a Dropsy: and now I proceed on to set forth the causes of a pained
Spleen; which being rightly stated, applications may more successfully be made
in that complaint.

The most frequent and apparent Symptom that afflicts the Spleen is Pain; and
this does arise and depend upon some of these several diseases; Obstruction,
Tumor, Inflammation, Apostemation, Compression, Vlceration.

Obstruction in some of the Vessels of the Spleen, is a frequent cause that
produces pain; and this obstruction is procured from a feculency and grossness
of blood, which arises either from a natural debility of the Spleen not able
to perform its office duly; or occasioned by a melancholy disposition, a
studious, sedentary, inactive, or a careful and afflicted life; to which, or
singly, an evil bad diet and irregular diaetetic customs may contribute, or
effect: (as more fully you may be informed in a late Tract of mine, entitled,
The Preservation of Health and Prolongation of Life.) All which impedes the due
fermentation and volatization of the blood in the Spleen, from whence it
becomes thick and foul, and begets a stoppage, or too slow a motion and fullness
in those Vessels.

And whereas the office of the Spleen (as before determined) is to ferment
anew, spiritalize, exalt and rarifie the thick, indigested and melancholy
blood, sent thither for a farther elaboration and depuration; it is most
rational that this not being performed (from some of the impediments aforesaid)
obstruction and stagnation there will be the consequent; and the Patient from
hence will feel a pain and heaviness about those parts.

But for a more promptness or aptness to these obstructions, angustness and
straitness of the Vessels, so formed by Nature, does render some persons more
prone than others to obstruction and these splenetic pains.

And farther, this obstruction does arise not always from the causes aforesaid;
but sometimes from a compression of other parts adjacent that may incommode and
offend the Spleen, or by contusion from a blow or fall; or by an injurious
dress and too strait lacing or girding, as frequently amongst the female Sex.

These obstructions when continuing and contumacious, are so aggravated and
increased with additional influx, that they form a Tumor: this distension being
perceptible by sight sometimes, but always by seeling, is to be adjudged and
distinguished; whether soft and flatuous, or hard and scirrhous; the former
sooner yielding to means, but the latter more difficult of cure.

Inflammation, though rarely, yet sometimes does affect the Spleen; and this
inflammation does arise from obstruction; for the blood being stopped in its
current and passage, and upon some extraordinary causes being more hot and
fiery, does make a sudden ebullition and inflame, causing great pain, heat and
extension; and this pain is distinguished by pulsation and beating of the part,
having many Arteries. This Inflammation not rightly applied unto by diligent
and good means, does make transition, and passes into Apostemation; and
sometimes terminates in a scirrhous Tumor: but these two dangerous commutations
are to be prevented with great care and industry: therefore before the disease
arrives to this height, and when only pain or heaviness gives warning, and
tells you of a distempered Spleen, it is then most seasonable and opportune to
apply the means; and then a little may prevent that, which afterward perhaps a
great deal cannot cure.

And first the procuring causes, if any there be apparent, are to be avoided;
as a sedentary slothful life, intemperance and gross feeding, or unseasonable
eating, as late suppers; immoderate study, melancholy, grief or care; which
introduce sometimes, but always contribute to aggravate splenetic distempers:
and although a natural debility and infirm constitution of the Spleen, may
procure the effects aforesaid without other provocations, yet most frequently
they are so caused, at least much heightened thereby; and therefore for
prevention, as also for cure, those injurious habits are to be abandoned, and
such a diaetetic course of life observed, as may check this disposition of
body, as at large you may be directed in the forementioned Book, The
preservation of Health and prolongation of Life, etc.

For Pharmaceutic Remedies (that are made public) I shall commend the
aperitive Tincture of Mars; Pil. Antihypochondriac. Swelferi: chalybeated
Tartar; Sal volatile. Succini; Spir. Veneris rightly prepared: which prudently
used pro re nata, as the several cases require, may prove advantageous.

Pains of the Liver.
BEfore I inquire into the nature and causes of these pains, it will be
necessary to let you know, the office and use of this member, its situation,
figure and vessels; for hereby the disease (upon which pains depend) will be
more manifest and apparent, as also such parts as suffer by vicinity, connection
and consent from hence.

To enumerate the various Opinions that have been held by Learned men in all
Ages, concerning the office of this member, would be too tedious; therefore I
shall only mention what latter discoveries have proved most rational from the
motion of the Chyle and Blood, which is this: That the Liver primarily is
appointed to receive the blood coming from the Heart, to give it a farther
digestion and depuration, by separating the bilious matter; and secondarily, by
embracing the Ventricle, to cherish and promote the stomachs digestion, or
chylification: for which purposes this member is fitly seated, formed and
furnished with vessels to import and export.

The Liver is placed in the right Hypochonder under the Diaphragma, covered in
part by the short Ribs, and covering the upper and forepart of the Ventricle:
and for firmness of situation it is fastened by three Ligaments, to the Abdomen,
to the Cartilage ensiformis, and to the Diaphragma.

The figure of this member upon the superior part is unequal or round, the
better to give way to the motion of the Diaphragma; but the under side is
concave or hollow, fitly to apply to the extension of the Ventricle.

As for magnitude, it is various in diverse persons, greater and less: and also
different in the same persons, in health and sickness: this member sometimes
being wasted and shrunk; and sometimes swelled or increased wonderfully big.

This Organ has vessels appertaining to it, as Veins, Arteries and Nerves: the
two eminent great Veins of man's Body, Vena cava and Vena portae, having their
roots variously dispersed here through the Parenchyma or body of the Liver; the
trunk of the former rising out of the superior gibbous part; the latter from
the concave and under-side.

The Liver being designed for the use aforesaid, seated and accommodated after
this manner; we shall inquire into the impediments and preternatural
conditions, from whence pain and trouble arises: for many complain of pain and
heaviness in their right side, about the short Ribs, sometimes more forward,
sometimes backward, sometimes inward, and sometimes more outward. To what parts
these pains belong, and the causes from whence they arise, is worth our labor
to be resolved: for sometimes pains of the Liver have erroneously been taken
for Pleurisies, because the pain has extended upwards and affected the Thorax,
by reason of vicinity: and sometimes the muscular pains of the Abdomen in the
right Hypochonder, have been adjudged to be hepatic, not rightly discerning the
diagnostic signs.

Diseases which the Liver is most subject to, and procuring pain, are these:
Obstruction, Adhesion, Inflammation, Inflation, scirrhous Tumors, Apostems,
Ulcers. From hence we may understand, that as these pains are various in their
causes, so are they dissimilar and unlike in the sense of feeling, and
differently seated.

Obstructions that impede and injure the office of the Liver, and producing
pain are frequent; and these are either in the outmost gibbous part, and do
belong to the trunk of the Vena cava: or else in the hollow inferior part, and
the Vena portae is concerned herein: or else the obstructions are fixed in the
body of the Liver, and then the small ramifications of either or both Veins are
affected. Hence it is, that this member is most frequently infested with
obstructions, because it is stored with so many vessels as none more.

But besides these obstructions of the Vessels, there are also obstructions in
the Parenchyma or substance of this Organ; that is, when the small Meatus or
Pores are shut up, that ventilation and transpiration is denied: hence it is,
that this member sometimes is preternaturally extended and increased in
magnitude, through all its dimensions: for having a continual supply of
additional matter, and not duly expended, the part of necessity must be
augmented and enlarged. And it is observed by some, that those have the
greatest Livers, that are of a colder temperature, and such as are great
eaters: of this Cornelius Gemma gives an example of an Old woman that could not
forbear eating and drinking scarce a moment but with great trouble and anguish;
and being opened after her death, her Liver was found to be wonderfully big.

Signals declaring the Liver to be obstructed are; a heaviness, fullness, or an
obtuse pain in the right Hypochonder; and chiefly after meat, or exercise; and
upon more than ordinary motion, the face is apt to be high-colored, the hands
to look red, and the breath to be short, and they are apt to be feverish upon
small occasions; but upon rest and ease commonly they are inclined to be pale.

Causes from whence these obstructions arise and do depend, are; first, such as
remotely dispose; as a plentiful and bad Diet, or a gross feeding upon such
meats as are difficult to be digested and distributed (what those are, you will
find in the Preservation of Health, etc.) also a thick unwholesom Air, to be
without exercise, and to indulge sleep too much; which over-clogs the body,
makes a Plethory and fullness, whereby the circulation is retarded, laying the
foundation and an aptness for obstructions in general.

Secondly and more immediately; from a viscidity and grossness of the blood,
rendering it influid, slow of motion, and apt to stop in the vessels: and this
is generated in the Liver from its distemper, debility and decay of the
faculty; or is transmitted from other parts, and brought in from the antecedent
causes aforesaid: to which we may add angustness of the vessels in some persons
disposing to this inconvenience.

Obstructions of the Liver are carefully to be looked after and removed; because
they introduce many other diseases, as Jaundice, Dropsies, Fevers,
Inflammations, scirrhous Tumors, etc.

Adhesion or Coalescence sometimes is the cause of pain in the right
Hypochonder: as when the Liver sticks to, or grows together with the
Peritonaeum. And this may happen from too much and constant lying on the right
side; or by the magnitude of the Liver extending to the Peritonaeum, whether
tumified preternaturally, or increased by a natural nutrition and growth.

Now pain arises hence: the Membrane that invests and covers the Liver being
very sensible, as all Membranes are; that cleaving to the Peritonaeum is
disturbed and strained by motion or shaking of the body; or by lying on the
contrary side, the weight of the Liver endeavoring a separation.

Inflammation sometimes seizes the Liver, and causes great pain: and this
commonly proceeds from, or is the consequent of obstructions: for the blood
being stopped in its current, and overflowing, especially being more hot and
fiery, is then apt to inflame the part: and this is manifest to sense, by heat
and tension of the right Hypochonder.

Inflammation is known from other diseases of the Liver, by the vehemence of
the Symptoms that attend this more than in other cases; for the pain is
greater, the Fever higher, and other Symptoms more fierce and sharp.

If the Inflammation be upon the superior gibbous part of the Liver, it
counterfeits a Pleurisy, and affects the breast much, by short breath and a
dry Cough; the Tumor then extending to the Diaphragma, the Vitals are most
affected, and pain reaches up to the Jugulum sometimes: but if it be in the
cavous inferior parts, then the Stomach is most sensible thereof, by great
thirst, nauseating or vomiting.

But lest you be mistaken between an Inflammation of the gibbous part of the
Liver, and that of the Muscles, you must observe the difference by sight and
feeling: that the former has its extension circular according to the figure of
the Liver; but the latter not: besides the former may be perceived to lie
deeper; the other a more superficial distension.

If the Inflammation be in the body or flesh of the Liver, the pain is obtuse
and heavy: but if the Membrane investing be the seat of the Inflammation, the
pain is more sharp and punging.

Inflammations are better or worse, as the blood is good or bad; for according
to the degrees of pravity and goodness, the Inflammation varies; and therefore
a Phlegmon is not so vehement as an Erysipelas.

Inflammations are very cautiously to be dealt with, both in regard of the
present danger, as also for future consequents: for if a right course be not
observed in the Cure, although the Patient may escape the acute sickness, and
recover; yet he may fall into a Dropsy or Consumption, and that perhaps
incurable; the Liver being so decayed and tabefied, as not to be reduced to
soundness: hence it is, that after Inflammation, Apostemation so frequently
follows, or a scirrhous Tumor.

If the Inflammation terminate in, or leave an Apostem behind it; if it be deep
in the Parenchyma of the Liver, it is more desperate: but if the Apostem or
Abscess lies between the flesh and the covering Coat of the Liver, their case
is more hopeful: because the matter may be better discharged, and the Liver not
in so much danger.

Concerning the termination of this Phlegmon or Inflammation; either it spends
it self and goes off by resolution; or it arrives to maturation; or it ends in
a scirrhous hard Tumor. The first is only desired, and that which all
Practisers should aim at in the administration and application of Medicines:
the two latter are doubtful and dangerous. In the beginning therefore,
Discussives and Diaphoretic resolvers are the chief means to oppose this
disease; not neglecting to abate Plethory, and to make evacuation, thereby to
retract and withdraw fuel from the fire.

But if the Apostem cannot be discussed, then the best way is to bring it to
suppuration as soon as may be, left the part gangrene: and if the faculty of
the Liver be strong to digest and beget a laudable white Pus or matter, then
there may be hopes of the Patients recovery; but if it be sordid and stinking,
the case is desperate. This matter is evacuated sometimes by stool, and
sometimes by Urine; but if it fall into the Abdomen, section must be made to
let it out, if Nature cannot discharge it other ways. Natura in statu
praeternaturali ab interitu se liberatura saepe mirabiles quaerit vias ac
meatus. Moebius.

The Apostem being thus generated, and arriving to suppuration, it breaks, and
then the Scene is changed; for now it becomes an Ulcer, and challenges that
denomination. But an Ulcer is generated sometimes without Inflammation, by
sharp eroding humors, which is not so dangerous as the other; because it comes
on gradually, the Symptoms milder, and gives more time for the use of means.

An Apostem likewise is gathering in the Liver sometimes without Inflammation;
is not then so painful, nor comes to its height so soon.

Apostems do not always come to suppuration, but sometimes they grow hard and
scirrhous: and such Tumors the Liver, and also the Spleen are subject to.

These scirrhous Tumors do depend upon impacted matter that will not be
discussed; and are the consequents of Inflammations or inveterate obstrictions;
procured sometimes by an ill management of their intended Cures, drawing away
the thinner matter, and leaving the grosser behind; as by the use of too great
dryers and heaters: or by refrigerating and constringing Medicines, do so
incrassate the humors as not to be resolved.

This Scirrhus of the Liver is painful in the beginning before it come to be
exquisite and confirmed; but afterward not: and that which is with pain is
more hopeful; the other desperate, because it is in the way to gangrene. Those
that are thus affected, lie more easy on their right side than on the left; in
regard the weight of the Liver presses upon the Ventricle, when they are upon
the left.

You are to take notice, that pains of this Scirrhus, and also from other
Tumors of the Liver or obstructions, do not always possess the right side, but
pain is felt sometimes forward upon the region of the Stomach; for as much as
one part of the Liver lies forward upon the Ventricle: hence it is that many
are mistaken sometimes, in judging all pains about the region of the Stomach to
be pains of the Stomach, when indeed they are seated in the left part of the
Liver.

There is also an Inflation of the Liver, which is a Tumor or extension
thereof, from wind and flatulent humors, sometimes in the vessels, and
sometimes lodged between the investing Membrane and the Parenchyma.

This Tumor is not hard, but yields to pressure; the pain from hence is
mutable, shifting its place, greater and less, sometimes ceasing, but returning
by intervals.

There are also other causes that have and may produce pains of the Liver; as
stones and worms, which have been found upon dissection: but being more rare,
and scarce to be discovered but after death, I wave the prosecution thereof,
and pass on to the next considerable part.

Pains of the Reins and Bladder.
FOR the better understanding of Pains in these parts, and their Causes, we
shall first show you the formation of the Kidneys, and their use; afterward we
shall discover the impediments and morbous affects that produce pain.

The Reins or Kidneys are two, placed one of either side the Spine or
Backbone, about the lower short Ribs, the one under some part of the Liver,
the other under the Spleen.

In the structure of the Kidneys, the most observable for our purpose, are the
Cavities and Ductures in the Parenchyma or body of them, and the Vessels
leading to and from. The substance of the is much like to that of the Heart.

There are two Cavities in the Kidneys being larger than the rest, into which
the smaller Pipes do convey and empty themselves as containing Cisterns: and
out of these again there are other small conveyances to transmit and send it
forth: there are also certain pervious Caruncles or glandulous substances,
through which the Serum is strained; and thus the water is transmitted by
percolation.

The Vessels bringing into the Reins are the emulgent Arteries; and these draw
a Serum from the great Trunk of the Aorta Arteria, and import it into the
Kidneys (the emulgent Veins from the Vena cava were thought by the Ancients to
be for the same purpose; but latter discoveries contradict it*)

They also receive from the lacteal Veins the thinner and more watery part of
the Chyle, being an expedite and shorter way: hence it is the Urine is pale or
whitish, when the Kidneys are not strong enough to give this milkie humor the
urinary digestion: or when drink is too plentifully poured in, and forcing
through before its due time; therefore great Drinkers commonly piss a pale
water.

There are also Nerves inserted into the Kidneys from a branch of the sixth
pair, which also serves the Ventricle: hence it is, that the Stomach is drawn
into consent, by loss of appetite, nauseating and vomiting, when the Kidneys
are pained, as in a fit of the Stone it is manifest. By these Nerves the
Kidneys do suffer not only a heaviness, but sometimes very acute pains.

Vessels carrying the Urine out of the Kidneys, are the Vreters; one belonging
to each Kidney: and they pass from hence down by the Loins, between the two
Membranes of the Peritonaeum, and are inserted into the Bladder, to convey the
Urine thither.

The length of these urinary ductures are about a span; the cavity or hollow
like a straw; but capable of enlargement to the bigness of a finger, as by a
stone coming down, though with extreme pain, by reason they are membranous and
nervous, exquisitely sensible; and therefore upon any obstruction are highly
urged to expulsion, especially by a solid, sharp or rugged body, as stone or
gravel.

Hereby you may understand the office and use of these parts; that is, to drain
the body from a superfluous, saline and tartarous serosity; and this ought
daily and dully to be performed: but this serosity is not all discharged this
way by the Reins, but some passes off by insensible Transpiration, and some by
manifest Sweats, but the greatest part by the Kidneys. And from hence it
appears, that the Urine is partly an excrement of the first digestion, in
respect of the aquosity drawn from the lacteal Juice; and partly of the second,
in respect of the Serum sanguinis exhausted from the blood by the emulgent
Arteries. And here you may observe, that by a certain digestion or elaboration
in the Kidneys these serosities are transmuted into Urine, and then carries an
Odor or scent with it, much different from what it was before: and the like we
may observe in other creatures, that their urines have peculiar smells, which
argues a digestive transmutation.

But although Nature intends and endeavors this work constantly; yet there are
many casualties and impediments to disturb these parts, and frustrate in some
measure the designment of Nature: the errors and failings herein we shall
recite; but those chiefly that are accompanied with, or produce pain we shall
discourse of with brevity.

The general and most frequent Symptoms that manifestly afflict or incommode
the Reins are Pain and Weakness, or Tenderness about those parts.

Diseases planted there, from whence those pains or weakness do arise and
depend are, Intemperate Heat. Imbecility and a declining state. Consumptive
diminution and wasting. Inflammations. Scirrhous Tumors. Angustness and
Obstructions of the Cavities and Ductures. Apertion of the Vessels. Apostems.
Ulcers.


Some there are whose Pains are hot and molesting; not by a natural
constitution, but acquired by time and evil customs, or accidents happening to
those parts: and this begets a tenderness there, and it is painful to lie on
the Back.

The Urine most frequently is hot, or high-colored; sometimes sharp, and then
apt to make water often: prone to Venery, at least the constitution of those
parts does dispose that way.

Causes introducing this distemper are, too frequent use of Wine, strong Drinks
and hot Spices, much Riding, lying on the Back, and soft Beds, or too frequent
Venery: and for a correction of this distemper all these procurers and
aggravators are sparingly to be used, and some of them to be avoided and
forborne.

But if this intemperate Heat depend upon any other disease seated there,
disturbing the office of the Kidneys, and raising a preternatural heat; then
Remedies must be applied to that, as the nature thereof does require, which
being removed, this heat will allay and cease.

Imbecility and weakness does sometimes affect the Reins, and a decay in the
performance of their office may be perceived; and if this be not the consequent
of some manifest disease, debilitating and rendering them incapable, then you
must know that

There is a natural Robor and fortitude implanted in every part by Nature,
whereby they execute their functions with integrity and constancy: there is
also an inequal distribution of this vigor and strength, that some parts
naturally are strong and durable in their stations; others are not so firmly
radicated in their principles, but by time spontaneously fall off from their
duties, and decay much sooner than other parts of the body. Hence it is that
some, though regularly living, complain of this part, others of that.

There are also occasions, accidents, and different manners of living, which we
call Diaetetic customs; which as they are various, do variously injure and
decay this or that part of the body, and cause it to decline sooner than the
rest. Imbecility therefore of the Reins comes under some of these notions, and
has its original from thence; which when such a case present, examination is
to be made, to which of these the case belongs and is to be ascribed.

Now that which I call Imbecility or a decayed state, is when the Reins do not
make a due secretion or separation of the Serum from the blood, and give it the
urinary transmutation: so that from hence the Urine is but little, and that not
well digested: the injurious consequents whereof are many; for the blood
remaining too much diluted, and overcharged with the Serum or watery part;
which being distributed throughout the body, and falling upon this or that
part, cause many Hydropic diseases, and some of them mortal: as examples hereof
might be given.

The next considerable is, Consumptive wasting, diminution, or lessening of the
Kidneys, not by ulceration, but exsiccation; proceeding from a hot and dry
distemper of the Kidneys, arriving to a colliquating Hectic, or Tabes; which by
time begets a Consumption of the whole Body: procured sometimes from a
falacious temperament.

There is felt a heaviness and weakness about the Loins, and the Kidneys do not
perform their office aright.

Inflammation sometimes possesses the Reins: caused by pain of the stone,
gravel, or otherwise by obstructions: sometimes by a blow or fall; also by an
influx of blood, or any foul corrupt matter transmuted thither and lodged
there, obstructing the passages, and causing a suppression of Urine.

This disease is always accompanied with an acute Fever, great Thirst,
astriction of the Belly, heat of Urine, and great pain about the Loins: and if
the Arteries be affected, the pain will be with pulsation: Sometimes a Delirium
attends, with long watching; and if the Inflammation be in the Membrane, the
Patient is scarce able to sit upright, because the pain thereby is exasperated.

If the right Kidney be affected, pain extends upwards to the Liver and short
Ribs, and downwards to the Genitals; also a stupor seizes the right Thigh by
consent; the Nerve being compressed that passes thence down to the Thigh. But
if the left Kidney be the part affected, that side is most grieved, and in like
manner: but if both the Kidneys be attacked, then the Symptoms on both sides
are equal.

The termination of these Inflammations are either by an Apostem or Abscess; by
induration and a scirrhous hardness; or by Transpiration and resolution: which
last is the only safe and secure way, and this the Physician ought to design
for, and aim at in his administrations.

But if contrary to his endeavors, the Inflammation apostemates, suppurates,
and breaks, evacuating the purulent matter by the Vreters into the Bladder,
there is good hopes of safety; but if it be discharged inwards by the emulgent
Veins, the case is desperate.

Scirrhous Tumors in the next place come to be viewed; and these are hard
Tumors very difficult to be removed: being the relict of an Inflammation or
other Tumor preceding, and not well cured: or formed by gross matter congested
and accumulated there, causing contumacious obstructions: for humoral matter
flowing thither, and being obstructed in the transition, the heat of the part
does exsiccate and harden it by time more and more; and then by accumulation
and addition forms a Tumor.

This causes heaviness about the Loins, but little pain: the Urine is but
little also, and that pale and watery, in regard the office of the Kidneys is
debilitated, and by reason of the angustness of the passages, letting pass the
thinner, but retaining the thicker part of the Urine.

The longer this Tumor continues, the more difficult and incurable it becomes;
and withal, it brings on hydropic Cachexies: for the superfluous serosity not
being drained away, regurgitates back into the body.

The Cure is to be set upon with internal and external Medicines: Aperitives,
Resolvents, Discussives and Emollients.

Apertion of the Vessels, contrary to Nature, sometimes does threaten danger, by
the appearance of blood staining the Urine: and this proceeds from a weakness
of the Vessels, being relaxed in their retentive faculty; or by a plenitude and
fullness of blood; or because the blood is thin and sharp, which causes the
mouths of the Vessels to open.

On the contrary; Angustness or straitness sometimes does incommode the Vessels
appertaining to the Reins, which hinders the free ransmission of the Urine.

Now this angustness of the Vessels does arise either by compression from some
Tumor, or distended part that presses upon the Vessels and straitens them from
without:

Or by contraction or constriction of the Vessels that are shrunk; as by great
heat in long Fevers, or a Tabes that seizes the Kidneys:

Or lastly, by obstruction within from some viscous matter, grumous or clotted
blood, sand, gravel, stone, etc.

The Sign declaring these obstructions, is a suppression of Urine with pain; or
an abatement of the usual quantity, not answerable to the drink received. The
place or part affected, whether in the Kidneys or Vreters, is known by the seat
of pain.

The causes that obstruct are known by their proper signals, and by examining
into the preceding state of the Patient.

The place or part grieved with these obstructions, whether in the Kidneys or
Vreters, pain discovers, and the dislodging or shifting thereof.

Of all the obstructions that infest the Kidneys, the most frequent and saddest
complaint is from the Stone; this being the most contumacious obstruction, the
most painful, being a hard solid body, and the most uncertain Remedies for
relief.

Concerning the generation of these Stones, there have been various Opinions
amongst Learned men: in short, the difference and contest hereupon may be
reduced to these two Heads; what the material cause of the Stone is, and what
the efficient.

For the material cause, or matter whereof the Stone is bred; Galen and most of
his Disciples will have it to be, a phlegmatic, gross, or viscous humor apt for
condensation and induration: and the efficient to be heat exsiccating this
matter, and bringing it to a stony hardness; but others of them will have this
to proceed from cold, by way of congelation.

But this Doctrine cannot hold as rational, nor does it answer experience: as
for the matter we cannot allow it to be such; for as much as many that abound
with a viscous tough Phlegm and slimy matter, as most ancient people do, yet
many of them are never trouble with stone or gravel. And for a concurrence of
both the causes, material and efficient, we have examples of the Aged, who are
most cold and phlegmatic; and for abounding heat with the like matter, we may
produce Fevers; yet no stony concretion or signs thereof to be found from such
sicknesses: So that we are now to seek for other causes both material and
efficient, whereon to ground our endeavors for the relief of such as are
afflicted with this disease.

The matter therefore and substance of the Stone, is from a tartarous and
saline succus, with the addition of a terrestrial feculency, concreted or
petrified by a lapidifactory Spirit or disposition of the Reins, which is the
efficient and seminal being of that production.

The concurrence of both these causes does much produce the Stone, and afflict
the Patient in a high degree: but one of them is sufficient, viz. this
petrifying power of the Reins, to coagulate any laudable good matter imported
there, into a stony substance: To confirm this, Fernelius relates upon his own
knowledge of one that for three or four months together, above a dozen small
stones came from him every day; all which time notwithstanding, he eat nothing
but Broths and Panadoes, being confined to his Bed by weakness and pain.

But allowing this to be true from the credit of the Author; yet we must own
and acknowledge, that besides this principal cause of a petrifying Spirit in
the Reins, there are also antecedent and procatarctic causes adjuvant and
promoting; as some sorts of meats and drinks, and other errors in the
Diaetetics, that increase and set forward this disease, which otherwise might
be much slower in generation, nor yet arrive to so high a degree of torture:
also the Stomach, Spleen or Liver not performing their functions rightly, may
contribute matter to the promotion hereof.

For relief of the diseased in this case, there are two grand intentions to be
prosecuted, and aimed at: a dissolution of the body of the stone already
generated; and secondly, the taking away of the petrifying disposition of the
Reins, and abolition of that coagulating ferment: and for these purposes were
Paracelsus his Ludus and Aroph; also the Alkahest cannot fail herein.

But such as have not acquired the great Arcana's, and cannot procure a
dissolvent for the Stone, that is, to make an Analysis or resolution of it into
a liquid juice, and reduce it back again to its humoral flowing state, capable
of abstersion and cleansing out, must endeavor to facilitate the exclusion of
this hard body, by the best and most hopeful means for that purpose, by
lubrifying, relaxing, and dilating the passages, and asswaging the Spasm and
contraction of the Vreters, that the stone may slide away much sooner, and with
less pain: hence by way of caution observe, That Diuretics and provokers to
expulsion are not to be given, before this preparation be made, else you
precipitate the Patient into danger, and increase his torment, dislodging and
forcing the stone through angust and very tender cavities, not provided to give
passage without detriment to this unwelcome stranger.

And thus much briefly concerning petrifaction, or the production of Stones in
the Kidneys; I proceed on to the next, a most difficu't and painful disease
belonging to this Member, namely Ulcers.

Ulcers of the Kidneys are introduced several ways, or take their rise from
several causes.

1. Acrimony and sharpness of humor passing this way, and continuing long, does
excoriate; which not timely observed and remedied (because pains at first are
but small) does corrode farther, eat into the flesh, and plants an Ulcer. 2.
The Kidneys are ulceratedsometimes from an Inflammation or other Apostem there,
coming to suppuration and breaking, which discharges the matter by Urine, or
otherwise, but leaves a putrid Ulcer behind. 3. Sometimes from a clot of blood
extravasated or out of its place putrefying, does infect the part, tabifie and
ulcerate; and not to be neglected, lest this be the consequent. 4. Sometimes a
Stone, being rough, angular or sharp, frets or grates upon the parts, and makes
a solution of continuity, which at first sends forth a bloody Urine, afterward
purulent and begets an Ulcer: and this last is the most frequent cause that
generates Ulcers in the Kidneys.
These Ulcers are discovered by pain about the Loins, a purulent Urine, and
sometimes Caruncles or small fleshy rags, or strings of concreted blood is
brought forth with the Urine, accompanied commonly with heat in the Back, and
sometimes faint Sweats, which continuing, bring on a Consumption and Hectic
Fever.

Of these Ulcers some are more sordid, foul and stinking, as the Urine does
declare: others not ill scented, the Pus white, not viscous, but cloudy and
light.

The difficulty of these Cures lies here; for that the Urine which is acrid
flowing always by the Ulcer, hinders the consolidation of the part: besides,
the situation being remote, the virtue of a Medicine is much altered before it
arrive to the part: but in the designment and managing of these Cures, the body
must be well cleansed, not with the common deleterious Purgers, but balsamic
Detersives; and so kept with a proper Diaetetic regimen, as no impurity or
sharp humors disturb or abate the power or Medicines, which must be truly
balsamic and healing.

The experience of these Ulcers I have had several times, both many years since
and lately. I remember in the year 1652. I cured an Ulcer of the Kidneys in a
man about thirty years of age, living near Sheffield in Yorkshire, who came to
me four miles twice a week during his Cure; I being then for a while at Norton
upon the edge of Darby-shire. His Urine was hot, sharp, and stinking, with a
great purulent sediment; a great pain in his Back, with scorching heat, and
often flushing faint Sweats all over his Body. Indeed I have wondered since how
I did perform such a difficult Cure then, having so little practical knowledge,
I being but a Tyro in this Art, it being in the first year of my Practice, and
newly graduated Batchellor in Physic: but Providence had appointed me the
instrument to free this poor man out of his pain and languishing condition.
Since I have been acquainted with several of the like cases, and may with
better assurance promise a Cure, from tried Medicines acquired by experience,
beyond what Book-practice does communicate: and this last year here in London,
I cured a Gentlewoman of an Ulcer in the Kidneys.

In the next place we are to take notice of Pains belonging to the Bladder.

The Bladder is the last receptacle for the Urine, and performs the office of a
Cistern to the Body, for keeping and discharging the Urine at convenient times;
and therefore is capable of distension and contraction, being a membranous bag,
furnished with right, transverse, and oblique Fibers for that purpose: and has
two Muscles at the neck of it, to let go or retain the Urine.

This part is liable to great grievances and painful infirmities: as
Distension, Obstructions, Inflammation, Excrescences, Ulcers, scirrhous
hardness. From hence come suppressions of Urine, imminution or small quantity,
ardor or heat of Urine, Strangury or dolorous emission and dropping,
incontinency of Urine or difficulty of retaining it.

Distension of the Bladder happens from too long retaining of the Urine,
whether it be voluntary or involuntary: so that afterward the Fibers do not
recover again the power of contracting the Bladder: and this may prove of
dangerous consequence, and to some it has proved mortal.

Obstructions of the Bladder, causing a suppression of Urine, or diminution,
dolorous or difficult excretion, does arise from many causes: as a stone in the
Bladder or gravel, coagulated blood, worms, a viscous humor or purulent matter,
a Caruncle or Tumor in the neck of the Bladder: or by compression from a
tumified part adjacent; as the Womb or right Intestine.

Inflammation sometimes happens from extremity of pain by the Stone, Ulcer, or
other torturing cause; and these Inflammations are commonly mortal.

Ulcers do possess the Bladder sometimes, and most commonly in the neck
thereof, caused by a stone or gravel excoriating and wounding the part: or by
an eroding purulent matter coming from other parts, and lodged there; or by a
continued Acrimony and sharpness of Urine corroding: sometimes from an
Inflammation or Abscess: more rarely, but it has happened sometimes, from a
Gonorrhoea ill cured; and I may say very ill indeed; for the Ulcer thus
procured, is of far greater difficulty and danger than the Gonorrhoea.

Not long since an Ulcer of the Bladder was committed to my care, being the
relict of a Gonorrhoea ill managed by a Surgeon, using Restringents
unseasonably.

Ulcers in the meatus Penis, as also in the Prostates, are more frequently
offered to our help: as lately another person applying to me having an Ulcer
procured in the Prostates, from the like improper and pernicious course: and
although Gonorrhoea's are frequently cured, and may with much certainty and
safety in skilful hands; yet there are many that patch up a seeming Cure for
the present, but future consequents are sad memento's of their Undertakers
folly. And at this time I have a Patient, repenting that ever he committed
himself into the hands of a practicing Apothecary; for he by stopping his
Gonorrhoea before the virulency was eradicated (which I judge was done by
astringent Medicines) the Patient was forced to leave his Undertaker, and came
to me in a painful and dangerous condition; one of the Testicles being
inflamed, hard, and swelled as big as a Turkyegg.

By such miscarriages some have been quite lost; others have been perplexed and
almost ruined afterward with difficult and very chargeable Cures: as not long
ago, a Gentleman came to me, who had spent above five hundred pounds, having
been under several Physicians and Surgeons of good repute, for some years;
being reduced to such a difficult state, from the imprudence of his first
Undertaker.

Ulcers in the Bladder are known by pain about the Os pubis and bottom of the
Belly; a strong or stinking Urine, if the Ulcer be fordid; a purulent or
furfuraceous matter floating; a hot or sharp Urine, which causes a painful
discharge thereof, and sometimes with difficulty, if any excrescence or viscous
matter obstruct the passage.

These Ulcers have been accounted incurable by our Predecessors; but this Age
has given testimony of their curability; and my self have had good success in
these undertakings to the relief of some thus affected, and great satisfaction
to my self.

Verruca's, Caruncles, or fleshy Excrescences do infest the neck of the
Bladder; and sometimes the Vrethra or urinary ducture; and these commonly are
the products of a preceding Ulcer or Gonorrhoea, and sometimes conjoined
therewith.

And now we have briefly declared and run through the several pains that belong
to the Kidneys and Bladder, remarking the diseases whereto they belong, and
from whence they do arise: it remains in the last place, that we set down the
principal morbous affects, discovered or intimated by the Urine.

Capital Symptoms that attend the Urine, denoting some diseases or infirmity
considerable, in the parts that belong to this urinary office, are chiefly
these: a bloody Urine, sand or gravelly, oily or greasy, purulent or
furfuraceous: too much Urine, or too little, a painful suppression, or
emission: a white water, red or black: stinking, or strong-scented: hot or
sharp.

And thus having traced through the Head, Breast and Belly, examining the most
frequent and remarkable pains thereof; it remains that we inquire into those
pains that possess the Limbs, as Legs and Arms, of which in the following
Paragraph.

Gout-pains and Rheumatism.
IN this our Catalogue of Pains, We must not forget to insert Arthritic or
Gout-pain, being so eminent a Tormentor, so contumacious and resisting, that
oftentimes it has bid defiance to the potent means of the most reputed
Physicians; hereby gaining the name with many, and accounted amongst the number
of incurable Diseases: from hence the endeavors of the most are rather to
palliate than to cure, as having no hope to effect so great a work.

I must confess that mitigation and allay of pain is very acceptable to the
tortured Patient, and not without a deserved praise to the Physician; but to
acquiesce and rest here as the ne plus ultra, is too inferior a station, and
below the dignity of his function: we will therefore make a farther inquiry
into the nature and difficulty of this contumacious Malady, thus posted;
possibly thereby to meet with some encouragement, and to find out a way
conducting us to such advantageous approaches, as may dispossess and subdue
this grand enemy.

Arthritis the Gout, is so denominated from (...) Articulus the Joint, and is
the generical word comprising several particular species thereof, having their
distinguishing names from the part affected: as Podagra the Foot-gout, Gonagra
the Knee-gout, and Chiragra the Hand-gout: but Rheumatism takes denomination
from motion or fluxion; Rheumatismus, fluxio, from (...) fluo; this kind of
Gout not fixing here or there, but moving from part to part, is therefore
called the running Gout.

I shall treat of these several Gouts together, because of their affinity with
each other in their continent cause, and differing only as to the seeds morbi,
which may cause some variation in practice, but not much.

Concerning the continent cause of the Gout, there are various Opinions; some
determine it a sanguine humor, others phlegmatic; some a choleric, others
melancholy, and some a mixture of these humors. Hippoc. lib. (...), will have
the Gout to arise from Choler and Phlegm; Galen de comp. medic. says, the humor
is sometimes sanguine, but for the most part phlegmatic, or Phlegm and Choler
mixed. Trallianus also an ancient Greek Author lib. 11. derives the Gout from
Blood, Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy; farther affirming, that if the several
kinds of the Gout, arising from the different mixture of these humors were
rightly known, this disease were easy to be cured.

Thus from the difference of opinions and mistakes concerning the Gout, the
designment of Cure, and means adapted thereto have been various, and also
frastraneous: other improbable opinions there are, but I wave the recital? of
them, and come to set down what is most consonant with reason, established upon
latter and clearer discoveries.

And here I must premise a few things as introductory, but necessarily serving
to our present purpose.

Food which sustains and repairs the body is meat and drink; of meats some are
liquid, others solid: but the solid and dryer meats coming into the stomach,
are macerated, liquefied and transmuted (by the digestive power thereof, and
assistance of ingested liquors)is changed into a liquid juice called Chyle:
this Chyle being exported out of the stomach, receives several alterations
afterward in the various parts through which it passes, and is become a milky
juice in the Venae lacteae, blood in the Veins and Arteries, water in the
Lymphae-ductus, and a spirituous exalted Succus in the Nerves; and all these
for various uses and purposes; but still keeping in a liquid form, and flowing
in the Vessels containing. And to prevent stagnation or stoppage of their
motion in the several small Pipes of conveyance through the body; hence it is
that all the humors or juyces of the body, do participate much of water, or a
thin watery and fluctuating substance called Serum, by some Lympha, by Helmont
Latex: which being thus appointed for a distribution of the Chyle and Blood;
hence it is that Hippocrates fitly calls it (...), Vehiculum nutrimenti.

This Serosity or watery part abounding, is not easily contained in the Vessels
or Conduit-pipes, especially being depraved, become sharp and penetrating with
a Tartarous saltness; but either by apertion or exsudation is let put; and
where it takes its course, discharging it self upon some tender part, there
pain and trouble arises.

Thus the Gout takes its beginning from an acrid or sharp saline serosity,
invading the Ligaments, Membranes and nervous parts about the Joints,
lancinating those tender and very sensible parts.

But how this Serum comes to abound, and how to be depraved, is worth our
inquiry; for from hence is the designment of Cure grounded, to prevent and take
off both the one and the other. So long as it remains in its due state for
quantity and quality, it is very necessary and useful to the body; but when it
degenerates or is redundant, it raises disturbance variously, according to the
parts it does infest: hence Catarrhs or destillation of Rheums into the Eyes,
causing them to be sore, hot and inflamed; sometimes upon the Lungs, causing
vehement Coughs and shortness of breath: from hence punctures, stitches or
sharp pricking pains in diverse parts of the body; Headaches, Tooth-aches,
spurious Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, Arthritic or Gout-pains.

Now this serosity does abound, either from a deficiency of the digestions, and
transmutation of alimentary matter received: or from a deficiency of secretion
or, discharge of it by those Emunctories appointed for that purpose; for as
there is a continual supply by eating and drinking, so there ought; to be a
proportionable discharge.

First, From a defect of digestion in the Chyle and blood, when they do not
attain that complete state as Nature has required; but receive only a crude
and imperfect transmutation: and this sometimes procured from an injurious sort
of meats and drinks, or offending in quantity; as much Fruits, small Beer,
Water, etc.

Secondly, From an insufficient discharge, and for want of due evacuation, this
Serum does abound and become superfluous: that is, when the parts destined by
Nature to separate, attract and transmit this serosity of the Chyle and blood,
do not perform their office duly; as when the Lymphaeducts, Spleen or Reins are
deficient in their functions; also when the Pores are occluded, and
Transpiration hindered, these occasion the overflowing and abounding of this
serosity, having not its right conveyance, due vent, and discharge.

This Latex or Serum rarely continues in a solitary state of redundance, but
also is then soon vitiated and becomes depraved: for as our meats and drinks
are endowed with a Tartarous and saline principle; so this Serum is impregnated
therewith, and abounding variously as the food received contains variety of
Salts; which discover themselves and appear more or less, according to the
strength or debility of the digestive power of fermentation, being able to
subdue and subject them to the service of the body; or otherwise to suffer them
to be exalted in their peculiar natures: and then as they are more sharp or
milder, so is the pain and disturbance from them greater or less.

But how this saline serosity does discharge it self upon the Joints, and
affect them with pain, is (by the consent of Authors) from a laxity or
imbecility of articulation, or promptness of the Joints to receive: but this
reason I cannot close with, since a more probable and rational may be given,
which is from the formation and conformation of parts, as thus: That when the
Serum sanguinis this serosity does effervescere and ebullire, estuate and grow
turgid in the great Vessels of the Veins and Arteries, afterward in the
smaller Vessels; then it comes into their branches, and so to the extremities
and terminations of them; which terminations (most of them) are placed in the
Joints, where they do effundere, discharge and let out this hostile injurious
Serum, and therewith torment the Joints, causing sharp lancinating Pains,
Inflammation and Tumor of the part, etc. such Symptoms as attend the Gout.

As the Gout makes its progress from one state to another; so the Symptoms
supervening do vary and appear gradually, as the disease arrives to its height
and fierceness. First, the part affected is more tender and sensible than
usually, also less active and vigorous in motion: and before a fit of the Gout
oftentimes a general indisposition or febrile heat disturbs the Patient; the
blood then fermenting for a purification, casts off this morbific tartarous
serosity upon the Joints. The part thus affected most commonly is tumefied, and
sometimes inflamed, pains increase and grow very sharp, and in some by time and
continuance of this disease a tophous hardness or Nodes seize the part as the
relicts and insignal characters thereof.

Some have the Symptoms of the Gout in a remiss degree, only at changes of the
weather and seasons of the year, and are not confined to the house by a
considerable seizure and great pain, but can walk abroad, although with some
complaints and indisposition: others are attacked more violently, and so
disabled, that they are laid up and deprived of their liberty.

To some the Gout is hereditary, derived from their parents in the principles
of their Nature, and will show it self, although they be of a strict and
regular life: to others it is adventitious, arising from the procuring causes
of this disease in the course of their life; by intemperate and inordinate, or
incongruous way of living in the Diaetetics, unsuitable and unfit for their
condition of body.

For Cure of this Disease, these aims, are to be intended and prosecuted.

First, That this saline acid humor be prevented and stopped in the fountain or
spring, the parts mandant from whence it does arise, that a future supply may
not be generated.

Secondly, What is already produced, may be mortified, abstersed and evacuated
out of the body.

Thirdly, That the parts recipient, invaded and debilitated, may be eased,
restored and roborated.

The first intention is performed by such means as rectify and fortify the
digestions, whereby their elaborations and transmutations of aliment received
may be pure in their proper natures and free from any degenerate mixture: and
here both good Aliment and good Medicament is required: for election of meats
and drinks, and other Diaetetic rules necessary for gouty persons to observe,
consult that Book called, The Preservation of Health, etc. where at large you
are advised, and too much to insert here. For Medicament, gentle Vomits are
profitable, both for cleansing and removing of the fundamental matter; as also
for a revulsion from the part affected, and retarding the current thither: but
where that operation is not convenient, then keep the stomach clean with a good
Purgative downwards: the best Shopmedicines for this purpose is Pil. stomac.
and Aloephangin. also Sir. de spina cervin. and Elixir propriet. in the
intervals.

The second designment, is attained by Alcalyes, whose properties are to
correct and kill all acidities and corrosive sharpness: and these are the Salts
of Vegetables made by Calcination: and next to these are Absorbents that imbibe
and tame acids, being alkalisate or affine to Alkalies: as Oculi cancror.
Coral. Chelae canc. cran. human, corn. cer. ust. margarit. sacchar. Saturni.
etc. But besides these, Cathartics, Diaphoretics, and Diuretics are to be used
in due order; whereby the tartarous matter residing or fluctuating in any part
of the body may be sent forth several ways.

To perform the work of Purgation you may use Arcanum corallinum and Pilulae
Antimoniales prepared to work only downwards, which are of the better sort of
Medicines made public: in my own Practice I use Pil. Arthriticae nostr. which
seldom fail my expectation; being seconded by some other Medicines in their due
place.

After Purgation promote Transpiration, for this does much abate and scatter
the superfluous serosity, driving it a centro ad circumferentiam, and
transmitting it by the Pores; and may be done with diaphoret. or with decoct.
rad. bardan. sassaphras, chinae, sarsaparillae, card. benedict.

Also Evacuation by Urine is of great advantage to spend and drain the acrid
Serum that way: and to set forward this operation, use Sal succin. or the
Mercurial liquor that separates from the Oil and Salt after distillation: also
Sal volat. urinae and viper. are profitable.

To effect the third intention? Topical Medicines to assuage pain, to discuss
and roborate, are useful and necessary to relieve the part affected.

For allaying pain in time of extremity, this Anodyne Cataplasm has been used,
and commended for successful: Rad. lilior. alb. althaeae ana ii. fol. parietar.
hyoscyam. ana M. j. Coq. lact. vaccin. q. s. in mucilaginem, addend. micae
panis alb. ii. pulpae cassiae j. croci pull. ss. ol. rosar. q. s. fiat
Cataplasma, s. a. This Medicine is well designed and congruous in all its
parts; and like unto this several others for the same purpose may be formed,
and which will perform the intended effect: yet they cause a relaxness, and
leave the part weak and tender: Unguents and Liniments upon the same account
are cautiously to be used: but Lixiviums to foment the part affected, are
profitable to assuage, discuss, and roborate.

But they that will take a little pains to procure a good Medicine, let them
unite Sal volat. urinae cum spir. vin. rectificat. by digestion and
circulation, in which if you dissolve a little Camphire, you have then an
excellent Topic Remedy both curative and prophylactic, with which you are to
foment the part every day.

Or if you will make a Cataplasm cum mica panis alb. macerated in spir. vin.
addend. croci parum, you have then a safe and good Medicine.

Some do adventure to use Restringents, Repellers and Coolers, to drive back
the humor flowing; and they are made of Bol. armen. sang. dracon. malicor.
album. ovor. acetum, and such like; but this is hazardous and dangerous to give
the morbific humor a sudden check, which may return upon some noble part;
therefore I advise against such attempts, being not rational, and experience
has confirmed their fetal events.

For a Prophylactic-Remedy, or by way of prevention, to keep off the returns of
the Gout, Spigelius commends this Medicine, and calls it his Podagrical
Antidote.

R. Troch. de viper. fol. centaur. min. chamaepith. beton. ana j. chamaedr. ii.
rad. gentian. aristoloch. rotund, poeon. bardan. ana j. baccar. lauri, myrrhae,
rhabarb. elect. spic. nard. ana ss. caryophyl. ii. in pulverem redacta,
serventur in vitro, vel cum melle despumato misceantur.

Of the Powder he appoints a scruple for a Dose, of the Electuary a dram; and a
draught of warm water to be drunk after it. The Medicine is good; but warm
water to be taken after, I cannot so well comply with that. For my own
Patients, I give an Extract designed for this purpose, and sometimes a
Diet-drink, which strengthens the digestions, and prevents the saline serosity
from generation, and are preservatives of value to those that have experienced
them.

Now as concerning the curability and incurability of the Gout, we will make
some inquiriy into this matter, because it is acknowledged by all to be of
difficult Cure; and by many it is accounted an incurable disease: this opinion
being fixed in the minds of most people so afflicted, and despairing of help,
at least of a Cure, they provide only to abide the pain, and resolve to be
contented with their condition, as thinking there is no other remedy but
patience, because they see few or none cured.

But I cannot consent with this opinion, that the Gout is an incurable disease,
knowing the contrary by experience; although I must confess, such Cures are
rarely performed: and the reason why; not so much from the impossibility of the
thing to be done, as from the intractability of the persons to be governed and
ruled, and the circumstances under which some persons lie.

For the younger sort being the most curable, or in the best capacity for it;
they will not be confined to such Methods, Rules, and abstinence for such a
time as is requisite for this Cure; but indulge themselves in the liberty of
their enjoyments, and pleasures of sense, doing those things which are very
opposite and injurious to their condition of body; whereby they set on and
procure the returns of this disease, notwithstanding some former good means
used, has taken good effect, and checked the obstinacy of this Malady with
hopes of prevailing.

For the old and feeble sort, they have not that assistance of Nature to
cooperate with the means; besides, the continuance and long impressions of this
disease, habitually indisposing, perverting, and enfeebling the parts affected,
both mandant and recipient; which makes the perfect restoration of such, of
much greater difficulty, and very rarely effected.

To these we may add, that for the most part, the Gout takes up its quarters
with the rich and those that live plentifully, having all things for pleasure,
ease and delight.

Dormit and in pluma purpureoque thoro: and the people thus stated cannot, at
least they will not restrain their appetites or cross their inclinations, and
be observant of, and obedient to the Rules required; abstaining from the things
they love and delight in; but on the contrary, do gratify their senses,
although they suffer for it afterward: and finding the disease not to be
mortal, they choose rather to undergo pain for a time, than deny themselves the
pleasures of their life as they account: and therefore it is, that the poor are
seldom troubled with the Gout, because they fare hardly, and labor much, both
which are great enemies to and opposers of the Gout, giving no place for
reception thereof, or long abode at least, if it chance to lodge there: hence
this disease was called by some (...).

Thus you see, and more at large might be amplified; how the Gout becomes so
triumphant and invincible, having gained the character of Opprobrium Medicorum,
as able to baffle all the designs of Physicians and their Remedies.

But amongst the vain Opinions that are raised concerning the Gout; this is not
the least that alienates the minds of most people from their reason, and checks
their endeavors for help: viz. that it is dangerous to tamper or provoke this
Lion, because some have miscarried, and died by trying with uncertain means and
hazardous Medicines; who otherwise probably might have lived a long time, the
disease commonly not being mortal, but a lingering and torturing sickness. And
farther, it was related to me, that a great person in this Kingdom, a few years
since (now dead) being often and much afflicted with the Gout, his Physicians
told him, that the Gout kept him alive; and if he were cured thereof, he would
dye soon after.

To obviate these objections I answer, and part hereof I grant, that some have
dyed by their endeavors for Cure; and this not so strange, for the like may be
said in all other diseases, that some have dyed by their Physicians, or such as
they entrusted as Physicians, and not solely or chiefly by their disease:
Examples we have had in the most, if not all diseases, the most curable and
facile to be dealt with: so that by unskilful men, improper courses or
designments, and by bad Medicines, or casualties happening by the Patients
folly or their Tenders, many have dyed in the prime and strength of their age,
by endeavoring for Cure in Diseases not mortal nor of sudden danger in their
own Nature, and amongst those the Gout may be reckoned: So that if you will
plead for no Physic, no tampering (as you call it) with the Gout, by the same
argument you may abandon Physic in all other sicknesses; for the adventure is
equal, and the security depends only upon the judgment and ability of the
Physician, and no more hazard in this disease than in another. I say therefore,
in case of the Gout, as also in all other diseases, if you will securely
proceed; take a knowing man well grounded in the Theory, and through paced in
the Practice of this Art; Having a frequent experience in the progress and Cure
of Diseases, and a critical Observator of the Gout in particular; this man you
may as freely trust, and safely yield obedience to in managing a Cure for the
Gout, as you can do to other Physicians, in all cases whatsoever.

Now as for those Physicians (if there be any such so ignorant or fallacious)
that allege the Gout to be any way a Preservative of Life, and pretend not to
cure it for that cause, I must tell them plainly; first, that this is only a
pretense to palliate their inability, and a crafty evasion to shift off the
censure that may fall upon them, for not curing what they ought, and would
willingly do if they could.

Secondly, To show the pretense is erroneous and void of truth; we will search
the Gout and see if there be any thing in it, or appertaining to it, that is a
Preservative of man's life, or conducing to his health and a sound state of
being.

In the Gout there is no pleasure nor recreation either of Mind or Body; both
which are promoters of Health, and consequently prolongers of Life: but on the
contrary, the Gout is attended with a sedentary inactive confinement,
melancholy, pain, watching, and unseasonable sleep, (the consequents and
effects of which are debility ot all the faculties and enervation of strength)
which as these continue longer or more violent, and return more frequently and
often, by so much more is the Patient damnified, both for the present and the
future, and rendered more infirm and liable to the decays of Nature.

But perhaps you will say, this serosity and sharp punging humor, falling into
an ignoble part, and far off from the Vitals, is much better and safer there
than to wander up and down the body which (as it has happened sometimes) may
invade a principal part, and there threaten or cause death: therefore so long
as this humor has a recourse to the Joints, and is not turned off from that
current, the Patient is not in such great danger as otherwise.

To this I reply, That true it is, if there were a necessity that this
Tartarous gouty humor must invade one part or other; better it is that it
passes a safer way, and lodges in an ignoble and remote part; and better it
is that the Physician does nothing than do hurt, or run a hazardous course. If
he cannot eradicate this morbific matter, stop the spring and fountain from
whence it does arise, and where it is generated: or this being too hard and
difficult a work, if he cannot derive the stream and issue thereof to the vents
and outlets that Nature has appointed and framed for a discharge of
superfluous and degenerate humors, but lets them have their course (because not
mortal) to the constant trouble and damage of this or that part in particular,
and consequently makes the whole to suffer sympathically and by consent: such a
Physician either has not a true notion of this disease the Gout, or else he
wants commanding Medicines elaborated by his own hands, exquisite and effectual
to answer the indications that this disease and causes thereof will put him
upon for relief of the Patient: but to pretend that this disease must not be
cured, because it spends or employs the humor in a safe way (so called) is much
what alike (but very unlike a good Physician) as to suffer a man to continue
languishing in a Looseness or Vomiting, because it discharges some peccant
stimulating matter: but in this case, as also in that of the Gout, the
extravagancy and irritation of noxious humors are to be checked, collected and
sent forth by good Medicines, in a placid gentle way, through convenient
ductures and outlets, and not let to continue in a detrimental extravagant
course.

Now concerning the curability and incurability of the Gout, I do own that
some are much more capable of Cure than others, by the nature and condition of
their bodies: and some are not curable, as age and other cirumstances have
reduced them to an incurable state: yet I say, in the worst of cases there are
mitigations and helps, that check and tame the fierceness of the disease,
render it more tolerable and easy: and such Prophylactics or Preventives there
are (with a due Regimen of life) that will keep off the frequency, and retard
the returns of this painful Malady.

Thus much concerning the Gout fixed, or constant to a part: it remains that I
deliver my thoughts and experience touching the Rheumatism or running Gout, so
called; because it shifts from part to part, invading not only the Joints, but
also the membranosum Genus, the Membranes both of the Muscles, Viscera, and
Bones.

Hence it is, that sometimes these pains are external in the Muscles and habit
of the Body: sometimes internal, when the Viscera are assaulted; as the Lungs,
Liver, Intestines, Spleen, etc. sometimes these pains affect the Bones, by
pricking the Periosteum, that Membrane which covers and enwraps the bone.

Some complain of their Arms, others of their Shoulder-blades; some the Bach,
others or at other times the Breast; sometimes the Thighs, and sometimes the
Legs; the humor shifting and moving from one place to another: and this upon
changes of the weather, turning of the wind, and seasons of the year; these
pains do go and come, afflicting more or less: and yet no swelling,
Inflammation, or outward appearance upon the part grieved.

These pains continuing, or frequently infesting, do debilitate and disable the
parts affected; insomuch that some go very weakly, others use their arms but
with little strength, and some the use of their Limbs almost taken away.

The material and continent cause of these fugitive and vagrant pains, is the
same or of the same nature with the former Arthritis or Joynt-Gout: viz. a
tartarous or sharp penetrating serosity that molests these several parts: and
to confirm that this is a serous or watery humor; it makes no Tumor, nor
suppurates, which were it of another kind it would: besides, the mobility and
fluctuating nature thereof, argues it to be of that kind: and farther a
juvantibus we may most rationally conclude so; Transpiration and copious
emission of Urine, and also Purgation that evacuates serous humors, gives allay
and sedation to these fleeting pains.

But why this should be so moveable, and changing its place, the other fixed or
constant to a part, since one and the same humoral matter is the cause of both;
the reason hereof may be this: from abundance of the humor, and for want of
vent; one way not being sufficient to receive and spend it, Nature is
necessitated to find out and break through several ways; that is, by forcing
the Anastomoses, and opening the terminations of the Veins, spewing forth this
punging irritating humor into several parts: and being an unwelcome guest,
hostile and troublesome, the Archaeus or vital principle defending its
Territories (quoad posse) and unwilling to give it harbor, transmits it from
place to place.

This Rheumatism and erratic pains depending upon the same humoral cause with
the Gout, will require much what the same method and Medicines for Cure: as
also such Prophylactics that are proper and fit by way of prevention for the
other, may here be used with the like advantage; and therefore it is not
needful to point out a particular methodus medendi, or peculiar Medicines: only
the Topical Medicines are not of such use here as in the Joint- Gout.

And now I have gone through and briefly inquired into the most, and most
considerable pains incident to several and principal parts of man's Body: it
remains now (as is proposed and promised in the front of this Work) that I
proceed on to the next Stage; viz. Inflammations, and there observe what is
most remarkable, and most profitable to be taken notice of.

Inflammations internal.
BY the common order of causation, Pain precedes, Inflammation follows. To
illustrate and set forth the nature of Inflammations more evidently, and to
avoid confusion and intanglement in our Discourse, we shall distribute our
matter, and place it distinctly under these following Heads.

First, What the word imports, and congruous signification with the nature
thereof.

Secondly, What Parts of the Body Inflammations do usually possess.

Thirdly, The occasional Matter that provokes and sets forward these
Inflammations.

Fourthly, How they arise, and from what Principle or Efficient they are caused.

Fifthly, The Use and Practice that arises naturally from the preceding
Doctrine.

The word Inflammatio used in the Latin, in the Greek is (...) and (...), from
(...) uro, to burn or inflame: in both Languages signifying some extraordinary
and preternatural heat kindled and begun in some part of the Body: and in the
common acceptance of a Phlegmon or Inflammation, is understood thereby a hot
Tumor arising from blood.

But although Inflammations are reckoned among the Tumors, and so accounted by
most Practisers: yet I must take leave to divide Inflammations from Tumors, and
distinguish them apart, as properly so; for commonly they are separate,
although oftentimes conjunct: and the denomination was given a calore, not a
tumore.

By* Inflammation therefore I understand here only a preternatural or
extraordinary heat begun in any part, (as the Etymon of the word imports)
before a Tumor be raised; but by time and continuance Inflammation or great
heat does attract matter and forms a Tumor, and then Inflammation and Tumor are
coupled or complicated together: for as we plainly find external parts to burn
or feel very hot, and to look red; you say then, the part is inflamed, although
no Tumor or swelling appear; so is it internally, the part is fiery, hot or
inflamed, before a fluxion of blood arrive thither to throng the part and raise
a Tumor; so that there are Inflammations without Tumors, and Inflammations
conjoined with Tumors; and here I make Inflammation a distinct Classis, and to
be a gradation or step toward a Tumor, which probably may follow, if not
prevented, as sometimes it does.

And here it is worth our inquiry, to know the reasons why some Inflammations
produce Tumors, and some go off without forming a Tumor: and this is caused
from the difference of the parts affected; and the copious influx, and
contumacy of the material cause to be removed; from the efficacy of means
timely used, or the strength of Nature to relieve her self.

Secondly, We are to take notice what parts of the Body are subject to
Inflammations; and they are the muscular flesh, the Membranes, the Parenchyma
of the Viscera, and the Glandula's: hence it is, that Inflammations as they are
seated in diverse parts of the Body, so are they called by distinguishing names,
from the part affected: as Phrenitis, an inflammation of the Meninges or
Membranes of the Brain.

Ophthalmia of the Eye. Parotis of the Glandule near the Ear. Peripneumonia of
the Lungs. Pleuritis of the Pleura. Nephritis of the Kidneys. Angina of the
Muscles of the Throat.
Now from the part affected you are to observe, that any member the more
nervous it is, by so much the pain is greater; and by how much the part is more
fleshy, by so much the sooner the Inflammation comes to a resolution, or
collection of matter.

In the third place we come to remark the conjunct and material causes of
Inflammations: and they are generated either by obstruction, or extravasation:

Obstruction begets Inflammation when the fluid liquors in the Vessels are
denied their free motion and transition: and this happens when these Juyces are
coagulated, gross or thick, and thereby become stagnant in the smaller Vessels.
Or by compression, when the Vessels are stopped by some adjacent part tumified or
extended beyond its common bounds. Or by an influx of blood rushing into some
smaller Vessels, from whence there is not a ready transmission and passage: for
the venal and arterial Pipes entering into a member are commonly large, but grow
smaller, as they go deeper in, and their ramifications very minute, that they
may soon be overcharged by a turgid blood, more than ordinarily fermenting and
flowing in.

Thus great pain from what cause soever may introduce Inflammation, by drawing
a flux of humors to a part or member, from whence they cannot readily retire or
move forwards. And here you may see how Contusions, Luxations, Fractures, etc.
do occasion Inflammations, if not prevented by care and skill with exquisite
good means.

By extravasation sometimes Inflammations do arise; that is, when either by
plenitude and fullness, or heat and thinness of blood, the terminations or
mouths of the Veins are opened, and some effusion made; which then being out of
its proper place does degenerate and corrupt, and affords matter for
Inflammation. Thus by Ruptures, Punctures and Wounds, extravasated blood is the
material cause of Inflammations.

Fourthly; but matter alone cannot produce an Inflammation (nor any other
disease) being inactive and a dead thing of it self, except some vital Agent
works upon it, forms and moves it: who or what this Agent is, we are to inquire
farther.

Since then Inflammation is not procured by matter alone, nor can it exist only
by matter, there must then be an internal efficient and movent Principle joined
with this matter, that fabricates and generates of this matter an Inflammation.

But understand me rightly: I do not mean that this matter takes fire and is
kindled, as if it were a sulphurous and combustible matter, and so cause an
Inflammation or scorching heat, no such thing: but this morbific hostile matter
stirs up the vital heat by way of irritation, provokes the vital principle to
estuate and wax hot: for from hence does all heat emanare, stream, and issue
forth; whether it be a temperate and natural warmth, or a preternatural and
inflaming heat, both proceed from this fountain: So that hereby you must
distinguish between the occasional matter of Inflammations, and the internal
efficient that does excandescere and inflammare. This inflaming heat arises
from a principle much different from the materia morbifica occasionalis: this
great heat does not rise out of the morbific matter inflamed, but from the
vital Principle incensed.

A Stone in the Kidneys by raising great pain, may cause an Inflammation there;
and this stone is the occasional and material cause thereof; but none can think
that this contains fire in it, or is capable to be inflamed, or to communicate
any heat to the containing parts, save only what it has received from the
vital heat residing in the body. And thus it is in all other cases of
Inflammation, in any part of the body, from what cause soever.

This vital Principle is seated in every member of the body, and does preside
as Governor; and not only for defense thereof, but also to move and act in it
so; as no vital office or function can be performed without the assistance and
power of this internal invisible Agent; nor is there any heat, but what arises
from hence: And this is that which Hippocrates calls the impetum faciens;
Helmont the Archaeus, which I choose rather to call the vital Principle.

When any thing happens out of order in the body, a Vessel obstructed, or some
liquor extravasated, or what else that may disturb and interrupt any member in
its office; soon the vital Principle is affected and concerned therein; and if
the matter be considerable and contumacious, pain arises there: and this pain
is the suffering and anguish of the vital Regent, struggling to resist the
injury, and laboring to remove the impediment: hence the Inflammation and
preternatural heat arising from this vital power.

Fifthly, and in the last place, from the doctrine preceding we are to make
some observations that may be useful for guidance in Practice, and to remark
some pernicious errors that pass undiscerned.

And first, here you must take notice of the affinity between Inflammations and
Fevers: that most Fevers do arise from Inflammations of some particular part,
and are the offspring from thence, or springing from that root. For the quod
sit Practice does affirm it; for rarely you shall meet with any considerable
Fever, but some particular part is chiefly complained of; and as the grief or
pain does abate there, the Fever is remiss and slackens also.

Secondly, you are to note, that Fevers are erroneously defined, a calore
praeter naturam in cord accenso: assigning the Heart to be the Focus where
febrile heat is first kindled, and from whence it is maintained; when almost in
any other part of the body, if an inflammation happen there, a Fever will
certainly follow, taking its rise from thence, not from the Heart: so that the
Heart then suffers sympathically by consent; not idiopathically and originally.
And whereas I said almost any part, intimating thereby, that a slight
Inflammation may be in the small and capillary Veins of short continuance,
which may not communicate a Fever to the whole body: and such inflammations we
see externally planted sometimes, the capillary Veins of the Cutis being
affected calore and rubore, which either spontaneously vanish, or soon yield to
some outward application only.

Thirdly, From the denominations of Fever and Inflammation, you may observe
the parity or near relation they have to each other; for from the Etymon of the
words, they seem to import much what the same thing, denoting only an
extraordinary heat, (...) from (...) ignis, and in the Latin Febris, a ferveo:
(...) inflammatio, from (...) uro.

Fourthly, We shall not depend upon Etymologies, which are allegorical, and
often strained; but inquire into the nature and extent of each, and know what
is meant by the one and the other, and then what difference between them.
Fevers are known, and defined by preternatural heat and effervescency through
the whole body. Inflammation is a preternatural heat of a particular part.
Hence we remark, that Fevers are general Inflammations or inflammations
dilated: Inflammations particular Fevers of a member, thus differing in extent
and latitude: but withal observe the order of causation; Inflammation precedes
and lays the foundation, in this or that part there is the fomes and miner a
morbi: a Fever follows upon the whole body, caused only by consent from thence
and condolency.

Now if all or most Inflammations cause Fevers, and Inflammations so frequent,
as being the certain consequents of great pain, then two things are to be
noted: first, that upon the appearance or discovery of a Fever, you may
suspect an Inflammation couched under it, from whence as the spring, this
Fever does arise. Secondly, that the Cure of most Fevers ought to be designed
and managed so, as respecting and aiming chiefly at a particular Inflammation,
upon which the Fever does depend: sublata causa -- and when a Fever arises
upon this account (as. for the most part it does) then little regard is to be
had to the general Fever, but die stress of Cure lies upon removing the
occasional and material causes of Pain and Inflammation in the particular part,
the foundation of all the rest, which being removed, the depending Fever falls
of course.

Thus all our Discourse tends to make a true discovery of causes; that when
preternatural heat does arise in the body and beget a Fever; we may know, not
only what to call it, but also what to do, by levelling at the right mark.

But by the way I must tell you also, how a Fever sometimes does arise, and
not from Inflammation of a pained part: and that is when some heterogeneous
discordant matter, or some malign and venenate Miasm is mingled or got into the
blood; Nature, which is the vital Principle, raises a preternatural
fermentation and febrile effervescency in the mass of blood, for a purification
and separation of this exotic mixture; and admits of no sedation and rest until
that work be finished.

Fifthly, and from hence you are to be warned of the dangerous and common
Practice in Fevers, by Juleps, Barley-water and other such like cooling
Medicines used to allay the heat; from a great mistake of the rise of Fevers,
and from whence this heat does assurge: for, whether the Fever does depend
upon a particular inflamed part; or a general fermentation of the blood for
purification; in both cases of Fevers, such cooling Medicines are pernicious,
and have killed thousands: for by insisting so much upon them, and aiming to
suppress the Fever by Coolers, (which is not possible to be done) thus
trifling the time away, the opportunity of curing is lost, and the disease
prevails.

The error of these cooling Medicines is apparent from the insuccess thereof;
for never was the thirst of a sick person satisfied by a Julep; but a draught
of good drink, such as the Patients stomach calls for, that is acceptable and
refreshing: so that I say, Juleps are but cold comfort to a feverish sick man;
for these cold Medicines imposed upon the sick, are so far from assisting
Nature to perform the work she is struggling about, that they nauseate and flat
the stomach (which should invigorate the other faculties) damp the power of
Nature contending, and leave her languishing for refreshment coveted in her
natural common drink.

What advantage can there be in a Julep to take off, or any way contribute to
the removal of any matter that is the cause of Inflammation in the Liver,
Spleen, Kidneys, Mesentery, Pleura, etc. any part of the body? truly none; but
that is not all; for besides the doing no good, it does much mischief, in
suppressing the fortitude of Nature, and cheating the poor Patient of that
desired common assistance by drink that would be comfortable. But no more of
this, because I have enlarged upon this point page 27, 28, 29, 30. yet it falls
in here, necessarily to be taken notice of; because Inflammations always
introduce Fevers, which Fever being most obvious and apparent, ingrosseth all
endeavors for allaying that general and expanded heat; but they go the wrong
way to work, even preposterously, beginning at the wrong end.

But now to inform what is necessary to be done, when a pained inflamed part
requires help, take these directions in general, which will be advantageous in
most, if not all particular cases.

First, Examine and consider the nature of the part inflamed, being the part
primarily affected, the foundation of this disturbance; from whose peculiar
structure and fabrication, as also from its office, you will find what are the
usual impediments that molest and disturb such a part, and how it becomes
liable thereto.

Secondly, You are to consider what way this matter is to be carried off (if it
be humoral) and by what means: adapting such Remedies suitable to the condition
of the part affected, and proper for the removal of such a morbific cause.

Thirdly, The Fever that arises from, and depends upon this Inflammation, is
not to biass you, or take you off from any thing necessary to be done, in order
to reduce the part primarily affected, but prosecute directly there, and regard
not the Fever; for as you get advantage in relieving the part grieved, you
will find the Fever to decrease, and totally vanish when that is restored. And
to tell you plainly, I know nothing you can do advantageous for the part
inflamed, that may be injurious upon account of the Fever, if the Fever were
independent, and had no relation to the other.

Fourthly, If blood be the primary cause, or otherwise aggravating through
plenitude, make a depletion; thereby the Circulation will be more free,
turgency abated, and fluxion prevented, at least retracted; for if the cause be
in the Veins or Arteries, most necessary it is to be done; for commonly then a
plethory, grossness, or coagulation gave the occasion of this grief; but if it
an acrid serosity, that lanceth and irritates the tender part, Phlehotomy may
draw off, and make a diversion for a time, until other good means can be
administered, to eradicate or blunt the sharpness of its acidity.

Fifthly, Set open the vents and outlets which Nature has framed, and make
evacuation, to abate fullness, and remove foulness in the whole body, thereby
you will prevent or allay the turgency of ill humors that are apt to ferment
and move upon this disorder; and cut off a supply of morbific matter that may
resort to the part pained, of raise a new disturbance in other parts of the
body.

Here you must procure, and prosecute this intention with Balsamic Abstersives,
the true Cathartics, (not venenous Laxatives the common reputed Purgatives) and
cleanse the lower region of the body; whereby also you will subduct and draw
away from the parts affected. The grosser matter being thus removed and carried
off sufficiently, the remainder discharge by Transpiration, making an apertion
of the Pores, and setting open those imperceptible vents, by the use of
effectual and choice Diaphoretics, thereby to attenuate, rarifie, and scatter.

For outward Inflammations Topical Medicines are applied to the part,
Fomentations, Cataplasms, Unguents, etc to appease and allay: but our internal
cases do not admit of such applications: therefore we are to design otherwise,
and adapt such internal Medicines, and by such operations, as may reach the
morbous matter to remove and transmit it: yet when an Inflammation is seated
near the superficies or extern parts of the body, as the Pleura, the gibbous
part of the Liver, and such like; especially if a Tumor conjoined do appear
also, or any visible extension, then local Medicines may be of good use, and
contribute toward a Cure.

But here by way of caution take notice, That no refrigerating or repercussing
application be made, to repel and drive back from the part pained; for this may
prove of dangerous consequence, as the imprudent adventures of some in this
manner have left sad memento's, to forbid the like practice.

But some may say, How shall we know when any internal part is inflamed,
because neither the eye nor the hand can reach there to discover the disease?
Yes very well; for great pain and anguish continuing in any secret internal
part, and raising a febrile heat in the whole body, does as certainly declare
that part to be inflamed (in the sense before expressed) as any outward signs
can manifest, where seeing and handling does or can adjudge the case.

Sixthly, and in the last place; because Inflammations do arise from, and
depend much upon the continuance of pain; therefore Anodynes or allayers of
pain may be profitable at some times, and in some cases; but warily to be used,
and the times nicely to be distinguished and chosen, as not to displace or put
by a curing Medicine; for no Opiate or Anodyne is curative, but palliative, and
for allaying the extremity of pain, and to give rest only: for pain keeping the
sick from natural and wonted rest, does bring great weakness and lassitude of
spirits. Since pain therefore and long watching enervates and debilitates
Nature greatly; on the contrary, sleep refreshes and restores much, that the
enfeebled Patient then may gain respite from pain, and refreshment by rest;
when the sick is in danger, as being tired out for want of ease and sleep, then
the case calls for Anodynes, and ought to be made use of.

But because Opiates and Anodynes do not remove the morbific cause, therefore
they are not to be insisted upon, or relied on as curing means; but they are to
be used in cases of extremity for mitigation and ease; and at such due times as
not to hinder the operation of any curative Remedy.

Tumors Internal, Scirrhous, Apostemate, and Cancerous.
TVmors may fitly be placed next to Inflammations, because Inflammations are
the foundation or occasion of many Tumors; though Tumors sometimes arise not
procured or cause by Inflammation preceding: but most frequently Tumors grow up
and take their rise from pain; and where pain is, Inflammation (in our sense)
follows of course: and there is much reason for it, because pain and heat does
arise from one and the same principle, as already set forth: and when this
painful inflaming heat continues, you may rationally expect a Tumor (by
fluxion) to follow; if not prevented by good means, to pluck out the spina
morbifica the thorn in the flesh; or Nature so powerful and prevalent to free
her felf.

Tumors have their denomination a tumeo to swell; and the Greek word (...)
fignifies protuberance or expansion; so that by Tumor you may understand a part
enlarged, and increased in bigness preternaturally: for natural extensions are
not to he called Tumors: as the dugs or belly of a woman with child, though
they be extended bigger than ordinary, yet it is natural, or by the course of
Nature.

You are not to expect here a Chirurgical Treatise of Tumors, as if tire Cures
hereof were to be performed by manual operation: but I shall show you some
differences of external Tumors that require such management, only that you may
the better apprehend and judge of internal: for as external Tumors do arise
from internal matter, and present outward; so hidden internal Tumors are
formed of the like matter, and from such occasions much what as the external,
save only some outward injuries that may affect the superficial, and hot the
interior parts: as Contusion, Scalding, Cupping, Vesicatories, etc.

Galen in his Book de, Tumoribus, reckoning up all sorts of Tumors as he
supposed, gives in the account to be sixty one: but Ingrassias in his Survey of
Tumors afterward, adds art hundred sixty five more to them, and gives
particular names: but examining the reason hereof we find the advance of
number, not any way to promote their Cures, but makes confusion and perplexity
in Practice: for this variety is not from any real difference in their nature,
but from some accidental difference between them in appearance; as magnitude,
figure, situation, etc. so that the same in kind is repeated by another name:
therefore this vast number will admit of a great abatement, and the designment
of their Cures much easier and better managed, when all are reduced under a few
general heads, respecting their continent matter, and many joined together
under one name by the union and similitude of their nature.

The difference therefore of Tumors arising from the variety their material
causes, and the modus generandi, are chiefly to be looked it; for from thence is
the designment of Cures more especially bottomed; but with some respect to the
seat or part affected.

The general division of Tumors from their material causes (in the common
received Practice) is sixfold.

First, from Blood, which makes a Phlegmon.

Second, from Choler, which generates an Erysipelas.

Third, from Phlegm, which begets an Oedema. Fourth, from Melancholy, which
makes a Scirrbus.

Fifth, from serous or watery humor, which generates watery Tumors, as
Hydrocephalus.

Sixth, from Flatulency, and this Tumor is called Emphysema, Inflatio, Tumor
flatulentus.

Under these six general Heads are comprised alfo several other subdivisions:
as first, such as arise from the degenerate and depraved condition of these
simple and single humors: secondly, such as spring from the composition and
mixture of the simple humors one with another.

How far I can comply with this specious Doctrine, whether it be not more
notional than practical, and my exceptions against it, I shall not declare now,
in regard time, and the intended conciseness of this Work, will not give me
leave to establish my own opinion, and judgment dissenting in this matter; nor
is it necessary to lay open the intricacy of out design in hand, by debating
and controverting this Doctrine, which relates chiefly to external Tumors and
Chirurgical Practice.

And although internal Tumors are generated of the same matter as external; yet
all these differences (supposed to be true) cannot so nicely and certainly be
adjudged and determined; but indications from thence must be more general and
at large, for dislodging, cleansing, and carrying off any such material cause,
that infests and tumifies a member or part.

Since therefore internal Tumors do not present themselves to the eye, for a
more certain and exact: knowledge; we are to make judgment of them and
determine, from the fabrication and office of the part affected and
complaining; which gives some intimation thereof, what Succus, or depraved and
preternatural matter may reside there: as also from the general constitution
and disposition of the body antecedently disposing thereto: for that Cacochymy
which is predominant in the body, is most likely to be the cause or matter of
the hidden Tumor, except some other circumstances and probabilities do mainly
suggest another morbous matter.

From the nature and condition of the part affected, you may sometimes conclude
the Tumor there to be of such a kind: as when the left Hypochonder is
preternaturally extended, you may rationally judge flatulency and melancholy
feculency to be the matter and cause thereof.

From the signals of a serous Cacochymy, or abounding serosity in the body; you
may conclude, if swelled legs or feet do happen hereupon, the Tumor is hydropic.

For the modus generandi, and the occasional causes of internal Tumors, they
may be reduced to these five.

1. Attraction. 2. Transmission. 3. Congestion. 4. Obstruction. 5.
Extravasation.
First, By Attraction humors are brought to any part, and there accumulated:
and thus pain increasing heat preternaturally (like a Ventose or a Vesicatory)
does attract from the adjacent parts, and procures a confluence of humors to
the part pained, and thereby forms a Tumor.

Now if pain be so apt to beget a conflux, and consequently a Tumor; then you
ought to beware, and often suspect such a product; for as much as pains are
very frequent in most diseases, as before proved. Then also remember upon a
cessation of pain, there ought to be care taken by proper means, for the
recession and dissipation of confluxed matter: and not imagine upon a
presumption, that when the pain is gone, all is gone, and the Patient secure.

Secondly, Transmission procures a Tumor, when the expulsive faculty of some
parts is vigorous and strong to send off any excrementitious matter, and
deposite it upon a weaker, which being not able to expel, it lodges there and
generates a Tumor. Thus the principal and more noble parts have a natural robor
and fortitude, to send off their superfluous and noxious matter, and transmit
it to the inferior and ignoble.

Now there are some parts that are weak by Nature; and some by Accident.

By Nature those are weak that are designed ministerial and subservient, and
therefore liable to transmited matter from their superiors: thus the Glandules
are all weak parts, lax and spongious, apt to receive and imbibe: hence it is
that the Heart transimts to the Glandules in the Armpits; the Brain behind the
Ears; the Liver to the Groins; and the Glandules of the Mesentery are very apt
to tumifie, and are the latent causes of some difficult abstruse diseases. The
Skin also is a weak part and general Emunctory for the whole body, and
therefore many Eruptions and Tumors are there visible.

By Accident some parts are weak; as when by a disease, inordinate living, or
casual injury; some particular part, though strong by nature and original
formation, may be vitiated, debilitated and made feeble.

Thirdly, By Congestion Tumors are sometimes bred; as when a part or member
does not transmute the alimentary supply into its own substance, but suffers it
to degenerate there, and accumulate into a Tumor: or else the expulsive faculty
may be weak, and not able to send off the excrementitious part, which remaining
there may produce the like: or sometimes the fault may be in the nutritious
supply, not being capable of a good transmutation, as in cacochymical and foul
bodies.

Sometimes the relicts of an acute sickness not well cured, by congestion in
this of that part does afford matter to beget internal Tumors; and therefore
after the small Pox, Agues, Fevers, etc. purgation and cleansing ought well to
be performed, else chronic diseases commonly do succeed them, from peccant
matter lodged here or there: and therefore upon such neglects or insufficient
performance thereof, we find commonly big and hard Bellies, or swelled Legs;
some part or other pained, tumified, or hard. And these are the effects of
imperfect Cures, when the morbific matter is only abated, and the storm laid;
but the remainder accumulates by collection and congestion, to produce a
dissease of another nature.

Fourthly, By Obstruction Tumors or extensions are begotten: for when the
current is stopped in any Vessel, and by the Law of Circulation the continent
Succus or humor, is still moving forwards to this place obstructed; the Vessel
or containing part must needs tumifie and swell, as not able to receive and
contain the additional flowing matter in its former dimensions. And this is
apparent to the eye in external parts, which must needs prove the internal: for
a strait Ligature upon the Arm or Leg, does cause the part below the binding to
swell: and for this reason; because the Vessels are obstructed by compression,
that the blood cannot circulate and move on. And the case is the like in
effect, when obstruction of a Vessel is made from coagulation, incrassation or
grossness, or any concreted matter within the ducture or cavity, to obstruct
and stop the stream.

Now obstructions are generally acknowledged to be the frequent causes of many
or most-diseases: and few cases do present in Practice, but obstruction bears a
part, and sometimes the solitary cause; or else obstruction is very much
wronged; for nothing more frequent in Physicians mouths than obstructions; and
yet nothing more seldom mentioned than an internal Tumor: from whence we may
well conclude, it is rarely thought on or not at all suspected. But
obstructions are so familiar and frequent in discourse, that they are little
accounted of, at least not thought to be of any dangerous consequence: not
considering that this obstruction may, and does often (being contumacious)
beget a Tumor; and this Tumor may cause a long and difficult, or dangerous
acute sickness, if not mortal: for the progress may go on still, from Tumor to
Apostem or suppuration, and then plant an Ulcer there: or this Tumor may become
scirrhous and hard; then perhaps cancerous, gangrened, and then you know what
follows next, mortification.

From hence it is very reasonable to judge of the series and course of many
chronic, or long lingering diseases, as also or the acute mortal sicknesses;
most of which do make their progress by these stages, have these commutations
and transition; at last their fatal termination, because this latent train of
diseases was not suspected.

But all this while the Fever was the disease feared, and vainly endeavored
against; and the Patient is said to dye of a Fever, because a Fever did
attend (the life did estuate and was disquieted) in the whole course, and every
transition of the sickness, even to death.

Fifthly, By Extravasation a Tumor is sometimes generated: as when the Vessels
are replete and full causing tension; by thinness, heat, and sharpness of
blood; or a preternatural and turgid fermentation distending the Vessels: the
mouths of the Veins are hereby opened sometimes, and a stillicidium or effusion
of the contained liquor procured; which being lodged out of its proper place,
does corrupt, inflame, and produce a Tumor.

Now concerning the signs of an internal Tumor, they are not only extension and
increase of magnitude; which is apparent when it makes a protuberance upon the
superficies: but also a fixed heaviness or hardness; or pain upon pressure with
the hand, does give great suspicion and probable conjecture of a latent
internal Tumor lying deep and obscure; especially, and by way of confirmation,
when the preceding causes apt to generate Tumors, do concur to strengthen the
probability.

But before we conclude this Discourse of Tumors; something more is to be said,
and that touching a Scirrhus and Apostem, which are comprehended under Tumors;
and do signify only the distict and special condition thereof: and here we
have occasion to take notice of the different state of Tumors, and their way of
resolution, fixation, or translation.

Tumors do either wear away and spend by discussion and transpiration: or they
recede by a translation of matter into another part: or they apostemate and
come to suppuration: or they indurate and become scirrhous: or they tabefie and
corrupt the part where they are seated.

Discussion of a Tumor is the best that can be expected; and this ought chiefly
to be aimed at in Practice: the next to be hoped for and endeavored, is
dislodging of it and removal from a noble to an ignoble part; or to such place
where means can better be used, and more apt for recession, or egression of the
continent material cause: but if the Tumor apostemates, the danger is greater
or less according to the nature and condition of the member or part: if it
indurates, the danger is delayed; but if it corrupts the part, the danger is
greater, and more speedy in execution.

Apostem is that degree or state of a Tumor, when it is maturated or ripe,
which is called Suppuration; the material or humoral cause being then converted
into a Pus or purulent matter: and while this is in fieri doing, all Symptoms
are aggravated, pain, heat, pulsation, tension are greater: but being
perfected, they all decrease again, and the Patient finds ease; but not out of
danger in these internal Apostems; for if it be so seated, where there is no
convenient vent or Emunctory to discharge it, the case is desperate.

As the humoral matter that formed the Tumor was more benign and good, as pure
blood; so the converted Pus or purulent matter from thence, does commonly
answer it in goodness: for of good blood and in sound bodies, the maturation is
more kindly, the Pus white, mild, and not endangering to corrupt the part: but
in foul depraved bodies and malignant diseases, apostemated matter is more
putrid, stinking, and venenous, and does threaten a Gangrene or mortification
of the part: and therefore such internal collections of matter, in pestilential
and malignant Fevers, Venereal Pox, small Pox, and such like, are commonly
mortal.

Scirrhous Tumors are such, as when the continent matter does not maturate and
become soft, fit to break and discharge; but grows hard and fined in the part,
not apt to be discharged or removed by discussion or suppuration. And this the
word Scirrhus imports, from (...) induro.

Tumors in some parts of the body are apt to suppurate, as in the carnous or
fleshy: in other parts, as the Joints, Tendons, and Ligaments, more inclined to
indurate and become scirrhous: and the reason may be this; that those parts
which take their origin from blood, are more prompt and ready to suppurate as
the flesh; but those which take their rise from seminal matter, as the Tendons,
Ligaments, Nerves, etc they are more inclinable to scirrhosity or hardness.

But besides this disposition of the parts affected, there is also, and chiefly
a propension in the congested or influxed matter of these Tumors: for by the
different nature of humoral matter, some is more fluxible and thin,
participating much of serosity, and apt to transpire or be discussed: other
more yielding to a preternatural digestion and suppuration, as the blood that
is pure and good: other inclining to be viscous, coagulated, and consequently
to indurate; as a feculent, grumous, or gross blood, deprived of its serosity.

And farther; besides the disposition of parts, and that of the material cause
inclining to this scirrhosity, there may also come in and be joined with these
a third promoter, which in some cases may be the chief cause, and that is, an
ill method and injurious Medicines, so endeavoring to remove, may thereby fix
and fasten the matter: for thus a Tumor which might probably be dispersed, may
be changed from its own capacity and tendency, and become scirrhous and
indurate: as when constant or great Coolers are administered to abate the
symptomatical or concomitant Fever, the matter of the Tumor is thereby fixed
and impacted;which otherwise might have surrendered unto proper and powerful
Medicines duly used. And e contra, by too great Dryers and Heaters, the thinner
part is evaporated, and the grosser remains; therefore medio tutissimus ibis;
good resolutive transpiring Medicines, taking their turns with the use of
proper Cathartics, is the safe and bed way.

These scirrhous Tumors, although they are not so dangerous for the present,
except they be very great, or cancerous; yet they are the foundation of some
chronic or lingering diseases, which proves very contumacious, and sometimes
incurable, especially if the Tumor be latent and concealed: and Hectic Fever
sometimes takes its rise from hence, which if you think to cure by Emulsions,
Restauratives, and cooling Drinks, you will be much mistaken in your purpose
and endeavors.

These scirrhous Tumors, some are with pain, some without: those that have pain
are more hopeful (except they be cancerous) but those which are insensible upon
pressure, are more difficult, or incurable. Now according to the nature and
degree of depravedness in the continent matter, and from the part affected, so
are these Tumors better or worse to be dealt with. And because these Tumors are
internal and hid from the eye; therefore judgment is to be given of them from
their situation, and from the constitution, with other circumstances of the
Patients body.

But although these scirrhous Tumors are thus difficult to be undertaken and
managed; yet these are not the worst, and they may arrive farther, and to a
more dangerous state: as when Tumors in their variation and degeneration do
turn cancerous; and this is apt to be in such bodies as abound with a black
feculent blood; or a thick blood adust by intemperate heat: and by how much the
blood thus exceeds in this preternatural condition, by so much the Cancer is
completed, confirmed, and the worse: and this supervenes a Scirrhus commonly,
as being an apt previous disposition; (but may happen also without a Scirrhus
preceding, from other Tumors degenerating into Cancers) and therefore in the
Cure of scirrhous Tumors, great circumspection and diligence is to be used,
lest by their delay add continuance, or improper usage of Medicines, these
Tumors do not become cancerous and desperate, as sometimes it falls out so.

Now a Tumor is said to be cancerous, when it turns into a dark reddish, or
livid and blackish color, declaring this transmutation and degenerate state.
The beginning of these Cancers are very small in compass (as those that present
outward do manifest their gradual enlargement) but by time they increase and
grow big, with tumified Veins round about.

These cancerous Tumors may happen to any part of the body, but chiefly and
molt frequently, in the upper parts about the Face, as Nose, Lips, etc. or the
Dugs, and other glandulous parts; also the Womb is thus affected sometimes from
Tumor there bred, venereal or other, degenerating cancerous.

These Tumors sometimes are occasioned from the menstrual suppression in women;
and Heamorrhoidal in men: and when it happens so, those causes are to be
removed with speed.

Great skill and circumspection is to be used in Tumors of this nature; lest
provoking the continent matter, it grow more fierce, eating and ulcerating; and
from a cancerous Tumor, it become a cancerous presiding Ulcer, which is worse:
now the signs of this Tumor inclining to break and ulcerate are, great heat and
pulsation in the part.

The difficulty or incurability of Cancers lie here; for that the cancerous
matter will not yield to digestion or discussion: and this because the part
affected is debilitated and overcome, by this depraved, malign matter, that it
cannot exercise its transmutative and digestive power: nor will this cancerous
matter obey Discussives, by reason of the viscidity and grossness thereof:
wherefore Hippocrates gave sentence, That such are not cured but by section or
ustion: and yet this is not to be done, except the Cancer be small, and in such
a part as will admit of amputation.

If Cancers external are thus difficult to be managed although they appear to
the eye, and are subject to manual operation and tractation; the internal must
be greater and more hazardous, where they cannot be applied unto after this
manner, with convenient Topical Medicines: therefore prevention in time is
mainly to be endeavored when a Tumor is generated, lest it change into this
dangerous condition: for I find by the design of Practisers in the Remedies
appointed, that palliation is sought for, the Cure not hoped for.

The grand intention to be prosecuted for Cure, is to change the condition of
the blood, which does feed and supply this Cancer; so that the antecedent cause
being taken away, the continent will then more likely abate; and until that be
done, this cannot be expected.

The means indicated for Cure of these cancerous Tumors are branched into three
parts: Dieatetic, Pharmaceutic, and Chirurgical: but I shall not enlarge upon
the Indications for Cure, for that these cases are so nice and difficult, as
not to be handled with generals; but from a collation of all the circumstances
attending the Patient, which varies every particular case.

And so I pass from Tumors, to remark their usual commutation and transition
into Ulcers, the next considerable in order to be treated of.

Ulcers internal.
THE Latin word Vlcus is derived of (...), signifying a disjunction of parts
or solution of continuity: but to distinguish this from other solutions of
continuity; an Ulcer does yield a Sanies or purulent matter; so that a Wound
coming to digestion and affording pus, may then be called an Ulcer: and any
part that is gauled, raw, and tender, the covering Membrane being fretted and
eaten away by some sharp humor, or other cause, it styled Excoriation only,
until it produce corrupt matter; and then it is properly called an Ulcer: thus
internal parts are sometimes excoriated, raw, and painful, but cicatrized or
skinned again before it arrive to the degree of an Ulcer. And thus it is most
frequently in the urinary ductures or passages, and sometimes in the Guts; but
such Excoriations are not to be slighted or neglected, lest they beget
Vlceration, as sometimes it falls out so.

By external or outward Ulcers which are manifest to the eye, you may conceive
of internal Ulcers; for they arise from the same causes, and have the same
accidents: but I shall not enlarge upon all the accidental differences that
attend upon, and distinguish external Ulcers, as not so pertinent and necessary
to our subject in hand.

The essential and most considerable difference of Ulcers does arise from their
causes, and from the part affected; which bears the great sway in curing, and
from whence the chief indications are taken; for although in external Ulcers
other accidental differences may be observed and noted; yet in internal Ulcers,
such differences cannot be regarded, as being obscured or hid: so that whether
they be broad or narrow, deep or shallow, fistulous or otherwise, is hot
positively to be said; and if it were known, institution or method of Cure
could not be so varied as external are capable of, by reason these are subject
to manual tractation.

The continent causes of Vlers, are such matter as emane and flow from thence;
and that is of three sorts: Ichor, Pus, and Sordes.

The first is an ichorous or sanious matter, being thin, indigested and watery,
or diluted bloody.

The second is a Pus or purulent matter, of a betted consistence and concocted
thicker.

The third is a sordid foul matter, more thick and glutinous.

The ichorous thin matter usually issues in the beginning of Ulcers, and
denotes indigestion; and also at any time afterward does declare the same,
that the Ulcer is not in a good healing condition.

The Pus or purulent matter signifies the Ulcer to be in a better state of
healing; and if it be white and sweet, these are good signs.

The sordid gross matter does intimate a preternatural heat of the parts
strongly exsiccating, but not healing; for as much as this matter is foul and
stinking.

Ulcers for their manner of generation and rise, may be caused these four ways:
by Erosion, by Frication, Apostemation, and Contagion.

1. By Erosion Ulcers are begotten in any part of the body, when a sharp
corrosive humor does excoriate and eat into the substance of any part: and
being thus injured, is thereby perverted in its office, and self-preservation;
converting that nutritious Succus which comes for its supply, into an ulcerous
degenerate matter, no way useful but to be excreted and voided.

And thus a Phthisis an Ulcer of the Lungs is sometimes generated, from a sharp
Serum invading that tender part: and thus a Dysentery is sometimes begotten,
being an ulceration of the Guts, from sharp excoriating humors: and thus an
ulceration in the Meatus Penis is bred, from a sharp eroding Gonorrhaea: and an
Ulcer in the neck of the Bladder may be planted there, by a sharp gauling Urine.

2. By Frication or attrition; as when any hard, bony, or stony substance, does
fret, raze, and excoriate a part: and thus a stone begets an Ulcer in the
Kidneys or Bladder, and sometimes in other parts of the body.

3. By Apostemation; as when any Apostem breaks and discharges its matter,
an Ulcer is left behind, though the Apostem be gone: and thus are Ulcers
generated sometimes in the Ear, from a preceding Apostem: in the aspera Arteria
after an Angina or Squinance: in the Breast after a Pleurisy; in the Lungs
from a Tumor suppurated there: also in the Liver, Spleen, Womb, or other parts
apostemated.

4. By Contagion or infection: and thus women whole Privities are infected, do
communicate this virulency or venom, and seize the Genitals of their Partner,
from whence venereal Ulcers do arise: and thus men whole Seed is tainted, do
infect sound women, and cause virulent Ulcers in their Privities; which
malignity not being well managed and mastered by skill, and efficacious
Medicines, it spreads, breaks forth, and begets Ulcers in many other parts of
the body: as at large I have set forth in another Tract, entitled, The Mystery
of the Venereal Lues.

Internal Ulcers, though they disappear, yet are known to be by these signs.

First, Pain, which is more or less according to the nature and sensibility of
the part.

Secondly, From preceding causes, as Inflammation or Tumor preceding, whose
Symptoms being allayed and ceased, yet pain remains.

Thirdly and manifestly, From excretion of ulcerous matter, where there is any
ducture or outlet for discharge: by the Intestines, by the Privities, the Nose,
Ears, or Mouth: but where there is no passage or vent, it corrupts the
containing part, and is mortal, except a passage can be made by section.

Ulcers from their causes, their aptness and inaptness for healing; some are
benign, mild, and tractable: others are malign, very difficult, or incurable.

The benign and mild, are such as arise in sanguine sound bodies, and the
younger people, having no ill Symptoms or adjuncts of impediment; the matter of
such Ulcers is a laudable Pus, or otherwise apt for digestion, more yielding,
and readily commanded by Medicines.

Malign Ulcers, and contumacious, difficult, or intractable, are such as are
sordid, fetid, ichorous, unctious, dolorous, corroding, and depascent, of long
continuance, virulent, cancerous, fistulous, cavernous; the products or effect
of malignant diseases, as venereal Lues, Leprosy, Pestilence, etc. in
cachectic habits of body, hydropic, hectic, aged, consumptive and decayed
persons: in principal, and difficult parts of the body; as the Brain, Lungs,
Liver, Spleen, etc. the Spondyls of the Back, and great Junctures.

Since Ulcers are thus various in their nature, from the several conditions of
bodies, and diseases that they arise from, or depend on, and the difference of
parts wherein they are seated; a general Method of healing, and course of
Medicines cannot be instituted and appointed; but every case has its peculiar
complication of circumstances, as directory indications to be remarked, from
whence a designment, method, and adaptation of Medicines is formed, suitable to
the particularity and different case of every individual Patient; and therefore
I have not proceeded to the Rules and Medicines for Curation.

Only thus much I shall note to you, as a grand observable in the Cure of these
Ulcers: That such as arise from some remarkable disease, as Dropsy, Scorbute,
Venereal Lues, or other malign and Cacochymical habits of body; that these
Ulcers are not to be cured until the disease and evil state of the body on
which they do depend, be reduced to a good condition or mediocrity of
constitution: for the antecedent cause which first produced the Ulcer, must be
removed before the Ulcer is capable of healing; because of the continual supply
of peccant matter brought to the ulcerated part: and therefore application is
first to be made there, else all endeavors will be frustrate.

And further, the designment of these Cures, are not to be paralleled with, nor
levelled by, the methods and intentions that the common Rules in Surgery
have laid down; for as much as many of them are erroneously grounded, and
deserve great correction and amendment, which hereafter will be pointed out and
discussed; for we have not room here, nor time now to engage in that
Cantroversie, and must refer it to the next opportunity.

Gangrenes and Mortification.
THE last and worst transition of this dangerous train of Diseases, and the ne
plus ultra in vitality is a Gangrene, being a borderer upon, or next adjoining
unto Mortification, or the beginning thereof.

And although Gangrenes are thus ranked next to Ulcers, and it falls out so
sometimes in the preternatural course of Nature (if I may so speak) yet it is
not always so; but a part may and does gangrene sometimes before it be
ulcerated, for Inflammations and Tumors do gangrene as often as Ulcers: but
Gangrenes are placed in this order after Ulcers, as being the worst and last
morbous state that can come, and beyond this there is no disease: for although
Mortification be set down after Gangrene, yet this is no disease, vita extincta
non est morbus; for diseases are seated in the life, corpus vivens est
domicilium morborum, and where no life is, there is no disease: but
Mortification is posited here as the center to which diseases move; and as
bounds to stop all farther disquisition.

A Gangrene is a corruption and change of a part or member, into such a degree
or state, as beginning to mortify, or is mortifying.

But Sphacelus with the Greeks, Syderatio in the Latin, which we call
Mortification in English; is when a part is perfectly mortified and dead: and
therefore a Gangrene is capable of Cure, but a Sphacelus not, because the part
is dead.

A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus. The external and primitive causes
of Gangrenes are; Contusion, Vulneration, Congelation, Combustion,
Constriction, Poison.

Contusion sometimes introduces a Gangrene by coagulating and fixing the blood
so firmly in the part contused, that thereby the life is suppressed and overcome:
for communication and intercourse with other parts of the body which is
requisite, being thus denied, the life extinguisheth: besides, the coagulated
bruised blood remaining long undiscussed, does putrify, and gangrene.

Vulneration or section sometimes procures a Gangrene, when the vital Principle
is so debilitated, or enormous by the wound, that instead of a good suppuration
and vigorous transmutation, a depraved matter is generated, which corrupts and
gangrenes the part: and thus a small cut of a finger or Toe has gangrened, and
killed the person: but in greater Wounds, the danger is greater, as more
frequently to happen.

Congelation, by extremity of cold, hindering Transpiration, and condensing the
blood, rendering it stagnant in the Vessels, suffocates the life, and gangrenes
the member: thus in extreme cold Countries, people by casualties exposed, have
their Limbs mortified sometimes: and thus a Gangrene is brought upon an
Inflammation or Erysipelas sometimes, by incautelous and pernicious application
of great refrigerating or cooling Medicines, thereby incrassating the blood,
and prohibiting transpiration. And this is very hazardous, though advised and
practiced frequently by some Surgeons in these cases, using cold,
astringent, emplastic Cataplasms; ex farin. hord. bolo armen. album. ovor.
aceto, etc when an Inflammation appears.

Combustion sometimes begets a Gangrene, and destroys the life of the part;
when by neglect thereupon, or improper means used, relief is not duly afforded:
and thus by Cauteries and Caustics sometimes a member becomes mortified. Now
Vstion or great hurt by burning, causes Gangrenes by corrugating, shrinking,
and searing up the Vessels, that they cannot bring supply of vital Spirits and
nutriment to the part.

Constriction or compression procures a Gangrene, by intercepting of vital
communication; so that the member thereby is as it were separated and cut off
from the body, and fountain of life: for the parts are maintained by influxed
rays and streams of vital heat and moisture to the remotest parts of the body,
but being deprived thereof they dye: thus a Ligature drawn strait about the Arm
or Leg, and continuing too long, may gangrene and mortify the part, by
excommunicating it from commerce with, and participation of the general life.

And thus sometimes internal scirrhous Tumors do compress the Vessels and
obstruct them: of this Fabricius Hildanus gives an example of one that a
Gangrene seized both his legs, of which he dyed: the cause was latent, until by
dissection he found a scirrhous Tumor about the Vena cava descending, between
the Reins, where this great Vein divides into two parts to supply both legs.

Poisons, some of them do gangrene by concreting and condensing the blood,
stopping the canals and suffocating the life, as the Venom of a Scorpion and
Asp: others by putrefying and corrupting the blood, or some other part where
they chiefly discharge their venom.

Internal and conjunct causes of Gangrenes are, Inflammation, corrupt,
venenous, or malignant matter, that preys upon, and destroys the vital
Principle; stagnation of the blood, or what else may intercept commerce and
supply from the fountain of life.

The Characters or signs declaring a Gangrene are these: the sense of feeling
decays, the color changes and inclines to be livid or blackish, the flesh
grows flaccid and frigid: but when the Gangrene proceeds on to a Sphacelus or
perfect mortification, these Symptoms then are aggravated, and appear more
eminent; sense is quite abolished, and the part becomes fetid and cadaverous.

Gangrenes are very seldom mentioned in Practice; and you shall rarely hear of
any person to dye of a Gangrene; yet I must believe (and not without good
grounds) that many thousands dye by an internal Gangrene, not taken notice of:
for if the major part, at least a great part, do dye with a high Fever or
Phlogosis, we may rationally then conclude, that a Gangrene is frequently
conjoined as the last Actor in the Tragedy and immediate cause of death: for
Gangrenes do commonly supervene Inflammations where they are mortal: and thus
also Inflammations from fractures and dislocations, often bring on a Gangrene.

And in malignant high Fevers there are sometimes such vibices, marks of
mortified blood, and black mouths, which do strongly suggest a Gangrene within
the body.

And for those that perish by the Plague in so short a time, whose venomous
matter shows it self by Spots, Vesicles, Buboes, and Carbuncles; most of these
dye gangrened.

And many of those that expire by the small Pox, have a Gangrene in some part;
the putrid matter being lodged there, Nature not able to protrude and bring it
forth: and it is very reasonable to assert this; for, if a Gangrene will arise
out of a very small portion of matter extravasated, defluxed, or congested in a
part; then where the whole body abounds with malign putrefaction and overflows
with it, any part thereof remaining within the body, may and does very often
corrupt and gangrene that part.

That our Opinions are not so extravagant and excentric from the Judgment of
all Learned men, as some perhaps inconsiderately may censure: take notice what
Arnisaeus an eminent Physician in Germany, Professor in the University of
Julia, writing to Gregor. Horstius about a Person of Quality that dyed of the
small Pox, queried or rather concluded, that the Liver was gangrened: and
farther says, Verisimile est, multis idem accidere, qui ex variolis moriuntur.

To which Horstius answers by Letter, and consents with his determination in
these words: Cum autem necessario febris sanguinea cum putredine majori
concurrunt, in tali casu facillime fieri poterit, ut praevalente calore febrili
(...) in viscere sanguificationis prae caeteris corrumpatur; inprimis cum,
propter cutem undique pustulis exulceratam and incrustatam, transpiratio and
eventilatio difficilior fit. Si enim inflammationes internae ipsiusque jecoris
juxta communem nostrum amicum Guil Fabr. non raro desinunt in gangraenam, non
video cur non idipsum saepius etiam fieri possit tunc temporis, ubi variolis
undique satis quidem expulsis, gravissima symptomata partium internarum
inflammatarum nihilominus perdurant, eo usque donec aegrum penitus jugulent.
Horst. Institut. Med. Disp. 3. coron. 1. additament.

And in many other acute malign Diseases, either the morbific matter is not
discussed and discharged from the seat of the disease; or else is expulsed
thence into some other, perhaps a remote part, where it corrupts the member,
and extinguisheth the vital Principle, called by some the innate Spirit.

Now concerning the curability and incurability of Gangrenes, take these
instructions before the disease be undertaken, or left for desperate and
hopeless.

First, Consider the duration or time of the disease, the age and strength of
the Patient; for a Gangrene in the beginning is more easy and hopeful, than
after continuance; because it proceeds on commonly and draws nearer to a
Sphacelus, which is incurable: also young persons, vegete and vigorous in
spirit, are more hopeful than others, aged, or worn out by long, or enervated
by acute sickness.

Secondly, Examine into the essence, nature, and rise of the disease, which
will lay open much of the difficulty thereof: for Gangrenes from a primitive
cause, as Contusion, Fracture, Section, Vstion, Caustic, or other erosion, etc.
are more curable and less dangerous, than those that arise and depend upon
antecedent internal causes; for Gangrenes of this sort do declare a cachectic,
depraved habit of body, and that some of the internal Viscera are damnified and
vitiated, from whence a supply of ill matter: and therefore in Hydropic,
Scorbatic, and Hectic febrile bodies; also in malign and contagious diseases,
small Pox, Venereal Lues, Plague, etc. Gangrenes are more desperate.

Thirdly, The part affected or seat of the disease is to be noted: for if a
principal part be gangrened, recovery is very rare; also in the Guts a Gangrene
is mortal, by reason of continual moisture there, and imbecility of these also
in the Vagina Vteri, and Glandules of the body, a Cure is seldom performed.

Now as touching the Cure of Gangrenes, there is not any one Method or
particular Medicine for Gangrenes; but they require such variation of Cure
according to the difference of their causes from whence they do arise, with
respect to the part affected.

And therefore we cannot point out any general course that may be applicable to
this great disease; but indications of particular and special cases must vary,
and will make exceptions against it: So that the rational Physician perpending
and duly considering the nature of the disease and variations thereof, as
aforesaid, with the Symptoms and circumstances attending; must design such a
Method, and adapt such Medicines pro re nata, as may best suit with the urgency
of this dangerous and threatening Malady.

The means required and useful in these emergencies are taken, some from
Pharmacy, and some from Surgery.

Pharmaceutic Remedies are both internal and external, Internal are select and
choice Purgatives, Diaphoretics, and Cardiacs, elaborated and prepared
according to latter inventions, and the best Rules of Art. Topical and external
are, Fomentations, Liniments, and Cataplasms, specificated and appropriated to
these purposes.

Chirurgical helps are, Phlebotomy, Cupping, Scarification, Canteries, etc. and
therefore an expert Surgeon must here be assisting, to perform these
operations.

Now all these various means are not to be used to every person gangrened; but
each case will require some of these, more or less, as the Judgment of a
skilful Physician in this disease, shall determine and appoint.

But if the Gangrene by continuance and neglect; or from acuteness by great
malignity and venenate matter, has proceeded too forward, and draws near to a
(...) mortification; then these means are to be laid aside, and nothing remains
to be done but amputation or dismembring; and that only if the part will allow
it, as Arm or Leg, Scrotum or Dug, -- immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.


And if a separation of this dead part from the living cannot be performed,
there is no hopes of recovery or reduction of that to life again: a privatione
ad habitum non datur regressus. Nor is there any hopes of the Patients life,
for this mortified part will corrupt and mortify the whole.

Where amputation can be performed, this question, as a difficulty, arises
amongst men of Art: Whether Section should be made in the sound, or unsound
part. Some are of opinion, that it should be in the dying or dead part; thereby
to avoid pain, to prevent the great Haemorrhage or flux of blood, and
Convulsion: but I rather consent with those that determine of the other side,
as the most secure way, and the arguments for it are more prevalent, rather to
take away some of the sound flesh, than to leave any of the corrupt and
mortified; for from that root the same mischief may grow again, notwithstanding
cauterizing, or what else may be done.

For a good performance and happy success in this operation being the ultimum
refugium and extreme remedy in this desperate case, there are many things to be
cautioned; some before as previous; others in the doing, and also after
dismembring, to prevent the ill accidents that may attend or follow. But I must
wave those particulars now, until occasion be offered to revise this Work, and
enlarge upon the several Heads treated of.

And since that these diseases now briefly discoursed, have such transitions
and gradations, from bad to worse, and from thence to extremity; it behooves
every one upon suspicion of these latent and obscure Maladies (intimated by
pain) to begin early with them, when with a smaller matter they are capable to
be reduced: but delays and neglects, or improper mistaken courses, do
precipitate the Patient into languishing and difficult, or irremediable
conditions.

Multae aegritudines sua natura sanabiles, aegri negligentia, aut Medici
errore, fiunt incurabiles. The Result of the whole matter, by way of
Recapitulation.
I Have thus briefly delivered to you the most considerable matter relating to
the Subject proposed in the Front of this Work, Pains, Inflammations, Tumors,
Apostems, etc. this frequent and latent progress of Diseases; which might admit
of great inlargements and long discourses upon the several parts, and points
touched upon; but I have only drawn out the chief Heads as a Compendium, easy
to review and retain in memory, whereto many cases and the most principal in
Practice do refer and belong, and may serve as a guide and caution to
Practisers that jog on in the common beaten road, who little suspect this train
of Diseases, and discern not their disguises in the sicknesses they undertake.

Indeed it seems something strange, that these capital diseases, which most
other are dependent upon, or move toward, should not be obvious, and more
frequently the subject of Practice; these being primitive diseases, and a
groundwork, from whence many others are derived and bottomed upon: or else they
are such, as most diseases do fall into, and are the terminations of them.

And it is very reasonable to expect, that both most acute and also chronic
diseases should go in this road, and make their transitions by these stages;
for pain is so general in diseases, and this so naturally leads on the rest, or
at least does signally declare that the rest are coming on; as in page 9, 10,
11, 12. is set forth.

And if you do but consider, that in diseases, both acute, and slow of motion,
there is most commonly a peccant matter lodged here or there, and causes
particular pain in some part; or else this morbific matter is floating in the
Vessels, and produces only some general indisposition, or a febrile estuation
and distemper: if it be lodged in any part by defluxion, or bred there by
congestion, it necessarily diseaseth that part, gives some disturbance by pain,
and will form a Tumor, if not removed and dislodged in due time: but if the
morbific matter be roving and fluctuating, Nature either makes a secretion and
sends it forth by her own strength, or assisted by Medicine; or else it is
transmitted into some ignoble part, where it will not lie dormant long, but
accumulates there, becomes more depraved, and lays the foundation for this
train of diseases: so that either way there is a tendency to bring about this
design, the subject of our Discourse.

In the most malignant sicknesses you may discern some or more of these
confederate diseases as Actors therein, whether small Pox, great Pox, Plague,
etc. for eruptions and superficial Tumors are but internal Tumors transplanted;
at least are the signals of Natures endeavors and strength, with or without
assistance to cast out that morbous matter, which otherwise must necessarily
inflame, tumifie, apostemate, ulcerate, corrupt and destroy the internal parts.

And Fevers that are not malign, they are adjudged salutary and hopeful, when
Nature makes a good Crisis, by Fluxes or Sweats, by Urine, or a Haemorrhage:
and if the morbific matter be not discharged some of these ways, it lodges
here or there, after long floating about, is sequestered and cast into some
recess, Glandule or other ignoble part, where it forms a Tumor, and is the
secret foundation of some chronic disease, or another acute sickness, if not
anticipated or prevented by due course of Medicine: and therefore in the
designment of most Cures, acute or chronic, these are the dangerous rocks you
are to avoid, lest the Patient miscarry here, for want of discerning and
foresight thereof.

The method and drift of our Discourse is, to let you understand, that this
grand Series of diseases is the usual progress in sickness; and by these stages
most diseases do pass on, and have their gradual advance by these commutations,
and thus make their approaches toward death.

Some go but part of this way, such as Providence with good means does shorten
the course, prevents the mischief threatened, and reduces them back into their
former state of health. Some are only pained for a while, it goes off and ends
there: but some are pained in a higher degree, and Inflammation follows
thereupon, but it goes no farther; this febrile inflaming heat is allayed, and
all is quiet again. Sometimes it proceeds farther, and to Inflammation a Tumor
is added; which notwithstanding by due administration of Medicine, this is
dispersed, and the sick reduced to a sound state again: but yet sometimes it
advances farther and into greater danger; as by some neglect, improper means,
or other casualties, that this Tumor apostemates; and then it cannot stop
there, for this must break, and then an Ulcer will follow of course: this
Ulcer, if not of a very malign nature, or very ill seated, is yet curable, and
the Patient may do well and recover, by care and skill of the Physician, and
tractability of the diseased: but else this does corrupt and mortify the part;
and then there must be dismembring (if capable) which is hazardous and
doubtful; or mortification of the whole will soon follow, which is certain.

Thus you see some go half the way; some but a quarter; and come off well:
others that are engaged in a fatal sickness, must go through and finish the
whole course by these gradations, or else per saltum; although they may step
over, and miss some of them, yet they do arrive at the period of mortification.

I have now finished what I intended briefly upon this Subject, having given
you a prospect of this secret and lurking train of Diseases; discovering them
in their causes and disguises; under what distempers they commonly are veiled
and obscured: their signal distinguishing Characters: their dependence and
complication: their manner of commutation and transition from one to another:
the Indications belonging to each state and gradation, prompting a designment
and method for redress, to obviate these dangerous and growing evils.

Of Fontanels or Issues, and Setons: Showing the right Use, and true Effects
thereof.
BY the course of Nature, humane Bodies are nourished and maintained, by a
continual supply of necessary food daily to be received in; which before it be
assimilated and incorporated into the substance of the body, this Aliment must
undergo several transmutations and digestions: in which previous disposition
and gradual preparation for nutrition, there is a separation made, the
nutritive and useful part, from the excrementitious and unnecessary: the
defecated utile part designed for aliment, is still conveyed from one digestion
to another, for a farther elaboration, until it has received the complement
and full perfection intended by Nature; the excrementitious and inutile part
separated in this course, is transmitted and received by sinks, channels, and
ventholes peculiarly appointed and framed for such conveyance and discharge out
of the body, as the Guts, urinary Ductures, Nose, Ears, Pores of the Skin:
which passages, if at any time obstructed and stopped, the detriment and sensible
damage soon confirms the necessity of their use and office.

And as Nature has thus appointed and framed in the body these Vents and
Outlets for the daily discharging of excrementitious and superfluous matter,
which else would deprave and corrupt the body, suffocate and stifle the life,
if not in some measure duly evacuated: in imitation therefore of Natures
contrivance, Art has invented Fontanels and Setons as Ports and Vents, to be
placed here or there, (as the variety of occasions require) to supply Natures
insufficiency and inability to help her self in the discharge and emission of
superfluous or depraved matter, which produces various diseases and Symptoms,
according to the several proprieties of their nature and degeneration; or from
organical difference, and peculiar offices of the parts they invade and infest.

And having such artificial passages of egress set open, by which Nature finds
her self alleviated and disburdened thereby; does daily transmit and send any
exuberant morbific humors to this new Outlet as to other common conveyances for
excretion, by her own institution and fabrication.

But for a fuller information and satisfaction in the use of these Fontanels
and Setons, we shall consider

First, What these are, and the manner how they are made. Secondly, What matter
is usually discharged and evacuated thereby. Thirdly, For whom and in what
cases they are beneficial. Fourthly, The places and parts of the body where
they are to be set. Fifthly, The due ordering and dressing of them; with
observations upon their various conditions and accidents. Lastly, The Time
convenient, and signs when to close them safely, with the circumstances thereto
belonging.
Vesicatories, Cupping, Cauterizing, and Scarification are used upon emergent
occasions for a more speedy and present help, and do show their effects sooner:
but Issues and Setons are planted upon a future expectation, and their effects
are matter of time, and therefore they are continued longer; and because they
are used sometimes by way of precaution, therefore they are designed to be of
continuance and constancy.

Fontanels are so called from Fontinella or Fonticulus; because, as a Spring,
they send out their moisture continually: and they are also called Issues, from
such issuing forth.

A Seton in Latin Setaceum, is so called, because that which was drawn through
the Seton, and remains to keep it open, was made of hair; but now we commonly
use silk.

Issues and Setons are used for the same purposes; but Setons having two
Orifices, and by drawing the silk to and again, do cause a greater discharge of
humors, if the morbific matter be brought to the superficies, as in cutany
affects: but these being more troublesome than Issues, they therefore are
seldomer used. Fontanels are made by Section or Caustic; but Setons are always
made by a perforating Instrument; which being well known to the Surgeon, I
need not say more.

For the nature and quality of humors issuing forth, they are diverse according
to the various disposition of bodies diseased or sound: such as the body
abounds with and is superfluous, such is transmitted thither for emission. And
that the humor evacuated is not good and useful for the body, appears by the
concomitant signs manifesting the nature of it; itching, pricking, sharp pain
about the place, Inflammation and spongious proud flesh rising, in some more,
in others less; which are not signs of a natural good humor, but a hot,
fretting, sharp, preternatural humor flowing thither, degenerate and corrupt.
Also any extravasated humor proceeding from the Veins and Nerves, does move and
flow thither; sometimes ichorous or serous, and sometimes bloody: And such
humors as were wont to resort to, and infest any infirm part, an Issue well
placed does intercept and evacuate: and although the matter that issues forth
is little to behold; yet because this evacuation is constant, it amounts to
something considerable.

From hence we may understand for whom, and in what cases these Fontanels are
beneficial.

For corpulent and plethoric bodies; such as feed high, and live a sedentary
inactive life, whereby a liberal and free Transpiration is restrained, Issues
may be good for them by way of precaution; for they are in danger of some
sudden disease.

For several diseases of the Head, idiopathically affected; Convulsions,
Vertigoes, Pains, lethargic and sleepy disposition, sore Eyes, etc. Fontanels
or Setons may be used with benefit.

In cachectic depraved bodies, and diseases from putrid humors; Issues make an
abatement of the morbous matter, and give some mitigation of the effects.

For Revulsion, Derivation, or Interception of a humor injuriously resorting to
an eminent or an infirm part; Issues are advantageous to alter the course and
current thereof.

For erratic pains, cutany defedations or eruptions, and Tumors in any part;
Fontanels are beneficial.

In most chronic diseases, that give time and liberty for the use of various
means, a deliberate way of Cure, and gradual spending of the morbific matter;
Issues do contribute assistance herein: but in acute diseases that require
speedy help, they are not a proper Remedy.

But although these Fontanels are of good use in the cases aforesaid; yet they
are not to be relied on as curative Remedies; that is, they do not eradicate a
disease, because they do not apply to the spring where it does arise; but they
give vent, and turn the current of a humor this way, or that way, that it shall
not overflow to do hurt other ways. They minorate and lessen the morbific
matter, and abate the extravagant productions and growth of a luxuriant humor,
and are but remedia a posteriori: So that these Issues do not hinder, must not
justle out the use of good Medicines that must take away the antecedent cause,
and radically cure; by applying to the fountain and rise of a disease, the part
primarily affected and deficient in office, that is the original cause of any
producted noxious matter.

For the right placing of Issues, that they may prove advantageous for the
purposes intended; you are to consider whether the case requires a general
evacuation only, or revulsion and evacuation, or derivation and evacuation. If
only a general evacuation answers your intention, then set your Fontanel in the
left Arm: but if for revulsion of a humor, it must be remote from the part
affected or complaning; but if derivation be most convenient, then the Issue
must be near the part affected. Sometimes an Issue is placed in the part
affected, to empty and evacuate a morbific humor lodged there.

Secondly, Having thus determined the part or member; you are then to choose a
fit place for the Issue, observing diligently the position and motion of the
Muscles, else your Issue will not be so beneficial nor lie easy: for if it be
set upon, or too near a Tendon, or in the body of the Muscle, the motion and
attrition of the Muscle will molest and disturb it with pain, and the
evacuation will be but little; therefore you must place them in interstitiis
Musculorum, in the place or distances between the Muscles, where the
extravasated humors are most frequent in their motions and perambulations: and
therefore this operation is not rashly to be attempted, but considerately to be
performed by good advice, and a skilful hand in Anatomy.

Fontanels being thus appointed for several purposes and cases, will require a
different situation, some in one part of the body, and some in another. For
diseases that are seated in the Head, Fontanels or Setons may be placed in the
hind-part of the Neck: but because they appear more in sight there, and also
are troublesome, Issues may with the like benefit be set inter Scapulas, between
the shoulders, one of each side the Spine: or else in the Arm between the two
Muscles Deltoides and the Biceps, about four or five fingers breadth below the
shoulder-joynt: and this is the most frequent place, because the Patient may
dress this Issue without help.

But Fontanels in the Back do not only contribute help to infirmities of the
Head, but also they are beneficial for Arthritic or Gout-pains, by intercepting
and evacuating the morbific humor that tends toward the Joints: also Fontanels
thus placed, do divert and turn off a defluxion or current of humors that
invade the Lungs; and therefore such as are troubled with Coughs from a
destillation of Rheum into the Breast, and are inclining to be consumptive,
will find benefit thereby.

In the Groin Issues may be set for diseases of the Liver or Spleen, observing
the rectitude of parts; the right side for the Liver, the left side for the
Spleen: this place also is convenient for derivation of the morbific humor that
causes Sciatica-pains, and pains of the Back toward the lower end of the
Spine, and about the Loins. The Glandules in the Groin are appointed to receive
superfluous and excrementitious humors, which being readily discharged again by
Issues, the current of morbific matter will then more freely resort thither,
and exonerate such parts adjacent as are infested and oppressed therewith.

The Thigh and Leg also are places for Fontanels, to make a revulsion of humors
that molest and injure the superior parts; and also may serve for a general
evacuation. In the Thigh an Issue is usually placed a little above the Knee, as
being most fit there for a binding to keep on: as also in the Leg a little
below the Knee, the inside of the gartering place.

The Issue being made, whether by Caustic or Section, the orifice must be kept
open with some pellet; for which commonly the largest sort of Pease is made use
of, and so continued, except some occasion by alteration or condition of the
Fontanel causes variation; and then sometimes little balls are made of
Ivy-wood, Gentian-root, Orris, or Hermodactyls, etc. as the case may require.

The first dressings of the Issue for two or three days a digesting Plaster is
to be laid on; afterward an Ivy-leaf may be used, which attracts a serous
humor, and provokes the Issue to run; and over this is laid a thin paper: but
for a constant wearing and common use, a piece of varnish or oil'd cloth, such
as the coverings or riding Hat-cases are made of, is very commodious and easy
to provide; very necessary for journies or voyages, where the other is not to
be had; and this you need to change but once in a week or more, wiping and
turning it every dressing.

For the due ordering and keeping of Issues, you are to observe the times of
dressing: such as run sparingly or but little, once in 24 hours is sufficient;
but those that send forth matter more freely and plentifully, dress them
morning and night: that is, to take out the Pease, wipe the place, and put in
another.

If the Issue fills up at the bottom, and makes the Pease to start, then lay a
Groat upon the place next under the binding, which will keep in the Pease, and
continue the Fontanel deep.

If the brim or edge of the Issue rise high with proud flesh, sprinkle a little
powder of burnt Alum upon it, for one or two dressings, which will bring it
down even with the Cuticula.

When your Fontanel abounds, and runs much with a sharp, or stinking ichorous
humor that excoriates round about the Orifice, and causes pain; to abate and
take off the antecedent cause, you must purge sometimes with a proper and good
Medicine: avoid also intemperate, or often drinking between meals; be sparing
in your diet, especially at nights, and keep seasonable hours for bedtime.

When you desire, and the case requires an Issue to evacuate more; enlarge the
Orifice and Cavity thereof, by putting in pellets bigger than pease, as
Horse-beans; and if that be not sufficient you may put in two.

An Issue sometimes at the first making will not run well; the morbific matter
being accustomed to frequent other places, and having not found this new
vent-hole: you must then wait with patience for the desired effect, and use
such means as hereafter is prescribed for a dry Issue: but if after six months
you find not some reasonable discharge of matter here, let this Issue heal up,
and set another in some place else, where the humors may more freely resort.

If an Issue runs but little, and begins to grow dry, as sometimes it happens
so; then put in a pellet made of Ivy-wood, Orris-root, Gentian, or Hermodactyl.

When your Fontanel is inflamed round about, by reason of Plethory or a febrile
turgid blood causing extravasation and fluxion about the orifice; then apply
Emplastr. e mucilaginibus to the place; but if it continue pertinaciously, and
threatens farther mischief (as sometimes a Gangrene has happened hereupon)
then bleed and purge, which will empty the Vessels, retract and give room for
retirement, and is the best way to prevent danger.

If a Fontanel by time shifts its place, and settles lower, as sometimes it
does in the Arm or Thigh, and comes too near the Juncture; then you must suffer
this to close or heal up, and another must be made higher in the proper place
convenient.

The closing or healing up of an Issue, not substituting another elsewhere, is
warily to be done by advice, else you may run a hazard and be in danger
thereby; for some upon this account have lost their lives: for Nature having
found such a convenience and help, does expect and requires it to be continued,
until the occasion be otherwise prevented, and cause removed by Medicine, or
Nature better able to discharge and free her self by the Emunctories and
outlets of her own appointment. Now if prematurely and unseasonably, this
artificial passage be denied and stopped up, there being cause for the contrary;
the confluence of humors then meeting and gathering at the place, regurgitates
back again with united force and greater current; at which Nature being
surprised unexpectedly, and having made no provision to secure her self from
such a Reflux, the same preternatural Symptoms and ill affects, against which
the Issue was first appointed, or rather much worse, will ensue thereupon.

Before the closing up of an Issue, these things are to be considered: the
cause for which it was appointed; what effects, alteration or abatement of the
infirmities since; the age of the person, whether in youth, strength of Nature,
or declining years, and what state of health the person has for some time
enjoyed, and is now in: which are to be adjudged and determined variously, as
particular cases and their circumstances collated do suggest: but generally the
body is to be accounted in a better or worse condition, as the humor issuing
does appear: ichorous, sharp, bloody, and sordid matter, smelling strong or
stinking, much in quantity, declare the body to be cacochymical and foul, the
Juyces depraved and degenerate, and require the Issue to be continued: but the
matter issuing white, reasonable thick, sweet, little quantity, not sharp or
painful, nor causing Inflammation about the place; these are good signs, and
show soundness of body, the nutritious Juyces to be in their natural condition,
amicable and friendly to the body, and permit an Issue to be healed, caeteris
paribus: but withal let due Purgation succeed by intervals, and a spare diet
for some time.

London, from my House in Wine-Office Court in Fleet Street.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed and Publish-by the Author.
Morbus Polyrhizos and Polymorphaeus.
A Treatise of the Scurvy: examining the different Opinions and Practice of the
most solid and grave Writers, concerning the Nature and Cure of this Disease:
with Instructions for Prevention and Cure thereof. The fourth Edition. By E.
Maynwaringe Dr. in Physic.

Tabidorum Narratio.
A Treatise of Consumptions: Scorbutic Atrophies, Tabes Anglica, Hectic
Fevers, Phthises, Spermatic and Venereous wastings: radically demonstrating
their Nature and Cures from vital and morbific Causes. By the same Author.

The Mystery of the Venereal Lues.
Gonorrhoea's, etc. disclosed: comparing the dissenting Judgments of most
eminent Physicians hereupon, and the various Methods of Cure, practiced in
Foreign Countries. Resolving the Doubts and Fears of such as are surprised with
this secret perplexing Malady. By the same Author.

Vita Sana and Longa.
The Preservation of Health, and Prolongation of Life; proposed and proved in
the due observance of some considerable Precautions, and daily practicable
Rules relating to Body and Mind, compendiously abstracted from the Institutions
and Law of Nature. By the same Author.

Medicus Absolutus', (...).
The complete Physician, qualified and dignified: the Rise and Progress of
Physic, Historically, Chronologically, and Philosophically illustrated:
Physicians of different Sects and Judgments, charactered and distinguished: the
abuse of Medicines, Imposture of Empirics detected, etc. By the same Author.

Praxis Medicorum Antiqua and Nova.
The Ancient and Modern Practice of Physic examined, stated, and compared: the
Preparation and Custody of Medicines, proved the Physicians Charge and grand
Duty, etc. By the same Author.

Sold by the Booksellers.


