Tutela Sanitatis. SIVE VITA PROTRACTA. THE Protection of long Life, and
Detection of its brevity, from diaetetic Causes and common Customs.

Hygiastic Praecautions and Rules appropriate to the Constitutions of bodies;
and various Discrasyes or Passions of Mind; daily to be observed for the
preservation of Health and Prolongation of Life. WITH A Treatise of Fontinells
or Issues.

Whereunto is Annexed BELLVM NECESSARIVM SIVE MEDICVS BELLIGERANS THE Military
or Practical Physician Reveiwing his Armory: Furnished with Medicinal Weapons
and Munition against the secret invaders of life; fitted for all persons and
assaults; with their safe and regular use, according to medical art and
discipline

By Everard Maynwaring Doctor in Physic.

Toga conuenit armis
ET Bellum gero, pro bono pub lico.
LONDON Printed by Peter Lillicrap. And sold by S. Thompson Stationer at the
Bishops head in St. Paul's Churchyard: T. Basser Stationer under St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet-Sreet. 1664.

To His Renowned Highness RUPERT, COUNT PALATINE of the Rhene, Duke of
Cumberland, Knight. of the Garter, etc. Health, Happiness and long Life.
AS it has been the Custom of past Ages to prefix some Eminent Personage in
the Front of their Works, partly to show a respect to Dignity and Honor, and
to reverence the Excellency and illustrious Eminency of the Person; as also
their peculiar exemplary Merits and Endowments suting with, and favoring the
Treatise: I am hence imboldened in this Dedication to set Your Highness a
Patron, as you may be a Pattern of temperate and regular living. Health and
long Life, two great desiderable Enjoyments, the one a step to the other, and
both acquired (by the course of Nature) in the methodical and regular
observance of Diaetetic Customs.

And since the Endowments and Faculties of the Mind, are much disposed and
Biassed, heighthened and abated in their operations, by the Temperament and
Constitutional Changes of the Body; and that also by a seminal power and virtue
from Parents, the ill effects and products of irregular and a methodical living
is implanted and charactarized in their offspring; Therefore the regular
tuition and government of the Body is of great concernment to all; but more
especially to such, who more eminently are serviceable in a Kingdom, and
constituted as Pillars of Honor to support and bear up the spreading Fame and
Renown of our Nation for Heroic Worthies: That we may not untimely be deprived
of such, nor of our hopes in their Noble and Illustrious succeeding Progeny.
And as a Duty complying with my nature, the propagation of Honorable renowned
Families, and preservation from a degenerate Issue, by praecautions and wholesome
Rules, is much intended by these Endeavors.

I now crave your Highness acceptance of this small Offering, the Fruit of my
Study and Labor; which may serve as a Directory in the daily use of those
requisites necessary to being and well being: In the regular course of which by
a Decree in Nature, is promised Sanity, length of days, and juvenile vigor;
that as your Highness is eminently placed in Dignity and Power, your natural
Endowments also and personal Abilities, may not be clouded with the untimely
defects of Nature, nor impedited in the full fruition and free enjoyment of
Temporal Happiness; which shall be the constant wishes and desires, as hereby
it is the endeavors of

Your Highness most humble Servant Everard Maynwaringe.

Literato Philiatro Lectori Salutem.
PYrrhus Rex, deorum in templo immolaturus, hoc unum (...) tanquam
exoptatissimum a diis immortalibus petebat. Inter omnia namque humano generi
chara ac utilia corporis sanitas post animae salutem, in praetio ab omnibus,
prae omnibus bonis, maxim habenda est. Quippe quod ea vacillante ac labante,
nec animae functiones, nec corporis membra, ad munia sua rite disponuntur, sed
vel fractis viribus fatigata succumbunt, vel more indebito prave and remiss
operantur. Frons hilaris and Serenus in Severiorem maestumque transit and
indies deflorescit formosa juventus: Honores porro and divitiae, splendida illa
fortunae bona (amissa sanitate) ingrata ac seposita parvi penduntur: Voluptates
and deliciae qualesecunque solitae, injucundae and exoletae transeunt. Quae cum
ita sint, omni studio and labor sedulo incumbendum, utquantum naturae viribus
detur, vel artis ingenio excogitari possit, hanc vitam in multos annos sartam
tectamque tueamur. Et licet ex rei natura vitae perennitatem non expectamus eo
quod potestates and causae vitales a principiis facile inuicem dissidentibus,
Et sese mutuo destruentibus dependent; morborum saltem occasiones and
incursiones saepius praecaueri, juventutis efflorescentiam, vigorem nativum and
viva citatem diutius conservari, and majori circulo vitae cursum peragi, nullis
naturae legibus repugnat.

Porro cum vitae nostrae scintilla variis obiciatur injuriis, adeo ut facili
negotio praefocari and extingui possit; and cum nihil in toto terrarum orb hac
vita salubri suavius obtineamus; nullis nec impensis, nec curis, nec praeceptis
parcendum, quantum in nobis, and naturae potestati concessum, a diminutione and
extinctione quam diutissime conservare and protahere valeamus. In hunc finem
sanitatis hanc tutelam and vitae praesidium juxta nuturae normam and leges
artis concinnatum, nulli non obtemperanti profuturum puto: opus non minus utile
sanis, quam aegris necessarium; viuere nam sanos docet, aegrotos valere. Prima
pars been vivendi regulas tradit, quo sanitas praesens diu conservetur; altera
autem tuto medendi, quo amissa cito, paucis, parvo recuperetur. Habes (lector
benevole) instituti mei rationem, and operis divisionem: multa me reliquisse
fateor studiis futuris, and me mihi satis nondum fecisse; in posterum vero, and
politiora haec and plura edita fore curabo. Interea hiscefave and fruere, ut
sanitatem siquando amissam quam primum restituas, presentem feliciter tuearis.
Jnde proemium hoc maximum multis ut prosim, valde quaero. vale. dat. Londini 6
calend. Octobr. An. Dom. 1663.

Imprimatur

Sept. 25. 1663.

M. Franck S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo P. ac Dno. Dno. Archi-Ep. Cant. a
Sac. Dom.

The Introduction.
THe scope and intention of the Medicinal Art, at which every good Physician
collimes and aims at, directs to these two marks; Preservation of the sound,
and Restoration of the Sick: and Janus-like he casts a double Aspect; to the
healthy for their continuance; to the sick for their recovery: nor is he less
concerned and rejoicing in natures prosperity and triumph, then subsidiary in
her adversity; but shows the highest friendship in her declensions and lowest
ebb. And having proposed such a Pattern for my imitation, I have drawn the
ensuing Work according to this examplar; which is presented to you now as a
rough draught from the first hand, and shows you only the lineaments and
proportion of the intended piece; but coming over it again by a reveiw, with
the second hand, as I purpose at my better leisure and vacation from
disturbance; I hope something of perfection may then be superadded, and the
life appear, which these dark lines do now but shadow forth; and what I have
touched but lightly, and unbratically exhibited to your view, shall more
clearly and fully be delineated in the next impression, in the interim take
this as the earnest of what I intend.

The present work is divided in two parts; The first advises and cautions the
Sound; the latter directs and assists the Sick: That I may not seem less a
friend to health, then an assistant in sickness. The former part is
diaetetical, and prescribes laws to govern the healthy; and rules out the
pleasant paths of health for them to walk in, that in the darkness of unadvised
precipitate ignorance, they rush not upon the ruin of a well tempored body,
and discompose the harmony, and integrity of natural, vital and animal
faculties, which by natures course might continue much longer in their vigor
then the common age, if not by folly and wilful erroneous practice, violently
disordered, debilitated and brought to untimely periods.

And that you may knowingly the better suite all your actions most proper and
concordant with your own body and peculiar nature; your temperament and
constitution by certain characters and signs is discovered, thereby you may so
order and govern your self rationally and fitly, as each temperament
particularly requires, and distinctly and plainly is prescribed. And by
diligent observation you will find, in the course of life, your body to change
and vary much; sometime to be Phlegmatic, sometime Choleric, another part of
your life Melancholy to he predominant; as your condition of life, Diaetetic
customs, and progress in age, will dispose and alter your constitution; which
the peculiar figns of each prevailing humor will demonstrate and evidently
show. Those duly marked and the Hygiastic Rules justly observed, the age of
man would be extended to a third part longer, many diseases avoided, and scarce
known which are now most obvious and frequent.

But such is the folly and wilful error of the most, being prodigal of their
lives and incautelous* nothing regarding what conduces to health and long
life, but promiscuously follow and elect this or that, after the dictates of an
irrational and sensitive desire, To gratify the present appetite in trivial
and vain satisfactions; thereby purchasing shortness of days, accumulating
and adding one distemper to another, debilitating one part after another by
such irregular and intemperate practice, until the body become a Hospital of
diseases, so complicated and contraindicating one another, that a College of
Physicians is but sufficient to consult the restoration, if any for such a
person; when perhaps as yet he has scarce numbered half his days of the usual
age of man. But yet, the crime were less if only to themselves the prejudice
did extend, but also to posterity their diseases are propagated; the children
having impressed upon them, and radicated in the principles of their nature,
the seminal power and productive virtue of inordinate, irregular, and
intemperate living of their genitors and progenitors: that the children may
bear witness to the following age, the vice and folly of their parents and
praedecessors, recorded and characterized in them.

But whosoever desires to live long, to see their Childrens children, to
preserve their youth, strength and beauty, to be free from molesting pains and
loathsome diseases, to preserve their senses and enjoy the perfections of mind
to the extremity of age; let them conform and be obedient to the Higiastic
laws and rules herereafter prescribed; and they may expect what is here
proposed for their reward. Nor shall I exact and require of you an irksome
strictness or Lessian preciseness to eat and drink by weight and measure: but
a reasonable observance, suitable and well agreeing with a sober rational
person, not restraining convenient liberty and the lawful pleasure of life. Nor
can a regular course of life be thought troublesome as a difficult and hard
restraint, but most pleasant and free, except to those accustomed to the
contrary; and the leaving of those ill customs is the difficulty, but the
rules enjoined be facile and easy to observe.

Non quia difficilia sunt, multa non tentamus;
Sed quia non tentamus, difficilia sunt.
And having once acquired a good habit and constant use, to return to an
irregular intemperate living, would be a far greater burden and irksome, if
enjoined and imposed, then the declining and deserting a destructive course,
for a laudable wholesome practice, most consonat to a rational creature,
experto Creed --

Qui medice vivit, sine medicis diu vivet:
Qui non medice vivit, cum medicis saepe, sed non diu.
The second or latter part of this Book is therapeutical, containing safe and
wholesome medicaments for the sick and infirm; briefly showing their virtues,
aproppriation use and doses, but reserving to my self their composition and
ingredients, which although expected and desired by some yet for sufficient
reasons I thought best to conceal. First because they are the arcana's of the
medicinal Art, and ought not to be divulged to any but the sons of art, who
make it their business and study after such inquiries. Secondly, I write not to
Physicians, but to those who stand in need of such, their advise and
assistance; else my pen had run in another dialect, and the subject, matter
some novelty's to present. Thirdly, I will not undertake to teach you to be
Chemists, or the Apothecaris art, and you must be knowing in both, or these
medicines will avail you little. Fourthly, least the medicines should be
abused, by ignorant pretenders to skill, endeavoring to make them, of which
they are not capeable, and so defame good medicines, prejudice the author, and
those that shall use them. And farther, medicines does not belong to you, of
other employments, professions, trades, or who ever not authorized in the
faculty; this belongs to the Physician to know and appoint, as his propriety,
and you to have the benefit and use of them, nor ought any to challenge the
making of medicines as his right, but as subordinate, a servant of Physicians,
to do the toyling part and servile work that belongs to it. And here I much
admire how the trade of medicines first came up,: that a Physician should be so
very strict and exact in knowing the state of his patient, not trusting to the
fallible insufficient relation of another, but must view and examine the
patient himself: Yet the remedy which is the main, that conflicts with the
disease, wherein if there be a fault, the Doctors learning is of no effect;
this is committed to the care, skill, honesty of others, their servants and
boys, what reason is there for this? but when Physicians were few and scarce,
practice very great and abundant, having not time enough to visit all their
patients and take their fees; Neglected medicines, threw off that care as a
burden, and relied upon others, from whence has sprung not a few
inconveniences, and prejudice, to Physicians as well as the sick; Which I
forbear to mention. And since medicines is become a trade, it is a trade of the
greatest and most general concernment I know. And I must say, an error, mistake
or abuse in the medicine is far greater and more dangerous, then a deficiency
or error of the Physician in his judgment of the Patient. For a good medicine
is not so tied up and restrained to one disease, But it shall operate for good
in many others, (seasonably given in due quantity) so that if a Physician do
not so exactly determine a right concerning the Patient; yet if the distemper
he imagines, have but an affinity and proportion with that which really
afflicts the Patient, and he gives a proper medicine according to his own
determination, his medicine shall prevail and succeed well. But an adulterate
bad medicine, though given by the most skilful hand and deliberate
consultation, shall have bad effects: and therefore I may affirm, that a
Physician of ordinary parts, with extraordinary curious medicines, shall
perform more and greater cures, and have less miscarriages, then the most
knowing and learned, with ordinary, sophisticate medicines. And I think it much
more necessary, that the Physician should look into the medicine then the
chamber pot, as a thing of greater concernment, and he shall practice with more
security to his own reputation, and less hazard to his patients life. And that
Physician who spends some time in Pharmacy- shall find more satisfaction in
seeing a medicine duly prepared and compounded once, then in reading it a
twelvemonth. From hence the true proportion and quantity of each ingredient
will exactly be known suting with the form of the medicine, which incongrously
I have seen prescribed for want of knowledge in the pharmacopoietical part.

From hence the particular properties and differing qulities of each ingredient
will more plainly and fully be discovered in their single preparations,
corrections, defecations, exaltations and gradual mixtures, their conflict,
discrepancy and rejection one of anothor in single applications, and their
mutual agreement embraces and union, in the whole composition by fit mediumes
and artificial conjunction the diversity of Tastes and Smells reduced into one
by fermentation the true color, taste, smell, consistence and due form of the
Medicine, will be discerned from a stovenly inartificial sophisticate Medicine,
and he that is not skilful practically in the artificial making of Medicines,
shall never rightly discern a good Medicine from a bad. Not that I think fit a
Physician should toil in the drudgery of it; but a supervisor of his Servants,
to prevent mistakes, abuses, and slovenly operation. In vain the Physician
curiously inquires and strictly examines the state of his Patient, if he be not
as well ascertained and fully satisfied in every Ingredient of the Medicine. He
that practices with unknown Medicines may be glad of his success; but if the
contrary happen he shall not be satisfied where the fault was; whether in
himself or the Medicine, the contumacy of the disease, or intervening
accidents, nor can he note that an observation for the future.

Infaeliciter aegrotat ubi plus est periculi a medicamento quam a morbo. Of the
Druggs imported into England, a fourth part is more fit for the Dunghill then to
come into the body of man; and he that takes a Medicine of that needs no other
disease. Another fourth, though not damnified corrupt and naught; yet weak, of
small virtue and efficacy, and a degenerate sort; as much differing from the
best, as they are in price, and that is double; and what think you becomes of
these? they are not thrown away, when they are made up in medicine they pass
current.

Beer that is made of Water, Hops and Malt three common things, and easy to
be done after a common rule; and yet what variety of drinks, some good, some
bad, differing in strength, taste, color and consistence: So many Brewers,
almost so many kinds of drink. What think you then of making Medicines, having
twenty, thirty, forty, and some fifty Ingredients in the composition; and of
these, many requiring a Single and several preparation and praevious ordering
before they are fit for Composition; as correction, defaecation, digestion,
trituration, dissolution; coagulation, calcination, torrefaction, insolation,
impregnation, etc. Many more tedious to relate. Do you think now there is not
more variety in the goodness and excellency of a Medicine of the same species
and kind, from several men's ordering and their Servants (differing in Art,
care and honesty) then in Beer or Ale made of two or three ordinary
Ingredients, and easily discerned by the palate, smell or sight. But the other
of many, various, exotic strange Druggs not known or heard of by the most in
their age; producing a mixture, sometimes not to be detected nor determined of
the goodness, (although an Artist) but by operation and the effects.

Sine certa notitia medicamenti virtutum, non tuto curabit medicus From hence
may be collected the reasons and motives which first put me upon this work, and
made me a Pharmacopoeian to my own practice. And being furnished with a large
stock of Medicines peculiarly composed and appointed for the most and
principal occasions that might occur in practice, and which I had often
experimented with success; and by due observation found to be efficacious for
their appropriate uses; I was moved to communicate, and convert my private
stock to a public store, for the benefit of those who have not a fee ready,
suitable for a Doctor but must apply themselves to bold professing Empiricks,
and other pragmatical fellows that deserve to have their ears eut for their
impudent ignorance in the practice of Physic, and saucie usurpation of so high
and mysterious employment that the most learned men of the faculty in all ages
have, and are still in the disquisition; the many abuses whereof in Medicines,
and their improper use, is now the greatest and most dangerous Cheat in this
age: And if an account of the dead could be rightly taken, a third part would
be found to have died, by noxious or deficient Medicines, an illiterate
pretender to Physic, or the imprudent advice of a friend or relation to the
Sick. And it is not a strange thing to Physicians who have observed, that Women
sometimes kill their own husbands and children giving them deadly draughts for
sanative potitions. The many sad consequents of this nature are so many, that
it would take up more time and paper to relate then I can now spare, and
therefore must wave the discourse. Quisque sibi caveat.

For the Magazine of Medicines, which here I own as my munition for practice, I
have formed and reformed by exemplars from the neatest inventions of the most
expert renowned Doctors, Pharmacopoeians, Galenical and Chemical, both ancient
and modern. Pharmacy being the chiefest part of my Study and most delightful of
late years. And having approved in practice what in reason they promised at the
veiw, enticing to experiments, I may with confidence commend to your use, being
a witness to all that belongs to them; made choice of their Druggs, saw their
due preparation and Composition; and not only a spectator, but an agent
sometimes, where the strictest care and nicest curiosity is required, being the
best recreation I know or can desire: For my part, I desire no other weapons to
oppose any Herculean disease where the capacity of the subject will endure the
contest, and be conformable to the commands of such a discipline, I shall
require to be observed. The Patient must bear a part, or no good to be
expected, there must be a conspiration, consent and agreement between the
Physician, the Patient, and the Medicine against the disease, or the design
will fail: The Physician cannot our without a good Medicine, the Medicine
cannot cure, except prudently appointed by the Physician in fit Doses, at due
times, with the requisite circumstances; and yet neither shall prevail, if the
patient be disobedient, intemperate and careless: For if by good medicine you
prevail against your disease, get ground one day and lose it the next, or soon
after, by an unfit improper ordering your self, the labor is in vain; as by
too often experience we find it in practice, with peevish, unruly, imprudent
patients, who think the taking of the physic is sufficient, let themselves
live at the old rate and customs which first occasioned the disease. You must
not therefore expect these medicines to take that effect as is promised and
declared in the enumeration of their virtues and appropriate use; if you by an
irrigular course and daily common practice in eating, drinking, sleeping,
passions of mind, rest and motion, or other customs whatever, improper and
unfit for the condition of your body and distemper, act with a Counter motion
and repugnancy to the efficacy and virtue of the Medicine, and also cherish,
indulge, and strengthen the disease. Therefore remember that a duty is
required, incumbent upon you, and impute not your miscarriages, improper,
unseasonable, insufficient use of the means, to the deficiency of the Medicine;
and that you make a difference between a chronic, inveterate, radicated
disease, to which you are propense by hereditary nature, constitution, or
constant bad customs; and a slight accidental infirmity. The former requiring
a more serious prosecution, continuance and repetition of Medicines; if you
have been many months, perhaps years contracting a disease you may well allow
some days for a parting.

And that these Medicines may not receive a prejudice in their reputation
undeservedly, and for want of knowledge in the proper choice and use of them,
especially in such cases and persons, where a subordinate use of Medicines is
required, for the eradicating of a contumacious and chronic disease: such I
say, who desire a methodical and exact course in the use of these Medicines,
more at large, and peculiar for their complicated diseases and condition of
body, then what is expressed and provided for in this book; I shall upon their
application to me whether by letter, (if far distant) or otherwise; give them
my advice and directions in the choice and use of any Medicine or Medicines, as
their particular case requires, according to the true account and relation I
shall receive of their infirmities, at my dwelling next to the Blew-Bore on
Ludgate Hill, London.

OF Life, Health, and Sickness.
AFter the praevious disposition of formation and effiguration of seminal
matter in the womb, by the innate spirits thereof, the chief actors in
vegetation, having prepared, fabricated and made ready for animation, the Soul
then exerts her power, animates, and gives life; and as supreme moderator and
governor disposes and orders all for future conservation and perfection of
operation. The seminal Spirits which before were chief and principal in
preparation and fabrication of this mansion; are now after the souls assuming
the Government, but instrumental and subordinate, immediately acting by virtue
and power from the soul received, neither can the one act without the other;
the soul cannot act the body in its operations, but mediately by the
intervening Spirits: there is so great a distance between the spirituality of a
soul, and the corporiety of bodies; but the Spirits being of the most refined,
subtle, volatized material substance, are the fittest Intermedium of
conjunction, conveyance, and commerce between the Soul and body, nor can the
spirits act their parts in any Vital operation, but by the energy, command and
power derived from the soul.

These spirits have their residence in every part of the body, as principal
assistants and excitors to the performance of the office, and duty belonging to
the several parts, and are the approximate immediate agents of the soul; and
they are preserved, maintained and supplied by the additional spirits,
extracted from the bodyly aliment daily received.

There is also a ferment or transmutative quality peculiar to each part or
office for concoction resulting from the particular nature, property and temper
of each part; being the author of alteration and transmutation, by virtue
whereof the food received is digested, volatized, and receiving various
impressions according to the disposition of the ferment of each part by which
it passes, until it be fit for assimilation into the substance of the body.

In the vigor and rectitude of these ferments and the aforesaid spirits,
consists the sanity and integrity of each member in its office; but the
diminution, alienation and depravation of either, vitiates and imbecillitates
the parts, indisposeth and incapacitates them to their office and duties, from
whence various morbifick effects are produced, answerable to their several
causes, and the variety of organical parts, in their principal or ministerial
functions.

These Spirits and ferments are preserved and maintained in their natural
purity and vigor, by a temperate sweet Air; wholesome and regular diet,
seasonable sleeping and waking, moderate and constant exercise, due evacuations
and retentions, tranquillity and ease of mind. But these irregular, unnatural,
disproportionate or unsuitable, in matter, manner, times or order, destroys the
regular economy and peaceable Government of the body, raises discords,
introduces and begets morbifick causes, abbreviates and shortens life. Of
which particularly hereafter.

This I have premised as a ground work for the superstructure intended, and for
your preparation and clearer apprehension of what shall be delivered in the
following discourse, knowing upon what bases it is founded.

The life of man consists in the Conjunction of soul and body, mutually
embracing each other with the bands of Love and desire of continued Union,
until the incapacity and unfitness of the body by its ruinous and decayed
condition, or other impediments and deficiency enforces the soul to desertion
and departure. Spiritual and Corporeal substance are now knit and interwoven
one with another, by an extraordinary curious artifice and contrivance, so that
you can not say here is the soul and there the body, but soul and body are
jointly extended throughout the whole, and in every part there is both soul and
body: life is the result of this connection; as by the meeting and attrition of
flint and steel fire is produced, so by the reciprocal contact and conjunction
of soul and body life is generated, being of a luminous influential nature
diradiated through the body from whence vital motions and heat, as the product
and concomitants thereof do give a testimony of its virtual presence and
efficacious energy: and as the Ratio formalis of life is in lumine; so the
virtue, power and emanations of life are manifested in action, in operation
and action: and although the soul cannot by a reflex act in this life, see the
face of its own being, nor can we see it in another, being invisible a priori,
environed, veiled and hid by the interposition of a dense opacous body, yet we
may see the back parts and behold what it is in operation and effects: and as
Operatio sequitur esse, according to the axiom; we may judge of the purity,
radication and durability of life, by the integrity, strength and constancy of
its actions and functions: and this integrity or perfection of vital operations
is that which we call health or sanity: and it is the free, indisturbed
unanimous performance of all the faculties in the rectitude of their duties,
being the prosperous serenity, mutual enjoyment and happiness of soul and body
in their conjunct state.

The benefit and excellencies of this health is best known to those that have
lost it, Carendo magis quam fruendo, quid valeat cognoscimus: you that have it
and know not how to prize it, I Will tell you what it is both positively, and
privatively, that you may love it better, put a higher value upon it, and
endeavor to preserve it with a more serious and, strict observance and tuition.

Health is that which makes your meat and drink both savory and pleasant, else
natures injunction of eating and drinking were a hard task and slavish custom.

Health is that which makes your bed easy, and your sleep refreshing, that
renews your strength with the rising Sun, and makes you cheerful at the light
of another day; it is that which fills up the hollow and uneven places of your
Carkase, and makes your body plump and comely; it is that which dresseth you up
in natures richest attire, and adorns your face with her choicest colors.

It Is that which makes exercise a sport, and walking abroad the enjoyment of
your Liberty.

It Is that which makes fertile and increases the natural endowments of your
mind and preserves them long from decay; makes your wit acute, and your memory
retentive.

It Is that which supports the fragility of a corruptible body, and preserves the
verdure, vigor and beauty of youth.

It Is that which makes the soul take delight in her mansion, sporting her self
at the casements of your eyes.

It Is that which makes pleasure to be pleasure, and delights delightful;
without which you can solace your self in nothing of terrene felicityes and
enjoyments.

Having taken a brief survey of natural life in the best estate, graced and
adorned with the society of health and its great attendants; the coucomitant
benefits, privileges and enjoyments: now take a view of your self when health
has turned its back upon you, and deserts your company; see now how the Scene
is changed; how you are robbed and spoiled of your comforts and enjoyments; the
want of health makes food to lose its wonted relish, and is become disgustful
and unsavory: the stomach now refuses to receive its daily charge, no longer
able to perform the task, but desires a quietus est, from the office.

Sleep that was stretched out from evening to the fair bright day, is now broken
into pieces, and subdivided not worth the accounting: the night that before
seemed short is now too long; and the downy bed presses hard against the bones.

Exercise now is toyling, and walking abroad the carrying of a burden.

The body that moved so light, and readily obeyed the steerage of the Pilot; is
now over ballac'd with its own weight, and slowly tugs as against the stream.

Conjugal embraces are now but the faint offers of love, the shaddows, and
representations of former kindeness.

The body that had the magnetisme and secret attraction of souls, may now be
approached without loss, or danger of being snared and fettered as a bondslave:
the lilly and the rose that nature planted in the highest mount to show the
world her pride and glory, is now blasted, and withered like long blown
flowers. The eye that flasht as lightning, is now like the opacous body of a
thick cloud; that rouled from East to West swifter then a Celestial orb, is
now tired and weary but standing still; that penetrated the center of another
microcosme, has lost its Planetary influence and is become obtuse and dull:
the hollow sounding breast that echoed to the chanting bird, and warbled forth
delightful tunes, now runs divisions with coughing strains, and pauses with a
deep fetched sigh for breath, to repeat those notes again.

The Veins, those rivulets that ran with vital streams bedewing the adjacent
parts with fruitful moisture, is now drunk up with parching heat, or muddied
and defiled with an inundation of excremental humors.

The want of health converts your house into a prison, and confines you to the
narrow compass of a chamber, it is that which sowers the sweetest and most
beloved enjoyments: it is that which disunites and breaks the league of
copartnership between soul and body, alienates and makes them at jarrs,
discomposeth their harmony, and weary of their wonted, sweet society.

The Prolongation and Abbreviation of Life.
MAn Consisting of soul and body, and this body compounded of heterogenious and
dissimilar parts, destinated to various actions and offices, and not
independent in being and conservation; will necessarily require variety of
assistance and supply, proportionable and suting to their several purposes,
faculties, proprieties and temperatures; in matter, manner, times and order;
for their maintenance and sustentation in the integrity of their actions,
offices and duties, Constitutional dispositions and temperaments, peculiarly
conservative of themselves, respectively and consequently of the whole: And by
the Law of nature, (being subject to corruption and dissolution, through the
fragility of constitutive principles, connection and fabrication) is bound to
observe rules, orders and customs most consonant for preservation and
continuance in being. Now if there be a disproportion or unfitness, in the
matter and quantum; or irregularity in the manner times or order of the
auxiliary requisites and conservatives contrary to what the Law or necessity of
his nature requires and commands, there arises distempers, ataxjes and
disorders, the praeludiums to ruin and dissolution.

And this body being in a continual flux and reflux, conversant in vicissitudes
and variations of opposites, dissimilars, contraries and privations, as heat
and cold, siccity and humidity, filling and emptying, rest and motion, sleeping
and waking, inspiration and expiration, and the like; could not subsist amidst
these opposite subalter nations, if they were not bounded and regulated by due
order of succession to fit and convenient times, that they might not clash
interfeere and encroach upon each others privileges, due times and proprieties.

If heat exceeds, the radical moisture dryes up, the spirits evaporate, and the
body withers.

If cold, the faculties are torpid and benumbed, the spirits being frozen up to
a cessation from their duties.

If moisture prevails, the spirits are cloged, suffocated and drowned in the
channels of the body.

If siceity and dryness, the organical parts are stubborn, unpliable and
incapable of their regular motions and due actions, the vitastreams being drank
up that should irrigate, refresh and supple them.

Were the body always taking in and sending nothing forth; it would either
increase to a monstrous and vaste magnitude, or fill up, suffocate and stifle
the soul: were it always in excretion and emission, the body would waste away
and be reduced to nothing.

Nor is the receiving in of any thing, sufficient and satisfactory to the body
for its preservation, but that which is appointed by nature proper and suitable:
nor emission or ejection of any thing, but that which is superfluous and
unnecessary to be retained.

If sleep prevails contrary to the Law of nature, the body in a lethargic
soporiferous inactivity, stupefied and senseless lies at the gates of death.

If watching exceeds the limits, transgresses and steals away the due time for
sleep, the faculties are debilitated and enervated, the spirits tired, worn out
and impoverished.

If inspiration were constant without intermission, the body would puff up and
be blown like a bladder.

If expiration were continual, the soul and spirits would soon quit their
habitation and come forth.

If always exercised in motion, the body would pine and wear away: if always
at rest, it would corrupt and stink.

There is a rule therefore proportion, measure and season to be observed, in
all the requisite supports and auxiliary helps, belonging to our preservation,
and by how much or often, any of these necessary alternative successions are
extravagant and irregular, exceeding the bounds and limits prescribed by
nature, justling out the successive appointed action duty or custom from its
seasonable exercise and due execution; by so much is the harmony of nature
disturbed, vigor abated and duration shortened, by those jarrs, discords and
encroachments.

The thwarting and crossing of nature in any thing she has enjoined, either in
the substance or circumstance, is violence offered to nature, and is
destructive more or less according to the dignity or quality of the thing
appointed.

For nature was not so indifferent in the institution of th^se duties and
customs, that they might be done or not done; or so careless and irregular, to
leave them at your pleasure, when and how, or to be used promiscuously and
preposterously without order, ^t the liberty of your will, fancy and occasions:
for as you may see in all other creatures exactness of rule, method and
constant order impressed upon and radicated in their natures, by which they act
always suitable regular and constant: you may not imagine so choice and
exquisite a piece as man, to be left without a law and rule to guide and steer
him in the necessary actions concerning life, and that he should rove in
uncertain, inconstant, unlimited quantities, times, orders, manners and the
like; but is bounded and restrained upon penalties and forfeitures of being,
well being and long being, to the nice and strict observance of these laws and
customs necessary for the tuition of life and defense of humane frailty.

As moral good actions are placed in a mediocrity between two vicious extremes:
so natural actions and auxiliary requisites conservative of life, have their
golden mean; digression from which on either side leads to ruin and
destruction.

Too much sleep or too little; too much meat and drink, or too little to much
rest, or too much motion; too much air, or always close pent up too great
excretions or too long retentions too much heat or too much cold; either of the
extremes lead to the gates of death.

And as nature has not appointed any thing, or every thing to be food, but
this and that; so likewise not at any time to be received, not in any quantity,
after any manner prepared, or in what order you please, but proportionable,
suitable and convenient.

As there is variety of dispositions and inclinations of mind agreeing with
and liking one thing, but disagreeing resisting and disliking another: so is it
in the variety of bodies and food: one body is of this constitution, temper and
appetite; will suit and agree well with this meat, and disagree with another:
for if all meats were convenient for all bodies to be used promiscuously
without choice, how comes it to pass, the antipathy, resistance and abhorrency
of some bodies against some particular meats and this not from a fancy and
conceit, but radicated in the constitution; that if it be eaten though
unknown, shall produce Fluxes, vomitings, swoonings and such like effects: here
is manifested the opposition, disagreement and distance between this
constitution and this kind of meat; which being so great, that the dislike and
discordancy appears presently: other disagreements which are in a lower degree
of opposition, do not manifest themselves immediately, yet they produce ill
effects in the body, plus minus, pro viribus, which discover themselves
gradually, at times and seasons and occasions. If you acknowledge the former
you must admit of the latter, the reason is, a majori ad minus.

As sleep is appointed by nature, to refresh the spirits and repair lost
strength: so the time for sleep is appointed and limited: not when you please:
the Sun that glorious light was not made for you to sleep by, nor the night for
sports and revells, but for rest.

Nature does not only command what to be done; but when, how much, how long,
after what manner, in what order; the modification, Circumstances and requisite
qualifications, as well as the thing it self, are to be regarded. And therefore
by a diligent inquisition and curious speculation into the works of nature,
you may as much admire the manner of preservation, government, order, weight
and measure, regular vicissitudes alternations and successions, as the
excellency and contrivance of the things themselves, in their creation and
generation.

Whatever is appointed by nature as necessary for conservation and support of
being though never so good, yet if it be unseasonable, out of course,
immoderate in quantity, quality or duration; alters the property and Intention
of nature, converts good purposes to bad effects.

We say every thing is best in its own kind; and of continuance in its own
Element: and nature is most cheerful, vigorous and durable in the course and
method of her own injunctions: but being put by, thrust out of her own way, is
not of long duration: the birds cannot live in the Sea, nor the fish upon the
land, nor your nature continue long in an unnatural way against her self. Are
you composed of natural principles, and will you not live conformable to what
you are? do you not live by natures assistance and natural means, and do you
think to continue long in a Counter-motion against the nature of your
Composition? they that invert natures course, preposterously promiscuously and
in congruously using the necessary conservatives of life; not only are
deprived of their benefit, but also receive a positive hurt, disordering the
constant regular motions in the body, and discomposing the harmonious and
sociable temperaments of the parts.

There is a rule therefore, method, measure and season, in all the requisite
supports and auxiliary helps belonging and necessary unto life, or lawful
actions and customs whatsoever; which duly observed, are of much advantage
for the preservation of the body in its true natural state, vigor and
prolongation of being: but other wise, a methodically and inordinately used,
disturbs natures course, uniformity and regularity- of operations, raises
unnatural motions, commotions and cessations; introduces disorders and
disjoynes the frame of nature, accelerates and hastens the dissolution of the
body.

The Impediments of long Life.
AN infirm, and weak constitution from the Womb derived from tender, imbecile
and infirm parents. Irregular and unfit tractation of Infants, whose tender
bodies are soon discomposed and disordered by bad Nurses, their erroneous
customs, and the ill proprieties of their milk.

Noxious and intemperate Air.

Irregular eating and drinking.

Immoderate and unseasonable exercise, motion or labor.

Too much, or unfit rest.

Sleeping and waking in extremes.

Immoderate Venus.

Undue excretion, and retention of Excrements

Inordinate passions, and perturbations of mind.

All unnecessary and bad customs.

Hygiastic Precautions, and Rules for the preservation of Health, and
prolongation of life.
Of Air.
Air is so necessary to life, that without it we cannot subsist: which
surrounding us about, and being continually sucked and drawn in, must needs
affect the body with its conditions and properties, and by observation you may
find, the body, by the various constitutions and changes in the air, to be
variously affected, well and ill disposed; of which, infirm parts are most
sensible, that they prognosticate before an alteration come: the mind also by
the mediation of the spirits is drawn into consent, and has its dispositions
and variations: when the Air is close, thick and moist, the spirits are more
dull heavy and indisposed; but at the appearance of the Sun, and a serene sky,
the spirits are unfettered, vigorous and active; the mind more cheerful, airy
and pleasant.

The Spirits are of an aetherial nature, and therefore do much sympathize with
the present constitution, and change of air: for of the air drawn in by the
motion of the vital parts, are the vital spirits augmented and supplied
continually, by the peculiar ferment and operation of the heart, therefore the
pureness of the air, makes much for the purity of the spirits.

A gross impure and noisome air, obtunds and deads the spirits, makes a slow
pulse, obstructs the pores and hinders ventilation, generates superfluous
humors and causes putrefaction.

A serene sweet thin Air perfumes and purifies an unwholesome body; cherishes
the heart, makes a lively pulse, and much increases the vital spirits;
rarifies and volatizeth a gross coagulate blood, opens the pores for
transpiration of putrid and offensive vapors, acuates and sharpens the
appetite, and helps digestion.

The best air and most agreeable to temperate bodies is in temperate climates,
for heat, cold wet and dry: not subject to sudden and violent changes, as in
some parts of America and other Countries very frequent; not gross and
turbulent, infected with putrid vapors and noxious exhalations, from stinking
ditches, Lakes, Boggs, Carrions, Dunghills, Sinks and Vaults, for which causes
great Cities, and the adjacent places are not so healthful nor the people so
long lived.

Change of Air sometimes is very necessary for the conservation of health; the
recovery of it declining and lost: for, temperate bodies by an intemperate
air, shall gradually and in time become intemperate: intemperate bodies, by
the contrary intemperate Air shall be reduced to temperature; at least, shall
conduce much and be very Auxiliary for the reduction. Therefore bodies
declining from exact temperature, are best preserved in that Air opposite to
their declensions: as Choleric, hot and dry bodies, in a moist and cool air;
Phlegmatic, cold and moist bodies, in a dry and warm Air.

It is not therefore of small moment, in what place you live; and more
especially such, who labor of, or are more subject to, any pectoral infirmity:
for the Lungs being of so tender a substance and porous, continually drinking
in the air, is most apt to receive impressions from it according to the
qualities it is pregnant with and infested; and many diseases of the breast
arise from this sole cause; and many exasperated by it and continued: hence it
is Asthmatick Phthisical and Consumptive persons shall not be cured in some
places, but may have cure in another.

Be clothed according to the Clemency, season and temperature of the Air,
your age, and habit of body: lean and thin bodies, pervious (corpora rarae
texturae) and whose skin are loose and lax; may wear thicker clothing, because
such are more perspirable, do magis emittere and transpirare; and are also more
penetrable and subject to injury of the Air. Fat and fleshy people, and whose
bodies are solid, firm and hard, are more impenetrable and impervious, and may
wear thinner Garments. Infants and children lately cherished in the stove of
the womb, being of tender, soft bodies and porous, are easily exposed to the
prejudice of the Air, Vigorous youth, and middle age being accustomed to all
weathers, whose spirits abounding do strongly resist and keep out the assaults
and injuries of an offensive Air, may best endure hardship. Old age whose
natural heat is abated, and spirits exhausted, stands in need of good
defensatives against external cold, and to cherish internal heat.

Observe the seasons and changes of the Air, and be then most careful, for at
such times you are in most danger to exchange health for sickness: hence it is
that Spring and Autumn abounds most with diseases; the Air then assuming new
qualities opposite to its former constitution, sets new impressions upon our
bodies, which occasions the various aestuations and turgid fermenting of
humors, producing diverse symptoms according to the variety of their nature,
the organical difference, office and constitution of the several parts.

The Sun being risen, and the air clear, open your Chamber-windowes, that the
fresh Air may perfume your Room, and the close Air and enclosed vapors may
go forth.

Bad smells and putrid vapors being drawn in with the Air are very injurious
to the Lungs and vital parts; contaminating the spirits, and impressing upon
the ferment of those parts their tetrid nature, are oftentimes the original of
a Consumption; and if the Lungs be weak and infirm, are more apt to receive
the prejudice then others. But fragrant smells refresh and cheer the vital
Spirits, and are very wholesome, breathing forth the virtue of those things from
whence they do proceed.

Be not late abroad, nor very early; before Sun rising and after setting the
Air is not so good; being infested with noxious vapors, until the radient
influence of the Sun dispells and purifies: and those whose custom it is to be
often aproad at such times, are most frequently molested with Rheumes, and
Rheumatic diseases, which their declining years will more evidently manifest
the prejudice. Likewise in moist, foggy, dark weather, it is better being within
then abroad; and if it be a cool season, good fires and fragrant fumes are then
both pleasant and very wholesome. Be frequent abroad in the fields when a clear
sky invites you forth, and let the fresh Air fan you with its sweet breath;
but more especially in the morning; the Air is softer and more pleasant then
your bed, and sure I am, far more wholesome.

Temperie Coeli corpusque Animusque juvatur

Ovid Meat and Drink.
Esteem temperance and regularity in eating and drinking as a great
preservative of health, not a Lessian diet to pine and enseeble the body, but
moderate in quantity proportionable to the stomach, agreeable in the first and
second qualities, seasonable as to times and order. The contrary irregular
practice has destroyed and shortened the lives of many. Plures gula quam
gladius.

For quantity, your own stomach must measure to you what is convenient; which
is a certain rule of proportion, if you observe not to eat to a satiety and
fullness, but desist with an appetite, being refreshed light and cheerful, not
dulled heavy and indisposed to operation and action, either of mind or body.

A set quantity or measure of meat and drink, cannot be prescribed as a general
rule and observation for all to follow, in regard of the variety and great
difference of persons, in Constitution, age, strength of nature, condition of
life, and infirmities, that what is convenient for one, is too much for
another, and too little for a third; the strong and healthy cannot conform to
the sickly weak and infirm in quantity, nor the laboring man to the sedentary
and studious, or the idle: therefore every stomach is to be its own judge: and
every one ought to moderate themselves by the cautions before mentioned.

Indulge not to the cravings of an irrational sensitive appetite, but allow
such a supply of daily food, as will support and maintain bodily strength and
not over-load it: thereby the spirits will be vigorous and active, humors
attenuated and abated, Crudities and obstructions prevented, many infirmities
checked and kept under, the senses long preserved in their integrity, the
stomach clean, the appetite sharp; and digestion good. But by the surplusage
and over-charge, the stomachical ferment is overlaid and its incisive
penetrative faculty obtunded, the appetite and digestion abated, the stomach
nauseating, fluctuating, and belching with crudities; from whence Gripes,
Fluxes and Fevers: the spirits clogged, dull and somnolent; by their
indisposition and inactivity humors subside, degenerate, incrassate, obstructs;
from whence various symptoms and depraved effects throughout the body,
debilitating and decaying the fenses, enervating and stealing away the strength
of the body, by defrauding it of good nutriment, hastening old age, and
shortning Life.

In Winter you may eat more freely, the ambient external cold compresseth and
unites the spirits, drives them to the center and fortifyes the stomach: but in
Summer the spirits are dilated, exhausted and drawn forth by the external heat
opening the pores; wherefore the appetite is not so sharp, nor digestion so
quick. And the Rule is true, though heat be not the principal cause of
concoction, yet it is a necessary agent, excitor and cooperator.

For the quality of diet, make choice of such for the most part as is commended
to you, convenient for that constitution you are of, as you will find
prescribed in the several temperaments following. But withal observe, what is
most agreeing and disagreeing to your peculiar nature and individual propriety;
what is most desired by your stomach and best digested, is a good guide in the
choice of meat and drink.

Paulo peior sed suavior cibus and potus, meliori, at ingrato praferendus.

Change your diet according to the seasons of the year, the variation of your
temperament, and inclination to this or that distemper: in Winter more meat
and less drink; in summer less meat and more liquids: in hot weather a cooling
diet, in cold weather that which is warm and heating: in summer meats boiled,
in winter roasted: a hot and dry body must have a cooling and moist diet; a cold
and moist body, a hot and dry diet: temperate bodies are preserved by temperate
things and their like; distempered bodies are rectified and reduced by their
contraries and dissimilar.

The more simple and single your diet is, the better and more wholesome: but if
your stomach must have variety, let it be at several meals, and so you may
please your palate without prejudice: accustom not your self to delicacies
and compound dishes, the heterogenity of their nature, begets a discordant
sermentation in the stomach, troubling concoction, from whence eructations,
nauseous belchings, and offensive risings in the throat. Quo simplicior vict us
ratio eo melior. Aphor.

Of all meat, flesh affords the most nourishment and the strongest.

If your diet sometimes be not so good and proper for you in the quality, make
amends ^n the quantity and eat the less.

Of all sauces a good stomach is the best; but ^f you must have other, let it
be acide sharp or biting.

Accustom strong stomachs to strong meats; the weaker to lighter of digestion:
very light meats in strong stomachs are soon digested, but withal parched and
corrupted, and turn to a bitter and choleric juce; solid hard meats in weak
stomachs lie long and heavy, and pass away crude and indigested.

Meats in respect of their facility and difficulty in digestion are termed
heavy and light.

Heavy meats be such as are more dry, hard, solid and dense, gross, course and
tough, or over moist slimy and cold: requiring a longer time in fermentation,
volatization and digestion, before they be fit to pass off the stomach.

And they are either so in their nature: as all old flesh, bull beef and ox,
brawn, pork, venison, hare, goose, duck, swan, crane, bitter, heron and most
water foul: Eeles, lobster lampreys, tench, stockfish: beans, pease when they
be something old; brown bread, barley and Rye bread: also some parts are of
harder digestion then other; as brains, hearts, livers (except of tame fowl,
birds, and some very young flesh) milts, kidneys, skin.

Meat made heavy (or made worse then in their own nature) by preparation,
keeping and dressing, as dried, fried and broiled meats; meats long salted and
kept, as bacon, hang^d beef, and long powdered, old ling, salt cod, haberdine,
pickled herrings red herrings, pickled scallops; sturgion, salt salmon, old
cheese, hard eggs, tosted cheese, tosted bread especially, if it be scorched;
crusts, pie crust, bread not well baked, unleavened: meats over baked, hard and
dry; long kept, meats roasted dry, or scorched.

Light meats and of quicker digestion, be such as are more soft and tender,
rare as it is opposed to density, therefore sooner penetrated by the
stomachicall ferment; succulent, volatile, soon fermenting and yiedling to
digestion.

As young tender flesh: veal, young mutton, lamb, kid, pullet, capon, chicken,
conies, turkey, pheasant, patridge, plover, woodcock snite, heath cocks, railes,
small birds: whiting, smelt, bister, flownder, soles, plaise, thornback, maids,
turbut, shrimps, prawnes, trout, carp, pike, bream, perch, roches, daces,
loches: ^ere eggs, milk, wheat bread, white, light, and well baked; also oaten
bread well made: and these may be divided into two sorts; that ^s, meats very
light as rere eggs, sucking rabbits, chickens, whitings: and meats indifferent
light, as mutton lamb, veale.

Very light meats are soon digested, apt to be corrupted; breeds tender and
effeminate bodies, soft and loose flesh easily lost: solid strong meats are
slower in digestion, not easily corrupted, slow in distribution, makes strong
bodies firm hard flesh and durable.

Use not meats that has any quality in extreme; as very salt, very hot,
sower, binding or the like: but keep to those that are mode rate.

Let your bread be of wheat, leavened, well kneaded and baked, light and white;
which you may eat new, but not hot; nor staler then two days old, and choose the
crumb, rather then the crust.

Seasonings of meat are used either as preservatives to keep them from
putrefaction and decay; or as correctives, to alter and change some ill
quality, and promote digestion; or for delight to gratify the palate; as
sugar, salt, vinegar, mustard, peper, cloves and other spices.

Meat moderately salted, having time to digest ferment, volatize, and a^^er the
crude qualities, is better and wholesomer then fresh (...) but to eat salt at
the table is not so good, if the condition of the meat be such as to allow
(...) praevious digestion and seasoning. Salt is grateful to the palate and
stomach, excites the appetite, concocts crude phlegmatic matter that lies upon
the stomach, hinders putrefaction and is abstersive: but immoderately used,
corrodes and frets, causes itching and breakings out* very bad for thin lean
bodies, it heats and dryes the blood and radical moisture,

Sugar in a temperate clean body, moderately used nou^sheth and is good, but in
a soul body is soon corrupted, degenerates and makes the body more impure;
turns to choler and inflames choleric hot bodies. The freequent and immoderate
use in any obtunds and abates the appetite, causes putrid humors and makes an
unwholesome body.

Vinegar and sower juces as of lemmon, verjuce and the like; procure appetite
and help the stomach in digestion of grosser meats: but the immoderate and
frequent use, cooles, dries, constringeth and binds the body, hurtful to the
nerves and nervous parts; very bad for women, and those that are subject to the
Gout, Asthmaes and stoppings in the breast, or in other parts, and for lean dry
bodies.

Mustard quickens the appetite, warmes the stomach, dries up superfluous
moisture, helps the stomach in digesting hard meats, opens stoppings in the
breast and head.

Mace, ginger, nutmeg, peper, and cloves, they help a cold stomach, comfort the
heart and brain, refresh the spirits by their aromatical odor, are grateful
upon the palate, and very acceptable to phlegmatic cold bodies.

In the use of the forementioned, I shall give this caution: that young
stomachs, and strong healthy bodies which need not a spur to their appetite,
nor a help to digestion, that they frequent not the use of these seasonings and
sauces; but reserve them for age; deficiency of stomach and other infirmities;
for if you accustom your self to them in youth and strength, to please your
palate and entice your stomach there being no need; when the condition of your
body does require them, you shall not find that benefit and assistance from
them, which otherwise you might have expected and received, had you forborne the
use of them when it was not necessary.

When you come to Meat, leave your care and business, but bring in your
friend, and be as merry as you can, mirth and good company is a great help to a
dull stomach both for appetite and digestion.

Eat not presently after exercise, and when you are hot; but forbear until the
spirits be retired and settled in their stations.

Eat not hastily but chew your meat well, it is a good preparation for
concoction, and your stomach will more easily and sooner digest it; but if it
be half chewed the stomach musthave the labor to chew it over again with its
incisive ferment.

Liquid meats soluble and lighter of digestion eat first; the more solid last,
and that which has any astriction.

Drink a little and often at meat, to macerate and digest, especially if your
meat be dry and solid, and to help distribution of aliment; but great draughts
causes fluctuations.

To stand or walk softly after meat is good; the stomach then being distended,
is not compressed of any part, which sitting does not so well avoid: but hasty
motion opens the orifice of the stomach, precipitates and vitiates digestion.

Forbear reading, writing, study or serious cogitations for two hours after
meat; else you draw off from the stomach, abate the strength of digestion, and
injure the brain.

Omit a meal sometimes, it acuates and sharpens the stomach, concocts
crudities, and makes the next meal relish better,

Eat no late suppers, nor variety at once; a good stomach may endure it for a
while, but the weaker is more sensible of the injury, the best is prejudiced in
time.

Keep a sufficient distance between your times of eating, that you charge not
the stomach with a new supply before the former be distributed and passed away:
and in keeping such a distance, your stomach will be very fit and ready to
receive the next meal, the former being wrought off perfectly; no semidigested
crude matter remaining to commix with the next food: and that is one chief
cause of crudities and a foul stomach, when a new load is cast in before the
former be gone off, which begets much excrements, not much aliment, clogs the
body and procures diseases.

The stomach that is empty, receives, closes and embraces food with delight,
will be eager and sharp in digestion, and the body will attract and suck the
aliment strongly, each part as it passes along will perform its office readily
and sufficiently; which they will not do if often cloyed with depraved and
indigested aliment, but slowly and with reluctance; for although they do not
act by reason, yet they have a natural instinct or endowment, to discern their
proper and fit object.

Drink for necessity, not for bad fellowship, especially soon after meat,
which hinders the due fermentation of the stomach and washes down before
digestion be finished: but after the first concoction, if you have a hot
stomach, a dry or costive body, you may drink more freely then others: or if
thirst importunes you at any time, to satisfy with a moderate draught is
better then to forbear. Accustom youth and strong stomachs to small drink, but
stronger drink and wine to the infirm and aged: it cheers the spirits, quickens
the appetite, and helps digestion.

For corpulent gross and fat bodies, thin hungry abstersive penetracting wines.

For lean thin bodies, black, red and yellow wines, sweet full bodied and
fragrant, are more fit and agreeable.

For Drink whether it be wholesomer warmed then cold; is much controverted,
some stiffly contending for the one, and some for the other: I shall rather
choose the middle way with limitation and distinction; then impose it upon all
as a rule to be observed under the penalty of forfeiting their health, the
observation of the one or the other.

There are three sorts of persons; one cannot drink cold Beer, the other cannot
drink warm; the third, either: You that cannot drink cold Beer, to you it is
hurtful, cools the stomach and checks it much: therefore keep to warm drink as
a wholesome custom: you that cannot drink warm Beer, that is, finds no
refreshment, nor thirst satisfied by it, you may drink it cold, nor is it
injurious to you: you that are indifferent and can drink either; drink yours
cold, when you cannot have it warmed.

That warm Drink is no bad custom, but, agreeable to nature in the
generality; first, because it comes the nearest to the natural temper of the
body, and similia similibus conservantur; every thing is preserved by its like,
and destroyed by its contrary: Secondly, heat though I do not hold it the
principal agent in digestion, yet it does excite, is auxiliary and a necessary
concomitant of a good digestion, ut signum and causa. Thirdly, Omne frigus per
se, and pro viribus distruit; Cold in its own nature, and according to the
graduation of its power, extinguisheth natural heat and is destructive; but per
accidens and as it is in gradu remisso, it may comtemperate, allay, and
refresh, where heat abounds, and is exalted.

Therefore as there is variety of Pallates and Stomachs, likeing and agreeing
best with such kind of meats and drinks, which to others are utterly
disgustful, disagreeing and injurious though good in themselves: so is it in
Drink warmed or cold, what one finds a benefit in, the other receives a
prejudice; at least does not f^nd that satisfaction and refreshment, under such
a quallification; because of the various tempers, particular appetitions and
idiosyncratical proprieties of several bodies, one thing will not agree with
all: Therefore he that cannot drink warm, let him take it cold, and it is well
to him; but he that drinks it warm does better.

Which is to be understood in Winter, when the extremity of cold has
congelated and fixed the spirits of the Liquor in a torpid inactivitie; but by
a gentle warmth are unfettered, volatile and brisk; whereby the drink is more
agreeable and grateful to the stomachs fermenting heat, being so prepared, then
to be made so by it.

Motion and Rest.
EXercise often, in the morning chiefly, with an empty stomach always; and
after excremental evacuation if you can procure it.

Exercise rowseth dull inactive spirits, gives ventilation, opens obstructions
by the motion attenuation and penetration of the subtle spirits, agitates and
volatiseth feculent fixed subsiding humors, concocts and abates superfluous
moisture, increases natural heat, promotes concoction, distribution and
conveyance of aliment, through the narrow Channels and passages unto the
several parts of the body; procures excremental evacuations, strengthens all
the Members, and preserves Nature in her vigor.

Vary exercise according to the condition of your body and season of the year:
the stronger, and Phlegmatic bodies, in cold weather, admit of stronger and
swifter motions: Choleric bodies, weak, and the Summer season, more mild and
gentle.

Be not violent in exercise, nor continue it longer beyond a pleasure; but
desist with refreshment, not a lassitude and weariness.

Put on some loose garment, until your body be cool and settled in its natural
heat and temper, the pores being opened by exercise, the cold is more apt to
enter, from whence a greater prejudice then you could expect benefit from your
labor.

Fly idleness and a sedentarie life, for want of due action and motion, the
body like standing waters, degenerates, corrupts and decays.

Ignavia corpus hebetat, labor firmat. Sleep and Watching.
MOderate sleep refreshes the spirits, increases natural heat, helps
concoction, gives strength to the body, pacifies anger and calmes the spirits,
gives a relaxation to a troubled mind.

Immoderate sleep dulls the spirits, injurious to a good wit and memory, fills
the head with superfluous moisture and clouds the brain; retains excrements
beyond their due time to be voided, and infects the body with their noxious
fumes and vapors, an enemy to beauty.

Turpis qui alto sole semisomnis jacet,
Cujus vigilia medio die incipit.
Sen. Go early to sleep (not with a full stomach) and early from sleep; that
you may rise refreshed freshed lively and active, not dulled and stupid.

When you lay by your Clothes, lay aside also your business care and thoughts,
and let not a wandering fancy prevent your rest.

Let your bed be soft, but not to sink in, which suckes from the body, exhausts
and impaires strength: a Quile upon a Featherbed, is both easy and wholesome.

Avoid day sleeps as a bad custom; chiefly fat and corpulent bodies: but if
your spirits be tired with much business and care, or by reason of old age,
debilitie of nature, extreme hot weather, labor or the like that dissipates
the spirits; then a moderate sleep restores the spirits and is a good
refreshment; but rather take it sitting then lying down.

Night watching and late sitting up, tires and wastes the animal spirits, by
keeping them too long upon duty, debilitates nature, changes the fresh flower
of youth, heats the body, dryes, and exasperates Choler; in time extinguisheth
natural heat, breeds Rhumes and Crudities; most injurious to thin lean bodies.

Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est. Evacuation and Retention.
UNder this Head is comprised excretions by Stool, Urine, monthly Purgations,
Venus, by the Pores, palate Nose and Ears: of which the former are of the
greatest concernment, and special care to be had of them.

Excremental evacuations are various proceeding from the several concoctions;
conveyed out by several Channels and Vents: which duly evacuated are no small
helps to the conservation of health, and are the effects of a temperate and
regular body.

The retention of them beyond due time, argue distemperature of parts, or
irregular living; and brings much detriment to the body, by their noxious Fumes
and putrid Vapors, that might infect, corrupt, and disturb the body.

Immoderate evacuations causes weakness debilitie of nature by exhaustion, and
procures several diseases, Cachexies, Consumptions, Dropsies, etc.

To keep the body soluble is very good, that at least once a day you may not
miss to have a stool; else the Faeces are hardened, the body heated, the stomach
molested, the appetite not so good, the head heavy, dull and sometimes pained;
some grosser matter which should go away by seige, is brought by the Urinarie
passage, occasioning obstructions, all which are very injurious and destructive
to health.

Seasonable and moderate Venus, alleviates nature, and helps concoction.

Immoderate, exhausts the strength by effusion of spirits, exsiccates and dries
the body, hurts the brain and nerves, causes tremblings, dulls the sight,
debilitates all the faculties, hastens old age, and shortens life.

Cibovel potu repletis, superflue evacuatis, five exercitatis coitus
interdicitur.

Tempus optimum est mane, and post dormias.

Hyeme and vere frequentius permittitur, aestate parcissime.

Juvines sanguinei and pituitosi liberalius, parcius Melancholici, parcissime
biliosi, Senes, emaciati.

Mares plus quam faeminas laedit, and qui erecti solent.

Hygiastic Praecautions and Rules Appropriate to the several constitutions of
bodies, with their diagnostic signs.
THE Sanguine is moderately hot and moist, has a lively pulse, vigorous
actions, of color fresh or rosy, for habit of body soft, fleshy or
moderately fat; of a pleasant mind and good disposition (except casualties and
infirmities alter to the contrary.

The Sanguine constitution being the best and most temperate, ought to be
preserved in that state from degeneration and intemperate declensions: which is
performed by a due observance of diet, Air Exercise and Rest, Sleep and
Watching, voiding and retaining of excrements, and passions of the mind: for
any of these, irregular unsuitable, or unnatural of continuance, will alter and
change the best tempered body, into some other constitution of intemperature
answerable to their causes as the intemperate Air of a hot climate, or season
not regarded; violent exercise, nightwatchings, etc. Introduces a depraved
alteration and degeneration of the blood.

For the quality of your diet, let it be temperate; for temperate bodies must
use temperate meats, and distempered bodies their contraries: therefore keep
within this latitude generally and for the most part, from meats temperate, to
meats hot, cold, dry or moist in the first degree inclusive, those will suit
well with your temperament: Such are Mutton, Cow-beife or Heifer, Pork, Veale,
Lamb, Rabbit, Capon, Hen, Pullet, Turkey, Phesant, Partridge, Carrots, Turnips,
Skirrits, Sparagus.

For quantity, times and order in eating and drinking; for Air, Exercise and
Sleep, consonant and most agreeable to this constitution are to be sought in
the general Hygiastick Rules before mentioned, which are most proper and
applicable to this complexion; as being the common standard to measure others
by; and how far others vary from this temperament, by so much are they to be
accounted intemperate, and do therefore require some particular Rules differing
from the general, because intemperate constitutions and temperate are not be
governed by the same strictness of law, but must have some allowance and
exceptions, which shall be observed in the particular constitutions following.

Phlegmatic Constitution.
THe Phlegmatic person is more cool and moist, not so lively, quick, sharp and
acute as the sanguine: for habit of body corpulent fat or fleshy; the Veins
small and hid; a slow pulse; prone to sleep and ease, by cold things
prejudiced, by hot things benefitted; incident to cold and Phlegmatic
distempers, (which are to be understood, if customs casualties or infirmities
induce not the contrary.

Meats agreeable and convenient for this temperament, are such as be temperate
and such as be hot in the first and second degree; not over moist, but
potencially drying if heat be wanting: as young Beef powdered, Mutton, Venison,
Hare, Turkey, Hen, Capon, Pidgeon, Turtle, Black-birds, Feldifars, small Birds,
sowced Puffins, Artichoaks, Parsnips, Potatoes, pickled Oysters, Anchovies.

Also Bacon, Haberdine, old Ling, salt Cod, pickled Herrings or dried, pickled
scallops, and such like savory seasoned meats, this temperament will admit of,
if the stomach be strong enough to digest them. And for the more security take
a glass of Sack after.

Refuse Lamb, Kid, fresh Pork, Pig, Goose Duck, and water Fowl, being over
moist and clogging a Phlegmatic stomach. But if your appetite much desires any
of these, let them be down roasted: also Eeles, Lampreys, fresh Herrings,
Makarel, Lobster fresh Salmon, Barbel, fresh Sturgeon, Tench, are injurious,
and most fresh fish, yet less prejudicial if you drink wine with them.

Let your diet be warm meats, oftener roast, then boiled.

Butter, Oil and Honey is very wholesome.

Mustard, Salt and Spices, are good for your use, especially with meats of slow
digestion, and that abound with much moisture.

Refuse Milk, and milk meats, Curds, new Cheese, Butter milk and Whey.

Olives, Capers, Broom-buds, Sampire are good sauce, also Garlic, Onions,
Leeks, in broths, seasonings or sawces, for a relish, but not raw.

Refrain cold herbs and sallads, as Lettice, Purslan, Violet leaves; except
Sorrel which although cold, yet a dryer and sharpner of the appetite: but use
Mint, Sage, Rosmary, Time, Marjerome, Parsley, Pennyroyal and such hot herbs.

Abstain from raw fruits, Apples, Pears, Plumms, Cucumbers, Mellons, Pumpions,
etc. But you may eat Walnuts, Filbirds, Almonds blanched, Chestnuts fiftick
nuts, Dates, Figs, Raisins.

Drink strong bear more frequently then small and sometimes Sack. Not French
wine if you be Rheumatick.

Indulge not your self in lying long in bed, or afternoon sleeps, too much rest
and ease, they dull the spirits, increase phlegm and superfluous moisture.

Frequent exercise and moderate abstinence in meat and drink, are great
preservatives of your health.

Choose a warm air and dry soil remote from Waters the best place for your abode.

Hot Baths are profitable, seasonable and moderate Venus a friend: the former
cherishes the spirits opens obstructions and dryes up superfluous moisture:
the latter sufcitates and raises the spirits, alleviates and helps Concoction.

If the smoking of Tobacco be good for any, the Phlegmatic may best challenge
the use of it.

Choleric Constitution.
THe Choleric person is hot and dry, eager and precipitate in action; froward,
hasty and angry; lean of body and slender: the Veins bigg, a hard pulse, and
quick: of color pale, swarthy or yellowish; the hair crisp or curled; propense
to waking and short sleeps; subject to Tertain Fevers.

Ad venerem proclivior, and cito satiatus. Use a cool and moistning diet, most
frequently boiled meats rather then roast or baked; but fried or broiled meats
never.

Eat brothes often made with cooling herbs; Rice-milk, Cock-broth, or Barley
broths with Rasins Currants and Prunes.

For flesh, choose young tender and jucy, temperate or cooling; as young Beef,
Veal, Motton, Lamb, Kid, Pork, Conies, Green-geese, Turkey, Capon, Chickens.

Observe fish days as good diet: and then you may eat fresh Salmon, Sturgeon,
Lobster, fresh Herrings, Crabs, Prauns, fresh God, Conger, Thornback, Soles,
Plaise, Whiring, Smelt, Perwincle, Oisters, Pike, Trout, Tench, and all fresh
fish, Eeles not excepted which are very unwholesome to others.

Milk and milk meats are pleasant and good, as Custard, White-pots, new Cheese
fresh Cheese and Cream.

For your sauces use Verjuce, Vinegar, Sorrel Orange, Lemmon, Apples,
Goosberies Currants: Prunes, pickled Cucumbers: as boiled Veale and Green-sauce,
roast Veal and Orange, holled Mutton, with Verjuce and its own juce; roast Mutton
and Lemmon or Cucumbers; green Geese and Goosberries; Stubble goose and Apples,
Pigg and Currants; Pork and Green-sauce; boiled Chickens with Goosberries or
Sorrelsops; Calves feet stewed with Currants and Prunes: and your meat thus
cooked is both food and Physic.

Take a lawful freedom and please your self with these fruits. Citrons,
Pomegranats, Limes, Oranges, Lemmons, Quince, Pearmains, Pippins, red Cherries,
Mulberies, Grapes, Damsins, Bullaces, Prunellaes, Respass, Currants, Barberies,
Strawberries: they cool and quench thirst, contemperate and aswage Choler, and
give a great refreshment to the parched spirits.

Eat sallads of Lettuce, Sorrel, Purslane Spinach and Violet leaves; they are
medicamental aliment.

Butter milk, Whey and Sider allays preternatural heat, checks the effrenation
of raging Choler, and are like water to fire.

Refuse the fat and brown outside of meat: also the crust of bread: Butter and
Oil adds fuel to the fire: Sugar and Honey has alliance and friendship with
Choler, being soon assimilated and converted into its nature.

Mustard Salt and Spices exasperates Cholet and makes it more fierce and
biting; Vinegar checks it.

Avoid wine, spirits, and strong liquors; they agitate Choler, and rouzeth up
a sleeping enemy.

Fast not but satisfy the stomach when it vellicates and calls for meat;
biting Choler must have something to feed on, or it will prey upon the body.

Cherish and indulge sleep, it cools and moistens, but let it not exceed in
length, which puts nature by her due times for necessary evacuations.

Use little and gentle exercise; be not laborious or toyling, but take your
ease avoid violent motion, it fires the spirits and enrageth choler.

Frequent Venus is most pernicious.

Cold bathes is profitable and refreshes much, by cooling the blood allaying
the spirits concentring them.

Bannish anger immoderate care, peevishness and fretting which discomposeth the
spirits heats and wastes them, angments Choler, dryes the body and hastens old
age.

Refrain Tobacco as an injurious custom, it exasperates Choler, by heating,
drying, and evatuating dulcid Phlegm which contemperates bridles and checks
the fury of acrid, sharp bilious humors.

Melancholy Complexion
THe Melancholy person, naturally so from the first principles is cold and dry:
but a Melancholy temperament, acquired by Education, Customs and Accidents, by
Degeneration, and admixture of other humors adust, is hot and dry: which make
the signs and symptoms of Melancholy to be different and various, and a
difference is to be made in diet and customs.

The common symptoms are a pale, black, or high Sanguine color; given to be
watchful, sad, solitary, and sudden laughter; a flow pulse, troublesome sleeps
and dreams.

Cold Melancholy has mild symptoms; if hot and adust, the effects are more
churlish and furious.

For cold Melancholy, let the diet be hot and moist: for the hot Melancholy
person, let diet be cooling and moist: in both let their meats be of light
digestion, affording good nutriment and not windy: as Mutton, Lamb, Veal,
Capon, Chicken, Partridge, Phesant, etc.

Abstain from Venison, Bull-beef or Ox, hanged Beef or long salted,
Goats-flesh, Hare, Bacon, Goose, Duck, Swan, Crane, Heron, Bittor and most
water fowl: Peacock, Quail, Blackbirds, Pidgeon; Red Herrings, salt Cod, Ling,
Sturgeon, pickled Scallo^s and salt Fish: dried Meats, fried or broiled, old
Cheese, Beans, Pease, Cabbage, Coleworts, Rye Bread, and all meats hard of
digestion or windy.

Capers, Broom buds and Sampire are good sauce, they open Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen.

Mustard and Vinegar bad, and all sower sauces, they make Melancholy more
contumacious and fixed.

Spices not good, if the person be hot, they cause adustion.

Use Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, Baume Fumiterry, Lettuce, Marigold
flowers, Violets, Clove-giliflowers, Saffron, they alter and qualify the
humor, and cheer the spirits.

Use Barley brothes with Prunes, Raisins and Currants. If Melancholy be adust,
and your body hot and costive, eat Pippins Permains, Cherries, Respass,
Strawberries, and such like fruits, to cool and moisten.

Drink Whey, Sider and small White-wines.

Refuse black wines and stale Beer.

Keep the body soluble, your head will be more free from pain, fumes and
heaviness.

Cherish sleep, it refreshes the spirits, pacifieth a troubled mind, and
banisheth cares.

Fly idleness, the Nurse of Melancholy, exercise often and follow business, or
recreations.

Walk in the green fields, Orchard, Gardens, Parks, by Rivers and variety of
places.

Change of Air is very good.

Avoid solitariness, and keep merry company.

Frequent Music, sports and Games.

Recreate the spirits with sweet, fragrant and delightful smells.

Moderate Venus good.

Banish all passions as much as in you lies, fear grief, despair, revenge,
desire, jealousy, emulation and such like,

Opus est te animo valere ut corpore possis. Cicer.

Tobacco hurtful (espicially if Melancholy be adust and a hot body) it heats
and exhausts humidity, makes Melancholy more contumacious,

Give not your self to much study, nor night watchings, they both dry the body,
and make humors adust, two great enemies to a Melancholy person.

Hygistic Praecautions and Rules Appropriate to the various discrasyes or
passions of Mind.
THe Soul and Body are so linked and conjoined, as Partners of each others ill
and welfare, that the one is not affected, but the other is drawn into
consent; mutually acting enjoying and suffering until death seperates and
breaks the bands of union assunder. Hence it is, a diseased body makes a heavy
drooping mind; and a wounded, disturbed or estless mind, makes a youthful
healthy body to decay and languish. Who therefore desires the health and
welfare of the body must Procure ease, rest and tranquillity of mind.

Sieve Animo Corpus, nec sine corpore,
Animus, been valere potest.
SHun Melancholy and sadness as very dangerous and destructive, occasioning and
producing variety of diseases; suffocates and choaks the spirits, retards their
motion and agility of operation, imprisons, and cloggs them in their Stations,
darkens their purity and light debilitating all the faculties of the body,
their chief operator being indisposed and disabled; fixes humors incrassates
and begets obstructions; and debilitates the Speen, alienates and subtracts its
ferment from the stomach, which decays both appetite and digestion, procures
scorbute, Hypochondriac Melancholy, pains and tumors of the Spleen, Dropsies.
Jaundice, etc. A great Enemy to beauty, soon changes florid blooming youth
into a pale withering countenance, and makes the whole body to languish and
decay.

Mirth subtiliates, purifies and chears the spirits, puts them upon activity
that before were torpid dull and heavy, and excites them to operation and duty
in the several faculties: volatizeth, rarifies and attenuates gross feculent
obstructing humors: preserves youth vigor and beauty; makes the body plump and
fat, by expanding the spirits into the external parts and conveighing
nutriment. Whose wholesome effects are much the same with those of exercise, and
may well supply when that is wanting.

-- Dum fata sinunt
Vivite laeti --
Sen. ANger is the beginning of madness which fires the spirits, and raises an
intestine tomult and disturbance; agitates and inrageth Choler and exasperates
Choleric diseases: raises hystericall apoplectic and epileptic fits in those
subject to them; causes tremblings of the nerves, palpitations of the heart;
discomposeth and disorders the whole body: but more especially infirm parts are
made sensible of the prejudice, and Choleric lean bodies.

Maximum remedium irae est dilatio.
-- Dis proximus ille est.
Quem ratio non ira movet, qui facta rependet
Consilio --
Claud. FEar suddenly surprising, enervates and chaseth the spirits to and fro
from their residency and faculties sometimes compressing and driving them to
the heart, causing violent palpitations and suffocation: or scattring them from
the fountain of life into the external parts, making a dissolution even to
exanimation. A long predmeditated and constant fear in a remiss degree,
produces the same effects with Melancholy.

Plura sunt quae nos terrent quam quae Premunt; and saepius opinione quam
relaboramus. LOve and desire being inordinate and impetuous, seldom goes alone,
but is attended with fear, anger, Melancholy, despair, one or more for its
consorts, with which the mind is racked and torn, and variously affected as
the several passions acts their parts by turns: notwithstanding difficulties
and sufferings, the soul is led away with an ignis fatuus of fervent zeal,
deserts her own mansion, and follows after with an eager prosecution of
enjoying, never at home but as a prisoner, and prisoners are but bad house
keepers: the body needs must languish and decay, when the soul thus delights
and strives to run away.

For a check to the impetuousness of this inordinate effection and immoderate
desire, take these considerations to calm, allay, and regulate your passion.

First, that you cheat your self in setting too high a price upon the object of
your affections, and lay out more in expectation, then the income of your
desire obtained can possibly make a return: that it is far greater in non
habendo, then it will be in fruendo; it will be much less when you have, then
it seems to be now you have it not.

Secondly, that the Delirium and fervency of your desire, does not hasten the
accompishment of your aims, but rather retards or frustrates: for the
extremity and strength of passion debilitates and suppresseth reason, the chief
contriver and manager of your design; puts you upon inconsiderate, immature and
rash attempts, and makes you more unfit, incapable and unable to effect your
purpose; for passion is always spurring, but reason has its stops and pauses,
keeps due times for onsets and progress.

Thirdly, that prudent and vigorous action, not innane hungry volition or
thirsty desire though never so great, must or can acquire the satisfaction of
your hopes.

Fourthly, that the ardency and height of desire, will not imbetter, sweeten
or add to the height of your enjoyment when obtained; but rather abate and
lessen it in your account and esteem: for what thing soever you purchase, and
are mistaken and deceived in, you will not vallue at that rate you first prized
it, but at the worth you now find it. Vehement and lofty desires screws you up
to such a height of expectation, mountain high; but you must descend into
fruition, that's in the valley; and when you find your self in a bottom, and
your Sails not so filled and puffed as formerly by the fresh gailes and blasts of
a strong desire; your topsails then begin to flap and flag when you come into
the still calm of fruition, and your lofty spirits and high thoughts will lower
amain when you Anchor in the Harbor of enjoyment: for in appearance it was
great when at a distance seemingly, but now you are come nearer it is much less
and inconfiderable really; and what swelled you full in the prosecution of
attaining, will not fill you now with satisfaction, but prove aerie when you
grasp it, and soon emptied in enjoyment.

Thirdly, that statutum est, it is appointed you must or you must not obtain
the thing desired, which to a rational creature, is sufficient without other
arguments, to qualify moderate and blunt the keen edge of desire, and curb the
violence of an impetuous affection: but not to cowardice, daunt or stop a
laudible active prosecution to attain a noble, virtuous and lawful end, with a
moderate submissive desire.

-- quisquis in primo obstitit
Repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor fuit.
Sen. Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum
Sero recusat far quod subiit jugum.
CAre immoderate and constant denies the animal spirits their due times for
refreshment, rest and ease; disables them from duty and the true performance of
their Offices, being weary and tired for want of respite, heats the spirits and
dryes the radical moisture; which changes a fresh countenance into paleness,
and pines the body: most injurious to thin, lean and Choleric bodies.

Si diis Curae es, quid tua cura potest? Revenge, jealousy and envy are the
Ulcers of the mind, continually lancinating, corroding or inflaming;
introducing a secret consumption, wasting the spirits and radical moisture, and
infeebling all the faculties.

Multis se injuriis objicit,
-- dum una dolet.
Sen. That you may the better know and rightly understand how the passions of
the mind redound and reflect upon the body to the decay and rune of it, and
abbreviating life.

First, consider that the body without the soul ^s dead and moves not at all:
by virtue of the ^oules conjunction with it, informing and assuming it, the
body acts with various motions and opperations, and according to the activity
^f the soul, organical aptitude and fitness of the ^ody is the exquisiteness
and perfection of their ^perations: the Soul then is agent, the body assive,
receiving the influx virtue and power from the Soul, who is Rectrix and
Gubernatrix ^o whom the rule and government belongs: it (...) evident therefore
since the body cannot act any thing of it self for its conservation without the
energy and assistance from the Soul, whose care is the regulating and
moderating the body in all actions external and internal; then the
distractions, inactivity, wanderings and neglects of the soul, does tend to the
subversion of the due order and government, and consequently the ruin and
dissolution of the body, which requires a constant supply of daily reparation
and regular tuition for its support and maintenance.

Now the Soul transported by passion from its genuine Crasis of placidness and
tranquillity, and reduced into a turbulent, unquiet and distempered state, is
that condition of incapacity and unfitness for the government for that time
being, and many damages arise thereby as in each passion particularly is
enumerated.

In a threefold manner the Soul is put besides it self in the regularity of
rectory, and is incurious of the welfare of the body.

First, the Soul is either carried away by some delightful object, as for some
thing vehemently desired, deserting as it were the body to follow after that
thing desired and coveted, extending her power and strength out of the body, to
lay hold, if possibly to obtain, and bring within the Sphere and Circle of her
enjoyment.

Or secondly, the Soul is in fury and disquiete within, by the apprehension of
some thing assaulting and disturbing it, to which the Soul has a contrariety,
and antipathy against: as in the passions of fear, hatred, revenge, anger; and
the disquietude and disturbance is continued by representations of their Causes
in the fantasy, which still present themselves to the soul, by way of a fresh
assault, which feeds the passion and continues the distemper.

Or thirdly, the Soul is languishing, heavy and inactive, altogether indisposed
to the government and tuition of the body; and perhaps desirous to be
discharged and shake it off, being weary of the burden, taking no delight in
their partnership and society, as in melancholy despair and grief.

In all which cases you shall find the body to suffer great prejudice and
detriment: But first, you must consider how, and by what means or instrument,
the Soul does act in the body; the Soul acts not immediately, but mediately by
the spirits, which are the Souls approximate and chief instruments in bodily
actions and motions, and are appointed their several Sations, Offices and
Duties peculiar to the several works, as Concoction, Separation, Distribution,
Excretion, Retention. Assimilation, Sensation, etc.

Now it will manifestly appear how the body is damaged and consequently the
life abbreviated.

In the first Case: when the Soul alienates her self, wanders away with a
vehement desire to procure and obtain any thing most agreeable and delightful
(at least so seeming) the Soul as it were contracts it self and unites all her
force, stands at full bent after this beloved, discharges all her thoughts
upon it, and spends her strength in desire and longing; until at last she
pines away with a tedious and starving expectation: In the interim the aeconomy
and government of her own mansion the body is neglected; the spirits, at least
a good part are enticed away and called of from their proper and peculiar works
and duty, perhaps to enlarge and increase the vigor of some other faculty,
more immediately subservient and attending the Souls new design and business;
preferred far before a good concoction, due excretion, nutrition, seasonable
rest, or what else; and those spirits remaining which have the burden of these
duties incumbent on them, have so small and inconsiderable support and supply
of influence from the Soul, to direct and back them in their performance, that
the functions are executed so weakly and depravedly, to the great prejudice and
damage of the body.

Concoction now is not so good, nor the appetite so quick; the Stomach calls
not for a new supply, as yet not being well discharged and quit of yesterdayes
provision: the Stomach now is weary of dressing and preparing long Dinners for
the body; Lenten and fasting days are its vacation from trouble, and best
contented when least to do.

Separation now is not so good, the excrementitious and nutritious part walk
hand in hand together, and pass without contradiction or due examination: the
watch now is not so strict at the Ports and privy passages, to discern what is
fit to pass this way, and what the other, and what to reject and keep out, but
promiscuously receives what presents it self.

Distribution now is not so good, aliment tires by the way, wanting spirits to
convey and bring it to its journeys end; and exercise to jog it on through the
angust Meanders, and more difficult passages.

Sanguification is now degenerate and vitiate, the preceding requisites and fit
praevious disposition being wanting.

Membrification or assimilation is now changed for Cachectic and a depraved
habit.

Excretion and evacuation of what is superfluous and and unfit longer to be
retained in the body, is not sent away in due time, but stays for a pass, the
governess is now taken up with other matters, neglects due orders and commands
to the expulsive faculty for their emission.

Necessary and wholesome Customs are now neglected and disregarded: the Soul
too often is wandering and gadding abroad, and best when she is from home; but
neglects the airing of her Cottage, and perfuming it with fresh aetherian
breath.

The Soul is now always restless and disturbed, nor shall the senses her
attendants take their due repose, but keeps an unqiet house at midnight.

In the second Case: the regular and due order of government in the body is
subverted and changed, when the Soul in the forementioned passions, of fear,
anger, hatred or revenge, is disturbed and a arum'd by the assault, approach or
appearance of some evil or injury; the Soul then summons the spirits together
from their common duties, and calls them to her aid and assistance, for
security from danger, to repulse the violence offered or revenge the injury;
hurrying them here and there, from one part to another in a tumultuous manner,
if the assault be sudden and surprising; sometimes inward to support the
heart, to give courage and resolution, which by their sudden concourse and
confluence to the Center; causes great palpitations, and sometimes
suffocation: or else commanding them to the outworks, into the external parts,
to repel the invasion and violence of the evil presenting or approaching, or
to revenge the quarrel: the hands and arms then receive a double or trebble
strength, the Muscles being full and distended with agile spirits for their
activity and strength in motion: the eyes then are staring full and stretched
fourth with a croude of inflamed spirits, darting fourth their fury and
spending their strength upon the adversary and object of their trouble: the
tongue then is swelled with spirits and bigg words, that wanting a larger room
for vent, tumbles out broken and imperfect speeches, and scarce can utter whole
words: The Legs and Feet then have an Auxiliary supply, and double portion of
spirits conveyed in to their sinews, to increase their agility and strength,
to come on or off: but in the mean time the heart perhaps is almost fainting,
so long being deprived off, and deserted by, those lively vigorous spirits,
which did inhabit and quarter there for its Lifeguard, protection and support;
are now called off their Guard and common duties, employed in Foreign parts,
commanded here and there as the emergent occasion presents it self to the
governess of this Microcosme.

In the third Case mentioned: the due order, government, and necessary
execution of offices and duties belonging to the welfare and maintenance of the
body and preservation of life, is neglected and weakly performed.

When the soul being darkened and overspread with a cloud of sadness, betakes
her self to a sullen incurious recumbency and retiredness willing to resign and
cast off the government and tuition of the body; and as a burden which she
delights not now to bear about, begins to loose her hold, who before had
embraced and clipped so close; suspending the virtue of her energy and vigorous
emanations; but now acting faintly and coldly, those necessary mutual
performances without regard to their former friendship, or their future
conjunct preservation. The body now begins to sinck with its own weight, and
press toward the Earth the natural place from whence it came. That aetherian
spirit which before had boyed it up and took delight to sport it to and fro, is
now ready to let it fall and groves downwards, to leave it whether it must go.
The wonted pleasures of their partnership and society, is now disgusted and
rejected: food now has lost its relish and is become unsavory: sleep which
before was pleasant as a holy day in the fruition of rest and ease, is now
composed of nothing but troublesome unquier dreams, linked together with some
fighing intervals, to measure out the weary night by. Exercise and sporting
reereations is now accounted druggery and laborious toyling: unwilling is the
soul to move her yokfellow, farther then the enforcing law of nature and
necessity commands and urges. their joint operations which before were duly
and unanimously performed, are now ceased, abated or depraved, by the
retraction, reluctance and indisposed sadness of the soul to act: the wonted
vigorous emanations of the soul, and her radiant influence upon the spirits is
now suspended, subducted and called back. These ministering attending spirits
and chiefest agents, which at a beck were always ready agile and active in the
execution of her commands now want commands to stir and warrants to act by: but
in a torpid and somnolent disposition, unfit for action and the exquisite
performance of their duties, and in a sympathizing compliance with the soul the
excitrix and rectrix of their motions, are ready to resign their offices, and
give over working, that what they now do is faintly and remissely performed,
with much deficiency and depravation. When the soul is pleased and merry, the
spirits dance and are cheirfull at their work; but when she droops and mourns,
the spirits are dull, heavy and tired, the functions weakly and insufficiently
executed.

From the preceding discourse may easily be collected, that the distempers and
alienations of the soul from her genuine crasis of serenity and quietude, is of
great disadvantage, to health; impressing upon the body various preternatural
effects, forming the Ideas and charracters of diseases upon the spirits, and by
them communicated, conveyed and propagated in the body: likewise the morbific
seeds and secret characters of diseases which lay dead and inactive, are by the
aeconomical disturbance and perturbations of mind, awakened, moved and stirred
up to hostility and action which otherwise would have layen dormant; as by
grief, fear or anger; hysterical passions, swoonings, epilepsies, etc. Are
often procured; and it is evident, and commonly observed by infirm and
diseased people, how passion agravates and heighthens their distempers; and
acccording to the temper of their minds will their bodily infirmities be
agravated or abated.

I shall conclude this subject with three corollaryes being the Epitome of what
has been asserted and aimed at.

1. There is no perturbation or passion of mind, whether little or great, but
it works a real effect in the body more or less, according to the nature and
strength of the passion; and by how much the more sudden, great, often, and
longer duration the passion is by so much are the impressions and effects
worse, more durable and indeleable. You cannot be angry or envious or
Melancholy, or give way to any such passion, but you cherish and feeed an
enemy that preys upon your life, and you may be assured that passion makes as
great nay greater alteration within the body; then the change of your
countenance appears to outward view, which is not a little, although but the
shadow or reflections of the inward distemper and disorder: and were it
possible by any perspective to see the alteration and discomposure within made
by a passionate mind, the prospect would be strange, and much different from
that placidness and tranquillity of an indisturbed quiet soul.

2. Strong and vehement passions or affections of the mind to intent upon this
or that object, whether desiderable, or formidable and to be avoided, alienates
suspends and draws of the wonted vigor influence and preservative power of the
soul due to the body; whereby the functions and operations are not duly and
sufficiently performed, but intempestively remissly and weakly: nor is the
damage only privative, but also introduces and impresseth upon the spirits a
morbific idea, which is ens reale and seminale, producing this or that effect,
according to the nature and property of the Idea received, and aptitude of the
recipient subject. Phansies and Idea's are let in naked, but they strait are
invested and clothed in the body, have a real existence, and are entia realia;
though at first conception but entia rationis: as the longing of a pregnant
woman, being but the Idea of a thing in her mind, begets various and real
distempers in her body, if not soon satisfied; and sometimes charactrized upon
the Embryo in the Womb. Likewise a good stomach is taken off its meat
suddenly, by the coming of some unwelcome bad news; the appetite is gone now
the soul is disquieted, and the Body really affected and altered: let this sad
tidings be contradicted, and the Soul satisfied of the truth to the contrary,
it sets a new impression upon the spirits, they strait are cheered, lively and
active; the stomach calls for meat and drink, and the faculties restored to
their wonted operations. Whereby it appears, the two passions of joy and grief,
as they are opposite in their objects, so are their effects wrought in the
body, as far distant and different.

3. A cogitative or contemplative person to intent, always or unseasonably
employing the mind seriously and eagerly either in real or fictious matters,
fabricating Idea's upon the spirits, disturbs and hinders other necessary
offices and opperations conservative of being, enervates and weakens their
performance in duty, impares health, and hastens old age: but those that live
most incurious, and void of studious thoughts and serious cogitations, preserve
the strength of nature and integrity of all the faculties, protract the verduce
and beauty of youth, much longer from declensions and decay; for by how much
the rational faculty is over busy and imtempestively exercised, drawing the
full vigor of the soul into the exercise of that faculty, and robbing other
inferior functions of their necessary influential supply, and emanative power
from the soul; by so much the other faculties are impoverished and abated,
their executions more languid and depraved: and therefore it is, a close
Students life, disposes and inclines to many infirmities, enervates and
debilitates nature, abbreviates and shortens its course.

(...)
(...).
Fieri non potest, ut animo male affecto,
Non etiam una laboret corpus.
parce bibe,
frugaliter ede
utere exercitio
raro venere
diluculo surge
tranquillo sis animo
tempestive fac omnia
immodice nihil.
Ars brevis, vitam trahit longam.
Of Fontanels or issues.
NAture having appointed the Body to be preserved and nourished by a continual
supply of necessary food daily to be received in, which before it be
assimilated and incorporated into the substance of the body, suffers several
concoctions and transmutations by the digestive ferment of the parts,
destinated for that office and work: in which praevious disposition and gradual
preparation for nutrition there is a separation made, the nutritive and
necessary part from the excrementitious and unnecessary; the purest defaecated
part ordained for aliment, is conveyed still farther from one digestion to
another, until it has received the compliment and full perfection intended by
nature: the excrementitious and inutile part segregated, is received by sinks
and channels peculiarly appointed and framed for their conveyance out of the
Body as the lower guts, Urinary ductures, Nose, Pores, etc. Which passages if
at any time obstructed and stopped up, the derriment and sensible damage soon
confirms the necessity of their use and office. And as nature has appointed
and framed in the Body vents and out-lets for the daily discharging of
excrementious superfluities, which otherwise would putrify, suffocate and
stifle, if not in some measure duly evacuated.

In imitation of natures contrivance, Art has invented Issues as Ports and
Vents to be placed here or there, as the variety of occasions require, to
supply natures insufficiency and inability to relieve and help her self in the
discharge and emission of superfluous extravasated humors and putrid vapors;
which retained, produce various symptoms, according to the several proprieties
of their nature, and degeneration, organicall difference, and peculier office
of the parts they invade and infest.

And having such a pass Port, by which nature finds her self alleviated and
disburthened, does daily amandate and send superfluous humors to this out let,
as to other common passages and conveyances for the excretion and voiding of
excrements, by her own institution and fabrication.

And having found such an auxiliary convenience, she does expect it to be
continued, and relies upon the assistance, until the occasion be otherwise
prevented, the cause removed, or nature better able to discharge and free her
self, by the channels and passages of her own appointment.

Now if praematurely and unseasonably, this artificial passage be denied and
stopped up, there being cause for the contrary; the confluence of humors meeting
and gathering at the place, regurgitates back again with a united force and
greater current, at which nature being surprised unexpectedly, and having made
no provision to secure her self from such a retrogradation or reflux, produces
the same preternatural symptoms and effects, for which the issue was first made
or worse.

For your better satisfaction and information in the use of issues: first I
shall consider for whom and in what cases beneficial; Secondly, what it is that
issues forth and is evacuated; Thirdly, the places and parts of the body proper
and conveniant for them; Lastly, the signs when to close them without danger.

For corpulent and plethorick bodies, that feed high and live a sedentary
inactive life, whereby ventilation and transpiration is cohibited and
restrained, issues may be used by way of Praecaution.

In Cachectic bodies and diseases from putrid humors; issues makes evacuation
and allevates.

For revulsion, derivation or interception of a humor inconveniently resorting
to an eminent, or infirm part, issues alters the course and current.

In Diseases from venenate and noxious vapors, appearing with uncertain
motions, and intervals; issues retards, and abates the strength of their
paroxysmes.

For Eiratic pains Cutany defaedations and extuberations from extravasated
humors, and frustraneous digestion; the use of issues may be beneficial.

Issues are as Rivulets or Channels from a fountain to prevent inundation, and
direct the streams: they do not destroy the Spring, but give vent and current
this way, that it shall not overflow to do hurt otherways. They do not
eradicate a disease, but they lessen and abate the swelling productions or
growth, prevent or retard the frequent paroxysmes, and returns of formidable
and dolorous symptoms; give time and space for a Physician to use fit
efficacious Medicines to extirpate, and take away the antecedent cause; and are
but remedia a posteriori, and palliativa, to mitigate the effects, not curative
and eradicative.

For the nature and quality of humors issuing of (...), they are diverse,
according to the various disposition of bodies, temperaments and morbific
causes; such as the body abounds with and is superfluanous, such is transmitted
thither for emission.

That the humor evacuated is not useful and necessary for the body: appears
first by the concomitant figns manifesting the nature of it: itching, pricking
sharp pain about the place, inflammation and spongious flesh rising, in some
more, in others less; which are not signs and effects of a natural good humor,
but a hot corroding, sharp, unnatural humor flowing thither, degenerate and
corrupt: beside, nature is not prodigal in the excretion and expense of humors,
profitable and useful for the body, except by irritation.

What is the reason that in cachectic foul bodies Ulcers in any part are
difficult to cure? but by reason of a continual supply of bad humors, resorting
thither for evacuation, and will not let the sore heal up because they will
have vent: and therefore a skilful Surgeon, does not only apply topical
Medicaments, but also endeavors to remove the antecedent cause, by internal
medicine and reduce the Cacochymical ill habit of body to a natural good state
and condition by alteration and evacuatioy which being procured, the wonted
flu^^ humors to the ulcerated place is stayed, and then nature heals the sore
with a very little help.

In placing of Issues rightly, three things is to be considered; First that
they be commodious and properly situate for the affluence and effiux of the
morbific humor; for humors have a tendency and an inclination to one part more
then to another, according to the communication of parts, and rather downwards
then upwards, from the propensity of their gravity: Secondly, whether Revulsion
or derivation of the morbific cause be most convenient and benificial, in the
case for which an issue is appointed. Thirdly, That the position and motion of
the Muscles be diligently observed, else the Issue will not be so beneficial
nor lie easy; for if it be set upon a Muscle the motion and attrition of the
Muscle will continually molest and disturb it, and the evacuation will be but
little: Therefore you must endeavor to place them in Interstitiis Musculorum,
in the distances between the Muscles where the extravasated humors are most
frequent in their motions and perambulations.

In the Closing up of an issue these are to be considered: the cause for which
it was appointed, what effects alteration or abatement of infirmity; the age of
the person, whether in youth, strength of nature, or declining years; as also
the season and time of the year: which is to be adjudged and determined
variously, as the particular case and circumstances collated do suggest; but
generally the body is to be accounted in a better or worse state and condition,
as the humor issuing is better better or worse; thin, sharp, bloody or foul,
smelling strong or stinking, much in quantity; declare the body to be
cacochymical and foul, the humors depraved and degenerate, and require the
issue to be continued: but the matter issuing white, reasonable thick, sweet,
little in quantity, and not sharp causing pain, nor inflammation about the
place, are good signs and show soundness of body, the humors to be in their
natural condition, amicable and friendly to the body, and permit an Issue to be
closed up: but let due purgation immediately succeed, and a spare diet.

BELLUM NECESSARIUM. SIVE MEDICUS BELLIGERANS; The Military or Practical
Physician reviewing his ARMORY.
Furnished with Medicinal Armature and Weapons, offensive and defensive,
Anatomically fitted and appropriate

To the Head Capital Pills. Cephalic essence.
Lungs Pectoral Electuary. Balsamic Extract.
Heart Cordial Tincture. Bezoardic Confection.
Stomach Stomach Pills. Digestive Elixir.
Spleen Mesentery and Liver Cachectic Fills. Scorbute Tincture. Hydropic Pills.
Hydropic Powder.
Guts Aperitive Powder. Retentive Powdex.
Reins and Bladder Nephritic Extract. Nephritic Powder. Dysuretic Powder.
Genital Parts Restaurative Essence. Hysterical Pills. Expulsive Powder.
Restringent powder.
Joints Arthritic Pills.
Skin Cosmetic Water. Powder of Saturn.
Miscellaneous Italick Pills Neapolitan Pills. Haematic Powder. Febrific
Elixir. Sarcotic Pills. Sudorific Pills. Sympathetic powder. Issue Cerecloth.

The Virtues use and Doses of each Medicine.
For the Head.
THE Capital Pills are appointed for infirmities of the brain and nerves, and
evacuates noxious humors that molest and hinder the exercise of the rational
faculty; or obstruct and impedite the free operation of the sensitive; whereby
the animal spirits are alleviated, the ventricles of the brain and organs for
sense freed from obstructions; Conducing much to the cure of infirmities
afflicting the head and nerves as lethargies, apoplexy and soporiferous
diseases; Convulsions epilepsy, palsies, vertigoes, tremors; pains of the head,
rhumes, dull sight, or hearing,

Take them after your first sleep; or half the dose when you go to bed, the
rest at 5 or 6 of the clock next morning; in so doing you will not be called up
before your due time to rise. When you are up, drink some warm posset drink,
and walk about the house: Eat at noon; thus do 3 or 4 days together for they
operate gently.

The Dose for men and women is 5 or 6 Pills: for 14 years old, 4 Pills.

The Cephalic essence, is specifickly appropriate to the head, effectually
resisting the infirmities thereof, and strengthening the brain and nerves of
special use for such as are cataleptick, epileptick, apoplectick, paralytick;
that have a cold or moist bra^n, sunject to rhumes Convulsions, remblings or
weakness of the nerves, vertigoes, pains of the head: it strengthens a weak
memory, weak eyes, amends dull hearing if the defect be not organicall. It
quickens and raises the spirits in somnolent drowzy persons, makes them more
acute and vigilant, and roborates the animal faculty.

To be taken after the Capital Pills, if both be used.

Take it in the morning fasting, thus: Drop it upon fine powdered sugar, and
take it upon a knifes point; then drink a draught of what liquor is most
agreeable and proper for you: eat an hour after and go abroad. Also you may
apply it to the nose profitably; Whereby the virtue is received into the head.

The Dose for men and women is 2^ drops, for children and infants so many drops
as they are years old. If under a year old, only apply it to the nose, as
aforesaid, and also to the temples. Shake the bottle when you use it.

For the Lungs
THe infirmities most incident to the Lungs are.

1. A thin sharp rheum, irritating and provoking the Lungs to expulsion by
coughing which oftentimes procures an exulceration and spitting of blood, and
from hence a Consumption may ensue.

2ly. A gross indigested phlegm, stopping the vessels of the Lungs and pipes
for respiration, causing difficulty of breathing, wheezing and coughing, which
is called an Asthma.

3ly. A Consumption or Ulcer of the Lungs, which in the beginning not so easy
to be discovered, but to be known by these signs. An obtuse or heavy pain in
the breast, short breath, frequent coughing, and destillation upon the Lungs.
In time is made more manifest, by spitting of purulent matter, an ulcerous and
more sharp pain in the breast, a putrid Fever, the cough more vehement,
imbecility and weakness of all the faculties, etc.

For the infirmities aforesaid the Medicines following are effectual and
peculiarly appointed.

The Pectoral electuary, stays defluctions of sharp thin rheums that invade
the Lungs, Mitigates their acidity and saltness which indangers Corrosion,
spitting of blood, and a Consumption; checks the violence of coughing and
eases the breast: it helps a dry cough, loosens phlegm, and helps
expectoration, procures rest, and respite from coughing in the night.

To be taken at any time, the quantity of a nutmeg or more, but chiefly at
night and morning in bed.

The Balsamic extract, is most effectual in restoring weak, decayed Consumptive
or ulcerated Lungs; purifies and cleanses the breast from putrid matter that
causes the breath to stink or be ill savoured; defends the Lungs from tetrid
malign vapors, internally generated or externally received, inducing a
vicious depraved constitution of the Lungs, or promoting a Consumption;
roborates and strengthens the Lungs, firmly resisting an haereditary Phthisical
consumptive disposition subject to some families: Opens obstructions and
stoppings in the breast, from Crude viscous phlegm stuffing the pipes of the
Lungs and vessels for respiration; helps old coughs asthmatic wheezings,
difficult, short, and faint breathing, from indisposition decay or imbecility
of the vital parts, and restores their vigor and natural ability.

Attenuates, maturates and concocts tough raw phlegm, and facilitates
expectoration; retracts a confluence of crude humors flowing in upon the Lungs
by the arteria venosa, causing oppilatious, short breath and Pertinacious
coughing. Is both a preservative and curative medicine for persons Consumptive,
inclining or disposed thereto, by any Pectoral infirmity.

The Dose is half a dram for Man or Woman. For 14 years old, a scruple or 24
grains.

Take it night and morning in bed: if it be for putrid or ulcerated Lungs you
must continue the use of it 3 weeks or a month observing due order and diet: if
for lesser infirmities a shorter time will effect the intention. It confines
you not to the house, more then the tenderness of your own body, and the
coldness of weather prohibits you to go abroad.

Roll it in Sugar Candy, or fine powdered sugar, and take it upon a knifes
point and swallow it.

For the Heart.
THe Cordial Tincture, is appointed for fainting fits, it cheers the heart,
releives the vital spirits opressed, cherishes decayed nature in weak and
ancient persons; comforts and warmes a cold stomach, helps digestion, expells
wind and Melancholy vapors from the Spleen; very good for palpitations of
the heart, or oppression at the stomach through Crudities and indigested matter.

To be taken at any time night or day, when any the aforesaid occasions require.

The full Dose is a spoonful; for twelve years old, half a spoonful, and so
proportionably to younger.

The Bezoardic Confection, is a Sovereign Antidote against the Plague and all
contagious Fevers; it powerfully expells poisons, breaths out all putrid
matter and malignity, received by unwholesome Airs, or otherwise generated in
the body: effectual in the Smallpox, Measels, Spotted-feavers to bring forth
their Malignity to the skinn, and to prevent returning inwards: removes
oppressions at the heart, and any surfeit or over-charging of the stomach, by
intemperate eating or drinking; of excellent use in all sudden Sicknesses in
young or old, to defend the heart and vitalls, until the distemper manifest it
self: Necessary to carry with you in Travel.

Take it on a knifs point, or dissolve it in Posset Drink, as often as occasion
requires.

The full Dose is the quantity of a Chestnut, for fourteen years old, as much as
a Nutmeg; for seven years old, the bigness of a Hasel-nut. And so
proportionably to younger.

For the Stomach.
THe Stomach not performing its office rightly in Chylification, either by its
own weakness or otherwise impedited, lays the foundation of many diseases, and
therefore is primely to be fortyfied and assisted when any dificiency appears:
for, error in the first concoction is not amended in the following digestions
of other parts from whence various preternatural affects disseminated in diverse
parts of the body owning their rise and spring from this fountain.

The symptoms of an ill affected stomach are, fullness, heaviness or opression,
loss of appetite, slow digestion or depraved, nauseousness or vomitting, hicket
or belching, thirst, heat, or burning. For which the following Medicines are
appointed.

The Stomach Pills cleanses the first region of the body downwards, from
abounding Choler and Phlegm, evacuates and unloads an opressed stomach, from
humors and indigested matter that corrupts good nutriment, dulls the appetite
and hinders digestion; by their abstersive faculty, removes viscous Phlegm
impacted in the tunicles of the stomach, a receptacle for inflation and wind.
Prevents, diarrhaeas, lienterial and dysenterial Fluxes, gripings and pains in
the stomach and bowels, from sharp biting Choler or flatulent crudity by
taking away their causes. And leaving a greateful astriction upon the stomach
which promotes concoction. Destroys Worms, and prevents, their breeding by
carrying away putrid matter whereof they are generated.

Takes away bitter eructations and nauseous belchings, vellications and gripes
in the stomach from bilious acrid humors; makes the stomach clean and fit for
the reception of wholesome food, and then you may expect good nutriment.

Take them after your first sleep, or early in the morning: when you are up,
Drink some warm Posset, eat at noon. You may go abroad if the weather be warm,
and the condition of your body will safely permit; But otherwise keep house.

You may take them three or four days together, they work gently.

The Dose for Men and Women is five or six Pills; For the age fourteen, 4 Pills.

The Digestive Elixir, By its incisive and attenuating quality is very
auxiliary to the stomachs ferment deficient and decayed, or obtunded and
overlayed with crudityes, corrects the imbecility and indisposition of the
superior orifice of the stomach, and causes the stomach to close with more
delight and satisfaction upon its object. Prevents nauseousness, flarulent
belchings, nidorous and unsavory risings in the stomach from indigestion and
putrid fermentation. Kills Worms in the stomach and Guts; And amends a strong
offensive breath. By its saline quality, excites and quickens a dull appetite
and procures good digestion. By its Balsamic amaritude, is healing and grateful
to a watrish, crude raw stomach.

By its aromatic virtue, cherishes and refreshes a weak tender stomach.

But if the stomach be very foul, stuffed and clogged with gross Phlegmatic
humors, then first cleanse downward with the stomach Pills, or upwards by vomit,
if hot Choleric adust humors fluctuate, heat and broyl upon the stomach:
afterward strengthen with the use of this Elixir, and you will find a great
alteration both for appetite and digestion, the stomach much alleviated,
disburthened, and cheerful in the performance of its office.

Drop it in a little fine powdered Sugar, and take it upon a knives point, in
the morning fasting; you may drink after it Wine, Beer, or other good Liquor
most agreeable to your stomach: eat an hour after and go abroad: you may take
it likewise at four of Clock in the afternoon.

The Dose for men and Women is sixteen drops: for the age fourteen ten drops;
for eight years old six drops: and so proportionably to younger.

Continue the use of it a fortnight together. Shake the bottle when you use it,

Medicines appropriate to the Spleen, Mesentery and Liver.
THe Cachectic Pills are effectual against the defects and infirmities of the
Spleen, mesentery Liver and Gall, from whence arise a Cachectic or ill habit of
body, Dropsies, Scurvy, Hypochondriac Melancholy, Jaundice black and yellow,
obstructions and pains in the several parts named, various praeternatural
febrific aestuations and fermentations, crudityes and coagulations in those
parts primarily affected, from thence dessused and disperced into the mass of
blood, which being thereby vitiated and impure, produces various external
Symptoms, pallid and livid discolourations, scorbute spots and desaedations of
the skin, Tumors and Ulcers.

These Pills evacuate and cleanse gently, by which the fore named parts are
exonerated, and notably restored to their pristine vigor and due performance
of their office (but by strong purgatives debilitated.) They penetrate into the
second and third digestion, removing obstructions, and attenuating viscous
coagulations which obtund the spirits in their motion and activity, stop the
conveyance of nutriment and corrupting it, hindering the communication of
parts, necessarily subordinate and subservient one to the other in their
offices and duties, and retaining excrements of the several digestions which
ought duly to be separated and sent forth, from whence the ill effects that
ensue are numerous. They are prevalent in prevention, and composing unnatural
fermentations and turgid ebullitions in the blood and humors; from whence
Erratic pains, and various disquietudes. They imbibe and drink up (by their
alkalizate quality) sharp and acide humors which cause erosions and torsions of
the bowels, stimulating and provoking Fluxes, and sharp pricking pains in
several parts.

They depurate and renovate the blood from scorbutic degeneration and exotic
mixture by which the spirits recover strength and vigor which before were
alienated torpid and inactive, the organs for nutrition disburthened and
releived and made fit to perform and execute their several offices and
functions.

The Dose for Men and Women, is 4 or 5 Pills: (According to the strength, and
condion of their body to operate.) For the age 14, 3 Pills.

Take them early in the morning, you may sleep 2 hours after; when you are up
drink a draught of posset drink; eat at noon:

Thus do twice or thrice in the weak, continuing their use more or less, as the
occassion and greatness of the cause requires.

After these Pills the following Tincture is very proper and beneficial.

The Scorbute Tincture has a specific virtue against the Scurvy, which
discovers it self by certain symptoms attending it, as lassitude, heaviness
and indisposition to motion or action; pains of the head, thighs, hips, knees,
and other parts; putrefaction of the gums and looseness of teeth, inflation and
distention of the Hypochonders; red purple or livid spots upon the skin, etc.
Some of these signs are sufficient to declare the disease especially when
remote causes concur, as a close Air, gross diet, studious, melancholy or
sedentary life. This Tincture asists the spleen in the discharge of its office,
from whose imbecility and depraved operation chiefly, as an approximate cause,
the blood acquires a peculiar corruption and scorbutic malignity, detected by
some symptoms declaring its specific nature, and according to the degree or
height arrived at, are the symptoms more in number, and more exasperate and
worse in quality. The Tincture resolves and volatizeth coagulate and fixed
tartareous matter; attenuates and rarenes gross subsiding humors, which
obstruct the vessels of the Spleen and viscera of nutrition, causing turgid
inflations, schirrous tumors and pains in those parts, concocts crude ichorous
blood, depurates and renovates it from scorbutic feculency, and malign
putrefaction, makes it more fit for nutrition, and amicable to the body.

Take it in a glass of White Wind, or Rhenish which is best; or in good strong
beer, not new; or beer with the juce of Orange which is better; or whey if the
body be hot. In the morning fasting, and at 4 of the clock in the after noon.

The Dose for men and women is 24 drops: for the age 14 and under, so many
drops as they are years old.

Shake the Bottle then use it.

The Hydropic Pills are appointed for the cure of Dropsies, and watery tumors
of the body, whether universal or in particular parts: They are purgative, and
attract serous and watery humors from any part of the body and Evacuates by
seige. They excite the kidneys to attraction and expulsion, which before was
fluggish, imbecile or impedited in their office, whereby superfluous serosity
or water is accumulated and retained in the body; they are very aperitive
resolutive and diuretical, opening obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and
Ureters, dissolving any coagulate matter and sending forth the Morbific cause
by Urine.

The Dose for Men and Women is 5 Pills; or but 4 if a tender body; for 14 years
old, 3 Pills.

Take them in the morning fasting, and drink little until noon; then eat your
dinner. Thus do 2 or 3 days in a week intermitting a day between. Those days
you purge not, drink a draught of Wormwood wine, and eat some white biscuit
every morning, and at 4 of the Clock after noon: keep a spare diet, let your
meat be roasted rather then boiled. If your stomach be weak use the digestive
Tincture.

Be moderate in drinking. You may profitably use white wind mingled with the
decoction of sasaffras, two parts to one of wine.

The Hydropic powder has the same virtues and operation with the Hydropic
Pills. But because some are averse to Pills, that with facility can take a
powder, they may choose either.

Take it in a draught of posset drink or white wine warmed. Observing the
preceding directions.

The full Dose is one Dram: for the age 14, 2 scruples or half a Dram. And so
proportionably to younger.

For the Guts.
THe Retentive Powder, mittigates and stays all Fluxes and violent excretions
of the Guts, whether lienterial Dysenterial or diarrhaea's; not by an
astringent or binding quality of the Medicine, that were injurious to nature
and not subsidiary, to retain what nature desires to expel; but by attracting
and collecting the peccant humor that stimulates to expulsion and evacuating
it, whereby one stool that the Medicine procures, carries with it more of the
offending cause, then six other from the (often times vain) irritations and
struglings of nature without assistance.

By the anodynous virtue, it allayes and charms the turgid aestuation of
stimulating humors, by degrees evacuates and sends them forth, with less
disturbance and danger; whether they be sharp, bilious, or acide serous humors;
a saline irritating Phleme, a stinking corrupt Colliquation, or acrid and adust
Melancholy; having also and astringent virtue to bind after wards, and to
roborate the retentve faculty, the offending cause being removed; this is the
safest way to stop the flux of what nature soever, and in any person; women
with child, in child bed, children or infants, and to prevent the danger that
may ensue. If the Flux be bloody drink Whey wherein gads of Steel has been
quenched, for your common drink.

The Dose of the Powder for man or Woman, is a dram or more: to a Child of
twelve years old, half a dram. And so proportionably to younger.

Take it in Posset Drink, in the Morning in bed, and sleep after it if you can.
Do likewise the next day, if the occasion continue.

The Apperitive powder, is emollient absterfive and opening, appointed for
costive, hot and dry bodies; whereby excrements being too long retained, are
hardened and baked, sumes return up to the stomach, troubling Concoction and
offensive to the brain: it corrects the dry distemper of the Guts, or
intemperate heat of the Liver (frequent causes of costiveness) humects and
softens dry hard excrements, and procures two or three stools. It is a
necessary preparative to Physic, making the body f^uid and fit for purgation;
opening obstructions of the bowels, mesentery, Liver, Spleen Pancreas and
Matrix; whereby any Medicine has access to those parts, with more facility and
speed and less abatement of its strength, before it comes to operate upon the
part intended; the ductures and passages being laid open, by its Apperitive
virtue.

The Dose for Man or Woman is a Dram: for fourteen years, two scruples.

Take it in a wine-glass full of the Liquor of stewed Prunes, in the morning
fasting; half an hour after drink a good draught of posset drink, or Whey if
you have a hot costive body: an hour after this you may eat your breakfast;
spoon meat is best.

Thus you may do four or five mornings together.

For the Reins and Bladder.
THe Nephritic Extract, by a specific virtue resists the lapidifactory
disposition of the Reins, and petrifactive succus, prevents coagulation and
petrifaction: By the abstersive tartareous property, cleanses the Reins and
Bladder from mucilaginous slimy matter, sand or gravel that lodges in the
urinary passages. By the unctuous quality, mollifies, relaxeth lubrifies and
dilates the uriters and urinary ductures, for the more facile and speedy
exclusion of the stone-gravel or any viscous coagulated matter, which may cause
a suppression of urine, or strangury. By the balsamic virtue. Heals
excoriations of the urinary passages, caused by attrition of the stone and
gravel, or acrimony of Urine, and mitigates the pain. Very subtle and
resolutive, powerful to dissolve the stone; diuretical and purging by urine.

The Dose for Man or Woman is half a Dram, which is about the quantity of a
hasel nut.

Take it thus five or six mornings together fasting: roll it in fine powdered
Sugar or Honey and so swallow it; then drink a good draught of White Wind after,
or mixed with Ale. And you may follow your business.

The Nephritic Powder, cleanses the Reins and bladder from sand and gravel,
opens the Uriters and Urinary passages, provokes Urine, cooles the reins and
prevents the stone.

Take it in a glass of White Wind fasting, half a douzen mornings together.
But let the Powder be put into the wine over night and stand close covered.

The Dose is one Dram.

The Dysuretic Powder, corrects the sharpness of Urine (having an Hostile
quality and antipathy to acidityes) which causes the Uriters to twitch and
vellicate with a painful Convulsive motion and contraction in the small of the
back and hips to the Region of the bladder and bottom of the Belly: helps
incontinency of Urine or debility of holding water, strengthening the Sphincter
Muscle of the bladder and taking away the acrimony of the Urine, which provokes
the expulsive faculty: it checks the over strong attraction of the reins,
causing immoderate making water, thereby wasting the body, exhausting the
natural humidity and impoverishing the Mass of blood: coagulates a saline and
tartareous resolution in the body which coming into the ductures of the Urine,
stimulates and irritates to expulsion by its acrimony. Cooles the reins,
mitigates the ardor and scalding heat of Urine.

The Dose for Man or Woman is a Dram, for the age 14. two scruples: 8 years old
half a Dram.

Take it in the morning an hour before you rise, in posset drink: you may eat
or drink when you are up and go abroad. Use it a fortnight or three weeks
together. Observe your diet; and let your drink be steeled.

For the Genital Parts.
THE Restaurative essence, asists digestion in the Spermatic vessels,
strengthens the generative faculty; effectual against sterility or barrenness
in the feminine sex, and deficiency in the masculine; if the causes be
superfluous moisture, crudity and infaecundity of the seed, debility of the
Genital parts, frigidity or imbecility of nature, and not organical
impediments and defects. It strengthens a weak back, preserves the balsom of
nature, and natural heat; restores consumptive weak persons, strengthens old
age, and the declinings of nature; refreshes the animal and vital spirits by
its aromatical fragrancy; roborates the internal parts; asists the digestions,
prevents crudityes and the superfluity of crude humors.

Takes away putrefaction in bodies that have a rank or strong favor, by
reason of putrid humors breathing forth through the pores of the body; it will
depurate, cleanse and make such bodies more sweet and wholesome, and more
acceptable to their bed fellows.

Shake the bottle, before you use it.

Drop it into fine powdered sugar and take it upon a knifes point: then drink a
glass of Tent, Muskadel, or Sack, after it.

The Dose is 24 drops for Men or Women.

You may take it night and morning in bed.

In the use of strengthening Medicines, Take this observation: That if the body
be soul, let gentle purgation precede; first cleanse, then strengthen, that's a
regular course: for this purpose, let women take the Hysterical Pills; Men may
use the Stomach or Cachectic Pills: As the condition of their body most
requires.

The Hysterical Pills, have an abstersive, and purgative faculty, to cleanse and
open obstructions of the veins leading to the Matrix, whereby the terms may
have their due times, and color, according to the course of nature: they
dissipate flatulent vapors, and evacuate noxious humors collected in the womb,
which having aquired malign qualities by residence there, occasions various
symptoms and disturbance in several parts by consent from the Matrix: as
Hypochondriac Melancholy, palpitation of the heart, shortness of breath and
compression about the stomach, pains of the head, deliriums, Convulsive
motions, sadness, palenesse and unwonted Complexion; they prevent fits of the
Mother, disperse the vapors, and corrects the malignant cause: They cure the
Green Sickness, brings the terms into their right order, restores the
Complexion, and purges the lower Region of the body.

The full Dose is 6 pills; for fifteen years old, 5 pills; or but four, if she
be a tender body and easy to operate.

Take them early in the Morning, you may lie an hour after: when you are up
drink a good draught of warm Posset, and walk in the House. Eat at noon.

Thus do two or three days together: intermit so many days, then take twice or
thrice more. And you will find the benefit.

The Expulsive Powder, Is appointed for a difficult and perilous Child birth;
being effectual to expedite the delivery of Women in a slow hard labor: it
procures traveling pains when nature is unable and weak, gives strength to
the woman and Child, and hastens the Birth; expells a dead child, and brings
away the after burden.

You may give it twice in twelve hours, for the foresaid occasions, not oftener.

The Dose is one paper of powder.

Take it in a small spoonful of Cinnamon Water Penyroyal-Water, or Mace Ale; or
these mixed at the discretion of the Midwife.

The Restringent Powder, helps the debility and weakness of the Spermatic
Vessels, procured by immoderate coition, or other accidents: stays a Gonorhaea
or Running of the Reins, so called; corrects the heat and acrimony of the seed
that stimulates to expulsion, and allays the pain: asswageth any sharp humor in
the privities of either Sex, heals an exulration or excoriation there; takes
away itching or molesting heat; prevents the danger by immoderate copulation,
cools, allayes and strengthens those parts,

Use it thus: Take a quart of Smiths water, let it stand six hours to settle,
then pour off a pint clear, in it put the Powder, shake it well in a Bottle;
then with a Syringe inject it into the privy part morning and night, and you
will receive much help and ease.

But if the Gonorrhaea be virulent, proceeding from the Pox; then it is
requisite also that you take the Medicines proper for that disease, as the
italic and neapolitan Pills, to purify and cleanse your body from that
malignity and virulency where with the humors are tainted and vitiated; And to
prevent future danger.

For the joints.
THe Arthritick Pills, are peculiarly appointed for the Gout, whether
hereditary or acquired by diaetetic errors, or differing in the part affected;
as the feet, knees hips, hands or other Joints; yet owning the same approximate
cause, and admit the same cure. They attract the serous acrid humor which
pricks and lancinates the Periostium and nervous parts about the Joint: and
retract the confluence of humors (caused by pain) resorting to the part
affected. They are very profitable and Auxiliary against a rheumatismus
(commonly called the running Gout) which is an erratic pricking pain wandering
from part to part, caused by a flatulent acrimonious humor, afflicting not only
the joints but the periostia of the Bones between joint and joint, the Muscles
of the body, and membranes of the internal viscera: they prevent fluxion and
transition of turgid humors, evacuates biting Choler, Saline and sharp Serous
humors. And checks the serocity of their nature. By their alkalisate quality,
they destroy exotic acidities which are dolorous and hostile to neru us and and
membranous parts, and are a singular prophylactic or preservative from the
cruelty of arthritick arthritic or Gout pains. Use them Spring and Autumn for
prevention: or at other seasons if occasion require.

The full Dose is 5 Pills: for feminine and tender bodies easy to operate, 4
may be sufficient.

Take them early in bed, lie an hour or two after; drink a little posset when
they work, and eat at noon: Do so two or three days together; intermit 4 or 5
days, and take again.

After Purgation the Sudorifio Pills are beneficial.

For the Skin.
THE Cosmetick Water, is appointed for discolourations and commaculations of
the skin; native or adventitious, (accounted no small infirmity with the
Ladies) being symptoms denoting the constitution, and temperature of some
principal parts, diseases present and imminent, or the vestigia and marks of
preceding infirmities and external accidents, displayed in their proper
distinguishing colors, citrine, liuid, brown, red, swarthy etc. According to
the nature of their causes, as in both the jaundice; Scurvy, distempered Livers
and Spleens, obstructions, and most Cachectic bodies, Smallpox, Measels,
Contusions, burns etc.

This washing is no fucus that says an artificial color upon the skin to
palliate a bad complexion and deceive the sight. But to amend and tiear a dark
brown skin, of the face, neck, breast or bands: it takes away Sun-burn,
roughness, swarthiness, Morphew, small Pox spots and pimplex has an abstersive
and attenuating faculty to thin and puri^e a muddy thick skin which clouds the
luster of a lively peircing aspect.

There is nothing more amiable then the life, which is presented to view with
some interposition, being veiled with the skin, which if dark and thick,
eclipses and hides much of the luster and penetration.

But if thin, clear and more transparent, the glory and beauty of the life then
streams forth with great attraction: And therefore the eye is the most lovely
victorious part, for its dilucid clearness, in which the sparklings and vigor
of life is most visible and naked. It Is not white and red that has the
magnetisme of love, but the life dressed in those perspicuous colors.

You may use or leave this water when you will without prejudice, there is no
Mercury not any thing to injure the tenderest skin.

Shake the Bottle, then wet a cloth with it and wash your face every morning.

The Powder of Saturn is appointed for Cutany defaedations, venereous Scab^ and
Ulcers, pustules knobs in the flesh and glandulous tumors From the venereous
cause. Also Scabs and Ulcers from other causes; Tettars, Ringworms itch,
pushes, pimples. Chilblanes, cooles all outward inflammations, represseth
tumors and asswageth their pain, very profitable for Sores or Tumors of the
Kings evil.

Use it thus: take a quart of Smiths water let it stand to settle; then pour of
a pint and half clear, in it put the powder and let it boil gently to a
pint, in a glass^ bottle set in a Kettle of water; then let it stand 2 days
to settle very clear; pour it off and keep it for use: and with this liquor
bathe the places affected morning and night.

For the Venereal Pox.
THE Italic Pills, are a specific purgative Medicine for the Venereal Pox. They
purge and cleanse the body by their appropriate virtue from the virulency and
foulness of that disease, which corrupts the whole mass of blood, and breaks
forth into pustul's, Scabs and Vicers, by time invading the solid parts; they
mitigate pain, checkes and abates the rigor of other symptoms which attends
this disease, and prevents the danger.

The Dose for Man or Woman is 5 Pills.

Take them early in bed, lie an hour after; and when they work, drink a little
posset drink: you may eat at noon.

The Neapolitan Pills, are a Peculiar Sudorific Medicine for the great Pox
after the preceding purgation, to transpire and breath out by sweating the
remaining malignity and contagious infection wherewith the body is tainted.
They dispell the malign vapors, and relieve the spirits oppressed, purify
the blood, and eradicate the impurity and venenate qualities of the disease, by
their peculiar propriety and opposition.

The Dose for Man or Woman is 4 Pills.

Take them in bed eaily, or at night if more convenient for your occasions;
half an hour after drink a draught of hot bear or posset drink wherein Sage is
boiled be covered warm and lie to sweat when you have sweat 2 hours, (not
longer) let some clothes be taken of and cool by degrees, and have a care you
take not cold after sweating, the Pores being open.

A regular and easy cure for the Venereal Pox with the preceding Medicines.
THis disease sometimes lies obscure and dificult to be dettcted, and puts on
the disguises of other infirmities, but those who are guilty of the danger, may
conclude by some of the following symptoms, what it is that troubles and alters
them. Yet this foul disease is not always got by impure copulation; But
otherwise sometimes, Man with Man, and Woman with Woman, lying together, and
having intimate Society. And although it be infections, yet all bodies are not
apt to receive it, as all catch not the Plague in an infected house. But I must
shorten the discourse, and come to the symptoms which attend the disease, and
they are various according to the degree and height arrived at. At first a
lassitude, weariness and indisposition to motion, heaviness and dullness, the
Spirits being tainted and opressed with the infection: pain of the head,
shoulders and other parts, chiefly at night: heat and burning in the palms of
the hands and soles of the feet: a Gonorrhae a or running of the Reins:
afterward breakings out upon the skin venereous buboes, and Ulcers of the
privy parts, etc. Which come not altogether, but successively by degrees,
discovering the discase in its progress, and degree of malignity.

The cure is performed thus; the first day take a Dose of the I^alic pills; the
second day let a vein be opened, if you be Feavorish or of a hot constitution;
take blood at the discretion of your Chyrurgeon. The fourth day take the Italic
pills again; rest the fifth, sixth, and seventh: the eight day take the Italic
pills again: the tenth, eleventh, twelfth days take the Neapolitan Pills to
sweat; then rest 2 or 3 days, and take the Italic pills again; and after that,
the Neopolitan. As occasion requires continuance.

This method you are to observe for a short or longer time, according to the
greatness and inveterate contumacy of the disease. Interchainging these
Medicines and giving convenient respite: which course will not be hard for you
to observe although your body be weak and brought low with the disease, for
nature will strengthen and be much encouraged daily, by the assistance of these
Medicines and Methodical course, prevailing upon the disease. And you will be
more cheerful and strong then at first when you began.

In the interim during this course and method, no day is prohibited but you may
use the powder of Saturn, if there be any Ulcer, pustuls, Scabs, or tumors
caused by this disease: also the Restringent powder if there be a Gonorrhaea:
and if your mouth be fore, or the gums swelled and tender by reason of the
malignant humor spending it self that way by spitting, as sometimes it does;
then use to gargle your mouth often with hot broth, or warm Beer sweetened with
honey, and you need not fear any prejudice.

Haematic Powder.
THe Haematic Powder is appointed as a necessary help to rest ain an immoderate
Flux of blood that is hurtful and weakening to nature; whether it be the
overflowing of women's monthly purgations, vomiting or spiting of blood,
Haepatic Fluxes by Stool, by Urine, or at the nose. It corrects the acrimony,
tenuity or serosity, and heat of blood which stimulates to expulsion, and
causes transudation, apertion, or erosion of a vein It incrassates and
thickens the blood; And makes it indisposed for fluxion, constringeth and
binds the Vessels and assists the dibility of the retentive faculty.

Take it in a draught of Verjuice Posset cold, morning and night in bed.

The full Dose is one Dram: for twelve years old, half a dram.

Febrific Elixir.
THe Febrific Elixir, is very auxiliary to mitigate and allay the burning heat
of Fevers; it checks the fermenting ebullition and aestuation of the blood;
resists febrific putrefaction and disposes to transpiration of hot putrid
vapors, which causes restlesness and unquiet watchings; asswageth immoderate
thirst, irrigates and refreshes the parched spirits: excites decayed appetite
by restoring the stomachical ferment, and is grateful to the stomach.

The full Dose is twenty drops: for young people so many drops as they are
years old.

Shake the bottle when you use it.

You may take it in a glass of White Wind: or mingled with fresh smalbeer equal
parts, a good draught; twice in the day, or night. You may put Syrup of Oranges
or Lemmons if you will to it, for the Palate sake; you need not fear the heat
of the wine to prejudice you.

Sarcotic Pills.
THE Sarcotic Pills are appointed for Vicers internal and external, they
exsiccate cleanse and heal by their Balsamic virtue, excoriations and ulcers
within the body, where there is a possibility of cure; taking away all
corrosive and sharp fretting humors, which continues the ulceration: they are
very advantageous toward the cure of external ulcers and sores in any part of
the body, subtracting the antecedent cause, evacuating serous acrid humors
which feeds the sore and prohibites healing: they are proper and beneficial for
wounded persons, to expedite their cures: they are good for Scabbed persons,
Leprous, or have any breakings out upon the skin.

The Dose for Man or Woman is 5 or 6 Pills: for 14 years old. 4 Pills.

Take them 3 or 4 mornings in a week; you may lie an hour or 2 after them in
bed. 3 hours after taking them, you may drink posset drink, or whey: Which
also is best for your common drink, in the forementioned cases, and to have it
steeled with gads of steel quenched therein.

Sudorific Pills
THE Sudorific Pills are aperitive, resolutive and discussive; opens the pores
and procures breathing sweats; removes Cold, Aches, and stiffness in the
Muscles and joints; transpires and breaths out putrid vapors and superfluity
of crudy watery humors and rheumatic moisture; depurates and cleanses the
blood; and opens obructions: very profitable in contusions or bruises,
dissipates and scatters the Flux of humors resorting to the dolorous part
affected, and prevents coagulation of the blood, resolves it if already fixed
and congealed; they prevent tumors, and internal apostumation, and disperseth a
colleciton of humors. A general Medicine, and may fitly be used in all cases
that require sweating, with facility and benefit.

You may take them 2 or 3 mornings together fasting, in bed covered warm; a
quarter of an hour after, drink a draught of hot possetdrink, then sweat will
break forth, lie in it for 2 hours; then take off clothes by degrees, and cool
with discretion.

The full Dose is 4 Pills: for 14 years old, 3 Pills.

Sympathetic Powder.
THE Sympathetic Powder, is of known virtue in cureing green wounds, as also
the Toothache.

Take a few drops of blood from the wound, in a piece of linen, and lay upon
the blood a little of this powder; then tie it up close, and put it in your
bosom, and keep it warm day and night, for if cold or wet happen to it, the
wounded person will be much disturbed and pained. If there be wounds in several
parts, each wound must have a several cloth used in like manner, wash the wound
with white wind, or the parties urine; then bind up the wound with convenient
linen cloth that cold come not to it, and in such manner as the brims of the
wound may draw toward each other: the third day open the wound and wash away
the quittour or corruption, then bind it up again with fresh clothes, and you
will have a speedy cure, if the wound be in such a part of the body as is
cureable. In like manner you may do to a beast wounded, with success.

For the Toothache thus: cause your gum to bleed where the pain is, with a
penknife or needle; then stain a cloth with it the breadth of a groat, without
rheum; then lay a little powder to it; tie it up and keep it as aforesaid, and
it seldom fails to give present ease and cure.

Issue Cere-cloth
THE Issue Cerecloth is very commodious for those who have Issues in any part
of the body, it attracts and draws to the place for vent, extravafated,
superfluous, erratic humors: causes a dry Issue to run, and brings away filthy
matter; prevents inflammation and keeps an Issue cool: very necessary in
journyes and voyages; one piece will serve a month in wearing, then lay on a
fresh one; wipe it and turn the other side to the place every dressing, and lay
a paper upon it.

A Catalogue of the Diseases and Symptoms for which the Medicines are
peculiarly appointed.
PAlsy, page 80. 81. Lethargy, page 80. 81. Convulsions, page 80. 81.
Falling Sickness, page 80. 81. Vertigoe page 80. 81. Headache, page 80. 81.
Tremors, page 80. 81. Rheums, page 80. 81. 114. Bad hearing page 80. 81. Bad
sight page 80, 81. Coughs, page 82. 83. Consumption, page 82. 83. 100. Spitting
blood, page 82. 83. Short breath, page 82, 83. Ill savoured breath, page 82,
83, 88. Palpitation of the heart, page 85. Fainting. page 85. Oppression at
heart and stomach, page 85. Melancholy vapors, page 85. Bad Stomach, page 87,
88. Surfets, page 85, 87. Pain at stomach, page 87. 88. Wind, page 85, Worms,
page 87, 88. Cholick, page 87. Costiveness, page 96. Fluxes, page 87, 95.
Jaundice, page 90. Gripings, page 87. Spleen, page 90, 91, 92. Scurvy, page 90,
91, 92. Obstructed Liver page 90. Dropsies, page 93, 94. Obstructed Mesentery,
page 90, Stone and gravel page 98, 97. Infirmities of the Urine, page 98. 99.
Gonorrhaea, page 103. Green Sickness. page 101. Them immoderate, page 111 Fits
of the Mother page 101. Barrenness, page 100. Masculine Imbecility, page 100.
Hard-labour, page 102. Weak backs, page 100. Fevers, page 85. 112. Plague, page
85. Smallpox, page 85. Measels page 58. French Pox, page 170. 180. 109.
Poisons, page 58. Gout. page 104. R^nkness of body, page 100. Inflammations,
page 107. Tumors, page 107. Ulcers, page 107. 113. Bruises, page 114. Aches,
page 114. Stiffness, page 114 Scabs, page 107, 103. Itch, page 107. 103.
Tettes, page 108. Ring-worms, page 107. Swarthyness page 150. 160. Sun-burn,
page 150. 160. Morphew, page 150. 160. Spots, page 105. 160. Chilblains, page
107.
Initia Morborum quamvis levia serpunt, Venienti occurrite --

FINIS.
The Medicines are appointed at these Rates; that none may give more; or expect
them for less.
s. d CApital Pills 2 6 Cephalic Essence 5 0 Pectoral Electuary 2 0 Balsamic
Extract 7 0 Cordial Tincture 2 6 Bezoardic Confection 3 0 Stomach Pills. 2 6
Digestive Elixir 5 0 Cachectic Pills 3 4 Scorbute Tincture 5 0 Hydropic Pills 4
0 Hydropic Powder 3 4 Aperitive Powder 2 6 Retentive Powder 2 6 Nephritic
Extract 6 0 Nephritic Powder 4 0 Dysuretic Powder 4 0 Restaurative Essence 10 0
Hysterical Pills 3 4 Expulsive Powder 5 0 Restringent powder 3 0 Arthritic
Pills 4 0 Cosmetic Water 6 0 Powder of Saturn 2 0 Italick Pills 3 4 Neapolitan
Pills 4 0 Haematic Powder 3 0 Febrific Elixir 5 0 Sarcotic Pills 4 0 Sudorific
Pills 2 6 Sympathetic Powder 3 0 Issue Cerecloth 1 6

WHat Medicines you intend to keep for emergent occasions, set them in dry
places from moisture and they will remain in full virtue, the Electuaries a
year and half; the Pills and powders two years: the Elixirs, Tinctures,
Extracts and Essences many years, being close stopped.

FINIS.

