THE ANTIQUITY OF THE Royal Line OF SCOTLAND Farther Cleared and Defended,
Against the Exceptions lately offered by Dr. STILLINGFLEET, In his Vindication
of the Bishop of St. ASAPH.

By Sir George Mackenzie, His Majesty's Advocate for the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

LICENSED,

Nov. 2. 1685. To. L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball against the Royal
Exchange. 1686.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
IT is not my practice to plead any thing for your Majesty with zeal, until I
find it a matter of some importance; and my self likewise convinced that I
cannot answer my own Arguments: By this rule, when I first saw the Bishop of
St. Asaph's Book, I took some pains to persuade my self, that it contained
nothing prejudicial to that right of precedence, which is due to your Royal
Race, as the most Ancient Monarchy which we know. But finding that there was no
way to secure this precedence to the Royal Family, against those consequences
which necessarily arose from his Positions; I thought it my duty, at that time,
to answer his Lordship's Book, as I do now Dr. Stillingfleet's: especially,
since they, in overturning the ancient settlement of the Royal Line in
Scotland, destroy one of the great Foundations, whereby your Majesty's
Grandfather, your Father, and your Last Parliament, have farther engaged, and
encouraged the Loyalty of this your. Ancient Kingdom: Wherefore, Sir, these
Reverend Divines will now, I hope, hold me excused, in regard that I pleaded
first for them, with my self, before I pleaded against them, for your Majesty:
And if I could have found any man to have satisfied me, as to the
inconveniences arising to the Crown in these Points, I had never printed that
Book in defense of the Royal Family, and of my Native Country. But, now humbly
to satisfy your Majesty as to the dangerousness of these Positions (even
supposing the Authors innocent of any ill design, as I am apt to think they
are) and to convince them, how impartial I am upon any National Account; I beg
leave to mind your Sacred Majesty, that some of our Own Historians having erred
with as little ill design as they, touching the Succession of King Robert the
Second; An Argument was drawn from it, in favor of Bastards, and was much
boasted of by the Enemies of the true Royal Line, and thereupon, I did, to the
satisfaction of all indifferent men, refute our own Historians in that Point,
as, I hope, I do now these Gentlemen in the Points controverted. Scarce any
thing, Sir, can be thought inconsiderable, wherein a Crown is concerned; or any
consequence so remote, but should be adverted to, in a Season when a long
Rebellion has so far debaucht the Inclinations of too many of your Majesty's
Subjects: But certainly, nothing can be thought inconsiderable, which Kings and
Parliaments have judged so useful for establishing the precedence of the
Sovereign, and for confirming the Affection and Loyalty of the Subject. And the
Doctor's way of telling us, (in place of all other defense) that the Irish
carry up the Royal Line Praef. page 5.
within six degrees of Japhet, and so we shorten it, is not serious enough in a
Subject we ought to treat of with veneration; since the Doctor, in the Chap. 5.
page 267. and passim.
same Book, does but make himself merry with Offlahertie, the Assertor of this
pretended Antiquity.

Sir, the agreement of Men of different Professions, almost at the same time,
against the Royal Line, is very remarkable; some endeavoring by their Swords
to cut it short at that end which lay next to them; Whilst others, by their
Pens, have undertaken what derogates from its glory, by lopping off its remoter
end; which I Am sure lay far out of their way: And I wish, that as your Majesty
has most successfully defeated the one, by your Victorious Arms; so I may be so
happy, in your prudent Reign, as to contribute somewhat to disappoint the
other, by what I have said in vindication of its Antiquity.

Sir, The dutiful inclination I have to serve your Majesty, is, I confess,
much heightened, by the Royal Obligations you have been pleased to lay upon our
Nation; not only in your gracious protection of it, but in the glory you have
added to that Royal Family, under which we have been so long happy. Your
Majesty owes your success (next to that merciful and miraculous providence
which still attends your Sacred Person and Family to your own wise Conduct, and
to the great Justice of your Cause; and not to your Councils or Servants,
though it is your Majesty's goodness to be as kind to them as if you did. And
therefore, Sir, I am so far from valuing my self, upon any success I may, or
can pretend to have, in pleading for your Majesty, either in Print, or at the
Bar; that I shall still ascribe whatever advantages I may gain that way, to the
Justice of your Majesty's Cause, without arrogating any part of it to my own
Skill or Eloquence.

And now your Majesty having by your own Royal Influence, and the Prudence of
your proper Conduct, overturned in so short a time all the Designs of a
Rebellion, so deeply rooted; And by your gentleness and clemency overcome the
obstinacy of your most inveterate Enemies, which is by far the more wonderful
Victory, thereby contracting into one year the glories of a long Reign: I can
never have the vanity to imagine, your Majesty should yet any way need the mean
assistence of,

Sir, Your Majesty's most Dutiful Loyal and Obedient Subject and Servant,
George Mackenzie.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE King's Advocat in duty bound to defend the Antiquity of the Royal
Line. This debate, as it was unnecessarily started, so it is unwarrantably
continued. The Author's Answers to Buchanan's Jus Regni cleared, and defended.
CHAP. II. That the Scots were placed here before the Tear 503. CHAP. III. What
the Bishop of St. Asaph and Dr. Stillingfleet say against our Histories, from
Fergus the First, examined. CHAP. IV. Our Authors vindicated in the accounts
they give of the Genealogy of our Kings. CHAP. V. The Irish Genealogy of our
Kings compared with the Accounts given by the Chronicle of Melross, and both
compared with the Genealogies contained in our Histories; with a full proof,
that our Historians are to be preferred to the Irish Annals as to this point:
Ogygia examined.
The Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland farther cleared and defended,
against the Exceptions lately offered by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Vindication
of the Bishop of St. Asaph.
CHAP. I.
KING James, having in his Basilicon Doron, p. 201. founded his Royal
Prerogative upon King Fergus's having made himself King and Lord, as well of
the whole Lands, as of the Inhabitants of Scotland; and King Charles the First,
having in a Letter to his Parliament, An. 1641. founded that kindness, which he
expected from the Scots, upon this; that they and their Predecessors were
Sworn to maintain that Race of their Kings which he now represented, after 108
Descents: I leave it to all indifferent men, if I, as King's Advocate, was not
in duty obliged to answer a Book written by the Reverend and Learned Bishop of
St. Asaph, to prove that King Fergus, and 44 posteriour Kings were merely
fabulous and idle inventions, since that assertion did not only give the lie
flatly to two of our most just and learned Kings, but overturned the
foundations on which they had built the duty and kindness of their Subjects:
And since precedence is one of the chief glories of the Crown, and that for
this, not only Kings, but Subjects fight and debate; how could I suffer this
right and privilege of our Crown to be stolen from it by this Assertion; which
did expressly subtract about 830 years from their antiquity; and, in
consequence, lessened it by other 500? for we can produce no evidences for
these also, which may not be quarreled, if our Adversaries be allowed to reject
what is here controverted; consequentially to which, Ubbo Emmius, magnified by
the Doctor, has brought down their Antiquity to Kenneth the Third: and since
nothing can be answered to these grounds, which I may conclude, because Dr.
Stillingfleet has answered nothing to them, nor to the many reasons whereby I
proved that Episcopacy was no otherways concerned in this debate, than in as
far as it was made a pretext for the more secure opposing our Monarchy: I
admire how Dr. Stillingfleet could adventure to continue the debate, especially
after a whole Parliament of zealous Episcopal members, (and wherein there did
sit 14 Bishops) had unanimously, after many of them had read, and all had heard
of the Bishop's Book, thought of new again, this Antiquity a solid and
necessary Basis for their Loyalty.

All that the Doctor answers, is, That our Kings are still ancient by the Irish
Race, and so were Kings in another place: But he should have considered, that
the Conquest of an ancient Kingdom brings not to the Conqueror the antiquity
of those he conquers; and our Kings succeed only to the Irish by the Scottish
Kings now controverted; and if he rejects ours for want of sufficient proofs,
he must by a stronger consequence reject the proofs* that can be produced for
them, and he does so indeed with much scorn and gayety; nor can he prove our
Kings to be descended from Fergus the Second, if he allow not my proofs for
Fergus the First; nay, which is more, I have proved the descent of Fergus the
Second, from the Irish, in their way, to be impossible, and all the Authors
for this opinion to have contradicted one another: so that these two Loyal
Divines toil much to prove their King to be, not only not the most ancient,
but one of the last Kings in Christendom; and are angry at me, though the
King's Advocate, for daring to say, that this was a king of lose Majesty: by
which I meant only then, a lessening and wronging of the Majesty of our common
Kings, though I qualified this Rhetorical expression, by adding, that I was
sure the learned Bishop of St. Asaph had written this with a design rather to
gratify his Order, and Country, than Industriously to injure our Kings or us;
and thus, in that matter, I have been gentler than my employment could well
allow, or my present treatment does require. The Doctor being resolved to found
every thing upon his own authority, knowing of little other help, tells us,
That such as are to write in matters of Antiquity, should be extraordinarily
versed in the best Authors, and should have a deep judgment, able to compare
them together; and this being the Preface of his own Origines Britannicae,
Praef. p. 3d.
may be, I am afraid, so construed, as if he would have us take his own word
for his being a most learned and judicious Antiquary and Critic, for else he
would not have undertaken this sublime and hard task; as also he tells us by
the same art, that it was not every Advocate used to plead eloquently at the
Bar, and who took citations at second-hand, who could manage so weighty
matters; making it thus great Insolency in me to grapple with him in our own
History, which, a Scotchman, and in the Latin Authors, which a Civilian should
understand best of all others; for this debate requires little other learning
beside these, and the reading of some few passages in others, which I have read
in the Authors themselves with as great attention as the Doctor, without
taking any of my Citations at second-hand, or using them without considering
first their full import, and remotest consequences, as several learned men here
can prove, and will better and more convincingly appear from this debate it
self; in which, beside the main positions, I hope to prove that either the
Doctor has not understood so well, or at least has not used them so ingenuously
as I have done.

To reflect somewhat on me, and much on our Historians, without contributing
any thing else to the present debate, save what may arise from the weakening our
credibility, the Doctor asserts that I should have in my answer to Buchanan's
Ius Regni, denied that any respect was due to arguments brought from our
Histories, to prove his Republican Principles, and I should have decry'd our
Histories as fabulous, and invented merely to sustain those Principles.

To which my Answer is, that I should be glad to find Dr. Stillingfleet as firm
a friend to the power and interest of Kings, as I have been, though I think he
gives no great evidence of it, in urging unnecessarily all Buchanan's popular
arguments, with the same exactness that those do who wish them to prevail; but
none can-lessen the esteem of the Book here in question, without reflecting
upon the famous University of Oxford, whose testimony I have subjoined to this,
and which I think the next to that of a good Conscience.

But to the point: I must remember our Readers, that Buchanan having urged
against the absolute power of our Kings, that they were limited by a contract
betwixt King Fergus and the People; my Answers were, that first this Contract
was denied, and a History may be true, though some points be foisted in upon
design, else few Histories are true; and this is Dr. Heylin's Doctrine as well
as mine. (2.) That Fordon, whom they call our first Historian, now extant, did
expressly say, that Fergus constituit se regem; and this is clear also by the
Book of Pasley, and I have cleared that it could not be otherways; and if
Boethius, has only copied Fordon, and Buchanan, Boethius (as our adversaries
contend) they must be all regulated by Fordon's Loyalty. (3.) That if Boethius
be urged against us; we must consider all he says, and if so, we will find that
he derives the Monarchy from Gathelus, and he was King without contract, before
Fergus, whose reign I assert not there, though I use it justly against such as
object that Tradition as Argumentum ad hominem. (4.) These limitations being
found inconsistent with the safety of King and People (as indeed all
limitations are) they were repealed by express Laws in the Reign of King
Kenneth the Third, and by many and clear posteriour Statutes, founded upon
sad*experience: And if such Limitations could be introduced, they could be
abrogated, by express consent, and so our Kings are now freed from them. (5.) I
clear that these expressions crept into our Histories by the humor which most
Churchmen were in at that time, of having Kings depend on the Church, and so
not absolute; in which our Historians are less guilty than those of other
Nations, whom in friendship I will not now name. And as to the instance brought
from our Histories, to prove that the People deposed Kings; That concluded
only that the People were Rebels, but not that our Kings were Limited; but to
have denied our Histories, in as far as they proved this, it concerned me to
have denied them till Kenneth the Third's time, which had been very ridiculous,
according to the Bishop of St. Asaph's own opinion, and had justly defamed my
Book amongst my own Countrymen. And how should we acknowledge this to be a
peculiar guilt in our Historians, except we deny the truth of all English
Histories since William the Conquerour's time: Because they mention Limitations
extorted from their Kings; murders committed upon many of them; and the right
of Election to be stated in the people, as I have proved in a Letter to Dr.
Stillingfleet, unfit to be exposed to public view for the same Reasons, that I
think the Doctor should have suppressed that undutifull dis-respectfull part of
his debate, against our Historians who deserve much less to be taxt than his
own Friends, for their ill founded conceptions of the rights of Monarchs in
those days; and to reform which, I have been somewhat more instrumental than
the Doctor. But such injurious and national Excursions as this, seem to prove
to Conviction, more partiality than consideration in the Doctor, though
otherways an honest and learned man in cold blood. But to show that he is not a
dis-interessed Critic, I must observe, that he ingenuously confesses that he
owed so much service to so worthy Praef. page 72.
and excellent a Friend as the Bishop of St. Asaph; for though he adds, that if
my Arguments would hold good, they would also overthrow several things in his
late Book, yet this is but a mere Pretext, for nothing in my Book relates any
way to any part of that Subject which he treats upon, except in the second and
fifth Chapters wherein he takes also my Book expressly to task in the same
Points. And therefore I conclude that if he, though a Churchman, thought
himself concerned in honor to own his Friend, albeit an Aggressour; I as a
King's Advocate may be more justly allowed to own our Kings when attacked
unjustly, and unnecessarily, by their own Subjects, and Beneficiaries; And
though it may be instanced, that the antiquity of the Royal-line has been
controverted in other Nations, yet it cannot be instanced that this has been
done by Subjects, after their Kings and Parliaments have seriously founded the
Loyalty of the Nation upon that antiquity, and the Kings have asserted that
antiquity under their own hands, upon so solemn occasions, which is our case,
and where the antiquity it self is not absolutely fabulous; but on the
contrary, is in it self so reasonable, and is warranted by the Testimonies of
contemporary Historians, and allowed by the most judicious Critics.

CHAP. II.
That the Scots were placed here before the Year 503.

NOW without either vanity or levity, or any distracting digressions, I must
put the Reader in mind that in my Book I did only Page 2.
undertake to prove against the Bishop of St. Asaph, That the Scots did settle
in Britain before the Year 503. And after I had proved this sufficiently, by
the clear and positive Testimonies which I adduced, and had made it appear by
some of the same Testimonies, that we settled here before Julius Caesar's time;
and particularly that Reuda, one of our Kings, was expressly acknowledged by
Beda, one of the Authors I cite; I proceeded to prove that our Historians are
to be believed as to King Fergus, there being only a hundred and thirty years
betwixt these two Kings. As to which, our Historians being many, and men of
Reputation, they ought to be believed, they having narrated nothing that is
improbable, and having declared that they were sufficiently warranted so to
write, by the Records delivered to them by Authority out of our ancient
Monasteries then extant; and that Oral Tradition, universally received of a
whole Nation, is a great Fortification of so short a step as a hundred and
thirty years. And in the last part of my Book, I clear against Archbishop
Usher, and the Bishop of St. Asaph, That this Country was called Scotland, and
We Scots, before the Year 1000, a position they were driven to maintain in
defense of their former Paradox.

Dr. Stillingfleet, without taking notice of these Points which I treated
separately in the method now mentioned, would more cunningly than ingenuously,
make his Reader believe that I have undertaken by every Citation and Reason to
prove the truth of all the parts of our History from Fergus downward: and
therefore when I adduce a Citation for proving that we were settled here before
the Year 503; or that this Country was called Scotland before the Year 1000:
He asks, Where is there mention in these Citations, of Fergus? And takes no
care to consider my Citations, with relation to the particular Points for which
they are produced, as in my Dr. Stillingfl. praef. page 23.
Citation of Scaliger, concerning the Scotobrigantes, and in my Cap. 5. p. 285.
Citation of Claudian, etc.

To return then to my first Method, for the Readers fuller conviction, I must
put him in mind that I did prove the first of these positions, viz. That we
were settled in Scotland before the Year 503. (1.) By the Authority of the
British Historians within the Isle, (2.) By the Roman Historians, who could not
but know us well, because that Nation fought long with us, (3.) By
Ecclesiastic Writers and Historians, who prove that the Scots were
acknowledged to have been a Christian Nation here before that time, and
therefore behooved to have been settled here, (4.) I fortify these Citations by
most clear Reasons, (5.) Because the import of some of these Authorities is
controverted, I appeal to the best Historians and Critics, as the most
competent Judges betwixt the reverend Prelate and my self; and these I hope
will be found to have asserted the truth of this my Position, and the justness
of my Citations.

The first Citations I used were from Gildas and Beda, the most ancient and
esteemed of all the English Writers: And I did begin with Beda, because he
transcribes and explains Gildas; and I shall repeat the Argument as I stated it
in my first Book.

The venerable Beda, though a Saxon himself, and so an Enemy to us, having
written an exact Chronology according to the periods of time, does in his first
chap. de priscis Incolis, tell us, that God was praised in five Languages in
this Isle; that of the English, Britons, Scots, Picts and Latins; and then
proceeds to tell that the Britons were the first Possessours, and possessed the
South parts; After which, came the Picts to the Northern parts, and the Scots
under Reuda thereafter made a third Nation in that part belonging to the Picts,
getting the Western part of Scotland, North from the Picts called Dumbriton or
Alcluith, and he inculcates their fixing here by three several, but concurring
Expressions. 1. Progressi ex Hibernia, they left Ireland. 2. Seeds vindicarunt
in Britannia, they settled in Britain. 3. In Britannia, Britonibus and Pictis
gentem tertiam addiderunt; they added a third Nation to the Britons and Picts,
and that this was very ancient, is clear; for he fixes them in Britain in that
Chapter, wherein he treats de priscis Incolis: and having thus settled the Scots
and Picts, in his first Chapter with the Britons, he proceeds in the second
Chapter, to setle the fourth Nation, viz, the Latins or Romans, beginning with
these words: But this Britain was unknown, and not entered upon by the Romans,
till Julius Caesar's time. And having described the Wars betwixt these three
Nations and the Roman Emperors, in a due Gradation marking every period of
time, through the Reign of their consecutive Emperors: and how at last the
Romans had abandoned the Island, and Aetius the Roman Consul had refused the
Petition of the miserable Britons, so often defeated by the Scots and Picts: He
in the fourteenth Chapter relates, how the Britons upon deep Consultation
brought in the Saxons, and from thence continues the Saxon History. The second
Argument I brought from Beda, was from the 5th. cap. l. 1. Eccl. Hist. where he
says, that Severus built a Wall to defend against the other unconquered
Nations, and in the 12. cap. he tells that Britain was vexed by the Scots and
Picts; two Over-Sea or Transmarine Nations: And thereafter, as if he had been
afraid, that this word Transmarine might have been mistaken, he adds, That they
were not called Transmarine, because they lived and were settled out of Britain,
but because they were separated from that part of Britain by the two Seas which
did almost meet. And in this he agrees exactly with Tacitus, who in the life of
Agricola says, that there being a Wall built betwixt these two Seas, the Roman
Enemies were closed up as in an Isle.

To these Arguments the learned C. 5. p. 285.
Doctor answers first that Beda, in the beginning of his History, does set down
the five Nations that inhabited Britain, and so if the Scots and Picts be
ancient, the Romans and Saxons must be ancient Inhabitants too in his Sense:
for they are likewise reckoned before the War with the Romans, his business
being to give an account of the present Inhabitants, and not merely of the
ancient.

To which I reply, that this is a mere imposing upon the Reader: for Beda, when
he names the five Nations, speaks of them in relation to the present Languages
wherein God was praised within the Isle, but when he speaks of the old
Inhabitants, he speaks only of the Britons, Picts and Scots; and the reason
why he sets not down the particular time wherein these fixed in the Isles, as
he does when he speaks of the Romans and Saxons, is because he knew the one but
the other was so ancient, that the exact time of their first settlement was not
known; for certainly a Chronologue would not have omitted that if he had known
it. For speaking of the Romans settlement, he condescends upon the particular
Year: But when he speaks of the settlement of the Scots and Picts, he only
says [Ut fertur] as they say, a word which he could not have used here, had it
not been in matters of the remotest antiquity. And if so, certainly they must
be much more ancient than the 503. And the inquisitive Beda was not able to
reach so far back in the Year 700. wanting the helps of the old Manuscripts in
our Monasteries, which only could tell him the exact time, and so he was
forced to rest in the general remark of our being fixed here time out of mind
even before his own age which was so near to the 503. that his own Father might
have told him precisely when we settled, if we had not settled here till then.

The Doctor's second answer is, that Beda does not at all intimate that the
Scots were in Britain before the Romans and Saxons. To which it is replied,
that Beda is a Chronologue, and is careful of the Notation of time where he
knows it: And therefore it seems still to me and has done so to such as
understand well Chronology, as sure a demonstration as that Science can allow,
that the Scots being named as one of the three ancient Nations inhabiting this
Isle, and their actions against the Britons and Romans, being narrated before
the Saxons are said to have entered, that therefore their settlement must be the
elder, though it be not said in express terms, and if any account of Kings, or
memorable actions, were set down by a Chronologue, without adding the years,
these things behooved to be considered ancient, according to the order wherein
they are expressed; especially in this case, since the Bed. L. c. 14.
defeat of the Britons by the Scots and Picts is made the cause of bringing in
the Saxons; and the cause must necessarily precede the effect. In fortification
of all which, we must mind, that this will agree better with the following
Citations, which clear, that the Scots settled here before the year 404; at
which time the Saxons entered, and that they were here before the Romans, is
likewise clear: for after they are marked to be settled in this Isle, Verum
eadem Britannia Romany usque ad Caium Julium Caesarem incognita suit.
Britain is said to be unknown to the Romans. And as the Romans are
acknowledged to have been here before the Saxons, and so to be set down by Beda
before them; Why should not the Scots be likewise acknowledged to have been
settled here before the Romans, since their settlement is first mentioned?

The Doctor's third Answer is, L. 1. c. 5.
That though Severus's Wall was acknowledged to be built against the
unconquered Nations beyond it; yet it is not said, that the Scots and Picts
were these unconquered Nations, else the controversy had been ended: But on
the contrary, Dion, by whom we may understand Beda's meaning, tells us, that
these Nations were the Maeatae and Caledonii: To which it is replied, that
Beda, in his first Chapter, mentions only the Scots and Picts, as settled here
with the Britons: in the second he brings in the Romans, and gives an account
of their progress under Julius Caesar: in the third under Claudius: in the
fourth under Marcus Antoninus: in the fifth, under Severus, he mentions the
building of the Wall to secure the Roman Conquest against the unconquered
Nations. After which, in the 12th, he recapitulates the War betwixt the Britons
and Romans, against these unconquered Nations, whom afterward he still calls
Scots and Picts. And again, he mentions the Scots and Picts, as the only
invaders of this Wall, built against those Nations whom he called unconquered,
without speaking of the Maeatae or Caledonii: So that from Beda it is clear,
that these unconquered Nations were the Scots and Picts; and therefore, by Dr.
Stillingfleet's own confession, the controversy is at an end. And these
Moeatoe and Caledonii were in effect the Scots and Picts, considered as
Highlanders and Lowlanders: for Bochart Canaan, l. 1. 42. tells us, that
Camdenus recte deducit Galedonios a Britannico Caled, quod durum sonat; duri
enim and asperi erant incolae, and terra etiam tota horridis and confragosis
montibus attollitur. Caledoniis opponuntur Moeatoe, Camd. de Britannia
Septentrionali, p. 3. Incoloe ol^m in Myatas and Caledonios distincti erant, id
est, in campestres and montanos. Idem, p. 501. Decheumeath, i. e. planities ad
austrum. And he derives Caled and Mead, from Hebrew and Arabic of the same
signification. And this farther appears by comparing Dion Cassius cited by the
Doctor, with Claudian; for Dion only says, Britannorum duo sunt proesertim
genera, Caledonii and Maeatoe: nam coeterorum nomina ad hos fere referuntur.
Incolunt Moeatae juxta eum murum, qui Insulam in duas parts dividit; Caledonii
post illos sunt. And Claudian tells us who were these against whom the Wall was
built. Venit and extremis legio proetenta Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, ferroque notatas.
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras.


From which I observe, that the Moeatoe were in effect the Picts, who dwelt in
the Low Country nearest the Wall, and that the Caledonii were the Scots who
then lived in the Hills. So that Dion is so far from proving that the Wall was
not built against the Scots and Picts, that he agrees with the other Authors
cited here and elsewhere, who all concur to prove, that the Wall was built
against the Scots and Picts. And the Doctor might as well conclude, that our
actions done here this day, are not done by the Scots, because our Histories
speak oft-times of the Highlanders and Lowlanders, which are the Maeatoe and
Caledonii. And I do conclude, that either the Doctor is not a man to parallel
Authors with Authors, or else he is not of that candor I did formerly take
Dr. Stilling fleet to be.

The Doctor's Fourth Answer is, That when Beda makes the Scots a transmarine
Nation, as dwelling beyond the Friths, and not out of Britain; this is only
said in his own defense; because in his first Chapter he had settled them in
Britain: and no more respect should be had to this, than if a Scottish Writer in
Beda's time had spoken of the Transmarine Saxons, using the words of an Author
who lived before their coming into Britain, and then should explain himself
that he does not mean the German Saxons, but these who lived in Britain beyond
the two Friths: Would this prove that the Saxons lived here before Julius
Coesar's time? all this I confess is a piece of odd reasoning: for certainly we
must either deny all Authority and reason, or confess that Beda, who was so
ancient an Author, and lived so near to Gildas's time, and to our Country,
behoved to know whether the Scots lived in Ireland or not: And it is not to be
thought, that Beda would have written so distinctly and positively such a great
and palpable Lie, merely to maintain his own Assertion: and therefore his
acknowledgment, that we were settled here beyond the Friths, and not in Ireland,
proves sufficiently quod erat probandum; and it seems to me a descension below
the gravity of so great a Doctor, to sport himself over and over upon the empty
criticism of my calling this a demonstration; neither is it any wonder, that
the Doctor is angry at me when I cite Beda: for both the Bishop of Page 18.
St. Asaph and C. 5. p. 285.
he, treat Beda so, because what he writes makes for us.

To Gildas's Authority it is answered by the Pref. p. 60.
Doctor, that by these Seas must not be understood the Friths of Forth and
Clyde, but the Sea betwixt Ireland and Scotland; because that Gildas speaks
still of them as carrying away their prey beyond Seas; and the passage over the
Frith behoved to be as large as that over the Seas, being 40 miles in some
places; whereas the passage betwixt Scotland and Ireland, is, in some places,
but 13 miles. To this it is Replied, that the Friths are called Mare Scoticum,
both by our Laws and the English Writers: And to these I now add their own
Brit. Descript. p. 24.
Luddus. His words are, Bernicia vero a Tissa ad mare Scoticum, quod nunc Frith
vocant. To which the Doctor neither has, nor can make any answer. And so the
word Trans Mare is not impropriated when it is applied to our mare Scoticum:
and though in some places the Frith of Clyde be so broad at the very entry to
the Ocean, where it is rather Sea than River, yet many parts betwixt Scotland
and Ireland are much broader than the broadest part of the Friths. And the
Scots in their Corroughs did not pass at the broadest part, but near the Wall
at Dunbritton, where they were nearest the Picts, and it is not a Mile broad
there, and is little broader for a long tract of the River under it; and the
broadest part of it is exceedingly more calm and passable than the Irish Sea;
the one being but a River and within Land, and the other being a strait of the
wide and open Northern Ocean, where the Sea, by how much it is straightened,
becomes the more turbulent. And therefore when Claudian expresses our Invasions
and Flights, he does it by Oars. Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus undas.
But that of the Saxons by Sails. -- Venturum Saxona Ventis.
Which presupposes Sails. Nor were the Corroughs mentioned by Coesar (l. 1. de
bello Civili) cited by the Doctor, made for Seas, but Rivers, as is clear by
the words, Nec pontes perfici possent; and these Militesque his navibus flumen
transportat. Edit. Variorum 1670. and 492. It does not therefore appear
probable, or reasonable, that a whole Fleet should be made by poor Pilferers of
such stuff fit to carry an Army, with its prey, over so turbulent a Sea, and in
the Winter time, they having fought and pillaged all the Summer, and the prey
being then ordinarily either Cows or Horses, there being little else to be
plundered; and if they had passed at Cantyre, which is that narrow place, they
behooved to have traveled likewise over a whole tract of ground, and two other
Seas, before they had come to the Frith of Clyde, and the Britons Country. And
Beda explaining Gildas's own words, tells us, that they ceased not to drive
preys from the Britons; And agere praedam, to drive a prey, is what can only
be done by Land, and so could not have been done in Corroughs. Nor is that
driving by Corroughs ever called a Piracy, as it would have, if it had been
from one Island to another. But the carrying of Beasts over a River is
consistent enough with the driving a prey, though that this, in the Doctor's
sense, infers an impropriety in the words, as well as a contradiction to common
sense.

Whereas it is in the last place, urged, that a Wall against the Scots and
Picts had been ridiculous, if the Scots could have come against the Britons by
Sea. It is replied, that the Doctor (not knowing the Geography of the place so
well as we, who have seen it) does not consider that this Argument proves
rather against himself; for if the Scots had dwelt in Ireland, which is almost
to the South from Dunbritton, It had been ridiculous to have built a Wall
against them from East to West: for against these incursions from Ireland by
Sea in Corroughs, it should have been built along the mouth and coast of Clyde,
from South to North, and the Doctor will allow me at least to call this a
Demonstration; it being a thing that may be seen. But the true reason why the
Wall was built, is very obvious, viz. because the incursions were made by the
Scots and Picts, who were not formidable except when united, and they had no
passage for an Army when united, but over the Wall: whereas any injury they
could do in their Corroughs over the Frith was very inconsiderable, and could
have been easily stopped; and so the Wall was still useful against Conquest,
thoughnot against Piracy. And to conclude; all this is most consistent with
Beda's Sense of Transmarine, but not with the Doctor's: And therefore we should
rather believe the venerable Beda speaking of things very near his own time,
when they are very probable, than a Paradox, broacht lately, far distant from
these times, and defended now by our too partial Adversaries: especially since
Beda shall be proved to agree thus, not only better with common Sense, but
with all the Authorities of the Roman Authors and Critics. And I must still
mind my Readers, that received Histories are not to be overturned without
infallible Proofs brought against them. But who can be a more favorable Judge
for the Doctor, than the Saxon and so his own Countryman, Albertus Crantzius?
Or who can better understand the Time of the Saxons descent, and the History of
Beda, than he who is himself the famous Saxon Historian? He C. 18.
then tells us, that in the Year 449 the Saxons were first invited here, but he
says, Let us write from a higher Rise. And so he proceeds to tell how the Picts
settled here, and he adds, that within a very little after them, the Scots,
resolving not to stay in Ireland, sailed sometime into Scotland; and being for
a little time resisted by the Picts, Utraque gens eam inseder at provinciam
quae jam diu Scotia est appellata.
both Nations settled in that part, which is of very old called Scotland. After
which, he proceeds to C. 19.
settle the Romans, and to relate our Wars with them, and he gives an account
that the Wall built by Severus, was against the Scots and Picts, without
mentioning, either the Maeatae or the Caledonii. From which it is clear, that
Crantzius not only makes our settlement much elder, than that of the Saxons,
and that we were here before them by way of settlement; and not by way of
Incursion; but also expressly acknowledges, that our settlement was very near
as old as the Picts, who are beyond all dispute owned to have been here long
before Julius Caesar's time. And (which is very remarkable) he cites none of
our Historians for confirming his opinion, and cites only Beda, whom he
interprets, and understands as we do, and as indeed all th World does, except
our prejudiced Adversaries.

It is also objected by the Doctor, that Gildas P. 13. Edit. Iocelia.
tells us, that the Scots and Picts two Transmarine Nations, did first invade
the Britons, under Maximus, which was long after Caesar's time. To which it is
answered, that Gildas there designs not to speak of the first Invasion of the
Scots and Picts, upon the Britons, but only of the first of the three
Vastations made by them: for the Scots and Picts did often invade the Britons
formerly, as is clear by Eumenius and others, yet they were never able to waste
their Lands, until that Maximus disarmed the Britons altogether, as Gildas
relates. And after this, Gildas sets down the other two Vastations, and names
them all, under the express numbers of First, Second and Third Vastations. (1.)
It is most clear by this passage, that the Scots who made this Vastation, lived
not in Ireland but in Scotland, beyond the Wall and Friths; for Gildas calls
both the Scots and Picts, Transmarine, without distinction. And certainly the
Picts lived not in Ireland at that time, and therefore neither did the Scots:
And consequently, Beda did most justly interpret the word Transmarine to be;
not because they lived without Britain, but beyond the Friths, and Beda
intimates that that was the common acceptance of the Word Transmarine, which
is imported in the Phrase, Transmarinas autem non dicimus, etc.

Because it is (...) by the Bishop and the Doctor, that Gildas can only mean in
all these passages, the Irish residing in Ireland; since he says Hiberni
revertuntur domum.
the Irish returned Home; and where could the Home of the Irish be, but in
Ireland? I think fit to refer the Reader to the Seventh Section of my former
Book; where I have fully proved, that by the Irish, in these Citations, is
meant the Irish inhabiting Scotland, and which I shall again more fully
vindicate in the fourth Chapter of this Book, from the objections urged in this
New Answer. I urged also in my Book, many Authorities to prove, that it was the
general opinion, even of the English Historians, that we were settled here, even
before Julius Caesar's time, to which the Doctor returns no Answer. And this
having proved my position by Authorities within the Isle, I Will now pass to the
foreign Authors.

Against the Citation urged from Eumenius in his Panegyric to Constantius, the
Doctor does very little else but repeat what the Bishop had said, and I had
(...)ly refuted; and seeing he can make none but such inconsiderable additions,
I wonder to find that Argument renewed, unless the Doctor thinks that his
Authority is greater than the Bishop of St. Asaph's, for I have already
observed, that the Comparison is strong enough in Buchanan's Sense, which is
all that is requisite. And I wonder to hear him say, that it was not a greater
advantage, and more for Constantius's honor, that he did beat the Britons
after they had been long trained up to fight, even by the Romans, than when
they were altogether rude, and had never seen any enemies but Picts and Irish
in Julius Caesar's time: For as common reason teaches us, that they could not
but considerably improve, in near four hundred years time of frequent Wars; So
the Bishop of St. Asaph tells us, P. 21.
that, to the end they might more easily resist the Scots and Picts, the Romans
taught them the Art of War, and furnished them with Arms; which is sufficient to
sustain the strength of the Oratour's comparison, when he asserts, that
Constantius's Victory over the Britons was greater than that of Caesar's: And
albeit the next Paragraph mentions other advantages, yet it does not follow,
that these advantages were not very considerable, and these advantages are no
part of the former Comparison, but make a new Paragraph, and are a new
heightning of Constantius's Victory, from other grounds, (2.) I could never see
how it could be truly said by the Orator, that the Britons were used to fight
against the Irish and Picts, if by the Irish be not meant there, the Scots: for
as I have proved that we were called Irish in those Ages, so I desire to know
where the Britons were used to fight against any Other Irish save those, who
inhabited Britain? Nor do the Irish pretend that ever there were any Wars
between the Britons and them, save only in Egbert's time, which was many years
after Caesar; and even this is but a Conjecture of a late Author, Usher and
Flahartie do adduce no more ancient Author for it. And so that cannot verify
the Oratour's saying, that they were accustomed to fight against the Irish in
Caesar's time. It is also very considerable, that the Picts here are joined, as
used to fight jointly against the Britons, for it can never be instanced that
the Picts joined with any against the Britons, save with us. And it is indeed
incredible, that the Scots should be accustomed to fight from Caesar's time to
Constantius's, and to the Year 503, (which must at least include about six
hundred years, allowing only one hundred years to verify that word) and yet
never settle where they fought, venturing their lives for the defense of other
Men's Lands for a prey, which could be of very little use to be plundered in
those days, there being little to be taken save Cattle, which could have been
hardly transported in Corroughs over such boisterous Seas, (3.) The Doctor
tells us, that Britannicum, and not Britannum is the Adjective, or at least
that this Author uses only Britannicum for the Adjective; and so soli
Britanni were not good Grammar, if constructed in the Genitive. But to this I
reply, that the Doctor adverts not that I have proved by Citations, which he
Answers not, that Britannum is an Adjective and so soli Britanni, good Grammar
in the Genitive, and there is nothing more ordinary for Orators than to vary
their Phrase, using sometime one way of expressing, and sometime another,
variety in such Cases giving both delight and Ornament: Nor can I see why, if
this had been ill Grammar, Cambden would not have carped at it, as he did not;
or how Scaliger would not have taken notice of it, he having decided for us,
after Buchanan had put this Construction on this expression: for though
Scaliger does not expressly take notice of the Construction, yet after he had
fully considered the debate betwixt Buchanan and Luddus (wherein this was one
chief Argument) he decides for Buchanan, which upon the matter is a clear
approbation of Buchanan's Construction. This is all I contended for, by citing
Scaliger; only the Citation of him on Tibullus is wrong printed, for that of
his on Eusebius. And that this is a clear Consequence drawn from Scaliger in
his Notes on Eusebius, is undeniable. And if so, then certainly the opinion of
Scaliger and Buchanan, with Cambden's acquiescence, is much to be preferred to
our prejudiced Enemies, whose Learning does not lie so much that way. The
Argument from the pointing adduced by the Doctor, in Puteanus's Edition of
Eumenius is not only contrary to that of Stephanus and Plantin, which I have
cited; but even from that way of pointing, there is no advantage to the Doctor.
For to sustain the words soli Britanni to be Nominative, there should have been
a Comma after soli Britanni: For as they now run, Et soli Britanni Pictis modo,
and Hibernis assueta hostibus, they cannot be Constructed otherwise than thus,
Natio rudis and assueta hostibus, Pictis and Hibernis, soli Britanni: And if
soli Britanni likewise had been Nominative, the Orator to make good Grammar,
should rather have said Natio rudis, and soli Britanni assueti, (and not
assueta) Pictis and Hibernis. But abstracting from both the pointing and the
Grammar, it is undeniable from this place, that this ancient Roman Orator did
in the days of Constantius before the Year 503. consider our Colony as
accustomed to fight against the Britons, and as a distinct people joined in
this War with the Picts, which cannot be applied to any other Nation but to us.
And therefore Cambden and Usher, more reasonably fly to another subterfuge,
viz. that Eumenius spoke according to the conception of that Age, wherein he
lived; and it is undeniable, that that Age considered only us, and the Picts,
as fighting against the Britons, and as two Nations fixed here. But this Answer
is also very ridiculous; for if our Antiquity had not been very considerable in
Eumenius's days, the Orator would not have exposed himself so far, as to found
the Comparison upon a palpable lie, where he might have been traced; and so I
confess if such kind of Answers as these be allowed, no Nation can prove its
Antiquity. But agreeably to all these objections, this Citation proves at
least, that the C. 1. Parag. 5.
Bishop of St. Asaph's position, that the Scots were not at all in Britain,
neither by Incursion, nor by any other way, till the Year 300. is inconsistent
with this Roman Author, as well as our Story, and the general belief of Rome
at that time.

The next Author whom I did cite, was Latinus Pacatius, who, in his Panegyric
to Theodosius upon his Victory in Britain, complements him for having reduced
the Scots to their own Marshes; which shows, that the Scots had their own
Marshes in Britain before the year 503. To which the Doctor answers nothing.
And from the same Authors calling (in another place) the same Marshes, the
Marshes of the Caledonians, I infer, that these Marshes were in Britain, and
not in Ireland; and that the Scots were called Caledonians. And thereafter I
adduce Valerius Flaccus and Martial, to prove our Antiquity. To all which, the
Doctor answers nothing, but that the Caledonians were Britons, without
answering my citations, which I have adduc'd to prove this. And as to the
Critics whom I cite for us, C. 5. P. 283.
he says very wisely and profoundly, that we are not to follow Modern Writers
in their Improprieties. This Answer, so injurious to all the learned world, he
also returns to my proving from Lipsius, Bergier and others, that Galgacus was
a Scot. And when from Tacitus himself I prove, that he must necessarily have
been a Scot, for the Irish Kings never came to fight in Britain. He could not
be a Briton, because he was speaking to those who had never been under the
Roman slavery. And Tacitus tells that he was a King of a Nation unknown, and
but newly discovered, whereas the Romans formerly knew the Britons. Neither was
he ever pretended to be a Pict, nor is he in the Genealogy of their Kings. To
all this the Doctor answers nothing.

All then that is answered to my testimony from Tacitus, is, That those who
fought under Galgacus, were Britons, and not Scots, as appears by Galgacus's
Speech to them, wherein he says, that they are the noblest of the Britons, and
fight to recover the Liberty of the Britons: And if Tacitus had known that they
came out of Ireland, he had told it; nor could that Irish King who was with
Agricola, have omitted to inform him of this. To which I Reply; That Agricola
wrote not this relation himself, but it is written by Tacitus, who had it from
Agricola, and so cannot be exact, being but the relation of a relation; and
probably Agricola knew more of it from that Irish King. But there is enough in
Tacitus to prove, that we were settled in Britain at that time, and were of
Spanish extraction from Ireland, which was all that Irish King could inform.
For it is clear, (1.) That those who fought under Galgacus were Caledonians,
and past not under the general name of Britons; for Galgacus exhorts them, to
show by their valor, Quos sibi Caledonia viros seposuerat.
what brave Men Caledonia had separated from the rest; and though they were
Britons, yet that proves not that they were not Caledonian Britons, (2.)
Galgacus tells, that they were yet Integri and Indomiti.
unconquered and untoucht, which is not applicable to the old Britons, for they
were conquered before that time; but is so far peculiar to the Picts and us,
that we are still called Indomitae gentes. (3.) Tacitus describes two different
People in Britain, one big and white, which showed them of a German extraction;
another black in hair and face, said to be of a Spanish extraction. And can any
thing agree better with our Histories, and the description of the Picts, who
are said to have come from Germany, and of us who are said to be a Colony of
Spaniards, that rested for some time in Ireland? And Tacitus's saying, that it
could hardly be known then, whether these Nations were Indigenae an advecti.
Originally Britons, or Strangers, shows, that we were there very anciently;
which is also cleared by Beda, and confirms what he and Eumenius say. And
immediately after Tacitus, we are known under the names of Scots and Picts; and
the ablest Critics, who have compared Histories, call Galgacus expressly, King
of the Scots; whose Interpretation, because that is their trade, and they are
disinterested, must be preferred to the Doctor's; and I add now to Lipsius,
Bergier and others, whom the Doctor acknowledges to prove that Galgacus was a
Scot, Keppingius, who, though he doubts of some of our Antiquities, places
amongst these things, which are Hist. Univers. de reb. gest. reg. Scot.
certain, that in Agricola's time, Galgacus, King of Scotland, fought bravely
to retain his Liberty: and Farnabius, a learned and judicious English Critic,
in his Commentary upon Martial, lib. Spectaculorum, Epigram. 7. l. 3. who on
these words, Nuda Caledonio sic pectora praebuit urso.


Says, The Ursus Caledonius is e Scotia. And on these words, lib. 10. Epigram.
44. Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure Britannos.


He interprets Caledonios Britannos to be Scotos, conform to his exposition
of the foresaid words. [Nuda Caledonio, etc.] Schrevelius also, in his Edition
of Martial, cum not is variorum, is altogether of Farnaby's mind, and uses his
very words in his Commentary upon the two forecited places. I will finish this
period with Gretius, who, speaking of our Barclay, calls him Gente Caledonius,
etc. And with Scaliger the Father, who, in his Exercitations against Cardan,
declares the Ursi Caledonii to be Ursi Scotici: Which Authors, and many
others, have prevailed with Church-hill, in his Divi Britannici, to differ from
our Doctor, in confessing that the Caledonii were the Scots.

By the same Magisterialness, with which he contemned Lipsius, and the other
Critics, in the former citation, he does also condemn the authority of
Scaliger, and Salmasius, in my urging the Citations of Scotobrigantes, in
Seneca, and of the Scoticae primae, in Spartian. But however I must beg leave,
notwithstanding this, to consider, those two ancient Authors, Seneca and
Spartian, to be sufficient proofs of our Antiquity, till the Doctor's friends
can prove to me that he is a greater Critic, and as impartial in this case as
Scaliger and Salmasius are. But however, the Doctor answers not the reasons I
adduced, for proving these their Criticisms to be most just: and these are
abstract from all authority, and I recommend the reading of them to any
impartial Judge.

Claudian may be justly called by us, the Scottish Poet, as Beda is the Scottish
Antiquary: for Claudian's whole Poem is, in effect, a continued confirmation of
our History. For he having written a Panegyric to Honorius, and in it
magnifying Theodosius his Grandfather, he describes all along his fighting with
the Scots, which Sigonius calculates to be in the year 367. as Isackson on this
year observes. And I refer my Reader to my former Book, as to these passages
cited by me, none of which passages can be applied to the Scots in Ireland,
with whom Theodosius never fought, but only to the Scots in Britain, with whom
it is certain he did fight, many Monuments whereof are extant in that part of
our Country called Ierna. But the Doctor says, though this were granted, yet
it would fall much short of Alexander, or Julius Caesar's time: And what then?
for I never intended that this should prove either, but only that we were
elder than the 503. But (says he) there appears no Demonstration. More
wonderful still! for I called it no Demonstration, though I think it weighs as
much as any thing in the Doctor's Book. And I take notice only of this
Raillery, and Sophistical way of answering, to detect the two great Engines
which the Reverend Doctor uses all along in his Book.

That which he answers here speciously is, that by Ierna, is meant Ireland by
the Poet, and does he not mention the Scots moving all Ierne? -- Totam cum
Scotus Iernen
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Tethys.


And is it not Poetical (says the Doctor) to say he moved all a little part of
Scotland?

To which my Replies are, that first Scotland was called Ireland in these days,
as I have proved in the seventh Section of my former Book, and shall prove more
fully in the fourth Chapter of this. Only at present I shall add, the Lib. 1.
c. 37. Many evidences we have that Scotland is often called and hecht Hibernia,
as Ireland does.
English Polychronicon, which expressly tells us so, Prior to Fordon.

(2.) Did Theodosius conquer Ireland, or pursue them over to Ireland? and does
any Author call Ireland, [glacialis Ierne?] So then when a name is proper to
two places, which of the two is meant, should be determined by the action which
is said to be done in the place. And how agrees this with Beda's telling, that
we were settled here long before that time, and were not Transmarine? Or with
Latinus Pacatius, who says, that Claudius, before that time, triumphed over
Britain, and reduced the Scots ad suas paludes? And where have the Irish any
Monuments and Histories of these Victories, as we have?

(3.) Does not Iuvenal expressly make us, Iuverna, which is the same thing with
Ierna? -- Arma quidem ultra
Littora Juvernae promovimus.
Which cannot be applied to Ireland, because the Romans never went thither,
much less went they beyond it; and the adding -- Et modo captas
Orcadas, and minima contentos nocte Britannos.
does not all agree with Ireland: for it is neither joined to, nor is it near
the Orcades, nor has it so short nights as we have. But

(4.) The name of Ierna was not confined to the little Conntrey of Stratherne,
but was extended to all the Northern Highlands, as far as Innerness, and so the
Raillery of [moving all a certain little part] is insipid: nor is there any
thing more ordinary than to give the denomination of a part of a Country to
the whole; and thus, when it is said, the King beat the Hollanders; By this, is
meant, the whole Netherlands, though Holland be only a part: and this figure
is so frequent in all the Latin Poets, that it were a mark of ones ignorance
either to deny it, or insist on it. Thus Petronius Arbiter expresses the defeat
given by Caesar to Aphranius in Spain, per funer a gentis Iberae, though Iberia
be but a little part of Spain, so called from the River Iberus, because the
Battle was fought there; which holds in every circumstance with our case,
wherein the Poet describes the trouble of all Scotland, by Ierna, because the
Battle was fought there, though Ierna be only a part of Scotland, called from
a River of that name. And all Scotland, by the same Poet, and to this day, is
called Caledonia, though Caledonia be but a small part of it about Dunkeld. And
though I should grant that by Ierne here was meant Ireland, yet that cannot
make against our being settled here before that time; For it is very reasonable
to think, that the Irish, hearing that the Romans had penetrated so far into
Scotland, as to have defeated so many of these as came originally from Ireland,
they would have sent over men to assist us; especially knowing that it might be
their lot, next: even as if the French should beat and ruin the Scots now
settled in Ireland, our whole Country would certainly be in a commotion, and we
would send over men to their assistence, as we did in the late Wars. I
confirmed this citation of Claudian, by that of Sidonius Apollinaris, which is
likewise an original proof of our Antiquity. To which the Doctor answers, that
Sidonius distinguishes the Caledonian Britons from the Scots and Picts; This
is, indeed, just such another, as if, because I call my self, in Latin,
Scoto-Britannus, I should distinguish my self from the Scots and Britons. But I
would fain know who were these Caledonian Britons, who were different both from
the Scots and Picts; for after he has named the Caledonian Britons, in general,
he specifies afterward both the Sc ts and Picts. There is no answer made to
the testimonies from Hegesippus, Ammianus Marcellinus, nor Orosius: and
therefore I now proceed to the Ecclesiastic Writers cited.

After I had made it very probable that this Nation received, very early, the
Christian Faith, because the Christians, who were persecuted by the Romans,
would fly hither to us who had never submitted to the Roman Tyranny: I cited,
in general, for our Nations being converted under the Reign of King Donald,
Baronius, as the standard of Ecclesiastic History amongst the Papists, and the
Magdeburgick Centuries among the Protestants. And it is strange, if they, being
disinterested, and having the help of their respective parties, should fail in
so remarkable a matter as that of the conversion of a whole Nation. Nor can
Baronius be thought interested, because he would design to make our first
Mission flow from Pope Victor, and our first Bishop to be sent from Pope
Celestine: for it was all one to Baronius, as making as much for the Court of
Rome, that our first Bishop came from any Posteriour Pope. And if our single
and interested adversaries (though so mightily extolled by one another,) should
be preferred to these Authors, and as infallible as they would fain be
thought, there is indeed an end of all Controversy. But I am sure the
rejecting of all Authorities, I have cited, and which are not so much as
controverted, will not take with the indifferent World, and that satisfies me.
But however, beside the Authorities of these great Men, let us consider the
Grounds upon which they are founded, and which I have considered as well in all
the Editions of Baronius I could find, as the Doctor could have done, though
the Doctor in his wonted way Magisterially says, that it seems I never looked
into him. I am used in my Employment to be contradicted, which makes me look
exactly to my Citations. And whereas the Doctor tells, that what Baronius says,
relates to the Conversion of the Scots, and not to their Antiquity, This is
very ill reasoned: for it Baronius concludes, that we were a distinct Christian
Nation from the Irish; and had a Church distinct from theirs long before the
Year 503. it must necessarily follow, that in Baronius sense, we were a Nation
settled here long before the Year 503.

Prosper does expressly say, that Palladius was sent to the Scots believing in
Christ, to be their First Bishop, ordained by Pope Celestine. This Mission is
acknowledged to be in the Year 431. and consequently there were Scots before
that time, believing in Christ, so nationally, as to need a Bishop. The
Controversy then is, whether these Scots, to whom Palladius was sent, were the
Scots in Ireland, or the Scots in Britain for these Reasons. (1.) Because Beda
says so in those Chapters, wherein he speaks only of us, and not of the Irish,
and Dr. Stillingfleet only repeats here what I have formerly refuted. And Beda
could not but understand best of any man the Conversion of a Nation, to which
he was so near a Neighbor, to a Church, in which he is accounted so eminent an
Historian and Teacher. (2.) The universal Tradition of the Christian Church,
and of ours in particular, makes Palladius our First Bishop, and our
Monasteries and Churchmen could not but carefully transmit such a point as
that to us; especially in an age wherein Learning and Letters were freqeent
enough to be useful, in remembering so extraordinary a point. And St. Patrick
is acknowledged by the Irish themselves, to be their First Bishop, which could
not be if Palladius had been before him so that the Doctor here is forced to
ove(...) all History and Tradition, to establish his own. (3.) The same Prosper
does elsewhere say, that Palladius being ordained Bishop for the Scots, whilst
he studied to preserve the Roman isle, Catholic, he made the Barbarous,
Christian. And that our Country was called an Isle, is acknowledged by all
Writers, after the building of the Wall. But I now farther evince this point by
Hadrianus Valesius, an Author much commended by the Doctor himself, who, lib.
3. Rer. Francicar. page 144. ad annum 429. has this most clear and unanswerable
passage. Sic igitur Britanniae Provincias quinque quae Romany paruerant, Angli
occupavere. Reliqua Picti Scotique incolebant: Et cum antea ut Prosper docet,
pars Britanniae imperio Romano subjecta, Romana Insula, pars a Pictis, and
Scotis habitata, barbara Insula appellaretur, omnis Britannia barbara Insula
facta est. With whom agree Agente palladio Scotorum Episcopo a Coelestino in
Britanniam misso ut Pelagianam haeresin extingueret. Rationar. tempor ad. an.
429.
Petavius and Car. Sigon. de Imper. Occident. p. 291. So that Dr. Stillingfleet
does unwarrantably turn this our Argument into an objection. And the matters of
Fact narrated, being only applicable to Scotland, as I have said, and as is
clear, by the best Interpreters that must determine the Case betwixt the Irish
and Us. (4.) Baronius and the Magdeburgick Centuries make Palladius our First
Bishop and the Mission to be to Us: And though they be not allowed by the
Doctor to be absolute Judges, yet certainly they must be allowed to be the best
Interpreters, and Baronius expressly says, Una omnium cum Prospero est
Sententia, etc. that all others were of this opinion.

The learned Bishop of St. Asaph, and Dr. Stilling sleet, to overturn this
undeniable point, have invented a New Hypothesis of Palladius, having been
first sent to Ireland, but that his Mission being unsuccessfull, he came back
and died in the Confines of the Picts, and then the same Pope Celestine, sent
St. Patrick; which Hypothesis I may now think is fully overturned, since Dr.
Stilling fleet answers nothing to the many absurdities and inconsistencies
which I urged against it; and to which I only now add that since the Bishop
confesses that he dares not deny, that there were several Conversions made
before Palladius in Ireland about the Year 400, It is strange that Palladius
should have met with so much opposition, as to make him so soon despair, that
he returned notwithstanding his Zeal, and St. Patrick posted from France to
Rome, and from thence to Ireland within less than a Year: and so Palladius is
only called the first Bishop in Nomination, and St. Patrick the first in
Success. Rare reasoning, rare despairing, rare posting, and rare distinctions
to over-turn the universal Traditions and Histories of all the Nations
concerned! Upon which account the Bishop of St. Asaph P. 59.
does very ingenuously confess, that this does not consist well with our
Hypothesis, nor with Prosper's own words. And all this is founded upon Nennius,
as the Doctor C. 2. P. 53.
acknowledges, and the P. 56.
Bishop of St. Asaph, and yet they confess that he is but a fabulous Author,
and cites Prosper most falsely, saying that Palladius Missus est ad Scotos in
Christum convertendos, and upon a Notation of time falsely imputed to Baloeus,
which I formerly urged, and is not answered. And the Doctor in the forecited
2d. Chapter, p. 53. would have us believe that Prosper contradicts himself in
making the Scots to be converted by Palladius, and yet to have been Christians
before his time, which are inconsistent. But he knows better things, for there
were Christians here before Palladius: for he was sent to be the first Bishop
which presupposes Christians already converted, and a Church ready to be
established; and he being sent also to convert us from the Pelagian Heresy, as
Baronius Petavius and others observe, it must necessarily follow that we were a
Church before that time, and remarkable too, for having a Heresy (which is an
Error long, and obstinately maintained) spread amongst us, and consequently we
must necessarily have been a Nation long before that time. But all men must be
ignorant, and inconsistent, when they make against the Doctor, and he cannot
answer them. And why does the Doctor lay the stress of this P. 68.
objection upon Prosper: if he be such an Author as is not consistent with
himself, as the P. 53.
Doctor says? And therefore I may be allowed to say that Prosper's Testimony is
for us.

I must beg the Doctor's leave to say, That the learned Dr. Hammond differs not
from me in the Point here controverted; for I have proved clearly from him,
That we were Christians long before the Year 503. by Dr. Stillingfleet's own
Confession, page 63. praef. For if we were converted before the Year 503, We
were settled before that Year. But so it is, That Dr. Hammond confesses, we were
converted before Celestine's time, and that Palladius was sent to our Scotia,
and not to Ireland; To which Dr. Stillingfleet makes no solid Answer at all.
And where the Doctor says, That I concealed Dr. Hammond's asserting that we
received the first Rudiments of the Christian Faith from the Britains, in
rejecting the Roman Customs; It is answered, That whether we received
Christianity from the Greek or Romish Church, or whether our Conversion was
rude or perfect, is not here controverted; But whether we received it before
Palladius's Mission: And that we were Christians before his time, is clear from
Dr. Hammond's own express Words. And though I relate our Conversion by Pope
Victor, as the common opinion, yet I am so little tied to that opinion, That I
also, from Beda, relate our Agreement as to Easter and other Points, with the
Greek Church, in contradiction to that of Rome; and from which, Archbishop
Spotswood did, before Dr. Hammond, think that our Conversion was from the
Grecian Church.

To conclude this whole Point, concerning Palladius, I am sure its very
Irreconcilable, that Dr. Stillingfleet should acknowledge that the Bishop of
St. Asaph mis-cited Baloeus, for proving that Palladius dyed Anno 431. (upon
which, his whole Hypothesis depends) and yet that he should positively assert,
That the Bishop's only fault was, that he was too exact in that Hypothesis.

The next Ecclesiastic Author I did cite was Tertullian, who about the Year
202. says C. 7. contr. Iudaeos as it is translated by St. Asaph, praef. p. 8.
that the British Nations that could not be subdued by the Romans, yet
willingly yielded their Necks to the Yoke of Christ. To this the Doctor only
answers, that this must be understood of the Moeatoe and Caledonii. But this is
inconsistent with Baronius's applying that passage to us: and that Sense is not
so much for the honor of the Christian Religion, these being but sub-divisions
of a Nation. But since this passage of the Conquered Nations in Britain, and
that I have proved unanswerably by Beda, that the Picts and We were these
unconquered Nations, it necessarily follows, that this passage is only
applicable to us.

The Doctor answers St. Jerome transiently, applying likewise what is said
there of the Scots, to the Scots in Ireland, without giving any special answers
to the Citations. But I have so fully refuted this in my Book, that it needs no
reply. But if the Reader please, he may likewise consider St. Jerome, where,
speaking of Pelagius, he says, Habet enim progeniem Scoticae gentis de
Britannorum vicinia.
His extraction was from the Scottish Nation in the Neighborhood of Britain.
And though some contend that Pelagius was a Briton, none ever contended that he
was an Irish man, and the Neighborhood of the Britons cannot be extended so
properly to Ireland, as to us. But whether Briton or Scot, yet it is clear from
this Citation, as well as from the former, that in Ierome's opinion there was a
Scottish Nation living then in Britain, and that this was the common opinion of
the Age, else so good an Author would not have written so.

To the Citation from Epiphanius, nothing is answered.

I confirmed all these Citations by several reasons, which are not so subject
to quibbling as Citations are; for these are founded on common Sense, and
therefore the Doctor answers little or nothing unto them. But I hope the Reader
will duly weigh them. But how can it be imagined that the Irish would have sent
no Colonies to settle, till after the 500. Year of God, they having been time
out of mind, acknowledged to have been settled in Ireland, and being a very
broody People, and having no Wars (whereas the design of Colonies is to
dis-burthen the Nation by foreign Settlements) or that they would not have
assumed to themselves the Glory and advantage of these Wars? or that the Scots
here would have fought for the Picts above six hundred years together, without
settling in the Country, which they conquered, contrary to the Custom of all
other Nations, who made Incursions? Or how can it be imagined that the Romans
would not have resented against the Irish, all their Inrodes, if they had been
made from Ireland? Or that the Picts could have subsisted without the Scots,
the Romans and Britons staying all the year within the Isle, and the Scots
going home always in the Winter? Or if they had not been settled among the
Picts, till the Saxons were settled among the Britons, how is it imaginable,
that the Picts would have invited them to setle then, when they had seen how
the Britons were ruined by their Auxiliaries? Or why would the Picts have
invited them to setle among them, when the Picts were become more numerous, by
the Generations of six hundred years, and after that they themselves were
straightened in their Possessions by the Irruptions of the Saxons; a new Nation
who had gained all betwixt the two Walls, which was, in effect, the far better
half of what they possessed? And since the Scots and Picts were still joined in
all the Actions that were performed, and are spoken of still in the same way,
and Phrase, how should we think the one was settled, and the other not? And that
no mortal Historian, or other, should have observed this, till Luddu's time?
All these reasons supporting one another, and joined to our Citations, should
be at least allowed to maintain the Authority of so many Historians and
Histories, in possession of belief.

Having thus established my own position, by Authorities and Reasons, I
appealed in this difference betwixt interested Countries, to the dis-interested
Judgment of the greatest Critics and Historians, and all whom I have cited are
acknowledged to be on our side, as I have formerly cleared in the respective
Citations. To which nothing is answered, but that we must not believe them
(being Modern Writers) in their Improprieties: An answer indeed, not worthy of
so undertaking an Antiquary. That we must not believe Antiquaries in their own
Art, nor dis-interested Authors in differences between interested Nations. But
since Scaliger is the only Critic, who is alleged not to be positive for us,
I here insert his own Words. In Tibullum, lib. 4. Te manet invictus? Invictus
sane adhuc eo tempore. Nam hactenus ne Caesar quidem illos subjugavit. Primus
Caesarum, Claudius de illis triumphavit: Cujus rei amplissimum testimonium
habes in Catalect. meorum lib. 1. nempe Elegantissimos versus a quodam ejus
temporis poeta scriptos quos inde petas licet. Sed and Seneca, in (...), idem
testatur in Choricis Anapoestis, and Coeruleos Scotobrigantes, pro quo
ineptissime hodie editur Scutabrigantas. Quare and Scoti hanc gentis suoe
Antiquitatem mihi debent, qui primus illum locum emendavi, quum ipsi hactenus
gentis suoe testem Claudiano antiquiorem non haberent.

And in Eusebium n. 20. 60. Et Caerulei Scotobrigantes, ut olim feliciter a
nobis emendatum esse asserimus: adversantur tamen quidam, in quibus boni,
malique; docti, indocti; Aiunt Scotos ante tempora senescentis, imperii notos
non fuisse. Utinam demonstrationem attulissent qua nobis jugulum peterent. Ante
Constantini tempora, inquiunt, notum Scotorum nomen non erat. Acutum sane
telum, nisi plumbeum esset. Burgundiones and Longobardi, decrepita oetate
imperii coeperunt notescere. Qui eorum meminerunt, de vetustissimis Velleius,
and Ptolomaeus, extant hodie. Si periissent, ut multi alii, ideo Longobardos
tunc primum, quum in Italiam irruperunt, Burgundiones quum Viennensem and
secundam Narbonensem occuparunt, esse, and vocari, coepisse diceremus --

Qui igitur ex Hibernia in Britanniam ferocissimi trajecerunt, non esse
coeperunt, nisi postquam in Britannia fuerunt? Quid stultius? Quid ineptius?
Sed eorum nulla mentio apud Ptolomaeum and Cornelium Tacitum, atqui nec
Burgundionum, Longobardorum, Anglorum and Gothorum, apud Plinium, Strabonem,
Melam, alios. Quam indignoe sunt hoe velitationes liberalibus ingeniis? --

Postquam per multum tractum temporis Septentrionalem oram Britanniae
excursionibus and latrociniis vexassent, tandem ab Antonino Pio in ordinem
redacti, finibus suis sese continuerunt.

From which I argue thus, Scaliger there concludes, that we were one of the
Nations against whom Claudius fought, and that we were never subdued till then.
for Claudius never fought against the Irish; and the Scots here spoken of by
Scaliger, must be those whose antiquity Scaliger did formerly prove out of
Seneca: for he says, Et Scoti hanc genti suae antiquitatem mihi debent.
the Scots owe to him the Antiquity of their Nation. But so it is, that the
Irish living in Ireland, do not owe the Antiquity of their Nation to him: for
it is not denied on either side, that they were much more ancient; and I am
sure the Irish were not called Scots, in Scaliger's time. And both this passage
of Tibullus, and that of Seneca, joining the Scots to the Britons, must
certainly be interpreted only of the Scots in Britain, according to Usber's
own rule.

The passage likewise cited by me out of Eusebius, ad M. M. L. X. does also
prove, that Scaliger thought us elder than the declension of the Roman Empire,
as is now alleged, for he speaks there of that Nation, of whom he had formerly
spoken out of Seneca. But so it is, we were these Scots, and not the Irish: And
it was never controverted; but the Irish was a Nation long before that time, as
I said formerly: and consequently, Scaliger contemns very justly those
Authors, who deny, that we were a Nation before Constantine's time, because no
Authors spoke of us till then: For, says he, the Longobards and Burgundians
were established Nations long before they were known by these names. And the
Nation of which Scaliger speaks, is that Nation Quae trajecit ex Hibernia in
Britanniam: And it were ridiculous to apply this to the Scots in Ireland, or
deny that Scaliger thought we settled here while the Roman Empire flourished.
Scaliger also there says, that after we had troubled Britain by Incursions, we
were at last forced to contain our selves within our own bounds. Which shows,
(1.) That we had made Incursions long before Antoninus's time, which was about
100 years after Christ, contrary to what the Bishop of St. Asaph says. (2.)
Antoninus forced us to contain our selves within our own bounds, and therefore
we had bounds and marches of our own, before that time, and so we were settled
long before 503. And all this agrees with Eumenius and Pacatius, and proves
that what they write relates to us. (3.) Pausanias, (whom Scaliger there cites)
tells us, that Antoninus took much Land from them; Ergo, they had Land before
that time, for that Land could not be in Ireland, for Antoninus never took Land
from the Irish. And whoever these Brigantes were, yet Scaliger there makes us
the Brigantes, and the question there is only concerning Scaliger's opinion of
us. Nor am I concerned at his calling us Brigantes: for I can prove that
Brigantes signifies not Robbers, but Highlanders, from the word Briga, which
signifies an Hill. And I receive kindly the Apology made by the Doctor for the
Bishop, that his Lordship called us not Robbers, but only produced a Testimony
from Gildas, whom I excuse for abusing us, he being of that Nation which was
overrun by us; and probably our spoiling of them might be the Ground of his
Quarrel.

The Doctor likewise argues against my Citations from Favin and Paulus
Aemilius, as speaking only of an alliance betwixt Achaius and Charles the
Great, and nothing as to Fergus, nor the Succession of Kings for 330. years
before Christ's Nativity: But, alas! How trivial is this Reflection! For I never
adduced these Authors for proving directly, that part of our History relating
to Fergus; but did justly argue, that we must have been settled here much
earlier than the Year 503. because about the Year 790. we were a very
considerable Nation, and entered into a League with Charles the Great, which
these Authors do fully prove. And I likewise produced this Citation, to show
how unwarrantably the Bishop of St. Asaph confined us to some few Countries now
erected into the Earldom of Argyle.

As to Sigonius, I shall set down some Citations which formerly I forgot to
place on the Margin. But it is strange that the Doctor could not find them,
though he uses not to search much for what makes against him, His words are, De
Occident: Imp. l. 6. p. 141.
Eodem anno (qui fuit 360 post Christum) Julianus apud Parisios hibernans,
Scotos, Pictosque Britannos incursantes audiens, Lupicinum magistrum armorum in
Britanniam destinavit. And in another place he says, Anno vero Christi 449.
Britanni namque a Pictis and Scotis (qui Pictis adjuncti partem Insulae ad
Aquilonem tenebant) desperato Romanorum auxilio ad Anglo-Saxones Germaniae
populos confugerunt. From which Citations, it is undeniable that Sigonius
thought that we were possessed of the Northern part of this Isle before the Year
360. and that at that time we were joined with the Picts, in possessing the
same.

I cited also Selden's clear Authority, to which nothing is answered.

And when I said in the first impression of my Book, that all Historians had
owned our History; I meant all who wrote before Luddus, and Camden, which I
still believe to be true. And yet to prevent quibbling, I ordered the expunging
of the word [All,] in the second Impression, before I knew of any censures but
my own. And now the Doctor produces only two, who wrote since their time, and
are not of such weight as these cited by me. And if Ubbo Emmius had considered
what I now produce, he had at least acknowledged our History before the Year
503, whereas he does not so much as allow our History till after the Year 829,
which, even the Bishop of St. Asaph will think ridiculous, and which being
after the French League is redargued by unquestionable Proofs, neither is
Boxhornius special, and has been misled by Usher.

Thus, I hope, I have again overturned the Bishop of St. Asaph's two chief
Positions relating to us, viz. That there were no Scots in Britain at all,
before the Year 300, which is expressly contrary to what is said by Eumenius,
Tertullian, Latinus, Pacatius, Seneca, Spartan and Beda; and that other
Position, viz. That we were only here by way of Incursion, from the Year 300.
till the Year 503. which was all that I did chiefly undertake, and for which,
though I needed not to have produced Arguments, but only answered his
Citations, (for according to Dr. Stillingfleet's own Position, a received
History is not to be overturned, but by very convincing Proofs) yet because I
found that neither the Bishop nor the Doctor could bring any Proofs to overturn
our History, I have likewise proved, the truth of it as to these Periods of
time, by Authorities which I may modestly say very learned men have thought
unanswerable, and which the Doctor's answers (being so insufficient after the
assistance he has got) show to be so.

CHAP. III.
What the Bishop of St. Asaph and Dr. Stillingfleet say against our Histories,
from Fergus the first, examined.

THough I was not obliged to maintain our History beyond the Year 503. that
being sufficient to overturn the two Positions laid down by the Bishop, yet I
think it fit and reasonable for me to examine also, what our two learned
Adversaries say against our Histories in general, even as to these dark times,
in which, neither our Neighbors nor we can get such a sequel and chain of
Authors, as these I have produced to prove our being here before the Year 503.

Let us then remember (1.) that we are only obliged to produce Historical, not
Mathematical, nor Legal proofs. (2.) That we are only maintaining our Origin
to be from a Neighbor Nation, and very near to the Age of Letters, and that
there is nothing in this our Origin, either vain or fabulous, we neither
deriving our selves from Egyptians, Grecians nor Trojans, nor contradicting
even in these first dawnings of our History, the uncontroverted Tract of
foreign Historians: And so all these long digressions, which the Doctor, to
show his own learning, produces, concerning Berosus, Manetho, Suffridus and
others, and particularly of their rejecting their own fabulous descent from
Brutus, is absolutely impertinent; there being nothing that can be alleged in
our History to contradict foreign Historians, which I have not taken off in my
first Book, without any answer made to it. And though there should be some
Errors in the Tract of a History, yet the whole History for that must not be
rejected, else no English Historian should be believed more than ours, we
seeing in our own Age, matters of Fact, especially relating to our own
Country, very much misrepresented, to say no worse at this time; And I desire
to know what Warrant Luddus, ou first Adversary, had for asserting the descent
from Brutus, and for his promising to prove it; and yet this Author passes for
a great Critic, and Camden states the debate betwixt Buchanan and him, as the
debate betwixt a great Antiquary and a great Poet: Well decided indeed, and
this is a great proof of Camden's being an impartial Antiquary, and since most
of the old English Historians who wrote their general History, tell of this
descent from Brutus, we may controvert in the same way the truth, even of their
latter Histories; because they are founded on their old Histories which assert
Brutus, and so contradict the whole Tract of the Roman story as ours do not.
(3.) The Bishop and the Doctor do both wrong us, very much, in observing, that
all our Neighbor Nations have thrown out the old and fabulous beginnings of
their History, but that we still retain our ancient Fables, for any man that
reads our History will see that most of our Historians have omitted the old
Irish Fables of Gathelus and Scota, and all that long line from Iaphet to
Fergus the first, narrated lately again by Ogygia, and much used by our
reverend Critic Dr. Stillingfleet in this answer against us. It is
acknowledged by the Doctor himself, that Boethius and Ioannes Major do very
ingenuously pass from many later things, because they smell of that fabulous
age, but the Doctor does charitably make these to be the effects, not of
sincerity, but of Craft: so nothing can stand in Judgment before such Critics.

The first thing I say then for our Historians, is, that what they say from
Rheuda's time, is not only made probable, but is undeniably proved by Beda and
Eumenius, who do clear that we were here before Julius Caesar's time; and if we
were, certainly we had Kings, nor did the Genius of our Nation ever incline to
a Commonwealth as others have done: Rheuda is made a Scottish King by Beda,
Galgacus by Tacitus, Donald by Baronius and the Ecclesiastic Historians, and
all this before the Year 300. From Rheuda then to Fergus the first, are but by
our Computation 130 years, and to what purpose should so many honest men have
conspired, and a whole Nation have concurred so zealously, to maintain a Lie;
so little useful, as the lengthning our Antiquity, for so short a time as 130
years? And though there were nothing for it but Oral Tradition, why might it
not be received for so short a Period? and since a Father might have told this
to his Son, in an age wherein men lived so long, and especially as to the
descent of a Nation, and the race of Kings, of which men are very careful: to
fortify which, I adduced Livius saying, Per ea tempora rarae literae fuere,
una custodia fldelis memoriae rerum gestarum, and quod etiamsi quae in
commentariis Pontificum aliisque publicis privatisque erant monumentis, incensa
urbe, pleraeque periere. But because there is a debate betwixt the Doctor and
me, concerning the Translation of these words, I urge from common Sense, that
Oral Tradition was to be Livius's best Authority, in the beginning of his
History, and in many things afterward; for though, after several years, the
Romans were exact in preserving their History by keeping public and distinct
Records, which the Doctor does needlessly prove, since it was never
controverted; yet certainly in those things which he narrated before the
building of Rome he could have no Warrant but Tradition. (2.) After the
building of Rome, it is not to be imagined, that a Nation only given to Wars,
would for many years fall upon the exact keeping of Records. (3.) These Records
might possibly bear the names of Magistrates, which is all that is proved, and
in a Monarchy could have been preserved without these, as to their Kings: For I
will undertake there are few here but know who reigned these 130 years bypast
among us, though they can neither read nor write: And though private
Magistrates might be forgot, yet hardly Kings, and very memorable actions could
be so: and I dare say, that in our own, and in most of the considerable
Families like ours, not only the Succession, but the chief Accidents which
befell the Family are remembered for two or three hundred years by many hundreds
in the Family, though there be no written History of such Families; so far does
interest and affection prompt and help Memory and Tradition to supply Letters.
(4.) Though these Records might have preserved names of Magistrates and
Treaties, with the conditions thereof, yet what were the occasions of War, the
considerable exploits and Strategemes done in them, and many other such matters
of Fact, could only be preserved by Tradition; for these were never Recorded
in any Nation, and could have no Warrant save Oral Tradition, without
mentioning the Harangues, and such like Historical matters: so that Livie, as
well as Boethius must have wanted flesh to fill Nerves to support it, and
color to adorn this History. (5.) Since the City, and most of these Records
were burnt, we have as great reason to doubt of their History as of Ours; for
albeit we cannot now produce the warrants of them after Vastations as
remarkable as their burning was, yet we have others who say they saw such
Books, even as Dionysius Halicarnassius cites Antiochus Syracusanus, for whose
History no more is said by the said Dionysius, but that he took his History out
of ancient and undoubted words, and he is but one Author who says so of
himself; whereas we have many Historians, who say that they with their own eyes
saw the Records, out of which they took the things they have.

These things being premised, I renew the Argument which I proposed in my first
Book for proving the truth of our Histories. Thus,

These Histories must be believed, and are sufficiently instructed, in which
the Historians who writ them had sufficient Warrants, for what they wrote, and
we have fiv^ or six Historians, men of untainted Reputation, who when they
wrote their Histories, declare that they wrote the same from Authentic Records
and Warrants, which, being a matter of Fact, is sufficiently proved from the
Testimony of so many honest Witnesses, who declared they saw good Warrants for
what they wrote: and if this be controverted, what can be true in humane
Affairs; or why should we believe Livius, Josephus or others, since the
Authors which they cite are not now extant? This is all the subject can allow,
and what the learned Bishop Pearson and Heylin think not only sufficient, but
all that is possible to be done in such Cases, the one, proving by my Method
and Arguments, that St. Ignatius's Epistles are Genuine, and the other, that
there was such a King in England as Lucius; and that he introduced into it the
Christian Religion, in which the Doctor agrees with him, against the Bishop of
St. Asaph, and I hope our Authors will at least give a deference to the
opinion of two such emnent English Divines.

The Laws also of all Nations allow, that when Papers are lost, the tenor of
them may be proved, providing a probable way of losing of them to be
instructed, which the Lawyers of all Nations call Casus amissionis. But so it
is, we assign two remarkable occasions and sufficient reasons, to instruct this
Casus amissionis. The first in the Reign of Edward the first, who industriously
did take away our Records. Which in the process before the Pope, we offered to
prove by most famous Witnesses in presence also of the said King, who, by his
not contradicting, did acknowledge this matter of Fact. The second in the time
of our Reformation, in which, the blind Zeal of some, and the interested
Avarice of others, prevailed with them to destroy the Records of our
Monasteries. And so far are these accidents true, not only in History, but in
our sad Experience, that we want in matter of private right, what might have
been furnished us both from our Records, and Monasteries: And so it were
ridicuous to think, that we abstracted those vouchers upon design; especially
seeing long after that, and till Luddus time, no Nation, nor Author, ever
controverted our History; and I Challenge the Doctor to produce any such
Author, as certainly they would have done, if the matters of Fact had been
either ridiculous in themselves, or inconsistent with the tract of other
Histories.

Of this fundamental Argument the Doctor takes no notice, and makes no answer
to it; but I, to fortify this Argument, having insisted upon the probability
of what our Historians relate, and the Reputation of the relaters, he runs out
in an answer to both these, to which I shall make a Reply: But I conceive
nothing can take off the strength of my Argument, except he either prove, that
there could have been no such Warrants, and that what is related is in it self
inconsistent with the History of other Nations, or that he had produced to us
good Authors contemporary with these things which he denies, and we assert,
and had showed that these Authors deny these Transactions, or deliver things
inconsistent with them; neiof which he has done, nor can do.

The first general Ground insisted on by the Doctor, is, that we have no
Historians who wrote in the time in which the things related were alleged to
have been acted; to which it is answered, as formerly, that an Author writing
from sufficient Records, is as much to be believed as if he had lived in the
time; and that is our Case: And I again renew my Query, if the Doctor thinks
that Dr. Burnet's Book of the History of the Reformation, should not be
believed in the next Age though the Warrants of it were burnt, which is very
possible; and had it not been great folly, and impudence, in five or six honest
men to have separately written, that they and each of them had the said
Records, when they wrote from them? And though the Doctor insinuates that this
has been formerly done by one or two which he cites, yet there were not many
concurring there, as here; and it is a very different thing, for one Author to
say that he wrote from such a Record, a particular passage, in which none was
concerned, and for many worthy Men to say in their Epistles to their Kings and
Nation, that what they wrote was true from the Records which they had given
them from Monasteries and other public Records, and to appeal to them as then
extant: and certainly many would be very desirous to see these Records in the
time of the writing these Histories, especially seeing the first Historians who
appear in Print have both Rivals, and Enemies, as well as curious Critics, and
the Monasteries themselves, and the Keepers of the pretended Records, could not
but have known the Forgery, if any such had been. Or durst so many ingenious
Men, though they had been careless of their Conscience, have trusted their
Reputation in so nice and quick-sighted an Age, as that, wherein all of them
wrote, to the discretion of so many who could have discovered the Cheat? Nor do
we find, even from what the Doctor himself writes, that the single Testimony of
these who pretend to have written from Records, is rejected, except where what
they say is redargued, as inconsistent with other uncontroverted Histories, and
Authors; or narrate things, in themselves incredible, as is evident from the
instances of Humbald, Geoffery, Annius and others: so that to reject our
Histories, lest the World should be obliged to believe these, is no solid, nor
just way of reasoning. But the Bishop himself, to shun this, did with a greater
show of reason urge that our Historians were but to be accounted as one, since
they followed one another in a File: But I did fully take off this, by proving
that each of them saw some few of these Records, and Warrants, a part; and that
they differed enough, to show that they were in no Conspiracy: and this I hold
as acknowledged, since the Doctor returns no answer to it.

That there could be no sufficient Warrants for our History, from the Annals of
our Monasteries, is contended, because the Monasteries themselves are much
later than Fergus the First, who is to be proved by these Annals. But to this
it is answered, that Iona and Abercorn, are Monasteries acknowledged by Beda,
as long prior to Beda's time; and though the Monasteries were later, yet they
might have Records as old as Fergus, for this is very probable in it self, and
consequently ought to be believed, since it is proved by famous Witnesses. And
whereas it is answered, that bare Probability is not sufficient to sustain a
History, but the Annals themselves out of which it is taken must be produced:
My return to this is, that if bare Probability were onelyproposed, the answer
is good, but it is not so when I say the thing is probable of it self, and is
actually proved by Witnesses beyond all exception. And whereas, to overturn
this, it is contended from the Irish Annals, that Fergus, whom we call the
second, was our first King. To this I need say no more, but that I proved in my
former Book, that all the accounts which the Irish gave of our entry into this
Kingdom, are inconsistent, and contradictory one to another, and to which the
Doctor has made no answer, and therefore they are not to be believed in
themselves; but much less are they to be believed when contrary to the Annals
of all our Monasteries, attested by famous Witnesses who saw them, and in a
matter in which we were more concerned than they: and so it is probable we
would have been more careful to preserve it is Memory, (2.) I have proved in
the first Chapter, not only by the assertions of our own Historians, but by
all the Historians who speak of us, both without, and within the Isle; that we
had Kings long before Fergus the second, and that we had even Christian Kings;
and it is almost impossible, that our Monasteries could have been mistaken in
that, or at least that they would not have condescended, who was the other
Christian King, if Donald was not: And at least, our Adversaries should be put
to prove who was our First Christian King, or acquiesce in him whom we assign.
And it is also very strange, that not only we, but the Romish Church it self
should be mistaken; they being very positive in concurring with us, whereas no
other Nation nor Church condescends, as I have said, upon any other First
Christian King, or Authors to prove it. And to conclude this Period, I must
say that it is wonderful, that positive Witnesses, that say they saw old
Annals, fortified by their Histories both at home and abroad, Pagan and
Christian, should be less believed than the Ballads and Traditions of another
Nation, who have none of these advantages: That Beda should be of less credit
than Iocelin, and Legends, in which I dare say the Bishop and Doctor believe
but very little, if any thing at all, save this; and why are not the Legends of
St. Congall and St. Brendan, who mention the settlement of St. Fergus the
first, as good as Iocelin, and others, produced to prove that Fergus the second
was our first King; especially seeing they likewise concur with Beda in his
Rheuda? Whereas the other contradict him, and that our Histories which have
rejected Gathelus and Simon Brek, because that too great Antiquity is
improbable, should be overturned by those who positively own a Lineal, well
proved descent from Iaphet, and condescend upon days, and months, and that our
Historians which are many, and very much esteemed over all Europe, should be
overturned by the Authority of Rhimes, and rags of History, which no Man
adventured to form into any Body whatsoever, till of late some Specimen is
given, in which, amongst other rare Marks of veracity, our League with France
was alleged to have been made with their Kings; as if France understood as
little their own Leagues, as they would have Rome to understand their own
Conversion; or that all the Nations of Europe should have been mistaken, as to
this palpable Point.

I reflect not on the Publishers of the Manuscript of the Abbacy of Melros,
printed at Oxford; for I honor every thing that comes from that learned
Society, in a special manner; but it is no reflection on them, to say that we
have another, much fuller, in what makes for Scotland, though it could not be
so exact as the other Monasteries, since it was ofttimes of old, under the
Saxons, who would certainly lessen what relates to us; and thus the fault lay
in the Copy, and not in the Publishers, for the Author of that Manuscript
calls Beda our Countreyman, so he must have been then our enemy; but however it
begins not with Alpin, as the Doctor alleges, though I mention that, because
he is not mentioned in the Oxford Edition: for it declares, that it is to
continue where the Reverend Beda left, and so is a proof of our Nation, and
History, from that time, and the differences of that from ours shall be
printed, and I have at present printed these few. And though Buchanan had the
Books of Pluscardin and Pasley, yet it does not follow that therefore the best
and most part of the Books of our Monasteries were not carried to Rome, or
destroyed, and so cannot be recovered from Rome; and how can it be imagined,
that those who burnt all our Magnificent Churches, would have spared a few
Books, written by Monks, and which were so little esteemed in those times
amongst our Zealots?

The Doctor, in proving there was no such Author as Veremund, forgets that I
have proved by two famous Witnesses, a Lord of the Session, and a Principal of
a College, (both learned, and devout men, much esteemed abroad where they
traveled) that they had seen the Book; and here is no bare probability. And I
hope it is uncontroverted, that the depositions of two Witnesses cannot be
taken away by probabilities; nor can it be alleged that Chambres followed
Boethius's faith in this, for he says he had it, and he cites many things
material out of Veremund, nor does the Learned Doctor Pearson prove any other
way the truth of St. Ignatius's Epistles, than by producing the Testimonies of
Origin and others, who have cited passages out of those Letters, as Letters
written by St. Ignatius, though none of these Authors lived in the age with
St. Ignatius; and so they did not legally prove that these Letters were written
by him which are not in Boethius. But however, let us a little examine the
Doctor's probabilities.

The first is, that many have forged Authors, as Annius: good! Ergo, these two
learned Men did it; a posse ad esse non valet consequentia. (2.) We have named
other Authors, who are not now extant: Ergo, Veremund never was: good again!
and if Fordon had been lost, or Elphinstoun, whom we have not yet seen, such
Authors had been both denied, and so had that learned Manuscript written by
Craig, which we have but lately recovered. (3.) Fordon cites not Veremund,
though he cites many others; This is such another consequence, as if I should
argue against the Doctor, that Boethius cites not Fordon; ergo, Fordon never
was. But I choose rather to argue thus; the Bishop and Doctor both think that
Boethius did only transcribe Fordon, and yet he never cited him, which they
think he did, that he might have the honor of being thought our first general
Historian himself: And yet it is proved, there was such a Book as Fordon, then
extant; and therefore I conclude, by the same reason, that Fordon transcribed
much of Veremund, and therefore concealed his Author. (4.) Bishop Elphinstoun
mentions him not; but to this I answer, that the Manuscript is not ours, and so
may be gelt; but I conceive, by the Doctor's Epitome of it, that it is it self
but an abridgment of Fordon, and therefore he mentions not Veremund, because
Fordon had not mentioned him, and it was very ordinary in those days, to write
Epitomes of Fordon, some whereof are extant with us, and Boethius tells us that
Elphinstoun never wrote an History, but only prepared some materials for one;
and if he wrote a History, here is again another Historian, who being a devout
and learned Bishop, must be thought not to have written without sufficient
warrants. Though then probabilities could overturn the deposition of Witnesses,
yet these have no weight, but what the Doctor's Authority gives them. And
though it were proved, that Baker, Baloeus, and the other English Historians
whom I cite, had not seen Veremund, yet surely they thought it not only
probable, but certain, that there was such an Author.

Against Fordon it is urged, that he mentions not our first Kings from Fergus
the First; to Fergus the Second; and that he confesses he knew not how long any
of these Kings after Fergus reigned; and from this also it is concluded that we
have no Manuscripts to instruct the same. Nam, says he, ad plenum scripta non
reperimus, To which it is answered, that this is a great argument of his
ingenuity, for if he could have written without sufficient warrants, why could
he not have made up this, as well as the rest? But the true reason is; that the
Warrants did then lie in the Monastery, especially at Icolmekill, where
Veremund's History was likewise kept. And it is clear, by Boethius's dedication
to the King, that he thanked his Majesty for ordering that these should be
delivered to him: and if the Doctor should at present write such another
Dedication to the King, thanking him for letting him have the use of the
Alexandrian MSS. of the Bible out of his Bibliotheque, could any man afterward
think that there were no such MSS? and that the Warrants of the Histories used
so to be kept, as not to be got without public Authority, is clear by the
custom of Nations acknowledged by the Doctor out of Livy, and asserted by me
in my First Book. As to our Nation, from Paulus Iovius, who was not interested
in us, and consequently, it was no wonder that Fordon, who was but a mean
Priest, could not have Veremund and the other Warrants which were necessary for
filling up the History of our Kings, between the two Fergusses, which Boethius
himself could not recover without the King's command, the Treasurer's
assistance, and his own great expense and labor: and I know not whether it
would not have been a greater villainy and folly in him, to have asserted all
this, if it had not been true, himself and all Persons interested being alive,
or a proof of Fordon's ingenuity, in not filling up what was deficient through
want of the Warrants.

Against Boethius, it is urged by the Doctor, that he could not have had
Veremund, and other sufficient Warrants from Icolmekill, as is pretended,
because his History is printed in the Year 1526. and he had not these Records
from Icolmekill, till the Year 25. so that the History could not be compiled,
printed and revised in a year. To which it is answered, that Hector Boethius is
acknowledged to have had a better invention, than to have forged so improbable
a falsity, especially in a thing he might have contrived as he pleased, and in
which the honor of the Nation was not concerned, and as to which, the King,
Treasurer and Monks of Icolmekill could have controlled him; but this is easily
reconciled, without a miracle, for certainly Boethius was writing his History
long before he got these Records, and doing what he could, as Fordon had done,
without them before; and having at last got them, after the third message,
Tertio Nuncio, which shows he was writing before, he might have easily added
from the beginning through the whole Book, what was to be expected from
Veremund, and others, and which, I dare say, the laborious Dr. Stillingfleet
could have done in a month, and there was time enough from the beginning of 25.
to the end of 26. (as we may well enough suppose) being near two years to have
done all this; and this was a far less miracle than for the Bishop and Doctor
to have sent Palladius from Rome to Ireland, to preach there long enough to
have a sufficient proof of the Irish being obstinate, and to despair of
success, to return, and to die in a Country of the Picts all in one year: and
St. Patrick, who was not then present, but was in France, to have got the news
of this death, to have formed the resolution, and to have gone to Rome, and
prevailed with the Pope to ordain him, and all this in the small space betwixt
the 25th of December, and the 6th of April following: at which time the Pope
died; whose preceding sickness could not but have retarded that Affair.

I admire the Doctor, for insisting on the Printer's mistake, not mine, in
calling Turgot, Archbishop of Saint Andrews, for I call him, p. 26. Edition the
first, Bishop of St. Andrews, and so the calling him Archbishop afterward
could not have been ignorance in me, and the Printers thought all Bishops of
St. Andrews must be Archbishops; and by the mistake of the same kind, without
any observation, Martial is made to have lived in Augustus's time, whereas I
placed him in Domitian's, and sent a Copy so corrected, in print, to the Bishop
of St. Asaph, and the half of our own printed Copies are right in this, but in
the Second Edition, I expunged these, and some other literal faults, before I
knew that the Doctor or any else was to write an answer: and, I am glad the
Doctor is so fashionable a Gentleman, as to understand Martial better than I
do: nor would I have insisted on the mistakes about Fordon, and Dempster, if
these had not been material to my purpose, whereof the one is not yet answered,
and the other not at all notic'd by the Doctor.

I urged upon this head also, that the Sacred History was for many hundreds of
years preserved by Oral Tradition: for though the Jews and we acknowledge, that
the Scripture was penned by Divine Inspiration, yet in arguing against Pagans,
we must make this probable by other Arguments. And the Doctor, in his Origines
Sacrae, (which Book I esteem very much) uses the same Common Places with me,
and amongst other things tells us, that men lived so long in those days that
they were able to transmit Historical Relations with much more certainty than
now. And Josephus, for proving the Sacred History against Appion, cites Foreign
Authors that are all lost now, and yet we believe there were such Historians.
And albeit afterward the Priests did preserve their Histories with great
exactness, yet that way of preserving History by Records, took not place for
many ages. And though our Monasteries are not to be compared with their
Priesthood, yet they were sufficient, especially in these sincerer times, to
preserve our Histories. And though what they preserved is not to be believed
with a Divine belief, yet they ought to have an Historical one allowed them,
especially since they are fortified by the probability of what they preserved,
and the concurrence of as much Roman History, as France or Spain can pretend
to. Nor are the Citations from our old Laws to be contemned: for these at least
might have been preserved by practice, as Lycurgus's Laws. And it is undeniable
that Skene, our famous Register and Antiquary, did within these 100 years
declare, He had old Manuscripts bearing these our old Laws, though they are now
lost, without weakening our esteem or observance of them, and he has printed
many of them. And though Historians might have adventured to print some
Historical Passages without sufficient warrant, yet neither they, nor our
Register, durst have adventured to print Laws, nor would our Governors have
suffered this, without sufficient warrants. And we must be believed in what
concerns us, and us only. Nor does it follow that because the Laws of
Alexander the Third were lost; therefore the Macalpin Laws might not have been
preserved, they being the foundations of the Rights and Successions of our
Kings. And therefore, as they were preserved with more care by us, they should
have been attacked with less zeal by the Doctor, for his Monarch's sake, whose
partiality I tax in this, and not his disloyalty. And to conclude this period,
in opposition to the Doctor, I do think that the most fundamental of all Laws
were in all Nations preserved by mere Tradition, and are not written to this
very day, save when some accident forces it, as in our late Statute for the
Succession. Which Position, since able Lawyers must acknowledge, I do not
contend for it with a Divine, who seems here to be out of his sphere, and more
dogmatical than his Profession will well allow. But why may not our Laws be as
old as about 800 years; since Seldom and Churchhill tells us, that there are
Laws yet extant in London, older than any the Romans had? And the Doctor's
Raillery, that probably these Laws were in another Chest at Icolmekill with the
MSS. which Boeth says Fergus brought from the sacking of Rome in the time of
Alaric, to be contemned: for as great Critics, as the Doctor, believe this to
be true, as one may see by Morhosius's learned Book de Patavinitate Liviana.
From this received Principle also I conclude justly, that since Lycurgus's
Laws, and the old Laws of other Nations have been preserved, most of them
without writing, and by mere Tradition, why may not the same Tradition be
trusted for the Names, and for some general and probable actions of our Kings
for 130 years, viz. from Rheuda, to Fergus the First? or why might not our
Monasteries have received these Traditions from such as lived nearer these
times than Gildas did, to the first planting of Christianity in Britain? And
yet his, and other Ecclesiastic Traditions, are generally received, and
acknowledged, and founded on, by our severe Doctor, and Churchmen ought to be
tender of them, because without these, Fanatics and Sectarians might press
them very much.

Another ground whereby I endeavored to render it probable that there were
such Warrants as these declared to have been seen by our Historians, was, that
what they declared was probable, and ordinary, for our Country, and other
Northern Countries, as Ireland, and Domestic Historians called Sanachies, and
Bards, who as Poets preserved their Histories. This Varaeus observes in
Ireland, and Powell in Wales. Antiquit. Hibern. c. 5.
Bardi custodiebant etiam Nobilium insignia and Genealogias. And in these were
probably the memory of the Names of our Kings, and their considerable Actions
preserved. Nor can it be imagined, that a Family can rise without getting their
Lands from some Kings; nor could they have done considerable Actions, except in
their service: and so in remembering their own Genealogies and Actions, could
not omit to record those of their Kings. And Livie, in the place cited, Praef.
p. 28.
tells us, that the Histories of Private Families were used as the Warrants of
the General History, and those Luddus does cry up as the Warrants he used. Nor
does Buchanan decry them, except in opposition to Luddus his using them as
proofs of these positions only, that are inconsistent with the Roman
Contemporary, and other Histories. And in so far I acknowledge they ought not
to be received; but that cannot be alleged against us.

I urged also that it was very probable, that we had ancient Written Histories;
because we had the Druids amongst us who were Priests under Paganism, and they
are acknowledged by Caesar to have had the use of Letters. And though Caesar
does observe that they were averse from consigning to Letters the Mysteries of
their Religion, yet it does not follow that therefore they used them not, in
preserving the memory of their Kings and memorable Actions. The one proceeded
from a design to keep their Mysteries from being subjected to an examination,
which they knew these Principles could not bear; and to conciliate a veneration
to their Religion from the ignorance of the Admirers, as Varaeus also confesses
De Antiq. Hibern. c. 5.
. But without the other, Letters had been altogether useless: for in what could
they have employed them, if not in this? And since Caesar De Bell. Gal. l. 6.
is positive, that they used the Grecian Letters, in privatis publicisque
rationibus, what can be meant by publicae rations, save their Historical
account of things? And this seems the more probable, that many of our Towns and
Ports especially, have Greek names. And to the Doctor's difficulty how the
Druids could have preserved their Chronology in these Ancient Times, I answer
from Pliny, who tells, that they numbered time by the course of the Moon, and
not of the Sun L. 17. c. ult.
: which proves, that very anciently they used Chronology. Nor does it follow,
that because some of the Druids are said to have opposed the conversion of
their People to Christianity, therefore others of them were not zealous for
their conversion: even as though the Ancient Philosophers were generally severe
Opposers of the settlement of Christianity, yet many of them, when converted,
were eminent Lights in their time. And therefore I may conclude, that since it
is very probable, that our Predecessors would be curious to preserve the Names
of their first Kings, and the way of their first settlement: and since they had
Letters wherein these might have been preserved: therefore it is probable that
they were accordingly preserved. And that these Traditions and Records, as well
as the Histories of Private Families relating these were consigned to the
custody of the Monasteries with us, as elsewhere. So that since four or five
Worthy Historians declare, They saw these each apart, their Testimonies
concurring in a probable matter of fact must be as sufficient, as if the
Warrants were yet extant; for since these would prove and satisfy in a Legal
Trial, much more ought they to be allowed in an Historical one, quod erat
probandum.

CHAP. IV.
Our Authors vindicated in the accounts they give of the Genealogy of our
Kings.

THE Doctor being convinced from these undeniable Proofs, that neither Fordon,
nor Boethius did forge the ancient Genealogy of our Kings, which the Bishop of
St. Asaph did positively assert, but that they had Warrants and Authorities
before their times; He falls upon a new device, and contends that Boethius did
insert many things contrary to the account of the Genealogy preceding him. For
as to the particular Genealogy from Fergus the First to Fergus the Second, he
has no account of this from Fordon, who has (as the Doctor says) professed,
that he could find nothing particular Pref. p. 5.
concerning them; though he cites several Chronicles; and though Fordon
mentions an old High Land Gentleman, a Genealogist, who gives an Lib. 3. c. 2.
account of the first Line betwixt the two Ferguses; yet the Genealogy by him
given differs from that, which is owned by Boeth and Buchanan, both in the
number, and in the names of our Kings. And this is alleged to have been done
of purpose, to put in Regents not owned by the Genealogists, and to support the
Law of incapacity, and that he might get mention made of Reutha, Galdus,
Caratacus and Donald. And the Genealogist thus having extended the first Line,
does as much shorten the second Line, betwixt Fergus the Second and Alexander
the Third; whereof the Doctor endeavors to give particular Instances. So that
the Modern Historians had added more Kings in the Race from Fergus the Second
to Alexander the Third, than are contained in the Genealogy betwixt Fergus the
First and Fergus the Second. And, upon the matter, the Genealogist has made no
more Kings in both Races, than the Historians make in the last Race from Fergus
the Second. And therefore the Doctor is as culpable in shortning the Royal
Line, as the Bishop of St. Asaph. He adds also, Lib. 5. cap. 60.
that Fordon mentions another Genealogy of St. David, made at the time of his
death, which ought not to be attributed to Baldredus, but to Cardinal Walter
Wardlaw, which exactly agrees with that of the Highlander, except in the
spelling of some few names, from Fergus the second upwards, to Fergus the
first. But the latter part of the Genealogy from St. David to Fergus the
second, being corrupted before Fordon's time, he would not have it stand in
Record against his History, but cut it off with an etc. from David to Fergus;
which Caution he forgot, when he did specially insert the Highlander's
Genealogy from Alexander the third, to Fergus the second. This is the meaning,
as near as I can understand, of the Doctor's words, being in themselves
somewhat perplexed. But the Doctor takes notice of a third Genealogy in Fordon,
which supplies, in some measure, the defects of that of King David, and it is
the Succession of Kenneth, the first Monarch of Scotland; and there he takes
notice of the difference betwixt the Genealogy and our Historians. For he
acknowledges that he does agree with the Highland Genealogy, except that it
has Dongare the Son of Donald Braick, which the Highlander does omit, and
makes only ten Kings betwixt Fergus and Kenneth, whereas our Historians make
twenty eight.

In Answer to this objection, I shall follow the method of the Highland
Genealogist, which proceeds ascending from Alexander the third, and the Nature
of the objection it self, which insists most upon the difference in the
Genealogist from our Historians as to the second Line, there being no objection
made as to the first, except as to some small difference in the names; and the
only considerable difference is betwixt Finnanus and Caratacus, which will
easily be cleared in answer to the objection against the second Line. And
though the Race and Line be the same with Fergus downwards; yet with the Doctor
we shall make an Imaginary distinction of first and second Race: And first; as
I applaud the Doctor, who has better thoughts of Fordon (than the Bishop had,
who asserted him to have dreamed the History of our Kings) that he was so
cautious, as not to set down the accounts that were imparted to him otherwise
than in his sleep, because he could not give a full account of them; so I must
likewise vindicate Boeth, who in his History has neither differed from, nor
contradicted Fordon, nor any other of these mentioned Genealogies. For as to
Fordon, though he gives not a particular account of the Names, times and
Actions of all the Kings betwixt the Ferguses, yet he does not profess, that he
could find nothing in particular concerning them, as appears by the words cited
by the Doctor himself; Sed and horum Sigillatim distinguere Which is not Lib.
4. but l. 3.
tempora principatuum ad praesens omittimus, nam ad plenum scripta non
reperimus. For here he tells the full number of our Kings, and five more, which
may be true by taking in of Fergus's Father and Grandfather, and some other
three Collaterals omitted by other Historians; and that they reigned in the
Isle, and not in Ireland. Only he forbears at present to distinguish the time
of their Reigns, not having then gotten a full account of them, which he seems
thereby to insinuate he expected before he finished his Book, wherein he was
prevented by death. But as he left Materials for the last and great part of his
Book, so he might have increased the first part of his Book in distinguishing
these particular Reigns. But it is likely, these Authors he cites, viz.
Legenda Brendani, Congalli, Grossum caput, and the several Chronica, had
nothing concerning these Kings; or that Fordon himself had found nothing
particular concerning them, when he knew so well their Genealogy, both upon the
occasion of the death of St. David, and the Coronation of King Alexander? And
as he gives the account of the most considerable Lib. 2. c. 12. 13. ^^. and
lib. 3. ^. ^^. Et in (...) Recapitulatione.
Persons, as Fergus, Reuther, Eugenius; so he distinguishes their times, and
tells how long the whole Kings reigned, and gives Disticks containing the
Periods of their Reigns: Albion in terris Rex primus germine Scotus
Illorum turmis rubri tulit arma Leonis
Fergusius fulvo Ferchard rugientis in arvo,
Christum trecentis tricenis praefuit annis.


And in the place cited by the Doctor, he asserts, that the forty five Kings
were ejusdem generis and gentis, Lib. 3. c. 1.
and Fergus's return is set down: Ad natale solum properat relevare jacentes,
Rex fessos regni cespite sospes adit:
Intrepidus propria pandens vexilla Leonis,
Terruit occursu quem fera nulla ferox.
Ocyus advenit, fuerat quae turbine diro
Subdita plebs X quater and tribus haec
Congaudens patrio [Regi servire, parata
Ad libertatem quicquid in orb volat.


And again, Fergusius universas Regni regiones, cis citraque vadum Scoticum a
patribus ab antiquo possessas, de muro lapideo, viz. and Inchgaell ad Insulas
Orcadas sub sua composuit ditione. Does the Doctor think, that this was to
profess, that he could find nothing concerning them? and that after him, Boeth
could make no distinct and particular account of that Succession, unless he
feigned them for some partial end?

But to come to the Highland Genealogist, there is no difference betwixt him
and our Historians: for though his number be fewer than that in our Records and
Histories, yet the reason is, because our Historians mention all that did
Reign, whether by Right or by Usurpation, or whether in the Direct or
Collateral Line; the Genealogist does ascend from Alexander the Third from Son
to Father in the direct Line, considering that Line only, whereof that King
was descended, amongst whom some were never Kings. The Genealogist begins,
Alexander the Son of Alexander, the Son of William, the Son of Henry, the Son
of David.

Here the Doctor objects, that Malcolm the Fourth the Maiden mentioned by our
Historians, is omitted, and Henry placed for him. But this was very reasonable:
for St. David Ford. l. 8. c. 1. l. 1. c. 39. l. 12, 13, 14. fol. 48. 57. l. 5.
passim. Boeth. l. 11, 12, 13, and 15. passim. Euch. lib. 7, 8, and 9. passim.
Les^. lib. 6, and 7. passim.
had only one Son Henry Earl of Northumberland, who died before his Father:
and so was never King, but left three Sons; Malcolm the fourth, who succeeded
his Grandfather, and was called Maiden; he never married, and he had for his
Successor William his second Brother, Grandfather to King Alexander, in whom
also the Race of that Brother failed. And then from David Earl of Huntingtoun,
the third Brother by the Families of Bruce and Stuart, the Royal Race is
continued in a direct Line till King James the Seventh, who now Reigns. So
then, if the Genealogist had said, that William was Son to his Brother Malcolm
the Maiden, and not Son to Henry his Father, instead of agreeing with our
Histories, he had both contradicted them and common Sense and Reason.

The Doctor next complains, that betwixt Malcolm, Canmore and St. David four of
our Kings are omitted, and, we say, very justly for the same Reason: for Donald
the Seventh was Malcolm's Brother, and Duncan his Bastard Son, none of whom had
right to Reign. And though Malcolm had two elder Sons, Edgar and Alexander the
First, who did successively Reign, yet they having no Children of their own,
the Succession did devolve upon St. David the youngest Son.

The third Objection is, that betwixt Ford. lib. 5. at the beginning. Maj. lib.
3. c. 5. Boeth. lib. 12. Buch. l. 7. Les^. l. 5.
Duncan, and Malcolm Canmore the Historians put Machaboeus, whom the
Genealogist omits, and very reasonably: for he was a Collateral by Dovada
Second Daughter to Malcolm the Second, and usurped the Succession before
Malcolm Canmore, who was Son of Duncan. and was great Grandchild to Malcolm
the Second by his eldest Daughter Beatrix, whom the Genealogist inserts, though
she was never a Queen, because by her the Succession was continued.

The Doctor's fourth and main Objection is, that betwixt Malcolm the Second,
and Kenneth the Son of Alpin, the Genealogist inserts none, whereas our
Historians insert thirteen; viz. Donald the Fifth, Constantine Second, Ethus
Surnamed Alipes, Gregory the Great, Donald the Sixth, Constantine the Third.
Malcolm the First, Indulphus, Duffus, Culenus, Kenneth the Third, Constantine
the Fourth, Grimus. Here indeed I acknowledge the Doctor has discovered an
Error; but I think it must be of the Writer, or at worst in the Highland
Genealogist his Memory or Expressions. And it is very happy, that it has
fallen out in this place, otherwise Fordon as well as Boeth might be suspected
of partiality, or that they inserted these Kings to serve their own ends: For
even the Doctor's worthy Antiquaries Ubbo Emmius and Boxhornius, who have
deserved so well of him, because they are most injuriously extravagant; as to
the Antiquity of our Kings, do admit the truth of this Genealogy, after Kenneth
who subdued the Picts. There are four indeed here omitted in the direct Line;
Constantine the second Son to Kenneth the Second, Donald the Sixth, Malcolm the
First, Kenneth the Third, Malcolm the Second's Father: Besides nine Collateral,
viz. Donald the fifth Brother to Kenneth the Second, Ethus Alipes, Constantine
the Second's Brother, Gregory Son to Dongallus, Constantine the Third Son to
Ethus, Indulphus Constantine the Third his Son, Duffus, Malcolm the First his
eldest Son, Culenus, Indulphus his Son, Constantine the Fourth Culenus his Son,
and Grimus, Duffus his Son, who were all Collateral to Malcolm the Second. I
shall give a very probable account of the mistake of the Genealogist in this
place. We see that it is twice Kenneth and Malcolm; Kenneth the Second and
Malcolm the First, and Kenneth the Third, who was Father to Malcolm the Second.
The Transcriber has thought, he had transcribed the First Kenneth and Malcolm,
and Constantine, and Donald that were betwixt them, and so has omitted them,
and proceeded to Kenneth the Third, who was Father to Malcolm the Second. As in
reading or writing, if two Lines begin with one word, the Reader or Writer
ordinarily omitteth one of the Lines by mistake. And as this was no design in
Fordon, so it could not be ignorance: for he describes particularly all those
omitted Kings, and there is also a particular Genealogy of them subjoined to
the end of Fordon's Book in the Genealogy of King James the Second. And if any
man make a History of persons, and draw out a Summary of their Genealogy, if
there be any difference, the Summary must be regulated by the History, and not
the History by the Summary.

The Doctor's fifth Objection is, that betwixt Alpin and Achaius the Historians
put Convallus and Dongallus; and very reasonably, because Convallus was
Fergus's third Son, and Dongallus was Solvathius's Son, and so Collateral, to
show the exactness of our Historians, as well in Ford. lib. 3, and 4. Maj. lib.
3. Boeth. lib. 8, 9, 10. Buch. lib. 5.
the Collateral, as in the direct Line. The degree of Proximity of every Person
is proved by our Historians from Kenneth the Second till Fergus the Second.

The next Objection is, the difference betwixt the Genealogist and our
Historians, from King Othabin Son of Aydan, whom Fordon calls Ethodius bind,
and our Historians, Eugenius (a Grand difference indeed) and Achaius the Second
Son of Etfin, who was Son of Eugenius the Seventh, who was Son of Findan who
was never King, Son of Eugenius the Fifth, Son of Dongard never King, second
Son to Donald Braik, second Son to Eugenius bin: For here there is both
difference of Kings, and many omitted. It is true, that here there is the like
Error committed in transcribing with the former: for the Genealogist, betwixt
Eugenius the Seventh, (whom he calls Ethac) and Donald Braik, he omits Dongard,
Eugenius the Fifth; and Fordon's Genealogy of Kenneth the Great, to Fergus the
Second, mentions Dongard, but omits Eugenius and Findan. Which error of the
Writer seems to have proceeded, because there are two of the name of Eugenius
so near together, that he thought, when he wrote Eugenius, he had written all
that had preceded Eugenius the Seventh, and did the more easily forget Dongard
and Findan, because they were not so well known, as never having been Kings.
But the mistake cannot be interpreted to be a design, seeing there is no
advantage in it, and it is in omitting and not in adding any that never were of
the right Line, and falls happily out, where our Antiquity is not questioned by
any but by Ubbo Emmius, and Boxhornius. For even Iocelin and St. Asaph do
acknowledge the Scots to have been settled under Aydan mentioned by Beda, as the
Father of this Ethodius bind. And the Doctor himself does settle this
Skepticism concerning the Original Chap. 5.
of the Settlement of the Scots in Britain under Aydan, in the beginning of the
Seventh Century; but is uncertain, if, or how much longer before that time. And
it could not be ignorance in Fordon, who describes all the particular Reigns of
these Kings. And in the opinion of Boeth, Findan is not omitted; for he makes
Eugenius the Seventh not to be Grandchild to Eugenius the Fifth by Findan, but
immediately Son to Eugenius the Fifth. The rest of these intervening Kings were
Collaterals, viz. Ferchard the Second Son of Ferchard the First, Malduine
eldest Son to Donald Braik, Eugenius the Sixth Ferchard's second Son,
Amberkelethus Findan's eldest Son, Murdach his Son, Eugenius the Eighth and
Solvathius, these four lineally descending from one another in the Collateral
Line; Fergus the Third eldest Son of Etfin and elder Brother to Achaius, Ethas,
or Ethachi, or whether Etfin or Ethafind. But I cannot remark, that the
Genealogist calls Ethafind Son to Ethdre, but he calls him Son to Ethachi; or
that the Genealogist calls Eugenius Ethac. Indeed the Genealogist calls him
Ethachi, whom Fordon in the Genealogy of Kenneth calls Eugenius. But these are
idle remarks. His Objection betwixt Fergus the Second and Eugenius the Fourth
is, that the Genealogist makes Dongall to succeed Fergus, and, leaves out
Eugenius the Second; very reasonable indeed, because Eugenius the Second though
eldest Son, had no Succession, and to Dongard Cobren succeeds, and to him Aydan
the Father of Eugenius. And there are left out from amongst our Kings mentioned
by our Historians Constantine the First, whom the Doctor calls Constantius,
because he was Dongard's younger Brother, and Congallus Dongard's eldest Son,
because he did not continue the Line, his Line being extinct after the Death of
Eugenius the Third, Convallus and Kinnatell his three Sons, and Kenneth the
first Son to Convallus his Grandchild. But the Doctor makes no mention of
Kenneth, but in place of him says, that Conranus is omitted by the
Genealogist, as if Conranus and Cobrenus might not pass for one.

Against the first Race, his Objections are much lighter, and so I shall not be
so special in giving Answer. His noticing the difference of names is very
pretty, betwixt Arnidal and Dornadill, Rowen and Rether, not Nothatus, as the
Doctor mistakes (for Nothatus being Dornadill's Brother a Collateral, he is
left by the Genealogist as such) and Rutha for Reuda, and There for Thereus, and
Rosine for Iosin, and Corbre for Corbred, and Daradiamore for Dardanus, and
that Corbre's Surname of Galdus was forgot; and Luthach for Lugtacus, and
Mogalama for Mogallus, and Coner for Conarus, Ethach for Ethodius, and
Fiachrach for Satrahell, and Athirkin for Athirco, Findachar for Findochus,
Thrinkline for Crathilinthus, Fencormach for Fincormachus, Romaich for
Romachus, and Enegussa, which the Doctor acknowledges is plainly Angusianus,
though it be not so plain as many others of the rest he Quarrels, Fethelmech
for Fethelmachus, and Engusafich and Etheat for Eugenius and Ethodius, Erthus
for Eirch. And so to have named this Objection is to refute it, being the
difference only betwixt a Latin Termination and a Vulgar, betwixt a Highland
and a Lowland. And if he will take the pains to compare, how these same Names
are written in Fordon, and how in Major, he will find the like difference. And
if he will not rest satisfied, he is referred to Flahertie in his Preface for a
fuller Answer. But Feritharis and King Donald, the first Christian King, and
Nathalocus, and other two Donalds are excluded by this ancient Genealogists;
and very reasonably, because Feritharis was Brother to King Fergus the First;
and Donald, because he was Brother to Satrael. Nathalocus was an Usurper,
concerning whose Contingency of blood, our Historians generally make no
mention; all the Collaterals proved by Boeth Lib. 2. 5, and 6. L. 4.
, Buchanan Lib. 2. and 3.
and Lesly Page 10.
. And the Doctor himself in his Preface acknowledges, that Nathalocus and
Donald were Usurpers, and so could not be mentioned in the Genealogy of the
right Line; Donald the Third called of the Isles, an Usurper, and Donald the
Second Brother to Findoch. And what though the Genealogist by mistake has
called Rosin the Son of There, when he was his Brother? and Ethodius the Son of
Eugenius, when he was his Brother? If the Genealogist had mentioned all our
Kings that did Reign, and had called the next always Son to the former King, he
had committed this Error oftener. And it has not been Fordon's ignorance: for
he tells that Ethodius was Brother to Eugenius. But the Doctor says, After this
you find a greater difference: for instead of Finnanus, Durstus, Evenus,
Gillus, Evenus the Second, Ederus, Evenus the Third, Metellanus, Caratacus, we
find there only Dethach, Iau, Aljelah, Even, Ederskeoli, Comermore. It seems,
the Doctor has taken this at second hand; for if he had looked either the
Genealogy of King Alexander or King David, he would have found Fin, which is
the same with Finnanus. But the Doctor might have known, that such a small
difference in names and numbers does not overthrow the verity of a Genealogy
from his Friend Flahertie in his Epistle to Io. Linceus, who takes the name of
Lucius Gratianus in Cambr. evers. as in the Genealogy of the Scripture Cainan
is interposed betwixt Arphaxad and Sala, who tells, that such like Errors may
proceed from one Person's having two names, or by taking a Brother for a
Father, or the like mistake of the Writer; where the Line may be a little
lengthned or shortened, the Tract of it remaining the same. But here, besides
the difference of Highland and Lowland Language, wherein Alexander is called
Alaster, and Archibald Gillespie, Gillus was a Bastard Usurper, and Evenus a
Collateral to Durstus, as appears by our Historians Boeth, Buchanan and Lesly.
As to the Genealogy of St. David, it is subjoined immediately to Baldredus his
Lamentation about him; and, whether it be his, or Cardinal Wardlaw's, it
furnishes still another ancient and more credible Author, a Cardinal. But
perhaps he was not Cardinal, when he told Fordon the Genealogy, but thereafter,
and the Transcriber of the Scotichronicon has given him his most honorable
Name. And though he died in Robert the First of the Stuart's time, yet he was
Archidiaconus of Lothian, and Secretary to King David the Bruce, as appears by
the Lib. 14. cap: 27.
Scotichronicon. And Fordon says of the account from him, Dudum acceperat, and
prefixeth a Preface, in which he asserts, that St. David was descended from a
Glorious and ancient Race of Kings, who had preserved their Kingdom free from
Slavery longer than any other Race of Kings had done, and had resisted or
expelled all such Enemies as had invaded them. Post Britones, Dacos, Pictos,
Anglosque repulsos,
Viriliter Scoti jus tenuere suum;
Et Romanorum spreverunt vim validorum,
Exemplo quorum pensarunt praeterit rum
Inclyta Scotorum proles laudem genitorum.


This does not agree with the Doctor's Origin of us after the Saxons, and our
dependence upon them. This Wardlaw Bishop of Glasgow is designed in
Scotichronicon Cardinal of Scotland and Ireland, and the account and Verses
appear to be far ancienter, than either Wardlaw or Fordon, otherwise Fordon had
hardly ever cited the Relation of one Contemporary with himself, and of one who
was perhaps a younger man. And as to the Pretense, that the passing from the
first Line before Fergus the Second will cut off the Pretense of establishing
the Regents, and incapacitating the Sons of Kings being Minors, This appears
evidently to be false. For long after Fergus the Second's time, the Collaterals
did certainly succeed, till that evil Custom was abrogated by Kenneth the
Third, about 700 years ago. And albeit many Murders and Encroachments were
committed upon these Kings of the first Race, their times being more barbarous,
what is that to the purpose? Were they therefore never in being, or not Kings?
Does not Flahertie tell us, that of the first hundred thirty six Kings of
Ireland; Centum ferrum sustulit, septemdecim naturae concesserunt, sex pestis
absumpsit; tres fulmine percussi, and december diversis aliis modis, singuli vivis
excesserunt? Were there not Murders and Usurpations in our second Race, and
has not the like been every where? And does not the Doctor remember of Richard
the Third of England, who murdered Edward the Fifth and his Brother, who were
his own Nephews, and usurped the Crown? And the inserting these, to lengthen
the Line in favor of Regents had been ridiculous: for by a clear Law these
were cut off in Kenneth the Third's time; and so our Historians needed not the
help of forged Genealogies in this. So that I can see no Design nor Politic in
Fordon nor Boeth, in this number and account they give of our Kings, nor that
they have differed from the Genealogist, nor that the Highland Genealogist has
shortened the Royal Line, as the Bishop of St. Asaph has done. And the Doctor
ought to have remembered, that I did undertake only to maintain the Antiquity
of our Royal Line at the least; to refute the Bishop of St. Asaph's Hypothesis,
of a Settlement in the Year 503, and not to vindicate every passage and part of
our History which cannot be done, as to any profane History.

By all which I may conclude most convincingly, that these three accounts given
of the Genealogies of our Kings are so far from Contradicting our History, that
they agree with it, and being inserted in three several Genealogies, prior to
Fordon, and being expressed by them upon very solemn occasions they do fortify
much the truth of the Genealogy of the Royal Line, and that Fordon did not
dream the same, but inserted these Genealogies in his History from good
Authors and by good Authority.

The Reader may for his better understanding the Answers formerly made, take a
general view of this complex matter, as sum'd up in these short Positions.

I. That the Highland Gentleman was obliged to ascend from Son to Father, as
all Genealogies do; and consequently he was obliged to name some who were not
Kings, because they were Fathers to Kings.

II. He was obliged to omit Collaterals, because, though they were Kings, yet
they were not such as were comprehended within the Gradation from Son to
Father, whereas our History rightly sets down those who succeeded as Brothers,
as well as Sons.

III. In this Genealogy some are omitted, as Bastards, and other Usurpers; and
so should not have been insert in a Genealogy to be repeated before the King,
though they were likewise expressed in our Histories, they having Reigned de
facto, though not de jure.

IV. The greatest doubt, that is made by the Doctor himself, as to our Kings,
is since Fergus the Second, after which, the Irish and others acknowledge our
Historical Genealogy; or after Kenneth the Second, since which time even Ubbo
Emmius does assert the truth of our History. And so any difference betwixt our
History and Genealogy must arise from the mistake of the Genealogist's memory,
or the Transcriber's negligence; and I have condescended upon a probable Ground
of mistake.

V. Most of the Difficulties arise from the difference of Names of the same
Persons, which is very ordinary in all Genealogies.

VI. There could be no Design in our Historians inserting any to favor the
Right of Regents: for the Succession of Regents was condemned by a positive
Law, before some of these controverted Kings did succeed.

VII. It is not imaginable, that our Historians would insert in their Histories
contradictory Genealogies: for that were so palpable, that, though it could
have escaped one Historian, yet it could not have escaped many.

VIII. To illustrate farther the whole matter, I have subjoyned the Tree of
Alexander the Third his Predecessors, both in the Direct and Collateral Line,
whereby it does evidently appear, that all his Predecessors mentioned by the
Genealogist were in the direct Line, and that these Kings of whom the
Genealogist made no mention, were only Collaterals to King Alexander; whose
Genealogy was recited. And I have also farther continued this Genealogy in a
direct Line from St. David by the Families of Bruce, and Stuart to King James
the Seventh, who now Reigns.

CHAP. V.
The Irish Genealogy of our Kings compared with the accounts given by the
Chronicle of Melross, and both compared with the Genealogies contained in our
Histories; with a full proof, that our Historians are to be preferred to the
Irish Annals as to this point: Ogygia examined.

I Having urged, that our Historians were to be believed in matters of fact,
such as are the Genealogies of our Kings, they being many, and Men of
Authority; and having declared, that they extracted their Histories from
Authentic Records, though now lost: And these matters of fact being probable
in themselves, and adminiculated by the current of Foreign Histories and
Authors, except our Adversaries should redargue them by Authors living in the
time, or more credible, which were inconsistent with them. The Doctor did
therefore urge the inconsistency of our Genealogies amongst themselves, which I
have fully answered in the preceding Chapter, and their inconsistency with the
Irish Annals, which he contends are to be preferred to ours, We being descended
from the Irish, and they having more ancient Annals than ours; which I am to
answer in this Chapter. And, for the preference of our Histories in the point
of Credibility, I adduce these following Arguments.

1. No History can be discredited, as uncertain and fabulous, upon the
Testimony and Authority of another History, except that other History be
acknowledged by both the Debaters; but much less, where it is reprobated by
him, who urges an Argument from it. But so it is, that Dr. Stilling fleet
himself does treat the Irish Annals in Ridicule, as to the remote part of their
Antiquity, in his Preface, page 33. and Chap. 5. p. 272. where he proves, that
they had not sufficient Warrants before Pref. p. 47.
the Eleventh Century, which is long after the time, wherein both the Bishop of
St. Asaph and he acknowledges that we were settled here. And consequently the
Authority of their History is not sufficient to overturn the time of our
settlement, as it is asserted by our Historians.

2. We desire to know, what Warrants the Irish had within six Generations of
Iaphet? Especially to warrant them, not only to condescend upon particular
actions, mentioned, and adminiculated by no other Histories, but even to be
special in the coming of some from Ireland, Ogyg. part 3. cap. 1.
just 40 days before the Flood. And that Partholanus, and others, Ogyg. part 3.
cap. 2.
arrived in Ireland, Anno 312. after the Flood, in the month of May, the 14th
of the Moon, and upon Wednesday. And how the Doctor should urge this History
against ours, as sufficient to overturn the credibility of ours, when he will
not allow us to know so much, as when our Nation at first settled in Scotland,
and who was our first King, about 2000 years after that time, when the Romans,
who lived long in our Neighborhood, in France, and fought long with us, are
acknowledged to have had the use of Letters, and the way of calculating time:
both which were absolutely unknown in the Ages mentioned in the Irish Annals.
And either the Irish had the exact knowledge of Letters, and the calculation of
time, when our first Colonies came over from them, or not: If they had them;
why not we likewise? and so the Doctor does unjustly object to us, that our
Histories are not to be believed, because we wanted both these. Or if the Irish
had them not, our History cannot be overturned by the Authority of theirs.

3. It Is acknowledged by all the Irish, except Iocelin; that we were at least
settled here since the Year 503. and so since that time we must understand the
History and descent of our own Kings better than any other Nation can do; nor
should any man debate with these that deny this principle. But so it is, that
since that time, the Irish account of the descent of our Kings differs
extremely from ours; for they will have Loarn to have been our first King, and
elder Brother to Fergus, whereas our Story makes no mention at all of any such
King, but makes Fergus the Second the Restorer of our Monarchy. And their
Catalogue calls him Fergusius Magnus, a title never given to him who founds,
but to him who augments the Monarchy. And how can any man imagine, that a
Nation would have forgot who was the Founder of their Monarchy, and being so
late, and yet have remembered his Brothers, and all the rest of the Line;
especially since Loarn is said to have reigned ten years, as Offlahartie says.
We make Eugenius the Second to have succeeded to this King Fergus, but they
make Domangardus to have succeeded to him.

They make Congallus to have succeeded to Domangardus, but we make Constantine
the First to have succeeded to Dongardus, whom I conceive they make Domangardus.

To our Corranus, whom he calls Gouranus, did succeed Eugenius the Third; but
he makes Conallus to have succeeded to him.

To Congallus succeeded truly Kenatellus, but he makes Aydanus to have
succeeded to him.

To Aydanus succeeded Keneth the First, but he makes Achaius the First to have
succeeded to him.

The differences after him, will best appear in these Columns, which may
likewise be observed from the beginning of this period.

The Genealogy as in our Histories from Fergus II. to Murdoch. The Genealogy as
in the Irish from Loarn to Murdoch. Fergus II. Loarn eldest Son, and Eugenius
II. eldest Son, Fergusius Magnus second Son to Erik, Dongardus the second Son
of Fergus the Second. Domangardus Son to Fergusius. Constantine I. third Son,
all three Sons of Fergus II. Congallus Domangardus' s Son. Congallus I.
Dongard' s Son, Gauranus Congallus' s Brother. Goranus Dongard' s Son. Conallus
Congall' s Son. Eugenius III. Congallus' s Son. Aidanus Gauran' s Son.
Congallus II. Congallus' s Son. Acbaius I. Aydan' s Son. Kinnatellus Congallus'
s Son. Conadius Achaius' s Son. Aidanus Goranus' s Son. Ferqhardus I. Conadius'
s Son. Kennethus I. Convallus' s Son. Danaldus I. Brother to Ferqhard. Eugenius
IV. Aidanus' s Son. Conallus II. Achaius' s Son. Ferchardus I. Eugenius' s Son.
Dungallius I. Donald Brec' s Son. Donald IV. Eugenius' s 2d. Son. Donaldus II.
Conallus' s Son. Ferchard II. Ferchard' s Son. Malduinus Conallus' s Son.
Malduinus Donald' s Grandchild by Dongard no King. Ferqhardus II. Eugenius V.
Donald' s Son. Achaius II. Grandchild of Donald I. by his Son Dongard. Eugenius
VI. Ferchard' s Son. Amberkelethus Son of Ferqhard II. Amberkelethus Findan' s
Son, who was Son to Eugenius. Selvathus Brother to Amberkelethus. Eugenius VII.
Brother to Amberkelethus. Achaius III. Son of Achaius II. And then Murdachus
Amberkelethus' s Son. Muridachus Son of Amberkelethus.

So that, comparing. Flahertie's account with ours, we shall find them to
differ in names, the times of their Reign, and Degrees of their Consanguinity,
the Irish omitting some who did Reign, and inserting others who never Reigned,
or at least, who Reigned not near these times, in which they are placed.

My fourth Argument shall be, That after the Year 503 we are acknowledged to be
settled, and to have had a distinct Kingdom from Ireland, and to have had the
learned Monastery of Icolmkill, from which Swarms of learned Men were sent to
all places; But especially to the Saxons in Lindesfarne, to whom Aidan, Finan
and Colman were sent Bishops, as St. Asaph and Flahertie acknowledge. And
therefore it cannot be denied, but that our Histories must be much better
believed, than either the Irish Annals, or the Chronicle of Melross, though
they agreed in what they differed from our Histories; But much more, when they
contradict one another; especially when their differences are very
considerable. And since the Chronicle of Melross is judged so Authentic by the
Bishop and the Doctor; it must be concluded, that, when that Chronicle differs
very much from the Irish, and comes near to ours, ours must be preferred to the
Irish in point of Credibility. But so it is that all this will appear by
comparing the three, in so far as concerns the Genealogies of our Kings, from
Murdachus, to Kenneth the Second.

By our Histories and Genealogies, Murdachus was Son to Amberkellethus, and
began to Reign Anno Christi 715, whereas by the Chronicle of Mailross he is
made the Son of Ewam as he was indeed Successor to Ewam, or Eugenius his
Uncle, Chron. Mail. p. 136. edit. Oxon. 1684.
though not his Son, and he is called Murizant, and he is said there to begin
his Reign Anno 741. But by the Irish Catalogue of the Scottish Kings in Ogygia,
his Reign is said to Ogyg. p. 480.
begin Anno 733.

By our History, Etfinus, Son to Eugenius, begun his Reign Anno 730. By the
Chronicle, Ewen, Son to Murizant, Anno 744. By the Catalogue, Dongallus Son of
Selvachus, is said to succeed his Cousin German Murdachus, Anno 736. Whereas
Dongallus did not succeed till the Year 824. Nor did Solvathius succeed till
the Year 767.

To Etfin succeeded Eugenius, who began to Reign Anno 761. according to our
History. By the Chronicle, Hedobbus, the Son of Ewen, succeeded to Ewen, Anno
747. By the Catalogue Achaius the Fourth succeeded to Dongall, Anno 743, and
Offlahartie the Author of the Catalogue subjoyns to this King an observation,
that in diverse Copies of this Poem or Catalogue. Selvachus, Achaius the Third,
Achaius the Fourth, and Achaius the Fifth, and Gregory are wanting; which
shows, of how small Authority this Poem or Catalogue should be: for Achaius and
Gregory are two of the most considerable, and uncontroverted of all our Kings
in these Periods. For Achaius did make the League with Charlemain, and is
mentioned in many Histories beside ours. And Gregory lived after the time of
Kenneth the Second, and is Surnamed the Great, because of the Victory over the
Britains, Irish and Saxons, and this is acknowledged, and is cited as such in
the famous debate betwixt us and the English before the Pope. Selvachus also is
acknowledged by the Chronicle of Mailross. But the secret and true Reason of
this suggestion is, that he might obviate the objection from the difference of
the number, and suppress Achaius, because they will have the League not to be
made with him, but with the Irish; and Gregory, because he invaded Ireland. O!
How witty are these Contrivances?

To Eugenius succeeded Fergus the Third, who began his reign Anno 764. By the
Chronicle to Head succeeded Fergus his Son, Anno 777. By the Catalogue, Aidus
fin the First, corrupted Ethfinn, succeeded to Achaius the Fourth his Father,
Anno 748. whereas truly Achaius was not Father to Etfin; but Etfin was Father
to Achaius.

According to the Catalogue there are nine Kings without any special Chronology
from 778 to 838; viz. Our Kings from Fergus 3 to Kenneth 2, are by our
Histories. According to the Chronicle of Mailross. Donall III. Solvathius.
Selvand. Conall III. Achaius. Eokall. Conall IV. Congallus. Dungall.
Constantine I. Dongallus. Alpine the Son of Eokall, which shows that Eokall was
Achaius, and then Aeneas. Alpinus and then Kined Son to Alpin. Aidus II.
Kenneth II. Eugemanus Aeneas Son. Achaius fifth Son of Aidus. Alpine the Son of
Achaius, and then Kenneth Alpine's Son.

Here are many Kings, of whom the Nation, where they are said to have Reigned
in a very late and uncontroverted time, know nothing, and in which the Irish
not only differ from us, but also from the Chronicle of Mailross, which seems
to have been written by some English Borderers, who though they have somewhat
carelessly observed what was doing among us; yet because of their Neighborhood
and Commerce, have understood the same better than the Irish.

It Is likewise observable, that by Collationing that Period of the Genealogy of
our Kings, from Fergus 2 to Malcolm 3; the Irish Catalogue in Ogygia, allows
from the 503 to the 1057, being 554 years for 51 Kings which is very short,
whereas we allow from the 404 to 1057, being 653 years for 46 Kings, which is
far more probable in it self, and more agreeable to the Doctor's observation,
who allows twenty five years Praef. p. 25.
to a Generation, according to the most received opinion; whereas this
Calculation allows only ten years, and about ten Months to every King, even in
those ancient times when Men lived long. And whereas it is still objected
against Hector Boethius, that he augmented the number of our Kings, by
inserting Collaterals to support the Law of incapacity; and to make the long
account of time seem probable. It Is answered, that this objection is fully
satisfied, both by the Authority of the Chronicle of Mailross, and this Irish
Catalogue, which insert Collaterals, as well as those of the direct Line. And
if all these Kings named by them had been in the direct Line, that great number
of fifty two joined with the Collaterals, had made the number of our Kings in
that Period to have come near to an hundred, and thus each King to have had
about six years allowed him.

I had not fully considered the Irish Genealogies when I insisted upon that
Argument from Carbre Lifachair, and now I acknowledge that my own Argument from
that Book was of no moment, and to show my ingenuity I pass from it. But the
reason why I said then, that there might be a hundred years allowed for a Man's
Life, is because the Civil Law allows so much, and a Man is never presumed to
be dead, till it is proved he lived an hundred years; but I confess the
Doctor's Calculation from Censorinus, of what makes a Generation, holds
ordinarily true; and is to be preferred in the accounts of Genealogy.

My fifth Argument against the Irish Genealogy is, That it differs not only
from ours and from that account in the Abbacy of Mailross, but from all the
French Historians, and our ancient Records yet extant; by which it is clear,
that our King Achaius entered in League with the French King Charlemain: whereas
the exact Offlahartie, makes only this French League to have been entered into
with Charles the Sixth in the Year 1380, which fell in the Ogyg. Pr. p. 27.
time of King Robert the Second, and adds, that this League was made by Robert
Stewart, Lord d'Aubigny, in which he confounds two known Stories, that he may
contradict Wardaeus his Countreyman; for it is indeed true, that the ancient
League was renewed with King Robert the First of the Stewarts, Anno 1380, the
Original whereof is yet extant in our Records, and whereof the Copy is in
Fordon: But this League was treated by Cardinal Wardlaw for us, and the Count
d'Bryan for the French, and the same League was again renewed, Anno 1425, by
John Lord Darnly Constable of France, for the French; and Wardaeus makes this
last Treaty to be the first that was made betwixt our Kings and the French: and
Offlahartie, not to contradict him, has joined the Persons who treated the one
League, with the time wherein the other was treated. But that there was a
League betwixt our Achaius and Charlmaigne, or at least long before the Year
1380, is most uncontravertable for these Reasons:

1. The French Historians acknowledge that this League was betwixt Achaius and
Charlemain; and I have proved by Eguinard Secretary to the said Charlemain,
that there was great Correspondence betwixt them; and that he esteemed very
much the King of Scotland. As also, I have proved from Italian Authors, that
there were Families descended of our Scotland settled in Italy, who came over
with William Brother to the said Achaius.

2. Not only does Chambers of Ormond, who lived then in France, set down the
Articles of that Treaty, and the several times it was renewed; but Fordon Lib.
14. c. 44.
does expressly insert the League that was betwixt Robert the Second, first of
the Stewarts, and the King of France. Wherein the King of France acknowledges
even at that time, the old Confederacies and Leagues, a longo tempore, inter
Praedecessores nostros Reges firmatae and connexae; and the King of Scotland on
the other part expresses, Confoederatio inter illustres Reges Franciae and avum
nostrum, this was Robert the Bruce; and adds, Et ab olim facta and diutius
observata. And to instruct this part of Fordon's Story, as well as the League
it self, we have the Original League with King Robert the First yet extant, and
Lib. 11. c. 15.
John Baliol (then pretended King of Scotland) refused to join with Edward of
England against Philip of France, because of the ancient League made by their
Predecessors Charlemain and Achaius, Et usque nunc inconcuse servata.
Whereupon a League is renewed and confirmed by a Marriage, the Tenor whereof
is also extant in Fordon, who also sets down the Tenor of the Pope's Bull,
prohibiting Alexander the Second, our King, to continue in his League with the
King of France, but to join with the King of England; and, as an effect of
these Leagues, Marianus (whom the Irish call their Countryman, albeit they
also confess, that he called our Country Scotia) mentions, that Anno 1070, the
Scots and French wasted the English: Which shows, that this Alliance was much
elder, than either the 1425, or the 1380, as O Flahertie asserts: And
therefore, that excellent Historian the Sieur Varillas Education du Prince, l.
1. chap. 1. p. 39.
relates, that Charles the Fifth's Governor did advise him not to expect, that
the King of Scotland would enter into his Interests, because the Alliance of
that Nation with the French had lasted seven hundred Years, without
interruption, from King to King, before that time. And by these we may see,
what a just Author Ubbo Emmius is, who rejects our History for many years
after this Alliance, and how judiciously he is produced by the Doctor. But,
though the French could have been mistaken in all their Histories, yet it is
not imaginable, that they would have bestowed great Privileges and Rewards upon
us for Services done by the Irish; and that the Families, who came over at that
time, would not have owned themselves to be descended from the Irish, and not
from us.

The Doctor, to induce his Readers to believe, that we are mistaken Praef. p.
4. 46.
in the Genealogies of our own Kings, pretends that the true Reason of the
mistake of the Scottish Antiquities was, that we finding, that there was a
Fergus in the Irish Genealogy called Fortis or Fortamalius, who Reigned truly
in 3775, and that in the descent of that Fergus there was a Conar; and from him
Rieda called by the Irish Carbre Rieda, and by us Eoch and Ried; and that there
were several other Names in our Genealogies agreeing with the Genealogies of
the Irish, as Eochoid, who was Father to Erk, and is acknowledged by both to be
Father to Fergus the Second; the Doctor from all this concludes, that the
Original mistake lay in applying the Irish Genealogy to the Kings of Scotland,
and that we either imagined, or would have others believe, that all the Kings
mentioned before Fergus the Son of Erk were Kings in Scotland, and so went back
by degrees, till we made up a formal Story of forty Kings.

To this we Answer; That it were a strange thing, that our Story, which we have
so well proved, should be overturned by the Doctor's mere Conjecture;
especially, seeing there is no Ground for such a Conjecture from any of these
Steps on which the Doctor founds his Probability. No Author, for ought we can
see, concurs with the Doctor in this Conjecture, as to Fergus; and O-Flahertie,
who pretends that he understands Ogyg. p. 468.
the differences betwixt the Descents and the Reasons thereof, goes no higher
than Conar the Second. And speaking twice of Fergusius Ogyg. p. 114, and 264.
Fortis, he makes not at all him to be the first Author of our Race. 2. If we
had not had a sure Warrant of the Settlement and Genealogy of our Kings, but
had only inserted the Kings of Ireland, as ours, from a vanity to be thought
Ancient; it is more probable by the same Reason, that we would have improved it
to a Story of twice forty Kings backwards. And why should the Doctor make us to
have sisted in Fergusius Fortis rather, than in Fergusius Rogius, or Fergusius
Denti-niger, both Kings in Ireland before Fergus the Second? 3. That there
could be no Ground for our sisting in Fergusius fortis, is very clear: for he
reigned Anno Mundi 3775, whereas our Fergus began to Reign Anno Mundi 3641, and
so we had lost 134 years of our Antiquity; and we should rather have fixed upon
Hugonius Magnus, who began to Reign 3619. and consequently agreed with the true
time of our Settlement, and there had been a more probable Conjecture from what
is said in Ogygia, in the Reign of Reactus immediate Predecessor to Hugonius,
in whose time it is said from the Manuscript of O-Duveganus, that one Ferc made
a descent into Albania, and conquered it; and this Ferc might have been more
probably said to have been Ferqhard, and so to have made way for the
Settlementof Fergus his Son as King here.

The next step of this Conjecture is, that wherein O-Flahertie agrees with the
Doctor, and O-Flahertie asserts, that all the Antiquaries of Scotland and
Ireland agree, that our Kings are descended from Carbre Ried the Son of Conar
the Second, who was King of Ireland. Which step is also ill founded. For 1.
Though indeed we had a King called Conar (as we had but one Conar) yet here our
Conar does not at all agree with the Irish Conar in time: For our Conar began
to Reign in the Year of Christ 149, whereas the Irish Conar the Second began to
Reign Anno Christi 212. So that here we had lost 63 years again of our
Antiquity. And the Conjecture from the Agreements in Names is very silly, we
being Neighbors, and speaking one Language; and Kings even in remoter Kingdoms
use to give their Children, one another's Names 2. The other part of that
Position, that we are all agreed, that our Kings are descended from Carbre Ried
the Son of Conar, and that our Country is called Dalrieda from him, this is
false: for we own our being called Dalreudini from King Reuda or Reutha, in
which our Historians follow Beda's express words; and Rieda and Reutha differ
much in time, Reutha having in Beda's opinion settled here before Julius Caesar;
whereas Carbre Rieda behooved to be born long after that time, for his Father
Conar Reigned only 112 years after Christ. 3. We had no Carbres, who could be
Sons to Conar the Second, for we had only one Conar, and so no Conar the
Second, and he was Posterior to both our Carbres; for Carbredus Galdus Reigned
in Anno 76, and Carbredus the Second reigned in Anno 113, and so long Prior to
the Reign of Conar in 212. 4. As to the Pretense, that Eochoid Ried, or Etdach
Ried is the same with Carbre Ried, and that our Genealogy had an Eochoid Ried
Posterior to Conar; this is Groundless: for both our Genealogies, and the Irish
have both Eochoids and Carbres, as distinct Names, nor do the Names appear the
same any manner of way. 5. Though it might be pretended, that our Country was
called Dalrieda from a Country in Ireland, and not from Reutha; yet non
conslat, that it was so called from a Country called Dalrieda, and so from the
Surname of Ried; but from Araidh King of Ireland, seeing the same, O-Flahertie
gives an account Page 165. 190. 327.
of a King of Ulster called Fiachus Araidh, from whom also a Country in Ulster
is called Dalaradia and Dalriadia, and the Inhabitants Dalaradii. And this King
Araidh was also after Conar: For he began to reign Anno 240. And as it was more
honorable to have a Country called after Reuda a Scottish King, than from
Araidh, who was but a King of Ulster, and so one of the Kings of a Province in
Ireland; so it is yet more dishonorable, to have our glorious Monarch, who now
Reigns, descended from Carbre Ried, who was but a Dynastie in this Provincial
Kingdom of Ulster; and so a Subject, each Provincial Kingdom having five
Dynasties, as O-Flahertie tells us. And from all this I leave to my Readers to
judge, whether Dr. Stillingfleet and his Authors do the King greater Honor,
in making him to be descended from a petty Subject; or our Historians, who make
him still to be descended from absolute Monarchs.

I cannot here omit to laugh at good O-Flahertie for asserting, that Ogyg. p.
475.
our Kings, even till the 590, were but Dynasties, Tributaries and Subjects to
the Kings of Ireland, and that Aidanus got an Exemption from paying Tribute at
the Parliament of Dromcheat; where he appeared. And the Doctor does great
Honor to our King in following such Authors, and rather to follow them, than
the venerable Beda.

The Bishop of St. Asaph has a different derivation of Dalrieda from all the
former Authors: for he brought it from R^ which signifies King in the Irish,
and Eda the King's name; so that Eda was a different King (and Author of this
Appellation) from Rheuda, Carbre Ried, Echoid Ried or Araidh. And are our
Histories to be overturned by such irreconcilable Authors?

The fourth step of this Conjecture is, in the Agreement of our History with
the Irish in the Persons of Eric, Eochoid, Mainreamhere, Oengus Fear, the
Father, Grandfather and Great Grandfather of our Fergus the Second, though
there be a difference in the rest of the Line, from Carbre to Fergus, our
Historians making this Line to consist of thirteen Persons, and theirs of ten.
But against this last Period it is represented, That the small Agreement in
this step, as to the Names of Father and Grandfather of Fergus, with their
residence in Ireland, the Grandfather having been expelled from Scotland, and
fled to Ireland, when King Eugenius was killed by the Romans under Maximus,
gave a Rise to some unexact Irish Writers to imagine, that the return of this
Fergus the Second from Ireland, after forty four years absence, was our first
Settlement in Britain. But the want of three in this Period of thirteen in a
direct Line does much over-balance the small Probability, that is urged against
us from the Agreement in two Names, and some resemblance in other two, viz. in
Carbre Ried, and Eochoid Ried, and Aenegusa Tich and Angus Fear. It is also
very observable, that this Irish Genealogy allows 283 years to these ten, viz.
from the death of Conar Carbre's Father (who dyed Anno 220, Arthur his
Successor having begun his Reign that year) to the Year 503, wherein Laorn
eldest Brother to our Fergus the Second (as they say) began his Reign; and yet
to fifty one Kings from that Laorn to Malcolm the Third, they allow only 554
years. And from the reflection it is also more probable, that there were
thirteen in this Period, and that Conar began to reign in the Year 149, and
Fergus the Second in the Year 404, as our Historians assert.

To all these I add the irreconcilable differences amongst the Irish Authors,
as to the first Founder of our Monarchy, and the time wherein it was founded;
as also the irreconcilable Consequences following thereupon, wherein our three
great Adversaries Camden, Usher and Bishop of St. Asaph did so widely differ,
as I have fully proved in my first Book, without any Answer; and by which
Contradictions Dr. Stillingfleet himself is so misted, that he cannot
determine, whether we settled in the fourth, fifth, sixth Chap. 5. page 282.
or seventh Centuries, professing, that in matters of so great obscurity he
could determine nothing.

My last Argument to prove, that our Histories cannot be overturned by the
Irish, shall be from comparing the Warrants of both. But, before I enter upon
this, I must again regret in this Book, as I did in my last, that the Irish
should mistake so far their own Interest, as to suffer or furnish theirs to
overturn the Credibility of ours: Since, because we acknowledge our selves to
have come last from Ireland, it were our common Interest to unite together, and
to sustain one another's Antiquities, as their Authors did before Bishop
Usher, who was of foreign Extraction. For, though they controverted some of our
Saints and Monasteries, because of the common name Scoti, yet till then they
never opposed our Antiquities, knowing that in so far as we proved our
Antiquity by Roman and foreign Authors, which they had not the occasion to do,
they in so far were proved to be ancient, which Stanihurst well observed, as I
did remark, in my first Book. And upon seeing the use that is made of Authors
against us, who are really for us (as Beda and others) we are apt to believe,
that theirs are not, if we saw them; and that the Irish rather omit our remote
Antiquities, than contradict them. Nor would we have controverted the Authority
of their Annals, though some of the English had produced them against us, if
some of the Irish had not by ignorance or mistake concurred of late with them.
We likewise desire them to consider, how our Adversaries, and particularly Dr.
Stillingfleet railly their Antiquities and Authors Ketin, Wardoeus and
O-Flahertie, and yet seem (which is severe) to allow their Antiquities, to the
end they may encourage them to oppose us, laying still foundations in the mean
time to overturn theirs also, when they have served their turn, which I now
proceed to discover.

First, The Milesian Race is accounted by the Irish their Fourth Race; and yet
this is controverted by Dr. Stillingfleet. And the Authority Praef. and Chap.
5. passim.
and Learning of the Druids, upon which the Irish do chiefly found the
Authority of their Histories, is absolutely denied; as it also is, that the
Irish had use of Letters, till after St. Patrick's time: and all the Antiquity
he does allow them is, as to general things, as, from whence they were peopled,
and that they had successions of Kings time out of mind; Praef. p. 45, 46.
and does magnify the Tygerneck Annals for confessing, that the Irish
Antiquities, till the Reign of Kimbacius their 73d King, are very uncertain,
and he lived within 59 years of our Fergus. And the Doctor adds, that he might
have gone farther, and done no injury to Truth; and at last brings down this
Truth to Fergusius Fortamalius, who lived Anno Mundi 3775. which is 134 years
after our Fergus; whereas we necessarily conclude the Irish to have a much
greater Antiquity: for there were many Descents made here from Ireland, to
prepare the settlement of Fergus; and Ireland lying in the neighborhood of
Britain and Spain, and described by the Ancientest Geographers and other
Writers, as inhabited, and without any mention of Conquest, it necessarily
follows, that they must have been Aborigines there. And, by the same reason,
they having been very ancient, and wanting Wars, must have eased themselves by
Colonies; And, this Country being within 13 Miles of them, our settlement must
have been very ancient. And so the one does necessarily infer the other, and
should not be made use of to contradict it; and the English, who have conquered
them, are interested to humble them, but we to maintain them. Albeit then it is
our own Interest to support their Antiquities; yet in as far as they are now
produced to overturn what relates to our Country, they are not to be preferred
to ours, as the Doctor asserts: for who would maintain, that the Accounts given
by the Saxons, Celtae or Spaniards should be preferred to the British, or
English, or Irish Histories for the times, after the Britains, English or Irish
were acknowledged to be settled? And as to the Irish Writers themselves, this
Poem selected and preferred to all other Annals by O-Flahertie, as not only
containing an acknowledgment of our settlement, but a Genealogy of our Kings,
we have proved, that it is not preferable to our Historians in point of
Credibility. And besides all that I have said of it, I must add, that
O-Flahertie Ogyg. p. 467. Verum aliquot desider at is Distichis, integrum
Apographum reperire non contigit; alias absolutum ex eo Catalogum contexere non
dubitaremus.
acknowledges, that there were several different Copies of it, and even this,
which he followed, was not entire, some Distichs being wanting, else he doubted
not to make an entire Catalogue. And even this, such as it is, is only written
in Malcolm Canmore's time, whom it mentions, who reigned in the 1057, of which
lateness all the other Irish Annals allowed by the Doctor are.

The main ground insisted on by the Doctor for preferring the Irish in the
point of Credibility to us is, that we neither had, nor could have so ancient
Annals as they, our Monasteries being only founded by St. David, and after
him, and so ^osterior to their Annals. Which Argument is founded upon a false
Supposition: for the Doctor himself Stillingfleet, chap. 5. p. 271.
acknowledges that the Psalter of Naran contains only matters of Devotion, as
the Irish Antiquaries cited by him confess. This is the eldest, and was written
in the latter end of the Eighth Century. The next is the Psalter of Cashel,
which he rejects as not well founded, and allows none as credible, but those
which are written after the Year of Christ 1000. And it cannot be denied, but
we might have had well-warranted Annals before that time; which the Doctor
denies. For first, We were then fully possessed not only of our own first part
of Scotland, but even of the Pictish part of it, and also of the Northern (now
English) Countries confirmed to Malcolm the First (by the English own
acknowledgment) who reigned Anno Christi 943. And so we were Masters of
Icolmkill, Abercorn, Abernethie, Mailross, Lindisfern, and other Monasteries,
which lay within that great extent; and which extent Dr. Stillingfleet
acknowledges, since Severus's Wall is by him confessed to be built betwixt Tine
and Esk. We had also the number of our Bishoprics increased by the subduing of
the Picts, as is not only probable in it self, but is clear by the
acknowledged Catalogues of Bishoprics in Fordon. Icolmkill is by Beda said to
be founded about the 560. and to be the chief of all the Monasteries in Britain
or Ireland. Abernethie was founded in Garnard's time, who was next Pictish King
to Brudeus, in whose time Columba lived, and so about the 600. And Fordon
relates, that this Monastery was founded 200 years before the Church of Dunkeld
was founded. And here is not only a Monastery mentioned, which might have had
Annals higher than the Psalter of Naran, suppose it had created History; but he
cites the Chronicle of Abernethie, which the Doctor acknowledges Praef. p. 51.
to be an old Chronicle; and Beda also acknowledges; that there was such a
Monastery as Abercorn. And though the Doctor cites Buchanan, Praef. p. 48.
saying, that it was so demolished, that no vestige of it did appear; yet, the
Pictish Kingdom being quite ruined, the Argument, that there was no such
Monastery, is of no force: for the Records of many demolished Monasteries are
preserved. And, though the Abbacy of Mailross was rebuilt by St. David; yet,
that it was a famous Monastery in Beda's time, is clear (for he tells, that the
Abbat of Mailross was translated to Lindisfern) and has probably remained long
demolished by the Wars, as Abercorn did; and the Writers did thereby express
the rebuilding as an original foundation. And the reason, why I said in my
former Book, that this Abbacy was (before it was rebuilt) called Rivallis, was
because I have seen in a Collection of Foundations made by our Lord Register
Skeen a Copy of the Foundation of Mailross, wherein the Lands of Mailross and
others are given to the Monks of Rivallis. But, whether Mailross or Rivallis
are distinct or not, is not material to our point; and, if they be distinct, it
is more for our advantage, since by that Concession we have two Monasteries
doted by St. David.

It contributes much to the preference of our Histories beyond the Irish in
point of Credibility, and to the establishment of the Credibility of our
Histories against all our Adversaries, that in the Debate before the Pope at
Rome, about the Year 1300. (where the Roman Antiquities must certainly be best
understood, and when the Debate was against the Learned English, who were very
much concerned to contradict us) we did own this our settlement before Julius
Caesar his entry into this Isle; and that we as a settled Nation, and not as a
vagrant company of Irishes, maintained that long series of Wars related by Beda
and our own Historians. And in that Debate we assert justly, that the visible
Ruins of the two Walls built by the Romans against us and the Picts are
certain proofs of our Antiquity, and that we were the People who maintained the
War. As also in a Letter from our Nobility to the Pope about the Year 1320. we
again assert our Antiquity, and that Haec collegimus ex Antiquorum gestis and
libris. And all this Debate and Letter being yet extant, these are surer
Warrants for our Antiquity, than any thing that can be urged against us from
the Irish Annals, the eldest whereof are in the Year 1100. written by Natives
at home, without any contradiction or warrant, for ought we have yet seen. Nor
has the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet answered the same Objection, when urged in my
First Book, though with less force than it is now urged.

Dr. Stillingfleet answers to all that is urged from the Antiquity of our
Monasteries, That this proves only, that we might have had, but not that we
had sufficient Warrants, since we produce not the Annals of these Monasteries.
To which my Answer is, that (1.) This at least overturns his Position, that We
neither had, nor could have sufficient Warrants for a greater Antiquity than
the Irish. (2.) The Irish produce no Warrants for their Annals, though much
later than ours; and, as we are equal in other things, so we are stronger in
this. (3.) We have formerly proved, as convincingly as can be in any such case,
that we had such Annals in these our Monasteries, and that our Historians
compiled our Histories from them; and that they were lost by the Invasions of
the English, and by the demolishing of our Monasteries in an Age, wherein all
their Records were thought Relics of Popery.

The Doctor's own chief grounds for preference, in point of Credibility, are
Still. chap. 1. p. 35.
Testimonies founded upon Ancient Credible Writers, having a concurrent
probability of circumstances, and that amongst these Ancient Writers,
consideration is to be had of their abilities, opportunities, care and
diligence, according to which Rules, I have formerly produced many concurring
Testimonies from Ancient Credible Authors, relating things credible, and
probable: and now in competition with the Irish, as to the abilities, and
opportunities of our Authors, and their care and diligence in collecting our
Histories, I contend, we ought to be preferable; because, beside the grounds
above urged, I must remember my Readers, that the Doctor denies the Irish any
opportunity of transmitting their Histories by Letters, till after St.
Patrick's time. But so it is, that I have proved that Palladius's Mission was
to the Scots in Britain, and the Doctor has acknowledged, that this Mission of
Palladius was Prior to that of Saint Patrick: and which is higher, the Doctor
acknowledges that the Unconquered Nations beyond the Roman Wall, were the
Christians spoke of by Tertullian; and I have proved that we were one of these
Unconquered Nations. And therefore, since we had the use of Letters before the
Irish, Letters being the surest Vehicles of History, and Christianity the chief
Nursery of Letters, it follows necessarily from the Doctor's own Rules, that
our Histories are more credible than the Irish. And this Argument holds equally
good, whether we our selves were the Unconquered Nations, when Christianity was
first planted, or became Masters by conquest of these Christians here, who had
the early use of Letters: even as the English, or Saxons, had good grounds of
knowledge, from the Letters and Learning of the Britans, whom they conquered.
The next is, that we had greater opportunity to know our own Histories, and
greater reason to use care and diligence in writing them, than the Irish, who
were Strangers. The third is, that the Irish having erred so grossly in the
last, and most uncontroverted part of our History, and in which they contradict
the Foreign and Contemporary Historians of other Nations, it cannot be urged
that their Credibility is of any moment, in the more ancient and darker part of
our Antiquities, and History, wherein they differ from us. And lastly, our
Historians have for their Abilities been very famous for many Ages, in Foreign
Nations, and amongst the best Critics; whereas we have seen no Histories from
Ireland till of late, and much later than ours. And though we are far from
having any low esteem of the Irish Abilities, yet we conceive, that the Doctor
should remember that by the suggestion of his Countrymen, Pope Adrian gives the
Kingdom of Ireland to Henry the Vid. Bull. in Fordon, lib. 12. cap. 33.
Second of England, ad declarandum indoctis, and rudibus populis Christianoe
fidei veritatem, etc. whereupon they writ a Letter to Pope John, wherein
Fordon, ibid.
they complain, that they were severely and cruelly used as Beasts, and
therefore desire that his Holiness would confirm the Election they had made of
Edward, Brother to King Robert the Bruce, for their King.

The Learned Bishop Usher was pleased, in partiality to his own Country, to
assert that this his Majesty's Kingdom was never called Scotland, till 1000
years after Christ. But the Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph finding that this was
not tenable; he only asserts, that after the Year 900. we got the rest of the
Country, and then it only came to be called Scotland. Both these Opinions I
have endeavored to refute in the Seventh Section of my Book, where I have
cleared all this matter in nine Positions, to all which the Doctor is pleased
to answer nothing, save (1.) That I have unwarrantably asserted that the Name
of Scots, does originally belong to the Scots in Britain, and only by way of
Communication to these in Ireland. But I beg his pardon, to tell him, that I
have no such Position, though for confirming my Answers to these two Reverend
Bishops in the former Debates, I did only for farther clearing the matter,
assert that the old name under which Ireland was known to the Greeks was Ierna,
and to the Latins Hibernia, which I proved from Bishop Usher himself. (2.) I
asserted that before the Year 400. there was no Author that made mention of
Scotia, or Scoti, but when they meant our Country, and Countrymen: and this I
have proved without any Answer. But in the (3.) place, I positively say, page
143. of my First Book, that I was not concerned to debate the Antiquity of the
names of Scotia, or Scoti, but only when we first settled here. And therefore
though our Historians do assert that the Irish were first called Scots, that
contradicts not any of my Positions. For though very anciently the Irish might
be called Scots, yet about the time that the Romans and others begun to write
of the Scots, the Books now extant do only apply these Names to us, and to our
Country. And the Author of Ogygia does himself P. 348.
acknowledge, that the Romans first invented the Name of Scotland: and if so,
it was probably applicable to Us: for they had much commerce with us, but none
with Ireland.

Amongst the many Citations which I adduced for proving that Scotland was
called Ireland, in Bede's time, one was from his Ecclesiastical History,
wherein Bid Lib. 4. cap. 26.
relates, that Egfrid, King of Northumberland, having sent an Army into Ireland
under Bertus, he wasted the Country, and the Innocent People: and the next
year, having sent an Army to waste the Province of the Picts, contrary to the
advice of his Friends, and of St. Cuthbert, God suffered that Army to be
destroyed, because the former year he had rejected their advice, that he should
not invade Scotland which did not wrong him. And to clear that the Scotia here
expressed was not Ireland, he adds the English and Scots who abide in Britain.
This Passage (as well as the others, which I have cited, and shall cite) proves
(1.) That Scotland then has been promiscuously called by the names of Hibernia,
and Scotia: for the same thing is said first to have been done in Scotia, and
then in Hibernia. And this answers the Objection, Hiberni revertuntur domum,
and where could their home be but in Ireland? (2.) It proves that this our
Country was called Scotia in Beda's time, and so long before the Year 1000.
which the Bishop denies. Nor can it be proved that the King of Northumberland
went to make war in Ireland, otherwise than from Offlahartie's late Book, which
is not to be put in balance with Beda, who was disinterested, and lived in the
very time. To which the Doctor answers, that by Scotland must be there meant
Ireland, because the Nation which Egfrid invaded, had been always kind to the
English; which cannot be said of our Scotland. But to this it is replied, that
I have proved in my Lib. 3. cap. 27.
Book, from the same Beda (who must be the best Interpreter of his own words)
that the English at that time were very kindly entertained by the Scots, and
furnished with all things necessary: which kindness proceeded from an Union in
Religion, which in those happy, and pious days, was the foundation of all
kindness: and thus I have answered the Doctor's Argument, but he has not
answered mine. But to prove that Scotland was called Ireland in those days, and
that this place of Beda's is applicable to our Country, and not to Ireland; I
cite the English Polychronicon, who says many Lib. 1. cap. 37.
evidences we have that this Scotland is ofttimes called (Heght) Hibernia, as
Ireland does: for which he cites many Proofs, and particularly this Passage in
Beda. If it is a Lib. 1. de Scotia cap. 39.
common Saw, that the Country which now is named Scotland, is an outstretching
of the North part of Britain. This Land hete sometime Albania, and has that
name of Albanactus, afterward the Land hete Pictavia, for the Picts reigned
therein 1070 Years: and at last hete Hibernia, as Ireland hight. And thereafter
it is said at the end of that Page, many Evidences we have out of this
Scotland, that it is often called and Hyte Hibernia, as Ireland has: and
particularly amongst many Citations out of Beda, he cites Egfridus, Lib. 4.
cap. 22.
King of Northumberland, destroyed Ireland, etc. which is the Passage
controverted.

This Polychronicon is cited by Fordon, and was Prior to him, for as Vossius
tells us, it was written by Ranulphus Higden, who died, Anno Christi 1363. and
was translated by Johannes Trevisa, who continued it Voss. de Hist. Lat. lib. 3.
to the Year 1398.

From which I draw these Conclusions. (1.) That this Country was called
Scotland before the Year 1000. which overthrows the Bishop of St. Asaph's
Assertion. (2.) That our Country was called Hibernia, which answers most of all
our Adversaries Arguments. (3.) That this place in Bid is to be ascribed to
us, notwithstanding Dr. Stillingfleet's reason, and Offlahartie's History.

For proving likewise that Scotland was called Hibernia, in Beda's time, and by
him, I produced among many other Passages that very clear one, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Where he says that Aidan was sent from the Isle which is called Hy, which is
the chief of the Scottish and Pictish Monasteries, and belongs to Britan; Et ad
jus Britanniae pertinet: albeit, speaking of Hy, in other places, he says it is
in Hibernia.

To which the Doctor answers, Does not Beda in the same place say, that the
Island Hy was given by the Picts, and not by the Scots to the Scottish Monks
that came from Ireland? But what a Paralogism is this? For it might have been
given by the Picts, and yet have been within the Territories of the Scots: for
these neighboring Nations did seize ofttimes Places belonging to one another.
And the Picts being sensible, that they were not able to keep this Place which
was so remote from their own Territories, they did therefore the more easily
mortify it to a Monastery. Nor could it otherwise have belonged to the Picts:
for it was never pretended that the Pictish Dominions extended to our Western
Isles, or that they did reach farther than Clyd: and Beda himself does march
them so. And the Shire of Argyle, and many Isles such, as Bute, lie betwixt
Clyd and Icolmkill, or Hy: and it was never questioned, but that these belonged
to Us, and were the Seat of Our Kings. And Usher thinks that Beda was mistaken,
in saying that the Picts gave this Isle to this Monastery. But (2.) does this
Answer prove, that it belonged to Ireland, which is the only Point here in
debate. Or can there be any thing more inconsistent with that, than Beda's own
words, which are, that it belonged to Britain as a part of it? And if it be a
part of Britain, it cannot be in Ireland, otherwise, than because Scotland,
which was a part of Britain, was then called Ireland. Nor does the situation of
the Place contribute less to clear this, than Beda's clear Authority. For it
was never pretended by the Irish, that our Western Isles, which lie upon our
Coast, belonged to Ireland. And the first thing that is known of them, is, that
they belonged to Scotland; and since this Monastery and Isle is now in the
possession of the Scots, and has been so for many Ages; We desire the Learned
Doctor, and his Irish Evidences, to condescend when, and by what War or
Transaction the Irish lost that, or the other Isles: for if it had been theirs,
we could not have got it, but by one of these two ways.

Since then Hy was a part of our Scotland, it necessarily follows, that Aidan
came not from the Northern Scots in Ireland, as Doctor Stillingfleet asserts:
for the Bishop of Saint Asaph acknowledges, that Aidan was ordained at Hy, by
the Bishop of Hy, and Dunkeld Cap. 5. p. 103, 104, 105.
, which he supposes with Usher to be then founded, and cites Bid Hist. 3. 5.
page 171, 172. and 3. 5. p. 166.
for his Voucher: and adds, that after Firian's death, Colman succeeded in the
Bishopric, who was also sent from Scotland, that is, from Hy; and that he was
a Bishop of Scotland: which must be our Scotland, for the reasons aforesaid,
notwithstanding of what the Doctor says. And from all this we wonder, with the
Doctor, that any that can carefully read Beda, can dispute, what is so clearly
said in him, that Scotland was called Hibernia; and so we'll conclude against
Praef. p. 69.
him in his own words. But we wonder what the Doctor means, when he
acknowledges that from Beda it appears, that the Scots had a Kingdom in
Britain. But when he speaks of the Religion of the same Scots, he means the
Scots of Ireland: this is indeed beyond my understanding: but I am sure, it can
have no color, from making the Ireland, wherein Icolmkill, or Hy is, an Isle
distinct from Britain; having in my former Book cleared, that our part of
Scotland, was called an Isle, as contradistinguished from Britain, by the two
Firths, Clyd, and Forth, being closed up by a Wall, and is therefore called an
Isle by Tacitus, and others whom I formerly cited. To whom I now add several
English Authors, as William of Malmsbury, who speaking of Britain, says, and
per se, velut insulam, a Scotia divisa. And Bartholomoeus Anglicus says, that
Scotia Regnum promontorium est, montibus and maris brachiis a Britannia
separata: and Anglorum progenies, Britanniam insulam possidet. And therefore
Beda speaking of Weremith in Northumberland, he tells us, that it is near to
Scotland, and adds, that by this it may appear, that the remotest part of the
Isle of Britain toward the North is Northumberland. Which could Scotiae
propinquum. Ex quibus patet quod ultima pars insulae Britanniae versus Boream
est Northumbria.
not have been true, if it had not been spoken upon the supposition, that our
Country had been an Island; for our Country lies benorth Northumberland; in the
Isle of Britain. All which are to be found in the Third Chapter of the Second
Book of Fordon, with several others, which I here omit, rather as unnecessary,
than impertinent.

I add to these Paulus Diaconus, Epit. hist. Romans p. 672.
who speaking of Wars betwixt the Britains and Saxons, from the time of
Ambrosius Aurelianus, says, that the Victory hung uncertain betwixt them, donec
Saxones potentiores effecti, tota per longum Insula potirentur: And this must
be only understood of England, for the Saxons did not in his time, nor since
conquer that part of Britain which belonged to us. But by that he only meant,
that the Saxons conquered that part which belonged to the Romans, and was
called an Isle, as contra-distinguished from ours. I Decr. 16. page 783.
proved this also from the Martyrologium Romanum, Abredonioe in Hibernia,
Sancti Beani Episcopi, to which nothing is answered: And I now add to it,
Baronius in not is, Page 784.
Beani vetera manuscripta ex quibus Molanus hac die fuit hic Episcopus
Abredonensis.

Having thus cleared the Antiquity of our Kings, and the truth of our
Histories, by so solid Reasons, and from so good Authority. I hope the reverend
Dr. Stillingfleet will be as Ingenuous, in retracting what he has written
against the State, in these Points; As he did very Commendably retract what he
had written against the Government of his own Church, in his Irenicum: At least
he will retract That insolent Expression, Praef. page 72. That our Antiquities
are universally dis-esteem'd, amongst all Judicious and inquisitive Men: Since
all men have not written their opinion, nor has he read all Writers; and this
at least contradicts the many parts of his Book, wherein he acknowledges, that
Lipsius and other great Critics are of our side. And I have cited most of all
the considerable Critics, and have fully satisfied the insignificant Answers
made by Dr. Stillingfleet to them; and if I have left any Expression in all the
Book unanswered, it is because it was unworthy of having been urged by Dr.
Stillingfleet, or answered by me.

And, though I could add many new Authors, who have owned our Antiquities;
yet, loving rather to reason, than to cite, I produce one, who not only owns
our Antiquities, but makes our Antiquities a strong Argument against the
Supremacy of the Pope. For (says he) the Bishop of Rome cannot pretend, that
the Church in Britain received the Christian Faith from Rome, since Scotland, a
part of it, was Christian before the Romans had access to it. The Author is
the learned Lomeierus; Joh. Lomeierus de Bibliothecis, p. 149. Edit. 2. Ex
Germania transfretamus ad penitus toto divisos orb Britannos, qui quidem
literarum cognitionem diu ante Christi tempora habuisse dicuntur: Anno enim
ante Christum natum 270. Dornadilla Maini silius, Scotorum Rex, praecepta
venandi scriptis commisit, and subditis suis servanda proposuit: quae leges and
nostro adhuc seculo, seu sacrae, observantur. Fidem Christianam non postremi
receperunt. Tertull. adv. Judaeos, cap. 7. Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca,
Christo vero subdita. Audiant hoc Romani Pontificis Gnathones, qui ejus
universalem Monarchiam in Ecclesiam quovis modo stabilire conantur. Britanni
fidem acceperunt in illis locis quo Romany aditus non patebat. Qui posset dari
Episcopus universalis, cum nullus unquam fuerit Monarcha politicus, qui sibi
totum terrarum orbem subjecerit? Quamvis Romanorum imperatores hac vana
opinione inflatos Spiritus gesserunt, ut se totius orbis Dominos crederent, cum
sane modicam ejus partem obtinerent.
who tells us, That the Britains had the knowledge of Letters 270 years before
Christ: for Dornadilla King of the Scots wrote, before then, the Laws of
Hunting observed to this day amongst the Subjects of that Kingdom, as Sacred
even to this Age. And they were not amongst the last, who received the
Christian Religion: for Tertul. advers. Iud. cap. 7. tells, that the places
which were unaccessible to the Romans, had yielded to Christ. And from this he
concludes, that they are Parasites, who flatter the Bishop of Rome, as
universal Mo narch of the Church, since here were Christians, to whom the
Romans had never access. From which I also draw these Conclusions: 1. Here is a
Proof of our ancient Learning, and consequently a Foundation for the
Credibility of our Annals. 2. Here is an acknowledgment of a King before Fergus
the Second, and long before the Year 503, proved too by Laws yet observed,
which was a sure way of preserving his Memory; and the matter of Fact is true,
for we remember those Laws as his to this very day. And though it may be
objected that he had this from our Historians, yet it still proves that he and
others believe our Historians.
3. Here is an acknowledgment, that Tertullian's Citation is applicable to us.
4. It seems by this more just, that the Bishop of St. Asaph should rather have
sustained our Antiquities, as an Argument against Popery, than rejected them
for answering an Argument against Episcopacy, Religion being of greater
consequence than Government, and the inference being stronger in the one Case
than the other; for he should have urged that it is not probable, that we who
were Enemies to the Roman Nation would have submitted to the Roman Church; but
would have rather looked upon their Missionaries as Spies, especially in those
barbarous times, when Nations were considered more than Doctrine: for though
Religion already received, might have Cemented us; yet before it was submitted
to, so great an enmity as was betwixt us, might have obstructed Commerce and
Kindness; from which probably proceeded our aversion to the Romish Rites as to
Easter, and other Points for many Ages, in which we followed the Greek Church
in opposition to the Romish. But leaving this Argument to be prosecuted by Dr.
Stilling fleet, it cannot be denied but both the learned Blondel cited by the
Bishop of St. Asaph, and Lomeierus were both convinced, that our Antiquities
were undeniable, for no man in his Wits draws Arguments from Premises which
himself thinks uncertain.

Possevinus also the Jesuit, in his Lib. 16. Cap. 5.
Bibliotheca Selecta, inserts among the Historians whom he recommends as most
Authentic, an account of our Antiquities: Wherein among other things, we are
asserted to have had a Christian Church here in the Year 203. and the Citations
from Tertullian and St. Ierom are appropriated to us, and to these are added
three other Citations, agreeing with them, one from St. Chrysostom in Sermon. de
Pentecost. a second from the same Author, in his Homilia quod Deus sit homo,
and a third from Petrus Venerabilis, lib. 8. epist. 16. And therefore, as in my
last Book I did conclude, that our Antiquity behoved to be very remarkable,
since before Bishop Usher's time, every Nation made us most ancient, next to
themselves; so in this Book I may conclude, that our Christianity must be much
ancienter, than those reverend Divines would make even our settlement, since
men of all persuasions concur in it, and speak of it with great Elogies, and
draw consequences from it, for the honor of their own Church: Which according
to the Doctor's principles cited by me, are the surest marks of Conviction.
Thus I hope I have sufficiently illustrated this Subject, and therefore I am
not resolved any farther, either to burden it, or my Readers.

For clearing some Passages in this Book, the Reader may be pleased to consider
seriously, these following Additions and Alterations.
PAGE 3. lin. 4. for Kenneth III. read Kenneth II.

Page 5. lin. 10. Add to what I have said concerning Lose Majesty; That Dr.
Stillingfleet, Praef. p. 5. calls this, the sharpest and most unhandsome
Reflection in all my First Book, and I am glad he does so; for if there be any
severity in these my words, Luddus is to be blamed, and not I: for my words in
my Letter to my Lord Chancellor, p. 11. are -- and since Luddus owns, that he
durst not deny the British descent from Brutus; lest he might thereby wrong the
Majesty of the English Nation; I admire, that any of the Subjects of Great
Britain did not think it a degree of lose Majesty, to injure and shorten the
Royal Line of their Kings. By which it may very easily appear, that I did take
the word Lose Majesty in a Rhetorical, and not in a legal sense, though I find,
that Dr. Stilling fleet does not answer my Objections, even supposing the word
to be there otherwise taken; for it seems for ought that is yet answered, that
to injure and shorten the Royal Line, is a degree of lose Majesty; that is to
say, it tends (in Luddus's own words) to wrong the Majesty of the British
Monarchy.

Page 8. lin. 10. Put out these words, -- and this is clear also by the Book of
Pasley.

Page 9. lin. 17. Instead of these words, that the People deposed Kings; read,
that the People sometimes de facto deposed Kings in those ancient barbarous
times; ibidem, lin. 23. Instead of these words, till Kenneth the Third's time,
read, long after Fergus the Second's time.

Page 20. lin. 19. For these words, and the inquisitive Bid was not able to
reach so far back in the year 700. read, that Bid made it not his business,
to search out secular Antiquities, having only designed (as is clear by his
Book) to write of us in so far as was necessary, for his Ecclesiastical
History, which needed not the helps of the old Manuscripts in our Monasteries.
Ibid. l. 14. Put out the words, ut fertur, as they say, a word used in the
remotest Antiquity.

For farther clearing Page 22, 23, 24. Cap 2. Whether the Meatae and Caledonii
were Britains distinct from the Scots and Picts, whom Dion calls the
Unconquered Nations, and who the Doctor says, were different from the Scots and
Picts; It Is fit to add to what I said on this subject, that our Adversaries
differ among themselves, and contradict one another in this point; for Cambden,
whom St. Asaph follows, makes the Picts Camb. Brit. page 82.
Caledonians, or Extraprovincial Britains, thinking it thereby more easy to
make the settlement of one Nation late, than to make both so; because thus he
differs less from received Histories: But the Doctor sticks not to make the
settlement of the Picts later, than that of the Scots; because he never finds
the name of the Picts mentioned, till about the time the Scots are, and
therefore refutes Cambden: Chap. 5. p. 240.
whereas Offlaharty rejects this reason, contending, as we do, that it is
ridiculous to say, that a Nation is no older, than from its being mentioned in
History under such a name.

Page 29. lin. 18. For etc. 492. read etc. page 492.

Page 32 lin. 3. After the word Piracy, add, And whereas the Doctor objects,
that this Wall was unnecessarily built betwixt the two Seas to hinder the
incursions of the Scots and Picts; seeing, I supposed, the custom was to cross
over the two Firths, and to land on this side of the Wall; for so they landed
on the British side, and left the Wall behind them, and consequently the
expense had been unnecessary, and the Romans and Britains very idle in building
it. To this it is answered, that I very justly supposed that the invasions were
over the Firths; and though they had left the Wall behind them after their
landing, yet the objection concludes not, that therefore the building of the
Wall was unnecessary; for the Britains being separated and distinguished from
the Scots and Picts by two Firths which did meet only in a short neck of Land,
they completed this natural fortification of Water, by building a Wall on the
Land where it was wanting, thereby defending themselves against the irruptions
of their Enemies; so that the Scots and Picts being debarred from entering by
this Neck, which was the easy and ordinary way before, were after necessitated
to invade by water, formerly the more difficult way. And this is not only a
conjecture arising from the clear probability of the thing (which were
sufficient to answer Lib. 1. cap. 12.
the Doctor's Objection that is only founded on a bare conjecture) but it is
the express reason given by Beda, who lived so near the time and the place, and
who speaking of this Wall, says, Fecerunt autem eum inter duo freta, vel sinus
(de quibus diximus) maris per millia passum plurima, ut ubi aquarum munitio
deerat, ibi praesidio valli fines suas ab hostium irruptione defenderent --
from which I must also add, that the Seas we came over, were our own Firths
abovementioned, and not the Irish Sea; for the Wall is said to be betwixt the
two Firths and Bays of the Sea, and thereafter in the same Chapter it is said
fugavit eos transmaria, which are also the words of Gildas: All which is
applied to our Firths, and not applicable to the Irish Sea, which can neither
be called Firth nor Bay in the singular number, nor Maria in the plural, it
being called Mare Hibernicum, as our Seas are called Mare Germanicum, or
Deucaledonicum. And that the Irish Sea was not passable, nor fit for such
Anniversary Invasions in Corroughs, is (beside all I have said formerly) clear
from the English Writers themselves, Bartholomaeus Anglicus, and the English
Polychronicon in their descriptions Polychr. lib. 1. cap. 32.
of Ireland. But the Sea that is between Britain and Ireland is all the year
round full of great waves, and uneasy; so that men can seldom sail it
securely. This Sea is sixscore miles broad, and Bartholomaeus Anglicus says of
it, -- Mare autem Lib. 15. cap. 80.
Hibernicum versus Britanniam undosum and inquietum est, and toto anno vix
navigabile.

The Doctor, to evite the force of our Arguments, makes the Caledonii and
Meatae to differ from the Scots and Picts, and to be Britains dwelling near the
Wall; who being forced to attend there for the defense of the Wall against the
Romans, left the more Northern parts of the Isle waste, which they formerly
inhabited, as the Blood does the extremities, when it runs to the Heart:
Whereupon the Scots invaded their Possessions from the West out of Ireland, and
the Picts from Scandanavia. But besides the Arguments I urged formerly in my
Second Chapter, I now add, that first, Beda makes only mention of five
Nations, who inhabited Britain, viz. the Britains, Romans, Picts, Scots and
Saxons, whereas if the Caledonii and Meatae had been different from the Scots
and Picts (and not the Highlanders and Lowlanders of the Scots and Picts under
different names; as I have formerly proved them to be) then there had not only
been five, but seven Nations inhabiting Britain. Whereas the Doctor contends
that Dion must interpret Beda's words, it is more reasonable that Beda, who
wrote long after Dion, should interpret his words; since Beda is so express in
describing who were Inhabitants of old, and in his time; and Dion, who was
before Beda, could not interpret him.

2. Either the Scots and Picts came into the Possessions of these Caledonii and
Meatae before the Romans, or after: if they came in before, then the Scots and
Picts must have come and settled here before the Year 412. because the Romans
left this Isle altogether about that time, without ever returning, and
consequently were settled here before the Year 503. which is the Bishop of St.
Asaph's Position: But if after the Romans left the Isle, then it was not when
the Caledonii and Meatae were necessitated to come for the defense of the Wall
against the Romans, which is Doctor Stillingfleet's Position.

If the Irish had overcome the Extraprovincial Britains, whom, as the Doctor
confesses, the Romans could not overcome; this Conquest must needs have fallen
out near to those times wherein Gildas and Beda lived, and whereof they write
the Wars and Vastations so particularly and exactly; and especially since the
Learned Doctor gives as a Rule, that a negative testimony is concluding, where
the Writer is knowing, and had opportunity to know, and the thing omitted is of
importance to the subject treated of; all this quadrats exactly with this case:
and though these Authors had omitted this Conquest, yet it is incredible that
these Ancient Irish Annals (by the Doctor alone so much preferred to ours)
would have omitted the full and clear relation of a Conquest so very glorious
to them, as the overcoming Nations, who could never be conquered by the mighty
power of the Romans; especially since this must have been, not some particular
Victories only, but one entire extinction of the Meatae and Caledonii, for
these are never after so much as mentioned: And it is yet more incredible to
think that we could have overthrown these Extraprovincial Britains, after the
Romans had been forced to leave the Island, and yet never be able to prevail so
far against them, when they had the Britains, Romans, and Us to be their
Enemies; it being acknowledged that we were by continual incursions
endeavoring to settle here about 200 years before the Romans left the Isle.

Whereas the Doctor cites Fordon distinguishing the Picts and Scots from the
Caledonii, and Meatae; and making them to be the Extraprovincial Britains in
the 36th Chapter of the Third Book of his Scoto-Chronicon, I have considered
the place cited, but I find no such thing in that Chapter. Indeed in the 37th
Chapter of the Second Book I find Fulgentius is called Dux Britannorum
Albanensium, and that the Britanni Boreales, are distinguished from the
Britanni Australes; but there is no mention made in that place of the Caledonii
and Meatae; nor does the division of South and North- Britains make any thing
against us, but on the contrary, it seems very clear by that Chapter, that the
Scots and Picts had been long settled in Scotland, before the Romans left this
Isle; for it is said there, that the Scots and Picts having (according to their
accustomed manner) overrun the Country, notwithstanding the assistence given
by the Romans to these Britains, Fulgentius was forced to make a peace with
them.

Page 36. lin. 2. For Fourth Chapter, read Fifth Chapter. And here add, that
by these words (totam cum Scotus Iernam movit) may be meant of our being forced
to retreat or return to Ireland, when we were expelled by Maximus; which agrees
with the time here describd by Claudian.

Page 36. lin. 10. For this, read thus.

Page 38. lin. 16. The Comma is before, but should be after Usher. And for do,
read does.

Page 41. I desire the Reader may be pleased to observe, First, That
Offlahartie himself confesses, that the words (soli Britanni) in Eumenius, are
understood to be in the Genitive, as Scaliger and we contend; and not in the
Nominative, as the Bishop and the Doctor allege. And here I would have the
Doctor to mind that true Maxim of Law cited by himself; a Witness which a man
brings for himself ought to be admitted against him.

Secondly, That the Bishop of St. Asaph makes use of Plantin's Edition in the
Catalogue prefixed by him, and in that Edition Eumenius's words are pointed as I
have cited them.

Thirdly, I wish the Reader to observe that in my First Book against the Bishop
of St. Asaph, Page 70. lin. 8. the particle and (in Eumenius his words, Natio
adhuc rudis and soli Britanni) is printed (it) and so the force of the Argument
is not understood, which was, that (and) copulat diversa, and so the Natio
rudis could not be the same with soli Britanni, but must needs have been of the
Genitive Case, and the words must have run, Pictis and Hibernis soli Britanni,
the Picts and Irish of the British Isle.

Page 45. For Britons, read Britains. And here add, that the words in Tacitus
are Nobilissimi totius Britanniae, which does not at all prove Galgacus his men
to have been Britons, but Britains; and so this agrees very well with the
Scots, who were Caledonian Britains.

Page 41. lin. 19. For Scotice primae, read Scoticae pruinae.

Page 51. lin. 2. For Fourth Chapter, read Fifth Chapter.

Page 57. lin. 17. Add, And that he was sent to the Scots in Britain is clear.

Page 60. lin. penult. For Nomination, read Omination.

Page 65. lin. 3. For the Conquered Nations, read relates to the Unconquered
Nations.

Page 68. lin. 10. Put a Comma after the word Mortal.

Page 72. lin. 15. In place of, a Nation before Constantius' s time, say, a
Nation settled here before Constantius' s time. Ibid. lin. 22. add, That these
words in Scaliger, and Scoti sunt adhuc in Hibernia, must be so interpreted as
to consist with Scaliger's former Arguments for proving our early settlement
here, and therefore the sense must be; That there are yet in Ireland some of
these Ancient Scots, or That the Nation from which the Albanian Scots are
descended are yet in Ireland; neither of which contradicts our ancient
Settlement here.

Page 76. lin. penult. For these words, Neither is Buxhornius special, and has
been misled by Usher; read, And Buxhornius has been misled by Ubbo Emmius,
whom he cites, and is later than Usher.

Page 77. lin. 8. For Spartan, read Spartian. Ibid. lin. 12. For all that,
read that which.

Page 81. lin. 16. Add, That the Doctor, Pref. p. 23. is very unjust in saying
that our Antiquities went not down with John Major, and that he gave little
credit to the being of Fergus the First; for it is clear that he repeats only
the Story of Gathelus, Scota, and Simon Brek, but is very positive in asserting
the Story of Fergus the First, and shows particularly that Beda did not
contradict that part of our History, but gives the true and reconciling
distinction, that Fergus laid the foundation of the Monarchy, and Reuda or
Rether enlarged it; and reckons above 700 years betwixt the two Ferguses, and
relates the Genealogy of Alexander the Third, as it was repeated by that
Highland Gentleman at the Coronation.

Page 83. lin. 13. For these words, he could have no warrant but Tradition,
read He could have no sufficient warrant without Tradition.

Page 94. lin. penult. Put out the word Saint from Fergus.

Page 97. lin. ult. Immediately after the word Verimund, add these words, many
material things which are not in Boethius.

Page 98. lin. 11. Put out these words, which are not in Boethius.

Page 108. lin. 25. After Alarick, add the word is.

Page 116. lin. ult. When Kenneth is called the first Monarch of Scotland, The
meaning is, he was the first Monarch of all Scotland, having subdued the Picts,
and therefore he is so termed by Fordon.

Page 119. lin. 17. For, it is likely, read is it likely.

Page 121. For de Muro lapideo, read de Mora lapidea. i. e. the stony Moor.

Page 129. lin. 16. For Ferchard's second Son, read Ferchard the Second his
Son.

Page 167. lin. For Tich, read Fich.

Page 175. lin. 14. For created, read treated of.

The Reader is entreated to excuse these mistakes in the printing, since they
were occasioned by the Author's great distance from the Press.

And if the Reader doubt of the old Alliance betwixt France and Scotland, the
Articles of the old League shall be printed, for they have been lately found
upon record in an old Register at Paris, and bear date 791. agreeing exactly
with what I have said page 109. of my First Book; and with page 74. of this:
and this proves us to have been a Nation settled long before, and of very
considerable reputation abroad in the World: for how is it imaginable that
Charles the Great, King of France, and Emperor of the West, should have
thought it either his honor or interest to engage in so strict an alliance
with a pack of Pilsering Vagabond Robbers, confined to the then very
insignificant County of Argyle, as is most unjustly alleged against us.

THE END.
The Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet is pleased to reflect upon the Author's Ius
Regium, but that the Famous University of Oxford had other thoughts of that
Book, the Reader may understand by the following Letter, which passed their
Public Seal, and was sent, as it is here set down, to the Author.

Honorabili plurimum Domino, Domino Georgio M'henzie, Equiti Aurato Regio Regni
Scotiae Advocato.
Illustrissime and Clarissime Domine,
CUM Regio Principum Iure and Majestate nihil sit sanctius, utpote quod iis
inviolatis and Regni gloria and subditorum pax unice conservantur, facile
possis credere, quam acceptissimos Academiae, quae Regi semper fida gloriatur
perstitisse, honores contuleris, cum vestras Regiae causae vindicias nobis non
tantum transmiseris, sed and in publicum simul, iniquo hoc tempore vocaris
patrocinium. Si quae enim (post probatam bellis civilibus fidem, ignibusque
traditos impios libellos, de quibus originem and vires sumserat perduellio)
ulterioris officii parts supererant, eas omnes vestro explevimus beneficio qui
causam principis una videmur defendisse, quod Doctissimi laboris effeceris
participes. Qui ipsa fundamenta penitus convellens quibus, inimica semper
Regibus, plebis improba innititur causa, de ipsa seditione vel Bellica potiorem
reportasti victoriam; cum enim armis miles rebels cogat in tempus tantum
gladios recondere, Tu, invictissimae rationis viribus, imperas ne iterum
stringantur. Languet quidem tantum quae debellatur, non extinguitur seditio,
devictumque licet humilis and abjecti vulgus imperii patiens videatur, vel
minima elucente spe res novas continuo molitur. Adeo ut Regias parts verius
sustentet qui suadet quam qui cogit parere, rebusque Imperii honestius
consulat, qui inconcussae fidei divinam statuens originem, Reverentiam
Principum non metum incu^it, Regibusque ex officio docet, non re, vel tempore
turpiter inservire. Hinc fit ut quamvis Scotorum virtuti plurimum debeatur,
quod rebels bis prosligaverint, Tibi plus sit referendum quod Buchanum and
Miltonum: quorum licet de scriptis derivatum plurimas Regni parts venenum
infecerit, Tu tamen grassante diu malo, tam felici tandem remedio subvenisti ut
conscientiae, Rationi, legibusque Regni antiquissimis necesse est renuncient si
qui in posterum sint qui in Deum Regemque una Rebels audeant iterum movere
arma. Quod itaque nostra ex part Unicum possumus, inter libros aeternae
memoriae sacros, Vestros Academia reponet, honores Autori exoptans quos ipsa
nequit confer, soliusque possit Principis Munificentia: Nimirum ut penitus
fractis per te Fanaticorum viribus, sentiat Rex quantum possit vel Unius
subditi literata fides, and Ipse experiaris quantum mereatur. Haec eo, quo
mittimus animo accipias, and inter affectus indicia aestimes quo Te prosequitur

Illustrissime Domine Nomini vestro addictissima, Universitas Oxoniensis.
E Domo nostrae Convocationis V. Id. Iunii, MDCLXXXIV.

Books printed for, and sold by Joseph Hindmarsh.
DAvelas's History of the Civil Wars of France.

Poems by several Hands, and on several Occasions, collected by N. Tate.

Miscellany; being a Collection of Poems by several Hands, collected by Mrs. A.
Behn.

The Works of Mr. John Oldham, together with his Remains.

A Discourse of Monarchy; more particularly of the Imperial Crowns of England,
Scotland and Ireland, with a close from the whole as it relates to the
Succession of I. Duke of York.

Practical Rules of Christian Piety, containing the sum of the whole duty of a
true Disciple of Christ.

History of Count Zozimus translated into English.

The Doctour's Physician, or Dialogues concerning Health, translated out of the
Original French.

Butler's Ghost; or Hudibras 4th Part, with Reflections on these Times.

Ienkinsius Redivivus; or the Works of that Grave, Learned, truly Loyal and
Courageous Judge Ienkins whilst a Prisoner in the Tower, and Newgate, by
command of the Rebellious Long Parliament, begun at Westminster, November the
3d, 1640. Wherein is plainly set forth the just Power and Prerogative of the
King, the Privilege of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and what is
Treason according to the Laws of the Land.

The Familiar Epistles of Colonel Henry Martin found in his Misses Cabinet.

A true Account of the Captivity of Thomas Phelps at Machaness, in Barbary, and
of his strange Escape in company of Edmund Baxter and others, as also of the
burning two of the greatest Pirat Ships belonging to that Kingdom, in the River
of Mamora, upon the 13th of June, 1685. By Thomas Phelps.

The Perjured Phanatick; or the Malicious Conspiracy of Sir John Croke of
Chilton, Henry Larimore, and other Fanatics, against the life of Robert
Hawkins, Clerk, and late Minister of Chilton, occasioned by his suit for Tithes.

An Historical Treatise of the Prerogatives of the Church of Rome, and of her
Bishops; written in French by Mounsier Maimburg, translated into English by A.
Lovell.


