A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL IN LENT, MARCH the 16. 1682/3.

By RICHARD MEGGOTT, D D. Dean of Winchester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

ECCLESIASTES 3.21. Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the
Spirit of the Beast that goes downward to the Earth?


THIS seems but an odd kind of Passage; and of all the Books in the World one
would least have expected it from the Holy Bible. That was written to instruct
men in Righteousness; but this tends rather to the hardening of them in their
Wickedness: That was to build us up in our most Holy Faith, but this strikes
at the very Root of all Religion.

Before therefore we give any Answer to the Question, it may do well to enquire
how it comes to be asked? As it proceeds from Solomon (whose Book this is)
it may startle us indeed, that a Man of his Superlative Parts and Wisdom should
insinuate so dangerous and wretched an Opinion! Speak so slightly of the Souls
of Men, as if they were no other than such as Beasts have! If we look into the
main Drift of his Writings, we shall find he had quite another Notion of them;
and Chap. 12.7. he affirms expressly, That when the Dust shall go to the Earth
as it was, our Spirits shall return unto God that gave them. What then? Does he
use Lightness, that his Word toward us is Yea and Nay? No surely, not so
neither; but he brings in this not as a Doctrine, but a Misfortune, not as an
Assertion that so it is; but as a Lamentation, that so it is thought, that
there is no difference between our Souls and those that are in the Beasts.

Among the Vanities the Sons of Men labor under, he accounts this as one of
the Chief, that they do not understand nor know themselves, because it is not
so very obvious to the heedless common Eye; and we fare in the same manner with
the other Creatures here both in Life and Death: He observes men are so
besotted as to imagine it is so after Death too, that it is all one then also,
and we no more survive than they do. This he bewaileth as the Occasion of many
more Evils than otherwise would be under the Sun; and yet a Disease so
Epidemical, that it was rare to find them who were wholly free from it, judging
the Thoughts of others by those which himself had sometimes had, and speaking
in the name of the Person he had formerly been; he makes as if the contrary
Tenent were but a bare Surmize, and that which no body could be sure of, who
knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of the Beast that
goes downward to the Earth.

This is the sad case that is here upbraided, and (Oh!) that there were no
reason to continue it, that the Cause had ceased with that Age it was written
in, and that in ours it were as groundless as it is doleful! But Men talk too
extravagantly to let us think so charitably; and what is here represented but
as a Temptation, is now adopted into an Opinion.

That therefore what is here observed, may tend to our better edifying, I shall
discourse upon the Design and Scope of it under these following Propositions.

First, That all men are not so well convinced and satisfied as they ought,
that their own Souls are other than such as Beasts have, they hesitate, as if
they they could not well tell what to think of it: Who knows, etc.

Secondly, That though it be not so evidently apprehended, yet there is a
wonderful and real Difference between them, The Spirit of Man goes upward, and
the Spirit of the Beast goes downward to the Earth.

Lastly, That the observing and Consideration of this Difference would be an
excellent Remedy for the mortifying and removing the Sins and Vanities of
Humane Life: To this he does ascribe them, that Men have not a due Sense of
their own Excellency and Immortality, Who knows the Spirit of Man, etc.

I begin with the First of these, That all Men are not so well convinced and
satisfied as they ought, that their own Souls are other than such as Beasts
have. It must be acknowledged for the Honor of our Species, that the National
Opinion throughout the World, has and does every where run in the Affirmative*
There is not a Kingdom or Country on the Face of the whole Earth, yet
discovered, so barbarous, which does not publicly profess to believe better.
But the Spirit that searches all things gives another kind of Account of Men's
Personal Inward Persuasions; and acquainteth us, that they who do not deny the
received notion of them as false, yet very ordinarily are but too mistrustful
whether it be true.

Gerson tells of a Friend of his, who for a long while had been very much
fluctuating in his Mind about this thing, that at last came to him, and with
great Joy told him, That by Reading and Meditation, by Prayer, and the use of
Means, he was attained to such a Plerophory, that he did now no more question
the things that are not seen than the things that are seen; and did as firmly
believe the Immortality of his Soul, as he did the Mortality of his Body. Such
are the Fruits of pious and sincere Endeavors, that by the Blessing of God
they overcome and conquer these untoward Suspicions; but without them they do
not use to go off of themselves, but by Fits and Occasions will disturb and
haunt us.

And there are two things in our very Constitution that do much contribute to
it.

The First is, the very little we understand in this State of what the Soul is.
She (like the Eye) sees all things else, but cannot see her self but in an
imperfect Looking-Glass: Could she behold her self as she is, she could never
doubt more: Then she would accost her self as Jacob did his Brother, and say, I
have seen thy Face as the Face of God. She would discover something Divine and
Celestial in her own Countenance: But now, as a Child of high Descent that was
dropped at his Birth in a strange Place, and can give no Account of his own
Quality, is easily made believe, that they are his Parents with whom he has
lived ever since he can remember, and those his Brethren with whom he has used
to eat and play. So it is here; being placed in the Body, and dwelling there
from the very first, it is apt to be persuaded it has no other Original; but
is the Product of Matter, as that which animateth the other Creatures; and so
in this Sense says to Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm, thou
art my Mother and my Sister.

They who have searched most industriously after her, the most profound and
eminent Philosophers do not at all agree in their Discoveries: Some will have
it one thing and some another; and so far is what the best of them have said
from satisfying others, that it is plain enough from Socrates's, Aristotle's,
Tully's, Seneca's faint misgiving Passages about her, it has been
unsatisfactory to them themselves. We are formally taught that it is a Spirit;
but when all is done we cannot tell what a Spirit is, and all that we know of
it, is only what it is not. Though she be within us we cannot perceive her, she
puts a Veil upon her shining Face, and near us as she is we cannot discern
the Form of her: And that may be one Account why Men are so staggered about the
Pre-eminence of their Souls, the very little they truly understand of what the
Soul is.

The other is the very great Resemblance between them and those the Beasts have
in their Functions and Operations. The curious and useful Offices which ours
perform in us, it is visible theirs also perform in them. Do ours give Life and
Motion to the Body? So do theirs too. Do we see, and hear, and feel, and smell
and taste? So do they too much more exactly. Have we our Affections and
Passions? So have they, their Love, their Anger, their Grief, their Joy,
according to the Occasions. Do we retain the Memory of things when they are
past and gone? So do they too, of Persons, Kindnesses, and ill Turns. Nor is
this all, even in that which we pretend our peculiar Prerogative,
Ratiocination, they seem to have a Share too; their Knowledge extends not
only to simple Objects, but it is evident by the Subtilty and Docibility which
is so wonderful in many of them, even to Propositions, Assumptions and
Deductions.

Several beneficial and choice Accomplishments which are Arts in us, and
attained with Difficulty, in them are natural; and some are of Opinion that we
learned them first from them: That we had our Architecture from the Nests of
the Swallow, our Music from the Notes of the Nightingale, our Weaving from the
Work of the Spider; our Skill in Simples, from Observation of what several of
the Beasts in their Extremities have Recourse to. However (without magnifying
the thing fancifully) thus much is certain, though it be in an inferior Manner,
yet something they have of all these things we value our selves so much upon:
And from hence, because they are in so many things something like, sensual and
superficial Men have great Jealousy that they are the same: For the preventing
or curing which dangerous imagination, I now proceed to the better Information,
which is to be gathered from the Text, my next Proposition.

That notwithstanding this specious Resemblance, there is a great and real
Difference; so great, as that we may conclude from it they have not both the
same End; but that the Spirit of the Man goes upward, though the Spirit of the
Beast goes downward to the Earth.

What has been said of our Country in particular, that it can never be
conquered but by it self, the Divisions and Treacheries of its own Inhabitants,
is as true of our Nature in general, it cannot be degraded but by it self, the
Neglect and Abuse of its own Faculties.

Did we exercise these as we might and ought, we could not be overcome by an
Host of such Objections: For though we are so much in the Dark about the Humane
Soul, yet we may well enough discern it from the Brutal; and notwithstanding
the specious Appearance of their Likeness, yet there is so vast an Vnlikeness,
that it must be a very hard thing for him that coolly thinks on both, really
to persuade himself that they are of the same kind.

That this may appear the clearer, we will take a particular View of the
chiefest of those things that seem common to them with us, wherein it is
pretended that they parallel us.

There are Four things the Beasts have something of as well as we,
Understanding, Will, Habits, and Illuminations.


Now let us compare each of these with our own, enquire and see whether it be
likely they are of the same sort; and,

First, Let us look upon their Understandings: It is confessed, that when they
first appear in the World, they have much the Start of us: and there is not any
of them, but in choosing their proper Food, in knowing their natural Enemies,
in providing for their own Support, have the Advantage of an Infant: Besides
these, some farther Improvements they make afterward themselves. By
Experience, Imitation, Institution, they acquire such Cunning and Tricks in
their way as look very sagacious and surprising: But yet all this is still but
the Ministry and Work of Sense, by those Impressions which they receive upon
their Imaginations from External Objects: And if all the Knowledge of Men came
so (large as it is, and surmounting theirs) I needs must say, the Difference
then would be only in Degree.

But besides this, we have another Way, a Superior Way of Knowing, which
presideth over this, and when it is out (as often it is) corrects its Mistakes,
and informs it better: If we had no other Guide but that, we should believe
the Sun less than a Bushel, the Moon bigger than any of the fixed Stars, with a
hundred such like Errors: For so they are represented to the Imagination. Now
how come we to perceive their Falseness? How could this ever be, if we had not
something above Sense; some greater Faculty that did control it?

It is true, even this so depends upon the Disposition of the Organs, that if
they are either defective by Nature, or decayed by Age, or hurt by a Disease,
or disordered by a Debauch, it is hindered in its Operations. So is a curious
Writer by a lame Hand, or but a bad Pen; but as they, if both never so well,
could not make a Letter without his Skill: So in this case too, though it
cannot, where the Organs are at fault, yet (as appears by the Anatomy of our
Brain, which differs not considerably, except in Quantity, from that of
Beasts) it is something higher than these Organs that act thus: So that here is
one Difference, between our Souls and those of Beasts, a Difference in their
Understandings.

A Second is in their Wills: They choose and refuse still as things appear to
their Senses, pleasing or unpleasing: As they say to them, they go or come; and
as they bid them do this, or that, they do it, follow their Dictates constantly
and quietly; and so it would be with us too, had we nothing in us but what they
have.

But if it be so, why are we thus? Two Desires are in our Breasts, and two
manner of Wills are struggling in our Bosoms. There is a Law in our Minds that
contradicts and opposes the Law of our Members; and what the Outward Man
commands, the Inward often will not endure. We cannot without Remorse do many
things that we would, and when we yield our selves to the Will of the Flesh,
there is something within us, that even then reproacheth us for doing so.
Insomuch that what the rude Turks do coarsely; when they are setting to a
Debauch, first give a Shout; which they say is a Warning to their Souls to
retire into their Heels, that they may not be Witnesses to their intended
Bestiality: All others in such Cases are fain to do in Effect, use Arts to
shift and get rid of themselves before they can comply well. There are none but
feel this at one time or other; and whatever they do themselves, cannot but
inwardly approve of those as the most excellent Persons, that deny the Sensual
Part, even in things where the Body would receive no Prejudice by being
gratified.

Now how could this be, if there were nothing but Corporeal and Material Soul
in us? Where then should be the differing Parties? Does the same Fountain send
forth both sweet Waters and bitter? Can the same thing be adverse and contrary
to it self? Is it so with the Dog in his Vomit? No, this perpetual Discord
argues there is something peculiar in the Sons of Men: And that is a Second
Difference between our Spirits and theirs, a Difference in our Wills.

A Third there is in our Habits: I speak not of acquired ones, those which are
the Fruits of frequent Exercise and Industry; but those which by the Schools
are called infused: Such Dispositions and Capacities as are communicated to,
and engrafted in each by the Author of their Beings. And of this kind we have
one of mighty Moment, so peculiar to us, that if there were nothing else to
instance in, might of it self convince us sufficiently; and that is
Religiousness, an Universal Bent and Inclination to the Worship and Fear of God.

They who are most for levelling us with the Inferior Animals, their most
eager Advocates freely grant them so far from this, that they will not allow
them the least Apprehension of such a Being: Nor indeed is it possible they
should have any. How can they that have only Corporeal Phantasms frame any Idea
of him; These are so far from helping us in forming a distinct Conception of an
Infinite Immaterial being, that Experience shows they but distract and hinder
us, when we attend to it: And yet Mankind of all Ages, former and later, of all
Places, civil and barbarous, of all Complexions, sanguine and melancholy, of
all Capacities, wise and weak, as by Instinct and secret Impulse own and feel
after him.

I know there have been some Atheists in the World; but I dare say, not half so
many as there have been Monsters; and if these do not make us alter our Opinion
of what is Natural as to our Shapes; why should those make us call in Question
what is so as to our Minds?

They that pretend this is not any natural Impression, but only the Influence
of Education, contrived for Convenience by Politicians, may as well say of the
Trees in the un-inhabited parts of the World, that they were not produced by
the Nature of the Earth; but secretly planted by a Knot of Gardiners. If it
were merely Artificial it would not be Universal; and where it was, would decay
without Care and constant looking to: But on the contrary, it is so agreeable
to the Humane Soul, that it springs up in all of them; and they who do all
they can are not able utterly to extirpate it, so much as out of their single
Selves. From this Principle and Propensity cultivated, spring Faith, Devotion,
Love, Sincerity, Softness of Heart, Denial of our selves, Sorrow for Sin, Care
for Eternity, with many other Heavenly and distinguishing Qualities, by which
Glorious Things are spoken of thee, Oh thou Inward Man! And do these look like
the Product of Matter and Motion? Can Sense be the Parent of Moral Virtue? Have
Brutes such a Faculty in them as Conscience? Are the Horse and the Mule
Subjects capable of Divine Grace? If they are not, why should it be thought
they have such Spirits as we? That is a Third Difference between our Spirits
and theirs, a Difference in our Habits.

I shall add a Fourth as apparent as any, and that is a Difference in their
Illuminations. This I mention distinct from the Understanding, as meaning by it
only that part of their Knowledge wherein both are merely passive, and
contribute nothing. Of this kind the Creatures about us every one have their
Omer, what is sufficient and convenient for them unaccountably put into them by
the provident Hand of him that made them: but with Men, besides that Candle of
the Lord (as the wise Man calls it) set up in the whole Species, there is
sometimes a Supernatural Light that shines in upon Indidividuals; and the
Father of Spirits upon Occasion has been pleased to honor them with
Revelations; at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, speaking to them himself
immediately. For though there have been great Frauds and Impostures about these
matters; and such things have often been pretended by some, and as often believed
by others where there was no Realty: Yet he must be very skeptical indeed, that
upon that Account will give Credit to none. Who can reasonably doubt but the
Divine Mysteries of our Faith were communicated this way, when he recollecteth
by how many mighty Miracles this manner of their Conveyance has been confirmed
to us? Who can make any Question but that the several Prophesies in Scripture
were imparted in this manner, when he finds how the Events many Hundreds of
Years after so punctually and precisely answered the Predictions?

It is true, this has been the Case comparatively but of few Persons; but
being as well satisfied as we can be of Matter of Fact that it has been of
any, the Argument has still the same Force, and equally proves what it is
alleged for; as if it were universal and constant, viz. that we have a more
peculiar way of Illumination; by Vrim and Thummim, by Dreams and Visions, by
Angels and Inspirations, things above our Understanding, and Secrets that were
then to come have been manifested to some for the Benefit of all: And is this
to be over-looked as nothing? Shall it procure them no Veneration, that God
himself takes such Signal Notice of them? Are any but ours Partakers of this
Privilege?

The Three former speak a clear Difference in Kind, and are also such probable
Arguments of the Immortality of our Spirits, though theirs are mortal, that
they and such like have always obtained general Belief. I will not say they are
so concluding, as that nothing can be objected against them: Perhaps Natural
Light cannot fully demonstrate it: But if we take in this last also, that of
Divine Revelations, then there remains no more place for doubting. For
besides the great unlikelihood, that the Almighty should manifest himself in
such gracious needless manner to Spirits of that low Rank, (Does God take Care
for Oxen) this is one thing he has revealed to them, that they are not such;
and that there is not only a Difference as to their Kind; but also as to their
End. The Spirit of the Man goes upward, etc.

And were this reflected on so seriously as it ought, that our Spirits die not
with our Bodies; but have an Everlasting Duration, what manner of Persons would
it make us? How careful that it may be well with them when they go from hence?
To this Solomon ascribes the Sins and Vanities he complains of in Humane
Life, that they were not so well convinced, and did not so well consider their
own Excellency and Immortality. And this brings me to the last Proposition I
am to speak to, Namely that

The Observation and considering of this Difference between our Spirits and
those of the Beasts would be an Excellent Means for the mortifying and amending
the Miscarriages and Vanities of Humane Life. Who knows, etc. The reason of
them he supposes is their not being sufficiently possessed and affected with
this.

When Saint Paul reasoned of Judgment to come it made Licentious Felix tremble.
We, Italian-like that ring the Bells to drown the Noise of thunder, expel out
of our Minds such severe and startling thoughts, with the loud Iustruments of
this Worlds Business and Enjoyments, did we not, it must needs be so with us
too: It is the not meditating upon our future State that makes us behave our
selves as we do, a conceit that they may dye like Beasts that hardneth Men to
live so.

The most Notorious Miscarriages of Men Solomon in this Book has ranked under
these three Heads, Voluptuousness, Earthly mindedness, and Profaneness.


These are the unhappy Mothers of all the other either Sins or Follies he
makes remarques on. Now the firm belief and Solemn Consideration of this great
Article, he more than once remembers us would be a Cure for all of them.

First for Voluptuousness,

A receipt for this ought not a little to be prized, if it were but for the
rifeness of the Distemper which is so very catching. Indeed none so apt to be
infected with it as those in great and Prosperous Circumstances; their
Temptations are extraordinary, and though sometimes their understandings be so
too, yet they are violently born down by them: It appears by his own Pen here
Chap. 2. so it fared with Solomon himself for some Years, notwithstanding all
his Knowledge and Accomplishments: but though these chiefly, it is not these
only that are ensnared by her: She has Idolatries of all sorts, and not only
they that wear soft Clothing, but they that are scarce able to cover their
Nakedness, devote themselves to her.

Now if with such our Inclinations there should meet this sad Delusion, that
there is no Life but this, what hopes would there be of amending or reclaiming
Men? When once they have imbibed this Opiat Principle, there will be no
awakening them; then they will reckon it not their failing but their Philosophy
to indulge themselves. Accordingly this sort of People used among the Ancients
to place a Scull upon the Table at their Feasts, not to correct but provoke
their Extravagancies, to keep them Sober but to make them Madder; that seeing
they must shortly be such as that, they should live as fast as they could, and
be diligent to get their fill of Sensuallity.

But with what Horror does he that is convinced of his existence beyond the
Grave look upon such Resolutions? what Stomach can he have to such dangerous
Dainties, that looks forward upon the everlasting Consequences? It was
wittily said of the Poet in Atheneus, If the Headache did but come first, Men
would not be drunk: And St. Austin descanting upon that desperate Passage of
them in the Prophet Isaiah 22. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
die. Certainly (says he) these men were distracted as well as debauched, that
could conclude thus: Had they been themselves it would rather have been, Let us
fast and pray, let us repent and redeem our time, for to morrow we shall die.
This is sound and proper arguing, such as Conscience can make no Reply to; and
therefore no more is said to the wild Extravagant, Chap. 11.9. but only this,
Know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment. It is
supposed such a Rational Creature as Man, when he comes to think seriously
upon this, will be wiser than to walk in the ways of his own Heart, and the
Light of his own Eyes.

That is a First thing insisted on, that a due Consideration of the Nature of
our Spirits would prevent the Sins of Voluptuousness.

A Second is Earthly-mindedness. This he speaks of in the fourth, and again
Chap. 6. as another Reigning Vanity: The former is a Sin against our selves;
this against our Neighbors; being the Cause of all that Oppression, Cousenage,
Uncharitableness, Envying, Ambition, Contention that the World is pestered and
disturbed with. Whence come all these unseemly and mischievous Doings, but from
not considering, that this is but our Passage to the place we must dwell for
ever in; and that according to our Behavior in the way here, will be our
Entertainment at our Journeys End? Were this well imprinted on us, as much need
as we have of these things, surely we could never think we have so much, as for
the while, the uncertain little while we can enjoy them, to do that in pursuit
of them, that will make us either blush or tremble, be either ashamed or afraid
when we are to leave them. When Scipio in Tully is relating the Dream of his
Ascension among the Stars, he says, as he looked down from thence upon the
Earth, the whole looked like so dull and inconsiderable a Spot, that he was
abashed and out of Countenance, to think of the Meanness of Men, in making such
a Stir and Bustle for any of the Scraps and Pieces of it. Indeed, he that goes
up into the Mount, and looks upon the things above, the Transcendent Glories
that we are designed for must needs have the same Thoughts; the things of this
World cannot but from thence look very small and little to him. The Apostle
speaking of them that died in Faith, in the Faith of these Great Articles,
Hebr. 11. gives them this Character, that they looked upon themselves as
Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth: No more set their Hearts upon that, than
the Traveller on the Inn he only lodges in for a Night, and on the morrow must
be gone from; think of it for their present Convenience, but by no means dote
of it as their Standing Happiness. This is the Natural Result and Consequence
of such Persuasions and Meditations: And that is a Second sort of Evils the
Consideration of the Nature of our Spirits would prevent, those of
Earthly-mindedness.

The Third is Profaneness, which is mentioned in this, and again treated on
more largely Chap. 9. as under the First Head are comprehended the Sins against
our selves; under the Second those against our Neighbor; so under this, those
more directly and immediately against God: Atheism, Infidelity, Blasphemy, and
those foolish, as much as hurtful Sins, that bring as great Reproach as Guilt
upon them they are found with Plutarch says of Sylla, that he was much more
exasperated against the Athenians for what they said against him, than what
they did: The one he looked upon as more excusable, being in their own Defense;
but the other he would make no Construction of, but that it was merely
spiteful. Something like it may be said in this case what Men do against the
Honor of God, admits comparatively of some Pity and Extenuation from our
Frailties and strong Temptations: This is Humane Nature; but to speak against
it, and teach Men so to do, where no Sensitive Appetite is gratified, this is
such a Platonic Love of Wickedness, as looks merely malicious and Diabolical.

Now these sorts of Sins which this Age has so abounded in, it is a more
proper Remedy for than any. It is an excellent Medicine for any Sin, to
mitigate (...) makes (...). For however (...) upon the Point of this Sword,
(...) they see nothing; and with Balaam, look upon it as the Restiness or
Cowardice of the Ass, to make any Bo^^ing at it; when once with his their Eyes
are opened, they acknowledge their Error, and are astonished at the Danger. Who
will dispute against Providence that owneth a Future State? Who droll upon the
Scriptures that thinks in them he has Eternal Life? Who make a Mock at Sin,
that believes there is a Worm that dies not? Who disobey them that rule over
them in the Lord, that considers they watch for their Souls? Such an
effectual Stop would it give to the Sins of Men of all Kinds, to be sensible of
this Important Truth, That the Spirit of Man goes upward, though the Spirit of
the Beast goes downward to the Earth.

(...) leave to exp^^^ (...) I must not suppo^^ (...) to, to be of them that
(...) Complaint, do not you (...) Spirit of Man goes upward (...) you do
acknowledge it; an^ (...) that (miserable Riddles of (...) we are!) How very
little is there of any of these Fruits? This Man, says he makes no doubt of
it, and yet lives in Rioting and Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness,
and many other Vices, of which it is expressly said, that they who do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Another pretends he does believe
it, and yet is covetous and proud, unjust and hard hearted, and makes no
better use of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, than those uncharitable ones that
were to depart accursed into Everlasting Burnings. A Third professes he is
convinced of it; but yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, and works not
while the Day is, though the Night is coming, when no man can work.

And is this our Kindness to our better Part? What Augustus is said to have
replied, when told how Herod had killed all the Males from two years old and
under, and among the rest his own; That it was better being his Hog than his
Son, This precious Heavenly Guest within us may too, wish it had been any thing
but what it is. How do we give it cause to lament its own Dignity, and be
troubled at its Prerogative! to be frighted to think it has no End, and repine
that it was not a Lamb or Worm! How may it sigh with Sadness, Oh that I had
been thy Body! then thou would have fed and clothed me. Oh that I had been
thy Friend! then thou would have been faithful and true to me. Oh that I had
been thy Child! then thou would have laid up and provided for me. Now Wretch
that I am, I can have no Regard; but am daily exposed to Everlasting Hazards
for Humors, Toys and Follies!

To stop all such too just Reproaches for the time to come, let us, in this
Solemn Season, for the judging of our selves, take their Case into better
Consideration. Use them so while they are in the Body, as we shall wish we had
done when they are going forth of it. Let us not for the sake of any thing that
is Temporal, make a Forfeiture of that which is Eternal: Nor to please that
part of us which goes downward to the Earth, lose that which goes upward.

FINIS.
Sermons Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DR. Hick's Sermon at the Act at Oxford. 40 -- before the Lord Mayor Peculium
Dei. 40 -- Notion of Persecution. 40 -- before the L. Mayor Jan. 30. at Bow
Church, 1682. -- Sermon of Temptations before the Lord Mayor. 40 -- Moral
Shechinah, or a Discourse of God's Glory, in a Sermon at the Yorkshire Feast,
Jan. 11. 1682.
Dr Sharpe's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 40 -- at the Spittle and Yorkshire
Feast. 40 -- before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. -- at the Election of
the Lord Mayor. 1680. 40
Dr. Smith's two Assize Sermons. 80 -- two Sermons on the 3d of May and 29th of
May. 40 -- one Lent Sermon. 40
Dr. Thorpe's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 40 Dr. Woodrof his Sermon before
the Lord Mayor. 40 Mr. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 40 Mr. Lynford's
Sermons. 40 Mr. Bryan Turner's Sermon Testimonium Jesu. 40 Mr. John Turner's
Sermon of Transubstantiation. 40 Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the King at Windsor.
40 -- Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Febr. 5th. 1682.
Mr. Brown's Visitation Sermon. 40 Dr. Fowler's Sermon at the Assizes at
Gloucester. 40 Mr. Cutlove's 2 Assize Sermons at St. Edmund-Bury. 40 Mr.
Inett's Sermon at the Assizes at Warwick. 40 Mr. Edward Sermon's Sermon before
the Lord Mayor. 40 Mr. Resbury's Sermon before the Charter House Scholars. 40
-- Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Allen Broderick.
Mr. Needham's 6 Sermons at Cambridge. 80 Mr. Thomas Smith's Sermon concerning
the Doctrine, Unity, and Profession of the Christian Faith. Preached before the
University of Oxford, with an Appendix concerning the Apostles Creed. 1682. Dr.
John More's Sermon ^ore the Lord Mayor. 40 Dr. Callamy's Sermon preached before
the Lord Mayor at Bow Church, on the 29th of May. 1682. Prosecution, no
Persecution: Or the Difference between suffering for Disobedience and Faction,
in a Sermon preached at St. Edmund-Bury in Suffolk, on the 22d. of March, 1681.
by Nath. Bisbie. D.D. Dr. Bisbie's Modern Pharisees, a Sermon, on the 23d. of
Matthew. 15th. ver. showing the Principles of the present Jesuits and Puritans,
to be of the same evil Influence. 40 Mr. Payne's Sermon preached June 29. 1682.
at the Brentwood Scholars Feast. 40 Mr. Wraye's Sermon, The Rebellious City
destroyed, being an Anniuersary Sermon in Memory of the Dreadful Fire of
London, Preached in St. Olave Hartstreet. Sept. 2d. 1682. Mr. Wraye's Sermon on
the fifth of November, 1682. Mr. Evan's Sermon before the Lord Mayor,
Moderation stated, October. 22d. 1682. Mr. Kidder's Sermon before the Lord Mayor,
July 16. 2682. Mr. Richardson's Sermon before the Lord Mayor Septem. 17. 1682.
Mr. Milbourn's Sermon, The Original of Rebellion: Or the Ends of Separation,
preached on the 30th of January in the Parish Church of Great Yearmouth. Mr.
Gipps's three Sermons Preached in Lent and Summer Assizeslast, at Lancaster,
and one on the Lord's Day in the late Guild of Preston. Mr. Gaskarths Sermon,
preached upon the first occasion after the Death of his Grace John Duke of
Lauderdale. 40 Mr. Young's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Febr. 4th. 1682. Dr.
Butler's Sermon before the King at Windsor.

