EDINBURGH, The seventh of April, 1677.
IT is ordered by the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
that none shall Re-print, or Import into this Kingdom, this Book, Entitled,
The Laws and Customs of Scotland, in Matters Criminal; By Sir George Mackenzie
of Rose-haugh, for the space of Nineteen years after the Date hereof, under the
pain of Confiscation of the same to Thomas Brown, George Swintoun, and James
Glen, Printers hereof, and further punishment, as the Council shall think fit
to inflict upon them. Extracted be me

Thomas Hay.

THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF SCOTLAND, In Matters CRIMINAL. Wherein is to be seen
how the Civil Law, and the Laws and Customs of other Nations do agree with, and
supply ours. By Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE of Rose-haugh.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by James Glen, Anno Domini, MDCLXXVIII.

TO HIS GRACE JOHN Duke of LAUDERDALE, Marquess of March, Earl of Lauderdail,
and Guildford, Viscount Maitland, Lord Thirlestane, Musselburgh, Boltoun, and
Petersham: President of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council of
SCOTLAND, Sole Secretary of State for the said Kingdom; Gentleman of His
MAJESTY'S Bedchamber: and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
May it please Your Grace,
THough the number, and wit of such as use to write Dedications, may seem to
have exhausted all that can be said upon such occasions: yet I have a new way
of address left me, which is, to write nothing of you, but what is true, by the
confession of your enemies, who admire more the greatness of your Parts, than
of either your Interest, or Success: And how you have made so great a turn in
this Kingdom, without either Blood or Forfeiture, showing neither revenge, as
to what is past, nor fear as to what is to come; continuing no longer your
unkindness to any man, than you think he continues his opposition to his Prince.

All have at sometime confessed, that you have been the Ornament, as well as
Defense of your Native Country, to whom every Scottish-man is almost as dear,
as every man is to his own Relations. And I am sure that your enemies will find
it easier to put you from your Office, then to fill it; and none of them can
wish you to be removed, without being himself a loser by it. Nor can I be so
unjust, even to such as opposed you, as not to acknowledge that I have heard
them talk of you so advantagiously (when design and interest oblidged them to
dissemble) as almost convinced me, that the most of them opposed you only in
public, rather from the glory of having so great an Adversary, than from the
justice of the undertaking. And your Country has in their late Confluences,
(where they crowded in mighty numbers, and with a remarkable joy to meet you,
when a private man) showed greater respect to your naked merit, then to the
highest Characters by which others were marked out for publict honor.

Having writ this Book to inform my Contrymen, and to illuminat our Law, I
could not present it more justly to any, than to your Grace, who has derived
your Blood from a Noble Family, which has been still eminent in our Courts of
Justice, since we had any; and who are your self, the greatest Statesman in
Europe, who is a Scholar; and the greatest Scholar, who is a Statesman: For
to hear you talk of Books, one would think you had bestowed no time in studying
men; and yet to observe your wise conduct in affairs, one might be induced to
believe, that you had no time to study Books. You are the chief man who does
nobly raise the study of the Civil Law, to a happy usefulness, in the greater
and general Affairs of Europe, and who spends the one half of the day in
studying what is just, and the other half in practicing what is so: All which
may be easily believed, from me who am as great an instance of your generosity,
as an admirer of it. Especially since you have left me nothing to wish, so that
what I say, needs not flow from flattery, and so must be presumed to flow from
conviction and gratitude in,

Your Graces most faithful, and most humble Servant, George Mackenzie.

THE DESIGN.
THe great concerns of men, are their Lives, Fortunes, and Reputation, and
these three suffering at once in Crimes, it is the great interest of mankind,
to know how to evite such accusations, and how to defend themselves, when
accused: And yet none of our Lawyers have been so kind to their Country, as to
write one Sheet upon this pleasant and advantageous Subject, which made it a
task both necessary and difficult to me.

In prosecuting this design, I was forced to revise and abreviat those many and
great Volums which make up our Criminal Registers, and having added to them
these Observations I have my self made, during my twenty years attendance upon
that Court, either as Judge, or Advocat; I collationed all with our Statutory
Law, the Civil Law, and the Customs of other Countries, and the opinions of the
Doctors: And, as I may without vanity say, that few valuable Authors treat of
Crimes, whom I have not read; So there is nothing here which is not warranted
by Law, or Decisions, or in which, when I doubted, I did not confer seriously
with the learned Lawyers of this Age; and yet I doubt not but in some
things, others may differ from me, as the best Writers do amongst themselves:
And having only designed to establish solidly the Principles of the Criminal
Law, I wanted room for treating learnedly each particular case, or even for
hinting at all such cases as may be necessary; And without wearying my Readers
with Citations, (which was very easy) I have furnished the Book with as much
reason as is ordinarily to be found in Legal Treatises.

The reason why I have so often cited the Basilicks, Theophil. and the Greek
Scholiasts, was not only because none before me have used them in Criminal
Treatises, but because I conclude them the best Interpreters of Justinians
Text: For these Books having been Writ in the same Age, and place, and some of
them by those who compiled the Latin Text, they must understand it best of all
others, of which I have given many instances in this Book, and shall here add
one, there forgot, which is, that the Latin Interpreters doubt much what is
meant by remittendum in the constitution, Si quis Imperatori male dixerit, some
interpreting it pardoned, some to be sent back to the Emperor: But the
Basilicks render it (...), which signifies only ignoscendum.

I cannot but admire much the wisdom of God, who gives not only inclination,
but pleasure to such as toil for the good of others; for I am sure few men
would have from any weaker impulse bestowed so much time, and so many thoughts
upon an employment, which without bringing gain, will certainly bring envy and
censure: For I find it is the genius of this Age to admire such as make the
public good bend to their designs, and to hate such as design to inform them,
as if he were more my friend who would set my Family by the ears, than he who
instructed my Children and Servants in necessary duties.

There are but too many who endeavor now to make all whom they hate, pass for
such as love Arbitrary Government; but as in many passages of my former life, I
have preferred my Countries interest to my own, so in this Book I endeavor to
oppose Arbitrariness, where it is most dreadful, and that is, in matters
Criminal, in which Life and Fortune are equally exposed; for he who
disinterestedly declares his own opinion, before private cases occurr, (wherein
interest or inclination may bias him) does in so much praeclude himself, and
others too (as far as his authority can reach) from the power of being
Arbitrary; and let others say what they please, I will stand more in awe of my
conscience then of my enemies, and govern my self more by my own reason, then
by the giddie multitude. I hope I need not be jealous that our publict
differences will make any unkind to this Book, which is published for their
service, and which is now more accurate, than when it at first pleased them in
Sheets. I did Print it, not only to correct the many false Copies which were
abroad, but to divert me from refining too much upon our publict debates; and I
wish the reading it may have the same effect upon others. And that all of us
would turn things to their true light, and consider without passion how happy
we are, who live under a Prince of our own Religion and Blood, whose clemency
is as extraordinary as his restitution, who governs us by our own Laws, and
country men; and distribute, all his own revenue amongst us: That we enjoy by
his prudence a profound Peace, whilst others bleed or starve in lasting Wars.
That all the Commerce of Europe is gathered in amongst us; that we are free
from those sucking Taxes under which they groan; and are but lately rescued
from a Rebellion, in which, after we had emptied our Veins and Purses for
Religion and Liberty, we became Atheists and Slaves.

THE INDEX.
PART I.
1. OF Crimes in general, and by what Law they are judged in Scotland. 21. The
division of Crimes. 25. Blasphemy. 29. Heresy. 34. Simony, Baratry. 37.
Treason: Laesae Majestas. 64. Sedition. 67. Poison. 72. De Incendiariis, or,
Fire-raisers. 80. Witchcraft. 109. Murder. 139. Of Duels. 148. Self-murder.
152. Paricide. 159. Incest, Sodomy, Bestiality. 163. Rapes, or Ravishing. 169.
Adultery. 185. Bigamie. 190. Theft. 211. Theft-boot and Receipt. 218.
Hame-sucken. 223. Breaking of Prison. 230. De Dardanatiis, or, Fore-stallers.
236. Usury. 248. The Bribing, Partiality, and Negligence of Judges. 255.
Deforcement. 268. Falsehood. 286. Stellionatus. 290. Perjury. 303. Of injuries
personal and real, and of infamous Libels. 309. Poynding of Oxen in time of
Laboring. 314. Bearing of unlawful Weapons. 317. Beggars and Vagabonds. 319.
Robbery, Oppression, vis publica and privata. 331. Art and Part, Open and
Consilio. 347. Some Crimes punished amongst the Romans, which are not directly
in use with us.
PART II.
351. OF Jurisdiction in general. 355. Of the Judge competent, de foro
competenti. 364. Jurisdiction of the Parliament in Crimes. 367. Jurisdiction of
the High Constable in Criminals. 372. The Jurisdiction competent to the High
Chamberlain, and Magistrates of Burghs Royal. 374. The Jurisdiction of His
Majesty's Privy Council in Criminals. 385. Of the Exchequers Jurisdiction in
Criminals. 386. The Jurisdiction of the Lords of Session in Criminals. 393. The
Admirals Jurisdiction in Criminals. 397. The Jurisdiction of the Commissars in
Criminals. 401. The Jurisdiction of Regalitis in Criminals. 411. The
Jurisdiction of Sheriffs in Criminals. 417. The Criminal Jurisdiction of
Barrons. 420. Of Justices of Peace. 423. The Jurisdiction of the Justices, and
of the several Employments and Officers of that Court. 429. The Jurisdiction of
the Justices over Soldiers, and of Military Crimes. 434. Advocations of
Criminal Causes. 442. Of Inquisition. 446. Of Accusations, and Accusers. 456.
Of Advocats and Procurators. 462. Of Libells, and the forms of Process thereto
relating. 476. Of Exculpation, and the other privileges competent to the
Defender. 488. Of Assizes. 511. Of Probation by Confession. 522. Probation by
Oath, by Writ, and by Presumptions. 527. Probation by Witnesses. 543. Of
Torture. 546. Of Remissions. 551. Of Prescription in Crimes. 556. Of
Punishments, de poenis. 567. Of Criminal Sentences, and their Executions.
PART I.
TITLE I. Of Crimes in general, And by what Law they are judged in Scotland.
1 How Crimes differ from Delicts and Malefices. 2 In what consists the nature
and essence of a Crime. 3 By what Laws Crimes are punished in Scotland. 4 How
far dole or design is necessar to the committing Crimes, and how tendencies and
insinuations are punished. 5 Whether Minors can commit Crimes. 6 Whether such as
sleep can commit Crimes. 7 Whether such as are drunk are punishable for Crimes.
8 Whether furious persons are punishable. 9 Whether an university or collective
body be punishable.
GOD Almighty having created this Lower World to be equally an instance of his
power, and of his goodness, did furnish it with great variety of excellent, and
wonderful productions: but lest these should be defaced at pleasure by man, who
having ruined himself, does little value, and is much inclined to ruin every
thing besides; therefore God did not only imprint upon his soul some (...),
common principles whereby he is led to love order, but did likewise fence the
aeconomy and government he had placed in the world with rewards and
punishments, And it was just, that as these who did virtuously, were to be
rewarded, so these who were vicious should be punished, which punishments are
the subject matter of the Criminal Law, and of this Treatise.

I. Transgression, or peccatum, is by Modestinus l. obligamur, ff. de. obl. and
Act. made the root of all enormities, and is divided delicta into quasi
delicta, and crimina. Quasi delicta, are such faults and transgressions as are
not so heinous that they deserve to be punished criminally; such as small ryots,
delicta, are such as deserve a more severe punishment, but yet because they
tend not to wrong the Commonwealth, and publict security immediately,
therefore do not deserve to be punished by any express Law as Crimes. Crimes are
these injuries done to the Commonwealth which are so immediate and heinous, as
that they are punished by express Law. This distinction is used by Matheus: but
Farinacius makes delictam the genus, and divides it, in crimen, and maleficium,
with us this subtilty is not observed, for the word Crime, comprehends both
Crimes, and Delicts. The Summonds raised for accusing in both, are called
Criminal Letters, and the Court in which both are judged, the Criminal Court.
Neither use we the word malefice in any Crime, but in witchcraft, in which it
signifies that prejudice, and damnage, which arises from the unlawful means
used by Sorcerers.

II. In what consists the nature of a Crime may be doubted, and l. 1. Reg. Maj.
c. i. A civil Action is defyned to be that which concerns Lands or Goods; And a
Criminal Action that which concerns Life or Limb. But Skeen in his observations
upon that place, does confess all that to be a Crime which concerns the public
good, whether a corporal punishment, or pecuniary mulct be craved: but this is
also too general, especially since the Law divides Crimes in public and private
Crimes: and therefore I offer these considerations, 1. All transgressions of
Law are not Criminal, v g. to make a disposition in defraud of Creditors, is
not criminal, though it be prohibited. 2. That is not only to be accounted a
Crime which bears expressly to be punishable by corporal punishment, or pecunial
mulcts: for in my Lord Renton's case against Hoom, it was found, that poynding
of Oxen in time of laboring was Criminal, though it be not appointed by the
Act whereby it is prohibited, to be punished by a definit punishment. Nor is it
expressed to be a Crime, likeas, single Adultery, is punishable, albeit it be not
declared to be a Crime by any express Law with us. 3. That cannot only be
thought a Crime, which is committed against the Law of Nature, for poynding of
Oxen is no more such, than making fraudulent dispositions.

III. The true nature then of a Crime may be comprehended, under these general
conclusions, First, that is a Crime, which is declared such by an express
Statute, as Murder, Treason; and it were to be wished, that nothing were a Crime
which is not declared to be so, by a Statute; for this would make Subjects
inexcuseable, and prevent the arbitrariness of Judges. And I find by the
general consent of Criminalists, nothing is to be accounted a Crime or punished
criminally; but what is forbid by the Law, under an express pain or punishment;
for they observe, that as there can be no punishment inflicted, but where a
delict is committed: so there can be no delict but where the Law has appointed
a punishment, Cabal Cas. 1. And this is clear, l. at si quis. divus ff. de
Religios. and sumpt. fun. l. haeres ff. de usufr. leg. Surd. consil. 301. And
yet Lawyers assert that such as disobey, and transgress any prohibiting Law,
may be punished arbitrarly, as contemners of the Law, sutably to the degree of
their contempt, though they cannot be punished Criminally as guilty of a Crime,
Cabal ibid. 2. The transgressing any Municipal Law, which prohibits that which
either the Law of God, or the Civil Law, punishes criminally, by corporal
punishment, or a pecuniary mulct, is a Crime, and thus the poynding Oxen, in
time of laboring was declared a Crime in the former decision, because though
it was prohibited by an express Statute, which did bear no punishment; yet it
ought to have been punished according to the Civil Law, whereby it is declared
to be a Crime. 3. That is a Crime whereby the publict peace is immediately
disquieted. Or whereby the Law of Nature is violated; Thus Incests, and Rapts,
were accounted Crimes with us, before they were declared to be such by an
express Law. And Bestiality, and Sodomy, are Crimes; though yet we have no
Statute against them. 4. That is a Crime, which long custom has punished, by
corporal punishment, or by a pecuniary mulct, in the Justice Court, as single
and not manifest Adultery.

From all which, it appears that the Law of God is the first fountain of our
Criminal Law; And thus the lybel in single Adultery is only founded upon the
Law of God. And in usury we lybel upon the Municipal Law, and the Law of God
jointly. 2. Our Statutes, or Acts of Parliament, are our proper Law; but even
these may run in desuetude, so far that they cannot be the foundation of a
criminal pursuit, for former transgressions, since the people who know not Law,
so much by reading the Books of Statutes, as by seeing the daily practice of
the Country, should not be ensnared by pursuits; upon old buried Laws; which
scarce Lawyers study or know. Nor can the people be thought to have contemned,
what they cannot be presumed to have known. And our Judicators* by ordaining
such ancient Laws to be renewed by proclamations, do confess, that before these
proclamations; these Laws were not binding: for else the renewing them had been
unnecessar, and if it were otherwise, we have so many paenal Statutes now in
desuetude, that the Leidges would be certainly ruined by them. And thus
Colonel Borthwick having pursued the Maltmen Criminally for contraveening the
92. Act. 6. Parliament; Ia. 4. The Council upon a supplication representing
their grounds, sisted that pursuit. But desuetude must be universal, ancient,
and notorious, else the want of any of these three qualifications, will alter
this conclusion. And yet I think that desuetude cannot in futurum abrogate a
Crime, and enervate the Law altogether, since the Parliament only, can rescind
their own Laws: nor should the people, nay nor our Judges; be made legislators,
consuetudinis ususque longavi non vilis est auctoritas verum non usque adeo sui
valitura momento ut aut rationem vincat aut legem. l. 2. C. quae sit long.
Consuet. which should rather hold in Crimes, then in any other subject, because
it seems absurd, that it should be lawful to the people, to loose themselves
from the Laws made against themselves; and to gain impunity by frequent
repetition of their faults: or to be able to free themselves from punishment,
by contemning these Laws by which they are inflicted.

The decisions of our Criminal Court, as of all our other, do bind the same or
succeeding Judges, rather out of decency, then necessity; for nothing ties
Judges but Laws, and none can make Laws, but the Parliament, which is very
suitable to l. Nemo C. de sent. and inter. where Justinian does expressly
command ne ullorum judicum sententiae pro jure reputentur. The reason whereof
given in that Law, is quod non exemplis, sed legibus est judicandum, and the
other reason L. ult. C. de legibus quia imperator est solus legum conditor. And
if we consider how much circumstances influence particular cases, how Judges
may fail where parties are named, and that decisions pass necessarily upon less
premeditation then is necessary to Laws; it will be found reasonable, not to
trust decisions too much. Likeas our Judges, do make express Acts of Sederunt,
as we call them, when they resolve to regulat future cases; which were
unnecessar if all decisions did of themselves bind. Nor does the decisions of
the very Parliament of Paris, bind even the pronounters themselves for the
future, as Conan observes, lib. 1. c. 15. And so frail, and fallible a thing,
are men's judgments; especially where votes are numbered, and not weighed: or
where experience may discover the errors, which the sharpest reason could not
foresee; that therefore Judges should no more be tied from altering their
decisions, then Philosophers to continue in the errors of their Youth. But yet
when the arguments pro and contra weigh equally, and reason seems puzzled where
to incline, the authority even of our former decisions, should cast the
balance, especially where the same reason then urged, was there pressed; and
in the interpretation of Laws (of which decisions are the best interpreters) if
a whole tract of decisions can be produced, it would infallibly bind, wherein
Craig diag. de jure quo utimur agrees with Callistrotus, l. 38. de. leg. in
ambiguitatibus quae ex legibus profisciscuntur consuetudinem, aut rerum
perpetuo judicatarum auctoritatem vim legis obtinere. Where these decisions
have proceeded upon a debate; by which the reason of Judges is much ripened,
and the future inconveniences fully considered: for as Pomponius well observes,
l. 2.. his legibus ff. de origin juris, his legibus latis caepit ut
naturaliter evenire solet, ut interpretatio desideraret prudentium authoritate
necessariam esse disputationem fori. And Durie in the case of Hoom of
Cowdoun-knowes, shows us how the L. of Session thought it not derogatory from
their honor, to retreat a sentence after debate, which they had pronounced,
when no Advocats were compearing.

We follow the Civil Law in judging Crimes, as is clear by several Acts of
Parliament, wherein the Civil Law is called the common Law. And Robert Leslies
Heirs are by the 69. Act. Par. 6. Ia. 5. ordained to be forefaulted for the
Crime of Treason, committed by the father according to the Civil Law. And
forefaultor in absence was allowed by the Lords of Session, in Anno 1669.
because that was conform to the Civil Law; and falsehood is ordained to be
punished, according to the Civil and Canon Law, Act 22. Par. 5. Q. M. And that
the Civil Law is our rule, where our own Statutes and customs are silent, or
deficient, is clear from our own Lawyers, as Skeen Annot. ad. l. 1. R. M. c. 7.
ver. 2. And by Craig l. 1. diog. 2. As also from our own Historians, Lesly. l.
1. cap. leg. Scotor. Boet. l. 5. hist: Camer. de Scot. Doctr. l. 2. cap. 4. And
the same is recorded of us, by the Historians, and Lawyers of other Nations, as
Forcat lib. 1. hist. Angl. Petr. diamitis Geograph. Europ. tit. D. Escosse and
Duck de auth. jur. civ. lib. 2. cap. 10. and though the Romans had some
customs, or forms, peculiar to the genious of their own Nation: Yet their Laws,
in Criminal cases, are of universal use, for Crimes are the same almost every
where, as Boet. well observes, leges Romanas a Iustiniano collectas tanta
ratione and sermonis venustate esse, ut nulla sit natio tam fera vel ab
humanitate abhorrens; quae eas non fuerit admirata. And K. Ia. 5. was so fond
of the Civil Law, as Boet. observes, lib. 17. that he made an Act, ordaining,
that no man should succeed to a great Estate, in Scotland, who did not
understand the Civil Law, and erected two professions of it, one at Saint
Andrews, and another at Aberdeen. And when James the 2. did by the 48 act of
his 3. Parliament ordain that his Subjects should be governed by no foreign
Laws, he designed not to debar the respect due to the Roman Laws; but to
obviat the vain pretenses of the Pope, whose canons and concessions were
obt^uded upon the people as Laws by the Church men of these times.

The 4th branch of our Criminal Law are the Books of Reg. Maj: which are in
criminalibus looked upon as authentic. Thus the Thief must be punished before
the recepter, and assysers must be pares curiae, etc. For which, and many other
maxims, there is no warrant besides what is contained in these Books of Reg:
Majest: But why should this be doubted, seeing they are cited as such, Act 47.
Parl. 6. Ia. 3. where it is said, that wilful and ignorant Assysers shall be
punished after the form of the Kings Law, in the first Book of the Majesty, and
by the 98. act. 14. p. l. 3. transgressions of that act are to be punished
conform to the Kings Laws, and of Regiam Majestatem, likeas by the 54. P. 3. I.
1. a Comittee of Parliament is ordained to meet and examine the Book of the
Law, that is to say, Regiam Majestatem, and Quoniam atta chiamenta, which is
repeated, 115. Act. 14. P. I. 3. And albeit they contain many things which are
not in use with us; yet they have been in use, and this objection would
conclude, the Acts of Parliament not to be our Law. It is then my opinion, that
K. Ia. the 1. has brought down some of these collections from England with
him. Nor find I these books cited before this time.

It is doubted whether the Secret Council can by any Act, or Proclamation,
either introduce a crime, which can infer tinsel of life, or escheat; for the
Parliament can only dispose upon our lives, and fortunes. And it being the
representative of the Nation, every man is in Law, said to have consented, to
what the Parliament does; I find Craig to have been of opinion that no Act of
Secret Council can infer a Crime, page 38. Nor can the Council, by their Acts,
warrant any to do what would be otherwise a Crime: for ejus est nolle, cujus
est velle. And none can take away a crime, but such as can introduce a crime,
and therefore Mr. Archb: Beath, being pursued, for killing some men, he
alleged, that these men, were bringing Meal from Ireland, And that by Act of
Council, it was lawful to sink or kill such as contraveened the Act. To which
his Majesty's Advocat did reply, that the Acts of Secret Council, could not
warrant the killing of a free Leidge, and the committing of murder: which reply
was found relevant. But since the Council are to secure the peace, and that
many accidents may emerge wherein the public peace cannot be preserved without
this power, it were hard to limit them too much.

IV. Whether dolus or a wicked design, be requisite in all crimes; is largely
treated of, by the Doctors, and is most fully debated, in the process of
Ochiltrie, Balmerino, and the Marquess of Argyle. And by the texts, placuit
just. de furt. l. 3. ff. De injur. l. pen. ff. ad. Leg. jul. de Adult. It
seems, that the wickedness of the design, makes only an action criminal; but
in my judgment, this inquiry may be resolved, in these conclusions, 1. That
seeing man can only offend in what is voluntar to him, it must follow, that the
will is the only fountain of wickedness. And consequently, it was at first the
design of Lawgivers, only to punish such Acts as were designedly malicious.
2. Because design is a private, and concealed act of the mind, which escapes
the severest probation. Therefore in some cases, this dolus is allowed by Law,
to be inferred from conjectures, and presumptions, where the act is such, as of
its own nature, may be good or evil, accordingly as it is circumstantiat: as in
poison, the giving whereof may be occasioned by ignorance, mistake, or malice,
3. Some acts are so irregular, of their own nature, that the Law requires only
that the act be proved, without proving the dole, or wicked design, as in
Sodomy, Adultery, etc. 4. Some acts, though they be not wicked of their own
nature, yet because the design cannot still be proved, therefore the
contraveening the Law is equivalent to design, and dolus presumitur contra
versantem in illicito, as the conversing with a woman after the Church has
forbid the same, and therefore the Doctors divide dolum in verum, and
presumtivum. 5. Where the Law has expressly required, dole, and defigne there,
it must be expressly libelled and proved, as in the Act 37. Par. 2. K. Ia. 2.
where it is statuted, that if any man wilfully recept rebels, he shall be
forefaulted; but albeit lata culpa, be equivalent, to dolus, in lesser Crimes,
yet the Doctors conclude, that where the crime may infer death, or mutilation
(loss of life, or limb, as we speak) there the grossest negligence, or lata
culpa, is not equivalent to dolus. Clar. Quest. 84, Number. 7. It is likewise much
debated, whether an endeavor, to commit a crime, be a crime, albeit the
efffect follow not. And albeit, it be a rule, in the Civil Law, that in
maleficiis, voluntas Spectatur, non exitus, l. 1.. divus ff. ad leg. Corn. de
sicar, yet is generally concluded by the practicians of all Nations, that
simplex conatus, or endeavor, is not now punishable by death: Clar. Quest. 91.
Gothofr.. Conatus. But for clearing this, accorcording to the principles of
reason, I shall form these conclusions, first, That all endeavor, is an
offense against the Commonwealth: though nothing follow thereupon: albeit
sometimes the punishment be connived at, or mitigated, according to the several
degrees of malice, but that it is in it self criminal, appears from this, that
simple design is punishable in treason, and some other atrocious crimes;
because in these, especially in treason, it would be too late, to provide a
remedy, when the Crime is committed. 2. In less atrocious crimes, the design
is punished, if the comitter proceeded to act that which approached nearly to
the crime it self, Si diventum sit ad actum, maleficio proximum. But this is
not simplex conatus, but in effect is a lesser degree of the crime, to which it
approaches; as if a thief, have put ladders to the house, which he resolves to
rob; or if he mix poison, but the potion be spilt upon the ground by an
accident: And albet it be commonly received, that even in these cases, affectus
non est puniendus, sine effectu, by the same punishment, with the crime
designed: yet I would distinguish in this, betwixt an effect disappointed, by
an interveening accident; and that which is stopped, by the repentance of the
committer, for, where the design was only disappointed, I think the ordinar
punishment, should not be remitted, in cases ubi deventum est ad actum proximum
(...). Basil: de extraord: crim: l. 1. And therefore the court of Savoy, did
very justly condemn a thief, to be hanged, who had entered the house of one
Girard to steal and murder, but was deprehended before the theft was committed
Goth.. Conatus number: 16. For since the punishment is only remitted in conatu, or
endeavor, because of the favorable circumstance, that nothing followed
thereupon. So I think this may be counter-ballanced by the depravity of the
design, in many cases. As if one should design to kill a whole family, or burn
a whole town, and seeing men are punished, not merely for what is done, because
that cannot be helped, as lawyers affirm, but because, the committer of a
crime, may commit the like; Therefore I conclude that he who designed to commit
a crime, should be punished as if he had committed it; if he was only let by
accident, because the Commonwealth cannot be otherwise secure. And therefore it
was admired, why in July. 1670. Mr. Stanfields servant, was not punished with
death for endeavoring to burn her Masters house, albeit she was apprehended
before any prejudice was done: But I would here add, as a caution, that great
praemeditation, should be proved before Conatus be punished capitally; for that
shows the confirmed malice of the designer, and is aequivalent, as to him, to
success. 3. In mean crimes, where the effect followed not, upon the design,
but was hindered by repentance: I think little or no punishment should follow,
for, nihil tam natural, quam unum quodque eodem modo dissolvi, quo colligatum
est. The like should also hold, where the design was taken up in passion or
without premeditation, because there the committer, is not for the future, so
much to be feared: but this subject will be more fully cleared in the
particular subsequent titles; for in some crimes, Conatus or endeavor, is more
punishable then in others.

Whether what tends to a crime, though it be not arrived at the full guilt
requisite, to make it fall expressly under the statute, or Law, by which that
crime is punished, to which it approaches: has been oftentimes doubted. As for
instance, to misconstruct His Majesty's Government, and proceedings; or to
deprave His Laws, is expressly declared punishable by death, by the 10. Act. 10.
P. I. 6. Whether then may not papers, as tending to misconstruct His Majesty's
proceedings, and Government, or bearing insinuations, which may raise in the
people jealousy against the Government be punished by that Law? And that such
insinuations and tendencies are not punishable criminally, may be argued thus.
1. It is the interest of mankind to know expressly what they are to obey;
especially where such great certifications are annexed, as in Crimes. 2. The Law
having taken under its consideration this guilt, has punished the actual
misconstructing, or depraving, but has not declared such insinuations or
tendencies punishable, and in statutis, casus omissus habetur pro omisso. 1.
This would infallibly tend to render all Judges arbitrary, for tendencies, and
insinuations, are in effect the product of conjectur: and papers may seem
innocent, or criminal, according to the zeal, or humor, as well as malice of
the judger. Men being naturally prone to differ in such consequential
inferences, and too apt to make constructions in such, according to the favor,
or malice, they bear to the person, or cause. Are not some men apt to construct
that to tend to their dishonor, which was designed for their honor, and to
think every thing an innovation of Law, or privilege, which checks their
inclination and design? Whereas some Judges are so violent in their loyalty, as
to imagine the meanest mistakes do tend to an opposition against Authority. And
thus zeal, jealousy, malice, or interest, would become Judges, if tendencies
and insinuations were allowed to be Crimes. 4. Men are so silly, or may be in
such haste, or so confounded; and the best are subject to such mistakes, as
that no man should know when he were innocent. Simplicity might oftimes become
a Crime: and the fear of offending, might occasion offense. And how
uncomfortably would the people live, if they knew not how to be innocent?
Whereas on the other part, it may be represented, that there are some Crimes
which cannot be determined as to all degrees of guilt. Such as is the
misrepresenting the Government, which may be done so cautiously, and in such
various, and different ways, as cannot be specified in any Statute. 2. If the
misconstructing the Government be a great guilt, certainly, what tends to it
must be punishable to some proportion. 3. It is the interest of the
Commonwealth, that all disorders should be punished; and surely it is a great
prejudice to the Government, that such insinuations, or tendencies, should
escape unpunished. And as in the Civil Law, there are many Actions which have
no definit and distant names, but are comprehended under the general names of
actiones in factum; And that there are actiones utiles, arising from the reason
of the Statute, as well as directae, which arise from the words of the Law: So
in criminal, there are Actions arising from the parity of reason, or at least,
which inferring guilt in some degree, are sustained with us, tanquam crimina in
suo genere. 4. The doing what may tend to misconstruct, or raise jealousies, is
expressly declared punishable by the 60. Act 6. Par. Q. M. whereby it is
declared, that such as sow evil reports, tending through raising such rumors, to
stir the hearts of the people to sedition. And by the 9. Act 20. Par. I. 6. It
is declared, that by the former Laws, every thing was declared punishable,
which tends to sedition, and dissension amongst the people. And if endeavors
be punishable, much more ought tendencies: since tendencies are express deeds.
Nor has the Judge more latitude, nor is he more arbitrary here, then he, and
the inquest both are, in judging what is art and part, for that is determined
by no Law: and because it could not be determined, therefore a lybel founded
upon art and part in general, was ordained to be sustained as relevant by our
Statutes.

V. What persons may be punished, or are capable to commit Crimes; will be
clear by determining what persons are not capable, and whether a minor may be
punished for a Crime, is contraverted amongst the Doctors; and for clearing of
the difficulty, we must distinguish betwixt such Crimes as are committed by
contrivance, and dolo malo. And in these a minor is to be punished, if the dole
can be proved, l. un. God. si adversus dotem. The sum of which Law is, that ubi
Minor deliquit. per dolum restitutio non procedit, sed ubi per culpam ibi
subvenitur ei per restitutionem. 2. In Crimes against the Law of Nature, such
as Murder, A minor, is liable though not to the ordinar punishment, but in
merely statutory Crimes, such as usury, forestalling of Mercats, etc. He is not
at all to be punished, except ubi malitia supplet aetatem, which, because it is
not presumable, should not therefore be inferred, but from very pregnant, and
convincing probation. And seeing art in all Crimes, seems to require judgment
and contrivance; it would appear, that though the Crime it self were punishable
in minors: Yet art and part should not, seeing that, in effect, depends upon
Acts of the judgment; wherein minors may be mistaken, because of their
fragility, and less age: and thus John Rae was not put to the knowledge of an
inquest, for being art, and part, of theft, because he was not the principal
committer, but went along with his father, and was not past twelve years of
age, 1. January 1662. 3. Though a minor be punishable where he is pubertati
proximus, yet he is to be punished more meekly; and thus the Viscount of
Frendraught, was put to the knowledge of an Inquest, for being accessory to the
away-taking and private imprisonment of Gregory, though this was a statutory
Crime. And thus Midlton, and Machan were put to the knowledge of an Inquest.
26. of August 1612. and the 9. of March, 1671. It was found after a most
contentious debate, that two boys, the youngest whereof was not twelve years
of age, should go to the knowledge of an Inquest, for casting down of a house
at their fathers command: albeit it was alleged, that this act was not of its
own nature criminal, as murder, or bestiality, but its guilt depended upon
circumstances, which minors were not obliged to know, as if the house belonged
to their father, of which they were informed, and so were not guilty. There are
some Crimes also, wherein minors may be punished, and are repute majors, per
fictionem juris (according to the opinion of some Lawyers) such as fornication,
adultery, sodomy, and omnia delicta carnis; because the guilt there consists in
the commission of the fact, and not in a contrivance, and so minors may be
equally guilty of these Crimes with majors. Yet I differ from these Doctors in
this; for since the committing these Crimes, may be occasioned, by levity, and
vacillancy of judgment in minors: and seeing furious persons would not at all
be punished for such Crimes, I do think the age is somewhat to be considered,
even in these cases; and that minors are not to be as severely punished, as
majors; seeing they are not of so solid a judgment as these are. I find, lib.
3. Reg. Maj. c. 32.. 15. And in annot. 100. verse. 3. c. 41. lib. 2. that a
minor is not obliged to answer for any Crime by which he may loss life or
limb. And a case is there cited betwixt His Majesty and the Abbot of Parbroth,
annot. c. 13. v. 12. And Skeen cites for this l. pen. C. de autorit. tut. and
l. 1.. occisorum ff. ad. C. Sillan. and Cap. 2. de delict. puer. extrav. The
reason seems to be, because a minor may (being pursued whilst he is minor) omit
some defense competent to him. And since a minor is not obliged to debate de
haereditate paterna, whilst he is minor; much less should he be obliged to
defend in a criminal pursuit, ubi calore juvenili potest dicere vel tacere quod
ei nocere potest. So that it seems, that albeit a minor may be punished for
several Crimes committed by him when he was minor, yet is he not obliged to
answer for any till he be major. But yet in the Viscount of Frendrauchts case,
it was found that a minor was obliged to answer to an indictment even during
his minority: But whether a minor confessing will be restored against his
confession, is fully debated in the title confession.

VI. Such as commit any Crime whilst they sleep, are compared to Infants, l.
si. servus. si fornicarius ff: ad l. aquiliam, and therefore they are not
punished, except they be known to have enmity against the person killed; or that
fraud be other ways presumable: quo casu, they may be punished extra ordinem,
Farin: quest. 82.

VII. Such as are drunk, are sometimes for want of dole, and malice, more
meekly punished than others; especially if they were cheated upon design, into
that condition by others. And in this case the Law distinguishes inter ebrios,
who are rarely drunk, and ^briosos, who are habitually drunk: for these last
should be most severely punished, both for their drunkenness, and for the
crimes occasioned by it. But such as make themselves drunk upon design to
excuse or lessen thereby the guilt they are to commit, merit no favor, and
such as knew they were subject to extravagancy in their dri^k, merit as little,
Cabal. cas. 297 I have not in our Law found drunkenness to defend in either
cases; And it was repelled in the pursuit of murder pursued against the Lord
of Spot and Douglas; for killing Hoom of Eccles. Anno. 1667. Yet I think that
in some circumstantiat cases, the Council may mitigat the Sentence upon this
account. But it is never a defense against the relevancie: Such as are furious,
are not in the construction of Law, capable to commit a crime. Stat. 2. Rob. 2.
for the Law compares them to infants, or to dead men, lege si quis ff. de
acquirend. haered. to such as are absent, l. sed. si. ff. de injuriis, and
makes them to be no more guilty because of the crime they commit, then a stone
from a house, or a beast is to be repute guilty and punishable for the wrong
they do. Quam si pauperiem pecus dederit aut tegula ceciderit, l. 5. ff. ad. l.
aquil: and the Law commiserats so far their condition, That it expostulats with
such as would pursue them for a crime, and non exigas poenas ab eo, quem fati
in felicitas excusat, quiabque; furore ipso satis punitur. l. Infans ff. ad. l.
Corn. de sicar: they are excused by their own misfortune, and abundantly
punished by their own fury: but since the Law protects furious persons from
punishment, because they want all judgment. l. 14. ff. de officio praesid. It
follows naturally, that this privilege should be only extended to such as are
absolutely furious. 2. It may be argued, that since the Law grants a total
impunity to such as are absolutely furious, that therefore it should by the
rule of proportions, lessen and moderat the Punishments of such, as though they
are not absolutely mad, yet are hypocondrick and melancholy to such a degree,
that it clouds their reason, qui sensum aliquem habent sed diminutum, which
Lawyers call insania, and the Greek (...) 3. That such as show any acts of
resentment, or revenge, in the wrong they do, may be punished with some degree
of severity; since they show some degree of judgment: But yet the Parliament
of Paris is justly condemned by all Lawyers, for having caused execute a mad
man, who had killed one that had struck him two days before, but since he did
show memory and revenge in that act, he might have been punished justly to some
moderate degree. 4. Since there are some mad men who have lucid intervals,
whose fury has its tides, and waxes and wanes, like the moon upon which it
depends; quos furor, stimulis suis variatis vicibus accendit. l. 14. ff. de
officio praesidis, that therefore they should be thought capable to commit
crimes when they are in their lucid interval; but not when they are agitated by
their fury. But here it may be doubted, whether the crimes committed by a mad
man who has lucid intervals, should be persumed to have been committed by him
when he was in his fury, or in his lucid intervals, and the general conclusion
is, that though every man be presumed to be sound in his judgment, till the
contrary be proved, quia qualitas quae inesse debet, inesse praesumitur: Alciat
praesump. 1. Yet, when a man is once proved to have been furious, the Law
presumes that he still continues furious, till the contrair be proved, for
madness is but too sticking a disease; and is seldom or ever cured. And this
presumption should rather hold in the committing of crimes, then in any thing
else; for the committing of a crime, looks liker the madness, then the lucid
intervals. And yet if my opinion were of authority enough, I would limit this
rule in two cases, 1. If the madness had fixed to an ordinary interval, as the
hight of the moon in lunaticks, I would presume that if the Crime were not
committed at that time, it behooved to be presumed it was committed in the lucid
interval. 2. If the person offended was one against whom the offender had
prejudice in his lucid intervals, or before his madness, or if he show any wit
or contrivance in the execution of the wrong he did, I would presume, that the
offense was committed in the lucid interval: But because the Crime in these
cases would be founded upon presumptions, I think the punishment should be
lessened upon that account; and possibly that Judge would not be much mistaken
who would remit something of the ordinary punishment in all Crimes committed,
even where the lucid intervals are clearly proved: for where madness has once
disordered the judgment, and much more where it recurts often, it cannot but
leave some weakness, and make a man an unfit Judge of what he ought to do, est
tantum adumbrata quies, intermissio, sed non resipiscentia integra: And as our
proverb well observes, once Wood, ^ay the worse.

It is statute by the 24. Chap. Stat. 2. Rob. 2. That a mad person shall be
kept by his friends, and if he commit any wrong, it shall be imputed to his
friends, and keepers; but though these may be made liable civily for any
damnage the furious man does, as a Master is in Law liable for the prejudice
done by a wild beast, which he keeps; yet it were too severe to punish them
corporally for the murders, and other Crimes which he commits, except where
they are commanded by the Judge to keep him exactly, which ought not to be
extended against such as are only his Curators, or nearest of kin. Bartol. ad
l. divus, ff. de off. praesid.

It is generally agreed to by Lawyers, that furious persons committing a Crime
in their fury, cannot be punished for it, though thereafter they return to
themselves: for in punishing Crimes, the time of the commission is to be
considered; though Jason, Tiraquel. and some others are of opinion, that if the
Crime was very atrocious, the mad man recovering, may be punished. And for this
they instance the Queen of Castile, who punished with death, a man who had in
his fury wounded her Husband King Ferdinand; and they cite l. 14. ff. de
officio praesidis. But the instance is founded upon the passion of a woman; and
that Law speaks only of Crimes committed in a lucid interval. And whereas
Caballus thinks such a punishment necessar^, for satisfying the discipline of
the Church; I should rather think, that the Church should of all other, least
punish that misfortune, it being against Christian charity, to add affliction
to the afflicted. And it were brutish for Church men to be more severe, then
the madness it self was, which was so charitable as to take its leave. As a man
should not be punished in his health, for what he did when he was mad: so upon
the other hand, a man who committed a Crime in his health, ought not to be
punished bodily, if he thereafter turn mad: for then he is not sensible of
correction, which is one of the great designs of punishment. And to punish him
then, were to endanger his soul: nor would the people be deterred from vice,
but would rather be troubled with passion at such a spectacle: but yet he may
be punished in his goods, Clarus quest. 6. tells us of one who was scourged for
perjury, though it was alleged he was mad, but this last seems too severe, for
the reasons foresaid; and since a mad man is looked upon as absent, it may be
justly doubted, whether he may be process'd during his madness, for a Crime
committed by him while he was in health, even in order to the inflicting a
pecuniary punishment: and that because absents cannot by our Law be tried
criminally: and because, mad men cannot inform their Friends or Lawyers, so as
they may propon their just defenses. But since absents may be tried for
Treason, by the late Act, it would therefore appear, that mad men may be
likewise accused for Treason during their madness; It may be likewise doubted
if he who used any means to make himself mad after his sentence, may not be put
to death, notwithstanding of his madness, since that madness was occasioned by
himself, and so should not disappoint the Law. But Clarus quest. 6. is of
opinion, that it ought to defend him from all corporal punishment, and Caballus
Casu 298. number. 27. is also of opinion, that even he who commits a Crime whilst
he is mad, though he himself occasioned the madness, yet he is not to be
punished by the ordinar punishment, for the Law does not presume that they made
themselves furious upon design.

IX. Whether a collective body of people, or university, such as a Burgh, or
Incorporation, may commit a Crime, seems debateable: And Ulpian. seems to deny
it l. sed and ex dolo ff. de Dol. Mal. whose words are, sed an in municipes de
dolo detur actio, dubitatur, ego puto, ex suo quidem non posse dare, quid enim
municipes facere possunt. But I conceive that we may clear this point by these
positions, 1. That properly Incorporations cannot commit a Crime; for they are
jus, non persona. 2. Crimes which consist in omission, may be fixed upon
Incorporations, as if their Magistrates omit what the Law commands. L. Iubenius
C. de Sacro-Sanct: Ecclesia and l. si procuratorem ff. mandati. 3. In these
things which are proper only to be done by Incorporations, such as in making
Acts, raising, and using unlawful Judicators: Incorporations may be said to be
guilty of what their Rulers commit: Constit. freder. de stat. and consuct. 4.
Even these Crimes which are ordinarily committed by private men, such as Murder,
Oppression, etc. are in Law sometimes charged upon the Incorporations; if these
things be done by command of the Rulers, l. Metum. ff. quod metus causa. 5. No
deeds of the Magistrates can infer a Crime against the Incorporation, except the
body of the people concur: for they represent not the people in their Crimes,
but in their Government: and they were not empowered in their election to
commit Crimes, l. si procurator. Celsus ait. ff. de condit. indebit. 6. If one
man oppose what may be a Crime, then the Incorporation cannot be guilty; for
the university there cannot be said to offend: since all concurred not, and in
damno vitando, potior est conditio negantis.

How far Incorporations may be punished, may be likewise clear by these
positions, 1. The Incorporation offending, may be ordained to restore, in so
far as they got advantage. l. Metum autem. ff. quod met. cause. and l. sed and
ex dolo ff. de dol. mal. 2. In these Crimes wherein the fathers may be punished
with the children, such as Treason, Incorporations may be likewise punished,
for their innocence is not more favorable, then that of Children. Bartol.
gives several instances, where Towns have been for Treason condemned to be
plowed. 3. If an Incorporation offend in doing things that are only proper to
be done by Universities, then the University may be punished, by confiscation
of a part of their common-good: but if an University should proceed to commit a
Crime, which is usually committed by private persons, such as the going with
displayed Banners to oppress their neighbors, then, as the deeds of private
citizens cannot wrong the Incorporation; so neither can the deeds of their
Rulers. And Bart. is of opinion, that if the Incorporation be fined, such as
are innocent should not be liable to pay any part of it, but it should all fall
upon the actors; Arg. l. 1. ff. de Magistrate. conveniend. for they were not
empowered in their election to commit Crimes, as said is.

TITLE II. The division of Crimes.
1 Crimes are public or private. 2 Ordinary or extraordinary. 3 Capital or not
capital. 4 Occult or manifest. 5 Atrocius or not atrocius. 6 Statutory and such
as are not punished by express Statute.
Crimes are divided by the Civil Law, into public Crimes, and private Crimes,
public Crimes are defined to be these, which any private person may pursue, for
public revenge, and whereof the punishment is stated by an express Law,. 1.
institut. de publ. jud. And a private Crime which none can pursue, but the party
injured, and which is not declared to be a public Crime by an express Law. But
many of the Doctors, do of late conclude, that all Crimes which are punishable
by the Statute of any particular Country, are eo ipso, to be accounted private
Crimes, statuta enim sunt loges judiciorum privatorum Bal. ad leg. ult Cod. qui
testa fac. poss. Yet this appears to be a mistake, for if a Statute should
allow any person whatsoever to pursue the Crime, therein forbidden; that Crime
would be doubtless a public Crime; for the true notion of a public Crime,
seems to be that, wherein the Commonwealth is immediately concerned either by
Interest, or Example; by Interest, as in Treason, or coining of false Money; by
Example, as in Murder, Witchcraft, etc. In which, though the Commonwealth be
not immediately concerned, as a body, yet every particular person of that body
is concerned; because he who committed that Crime, may commit the same again,
and semel malus, semper praesumitur malus, in eodem genere malitiae. So that
every ones having power to pursue a Crime, or a Crime being declared public,
by an express Law, are not the true constitutive differences, betwixt a public
Crime, and a private; but are only the effects thereof: for when the Kingdom,
or State, does find that any Crime, is of dangerous, and universal consequence,
then they allow, very justly, that every private man may accuse. With us in
Scotland, the vestiges of this distinction, are yet to be seen for, albeit his
Majesty's Advocat may pursue without the concurse of the party injured: Yet no
other person will be allowed to pursue any Crime, nisi suam vel suorum injuriam
prosequatur, and that every private person, may not pursue in all Crimes; is
clear, from c. 2. lib. 4. Reg. Maj. where in Treason, it is said, that every
man may pursue, which had been unnecessar, if every person might pursue in
every Crime, and thus Mc call having raised Letters in his own name, against
Charles Lindsay, for killing his Father, in July 1668. the Justices would not
sustain the pursuit at his instance, because he could not prove that he was son
to the defunct, and since his Majesty's Advocat, represents in all criminal
pursuits, the public: and as it is presumeable, that he will not refuse his
concurse, so he will be punished, if he refuse the same. It were therefore
inconvenient, and unnecessary, that every private man should be allowed the
liberty, of pursuing Crimes, in which he were not interested: this distinction
is much abused in the Books of Reg. Maj. For in them public Murder is defined
to be that, which is committed by forethought felony: and private Murder,
which is committed without being known to any, but the persons who were
accomplices, stat. Malcom. 2. c. 15.

II The Civil Law, likewise divides Crimes in ordinary, and extraordinary;
extraordinary were these wherein the Law had appointed no particular
punishment; ordinary crimes were such as were punishable by a liquid pain,
determined by the Law, and was therefore called crimen legittimum.

III. Crimes are likewise divided, into such as were capital, or not capital.
Capital crimes are such, as are punishable by death, banishment, or loss of
liberty: so called a capitis diminutione; but with us these crimes are only
called capital, which are punishable by loss of life or limb.

IV. Crimes are either occult, or manifest: occult crimes are these, which
either are occult of their own nature, as Hamesucken, Conspiracy, Adultery, or
such as are occult by accident, such as Murders committed by Innkeepers upon
their Guests. Though murder of its own nature be not occult, since it is
ofttimes openly committed. This division is considered by Lawyers, either in
order to probation; because in occult crimes less exact probation is accepted:
And thus with us the being robbed at Sea was found probable by these in the
Ship, because no other probation could be had there. And it is against the
interest of the Commonwealth that Crimes should pass unpunished: Or they
consider this division with respect to prescriptions, because it is debated
whether when a Statute appoints a Crime to be pursued betwixt and such a day,
that time should run in occult crimes, from the time the crime was committed,
or from the time it was known. In occult crimes also, torture is admitted more
easily then in other crimes.

V. Crimes are divided in such as are atrocious, and such as are not. Atrocious
crimes are these wherein the guilt is very great.

VI. In Scotland, crimes are divided in statutory, and such as are not punished
by an express Statute, as common Adultery, Bestiality, etc. And albeit it was
controverted in the Lord Rentouns case, Ian. 1666. that the poynding of Oxen in
the time of laboring, could not be accounted a crime, because it was not
declared punishable by an express Statute; yet the Justices found, that eo ipso
it was forbidden by a Statute: It was in so far a crime, because Authority was
thereby contemned, especially having been formerly declared a crime by the
Civil Law. And it were unreasonable to think that Adultery, albeit it be not
notour, should be a crime, albeit its penalty is not expressed by a Statute. And
with us especially of old it was most ordinary to forbid crimes without express
sanctions, as may be seen in several Acts of Parliament: Likeas by the Civil
Law, extraordinary crimes were declared to be such, as were forbidden by Law,
but where the penalty of the Law was not determined, from all which it appears,
that the essence of a crime consists in its being forbidden, and not in having
its punishment stated by an express Statute, though I wish it were otherwise.

What Crimes are called Crimes of the Crown, or Pledges of the Crown, is
treated largely Title Regalities: What Crimes are called Crimina excepta, is
declared in the Title Treason.

TITLE III. Blasphemy.
1 What is Blasphemy? 2 The several kinds of Blasphemy. 3 Whether Ignorance,
Repentance, or Railery be good defenses against the punishment. 4 What is the
punishment of Blasphemy, by the Common Law. 5 What by our Statutes? 6 Cursing
of Parents, and swearing, how punished?
BLasphemy is called in Law, divine laese Majesty, or Treason; and it is
committed either by denying that of God which belongs to him, as one of His
Attributes: or by attributing to him that which is absurd, and inconsistent
with his Divine Nature.

II. These who swear by the Head, or Feet of God, are guilty of this Crime by
the common Law, c. 51. si quis per dei capillum 22. quest. 1. videntur enim
amplecti anthropomorphitarum haeresin quae membra deo tribuebat: By that Cannon
they are also punishable, who delate not Blasphemers. Albeit regularly what is
spoken in passion be more moderately punished, yet it lessens not a Blasphemers
Crime, Hostien. tit. de maled except he speak at such a rate, as clearly
indicats that he is furious, or somewhat distracted: or if he recover himself,
and testify immediately his contrition; thus Socin. relates consilio 102. that
a Jew who had denied the Omnipotence of God, was absolved from a pursuit of
Blasphemy, because he immediately threw himself upon the ground, and kissed it,
and testified an extraordinar horror, which Lawyers say, is an extraordinar
punishment, and oftentimes exceeds the fear of Death. And there are some
Lawyers, as Abbas and felin ad cap. 13. de jure jur. who conclude, that either
he who blasphems passionatly, is unlawfully employed when he falls into that
passion, as in playing at Cards, Drinking, etc. and then his passion does not
lessen his Crime: But if he be honestly employed, as doing business, treating
for his Friend, and then if he blaspheme only in passion, it lessens his guilt,
and should mitigat his punishment: but why should passion excuse Blasphemy more
then Murder; if it be not because the fall cannot be repaired by Repentance, a
man being killed, but the fault in Blasphemy may be extinguished by Repentance.

III. Clarus thinks that these who Blaspheme in jest are to be less severly
punished; and that Rusticity mitigats the ordinary punishment in this case; but
Gothofredus is, as to the last, of a contrary opinion, because Rusticity
excuses not from the knowledge of the Law of Nature, much less of God, but they
may be reconciled thus, that open gross Blasphemy, is equally punishable in
both; but not consequential and indirect Blasphemy, as if a Countryman should
err in the Persons of the Trinity, which some remot High-landers are so
ignorant of, as not to know, those should rather be pitied then punished,
except they add obstinacy to Blasphemy, vid. Cabal cas. 296.

IV. The punishment of Blasphemy, is Death by the Law, Nov. 77. by the Canon
Law: Public repentance for the first fault, and the standing at the Church
Door, with an infamous Mitre, or Paper Hat for a relapse.

V. By our Act 21. Sess. 1. Par. 1. C. 2. Blasphemy, Railers against God, or
any of the Persons of the blessed Trinity, shall be likewise punishable by
death, if they obstinatly continue therein. From which Act it is observable, 1.
That this Crime can only be tried before the Justices; and therefore not before
the Lord of a Regality, though they have equal power, as has been formerly
observed. 2. Distraction is only excepted here, so Ignorance, Passion,
Rusticity, or Railery excuses not; nam exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis,
and yet these may excuse from the ordinar punishment, in some circumstances;
but are never defenses against the relevancy. 3. It may be doubted, why the
denying God, or any of the Persons of the Holy Trinity, is only punishable by
death, if they continue obstinat therein. And yet the railing upon, or cursing
God, or the Trinity, is simply punishable, without obstinacy: and the
difference seems to be, that cursing, or railing against God, cannot proceed
from Ignorance, but argues Malice: whereas the denying Gods Attributes, or the
Trinity, may proceed from Ignorance.

It may be doubted, if with us a person who should call himself the Son of God,
or the Messiah, could be punished as a blasphemer; and it is said that the
Parliament of England thought he could not: and therefore James Nailor was only
scourged for this Crime. Yet I think he could be reached by our foresaid Act,
as a person who railed upon God, and the Trinity. For to make our selves equal
with them, is to rail against, and vilify them.

VI. Cursing of Parents, viz. Father, or Mother (but no others) is punishable
by death, if they be past sixteen, or arbitrarly if they be below sixteen, and
above punishable, ( vid tit. parricid) Act 20. Par. 1. Sess. 1. Chapter 2.

Justices of Peace are by the 38. Act 1. Par. Chapter 2. to punish such as curse
and swear profanely, and exact from a Noble man twenty merks, a Barron twenty
merks, a Gentle man, Heretor, or Burges ten merks, a Yeoman forty shilling, a
Servant twenty shilling, a Minister the fifth part of his Steipend, and the
Husband must pay his Wifes fine, ergo regulariter, the Husband is not liable
for the Wifes fine, if there be no warrant therefore by Statute. By the 16. Act
5. Par. Q. M. the swearing abominable Oaths are to be fined, but that Act is
only temporary. By the 103. Act Par. 7. I. swearers and blasphemers ar to be
punished by the Magistrates, and if they fail, by the Privy Council. Nota by
this Act, that Women are to be punished in penal Statutes, conform to their
Blood, and their Husbands quality; that is to say, conform to their Blood if
unmaried, or to their Husbands quality if married: and therefore may be doubted,
whether these Women who have precedence according to their Birth, though
married, as an Earls Daughter, when married to a Gentle man, or those who have
precedence by a Patent, above their Husbands quality, should not be punished
according to their precedence, though married.

The Justices did in May 1671. fine a Woman in Dumfreis, in 500 merks for
drinking the Devils health, but did not find it Blasphemy.

TITLE. IV. Haeresy.
1 The definition of Heresy. 2 Whether Invocation of Spirits be heresy. 3 The
punishment of Heresy. 4 Jesuits and trafficquing Priests how punished. 5 The
specialities ontroduced in punishing this Crime.
HEresy is committed, when a Christian owns pertinatiously errors condemned by
the Church. I said when a christian owned them, because Pagans and Mahumetans
are not punished as Heretics. Simancas de haereti. cap. 31. number. 3. for these
are enemies to our faith in general, and err not in particular points of it. I
said who erred pertinatiously, because such as err ignorantly, or as having
erred perversely, do not pertinatiously adhere to their error; are not to be
esteemed haereticks. And this repentance is to be received any time, even after
sentence to stop the execution. Carer. fol. 642. except they have relapsed in
their Heresy, for their second fall is not to be taken off by repentance, but
though their repentance secures them against death in the first fall, yet the
are to be punished by perpetual Imprisonment. Igneus: in: l. ff. ad Sillan:
Cook. hoc. tit.

II. Though some make the adoration, and invocation of Spirits to be Heresy,
yet others do more judiciously determine that if these devils be invocked to
reveal things to come, then that invocation is of the nature of Heresy, for
that is to attribute omniscience to the Devil, which is one of Gods attributes,
but if the Devil be invocked for a particular end, or interest, such as that he
may learn the invocker how to prevail with a mistress, or how to gain a Princes
favor, in these cases the invocker is not to be called a Heretic. Clarus..
Haeresis. number. 25. but neither does that distinction please me, for such as
invock the Devil are not properly Heretics, especially if they have renounced
their Baptism, for there is no reason to call them Heretics who not only err
in the faith, but have renounced the faith entirely, and as Pagans are not
Heretics because they worship false Gods, so neither should they who worship
the Devil, and these who have renounced their Baptism, for they are in the same
condition with these who were never baptized.

III. The punishment of Heresy, in the opinion of the Doctors, is to be burnt,
and confiscation of the Delinquents Movables, Clar. number. 13. But by the Law of
England, Heretics are only to be burnt if they will not abjure.

By our Law Heresy was in the first instance tried by the Church, and the
Secular power did not meddle to condemn Heretics, till they were first
condemned by the Church, Ia. 1. Par. 2. Act. 28. In which it is ordained that
the Bishops shall inquire into Heresy, and if they be found, that they be
punished as the Law of the Holy Kirk requires: and if it misters, that Secular
power be called in support, and helping of holy Kirk.

From which Act it is observable, first, that the Kirk was Judge to Heresy, in
prima instantia, during Popery: and this is conform to the opinion of almost
all the Doctors, who think heresy crimen mere Ecclesiasticum, Alcia. in c. 1.
number. 37. de offic. ord. but they justly conclude, as in this Statute, that the
cognition belongs to the Church, and the punishment to the Secular Judge; and
this Canonists calls tradere h^reticum brachio Seculari: and Clarus does so far
appropiat this trial to the Ecclesiastical Judge, that he allows not so much
the Secular Judge as the power of mitigating the punishment: and yet now the
Justices are Judges competent, in prima instantia, to such as hear or say Mass,
but the reason is, because such are in general condemned by the Church, as
guilty of Heresy, and yet the Popish Church are still Judges to the
Protestants, though they be condemned in general as Heretics; for the Heretics
are tried and condemned first by the Ecclesiastic Judge among them.

The second thing remarkable in this Act, is, that amongst Ecclesiastics, the
Bishop is the first Judge in Heresy, which is also conform to the opinion of
the Canonists, Clar. h. t. number. 5.

After the Reformation, there was a Confession of Faith made, and is set down
by King James in his first Parliament, and Ratified Act 4. And they who profess
not the true Religion may not be a Judge (but this is not extended to Heretable
Offices) Procurator, nor Member in any Court, Ia. 6. pa. 1. c. 9. and such
Churchmen as will not subscribe that Confession, are deprived, Ia. 6. Pa. 3.
Act 46. and all such as refuse to subscribe, are to be repute Rebels and
enemies to the King and his Government, Act 47.

IV. Our Law fearing the pains taken by the Romish Church, more then the hazard
arising from any else, have been more severe to these, than to others: And
therefore the sayers or hearers of Mass, or such as are present thereat, are
punished, 5. Act 1. P. I. 6. by confiscation of all their goods, moveable, and
immovable, and an arbitrary punishment of their persons for the first fault,
banishment for the second fault, and death for the third fault. It may be
doubted, if such as hear Mass for curiosity, may be thus punished, which is
very ordinary abroad; and it seems that Heresy must be an act upon design, and
yet this Law makes no distinction here. 2. It may be doubted, if by
confiscation of Goods immovable, be meant Land and Heritages, for they are
called bona immobilia: and yet I rather incline to think that this should only
extend to Heritable Bonds, and such like, but not to Lands: for Heritage uses
always to be expressed distinctly, when the confiscation of it is designed: And
if Heritage were forefaulted by the first fault, the punishment of the first
would be greater then the punishment of the second fault, which is only
banishment: Nor does Heritage use to be expressed under the word Goods. But
thereafter the sayers of Mass, and trafficking Papists, and the receivers of
them against the King's Majesty, and Religion presently professed, are declared
guilty of treason, Act 120. Pa. 12. Ia. 6. But from these words, Against the
King's Majesty, and Religion presently professed, it may be argued, that only
such Jesuits, and others, as traffic to the prejudice of the King's Person,
and Government; such as these who attempted the Gun-powder-treason, or to kill
the King, or raise Rebellion, are only guilty of Treason, which seems the
rather, because it were hard to make simple endeavoring to persuade others in
mere matters of Religion to be treason. It is also observable from this Act,
that such Jesuits, or trafficking Papists, or receipters of either, as
satisfies the King and Kirk, are not to be guilty of treason; so that here
treason is taken away by repentance: but it may be doubted, if though they be
not guilty of treason, they may not be punished as Heretics, conform to the
above cited 5. Act. 1. Pa. Ia. 6. for the Act only declares that the penalty
foresaid shall not strike against them. And though (as I observed formerly)
such as are guilty of Heresy, may by repentance save themselves from the
punishment of death, yet are they still declared liable to other punishments,
such as perpetual imprisonment. But yet since our Law appoints no other
punishments against Traffickers, and receipters of Jesuits, but what is expressed
here, and that the punishment here expressed is taken off in case of repentance;
I rather believe that no punishment can be inflicted, in case of repentance,
against these. And it is very reasonable, that mere errors in faith should be
pardoned by mere repentance; but as to the sayers and hearers of Mass, the
former Act seems to stand.

The Sellers also, and dispersers of erroneous and Popish Books, are to be
punished arbitrarily, by the Rubric of the 25. Act 11. Pa. Ia. 6. but the
statutory words run only against the homebringers of such Books, the Books also
are to be destroyed, and warrant is given to Magistrates of Burghs with a
Minister, to intromet with them without hazard of spuilzie: But yet de
practica, other Officers, such as Sheriffs, and Lords of Regality do intromet
with such Books, though they be not warranted. And though inclusio unius est
exclusio alterius, and though the Act ordains a Minister to be present (which
was certainly appointed that it might be known whether the Books were Popish)
yet de praxi, Magistrates use to intromet without having a Minister present.

I find no express punishment against other Heretics in our Law, nor de praxi,
are other Heretics punished corporally; but whether they may not be punished
conform to the common Law, and upon that general Act of K. James the First, I
will not determine. As also, it is ordinary to banish only Jesuits, and sayers
of Mass, as was done December 9. 1573. Mr John Robertson was banished by order
from the Council, he enacted himself under the pain of death never to return to
Scotland.

V. The common Law, or Doctors have introduced many specialities in the trial
of this Crime, as first, that less clear probation is admitted in proving
Heresy, then other Crimes, Clar.. Haeresis, number. 20. And by an old Act of
Sederunt, socii criminis, Women, and Pupills, are to be admitted with us, to
prove hearing, and saying of Mass, else that Crime could not be proved. 2. A
Heretic may be tried after death, Alber. in rubr. h. t. which they say holds
not only in a Heretic found guilty by probation ( Haereticus verus) but in
these who were cited to compear for Heresy, but compeared not, whom they call
Haereticum praesumptum, but this holds not with us, no not in these who are
guilty of Treason, as being Traffiquing Jesuits or Papists, for only
Perduellion is by our Law to by tried after death: But though the Heretic
cannot be punished after death, yet his opinions may be condemned, as
Heretical, even after his death.

TITLE V. Simony, Baratry.
1 What is Simony? 2 How it is probable. 3 The nature and punishment of it in
Scotland. 4 Baratry Ecclesiastic. 5 Baratry Civil.
SImony is the selling or buying any Church Office, cupiditas emendi aut
vendendi aliquid spirituale aut spirituali annexum. So called from Simon Magus,
who offered to buy the Grace of God. And the Canonists teach, that it is Simony
to paction for any advantage in administrating the Sacraments, but not to take
reward after they have administrate them.

II. In this Crime, infamous persons, whoors, and other witnesses, who are not
habiles, or at least, who are not omni exceptione majores, are here receivable
cap. sicut. de Simon. because it is ordinarily carried on with much privacy, and
clandestine dealing, for which reason likewise, Lawyers conclude, that it may
be proved by presumptions. It is crimen mere ecclesiasticum, and cannot be
punished by Laics, the punishment is depravation.

III. With us, Simony is once mentioned, and that is, Act 1. Par. 21. Ia. 6.
Wherein it is Statute, that if the Archbishop, or Bishop deprehend that the
person who is presented, has made any Simonaical paction with the Patron;
whereby he has so hurt the Benefice, as that he has not reserved a sufficient
maintenance for himself, and his successors, suitable to the value of the
Benefice, that the Bishop may refuse the presentation, and the Lords of Session
are declared to be Judges to any debates arising betwixt the Bishop, Patron,
and Person upon that account. From which Act it is observable, 1. That it is
employed, and tacitly acknowledged, that Simony is a Crime by our Law, seeing
this is punished as a Branch thereof: and therefore I conceive, that what ever
is punished as Simony by the Canon Law, is punishable with us; and that a
Minister, or other Beneficed Person who bargains, or transacts with any to get
them a Church, or Benefice, and gives or promises Money therefore, is
punishable even by our Law. 2. That by this Act, a paction, whereby the
incumbent reserves to himself, a competencie suitable to the Benefice, is not
Simony; and what this conpetencie is, is left arbitrary to the Judge, because
it is not determined. 3. That this Crime is probable with us by Oath, because
of its clandestine convoyance, as said is. By the Stat. Eliz. 31. the person
committing Simony, is declared incapable to enjoy that Ecclesiastic Office.

IV. Baratry is a kind of Simony, ( Socinus reg. 55. Bald. part. 5. Consil.
21.) which with us is committed by these, who go to Rome to buy Benefices,
without licenses from the Chancellor, or their ordinar, I. 1. P. 7. cap. 106.
the pain of it is banishment, and never to bruik honor, or employment for the
future, within the Kingdom. This word comes from the Italian word Baratry,
which signifies, corrupting of Judges; for our Law presumed, that these who
went to Rome to get a Benefice, designed to get it by corruption. But though
Baraters are called canpones beneficiorum by the Doctors; as Craig observes,
page 371. Yet our Kings being of old very submissive to the Sea of Rome, durst
not directly at first, forbid application to Rome; but did only forbid the
carrying abroad Money out of the Kingdom; knowing that nothing could be done
there without Money: But thereafter this Crime growing greater, the Parliament
did by the 84. cap. P. 6. I. 3. forbid expressly the going to Rome, to purchase
Benefices, or to be its collectors, under the pain of being demeaned as
Traitors, and never to bruik Benefice, or use Worship; which is ratified by the
53. Act 5. P. I. 4. But though the punishment is that of Treason, by these
Acts; yet by the 2. Act 1 P. I. 6. the punishment of Baratry, is declared to be
prescription, banishment, and never to bruik Honor, nor Office within the
Kingdom: and all applications to Rome are punishable as Baratry. This Act being
after the Reformation. And by this last Act, it is declared that Baratry may be
punished, either by the Justices, or Lords of Session. And upon this Act James
Archbishop of Glasgow, was exauctorated after the Reformation, for going to
Rome.

V. The Sons of Noble Men, and others passing to Schools beyond Sea's without
the Kings License, are also said to commit Baratry, I. 6. P. 6. cap. 71. And
the Council uses to ordain Noble Men, who breed their Children abroad, in
Popish Schools, to bring them home under a great fine, as they did lately to
the Lords of Mordingtoun, and Semple in anno. 1668. Before which Act also, all
Laics going out of the Kingdom, without consent of the King, or License from
the Chancellor, committed Baratry. I. 4. P. 5. cap. 53. And though Craig
debates page 371. whether the punishment of this be the same with Treason,
because it is said to be punishable as Treason, cap. 84. Pa. 6. I. 3. Yet it is
clear, that this punishment is restricted by the Act 2. P. 1. I. 1. To the
being declared incapable of Trust, and Banishment. This Prohibition of Laics
going abroad, was first at Carthage, and is now in vigor at Naples, and many
other places. And though it be now in desuetude, at least is not punished,
except in Privy Councillors: Yet I see no reason, why any should say, that
this Crime takes only place in Vassals, holding immediately of the King; for the
Act is general. And yet Merchants are warranted by diverse Acts of Parliament,
to Traffic abroad, and so fall not under this Prohibition.

TITLE VI. Treason. Laesa Majestas.
1 Treason is divided by the Civil Law in Perduellion and Laese-Majestie. 2 The
differences betwixt Perduellion and Laese-Majestie. 3 Treason with us may be
divided in Perduellion Laese-Majestie and Statutory Treason. 4 The nature of
Perduellion, or rising in Arms, which is the first species of Treason. 5 The
second species of Treason is committed against the Kings Person. 6 The third is
the recepting such as have committed Treason. 7 The fourth is to hold out
Houses against the King. 8 The fifth is to assail Castles where the King
resides. 9 The sixth is to raise a fray in the Kings Host. 10 The seventh is to
trouble any who kills a declared Traitor. 11 The eighth is to impugn the
Authority of the three Estates. 12 The ninth is to decline the King or Councils
Authority. 13 The tenth is to conceal, and not reveal Treason. 14 The eleventh
is to desert the Kings Host. 15 The twelfth is to deny the Kings Prerogative,
in having the sole power in calling and dissolving Parliaments. 16 How the
killing Counselors is punishable. 17 The several branches of Statutory
Treason. 18 To accuse any man for Treason, if the accused be assoilzied, is
Treason. 19 Treason is not Baleable. 20 Summonds of Treason ought to be execute
by Heralds. 21 Whether less probation be sufficient in Treason then in other
Crimes. 22 Treason may be pursued after the Committers death. 23 Traitors may
be forefaulted in absence. 24 How disobeying the King is punishable. 25 The
punishment of Treason in general.
UNhappy man retains in nothing so much a desire to be like his Maker, as in
that he would be Supreme: and no wonder that this Crime should be incident to
him in this lapsed condition, when his will is crooked, and his judgment
blind; since the very Angels in their purity, and Man in his innocence, were
tempted by it: so that since men have subjected themselves to Government, we
may easily conclude they found a great convenience in this submission; else
they had never offered so much violence to their own inclination. To Societies,
and Laws, we owe every moment the preservation of our lives and fortunes, which
nothing but Discipline does secure: and without an entire submission, these
Societies would be but Companies of Robbers, and Laws but mere toys. How many
dangers do Governors incurr? And by how many cares and fears are they
disquieted? Wherefore it is most just, that those who govern, should be more
secure against their Subjects, then against their enemies, since they may be
most easily wronged by those who live in their own bosom, and who have easy
and open access to them. In other Crimes, one, or at most few, are wronged:
whereas in rebellion, and Laese Majesty the whole Society is offended. And
therefore it was most just, that those who design the ruin of the
Commonwealth, or the Supreme Governor (which Crime we call Treason) should of
all others be most severely punished. And the Basilicks, l. 1. h. 1. observes
well, that Treason is a kind of Sacrilege, (...).

I. Treason was by the Civil Law divided, in Perduellionem, and Laesam
Majestatem. Perduellion was that Treason which was committed against the Prince
or Commonwealth immediately: Adversus populum Romanum, vel securitatem ejus.
Laese Majesty (as opposed to Perduellion) was committed by speaking against
the Prince, revealing his secrets, etc.

This Crime was punished per legem juliam; the branches whereof are the raising
of Arms against the State, the being in accession to the flight of such as were
Hostages to the Commonwealth, or to the killing of any Magistrate of the
Commonwealth, the keeping correspondence with the enemies, the continuing to
govern a Province after a a Successor was named; the Levying of an Army, and
running in to the Enemies. All which are expressly enumerat ff. ad leg. Iul.
Majestat.

II. Betwixt these two, Hottoman assigns these four differences, 1. That
Perduellion was that whereby the Commonwealth was in general wronged, qui
summam rei publicae lube factare conati sunt. Laesa Majestas was that whereby
the Commonwealth was only wronged in a part, or by consequence; as to suffer
the enemies of the Commonwealth to escape, or to conceal them, etc. The 2. is,
the Crime of Laese Majesty might have been pursued before the ordinary Judge
in foro; but Perduellion could not be pursued but in the great Meetings of the
People, a populo Romano, comitiis centuriatis in campo martio. Whence probably
did arise the judging Treason by Parliaments with us. The 3. was, that the
Crime of ordinary Laese Majesty was not punished with death, as Perduellion
was, but with ban^shment. The 4. was, that the ordinary Laese Majesty was
punished by death, but Perduellion was punishable after death.

III. Treason may be with us divided in Perduellion, which we call High
Treason, called by the English Law alta proditio, or rebellion, which is only
with us a rising in Arms against the King; and in ordinary Treason and Laese
Majesty, such as to conceal, and not reveal Treason. And in Statutory Treason,
which is not Treason properly of its own nature, but is declared to be so by a
particular Statute, as is that of Murder under trust, Theft in Landed-men, etc.

IV. Perduellion in the Civil Law, is that which we call Rebellion in our Acts
of Parliament, and it was so called extravagan. Hen. 7. qui sunt rebels: And
there it is Statute that rebels and infideles, imperii, qui quom docunque
aliquid machinantur contra prosperitatem imperii. But I find not the word
Rebellion used in the Law before that time. Yet sometimes Rebellion is in our
Law taken for that which is committed against the Kings Person, as in the 3.
Act 1. Parl. K. Ia. 1. where it is said, No man shall rebel against the Kings
Person openly, nor notourly: But the Adverb there used openly and notourly in
that, and the subsequent Acts, interprets sufficiently the word rising against
the Kings person, to be the same with us that is called Perduellion in the
Civil Law, viz. Siquis hostili animo adversus principem, vel rempublicam
animatus sit. To raise Arms against the King then, or to rise in open
rebellion, is the first and highest degree of Treason, Ia. 2. Par. 6. Act 25.
where it is called a raising in fear of War against the King; which Act
comprehends all the kinds of Treason, like lex prima ff. ad L. Iul. Majest. And
therefore I will follow that method. And though it be added in that Act, that
it shall be Treason to rise in fear of War against his Person, or Majesty, of
what ever age he be of, without the consent of the three Estates: Yet the
consent of the three Estates will not defend the rising in Arms against the
King, as was found in the case of the Marquess of Argyle, being pursued upon
this Act, in Anno 1662. for rising in Arms against the Marquess of Montrose
then the Kings Commissioner. For the Analysis of that Act must run run so, as
that these words, Without consent of the three Estates, cannot be added to all
the former treasons committed against the Kings Person, which are contained in
that Act; For many things in that Act could not be justified by the Authority
of the three Estates, for else the three Estates, and not the King, would be
Sovereign: for they only are Sovereign, against whom Treason can be committed.
But these words must only be taken as added to the last Crime prohibit, which
is the assailing of the Castles, or Houses where the Kings Person is, which may
be lawfully done by Authority of the Estates. For if the King being very young,
were taken prisoner, as our Kings oft-times were in their minority, it had been
absurd to think, that these who went to assail, by the authority of the three
Estates, that Castle where the Kings Person was, should be punished as
Traitors, because of their obedience. But to suppress all pretext that might
arise from that Act, it is declared by the 5: Act 1. Parl. 1. Sess. Chapter 2. That
the King has the only power of making War, and Peace. And that it shall be
Treason for any number of men, less or more, upon any ground or pretext
whatsoever, to rise, or continue in Arms, to maintain any Forts, Strengths, or
Garrisons, or to make Leagues or Treaties amongst themselves, or with foreign
Princes, without his Majesty's authority and approbation first interponed
thereto: or to attempt any of these things under the pain of Treason. From
which Act it is observable, 1. That the authority of the three Estates is not
able to defend the rising in Arms, or making Leagues, seeing that is declared to
be his Majesty's prerogative. 2. That the rising in defensive Arms is Treason
by these words, upon what pretext soever. 3. That nudus conatus is in this case
Treason by these words, to attempt. By the English Law the conspiring to raise
a War is not Treason, except it be de facto raised; and with them, if three or
four rise to throw down private Houses, or for any private cause, it is but a
Riot; but if these three or four rise to reform Laws, or Religion, or upon any
public account, then it is accounted the Levying War against the King, Cook
hoc tit. page 9. who likewise tells us, that if three conspire to Levy a War,
it is Treason, if in the mere conspirers, if the rest thereafter Levied
actually a War, though he was not present; and in that sense only I would
interpret the severe l. 19. Basil. h. t. propter cogitationem dignus est poena
(...). And the English Law requires still ouuert fait, an open deed. This
rising in Arms is likewise called seditio regni vel exercitus Reg. Majest. lib.
4. cap. 1. and cap. 11. ibid. ad tit. sedit.

The second species of Treason, is to commit Treason against the King's Person;
and I find that this is the first kind of Treason expressed in the former Act 25.
Parl. 6. Ia. 2. whereby it is declared Treason to lay hands upon his person
violently, what ever age he be of. Which words were added to clear that it was
Treason to rebel even against his authority before he was Proclaimed, or
Crowned. For the being Crowned or Proclaimed, is tantum declaratoria juris, sed
nihil novi juris tribuit, it being the jus sanguinis, and succession of blood
which makes him King. This species of Treason is likewise declared, Act 3. and
4. Parl. 1. Ia. 1. and in their cases affectus sine effectu punitur: and thus
the Master of Forbes was hurled through the Calsey, hanged and quartered, for
imagining (this is an English term which signifies a design) to shoot K. James
the 5th. 17. July 1537. And the Countess of Glames was burnt for imagining to
poison the said King James the fifth, 17. July 1537. By the Law of England, it
is not Treason to kill a King out of possession, Cook page 9. But this seems
unjust, if the King's title be clear, as our Kings was in exile. Though in
dubious cases, such as betwixt the Bruce and Baliol, possession may difference
the case. To kill the King's eldest Son, is with them Treason, 25. Stat. Edw. 3.

The third species of Treason is, the resetting any who has committed Treason,
or that supplies them in read, help or counsel, cujus opera dolo malo hosts
populi romani pecunia aliave re adjuti erant: This is likewise discharged, Act.
97. Parl. 7. Ia. 5. Where all the Liedges are forbidden to reset, supply, or
maintain our Sovereign Lords Rebels, under pain of death: and if any disobey,
to enforce ( id est, to second the King) against notour rebels, against his
person, when they be required and commanded, they shall be punished by the King
as favorers of such Rebels, except they have for them a reasonable excusation,
Act 4. Parl. 1. Ia. 1. From which Act it may be debated the refusing to assist
against rebels that are not notour, or against Rebels that have not committed
any other Treason then Perduellion, cannot infer with us the guilt of Treason.
The Doctors here debate, whether a Wife resetting her own Husband, or a Father
his Son, commits Treason. And albeit it may be alleged, that the relation of
Sovereign and Subject, is the chiefest of all others, and so all other
relations should cede to it; and rebellion against the State looses all
relations, l. post liminium ff. de capt. and postlimin: Yet the ordinary
distinction is, that if any of these relations assist a Rebel with things that
are necessary for him as a man, as meat, drink, etc. In that case they are not
guilty of Treason; But if they assist these relations with any thing that may
be serviceable to them in their Treason, then they are guilty, Farin. quest.
113. number. 280. And Matheus hoc tit. cap. 2. number. 20. For albeit Rebels lose all
the privilege of the Municipal Law, yet they retain those privileges that
flow from the Law of Nations, and Nature, Bartol. ad l. amissum, ff. de capt,
and postlim. And thus Caesar pardoned Pompey's Sons, and Tiberius Piso's Son,
albeit they followed their Fathers after they were declared Traitors. But I
find in our Law many decisions of this question, as in July 1537. where Ianet
Douglas Lady Glames is convict and burnt, for fortifying and assisting the Earl
of Angus and George Douglas her Brethren, Traitors and Rebels. And 18. July
1537. the Mr. of Glames is hanged and drawn for concealing, and not revealing
the treasonable design of his Mother to poison the King: but the Countess of
Errol being pursued for assisting the Earl of Bothwel, at least for not
revealing a Letter she had received from the Earl of Bothwels Lady, desiring
assistance: It was alleged for the Lady, that the Countess of Bothwel was no
Rebel, though her Husband was, and that she had not consented. This was
delayed, Anno 1596.

VII. The fourth species or point of Treason is, to stuff the Houses of them
who are convict of Treason, and holds them against the King, or that stuffs any
of their own Houses in furthering of the King's Rebels, which is expressed also
by the former Act: Yet I think this rather exegetick of the former point, then
a separat point of Treason* for both these may be comprehended under help read
or counsel. Robert Stewart was hanged for keeping out his House against the
King: and the Earl of Orknay his Father was hanged for hounding out his Son;
the one the 5. of January, and the other the 1. of February, 1615. And
Cunninghame of Tourlands was forefault and execute for assisting his Brother in
keeping out the House of Cunninghame-head, 15. February, 1601. But yet when
Houses are ordained to be rendered (being kept only for private causes) under
pain of Treason, though the party disobey, yet if he thereafter yield, that
manner of keeping out Houses will not be punished as Treason, but Arbitrarily,
as in Burgies case, 1668.

The 2. of February, 2674. Mackloud of Assint was Pannel'd for having
Garrisoned his House of Arbreak, and convocating his Majesty's Liedges, to the
number of 400. men, under Pay and Colors. Against which it was alleged, that
Assint here only fortified his House, and convocat his men to oppose the Earl
of Seaforth, but not the King: Nor did he pretend any quarrel against the
Government, but against private oppressions. To which it was answered, that this
was expressly Treason by the 6. Parl. K. Ia. 2. Cap. 14. whereby it is Statute,
that none rebel against the King's Person or Authority: And the House being
here Garrisoned to defend against the Sheriff, who was coming to eject in his
Majesty's Name: To resist him, was to resist his Majesty's Authority, and being
Garrisoned in furtherance of Rebels and rebellion, it was Treason by the 25.
Act 6. Parl. K. Ia. 2. Likeas the Convocation being of about 400. men, or
thereby, under the command of Captains, Ensigns, and other Officers. It was
likewise Treason by the 75. Act 9. Parl. Q. M. and the 5. Act. 1. Parl. Chapter 2.
The Justices did find the Garrisoning of the House not relevant to infer
Treason, but only to infer the punishment of deforcement, whereupon the
pursuers were forced to allege of new, that they insisted against him for
having Garrisoned his House after the publication of the Letters of Fire and
Sword raised at the Pursuers instance against Assint, upon which debate they
found that the Garrisoning and providing of the House after the publication of
the Letters of Fire and Sword, was relevant to infer the punishment of Treason.
Likeas they refused to sustain that Article wherein was Libel'd the raising of
Men, and the disposing them in Companies under Colors, to be relevant, except
it were alleged that they were an hundred men or upwards, and were under
Colors, or Mustered, or under weekly or daily pay. And that all this was done
after the publication of the Letters of Fire and Sword: both which
Interloquutors seemed surprising. For as to the first, it seemed that the
Garrisoning of any House against a Sheriff, or any Judge, is to Garrison it
against the King' Authority; for a Sheriff does represent the King in his
Authority as much as any Soldier does. And it is undeniable, that to Garrison
Houses against the King's Soldiers, is Treason. Nor can it be denied but that
if this were allowed, no sentence could receive execution in Scotland, since
every man might Garrison his House, and every man might deny that he Garrisoned
his House against the King. And to put in a Garrison, and authorize them to
defend the House, was so clearly a Warlike action, that there was no place
left to debate upon intentions. And though the defending Houses be ordinarily
pursued as deforcement, yet the formal Garrisoning of it imports much more. And
the commission of Fire and Sword did not add any thing to the Crime committed,
in Garrisoning the House: For the design of such Letters is only to warrant and
command the Liedges to prosecute them as Rebels; So that before the raising of
the Letters they were accounted open and notorious Rebels, for Letters of Fire
and Sword are only granted against such; and therefore Assint in Garrisoning
his House to defend such, did expressly commit Treason against the 25. Act 6.
Par. Ia. 2.

The second part of the Interloquutor seemed likewise very hard; for raising
men in fear of War, and Listing them under Colors, or swearing them to
Colors, is certainly exercitum comparare, though there were no commission of
Fire or Sword; for the design of these Letters is not to make a Traitor, but to
prosecute actual Rebels. And though this Army was not Levied to oppose
immediately the King's Government, yet even to raise an Army within the Kingdom,
though no design could be proved, was Treason, for that was to usurp the King's
power: But much more was this Criminal, when the Levy was made, upon the wicked
design of opposing the execution of the King's Laws, to see which executed was
the chief part of his Kingly Government. And it is clear by the foresaid 17 Act
6. Parl. Ia. 2. that it is Treason to make War against the King's Liedges
against his forbidding, and if any do, the King is to gang upon them, with
assistance of the hall Lands, and to punish them after the quality of their
trespass.

VIII. The fifth point of Treason is to assail Castles, or places where the
King resides, or is for the time, ibid. But this must be only understood to be
Treason, if the assaulter know the King to be there, or if he be not, upon
design to rescue him, quo casu, he must be warranted by the Estates, as said is.

IX. The sixth point of Treason is, to raise a fray in the King's Host or Army
wilfully, Ia. 2. Parl. 12. Act 54. upon which Act the Mr. of Forbes was hanged
for raising sedition in the King's Host at Iedburgh, 14. July, 1537.

X. The seventh point of Treason is, to trouble any who kills a declared
Traitor, which Act extends only to the Kin, Friends, Fortifiers and Maintainers
of these who are killed as Traitors; because it is presumeable that when these
who are so related trouble the killer, it is presumeable the trouble arises
upon that account. 2. These relations are discharged to bear the killers any
grudge, or injure them by word or writ. Nota, It appears that the reason of
this grudge needs not be proved, but is presumed presumption, juris and de
jure, for here lex praesumit and disponit super praesumpto.

XI. The eighth point of Treason is, to impugn the dignity and authority of the
three Estates: or to seek and procure the innovation and diminution of their
power or authority, Act 130 Parl. 8. Ia. 6. But this is to be understood of a
direct impugning of their authority, as if one contended that Parliaments were
not necessary, or that one of the three Estates may be turned out.

XII. The ninth point of Treason is, to decline the King's Authority, or the
Authority of his Council in any case, whether Spiritual or Temporal. And the
King's Council are declared to be Judges competent to all causes whatsoever,
whether Spiritual or Temporal, of what ever degree or function the defenders
who are summoned shall be, Act 129. Parl. 8. K. Ia. 6. which Act was made to
repress the insolences of the Ministry, who about that time used constantly to
decline the King's Authority in Ecclesiastic matters. Conform to which Act Mr.
Andrew Crightoun was sentenced to be hanged and demain'd as Traitor, September.
1610. And Mr. James Guthrie was execute in Anno 1662. for declining the King
and his Councils jurisdiction at Striviling, when he was challenged for some
words spoken in the Pulpit. From this Act it may be observed, that the King is
in his own Person Judge competent over all Causes, and all Persons, even though
the pursuit be at his own instance, which will appear both from the Rubric and
Statutory part of the Act, albeit regulariter no man can be Judge in his own
cause.

XIII. The tenth point of Treason is, to conceal and not reveal Treason: But
concealing in this case is not Treason, except the concealer could have proved
it; for else he had by revealing and not proving made himself guilty of
Treason. This concealing of Treason is by the English Law called misprision of
Treason, and is punished only by imprisonment during life, forfeiting of goods,
and of the profit of Lands during life. For this Crime the Earl of Morton was
execute by King James 6. for having concealed the designed death of King Henry
his Father: And it may be doubted whether concealing be Treason, where the King
is not in a condition to repress or punish the Treason that is intended, for
there the end of revealing seems to cease, which is information in order to
resistance. It has been likewise doubted, whether the not revealing Treason
was punishable where the Treason was designed by the Prince or Queen: But since
they are likewise Subjects, and may commit Treason, therefore there can be no
doubt but it is Treason in any others to conceal their treasonable designs.

XIV. The eleventh point of Treason is, to flee from his Majesty or his
Lieutenant, which is not extended only to such as are sworn to Colors, but
even to such as are warned to, and do attend the King's Host, vid. tit. the
jurisdiction over Soldiers.

XV. The twelfth point of Treason is, to deny his Majesty's having the only
power of calling and dissolving of Parliaments, Act 3.1. Parl. Chapter 2.

XVI. By the common Law it is Treason to kill any of the Princes Counselors,
because they are a part of the Princes own body, l. quisquis C. h. t. But with
us the pursuing or invading any of the Session, Secret Council, or any of his
Majesty's Officers for doing his Majesty's service, is only punishable by
death, but not as Treason, Act 4. Parl. 16. Ia. 6. By Officers here are meant
only Officers of State, else it might be extended to Messengers. And I heard it
resolved that this Act extended not to such as invaded the Lion. And these
words, Any of the Session, are not extended to Advocats, Clerks, Macers, or any
else besides the Lords, as is clear by the narrative of the Act. But I think
the quality adjected that they were invaded for doing his Majesty's service,
may be proved by circumstances and presumptions, as if a pursuer who had lost a
Cause, should invade the next day a Lord who had voted against him. And the
words, This being verified and tried, import so much. But the Stat. Edward. 3.
is much more clear, making it Treason to kill the Officers therein mentioned
only, viz. Chancellor, Thesaurer, chief Justice of either Bench, or any Judge
of either Bench sitting in Judgment only; and from this Statute of our
Neighboring Nation, we may argue that the killing none below a Lord of Session
should infer the punishment of this Act. The killing a Member of Parliament is
not in England Treason, though the Parliament be a higher Judicatory then any
expressed in the Act. And Cook tells us that they allow not argumentum a fortiori
to infer Crimes. And with us the killing a Member of Parliament would not infer
death by this Act, since they fall under no qualification therein specified. In
England killing Officers falls only under the Statute, but with us, invading or
pursuing them is death, though it take no effect. Quaritur, If to invade them
when they are out of the Kingdom would fall under the Statute, since they are
not under that character elsewhere. Or if he who invaded them during their
being suspended, would fall under this Act, since during that time they
retained the character, and the exercise is only suspended. And it is resolved
by the Doctors that a Statute punishing such as invade Magistrates, is only to
be extended to such Magistrates as are once admitted, but not to such as are
only named or elected; for such Statutes are extended in gratiosis, yet they
are restricted in such odious points as their, Cabal. cas. 148.

Treasonable words, vid. t. Injuries and Libells. XVII, The third branch of the
division is Statutory Treason, which comprehends under it several other points
of Treason, which because they relate to other Crimes, therefore I shall also
refer the Reader to these Titles wherein these Crimes are principally treated
of. But it will appear by these Acts, that these Crimes are not declared to be
Treason, but only to be punishable as Treason, and therefore these Statutory
Treasons have not at all the other privileges competent to Treason, as that
they may be proved by Women, and alios testes inhabiles, or that he who accuses
in these will commit Treason, if he prove not his accusation. Thus wilful Fire
raising is Treason, Ia. 5. Parl. 3. cap. ultimo. Theft in Landed-men is
Treason, Ia. 6. Parl. 11. cap. 50. vid. tit. Theft, Murder under trust is
treason, Ia. 6. Parl. 11. cap. 51. vid. tit. Murder, sayers of Mass, Jesuits,
trafficking Papists and their resetters, commit Treason, Ia. 6. Parl. 12. cap.
120. vid. tit. Heresy. To buy or bring home poison, is treason, Ia. 2. Parl.
7. c. 31. vid. Poison. Thieves who take leill men upon Bond to re-enter them,
commit treason, Ia. 6. Parl. 1. cap. 21. But though this Act speaks generally
of the taking of any Scottish-man, yet it may clearly appear by the narrative,
and the whole strain of the Act, that the same strikes only against such
Thieves as kept correspondence with the English, and took Scottish-men
prisoners into England. But custom has interpret this otherwise, for Duncan
Macgrigor was 15. July, 1643. convict and hanged as a traitor, for art and
part of taking James Anderson and John Mackie, and the taking of Captain Cairns
found relevant as an Article of Treason against Assint.

To usurp any Prelates place after his decease, is likewise treason, Ia. 5.
Parl. 7. cap. 125.

XVIII. This Crime has in it many specialities; wherein it differs from other
Crimes: As first; He who accuses any man for treason, does incur the pain of
treason, if the defenders be acquit, which is occasioned (as the Act bears)
because of the odiousness of treason. But since the the Act says expressly that
this shall take place where the party calumniat is called, accused, and quit of
the Crime of Treason; therefore it may be inferred, that though the pursuer
raise Summonds of treason, and should pass from the same before the Panel go
to the knowledge of an Inquest, that eo casu, though the pursuer might be
punished poena extraordinaria, yet he could not be punished as a traitor. It
may be likewise doubted, if this holds in Statutory T^eason, as Theft in Landed
men, etc. And since the reason inductive of that Act is the odiousness of
treason, it would appear that this rigid Law should not take place in these
points of treason, which are not so odious of their own nature.

Another speciality in treason is, that it can only be tried by the Justices,
Reg. Maj. lib. 1. e. 1. v. 1. and that because of the Kings immediate interest,
since it is not presumable that the Fiscal in Inferior Courts would be as
careful as his Majesty's Advocat, who cannot appear there, and because of the
intricacies and great consequence of that Crime: but it may be doubted whether
Lords of Regality, or Subjects having a Justitiary, are Judges competent to
Treason, and it seems not, for the reasons foresaid.

XIX. The second privilege of treason is, that those who are pursued for
treason should be immediately committed to prison, and their goods should be put
under sicker Burrows, id est Caution, under which they must remain ay and while
they suffer an Assize, Ia. 2. p. 12. c. 49. and Reg. Maj. lib. 4. c. 1. But it
seems very hard in our Law, that there is no time prescribed for the pursuer to
insist, but that the person suspect may be kept in prison for a long time,
though he be very innocent, and offer himself to a trial; whereby the most
innocent of Subjects may be ruined in their Fortunes and Families, without any
just cause. And yet upon the other hand, it were hard that Traitors should be
allowed to go abroad, because probation cannot be presently had, which it may
be the traitor has abstracted, or that the King or State should be forced to
discover too soon by a pursuit, a treason, which he is bound in policy to cover
for some time. And as in War, so in Treason (which is as dangerous) many things
are allowed to be done which are not otherwise regular, the interest of all
preponderating the interest of any one, or a few.

XX. The third speciality in treason, is, that all Charges of treason should be
execute by Heralds and Pursevants, bearing Coats of Arms, and by Macers, and
that for the greater solemnity, else these Charges are declared null, Ia. 6. p.
12. c. 125. Likeas, the ordinary custom is to execute Summonds of treason
after that manner. But it was found upon the 5. of December 1666. in the Action
intented at his Majesty's Advocats instance against Mackulloch and others, that
this Act did only relate to Summonds of treason, or any other Charges, wherein
men are ordained to obey, under pain of Treason. But that inditements of
treason given to men who are in prison, may be execute by ordinary Messengers:
And yet the Act says, that all Executions given otherwise then is appointed by
that Act, shall be null.

XXI. Women, and others, may be Witnesses in this Crime, though in other Crimes
they cannot: and one Witness is sufficient here, and famosi and impuberes of
what ever age, are receivable as Witnesses, by an express Act of the Sederunt
of Lords of Session, in Anno 1591. Likeas, Cod. fab. hoc tit. def. 4. says,
est privilegium criminis Laese Majestatis ut facilius probetur. And that it may
be proved per famosos and socios criminis. And that it was decided in Savoy,
1591. vid. Pappon. lib. 24. tit. 2. But the English do most justly conclude,
that because the punishment is severe in treason, therefore it ought to be
proved by manifest and direct proof, and not by presumptions, or strains of
wit, Cook page 12. And that two witnesses are necessary for proving treason, he
proves most learnedly, page 26.

By the Civil Law, famosi, and mulieres were admitted to accuse in this Crime,
though not in any other Crime, l. 7, and 8. ff. ad l. jul. maj. But this last
privilege should only hold in Perduellion, Mascard. de prob. lib. 1. conclu.
462. and not in Statutory Treason. And that this should hold in no species of
treason, was Math. opinion, pa. 372. because per l. ult. cod. de prob. in
capitalibus causis Idoniis testibus atque appertissimis documentis opus esse
dicitur nec excipitur crimen Majestatis. Neither does it follow, that because
persons who are not admitted in other Crimes, are admitted to be accusers in
this, that therefore these who are unfit to be Witnesses in other Crimes,
should be admitted in this: for there is little hazard in an unfit accuser, but
there is great hazard in unfit Witnesses. And this I think much more suitable
to reason then the former Statute; for the greater the hazard is, the probation
should be so much the clearer. And though testes inhabiles may be received, or
one Witness may prove sufficiently for subjecting the Panel to the torture,
(which is all that can be inferred from that Act of Sederunt, which says only
that they ought to be received Witnesses, but says not, that they ought to be
received in all cases). Yet it were against all reason that any condemnatory
verdict or sentence could be founded upon such probation.

I find also by the Law of Savoy, that socii criminis, and famosi, are admitted
to be Witnesses; not in treason generally, but in Perduellion. And that Act is
by their Lawyers restricted so, that the Panel cannot be condemned to death or
forfeiture upon such depositions, but only to torture: Nor will he be tortured
upon such depositions, except the deponent be upon Oath, and abide the torture
also at his deposition, Cod. fab. lib. 9. tit. 5. All which seems most
reasonable, but yet it seems that no man is to be repute socius criminis, but
he who is convict, or has confessed the Crime, and dilates others; for else a
man being accused for treason, cannot allege that the Witnesses led against
him were socii criminis, for that were to confess himself to be guilty: for no
man can be socius criminis to the Panel, except the Panel be guilty himself,
and was socius to the witness therein nam relata se mutuo ponunt. And this was
so found in Assint's Process, but it was there alleged, that though socius
criminis could not be received for the Panel, yet he could be received against
him: And that was the sense of the Doctors, who exclude socius criminis from
being a witness in treason. But as to this, I doubt very much, for if a person
confessed his accession, it seems unjust that he could condemn others, being
infamous himself. And yet in open treasons, as rising in Arms, it seems
necessary to receive such as were in Arms; for none else can come near an Army
of Rebels, and so the Crime must be proved by these, or by none.

XXII. The fifth privilege is, that treason is not extinguished by death in all
cases, as other Crimes are. But that treason committed against the Kings
Person, or Commonwealth, may be inquired into after death, and the committers
Heir may be forefault therefore, Ia. 5. p. 6. c. 69. which Act bearing to be
founded upon the Civil Law; these general words contained in it, against the
Kings Person, or Commonweal, must only be extended against such treasons, as
were by the Civil Law accounted Perduellion: And therefore it is most necessary
to know the Civil Law in this case, and what was therein called Perduellion.
Seeing albeit all treasons may by an natural interpretation be said to be
committed against the Kings Person, or Commonwealth, yet the Civil Law
declared only that species of the Crime of treason, which they called
Perduellion to be punishable after death, l. ult. ff. ad l. jul. Maj. plane non
quisquis legis juliae Majestatis reus, est in eadem condition: Sed qui
Perduellionis reus est, hostili animo adversus rem publicam, vel principem
animatus. So that the infallible mark of Perduellion is hostilis animus, a
design of raising Arms. And therefore we may conclude that not only Statutory
Treasons are extinguished by death, but that even simple concealing, and not
revealing, or a malicious design to poison the King, and such other treasons as
show not a desire of rising in Arms, are likewise extinguished by death. And
yet the Basil. l. 12. h. t. say, that all the heads of treason are extinguished
by death, excepto capite proditionis, and insidiarum contra principem, (...).

Albeit the bones of the Defunct Traitor are ordinarily taken up, and brought
to the Panel in pursuits of this nature, as was done in the forefaultur of the
Lord of Restalrig; yet this is not necessary, but it is necessary in pursuits
of this nature, that the Defuncts nearest of Kin be called, as Defenders, for
their interest; both because their Estates are to be taken from them by their
forefaultur, and to the end they may defend the Defunct, and object both
against the relevancy of the Libell, and the hability of the Witnesses: And
therefore the Basilicks add very well, that haereditas publicatur, nisi crimen
ab haeredibus purgetur, (...).

It may be doubted, whether since the forefaulting after death, is founded upon
the Civil Law, and that the former Act bears expressly, that these pursuits may
be intended conform to the common Law, if these pursuits should not prescrive
with us in five years, as they do by the common Law: and it would appear they
should, since these pursuits are intented conform to the common Law, and quem
sequitur commodum eum d^bet sequi incommodum.

The sixth privilege of Treason is, that the Kings Advocat is to be the last
Speaker to the Assize in Perduellion, though in other cases the Pannel's
Advocats are to be last Speakers; And the last Speaker has much advantage, for
he may answer all is alleged by the opponent, Art. 11. Regulations 1670.

XXIII. The last privilege of Treason is, that albeit of old no persons could
be condemned in absence by the Justices; yet the Parliament still could have
proceeded against Traitors in absence. And now by a late Act of Parliament, it
is found, that in the case of Perduellion, and of treasonable rising in Arms
against the Kings Authority, the Justices may proceed to the receiving of
probation, and pronouncing of sentence even in absence of the Party: Which
being first propounded as a Querie to the Council, they remitted the same to
the Session, to whom his Majesty's Advocat gave in the following Reasons, and
Queries, upon the 15. August 1667. Whether or not a person guilty of high
Treason may be pursued before the Justices, albeit they be absent and
contumacious? So that the Justice upon citation, and sufficient probation and
evidence, may pronounce Sentence and Doom of forefaultur, if the Ditty be
proved. The reason of scruple is, that Processes of forefaultur are not so
frequent; and that in other ordinary Crimes, the defenders, if they do not
appear, are declared Fugitives, and that the following reasons appears to be
strong and relevant for the affirmative, 1. By the common Law, albeit a party
absent cannot be condemned for a Crime, yet in Treason which is crimen
exceptum: This is a speciality, that absents may be proceeded against, and
sentenced. 2. By the first Act of King James the 5th. his 6. Parliament, it is
declared, that the King has good cause and action to pursue all Summonds of
Treason committed against his Person and Commonwealth, conform to the common
Law, and good equity and reason, notwithstanding there be no special Law, Act,
or provision made thereupon. And therefore seeing by the common Law, persons
guilty of Laese Majesty may be proceeded against, and sentenced, though they
be absent. It appears that there is the same reason why the Justices should
proceed against, and sentence persons guilty of Treason, though absent, and
that he is sufficiently warranted by the said Act so to do. 3. It is
inconsistent with Law, Equity and Reason, that a person guilty of Treason
should be in a better case, and his Majesty in a worse, by the contumacy of a
Traitor, the same being an addition (if any can be added) to so high a Crime;
and that he should have impunity, and his Majesty prejudged of the casuality
arising to him by his forefaultur. 4. The Parliament is in use to proceed and
pronounce doom of forefaultur, though the party be absent: and in so doing they
do not proceed in and by a legislative power, but as the Supreme Judges: and
the Parliament being the fountain of Justice, what is just before them, is just
and warrantable before other Judicatories in the like cases. 5. By the
abovementioned Act of Parliament, it is Statute, that Summonds and Process of
Treason may be intented and pursued after the death of the Delinquents, either
his Memory, or Estate, delating the one, and forefaulting the other, whereupon
sentence may follow to the effect foresaid. And therefore, seeing sentence may
follow when the Delinquent cannot be present, and is not in being, it were
against all reason, that when they are wilfully and contumaciously absent, they
should not be proceeded against, and sentenced, if they be guilty. And it were
unjust that his Majesty should call a Parliament for punishing and forefaulting
of persons, being absent, or that he should wait till they die; especially
seeing in the interim the probation may perish, by decease of the Witnesses.

Follows the Lords of Session their opinion,
Edinburgh, the 26. of February, 1667.
The Lords of Council and Session having considered the Queries above-written,
presented to them by the Lord Bellenden his Majesty's Thesaurer Depute, it was
their opinion, that upon the Justices citation, and sufficient probation taken
before them, the Judge and Assize may proceed and pronounce sentence
thereintil, and forefaulter against the persons guilty of high Treason, though
they be absent and contumacious.

Sic subscribitur Io. Gilmore I. P. D.

Upon this the Parliament ratified the Processes led against these persons: and
by the 11. Act Parl. 2. Chapter 2. Ses. 1. it is Statuted, that rising in Arms
against the Kings Authority, might be pursued before, and judged by the
Justices. But the Parliament retain still a power cumulative with the Justices;
and when Processes of Treason are intented before them, they may proceed as
formerly, and thought this last Act a great innovation of all our Law. Nor is
it imaginable but that if it had been safe, that that privilege would had been
granted to his Majesty formerly: And that it is contrary to the Civil Law, is
clear, per l. 1. and l. penult ff. de requirendis reis, nam annotabantur bona,
and si reus post anum non comparuerit, and satis dederit de stando; non
recuperabit bona, non tamen de delicto habetur pro confesso. Divi fratres
rescripserunt, l. 1. ne quis absens puniatur, and hoc jure utimur, ne absens
damnetur. And that no probation can be received against absents in Treason, is
clear by Matheus hoc tit. and albeit per extrav. constitutionem Hen. 7. It is
ordained, that probation may be received in absence, yet this is repute no part
of the Civil Law, and is followed by no Nation, and by that extravagant
constitution this privilege is allowed to all species of Treason, which we
find to be unjust. And albeit Treason may be in some cases punished after
death, yet it cannot be from that inferred, that it may be punished in absence,
since after death the malice of unjust pursuers ordinarily ceases, and the
hazard of Death is then over: so that the event of the pursuit is not so
terrible, nor dangerous. And in these Processes, the nearest of Kin are called,
who may propound against both relevancy and probation, whatever was competent
to the Defunct. Whereas when a person is pursued in absence for Treason, no man
can in our Law be admitted to propound any thing in his defense. And albeit it
seem unreasonable that a person guilty of Treason should be in a better
condition by his contumacy, then if he compeared. To this it may be answered,
that this would prove too much, for this absurdity may be as well pressed in
absents for all other Crimes, and against such as are absents in all the
several inditements of Treason; and yet the Justices are never allowed even by
the late Act to proceed to sentence against any, but such as are pursued for
rising in Arms against the King. But the true answer to this seeming absurdity,
is, that the Law is not so inhumane, as to punish equally presumed and real
guilt: what may be a Crime, as what is found one. And it has been often found,
that men have been absent, rather out of fear of a prevailing Faction, or
corrupt Witnesses, or by inadvertence, or not being truly cited, or by being
violently detained, then out of a consciousness of guilt; yet since so
judicious a person proposed this overture, and since Council, Session, and
Parliament have fortified it by their Authority, I submit my judgment to their
determinations.

XXIV. It is ordinary for his Majesty, to command, or forbid, by private
warrands, under all highest pains, or as you shall be answerable to us. And the
certification here being indefinit, it may be doubted what the punishment may
be, in case of contravention. And 1. It would appear that the contraveeners
cannot be punished as guilty of Treason, for only Laws can make Traitors in
this Kingdom. 2. It seems that this being a contempt of the chief and Supreme
Magistrate, it may be punished arbitrarily; if the command be lawful, and in
case of importance, since even inferior Judges may punish such as contemn or
disobey them, in what is necessary for their jurisdiction. Likeas Lawyers are
of opinion, that in obediens praecepto superioris sub paena indignationis, est
arbitrarie puniendus, Cabal. casu 30. Bald. in l. legis virtus, ff. de legib.
Menoch. cas. 365. But in that case, they determine that the arbitrary
punishment cannot extend to death. And though some Doctors are of opinion, that
commissions are to be punished in this case more severely then omissions, yet I
conceive some omissions may infer greater contempt, and be more dangerous then
commissions. Nor allow I the distinction used by Lucas de penna, ad l. 1. C. ut
dignit. ord. servet. who says, that if the contempt be of dangerous
consequence, as if one being commanded to take care of a Castle, or to stop the
passage of an enemy, that then the contempt is to be severely punished by
death: but if the contempt be of things indifferent, or mean, then the contempt
is only punishable arbitrarily. And yet he is too severe in making it to be
punishable by death, except the person commanded were a Soldier, or one who
were obliged by acceptance of his Office to obey under that peril. And
therefore I would rather distinguish betwixt such commands as use to be
punished by death, if contemned, such as Military commands; and in these, the
contempt may be punished by death, for Custom comes in place of Law, and sibi
imputet, who has undertaken such an employment as requires such obedience. But
if the King should command any Country Gentleman, or Lawyer, to fortify, or
keep a Castle under all highest pains, it is probable, that their omission
could not be punished by death, and is only punishable by losing of the Princes
favor, and quod Princeps non exhibebit se gratiosum: which Bartol* makes the
punishment of that disobedience in all cases, ad extrav. qui sunt rebels.

XXV. The punishment of Laese Majesty was death, l. 5. C. h. t. animae
omissio, as Justinian calls it in his Institutions, together with the
Confiscation of all his Estate that lies within the Territories of him against
whom the Treason is committed; but is not extended to his Estate lying
elsewhere, C. 2. de constil. in 6. So that if a man commit Treason against the
King of Britain, his Estate in France does not forfeit.

With us the punishment of Treason is death, and Confiscation likewise of all
the Traitors Estate, whether Heretable, or Moveable, Feudal, or Allodial. And
the solemnity used in Parliament at the pronouncing of such sentences are, that
the Panel receives his sentence kneeling, and that after the Doom of the
forefaulter is pronounced against him, the Lion and his Brethren Heralds come
in in their formalities, and tear his Coat of Arms at the Throne, and
thereafter hang up his Escurchion reversed upon the Cross: Which had its rise
from the old Roman customs, for as Tacit, observes, lib. 5. deterrere omnes a
simili culpa volebant, non poenae modo, sed ignominiae m^tu, ut nomen e fastis
deleretur, and effigies tolleretur. Which is likewise clear, l. 24. ff. de
poenis. And that this is the custom of Flanders is clear by Perez. h. t.
moribus nostris insignia gentilia delentur, and destruuntur. But this I think
should only hold in the Crime of Perduellion, but not in other Treasons, Perez.
ibid. number. 19.

Another speciality introduced in the punishment of Perduellion, by the common
Law, was, that memoria damnabatur, and that his Children were declared
incapable to bruik any Estate or Office; which the Emperors Arcadius and
Honorius, l. 5. c. ad l. Iul. Maj. calls a mitigation of the punishment due to
Children, who as they say should have died for their Fathers Crime. But this is
so unjust, that no Nation does now use it, as Matheus observes, p. 352. And it
is expressly against l. Crimen ff. de poenis, and the Scripture, Deuteronomy. Chap. 24.
Verse. 16. And the opinion of Plato, lib. 9. de legibus. And therefore Amazias 2
King. 14.5, 6. would not kill such as were the Children of those who killed his
Father, because (as is expressed there) The Father shall not be put to death for
the Children, nor the Children for the Fathers. And Achan's punishment, Joshua
7.14. wherein he and his sons and his daughters were stoned to death, and
burned for his own Crime is no concluding argument against this opinion, since
that was founded expressly upon Gods revealed will, who can dispense with, or
alter the Laws of Nature: but it is very probable that the reason of that
severe sentence was, that God knew the whole Family to be involved in the
guilt. And it is very probable that they were resetters of the theft, or
conscious to it, since the stolen goods were taken out of the Tent were they
were. And I remember that our Parliament in Anno 1661. having adjected to the
Marquess of Argyles Sentence the dishabilitation of his Children, his Majesty
did expressly command it to be rescinded in the last Session of that Parliament;
in which the Children were rendered capable to bruik Estates or Honors, as the
other Subjects were. I know it is the opinion of some Lawyers, such as Budeus,
that this l. 5. was thereafter abrogat, ^. Sanc^mus C. de poenis, which by his
calculation is two years after the other. And though Matheus thinks that l.
Sancimus is only introduced in favors of the Friends, but not of the Children:
Yet it is more just to think that by this Law the former was abrogat, even quo
ad Children, since the reason given in that Law is general, Sancimus ibi esse
poenam ubi and noxia est propinquos, notos, familiares procul a calumnia
submovemus quos reos sceleris societas non facit. Nec enim adfinitas, vel
amicitia nefarium crimen admittunt. Peccata igitur suos teneant auctores: nec
ulterius progrediatur metus, quam reperiatur delictum. Hoc singulis quibusque
judicibus intimetur. Nor can it be concluded, that it is clear that the former
Law was not abrogat by that Law, since l. pen. C. Theod. de bon. proscrip. the
same Emperor Honorius leaves no Estate to the Children of Traitors; for it
does not follow, that because they are to succeed to no Estate of the Traitors,
that therefore they should be incapable to gain, or to succeed to any other
Estate. But after all these Laws the Basil. l. 5. h. t. extends the punishment,
(...).

Another punishment of Perduellion by the Canon Law, cap. felicis de paenis in
6. is, that the Traitors House shall be thrown down, and not rebuilt, which is
not in observance amongst us. Nor was it lawful to mourn for him when dead, or
to give him a public Burial, l. 11. ff. de his qui not. and l. 35. ff. de
relig. And with us it is ordinary for the friends of such as are condemned for
Treason, to get a warrant for attending them in mourning upon the Scaffold. But
I do not find that the attending him in mourning, or the burying him, was ever
accounted a Crime in Scotland.

I find that some Lawyers believe, that the fear of losing an Estate excuses
him who has complied with the Enemies of his Prince, notae ad Clar. h. t. number.
9. Imol. Consil. 34. But this was expressly repelled in the Marquess of Argyle's
Process 1661. But certainly the fear of life might excuse; for there can be no
Crime where there is not a voluntar act, and nothing can be voluntar which is
forced.

Though repentance is no relevant defense against a ditty of Treason,
especially where there is once a deed of Treason committed; yet such is the
clemency of Princes, that by the l. 1. Basil. h. t. I find that he who in the
beginning of a conspiracy reveals, is to be rewarded, but he who after the
Treason is committed reveals the Authors, (...), is only to be pardoned.

Sometimes likewise to punish the atrociousness of this Crime, the very Parents
are banished, and all the Family are ordained to change their name; as was done
Ravillac's case by the Parliament of Paris: for though these could not be
corporeally punished, yet the State may justly deny their protection, and
Country, to any who may be presumed will bear revenge, or probably were
infected with their Friends Crime.

But though these punishments may be inflicted after probation, yet if the
Panel was only denounced for not appearing in Tre^son, he only loses his
Movables; and a gift of forfeiture following such a denounciation was declared
null by the Lords of Session, because the certification of the Letters in that
case, is only to be denounced fugitives, and lose their Movables, 30. July,
1662. and 30. November. 1671. Haige contra Moscrop.

TITLE VII. Sedition.
1. What is Sedition? 2. The punishment of it. 3. Convocation of the Liedges
how punished.
I. SEdition is a Commotion of the people without authority, and if it be such
as tends to the disturbing of the Government, ad exitium principis vel
Senatorum ejus and mutationem rei publicae, it is Treason; but if it only be
raised upon any private account, it is not properly called Treason: But it is
with us called a Convocation of the Liedges.

These public Seditions are called Seditio regni vel exercitus, cap. 1. l. 4.
Reg. Majest. And this species of Sedition is punishable as Treason: And the Mr.
of Forbes was hanged for raising Sedition in the King's Host at Iedburgh. When
a Sedition is raised against the Government, it is ^epute Treason by the
Doctors, as is clear by Bossius de crimine Laese Majestatis: And Perezius hoc.
tit.

II. Albeit per l. 1. cod. de seditiosis, it be only said, mulctam gravissimam
subtinebit, which general term, in my opinion, is used to signify that this
Crime is not to be equally punished, but according to the several degrees of
guilt, and the authors and first raisers of the tumult are to be most severely
punished. And the Basilick says only that gravissimae paenae subjicitur (...),
which the Greek gloss expounds unwarrantably to be ultimum suplicium in all
cases, and as to raise men against the Prince is Treason, so to raise them
against Public Order or Discipline, (...), is Sedition properly, and thus
Treason and Sedition properly differ, though oftentimes Sedition may be
accompanied with qualities which may raise it to Treason. And this the
Basilicks make not seditiosus conventus Treason, but if it be raised ut
occidatur Magistratus seditiosus conventus, it is Treason in that case, l. 1.
h. t.

I find not Sedition to be expressly declared Treason with us in any case; for
by the 78. Act Ia. 2. Parl. 14. the raising of Commons in hindering the common
Law (which is properly Sedition) or the making of Leagues and Bonds within
Burgh, without the command of their Head Officer, is declared to be punishable
by Confiscation of Movables, and that their lives shall be in the King's will.
From which Act it is likewise to be observed, that the command of the
Magistrate does in things belonging to his Office excuse the Liedges, and
therefore it may be asserted that the Liedges rising in obedience to commands
of the Sheriff, or Lord of Regality, are not punishable, except it was clearly
palpable to them that their insurrection was in contempt of his Majesty's
Authority, which appears to be the meaning of the foresaid l. si quis contra
evidentissimam jussionem, etc. And seeing the Liedges are oblidged to obey their
Magistrates, and to rise when he calls them, as is evident by many Acts of
Parliament, and without this allowance his Majesty could not be served: it were
hard to punish them for that obedience, which would be punishable if they
refused it.

III. The convocating the Liedges in Bands of Men of War, for daily, or
monthly wages, without special license, is declared likewise to be punishable
by death, by the 75. Act 9. Parl. Q. M. which Act is ratified by the 12. Act
10. Parl. K. Ia. 6. And the making of all Leagues and Bands amongst the Liedges
without his Majesty's consent, are discharged, and the contraveeners are
declared to be punishable as movers of Sedition and unquietness, to the trouble
of the public peace of the Realm, therefore to be punished with all rigor, to
the example of others. Both which Acts are ratified by the 4. Act 1. Ses.
Charl. 2. And yet it may be contended that such Seditions as these are
punishable as Treason, since the making of Bonds and Leagues amongst the
Liedges is declared by the foresaid 4. Act to be one of his Majesty's Royal
Prerogatives. And sure it is Treason for any of his Majesty's Liedges to usurp
his royal prerogative. But sure it is, that to convocat the Liedges simply
without Bonds or Leagues, can no ways be accounted Treason, much less the
being present as such Convocations, though in Arms: And thus it was found in
the case of a Baxter who was pursued as guilty of the Convocation raised
against the Customers in Anno 1665. That naked assistance at such meetings per
se was not relevant to infer death, but only an arbitrary punishment, as is
clear by the 5. Act 1. Parl. Ia. 1. whereby all men are forbidden to travel
with more not they can sustain, and if they do, they may be put under sicker
Burrows till the King declare his will. And by the 85. Act 6. Parl. I. 1.
Electing of Deacons was discharged as Sedition.

Convocations are allowed in some cases, as for pursuing of Thieves and
Sorners, as Ia. 6. Parl. 14. cap. 247.

This Crime of simple Convocation is ordinarily pursued before the Council, and
is seldom punished either by the Council, or Justice Court, tanquum crimen per
se, but as the agradging quality of a Riot or other Crime.

TITLE VIII. Poison.
1. The punishment of Poison by our Law. 2. How far the giving good Druggs
irregularly is punishable. 3. Whether the poisoning Jews, or Excommunicat
Persons, be punishable. 4. Whether the poisoning Beasts, or Fields, be
punishable by this Statute. 5. Whether endeavors to poison be punishable. 6.
The aggravations of this Crime.
1. Poison is by our Law declared to be punishable as the Crime of Treason, but
it is not declared Treason, Act 31.7. Parl. Ia. 2. By which all persons are
discharged to bring home Poison for any use by which any Christian man or woman
may take bodily harm, and that under the pain of Treason, and that being
convict, they shall forefault to the King Life, Land, and Goods; but
notwithstanding of these words, for any manner or use, Apothecaries and others
do daily bring home Poison. But to this it may be answered, that they bring the
same home, not as Poison, but as Druggs, and the Law presumes that the Liedges
are in no hazard of that Poison which is in the hands of skilful men. This was
likewise the opinion of the Doctors Gothofred prax. criminal.. venenum: But
notwithstanding that the buying or giving of Poison is declared Treason by the
Law, yet I find no instances in the Journal Books where any have been convict
as Traitors upon this account: But on the contrary, John Dick for poisoning his
Brother and Sister is only ordained to be execute, but is not forefault, ult.
March 1649. If any Stranger bring home Poison any manner of way, it is provided
by the 32. Act of that Parliament, that they shall be punished the same manner
of way, and that no remission or safe conduct shall be profitable to them.

The reason of this severity proceeds from the abominableness of that Crime,
plus est enim hominem veneno necare quam gladio dicit gloss. in. ead. l^ge
just. de publicis judicibus per textum l. 1. de mal. and Math. For he to whom
Poison is given cannot defend himself, and Poison is a way of death so much
hated, that though the Law has allowed executions by the Sword, yet it has
never allowed any execution by Poison.

Those who give Poison were by the Civil Law called venenarii and they were
only punished capitally, per l. Corneliam de sicariis, l. 1.. 1. adl. Cornel.
de sic. And it may be proved by presumptions, Clarus Quest. 4. verse. fin. But
the Body must in this case be sighted by Physicians, and the poisonous quality
must be proved.

The buying of Poison, though with a design to kill thereby, if murder do not
actually ensue, is not thought capital by the Doctors, but only punishable
paena extraordinaria, Gothofred. prax. criminal.. venenum number. 21. Yet with us
the very buying is by this Act of Parliament capital.

II. Whether to give Druggs that are not of their own nature poysonable too
frequently, and contrary to the nature of the disease, be punishable by this
Law, or as murder, or be punishable at all, was debated in Kennedies case, the
8. of February 1676. and that it was punishable was contended, because venenum
or pharmacon was in Law nomen generis, and expressed good Druggs as well as ill,
l. venenum ff. de verb. sig. And the best of Druggs, given in great excess, is
Poison; for Poison consists in excess of quantity as well as quality, and
whatever overpowers our nature is poysonable to us. And since the one may kill
as well as the other, and that killing is that which is punished, the Law
should punish the one as well as the other. And whatever may be said where the
design was not known, yet here the design of killing was communicated to
Kennedie. And it is proved that he refused to give mere poison, left the
external marks after death should discover that Poison was given, but that it
was safer to give constant purgations to be thrown in by his Servant in his
drink upon all occasions, and that without his knowledge, and contrary to the
nature of his disease, he having a Flux: All which circumstances show a design
to kill. And Gothofred.. venenum is clear that medici and farmacopolae ineptum
medicamentum scienter ad hibentes ut infirmus morietur tenentur ut homicidae.
And though the judgment of Physicians ought to be asked where the design is
not known, yet where the design of killing, and means suitable to that design
are clearly proved, there is no place for consulting Physicians; nor can any
danger ensue from the preparat^ve of punishing this Panel to other Physicians
or Apothecaries, except they give Physic without being employed by the party,
and at the desire of Servants, who employ upon a design to kill, and
administrat the Druggs at unseasonable hours: All which are of themselves
Criminal; and this way is more dangerous then ordinary Poison, because Servants
are more easily admitted then others, and this way is less discoverable. Nor
needs it be proved that the Defunct died of this Poison, for even one who got
true Poison might have died of other diseases, but it is sufficiently proved,
that after the giving of their Purgatives, he died the next morning of such a
looseness as made his Bed to swim. And as this is like the natural product, so
presumitur contra versantem in illicito, especially all this design of Murder
being to conceal the Servants theft, in which this Apothecary was a sharer.

III. From these words of the Act, through the which any Christian man or woman
may take bodily harm, it may be concluded, that 1. The poisoning of a Jew or
Pagan falls not under this Act, though it may be pursued as Murder: And it may
be doubted whether the poisoning of an Excommunicat person can fall under this
Act, since they are not Christians: But to prevent all this, the English
Statute bears, that to kill any reasonable creature in rerum natura, by Poison,
or otherwise, etc. And Cook observes, that to poison a Jew or Turk falls under
their Satute.

IV. From these words likewise it may be observed that the poisoning of bruit
Beasts does not fall immediately under this Act, nor yet the poisoning whole
Fields, to the end Beasts may die. Albeit both these Crimes be punishable by
death by the Laws of other Nations, as Carpz. observes, tract. crim. Quest. 21.
number. 24. And since Theft is punishable by death, much more ought the poisoning
of Beasts be, since not only is the party less'd by wanting his Beasts as much
as in Theft, but the Commonwealth is more prejudged then in Theft, since the
Beasts so poisoned, are made unserviceable as to all uses; and men are likewise
in danger by eating or using of them: And this is worse then houghing of Oxen,
which is capital by our Law.

But if a Beast be poisoned, that men may be thereby poisoned, then the
poisoning of Beasts will infer death.

From these words, may take bodily harm, it may be inferred likewise that the
giving of Poison whereby men do fall Paralitick, or Lame, should fall under
this Statute, though the person dies not, since that may be constructed bodily
harm.

V. As also it may be concluded, that since to bring home Poison whereby men
may die does infer death, that therefore the giving of Poison, though death do
not follow, either because the Poison was not strong enough, or because the
party poisoned did counter-act its force immediately by suitable remedies,
should be punishable by death; for these are more immediate deeds then to bring
home Poison: And generally endeavor is in this Crime punished as the consumat
Act, where the endeavor comes to any deed that approaches the Crime, l. 1. ff.
ad l. Pomp. de parricid. though Carpz. is of a contrair opinion, asserting that
conatus or endeavor is only to be punished even in that case by an
extraordinary punishment. The administrating Drinks or Medicaments to procure
or increase love, is thought not punishable, though death do not follow,
because there was no design there to kill, Carpz. ibid. and l. siquis ff. de
poenis, though this be punishable, as that Law asserts, by a lesser punishment,
nam est res mali exempli.

VI. Endeavor is punishable in the poisoning of Parents, and in reiterated
endeavors, though death follow not. And the poisoning of Magistrates, or
Masters, since these great aggravations are so odious in the very contrivance,
that these aggravations are as odious as success: And as the Judge may mitigate
the punishment upon the account of lessening circumstances, so he may highten
the punishment upon the account of aggradging circumstances, Vasq. contraver.
illust. cap. 14. and Carpz. number. 50. quest. 20. part. 1. gives us several
decisions to this purpose, and amongst other decisions, tells us of two
Mountibanks who were burnt with hot Tongs to death, for having poisoned ten
several persons. But if a Physician would poison his Patient, it would be
certainly Treason with us, as being Murder under trust.

TITLE. IX. De Incendiariis, or Fire-raisers.
1. Malicious and designed Fire-raising is only punishable by death. 2. What
presumptions can prove this design. 3. Whether one may be punished for burning
his own House? 4. The punishment of Fire-raising according to the Civil Law. 5.
The punishmint of it according to our Law. 6. The burning of Coal-heughs how
punished. 7. Whether the drowning a Coal-heugh be punishable, as the burning of
it. 8. Fire-raising cannot be remitted. 9. The punishment culposi incendii. 10.
How accidental Fire-raising is to be punished. 11. How Masters are to be
punished for their Servants negligence.
IT is most unnatural that the Elements which were created to be Servants to
Man, should have dominion over him: And therefore these who raise Fire are
repute great enemies to mankind, and more criminal then either Theives or
Murderers. For in Theft, the thing stolen remains still with the Commonwealth,
whereas it is absolutely destroyed by Fire: And in Murder the Crime extends
never further then the design, whereas in Fire-raising, the merciless Element
which is employed, debords often beyond its commission, and involves in the
common misery those against whom the Fire-raiser had no design, with those who
were his known enemies. And therefore those who raise Fire within a Town are
burnt; whereas those who burn only a House are not so grievously punished.

I. A Fire-raiser, or Incendiarius, is by Lawyers defined to be he who of
design raises Fire, whether he kindle the same with his own hand, or
commissionat another, or executes himself another Commission. And because of
the atrociousness of this Crime, the attempt is punished, though the effect
follow not, and threatenings, though nothing follow, are punished, Damhaud.
rubrica de Incendiariis, but because this Crime is of so high a nature, and
that it is improbable that any would be so merciless to commit the same,
therefore the Law requires that the Fire-raising which is punishable, be
committed dolo malo: And with us it is required they be combustores domorum
nequiter and malitiose, as Skeen translates it, ad cap. 10. Malcolmi 2. And
wilful Fire-raising is only declared punishable by death, Cap. 8. Parl. 3. I. 5.

II. But since design and dolus are acts of the mind, therefore they are
inferred from presumptions, and what presumptions are necessary in this case,
are very well related by Far. quest. 110. cap. 2. And John Meldrum was execute
upon presumptions, 2 Aug. 1633. where he being pursued for burning the House of
Frendrick: The only presumptions adduced against him were, great threatenings,
capital enmity, his contradicting himself in his own Examinations, common brute
and open fame, that he was the burner. But I think that case very hard, and not
to be drawn in consequence, for though the dolus and design may be proved by
presumptions, because that is an act of the mind, yet the burning it self being
an external act, should only be proved by Witnesses and confession. 2. Seeing
probatio praesumptiva is but fi^titi^, it were hard to allow both the burning
it self, and quo animo the Fire was raised to be proved by presumptions against
that common rule in Law, that duae fictiones non cadunt in candem rem. 3.
Lawyers are positive, that dolus debet possit probari manifest, Bertez.
consil. 322.

III. It is doubted among the Doctors, whether he that burns his own House may
be punished as Incendiarius, since quilibet est rei sua arbiter; and dominion
is defined to be the using of any thing as we think fit. But since Fire-raising
is oft-times punished, not only for the prejudice it has done, sed quia flamma
potuit longius e vagari, therefore Fire-raising should be punished in this
case. And as it is not presumable that any man will burn his own without
design, so if this were not punished, men might upon the pretext of burning
their own waste and destroy their own, and ruin their neighbouss. And he might
very well be presumed to have had a design against his Neighbors; but though
the immediate dominion belong to private persons, yet the King has also an
interest, and dominium directum. And as no man can kill himself lawfully, so
neither can he burn his own House, except he can instruct that he did the same
upon a just and reasonable cause.

IV. The punishment of Fire-raising by the Civil Law, was various, and suitable
to the several degrees of the Crime; for raisers of Fire within a Town were
burnt alive: Those who burnt Corns beside Houses were bound and beat, and then
burnt, but not burnt quick, as we speak, lex 28. parag. Incendiarii ff. de
poenis, but the burning of a House or Village was not so highly punished. And
Clarus Quest. 68. thinks that the Statutory pain of Fire-raising, if it be
capital, should not take place in small Fire-raising: But since a small spark
may kindle a great fire, this conclusion seems very unwarrantable, if the Fire
was designedly raised.

V. According to our Law, the burning of folks in their Houses, and Corns, and
wilful Fire-raising, is Treason: And Laese Majesty, Ia. 5. p. 3. cap. 8. From
which Act it is to be observed, 1. That the Particle and, is not here
copulative, but a disjunctive, for either of these cases, viz. the burning of
Corns is per se Treason. 2. It is observable, that all Fire-ra^sing is not
Treason (though the Rubric of the Act bear, that all Fire-raising is Treason)
which may be concluded by these reasons, 1. That all punishments should be
commensurat to the Delicts and Crimes which are punished; and therefore since
Fire-raisings are very various, it were unjust that they should be all equally
punished, especially the punishment here being Treason, which were too severe
for burning Peets in a Moss, or a little Cottage standing in a Moor, where the
guilt is so small, that the offenders in these cases should be capitally
punished. And in a case pursued against Mackenzie of Suddie, upon the 29. July
1693. for burning some fuel standing upon a Moor, the Justices would not
sustain this as Treason. 2. If all Fire-raising were by this Act Treason, there
needed not a posterior Act have been made, cap. 146. p. 12. Ia. 6. declaring
that wilful Fire-raising in Coal-heughs, upon malice and despite, is punishable
as Treason. 3. By the foresaid Act of K. Ia. 5. it needed not to have been said
that the burning of Folks in their Houses, and the burning of Houses and Corns
should be Treason, if generally all Fire-raising were Treason.

For the better understanding then of that Act, we must consider that there are
three several species of Fire-raising declared to be Treason by that Act: The
first is, the burning Folks in their Houses, which must be interpret likewise
to be the burning of Dwelling Houses, though the People were not accidentally
there, or were possibly there, and escaped. Which species of Fire-raising is
most severely punished, both because Fire-raising was of all others the most
horrid, and domus sua est unicuique tutissimum refugium, and because ordinarily
the burning of all the persons dwelling in the House is thereby designed, as
well as the burning the House it self.

The second species is, the burning Houses and Corns, which is suitable to the
foresaid 28. Law ff. de poenis, where it is said, that qui acervum frumenti
juxta aedes positum combusserit, vinctus, verberatusque, igne necatur.

The third species is, willful Fire-raising, which differs in this from
Burning, that Burning is of a particular place, with design to destroy no more:
But Fire-raising is the burning a particular place, with design to burn more;
as to kindle a little Corn upon design to burn the whole Field.

VI. The other Act making the burning of Coal-heughs to be Treason, was
practiced upon John Henry, 14. June 1615. who was hanged thereupon. And the
reason of this Law was founded upon the favourableness of that Manufactory,
which some do ruin by putting fire in them, which is so easy, that nothing
could defend against it, but the severity of such a Law as this, and upon the
greatness of the hazard which did arise by such Fires as this, which could
never be quenched when once kindled.

VII. I was once consulted whether the drowning of Coal-heughs was Treason by
this Act, since erat eadem ratio utrobique, but I thought not, because penal
Laws, especially in which the punishment is so severe as Treason, should not be
extended, as is elsewhere largely debated. And the hazard of drowning a
Coal-heugh is not equal to the burning of it; for drowning can be easier
removed, and cannot spread so far.

VIII. So odious is this Crime, that it is expressly provided it shall be one of
the four points of the Crown, and so can only be cognosced by the Justices; and
all remissions granted for Fire-raising are declared null: But this last is not
in viridi observantia. And Fire-raising being included in the Earl of Caithness
remission, it was sustained, though their Acts were objected.

IX. If dole and design cannot be proved in the Fire-raising, so that it were
accidental, sed si culpa incendio causam dederit, there is a Civil Action, by
the Civil Law allowed, ex lege aquilia: But for the further understanding
incendii culpas, the more exact Doctors do distinguish betwixt incendium ex
culpa lata, ex culpa levi, and ex culpa levissima commissum. And since culpa
lata aequi paratur dolo, therefore they make it to be corporeally punishable,
though in that case the punishment is not extended to death; but if the same be
committed only ex culpa levi, then it is to be punished by a Fine: but if the
committer have not wherewith to pay his Fine, he may Subsidiarly be punished in
his person: But if the Fire be raised per culpam levissimam, then the committer
can never be punished corporeally, even though he want Money wherewith to pay
his Fine, dicunt tamen aliqui culpam levissimam in faciendo, aequiparari culpae
levi in committendo, Alex. con. 55.

IX. By our Law, he who burns a House in a Town by misgovernance, and not of
set purpose, as the Act says, he shall be punished at the sight of the
Magistrates of the Town, and his Goods, shall be given to him who suffers the
prejudice, and shall likewise be banished for three years; and if he have no
Goods, he shall be scourged at the Market Cross, and through the Town, and shall
be banished for seven years; but if he who owes the House, do either by
himself, his Wife, or Bairns, (id est negligently) burn his own House, albeit
no Neighbor be thereby prejudged, yet he shall be banished the Town for three
years: And if he to whom the House is set burn the same negligently, he shall
repair the damage, and be baninished for three years: Or if a Stranger, or
Traveller, burn, as said is, he shall be Arrested, and repair the skaith, which
if he be not able to do, he shall abide in Sickerness ( id est, in Prison) at
the King's will: And if the Governors of the Town be negligent in the
execution of their Office, they are to be unlawed in ten pounds: And if Fire
happens in Husband-Towns, in Barronies, they are to be punished by the Lords,
id est, Barrons in like-manner as Magistrates do within Burgh, Ia. 1. Parl. 4.
cap. 75.

By this Act likewise, no Fire is to be carried from on House to another, but
in a covered Vessel, under the pain of an Un-law; but since this Un-law is not
expressed, it is therefore Arbitrary to the Judge to raise it as high as his
Jurisdiction will suffer, though in justice he should proportion it to the
Crime, especially since it is not taxed here of design, that it may be
proportioned, as said is.

Upon this Act there may be several doubts raised, as first. What is meant by
the word misgovernance, for clearing whereof, the common distinction made by
the Doctors, and related by Alexander Consilio 55. would be considered. And it
appears that misgovernance in this case does include culpam levissimam, the
meanest fault, because the Act bears misgovernance, and not of set purpose; so
that whatever is not of set purpose, or designed, is punishable by this Act.
Likeas, the word recklesly, which is likewise used in this Act, as exegetick of
the former, may be properly enough extended to culpa levissima* but yet it may
be argued upon the other hand, that since the punishment of Servants raising
Fire by misgovernance, is to be Scourged publicly, and then Banished, and that
Masters are punished if they burn their own Houses, after that manner, it were
hard to extend this punishment ad culpam levissimam: and as the Law interprets
obligations to give Wine or Corn, neither to be extended to the best, nor worst
of that species; so in this case, misgovernance should be interpret, as that it
may properly neither be meant of culpa lata, nor levissima, but of culpa levis,
which is media: and the word misgovernance properly does imply a fault that is
considerable, and verba poenam imponentia, sunt strictissime interpretanda, as
Lawyers observe. 2. It may be doubted, whether if Children who are not come to
that age at which they are only punishable themselves, should burn the Fathers
House, if the Father be punishable by this Act, eo casu; and albeit it would
seem that he is, seeing accident without judgment is punished in this case, by
repairing the damage done, yet it is more suitable to reason to conclude that
he is not, because 1. He who has no government by Law of himself, or any thing
else, cannot be said to do any thing by misgovernance. 2. Children in Law are
equiparat to fu^ious persons, or Idiots; and as the Father could not be
punishable for what is done by his Children, being furious, and Idiots, so
neither can he be punishable for what is done by them whilst they are
impuberes. 3. Quia accessorium sequitur naturam sui principalis, and
subsidiarium naturam ejus cui est subsidiarum, and therefore, where the Child
himself cannot be punished, we ought to conclude that the Father ought not to
be punished for him.

XI. The Doctors do conclude that the Master of the Family is bound not only
for his own, but likewise for the fault of any of the Family who raises Fire,
for having choos'd them himself, he ought to be liable for their fault, and he
ought to blame himself for not choosing of better Servants. But this is to be
restricted to the injuries done by the Servants in their respective employments
to which they were made overseers by Masters: As for instance, if the Cook
should leave the Fire securely at night in the Kitchen, but a Laquie belonging
to the House should thereafter come in to the Kitchen and scatter it so as that
both their Masters and the Neighbors House were burnt, they conclude that the
Master would not be liable to make up his Neighbors damage, since the Master
was not to be blamed, the person choos'd by him having done his duty, Carpz.
part. 1. quest. 39. number. 51, and 52. But this seems unreasonable, for it may be
alleged that the Master should not have choosed any such Servants: And it is
all one to the Neighbors, by whom the prejudice is done, or whether it was
done without the committers office, or not. And therefore it were fit to
consider whether the person who did the injury was known to be a profligat or
vicious person before he was employed. And it seems that this may be the
interest of the Commonwealth, because it would secure Neighbors, and be
advantageous for the Commonwealth, that none should employ Servants who are
not sufficient.

TITLE X. Witchcraft
1. Wierus arguments against the punishing of Witches, with the answers
thereto. 2. Some observations which may persuade a Judge to be cautious in
judging this Crime. 3. Upon what presumptions Witches may be apprehended. 4.
Who are Judges competent thereto. 5. Paction with the Devil. 6. Renouncing of
Baptism. 7. The Devils mark. 8. Threatening to do mischief; how punishable. 9.
Malefices where there are no conection betwixt the cause and the effect. 10.
The useing Magic Arts for good ends. how punishable. 11. Consulting with
Witches how punished. 12. What the being defamed by the Witches imports. 13. A
Witches confession not punishable, except the thing confessed be possible, and de
succubis and incubis. 14. Whether the transportations confessed, be real, and
though real, whether punishable. 15. Whether a Witch can cause any person be
possessed. 16. Whether penetration be possible. 17. Whether transformation be
possible. 18. Whether he can make Bruits to speak, or raise storms. 19. Whether
Witches may transfer diseases, and whether it be lawful to seek their help for
this. 20. Whether Witches may kill by their looks. 21. Whether they can procure
love by their potions. 22. How they torment men by their Images. 23. Whether
Confessions before Kirk Sessions be relevant. 24. Who can be Witnesses in this
Crime. 25. The punishment of this Crime by the Civil Law, and ours. 26. The
punishment of it by the Law of England.
THat there are Witches, Divines cannot doubt, since the Word of God has
ordained that no Witch shall live; nor Lawyers in Scotland, seeing our Law
ordains it to be punished with death. And though many Lawyers in Holland, and
elsewhere, do think, that albeit there were Witches under the Law, yet there
are none under the Gospel; the Devils power having ceased, as to these, as well
as in his giving Responses by Oracles.

I. Wierus, that great Patron of Witchcraft, endeavors to maintain his
opinion by these Arguments, 1. That such as are accused of Witchcraft are
ordinarily silly old Women, whose Age and Sex disposes them to Melancholy, and
whose Melancholy disposes them to a madness, which should render their
Confessions very suspect: And in this Crime there are seldom other prooves;
whereas the things confessed are so horrid, that it cannot be imagined any
reasonable creature would commit them. 2. God can only work the Miracle
ascribed to Witches; he who is the Author of Nature being only able to alter or
divert its course. And the Devil does but delude the fancy of poor Creatures,
as Fevers and Melancholy misrepresent objects: Nor are such as are cheated in
the one more guilty then they who are sick of the other. And it is severe to
burn men and women for doing that which is concluded impossible to be done by
them. 3. It is unjust to punish them for doing ill by Charms, except it could
be first proved that these Charms produced the effects that are punishable; and
Lawyers should argue thus, those who kill or hurt Men or Beasts by unlawful
means, are punishable by death. But so it is, that Witches and Charmers kill
Men and Beasts by unlawful means, and therefore Charmers ought to be punished by
death. Off which Syllogism Wierus denies the Minor; for it can never be proved
that Verses, Crosses, or laying Flesh in the Threshold, etc. can destroy Men or
Beasts, these being causes very disproportionable to such effects, there being
no Contract betwixt the Agent and Patient in these cases. 4. These who execute
the will of God are not punishable, for that is their duty, and so cannot be
their Crime. But so it is, that whatever the Devil or Witches do, is decreed by
God either for trial or punishment expressly, and without his permission nothing
can be done. And if the Devil were not acting here by obedience, or were at
liberty, he would not leave any one man undestroyed, or any of Gods works
undefaced.

But that there are Witches, and that they are punishable capitally, not only
when they Poison or Murder, but even for Enchanting and deluding the world, is
clear by an express Text, Exodus 22. Verse. 18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live: And it is observable, that the same word which expresses a Witch here, is
that which is used in Exodus 7. to express those Magicians who deluded only the
people by transforming a Rod into a Serpent, as Moses had done, though no
person was prejudged by their cheat and illusion. Likeas, Lev. 29. and 27. It
is ordained that a man or a woman that has a familiar spirit, or that is a
Wizard, shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones; their
blood shall be upon them. Which Laws were in such observation amongst the Jews,
that the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. was afraid to use her Sorcerie before the
King, because the King had cut off those who had Familiar Spirits and Wizards
out of the Land. And so great indignation did the eternal God bear to this sin,
that he did destroy the Ten Tribes of Israel because they were addicted to it.

Not were the Jews only enemies to this vice, but even the Henthens following
the Dictats of Nature, punished Witches as enemies to the author of it; for the
Persians dashed their heads against Stones, as Minsing observes, ad. Item lex
Cornelia inst. de pub. jud. and Tacitus lib. 2. Annal. tells us, that Publius
Marcius and Pituanus were execute for this Crime: for which likewise Valerius
Maximus, lib. 6. eap. 3. tells us, that Publicia and Lucinia were with
threescore and ten other Romans hanged. But since it is expressly condemned in
Scripture, and by many general Councils, such as Aurelian, Toletan, and
Anaciritan, it should not be lawful for us to debate what the Law has expressly
condemned, by the same reason, that we should deny Witches, we must deny the
truth of all History, Ecclesiastic and Secular: And Plutarch, lib. 5. Sumps.
cap. 7. observes, Quodammodo Philosophiam tollunt qui rebus mirabilibus fidem
non habent opportet autem qua ratione aliquid fiat, ratione tractare, quod vero
id fiat, ex ratione est sumendum. It is sure that the Devil having the power
and will to prejudge men, cannot but be ready to execute all that is in
Witchcraft: And it is as credible that God would suffer men to be convinced by
this means, that there are Spirits, and that by their means he would give
continued proofs of his power in repressing the Devil, and of the necessity
that silly men have of depending upon his infinite power.

To the former Arguments it may be answered, that as to the first, all sins and
vices are the effects of delusion; nor are Witches more deluded by Melancholy,
then Murderers are by Rage or Revenge. And though it has never been seen that
persons naturally mad, have been either guilty of, or punished for this Crime,
the Devil designing in this Crime to gain only such as can damn themselves by
giving a free consent. Yet if Madness could be proved, or did appear; it would
certainly defend both against the guilt and punishment: And therefore such a
series of clear circumstances should concur before a person be found guilty of
this Crime, as should be able to secure the Panel, and satisfy the Judge
fully in the Quaerie. But since daily experience convinces the world that there
may be such a Crime, and that the Law exacts either confession, or clear
proofs, who can condemn the Law as rigorous in this case, since without
believing these there could be no Justice administrat, and whilst Judges shunned
to punish it in some cases, they behooved to suffer it from the same arguments
to go unpunished in all cases.

To the second, it is answered, that though neither the Devil nor Witches can
work miracles, yet the offering to cheat the world by a commerce with the
Devil, and the very believing that the Devil is able to do such things for
them, should be a sufficient Crime; but much more when they believe all those
things to be done by themselves, they giving their own express consent to the
Crime, and concurring by all that in them is to the commission of it. Likeas,
it is undeniable that the Devil knowing all the secrets of Nature, may be
applying Actives to Passives, that are unknown to us, produce real effects
which seem impossible.

To the third, though Charms be not able to produce the effects that are
punishable in Witches, yet since these effects cannot be produced without the
Devil, and that he will not employ himself at the desire of any who have not
resigned themselves wholly to him, it is very just that the users of these
should be punished, being guilty at least of Apostasy and Heresy.

The fourth Argument is but a mere and silly Sophism, for though God in his
providence permits at least all things that are done, to be done, yet such as
contemn either the commands of him or his Vicegerents ought to be punished.

I cannot but acknowledge that there are some secrets in Nature which would
have been looked upon in the first Authors as the effects of Magic: And I
believe that in the duller Nations a Philosopher drawing Iron with a Loadstone
might have run a great risque of being burnt; and it is hard to give a
judgment of Naudeus learned Book in favors of the Persian Magicians, the
Assyrian Chaldeans, the Indian Gymnosophists, and the Druids of the Gauls; for
it cannot be denied but that many true Mathematicians and Physicians have past
for Magicians in the duller ages of the world, but as to this, there is now no
fear since Learning has sufficiently illuminat the world, so as to distinguish
betwixt these two. But I am still jealous of those Sages who were frequented by
Familiar Spirits, though they were otherwise very excellent men, such as
Porphir. Iamblicus, Plotin. and others, who pretended by the purity of their
lives to be so spiritual, as to deserve the friendship of Spirits: For besides
that the Primitive Fathers and Doctors of the Church have testified against
such, as mere Magicians. It is not intelligible how those Spirits which
frequented them could be good, since they were tempted to fall from the true
Religion to Paganism, and did offer such Sacrifices as the true God did never
allow; and if such impostures were allowed, it were easy for any to defend
themselves, being truly Witches.

II. Albeit Witchcraft be the greatest of Crimes, since it includes in it the
grossest of Heresies, and Blasphemies, and Treasons against God, in preferring
to the Almighty his rebel and enemy, and in thinking the Devil worthier of
being served and reverenced, and is accompanied with Murder, Poisoning,
Bestiality, and other horrid Crimes. Yet I conclude only from this, that when
Witches are found guilty, they should be most severely punished, not with
Scourg^ng and Ban^shment, as the custom of Savoy was related to be by
Gothofred, hoc tit. but by the most ignominious of deaths. Yet from the
horridness of this Crime, I do conclude, that of all Crimes it requires the
clearest relevancy, and most convincing probation. And I condemn next to the
Witches themselves, those cruel and too forward Judges, who burn persons by
thousands as guilty of this Crime, to whom I shall recommend these
considerations,

1. That it is not presumeable that any who hear of the kindness of God to men,
and of the Devils malice against them; of the rewards of Heaven, and torments
of Hell, would deliberatly enter into the service of that wicked Spirit, whom
they know to have no riches to bestow, nor power to help, except it be allowed
by permission, that he may tempt men: And that he being a liar from the
beginning, his promises deserves no belief, especially since in no man's
experience he has ever advantaged any person: whereas on the contrary, his
service has brought all who entered in it to the Stake.

II. Those poor persons who are ordinarily accused of this Crime, are poor
ignorant creatures, and oft-times Women who understand not the nature of what
they are accused of; and many mistake their own fears and apprehensions for
Witchcraft; of which I shall give you two instances, one of a poor Weaver, who
after he had confessed Witchcraft, being asked how he saw the Devil, he
answered, Like Flies dancing about the Candle. Another of a VVom^n, who asked
seriously, when she was accused, if a Woman might be a VVitch and not know it?
And it is dangerous that these who are of all others the most simple, should be
tried for a Crime, which of all others is most mysterious.

III. These poor creatures when they are defamed, become so confounded with
fear, and the closse Prison in which they are kept, and so starved for want of
meat and sleep, (either of which wants is enough to disorder the strongest
reason) that hardly wiser and more serious people then they would escape
distraction: And when men are confounded with fear and apprehension, they will
imagine things very ridiculous and absurd, and as no man would escape a
profound melancholy upon such an occasion, and amidst such usages; therefore I
remit to Physicians and others to consider what may be the effects of
melancholy, which has often made men, who appeared otherwise solid enough,
imagine they were Horses, or had lost their Noses, etc. And since it may make
men err in things which are oblivious to their senses, what may be expected as
to things which transcends the wisest men's reason.

IV. Most of these poor creatures are tortured by their keepers, who being
persuaded they do God good service, think it their duty to vex and torment poor
Prisoners: And I know ex certissima scientia, that most of all that ever were
taken, were tormented after this manner, and this usage was the ground of all
their confession: and albeit the poor miscreants cannot prove this usage, the
acters being the only witnesses, yet the Judge should be afraid of it, as that
which at first did elicit the confession, and for fear of which they dare not
retract it.

V. I went when I was a Justice-Depute to examine some Women, who had confessed
judicially, and one of them, who was a silly creature, told me under secrecy,
that she had not confessed because she was guilty, but being a poor creature, who
wrought for her meat, and being defamed for a Witch she knew she would starve,
for no person thereafter would either give her meat or lodging, and that all
men would beat her, and hound Dogs at her, and that therefore she desired to be
out of the World; whereupon she wept most bitterly, and upon her knees called
God to witness to what she said. Another told me that she was afraid the Devil
would challenge a right to her, after she was said to be his servant, and would
haunt her, as the Minister said when he was desiring her to confess; and
therefore she desired to die. And really Ministers are oft-times indiscreet in
their zeal, to have poor creatures to confess in this: And I recommend to
Judges that the wisest Ministers should be sent to them, and those who are
sent, should be cautious in this.

VI. Many of them confess things which all Divines conclude impossible, as
transmutation of their bodies into beasts, and money into stones, and their
going through walls and closs doors, and a thousand other ridiculous things,
which have no truth nor existence but in their fancy.

VII. The Accusers here are Masters, or Neighbors who had their Children dead,
and are engaged by grief to suspect these poor creatures. I knew one likewise
burnt because the Lady was jealous of her with her Husband: And the Crime is so
odious that they are never assisted or defended by their relations.

VIII. The Witnesses and Assysers are afraid that if they escape that they will
die for it, and therefore they take an unwarrantable latitude. And I have
observed that scarce ever any who were accused before a Country Assize of
Neighbors, did escape that trial.

IX. Commissions are granted ordinarily to Gentlemen, and others in the
Country who are suspect upon this account: and who are not exactly enough
acquaint with the nature of this Crime, which is so debateable amongst the most
learned: Nor have the Pannels any to plead for them, and to take notice who are
led as Witnesses; so that many are admitted who are testes inhabiles, and
suspect: And albeit their confessions are sent to, and advised by the Council
before such Commissions be granted, yet the Council cannot know how these
confessions were emitted, nor all the circumstances which are necessary and
cannot be known at a distance. Very many of these poor silly Women do reseal at
the Stake from the conf^ssions they emitted at the Bar, and yet have died very
penitent: And as it is presumeable that few will accuse themselves, or confess
against their own life, yet very many confess this Crime.

3. The method I shall use in treating of this Crime shall be, 1. Upon what
suspicion Witches may be apprehended. 2. What Judges are competent. 3. What
Ditty's are relevant: 4. What probation is sufficient. 5. What is the ordinary
punishment. As to the first, I know it is ordinary in Scotland not only that
Magistrates do apprehend Witches almost upon any dilation, but even Gentlemen,
and such as are Masters of the Ground, do likewise make them prisoners, and
keep them so till they transmit them at their pleasure to Justices of Peace,
Magistrates, or to some open Prisons. But all this procedor is most
unwarrantable, for Gentlemen, and such as are vested with no authority, should
upon no account without a special warrant apprehend any upon suspicion that
they are Witches, since to apprehend is an act of jurisdiction; and therefore I
think no prison should receive any as suspect of Witchcraft, until they know
that the person offered to them be apprehended by lawful Authority. 2. Since
imprisonment is a punishment, and constantly attended with much infamy to the
name, and detriment to the affairs of him who is imprisoned, especially in
Witchcraft: I do conclude that there must some presumption preceed all
inquisition. For the meanest degrees of inquisition, though without captour,
does somewhat defame. And that the person should not be apprehended except it
appear by the event of the inquisition, that she lies under either many or
pregnant suspicions; such as that she is defamed by other Witches; that she
has been her self of an evil fame; that she has been found Charming, or that
the ordinary Instruments of Charming be found in her House. And according to
Delrio's opinion, lib. 5. Sect. 2. ad assumendas informationes, sufficient
levia judicia, sed gravia requiruntur ad hoc ut citetur reus, and ut judex
specialiter inquirat.

IV. Witchcraft was crimen utriusque fori, by the Canon Law: and with us the
Kirk-sessions use to inquire into it, in order to the Scandal; and to take the
confession of the Parties, to receive Witnesses against them; as is clear by
the Process of Ianet Barker and Margaret Lawder, December 9. 1643. But since so
much weight is laid upon the depositions there emitted, Kirk-sessions should be
very cautious in their procedors.

By the Act of Parliament Q. M. 9. Parl. 73. Act. All Sheriffs, Lords of
Regalities, and their Deputes, and all other Judges having power to execute the
same, are ordained to execute that Act against Witchcraft; which can import no
more, but that they should concur to the punishment of the Crime, by
apprehending, or imprisoning the party suspect: But it does not follow, that
because they may concur, that therefore they are Judges competent to the
cognition of the Crime; since the relevancy in it is oft-times so intricat, and
the procedor requires necessarily so much arbitrariness, and the punishment is
so severe, that these considerations jointly should appropriat the cognition
thereof solely to the Justice Court. Nor find I any instances wherein these
Inferior Courts have tried this Crime. And albeit the Council do oft-times
grant Commissions to Contrymen, yet that seems dangerous; nor can I see why
by express Act of Parliament it should have been appointed, that no Commission
should be granted for trying Murder, and yet Witchcraft should be so tried by
Commissions. The Justices ^hen are the proper Judges in Witchcraft.

V. As to the relevancy in this Crime, the first Article uses to be paction to
serve the Devil, which is certainly relevant, per se, without any addition, as
is to be seen in all the inditements, especially in that of Margaret Hutchison,
August 10. 1661. And by Delrio, Carpz. p. 1. quest. 49. and others; but because
the Devil uses to appear in the similitude of a man, when he desires these
poor creatures to serve him; therefore they should be interrogat, if they knew
him to be the Devil when they condescended to his service.

Paction with the Devil is divided by Lawyers, in expressum, and tacitum, an
express and tacit paction. Express paction is performed either by a formal
promise given to the Devil then present, or by presenting a supplication to
him, or by giving the promise to a Proxy or Commissioner empowered by the
Devil for that effect, which is used by some who dare not see himself. The
formula set down by Delrio, is I deny God Creator of Heaven and Earth, and I
adhere to thee, and believe in thee. But by the Journal Books it appears, that
the ordinary form o^ express paction confessed by our witness, is a simple
promise to serve him. Tacit paction is either when a person who has made no
express paction, uses the words or signs which Sorcerers use, knowing them to
be such, either by their Books, or Discourse; and this is condemned as Sorcery,
Can. 26. quest. 5. and is relevant to infer the Crime of Witchcraft, or to use
these words and signs, though the user know them not to be such; and this is no
Crime, if the ignorance be probable, and if the user be content to abstain,
Delrio, lib. 2. quest. 4.

VI. Renouncing of Baptism is by Delrio made an effect of Paction, yet with us
it is per se relevant, as was found in the former Procels of Margaret
Hutchison: and the solemnity confessed by our Witches, is the putting one hand to
the crown of the head, and another to the sole of the foot, renouncing their
Baptism in that posture. Delrio tells us, that the Devil uses to Baptize them
of new, and to wipe off their brow the old Baptism: And our Witches confess
always the giving them new names, which are very ridiculous, as Red-shanks,
Sergeant, etc.

VII. The Devils mark uses to be a great Article with us, but it is not per se
found relevant, except it be confessed by them, that they got that mark with
their own consent; quo casu, it is equivalent to a Paction. This mark is given
them, as is alleged, by a nip in any part of the body, and it is blew; Delrio
calls it Stigma, or Character, lib. 2. quest. 4. and alleadges that it is
sometimes like the impression of a Hares foot, or the foot of a Rat, or Spider,
l. 5. Sect. 4. number. 28. Some think that it is impossible there can be any mark
which is insensible, and will not bleed; for all things that live must have
blood, and so this place behooved both to be dead and alive at once, and behooved
to live without aliment; for blood is the aliment of the body: but it is very
easy to conceive that the Devil may make a place insensible at a time, or may
apply things that may squeez out the blood.

This mark is discovered amongst us by a Pricker, whose Trade it is, and who
learns it as other Trades; but this is a horrid cheat: for they allege that
if the place bleed not, or if the person be not sensible, he or she is
infallibly a Witch. But as Delrio confesses, it is very hard to know any such
mark, a nevo, clavo, vel impertigine naturali, and there are many pieces of
dead flesh which are insensible, even in living bodies: And a Villain who used
this Trade with us, being in the year 1666. apprehended for other villainies,
did confess all this Trade to be a mere cheat.

VIII. Threatening to do mischief, if any evil follow immediately, has been too
ordinarily found a relevant Article to infer Witchcraft with us. Thus Agnes
Finnie was pursued in Anno 1643. upon the general Article of having witch'd
several persons; and particularly for these Articles, 1. That William Fairlie
having nicknamed and called her Annie Winnie, she swear in rage he should go
halting home, and within 24. hours he took a Palsy. 2. That Beatrix Nisbit
refusing to pay the said Agnes the Annualrent of two Dollors owing by Hector
Nisbit her Father, she told her she should repent it, and within an hour
thereafter she lost her Tongue, and the power of her right Side. 3. That Ianet
Greintoun having refused to carry away two Herrings she had bought from the
said Agnes, and to pay for them, she told her it should be the last meat she
should eat, and within a little after she fell sick: Against which Articles it
was there alleged that this Libell was not relevant, and could not go to the
knowledge of an Inquest: 1. Because no means were condescended upon from which
the Witchcraft was inferred: And if this Libell were relevant, it would be
relevant to Libell generally that the Panel were a Witch. 2. Assizers are only
Judges to the matter of fact, and not to what consists in jure. But so it is,
that if this Libel were to pass to the knowledge of an Inquest, all the debate
in jure behoved to be before the Assize before whom the Pannels Procurators
behoved to debate how far minae and damnum sequutum are relevant, and how far
any person is punishable as a Witch, though no Charms or other means commonly
used by Witches be condescended upon; and as to the threatenings, they were not
relevant, seeing they had not all the requisits which are expressed by the Doctors
as requisite, for they were not specific, bearing the promise to do a
particular ill, as that Fairlie should take a Palsy, or Nisbit lose her
Tongue. 2. There was not a preceding reason of enmity proved, nor is it
probable that for so small a matter as a Herring, or the Annualrent of two
Dollors, she would have killed any person, and exposed her self to hazard; nor
was the effect immediate, nor such as could not have proceeded from any other
natural cause, without all which had concurred. Delrio lib. 5. Sect 3. is very
clear, that minae etiam cum damno sequuto, are not so much as a presumption:
but though all these did concur, it is very clear, both from Delrio ibid. and
Farin. quest. 5. number. 37. That all these threatenings are not sufficient to
infer the Crime of Witchcraft. Lastly, It was offered to be proved, that some
of these persons died of a natural disease, depending upon causes preceding
that threatening: Notwithstanding of all which, the Libell was found relevant,
and she was burnt. But I think this decision very hard, and very contrary to
the opinion of all received Writers, who think, that albeit minae be
adminiculatae with all the former advantages, and probatae de ea quae solet
minas exequi, yet the same are only sufficient to infer an Arbitrary
punishment, not Corporal, but Pecuniary; and certainly such a wicked custom as
threatening, is in it self a Crime: And thus it was only well found to be crimen
in suo genere, in the Process led against Katherin Oswald, November. 11. 1629.

IX. Sometimes Articles are Libel'd, wherein the malefice has no dependence at
all upon the means used: And thus it was Libel'd against Margaret Hutchison,
August 20. 1661. That John Clarks Wife being sick, she came to the Bed side
when all the Doors and Windows were fast, and combed her head several nights;
and the last of these nights she came to the Bed side, and put her hand to the
Woman's Pape, whereupon the Child died, which Article was found relevant per se.
And it was Libel'd against Ianet Cock, September 7. 1661. that a Woman called
Spindie being at enmity with her, she gave her a cuff, whereupon Spindie
immediately distracted; and being reproved therefore by the Minister of
Dalkeith, he immediately distracted; which Article was likewise found relevant,
being joined with fame and dilation: Which decisions are in my opinion very
dangerous, for they want a sure foundation, and are precedents whereby Judges
may become very arbitrary. And against these I may oppone a third alledgiance
used in the former Process against Agnes Finnie, wherein it was alleged, that
the conclusion of all Criminal Libels should be necessarily inferred from the
deed subsumed, and that conclusio semper sequitur debiliorem partem: nam
libellus est syllogismus apodicticus; sed non probabilis; and therefore except
the Libel could condescend upon some means used by the Panel, from which the
malefice were necessarily inferred, it could not be concluded that these
Malefices were done by her, or that she was guilty of the wrong done. Thus
Bodin lib. 4. does conclude, that veneficae non sunt condemnandae licet sint
deprehensae cum bufonibus, ossibus, aliisque instrumentis egredientes exovili
licet oves immediate moriantur. And Perkins cap. 6. asserts, that neither
defamation nor threatenings, albeit what is threatened does follow, nor mala
fama, nor the Defuncts laying the blame of their death upon the person accused
(called inculpatio by the Doctors) can infer this Crime, though all these be
conjoined; for in his opinion, nothing can be a sufficient ground to condemn a
Witch, except the Pannels own confession, or the depositions of two famous
Witnesses, deponing upon means used by the Panel. And it is remakable, that in
the Chapter immediately subsequent to that wherein Witches are ordinarily to be
put to death, GOD has expressly ordained, that out of the mouth of two or three
Witnesses every word shall be established. And in the Process deduced against
Isobel Young for Witchcraft, Feb. 4. 1629. and against Katherine Oswald,
November. 11. 1629. This point is likewise debated, it being Libel'd against the
said Katherine, that by her Witchcraft she caused a Cow give blood instead of
milk; and caused a Woman fall and break a rib in her side. Against which it was
alleged, that there was no necessar connection there, inter terminum a quo and
ad quem inter causam and effectum: But on the contrary, the Cowes giving blood
for milk might proceed from another natural cause, viz. from lying upon an Ant
or Emmot hill; and therefore I think that because we know not what virtue may
be in Herbs, Stones, or other things which may be applied, it were very hard to
find Cures performed by the application of these, without the using Charms, or
Spells, to be Witchcraft: But when these outward applications are used, to do
hurt; as for instance, if the said Margaret Wallace, being at enmity with John
Clark, and after she was forbidden to frequent his House, did continue to
frequent the same, and did throw in blood or any unusual thing upon his Wifes
Pap: if the Child who sucked the same had thereafter died, I think this
Article, joined with preceding defamation of her by another Witch, might have
been found relevant, because she was there in re illicita. And since the Law
cannot know exactly what efficacy there is in natural causes, it may very well
discharge any such superstitious forbidden Acts, as it pleases, under the pain
of Witchcraft. Nor can these who are accused, complain of severity, since sibi
imputent, that use these forbidden things against the express commandment of
the Law; and therefore since the Law and Practick has forbidden all Charms, it
is most just that these who use the same should be severely punished, whatever
the pretext be upon which they are used, or after whatever way or manner, or to
whatever end, whether good or bad.

X. Albeit per leg. 4. Cod. de mal. and Math. these Magic Arts are only
condemned, which tend to the destruction of mankind, but not these whereby men
are cured, or the fruits of the ground preserved; yet I have oft-times imputed
this constitution to Tribonian, who was a Pagan, and a severe enemy to
Christians, or else that it behoved to be so interpret, or that thereby
remedies, assisted by Godly Prayers, were allowed, else what mean these words,
suffragia innocenter adhibita. But since I am informed from the Ecclesiastic
Historians, as Zozim. lib. 2. that Constantine was not yet turned Christian
when he past that constitution; but however this constitution is omitted in the
Basilicks: and the Gloss says, that (...), it was not thought fit to be
mentioned, in the repurgation of the Law: And that constitution was very well
reprobat by Leo's 65. Novel. And by the Canon Law, tit. de sorti-legiis: And
the general Sanction of the former Act of Parliament leaves no place for this
distinction. Suitable to all which, John Brough was convict for Witchcraft, in
Anno 1643. for curing Beasts, by casting white stones in water, and sprinkling
them therewith; and for curing Women, by washing their feet with South-running
Water, and putting odd money in the Water. Several other instances are to be
seen in the Processes led in Anno 1661. And the instance of Drummond is very
remarkable, who was burnt for performing many miraculous Cures, albeit no
malefice was ever proved.

XI. Consulting with Witches is a relevant Ditty with us, as was found against
Alison Iollie, per. October. 1596. and this is founded upon the express words of
the Act. The professing likewise skill in Necromancy, or any such Craft, is by
the foresaid Act of Parliament a relevant Article. For the full clearing of
which Act, it is fit to know that Divination was either per daemono-mantiam,
the invocation of Pagan Gods, or Nanganiam, which was the Prophesying for
invocation of some Sublunary thing. Mangania is divided in Necromantiam, which
was a Prophesying by departed Spirits, Udromantiam, which was a Divination by
Water, etc. All which species and kinds of Divinations by any thing, is
comprehended under the general prohibition of Necromancy, and such like Acts:
So that Predictions and Responses by the Sieve, and the Shear, and by the Book,
and all such cheats and species of Sorcery are punishable by death in this Act:
Yet these forbidden practices may sometimes be excused by ignorance, or if it
can be cleared by circumstances, that the user designed nothing but an innocent
jest or recreation, Delrio lib. 4. cap. 1. quaest 4.

XII. The last Article in Criminal Libels uses ordinarily to be the being
delated by other Witches, which the Doctors calls diffamatio, and we common
bruit and open fame, which are never sustained as relevant, per se, but only
joined with other relevant Articles, as is to be seen in the foresaid Process
of Margaret Hutchison, though I think that Interloquutor very severe, since if
any of the former Articles be per se relevant, they need not the assistance of
fame and delation. Sometimes likewise, but with much more reason, Articles that
are of themselves irrelevant are sustained relevant, being joined with fame and
delation; an example whereof is to be seen in the 9th Article of the Indictment
against Ianet Cock, September. 7. 1661. In which Article she was accused for
having recovered a Child by Charms, with the help of another Witch; which other
Witch had confessed the same when she was confronted with the said Ianet:
Likeas both of them were found lying above the Child, whispering one to
another, and the blood of a Dog was found standing in a Plate beside them;
which Article was not sustained relevant per se, but was found relevant, being
joined with same and delation.

XIII. The relevancy of this Crime being thus discussed, the ordinary probation
of it is, by Confession or Witnesses; but the probation here should be very
clear, and it should be certain that the person who emitted it is not weary of
life, or oppressed with melancholy. 2. Albeit non requiritur hic ut constet de
corpore delicti, this being a Crime which consists oft-times in animo; yet it
ought to be such as contains nothing in it that is impossible or improbable.
And thus albeit Isobel Ramsay did upon the 20. of August 1661. confess that the
Devil gave her six pence, and said that GOD desi^ed him to give it her: and at
another time a Dollor, which turned thereafter in a Slait-stone; the Justices
did not find this confession, though judicial, relevant. And to know what
things are of themselves impossible for the Devil to do, or at least what is
believed to be impossible, may be seen very fully treated of in Delrio's second
Book, where it is condescended that succubi and incubi sunt possibiles, id est,
that the Devil may ly in the shape of a man with a woman, or in the shape of a
woman with a man, having first formed to himself a body of condensed Air; and
upon such a confession as this, Margaret Lawder and others were convict. It is
likewise possible for the Devil to transport Witches to their public
Conventions, from one place to another, which he may really do, by carrying
them: and sundry Witches were in Anno 1665. burnt in Culross upon such a
confession as this.

XIV. It may be, I confess, argued, that Spirits and immaterial substances
cannot touch things material, and consequently can neither raise nor transport
them: but if we consider how the Adamant raises and transports the Iron, and
how the soul of man, which is a Spirit, can raise or transport the body; and
that a man's voice, or a Musical sound is able to occasion great and
extraordinary motions in other men, we may easily conclude, that Devils, who
are Spirits of far more Energy, may produce effects surpassing very far our
understanding. And yet I do not deny but that the Devil does sometimes persuade
the Witches that they are carried to places where they never were, making those
impressions upon their spirits, and acquainting them what was done there, which
is done by impressing Images upon their Brain, and which Images are carried to
the exterior senses by the animal Spirits, even as we see the Air carries the
species of colors upon it, though in a very insensible way: and thus we see
likewise, that the sumes of Wine or Melancholy will represent strange
apparitions, and make us think them real. Nor ought it to be concluded that
because those Witches are only transported in Spirit, or in Dreams, that
therefore they ought not to be punished, since none can be punished for
dreaming; and that because those Witches desire to have these Dreams, and glory
in them when they are awake: nor have any these Dreams but such as have entered
into a preceding paction. I know that the Canon Episcopi in the Council of
Anacir, (or the Aquilean Council, as others call it) does condemn these
transportations, as false and mere delusions, which are impressed upon the fancy
of poor Creatures by the Devil, and cum solus spiritus haec patitur, nec non in
animo sed in corpore inveniri opinantur, but that Act of that Council does not
assert all transportations to be imaginary, and Dreams, but only declares those
who thought they followed Diana and Herodias to these public meetings, to be
altogether seduced, for these indeed were seduced; for Herodias being dead long
since, could not be at their meetings. But from that it is unjustly concluded,
that there are no real transportations, there being so many instances of these
transportations given, both in Sacred and profane Story; and persons having
been found wounded, and having really committed Murders and other insolences,
during these transportations.

XV. Whether it be possible for a Witch to cause any person be possessed, by
putting Devils into their body, may be debated; and that it is possible,
appears from the History of Simon Magus, and many others, and is testified to
be true by St. Jerome, in the life of St. Hilarion. And since Witches have
confessed that there are Devils who obey one another, and that there are
different degrees amongst them; why may not those of an inferior degree be
forced, by virtue of a paction with those of a superior order, to possess men
and women at the desire of Witches? Witches themselves have confessed that this
has been done. And I find by a decision of the Parliament of Thelodus, that
Devils have been heard to complain in those that were possessed, that they were
put there by the enchantment of such and such women: But upon the other hand,
it is not to be imagined that Devils would obey mortal creatures, or that GOD
would leave so great a power to any of them to torment poor mortals: And the
Devil, who is a liar from the beginning, is not to be believed, in saying that
he is put there by Enchantments; and though he make such promises to Witches,
yet he does in these but cheat them: and if the Devil could possess at
pleasure, we would see many more possessed then truly there are.

XVI. The Devil cannot make one solid body to penetrat another, Quest. 17. and
therefore I think that Article libel'd against Margaret Hutchison, of coming to
John Clark's house, when doors and windows were shut, should not have been
admitted to probation, since it is very probable they would have searched the
house after the second or third nights fear; and she could not penetrat doors
nor walls.

XVII. The Devil cannot transform one species into another, as a woman into a
cat, for else he behoved to annihilat some of the substance of the woman, or
creat some more substance to the cat, the one being much more then the other;
and the Devil can neither annihilat or creat, nor could he make the shapes
return, nam non datur regressus a privatione ad habitum: But if we consider the
strange tricks of Juglers, and the strange apparitions that Kercher and others
relate from natural causes, we may believe that the Devil may make a woman
appear to be a beast, and e contra, by either abusing the sense of the
beholders, or altering the Medium, by enclosing them in the skin of the beast
represented, or by enclosing them in a body of air, shaped like that which he
would have them represent, and the ordinary relation of the witnesses, being
wounded when the Beast was wounded, in which they were changed, may be likewise
true, either by their being really wounded within the body of air in which they
were enclosed, or by the Devils inflicting that wound really himself, which is
Delrio's opinion. But it would seem hard to condemn any person upon the
confession of what seems almost impossible in it self: And I cannot allow
instances in the Journal Books, where poor creatures have been burnt upon such
confessions, without other strong adminicles.

XVIII. The Devil may make Bruits to speak, or at least speak out of them,
Quest. 18.

He can also raise storms in the Air, and calm these that are raised, Quest.
11. And yet it being libel'd against Ianet Cock, that she said to these who
were carrying a Witch to be execute, were it not a good sport if the Devil
should take her from you; likeas a great storm did overtake them when they were
carrying her to the place, it having been a great calm both before and after;
yet this Article was not sustained relevant, since it might have proceeded from
folly, or jest, or van^ jactantia:

XIX. The Devil may inflict diseases, which is an effect he may occasion
applicando act va passivis, and by the same means he may likewise cure: A clear
instance whereof appears in the Marriage-knot. And not only may he cure
diseases laid on by himself, as Wierus observes, but even natural diseases,
since he knows the natural causes and the origin of even these natural
diseases, better then Physicians can, who are not present when diseases are
contracted, and who being younger then he, must h^ve less experience. And it is
as untrue that Divus Thomas observes, who asserts that cures performed by the
Devil cannot continue, since his Cures are not natural. And since he both may
make sick, and may make whole, it follows that he may transferr a disease from
one person to another. And I find that it being libelled against Margaret
Hutchison, that she took a disease off a Woman to put it on a Cat: It was
alleged that this Article was not relevant; because, 1. Una saga non potest
esse ligans and solvens in eodem morbo. 2. That in such transactions as these,
the Devil never used to interpose his skill, except where he was a gainer; and
therefore though he would transfer a disease from a bruit beast to a rational
creature, yet he would never transfer a disease from a rational c^eature to a
bruit beast; both these defenses were repelled. Many Witches likewise confess
that they cannot cure diseases, because they are laid on by Witches of a
superior order, who depend upon Spirits of a higher degree.

Some think that they may innocently employ a Witch to take off the disease
imposed by another, and lay it upon the Witch who imposed it, even as men may
innocently borrow money from an Usurer, to be employed for pious uses, or may
cause an Infidel swear by his false Gods, for eliciting truth: and that in this
manner Devils are rather punished then served. But since all commerce with
Devils is unlawful, this practice is justly reprobated by D, Autun, p. 2.
discourse 48. But yet it is thought lawful to all who are bewitched, to desire
the bewitchers to take off the disease, if it can be removed without a new
application to the Devil, but only by taking away the old charm; or it is
lawful to any to remove the charm or sign of it, if it be in their power, D,
Autun. page 825.

XX. Witches may kill by their looks, which looks being full of venomous
spirits, may infect the person upon whom they look, and this is called
fascinatio physica, sed fascinatio vulgaris, quae dicitur fieri per oculos
tenerorum puerorum vel parvorum porcorum vana est and ridicula, Del. lib. 3. Q.
4. Sect. 1.

I know there are who think all kinds of fascination by the eyes, either an
effect of fancy in the person affected, or else think it a mere illusion of the
Devil, who persuades Witches that he can bestow upon them the power of killing
by looks, or else the Devil really kills, and ascribes it falsely to their
looks: whereas others contend that by the received opinion of all Historians,
men have been found to be injured by the looks of Witches: and why may not
Witches poison this way, as well as the Basilisk does? Or why may not the
spirits in the eye affect as well as the breath? Or why may not looks kill as
well as raise passions in the person looked upon? Nor can it be denied but that
blear'dness is begot by blear'dness; and that menstruous women will spoil a
Mirror by looking upon it. Likeas there seems even some ground for it in
Scripture; for, Deuteronomy. 28.54. it is said, that a man's eyes shall be evil toward
his brother. And some likewise endeavor by consequence from Matthew. 20.15. Is
thine eye evil: the word (...) signifying in Scripture both to bewitch and to
envy. Some likewise think that St. Paul Gal. 3.1. alludes to this received
opinion, but conjecture does so much overruled all this affair, that it were
hard to fix crimes upon so slender grounds: And therefore though where Witches
confess that they did kill by their looks, their confession and belief may, if
they be otherwise of a sound judgment, make a very considerable part of a
crime, where it is joined with other probabilities, yet per se it is hardly
relevant.

XXI. It may be also doubted whether Witches can by amorous potions inchant men
or women to love: and though it may seem that these being acts of the soul,
cannot be raised by any corporeal means, yet l. 4. c. de Malef. and Mathemat.
makes this possible, and punishable, eorum scientia punienda, and severissimis
merito legibus vindicanda, qui magicis accincti artibus pudicos ad libidinem de
fixisse animos deteguntur: But this Law speaks only of lust, and not of love,
as I conceive. Nor can it be denied, but that not only Witches, but even
Naturalists may give Potions that may incline men or women to lust. And
therefore the question still remains, whether Witches may incline men or women
by Potions to a fancy and kindness for any particular person; and though
Potions may incline men to madness, yet it does not follow that therefore they
may incline them to love. And though D, Autun does bring many Arguments from
History, and pretends that the Devil may raise and excite the old species of
love which ly hidden in the body, and may thereby form a passion, yet these are
too conjectural grounds to be the foundation of a criminal sentence. The
Basilicks make the punishment of this to be deportation, and so supplies the
former Law.

XXII. Witches do likewise torment mankind, by making Images of Clay or Wax,
and when the Witches prick or punse these Images, the persons whom these Images
represent, do find extreme torment, which does not proceed from any influence
these Images have upon the body tormented, but the Devil does by natural means
raise these torments in the person tormented at the same very time that the
Witches do prick or punse, or hold to the fire these Images of Clay or Wax;
which manner of torment was lately confessed by some Witches in Inverness, who
likewise produced the Images, and it was well known they hated the person who
was tormented, and upon a confession so adminiculat, Witches may very
judiciously be be found guilty, since constat de corpore delicti de modo de
linquendi and inimicitiis praeviis.

XXIII. It is ordinarily doubted whether confessions emitted before the Kirk
Sessions in this case be sufficient: But this I have treated more fully in the
Title of Probation by Confession. Only here I shall observe, that Christian
Stewart was found Art and Part of the bewitching Patrick Ruthven, by laying on
him a heavy sickness with a black Clout, which she her self had confessed before
several Ministers, Nottars, and others, at diverse times; all which confessions
were proved: and upon these repeated confessions she was burnt, November. 1596.
Margaret Lawder was convict upon confession emitted before the Magistrates and
Ministers of Edinburgh, albeit past from in Judgment, December. 9. 1643. see
that Book of Adjournal, page 349. And if the confession be not fully
adminiculat, Lawyers advise that confessors should be subjec^^d to the torture,
which is not usual in Scotland. And it is very observable that the Justices
would not put James Welsh to the knowledge of an Inquest, though he had confessed
himself a Witch before the Presbytery of Kirkcudbright, because he was Minor
when he confessed the Crime, and the confession was only extrajudicial, and that
he now retracted the same; but because he had so grossly prevaricat, and had
delated so many honest persons, they ordained him to be scourged and put in the
Correction house, April 17. 1662. It was proved against Margaret Wallace, March
20. 1622. that she said that if it could be proved that she was in Gregs House,
she should be guilty of all the Ditty; and therefore it being proved that she
was in Gregs House, that probation was alleged by the Advocat to be equivalent
to a confession, as was found against Patrick Cheyn: To which it was replied,
that this could amount to no more then a lie; and in my opinion, it could not
have even the strength of an extrajudicial confession, but rather imported a
denial of the Crime.

XXIV. The probation by Witness in this Crime is very difficult, and therefore
socii criminis, or other confessing Witches are adduced; but though many of
them concur, their depositions solely are not esteemed as sufficient, ne vel ad
poenam extraordinariam imponendam, though some think the same sufficient to
that end, because of that general Brocard, ex multiplicatis indiciis debilibus
resultare indicia indubitata: But Delrio asserts, that the conjection of such
testimonies is not sufficient, Nanquam enim, says he, quae sua natura dubia
sunt possunt facere rem indubitatam ut nec multa aegraunumsanum nec multa non
alba unus album nec multa tepida anum callidum. And that the testimony of one
confessing Witch was found not sufficient to file the Panel, is clear by the
Process of Alison Iollie, who was assoilzied pen. October. 1596. Albeit Ianet
Hepburn another Witch confessed that the said Alison had caused her bewitch
Isobel Hepburn, whereof she died; but though VVitch-craft cannot be proved per
socios criminis, though dying and penitent Witches, yet it may be doubted if
the consulting Witches may not be proved by two Witches who were consulted:
for if this be not a sufficient probation, it would be impossible to prove
consulting any other manner of way.

The persons to whom the injuries are done by the Witches are admitted to be
VVitnesses: thus Katherine Wardlaw was admitted against Margaret Hutchison; but
sometimes they are only admitted cum nota, if the probation be not otherwise
weak, and thus William Young and Agnes Hutchison were only admitted cum nota
against Beatrix Leslie, August 1661. And in that Process likewise they received
only Agnes Ross cum nota, because she was the Mistress of the two Women who
were maleficiat. Neilson was admitted to be an Assizer against Margaret
Wallace, though he was Brother in Law to John Nicol, who had given information
for raising the Ditty, because the Ditty was not at Nicols instance; and yet
Starling was set from being an Assizer, because Moor who was alleged to be one
of the persons maleficiat was his Brother in Law. March 2. 1622. Dickson was
there likewise admitted to be an Assizer, though he assisted the Bailie in
taking her, which was found the office of a good Citizen, and though he had
deadly fead against her Husband, since it was not proved he had any against her
self.

Women are received Witnesses in this Crime, as is clear by the Process against
Margaret Wallace, and all the Processes in August 1661. The not shedding of
tears has been used as a mark and presumption of Witchcraft, Sprenger. mal.
malef. p. 3. q. 15. because it is a mark of impenitence; And because several
Witches have confessed they could not weep: But the being accused of so horrid a
Crime may occasion a deep melancholy; and melancholy being cold and dry,
hinders the sheding of tears: and great griefs do rather astonish then make one
weep.

XXV. The punishment of this Crime is with us death by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, to be execute as well against the user as the seeker of any
response or consultation, and de practica, the Doom bears, to be worried at the
Stake, and burnt.

By the Civil Law, Consulters were punished by death, l. 5. C. de mafef. and
mathem. nemo aruspicem consulat, aut mathematicum nemo ariolum, angurum et
vatum prava confessio nonticescat sileat omnibus rer petuo, divinandi
curiositas. In which Law, Fortune tellers are also punishable: though with us,
dumb persons who pretend to foretell future events, are never punished
Capitally, But yet I have seen them tortured, by order from the Council, upon a
representation that they were not truly Dumb, but (feigning themselves to be
so) abused, and cheated the people. The forsaid Law is renewed in the Basilicks
l. 31 h. t. (...). But Farin. and others thinks, that where no person is
injured, death should not be inflicted; and tha^ imprisonment and banishment is
now practiced by all nations in that case, Lib. 1. Tom. 3. quest 20. Number. 89.
and Clarus.. heresis number. ult. But Perezeus thinks this too favorable a
punishment except the users of these curious arts were induced thereto, out of
mere simplicity, and sine dolo malo; but with us no such distinction can be
allowed by the justices, who must find all libels relevant, which bear
consulting with Witches, and that Ditty being proved, they must condemn the
Panel to die; albeit I think the Council may alter the punishment, if it be
clear that the user of these acts had no wicked design nor intercourse with
the Devil therein.

XXVI. By the Law of England Witchcraft was of old punished sometimes by
Death, and sometimes by exile; But 1. Iac. this following Statute was made,
which I here set down, because it is very special.

If any person or persons shall use, practice, or exercise invocation or
conjuration of any evil and wicked spirit, or shall consult, covenant with,
entertain, employ, feed or reward, any evil or wicked spirit; to, or for, any
intent or purpose, or take up any dead man, woman, or child, out of his, her,
or their grave, or any other place where the dead body rests, or the skin,
bone, or any part of a dead person, to be employed or used in any manner of
witchcraft, sorcery, charm, or enchantment; Or shall use, practice, or
exercise any witchcraft, enchantment, charm or sorcery, whereby any person
shall be killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed, in his, or her
body, or any part thereof: that then every such offender or offenders, their
aiders, abbetters, and counselors, being of any the said offense, duly and
lawfully convicted: and attainted, shall suffer pains of death, as a fellon, or
fellons, and shall lose the privilege, and benefit of Clergy; and San^tuary.
If any person, or persons, take upon him or them, by witchcraft, enchantment,
charm, or sorcery, to tell or declare, in what place any treasure of Gold, or
Silver, should or might be found, or had in the earth, or other secret places:
Or where goods or other things lost, or stolen, are become: Or whereby any
cattle or goods of any person, shall be destroyed, or to hurt or destroy any
person in his, or her body, albeit the same be not effected or done; being
therefore lawfully convicted, shall for the said offense suffer Imprisonment by
the space of a whole year, without bail or mainprise. Once every quarter of
the year these Mountebanks are to mount the pillory, and to stand thereupon in
some Market Town six hours, and there to confess his or her error, and
offense.

TITLE XI. Murder.
1. The Etymology of Murder. 2. Self defense defined, and whether it be
punishable. 3. How moderation in self defense is said to be exceeded. 4. How
self defense must be proponed. 5. How it ought to be proved. 6. What is casual
homicide. 7. Whether he who was doing what was unlawful, may defend himself as
only guilty of casual homicide. 8. Whether he who is only guilty of casual
homicide may be fined. 9. What is homicidium culposum, or faulty homicide. 10.
What wound is to be judged mortal. 11. How the design of Murdering or
forethought felony, is to be cleard. 12. Homicidium in rixa when many are
conjunct actors, how punishable. 13. The killing of thieves, or such as resist
authority; how punishable. 14. Whether it be lawful for a father to kill his
own daughter, if he find her comitting adultery. 15. Assasination, how
punished. 16. Murder under trust, how punished. 17. What is art and part of
Murder. 18. How such as kill in the execution of law, are punishable. 19.
Whether it be lawful to kill a Rebel. 20. The life-rent escheat of murderers
falls in some cases. 21. Murder is one of the pleys of the Crown. 22. How
Sheriffs and other Judges ought to prosecute murderers. 23. Whether remissions
can be granted in case of murder.
GOD Almighty did to the honor of impressing man with his own image, add as a
second obligation, a natural horror in every man to be in any accession to the
defaceing it; so that he has consulted his own glory, and our security, jointly
in these severe laws which he has made against Murder. And his divine finger is
not seen so apparently, in any discovery, as in that of Murder: and it is very
remarkable, that these Barbarians, who saw the viper fasten upon Paul's hand,
did instantly conclude him guilty of Murder, because he was (to their
apprehension) so miraculously punished.

I. Murder comes from the Dutch word Moorde, which signifies, caedem ex
jusidiis vel proditorie factam. Math. h. t. And Murder is properly different
from Slaughter, the one being committed per seloniam, the other per
infortunium, Leg. Malc. c. 2. And therefore when our Law forbids killing under
trust, Ia. 6. Pa. 11. chapter 81. It calls it murder under trust. But when it
speaks of killing by accident, or in self-defence, it calls it Slaughter, or
Homicide. c. 22. Par. 1. K. Chapter 2. Ses. 2. And by this it seems that this crime
is better writ murder then murder, though murder be the ordinar way of
writing it, especially in our old Law.

The Civilians define Murder to be the killing man by man unlawfully. And they
divide it into that which is committed casually, in defense, culpable, or
wilfully.

II. Necessarium Homicidium, or homicid committed in selfdefence is when a man
being pursued or reduced to inevitable necessity, has no way left him to evit
his own death, but by killing the Aggressor: This is in law called inculpata
tutela, or moderamen in culpatae tutelae within which moderation, if the
defender contain himself, he is no way punishable, but if he exceed the same,
yet so favorable is self-defence, that the exceeder is not liable to the
ordinar punishment, but is ordinarily punishable according to the excess, at the
discretion of the Judge. With us likewise self-defence is only punishable at
the arbitrament or discretion of the Judge by the 22. act. Sess. 1. Pa. 2. K.
Chapter 2. But seeing that act ordains it to be punished at his discretion, it may
be doubted if in all cases self-defence be not some way punishable. And I
remember that Captain Barclay being assoylzied in December. 1668. Because the
Assyse found that the killing Sinclar was in his own defense, the pursuers were
to petition the Council (which is the ordinar way of taxing arbitrary
punishment in this case) that he might be fined. And very learned Lawyers, were
of opinion, that self-defence was in all cases punishable, though attended with
the most favorable circumstances of innocence; from whom I differed upon these
reasons, 1. By the Civil Law and the opinion of the Doctors, if the defender
contain himself exactly within that moderation, he is no way punishable, as is
clear by Farin. part. 74. quest. 25. part. 6.2. Self-defence is a duty, and so
not punishable; for it were against reason that the Law should punish what it
does comcommand. 3. The Law says that omni culpa caret qui se desendit, and in
our Law it is called murthrum justum. leg. Malcol. c. 11. and so to punish him
who necessarily defends himself, were to inflict a punishment where the Law
acknowledged there were no guilt. 4. It should be in the power of every
malicious rascal to wrong the most innocent, for either he behooved to suffer
himself to be killed, or to be punished by defending his own life: And by the
said act, it is only declard leisum to punish, but not necessary. And yet by
the Law of England, Murderers se defendendo for fault their movables, and both
in that and in murder, upon misadventure (for so they call casual homicide) the
murderer must have a pardon, Statute 6. E. 1. cap. 9. So great a regard, says
Bolton, the Law has to the life of a man, cap. 15. number. 16. And by the Law of
Savoy he who kills, though in self-defence, needs a pardon, but the Prince in
that case cannot refuse to grant a pardon. And therefore their Lawyers call
that pardon gratia justitiae, Cod. fabr. lib. 9. tit. 10. but with us, no
pardon is requisite, albeit it is most ordinar to take remissions in such
cases, bearing self-defence in their narrative.

III. This moderation is said to be exceeded in these three, viz. in Arms, 2.
In time. 3. In the measure of following, striking, etc. This moderation is
exceeded in Arms as if the aggressor have only a staff, and the defender wound
him with a sword or pistol; the defender is in that case punishable, for there
we^e no reason in that case the defender should have had any fe^r of his life,
nec erat in dubio vitae constitutus. And yet this conclusion is not infallible,
for if the defender was much weaker then the aggressor, he might be excused to
use such unequal Weapons. The defender is said to exceed in time, if he strike
the aggressor, ante quam sit in actu proximo occidendi, for else it should be
lawful to every man, upon the first apprehension of fear, to kill the
aggressor, which were very dangerous: and here it may be doubted, if when any
aggressor threatens to kill, if the defender who knows not when the threat may
be put in execution, may immediately kill. There are probable reasons to be
urged for either opinion: And albeit the punishment should in this case depend
upon the arbitrament of the Judge, yet if the aggressor be known to have any
design to Murder, or be a person who uses to execute what he threatens, and if
he have a Sword, though not drawn, or a Pistol, though not cockt: (For if he
have either of these, there is no doubt but he may be lawfully killed, because
he is in actu proximo offendendi, and no man should wait till he be killed) I
think that though the aggressor be killed, yet the defender has the benefit of
self-defence; and albeit he may be arbitrarily punished, yet he cannot be
punished with death: and many Lawyers are of opinion, that he who threatens to
kill, may be killed, which opinion they found upon these reasons, 1. Because
the Law looks upon that which is unlawful, as done, if it was intended to be
done, and that in odium of him who designs what is unlawful. ^. There is
greater fear from some threats, then from wounds; and therefore, seeing it is
lawful to kill these who assault us with wounding, why not, and him who
threatens? 3 d. per. l. 1. C. quando licet cuique, etc. Mortem inquit imperator
quam minabatur accipiet and id quod intendebat incurrat, nor can the friends of
the threatner complain, seeing the aggressor was in effect author of his own
death, And it is clear that the defender had no design to kill. Yet the
Justices would not sustain, minae per se, to be a sufficient qualification of
self-defence, but sustained it jointly with the aggressors fyring a Pistol,
though it mis-gave, and though the defender might have fled, January 1668.
Sinclar contra Barclay. And albeit by the Canon Law, insultatus debet fugere.
And that by the Law of England, he who is invaded, is obliged to flee as far
as he can, as to a Wall or Ditch, Bolt. cap. 15. number. 17. Yet by the opinion of
the Civilians, a person invaded is not obliged to flee far, Farin. quest. 125.
P. 2. It may be probable, that if the defender was alone in a House, or place
with the aggressor, and could expect no help, that upon threatening or other
probable designs laid against his life, he may kill the aggressor; and from
which may be deduced, that the actus proximus which Lawyers speak of, must not
be interpret, only the having a Sword drawn; for if a stronger man have a
weaker in a locked house, and threaten, he may kill him, though asleep, if he
cannot otherwise escape.

The defender is said to exceed in the measure; also if he killed him for
wounding, whom he might have shunned: or if he followed the aggressor, which
though it be not fully lawful, yet fugientem persequens dumodo in ipso actu non
punitur paena ordinaria licet occiderit, Boer. decis. 168. November 7. And albeit
much be left to the arbitration of the Judge, as to all the three, arma tempus
and modus: yet the general rule is, that if the defender exceed only in either
of the three, as, v. g. in the arms, or time, the excess is said to be culpa
levissima, and no way punishable: if in two of these, as in time and arms, then
it is accounted culpa levis, and is somewhat ^^nishable: but if the defender
exceed in all the three, as in time, arms, way of prosecution, then it is culpa
lata, but yet he is not punishable, as if he had dolose Murdered, for though it
be a rule in civilibus that culpa lata equiparatur dolo: Yet it is a rule in
criminalibus that culpa lata numquam equiparatur dolo ubi agitur de paena
corporis afflictiva Far. quest. 125. part 6. It i^ also controverted amongst
Lawyers, if seeing honor is as dear as life, it be lawful to kill him who
asperses our honor, as it is lawful to kill him who assaults our life. And
albeit Farinacius be of the judgment, that he who is thus provockt, being a
person of far more eminent condition, then the injurer killing him is not to be
punished as a Murderer, sed pena extraordinaria licet injuria sit verbalis; yet
in my judgment he errs in that position; for in effect, that is not
self-defence (because the verbal injury cannot be retreated, nor retained) but
it is revenge: yet dolor justus aliquando operatur ut paena ordinaria
temperetur, Boer. decis. 237 but yet that is not allowed in killing, and such
other injuries, quae non possunt revocari, Gothofr. prax. crim.. homicida, N.
25. and albeit this hold in verbal injuries offered to our Honomr, ubi nescit
vox missa reverti: yet if the injury offered to our Honor be real, and such as
may be stopped, as by commanding an eminent person to loose down his Breeches to
be whipped, or do any most ignominously servile Act to the aggressor, in that
caise, I should think that the killer should not be capitally punished, albeit
he was in no hazard of his life. I likewise think that the fear of imprisonment
by the defender, may excuse from capital punishment, seeing Liberty is as dear
as Life; and no man can be secure of his Life, if he be unjustly imprisoned,
and sibi imputet aggressor qui occasionem praebuit. It is likewise lawful to
kill such as would murder our Friend, or fellow-traveller, which is accounted
lawful, though not self-defence, which is extended also to the defense of all
others, because we should love our Neighbor as our selves. And it is lawful to
kill a Thief, who in the night offers to break our Houses, or steal our Goods,
even though he defend not himself, because we know not but he designs against
our Life: and Murder may be easily committed upon us in the night: but it is
not lawful to kill a Thief who steals in the day time, except he resist us when
we offer to take him, and present him to Justice.

IV. This exception of self-defence, must be propon'd against the revelancy,
and must be condescended upon, thus the Pannal no ways acknowledging the
killing; yet if he killed, it was done in his own defense, in swa far as the
Defunct drew a Sword, and thrust, or offered a Pistol, etc. And the Justices
will not allow that it should be propon'd to the Assize, as I have often heard
this pressed, but very unreasonably; for this concerns the relevancy, to which
the Justices, and not the Assizers are only Judges competent: And it were very
dangerous to refer to ignorant Assizers, Matters of such importance, and which
are often so intricat in Iure. And whereas it may be urged, that Art and Part is
referred to the Assize, and is not condescended upon, and made relevant. It is
answered, that the accuser cannot know the accession of the Panel, till the
Witnesses first condescend upon it: but the Panel cannot but know all the
circumstances of his own self-defence, and is not to learn that from others:
But yet though the proponer of a defense, does in civilibus acknowledge eo ipso
the Lybel: yet in criminalibus, though the defender, or Panel prove not his
exception of self-defence, he will not be condemned, except the pursuer prove
the Lybel.

V. The way of proving this self-defence, was by raising a precept of
exculpation, but is now only by a summonds, which expresses not so particularly
the defense in all its circumstances, but that it may be hereafter helped,
which it seems is unjust, for the Panel should know what himself did: nor
should a Judge grant a precept for exculpation, till he see that there be some
ground for craving it.

This exception of self-defence is so favorable, that it may be proved by
presumtions, by Witnesses, otherways declinable, as Cousens, Servants, and
Witnesses who depone only upon credulity; and the Defense it self being once
proved, it is presumed that it was done necessarily, and lawfully, and potius
ad defensionem quam ad vindictam Far. quest 115. part 7.. 1. And yet our Law
allows no Witnesses to be received in defense, but such as it allows pursuits
and witnesses led in defense, are more to be suspected; for men are naturally
inclined to go all lengths in bringing off the Panel; and for this cause it
is, that we have Assizes of Error against such as absolve a Panel: but none
against those who condemn him.

Before this Act of Parliament, self-defence was still sustained by the
Justices, to elide the Lybel of Murder, but it was often ineffectual, seeing there
were no precepts of Exculpation then used; and consequently, except either the
Panel could have proved the inculpata tutela by the accusers own witnesses,
who were led to prove the Murder (which was not secure, seeing these who saw the
beginning of the scuffle, and first aggression, might have been absent when the
aggressor was killed) or that the witnesses would have voluntarly appeared
(which was a probable reason to set them, they being eo casu testes ultronii)
the defense could not have been proved. Whether self-defence will defend, or is
lawful in Paricid. See more of this Title Exculpation.

VI Homicidium casuale, is when a man is killed casually, without either the
fault, or design of the killer, as if an Axe head should fall off, and kill a
by stander: or a Rider should kill with his Horses feet: In which case our Law
appoints, that if the prejudice be done by the Horses formest feet, then the
Ryder shall be forced to satisfy for the prejudice done: and these
satisfactions are called Croo or Galnes; but where it is there said, that he
shall give Croo or Galnes, as if he had killed him himself; it is to be
interpret, not as if the Rider should be punishable in that case, as if he had
killed him with his own hand: but that the Assythment shall be the same. But
the Rider is not liable at all for what prejudice is done by the Horses hinder
feet, lib. 4. Reg. Maj. C. 24.

Casual Slaughter, or homicide, then is that which is occasioned by mistake and
just ignorance, for if it proceed from affected ignorance; as for instance, if
a man will not know what he may know, his ignorance in that case will not make
the Murder following upon it, to be constructed casual homicide; but if it
proceed from gross and supina ignorantia: it may be punishable by an
extraordinary, or arbitrary punishment, but not by death. And since such
ignorance is a fault, the Murder occasioned by it becomes culposum, or faulty
homicide; as seems to me clear by C. continebatur etc. lator de homicid. It is
then necessary, that the committer used all exact diligence to evite the Crime,
else he is not in the case of casual homicide. Further instances whereof, are,
if a Mason before he throw down Stones, advertise all below, though in throwing
he kill, he is to be cleared as innocent. Or if a Hunter shoot at a Beast, but
a man come in the way and be killed: and yet if either the Mason cry not, or if
the Hunter did shoot in a place where people use to be, he is guilty of faulty
Murder, in these cases which shows clearly the difference betwixt these two
kinds of Murder.

VII. If the killer be employed about a thing unlawful, either in it self, or
unlawful to the actor, the murder ensuing is thought still casual Murder, since
Murder was not designed, if the committer did exact diligence to shun all
Murder; as for instance, to carry Guns is unlawful with us: and to hunt is
unlawful to Priests by the Canon Law. If then a man having a Gun illegally,
should lay it up securely: or a Churchman should kill a man, whilst he did
shoot at a Beast in a remote place; these Acts would not infer Murder, because
there was no Act done there, with relation to Murder, Covar. ad clement. si
furiosus, and yet the committer, versatur in actu illicito. But yet others are
of opinion, that if the committer be doing what is unlawful for him, he commits
murder, Tho. Aquix 22. quest. 69. Act: because he does not at all that he ought
to do in that case, to evite Murder, since what he does is unlawful: But I
think they may be thus reconciled, viz. if the committer do what is against the
Law of Nature: or what is criminal, he should be liable: or if what he does,
may probably produce ill consequences, and Murder, though he designed not the
same: in all which cases he ought to be liable. And it seems to me reasonable,
that he who Killed, when he was doing what was unlawful, may be arbitrarly
punished, though he did exact diligence to shun Killing.

VIII When homicide is casually committed, some think that because there is no
design to kill, therefore the killer ought no way to be punished. Others think
him liable to an arbitrary punishment, or fine, and quod Wergeldum solvere
tenetur. We semb. parat. ad l. Corn. de Sicar. number. 27. A third Sect of Lawyers
distinguish so, that if there proceeded no fault in the committer, then he is
liable in no fine, or to no punishment: but that he is, if any fault of his
preceeded. But it seems that if any fault preceeded, the Murder is not casual,
but is culposum; and so the distinction meets not the state of the question:
and it seems to me. that by lib. 1. S. 3. ff. ad l. Cor. de Sicar. all casual
homicide deserves some punishment. And since some Lawyers think, that Murder in
self-defence excuses not from all punishment: much less ought casual Murder,
since self-defence wants not only a design to Kill, but is a duty in it self.

IX. Homicidium culposum: or faulty Slaughter, is where the Murder was not
designed; and yet it was committed merely by accident, as if one should hound a
Dog at another, who should bite him at whom he was hounded, so that he should
by thereby; or if one should strike with a Batton, when he had a Sword; in
these and the like cases, the offender is to be punished arbitrarly: but
because aberat animus occidendi, this is not properly Murder, and so is not
punishable by Death; but is punished according to the quality of these
circumstances, which attend the Fact.

For clearing this difficulty, the Doctors say, that either the Killer is
guilty only of culpa levis, aut levissima, and in that case he is no way
punishable; nor is there any difference, inter homicidium casuale and
homicidium per culpam levem aut levissimam commissum, and this was found in the
case of Nicolson, who being pursued for Murder, it was alleged that it was but
homicidium casuale, or culposum, for in struggling, his Gun being a half-bend,
went off; nor knew he ever the Defunct, and so could have no malice against
him. To which it was replied, that the carrying of Guns is forbid by the Law;
and he the Defunct was in actu illicito: nor should he have carried a Gun which
used to go off, and versans in actu illicito nunquam excusatur: which reply the
Justices repelled, June 24. 1673. For they thought that the Law against wearing
Guns, was in Desuetude as to Fowlers, whose trade it was, and omni culpa caret
qui facit id quod omnes facere solent sed si sit lata culpa, it is to be
punished arbitrarly, but not by death, nam lata culpa nunquam equiparatur dolo
ubi agitur de paena corporis afflictivae.

X. Since the design of Killing depends much upon the nature of the Wound
given, Lawyers conclude, that where the Wound was not deadly, or vulnus
lethale, as they call it, the infli^ter of the Wound cannot be punished, though
the Party wounded thereafter died. And though some Lawyers be of opinion, that
if the Party live three days after the receiving of the Wound; the Wound is
thereby presumed not to be mortal, Accurs. in l. 1. C. de emendat serve. yet
generally this is referred to the arbitrament of the Judge; who is in this to
follow the opinion of Physicians, or of one Physician, if more were not
present: but if they vary, then the Judge should incline to punish, not by
death, but by an extraordinary punishment: for Murder is not to be inferred,
but from a concluding probation, Gail. observe. 111. lib. 2. and if the Wound be
but small, and a Fever follow, then it is presumed that the Party dyed rather
of a Fever, then of the Wound; especially if the Person wounded walked a foot
for forty days, Gomes Var. resol. lib. 3. cap. 3. And yet in December 1669.
Mr. William Somervel was found guilty of the Murder of Bessy Rentoun, though it
was alleged that the said Bailzie got only a Wound with a Batton, that she
never took head, but traveled five Miles that night a foot, and served as an
ordinary servant eight months thereafter, till she died of a Fever; with which
her brother infected her: all which was repelled, because this alledgance was
contrair to the Libel: wherein it was expressly lybelled, that the Wounds were
mortal; and though, where the Wounds are not lybelled expressly to be mortal,
such a defense might be admitted. And the Judge ought to consider intervallum
temporis, or supervenientia febris; yet these, nor no presumptions ought to be
received, where the Wounds were offered to be proved to be Lethal: but this
Decision was so ill liked, that the Council recomended Mr. William to His
Majesty, who granted him a Remission. And since Judges may be so arbitrary in
so great a concern, I should wish that the various periods of Nature, in its
cures, and the various determinations of Judges, were, as to the Criminal
procedor, fixed to some certain time. And that therefore, seeing ordinarily
Wounds that are mortal, do kill the receiver in forty days; I wish that it
were therefore generally concluded, that he who dies thereafter, dies not of
his Wounds, if he has walked a-foot till that time, vid. Zack. Quest.
Medicolegal: But by the Law of England, if the Person Wounded die within year
and day after his Wound, it is presumed he died of his Wounds, Cook P. 53.

There was another Decision upon this Subject, the 13. of July 1674. James
Mason being pursued for killing Ralstoun, alleged that he could not be guilty
of Murder, since Ralstoun followed him all that day from house to house, and
having at last put violent hands in the Panel, he was forced to throw him off
him, and his Head fell upon a Stool and bled; which Wound he took no pains to
cure, but stayed in the Streets in the night time: and though the Wound was
found not to be mortal by the Chirurgians, yet by cold and drinking, he killed
himself, ex malo regimine; and when it was replied, that this could not amount
to self-defence, since the killer was not in periculo vitae constitutus: it was
duplyed, that the violence done, was proportionable to the violence offered by
the Aggressor, and so exceeded not moderamen inculpatae tutelae; for the said
Panel struck not him with any mortal Weapon, but only gave him a thrust with
his hand, which was necessary to throw the Defunct off him. Upon which debate,
the Justices sustained the Libel, only to infer paenam extraordinariam; and
remitted also the Pannels defenses of casual Homicide, self-defence, and that
the Wound was not mortal, to the knowledge of the Inquest.

XI. It is here controverted, whether he who intended to kill one, by a mistake
killed not him, but another, be punishable as a Murderer; seeing as to the
person killed, the Murderer had no design: yet I think he should die, seeing the
design of killing a man, and not any one particular man, is Murder; and the
killer intended to deface God Almighties Image: and to take from the King a
Subject. And I find that this is determined to be Murder by Bolton, cap. 11.
number. 24. by whom likewise it is given as a rule, nihil interest utrum quis
occidat an acausam mortis prabeat.

And thus a Son for having carried his Father (being sick) in a frosty night,
from one Town to another, was executed as a Murderer, because the Father died.
And a Harlot having exposed her Child in an Orchard, where a Kite killed it,
was execute as a Murderer, also and ibi volunt as reputatur pro facto; And if
this were not Murder, this Crime might be Palliated under other shapes.

This Defense, viz. that the killer had no design to Murder, is a Negative, and
so can only be proved by presumptions, as if there was no deadly fead formerly
amongst the Parties. 2. If the Parties were Kins-men or intimats. 3. If the
killer struck with a Staff, having a Sword or Pistol, or having these struck
only with the hilts of his Sword, or with the head of his Pistol: and generally
it is rather presumed to be homicidium culposom, then dolosum and premeditatum
nam nunquam praesumitur dolus.

By our Law, Slaughter and Murder did of old differ, as homicidium simplex and
premeditatum, in the Civil Law; and Murder only committed, as we call it, upon
forethought felony, was only properly called Murder, and punished as such, K.
Ia. Par. 3. cap. 1. where it is Statute, that Murder is to be capitally
punished: but Chaudmella, or Slaughter committed upon suddenly, shall only be
punishable according to the old Laws, vid. Acts 95.96. Par. 6. Ia. 1. and 22.
Par. 4 I. 5 and 35. Par. 5. Ia. 3. and Act 31. Par. 6. Q M. The old Laws to
which these Acts relate, are Statute, William c. 5. Stat. Allexander c. 6.
Stat. Rob. 2. c. 9. in which it is declared, that Mu^derers who are guilty of
forethought felony, shall not have the privilege and advantage of refuge in
the Girth^: but that such as are guilty of Chaudmella, or casual Slaughter,
shall be sheltered in the Girth. Yet I find that none of these are in any other
old Statute, to determine punishment of casual Slaughter, but that it was not
punishable as Murder; is clear by the opposition. and in all our Laws, betwixt
single Slaughter, and fore-thought-fellony: all casual Slaughter was of old
comprehended under the word Chaudmella, which is a French word: Chaud
signifying Hot, and Mesler signifying to mix. But in effect, this Melletum
answers properly to rixa and homicidium, in rixa commissum, which is but one
species, homicidii non dolosi.

XII. By the late 22. Act Parl. 1. Chapter 2. Sess. 1. It is Statute, that casual
Homicide, Homicide committed in self-defence, and Homicide committed upon
Thieves, shall not be punished by death. And seeing this Act mentions not
Homicide, committed in rixa, or homicidum culposum: and seeing homicidium
culposum differs from casual Homicide; it may be doubted, if under the one, the
other may be comprehended: and it may be urged, that casual Homicide is in this
Act a general term, comprehending all Homicide, which is not committed by
forethought felony, because what is not designed is casual, and what is not
forethought is casual: and the Doctors do use the Word Casual oftentimes in
this general sense; as is clear by Gothofred prax. crim. hoc. tit. And by the
rubric of this Act, which bears an Act concerning the several degres of casual
Homicide. It appears that the word Casual, is taken there in a Lax
Signification: albeit I confess, that the inscription is most improper; seeing
Homicide in self-defence, and Homicide committed upon Robbers, are not Species
of casual Homicide: but whether Homicide in rixa be comprehended under that
Act, was contraverted in William Douglas case: and by that Decision it is
clear, that in in our Law, though Murder was not at first designed: yet if it
was designed the time the stroke was given, the killer is guilty of Murder:
that premeditation is requisite to make Murder Capital, being only such as
antecedit actum licet non congressum.

The Civilians in the case of Homicidium per plures commissum, state three
questions; The first is, where the Murder was committed upon forethought
felony, and then indefinitly, all the assisters are punishable by death. The
second is, when it is not certain, but it is only suspected, and presumeable
that it was deliberatly committed, and then all may be tortured; but if they
deny the design, they are all only punishable by an arbitrary punishment,
because of the uncertainty. The third is, when the Murder was certainly
committed, in rixa, or tuilzie; and then either the author of the Pley is
certainly known, and he is punishable by death, in the rigor of the Law,
Albeit many Lawyers are positive, that no Country uses this rigor; I remember
that in William Dowglas's case, this was urged: for there several Gentlemen
having made a quarrel, which was only proved by one witness, they went to the
Fields of Lies, and Hoom of Eccles, was killed, but it was not proved who was
the killer: and the quarrel was only proved by one witness; who likewise
proved, that Spot had the quarrel with Eccles, and that William Douglas had
none; and yet the Assise found William guilty, and he thereupon died because
present.

XIII. Homicide likewise committed upon Thieves, and Robbers, breaking houses
in the night, or committed in time of masterful depradations, are free from
punishment, by the foresaid Act 22. And albeit it be declared lawful to the
Justices, to fine such as are assoilzied from Murder, upon the defenses of
casual Homicid, and Homicide in defense: yet such as kill Robbers, or night
Thieves, are free from all arbitrary punishment. By this Act likewise, it is
lawful to kill such as assist, or defend the depredators, or oppose their
pursuit by force; and by the 6. Act of the second Session of that Parliament,
it is Statuted, that the Parties whose goods are robbed, shall acquaint the
Sheriff, or Justices of Peace, of the Paroch, who shall require all Parties to
concur; and if any of the concurrers, kill any of the Robbers, they are
declared free; upon which it may be doubted, if such as kill Robbers without
acquainting the Sheriff, or Justices of Peace, are punishable: and it seems
they are, seeing this Act explains the other, and modifies somewhat the
indefinite power given to private persons, who upon pretense of such invasions,
which might prove very dangerous: and therefore the last did wisely require the
concourse of the Magistrate; and upon this consideration, I know that it was
consulted, that notwithstanding of this, such as had not acquainted the
Sheriff, or Justices, could not be exculpat. And yet it may be argued, that
this Act narrates not the other, nor bears expressly a rectification of it; but,
without lessening the privilege therein granted, adds a new one, and so being
introduced in favors of possessors, should not be interpret to their
disadvantage. By the Civil Law, licebat nocturnum furum occidere. And by the
227. Act 14. Par. Ia. 6. it is declared lawful for the Leidges to conveen, and
execute Thieves, and they are all made Justices for that effect; upon which
Act, a defense was propon'd, for the inhabitants of Kintail, who took a Robber,
and execute him by their own authority, in a formal Court. But by the Civil
Law, and Doctors, it was not lawful, furem vel predatorem diurnum occidere,
except the thing stolen was of great value, and could not be otherwise
recovered; or that he defended himself, and resisted his being apprehended: all
which defenses may be proved, by the assertion of the killer, Farin. 125. part.
4. And if any other Probation were requisite, the benefit of these Acts were a
snare, rather then an advantage: and necessity legittimats many things, which
are otherwise hard.

XIV. By the Civil Law, it was lawful for the Father to kill his own Daughter,
if he found her committing adultery, and to kill also her adulterer. l. part.
1. ff. de Adult: which was allowed, rather in hatred to adultery, then because
the Law considered it was too hard for a Father to restrain his passion in that
case; for if it had been allowed to the father only upon this last account, it
had been allowed much more to the Husband to kill his wife, if he found her
committing adultery; for his relation being nearer, and his honor more
concerned then the Fathers, his passion behooved to be also more violent; and
yet the Law being jealous of the Husbands violence, does only allow the Husband
to kill the adulterer, if he be a mean person, but if the adulterer be a person
of quality, or if the adulterer be found elsewhere then in the Husbands own
house, it it not lawful to kill them, for the injury is hightned by polluting
the Husbands own house, and becomes a kind of adulterous Hamsuckin: And yet if
the Husband kill in either of these cases, that Law ordained the husband only
to be punished by some arbitrary punishment, but not by death. l. Marito. ff.
de Adulter. But this last determination does not satisfy justice, for it seems
reasonable that it should be rather lawful to kill a person of quality,
committing adultery, then a mean person, both because adultery is more ordinar
amongst them, as having more ease, and being more luxoriously fed, and because
the husband cannot be so easily presumed to have had former quarrels with a
person above his rank, and so should be believed to have killed him merely to
satisfy his just revenge. As also since they can sooner prevail, they ought to
be more rigidly punished. The Law has denied this privilege to women, who may
not kill their Daughters or Husbands, the reason whereof I conceive to have
been, that the Law considered, that Husbands were more prejudged then the
Wives, by adultery, since thereby, not only was their bed defiled, but their
estate carried away to another man's children, or else it thought women too
passionat to be entrusted with such a license, or that it was undecent to allow
women the use of Arms: And yet I believe their just grief would secure them
against the ordinar punishment; and though some prerogative be due to the man
over his wife, but not e contra, yet women may complain that men being the only
Legislators, have taken too great a measure of favor to themselves in this
Law. I have not observed any decision of this in our Law, and since our
statutes have secuted murderers in other cases, as in self-defence, killing of
thieves, etc. And yet have not privileged this case, it may seem that the
husband nor rather cannot kill by our Law, and the most that they could expect,
were, that after they were found guilty by the Law, the Council might either
change the doom of death into an arbitrary punishment, or might recomend the
party to his Majesty's clemency for a remission: But it were hard to punish
with death amongst us, what almost all Nations allow as lawful, and what may be
yet a further check to that growing vice. And this seems juster then to allow
with the Civil Law, that the Husband or Father, who are persons interessed,
should be judges in their own concern, and should be judges when they are in
passion, and because they are in passion; Nor can I see why the Law should
punish even him who possesses by his own authority what is truly his own, and
yet should allow here the parties interessed to punish with death by their own
authority: or that passion which only infers mitigation of the pain elsewhere,
should here infer absolute impunity, for this were to make one irregular Act
legittimat another, since passion is a transgression against reason, as Adultry
is against Law: But since this indulgence is personal, and only granted to the
Father and Husband, because of their just passion and near relation, it is not
reasonable that it should be extended to such as k^ll by the Fathers or
Husbands Command, which command none ought to obey, being contrair to Law: Nor
ought this indulgence to extend to the Father or Husband when they kill ex
intervallo, and not when they find the Committers in the very transgression,
for the Law allows no passion to continue; and therefore what ever revenge is
allowed to it, is only allowed if it be executed immediately, and ex in
continenti. And though in civil cases that is said to be done ex in continenti,
or immediately, which is done before the doer go about any thing else: Yet I
conceive that interpretation would be too lax in this case, and that the killer
could not plead this privilege, except he killed them in the very Act, or
rising from it.

Homicidium deliberatum, or upon forethought Felony, is still punishable by
death, and confiscation of the movables of the Defunct for His Majesty's use,
Stat. Rob. 3. cap. 43. And albeit Lawyers say, that it is still rather
presumable to be casual, then deliberat, and that by our Law and custom,
design is still libelled, yet because it is impossible to prove design, which
is a secret act of the mind. All killing is always punishable by death, except
some of the qualities of chance, self-defence, etc. be alleged upon by the
Panel. It may be here asked, if by our Law, he who strikes with his fist, or a
batton (which are of themselves no mortal weapons) be punishable by death,
though the party struct there by him dye: And it would seem hard that he
should, seeing no design to kill can be here presumed, and maleficia voluntas
and affectus distinguunt, and by the 5. cap. Will. Reg. number. 4. It is said, that
si quis interficiat cum pugno dabit regi 25. vaccas, and satisfaciet parentelae
defuncti secundum assisam regni, by which it would appear, that striking with
the fist is not capital, albeit death follow.

Murder premeditated, may be divided into that species which is simply such,
Assasination, Murder under trust, and self Murder.

XVI. Murder under trust, is with us, when a party who put himself under the
assurance and trust of another, is murdered by him: and this is by a special
statute punished as treason, Act. 51. P. 11. Ia. 6. The words are (where the
party slain is under the traist, credit, assurance, and power of the slayer;
the party being tried and found guilty thereof by an assize, it shall be
Treason, and the person found culpable, shall forefault Life, Lands, and Goods)
what this credit and assurance is, has often been questioned, and it is reported
that the origin of this, was to punish the Murder of a Gentleman, who invited
his neighbor to a feast, and killed him and all his relations in his own
house: so that invitation is one branch of this trust. 2. Assurance signifies,
that when two persons were at fead, and the one has found borrows to one
another, Act 97. Ia. 1. p. 6.3. Where persons at varience are under
capitulation. 4 This Act has been stretched to the conjugal trust betwixt man
and wife, anno. 1627. Andrew Row, And yet in the Process intented against
Swintoun, for killing his wife, anno. 1666. It being objected that this act
extended not to such trusts as this, the pusurer restricted his Libel to
Murder. And the Lords of Session, Anno. 1665. found that a sons killing his own
mother, was not a murder under trust, punishable by this act: and yet it would
appear, that both killing of wives and Children falls under that branch of the
act, where the party is under the power of the slayer. This species of Murder
was by the Civilians, called proditio, which is designed to be homicidium sub
praetextu amicitiae, v. g. dum sederem tecum in mensa vel amicitiam fingerem,
which is punishable by a more severe death then ordinar Murders. And in Spain,
the betrayer or proditor (for even in propriety of speech, Murder under trust
is treachery, or Treason) trahitur ad caudam equi and postea furca suspenditur,
Gomez.

By that act likewise, trial should be taken by an assize; And therefore the
Lords found, that though Mr. James Oliphant had been guilty of killing his
Mother, and that it had been Treason, yet his forefaulter could not fall to the
King, upon a simple Denunciation for not appearing to underly the Law, because
a trial is requisite in this case. And by the 137. act. 13 Par. Ia. 6. The
killing any person in the Parliament House, during the sitting thereof, or the
inner Tolbuith ( id est, the inner house of the Session) during the sitting
thereof, or the Council-house whilst the Lords sit, or kill any in the Kings
Chamber, Cabinet, or Chamber of peace, or in the kings presence any where,
infers the pain of Treason.

XVII. What is interpret to be art and part of Murder, can hardly be defined,
for it does depend upon the assize: A design to Murder, though no Murder
follow, affectus sine effectu punitur capitaliter, l. 1. is qui cum telo, C. ad
Corn. de Sicar: yet by the custom of nations, the punishment now reaches not
life, Clar. hoc. tit. number. 74. and I find that Matthew Stewart, being pursued
for contriving the death of Thomas Kennedie, came in the Kings will, and was
only banished, Mart: 1597. As also I find, that though Lawson was cleansed of
the murder of her own child, yet she being referred, to the Justices, because
of the violent presumptions adduced against her, and that she her self had
confessed she bore a dead child; the Justices therefore did ordain her to be
whipped and banished, 20* August. 1662. and Margaret Ramsay having confessed that
she bore a dead child, and was advised to cast it into the north-Loch, which
she did not, though without her knowledge it was done by others; the Justices,
though she was assoylzied by the inquest, ordained her to be scourged and
banished, 1661.

XVIII. Though such as kill in prosecution of Law, are not punishable as
Murderers, yet if they exceed, they are punishable, not only quo ad excessum,
arbitrarily, but even paena ordinaria, as Murderers. An instance whereof was
decided, the 14. of June 1672. in the person of Mr. Archibald Beath, who being
Pannelled for killing Allan Gairdiner, alleged that the Council had by their
Act and Proclamation, ordained all Meal brought from Ireland to be seized upon,
and the boats wherein it was brought, to be sunk, in prosecution whereof
Gardiners Meal being Seized, he broke the Seizure, and being followed in a
Boat, by the said Mr. Archibald, and others, he was commanded to stay his
Boat, but was so fare from obeying, though commanded in His Majesty's name,
that he had run almost down the Pannels little Boat, who was thereupon forced
to shoot at them, and though this Act, ex post facto, degenerat into an act of
killing, yet no killing was at first intended; and the rise of all such Actions
is to be first considered.

To which it was replied, that this act was to be understood civiliter, and did
only empower the Leidges to Seize, but not to kill, and all mandats are to be
so interpreted, as not to be extended, ad ea quae mandans in specie non
mandasset, or quae solitus est mandare si aliquando mandat non mandat nisi
certa forma servata, but it cannot be subsumed that the Council would have
allowed the importer of such victual, to be killed, nor do they use to entrust
the execution of such Laws to Ministers; and if they had designed that the
execution of this prohibition, should reach death, they would have expressly
allowed the Seizers to kill, as they use to do in such cases. To which it was
duply'd, that though the Minister was not obliedged to concur because of his
function, yet concurring as a Subject, he is not punishable therefore
capitally; and if a Minister should concur when the hue and cry were raised
after a night Thief, or if a Minister did assist such as pursued Rebels, and
should kill in the pursuit, it were absurd to conclude that he should be
punished as a Murderer, because he was not obliedged to kill: and it is not
imaginable, but if it had been proposed to the Council what seizers should do,
in case of resistance, but they would have authorized them to kill; nor could
their act receive complete obedience in case of resistance, for else such as
resolve to contraveen, might secure themselves by their resistance, and the
Council by empowering to sink the Boat where the Victual is, does very clearly
empower the killing of such as resist, for they might have been sunk in the
Boat, and he who is allowed to sink a Boat, is allowed to sink all who are in
it. Notwithstanding of which defenses, the said Mr. Archibald was put to the
knowledge of an inquest, and after the verdict was ordained to lose his head,
but the Parliament having thereafter that same month allowed by their act,
such as resisted to be killed, the said Mr. Archibald was thereupon remitted as
to the Crime, but was never readmitted to his Church.

Some Militia Soldiers also being pursued for Murder, 3. Febr. 1674. alleged
that they could not go to the knowledge of an inquest as Murderers, since if
they killed, it was in prosecution of their Officers orders, for they being
sent to Poynd, were resisted; and though it was replied, that opposition to the
poynding could not warrant killing, but they might have pursued a riot: This
was alleged not to be relevant, because, sibi imputent, who opposed, and
Soldiers must do effectually what is commanded: and their Officers may shoot
them if they return without effectuating what was commanded, and military
commands must not be delayed, nor opposed, like other commands. Notwithstanding
of which debate they were found guilty.

XIX. It is much controverted amongst the Doctors, whether it be lawful,
occidere hannitum, a Person at the Horn, and by the Civil Law, non licet Bart.
in l. ut vim. N. 1. ff. de inst. and jure, but by the Statutes of particular
places, they all conclude, it may be lawful, ob quietem publicam: and by our
old Decisions, that the killing of such as are at the Horn for Slaughter, or
other Crimes, is not Criminal, January 1600. Guthrie contra Iarden: but by the
foresaid 22. Act Par. 1. Chapter 2. It is declared, that the killing such as are
denounced, or declared Rebels, for Capital Crimes, or such as defend these
Rebels, may be lawfully killed; whereby it is employed, that such as are at the
Horn for other Crimes, may not be killed; and such could not be lawfully
killed, who are only at the Horn for Pecunial Causes, and any Statute allowing
to kill such, would be null, Clar. hoc. tit number. 53. But it may be here
doubted, what are these Criminal Causes, for which one at the Horn may be
killed? for clearing whereof, it is fit to remember, that the Doctors allow
only such to be killed, who are banniti ob grave delictum, Clar. number. 53. and
in reason, it should be such a Crime, for which the Rebel has deserved death,
if he had appeared; for it seems rigid and unjust, that wherever the conclusion
of the Summonds was Criminal, the Party being Denounced, may be killed; or that
when ever the Rebel was Denounced for absence from a Justice-Court, he may be
killed, seeing the common-good, which is the reason inductive of this Law, does
not require, nor in effect is not consistent with their interpretations. 2. It
may be doubted, if he who kills a Rebel for private revenge, and not ob
vindictam publicam, will have the benefit of this Defense: of this we have an
instance, anno 1600. where Robert Auchmoutic being pursued for the Slaughter of
James Wanchop, it was alleged that the Defunct was at the Horn, for receipting
a Traitor: to which it was replied, that the Panel killed him upon a private
quarrel, for having conversed with the Defunct long after he was at the Horn,
for that cause: but that he killed him in a Duel, upon a private quarrel: in
respect whereof, the Pannels defense was repelled, and he put to the knowledge
of an Inquest, and thereafter beheaded. And yet I find the Doctors of opinion,
that bannito occiso per inimicum occidens non reputatur homicida, and which is
more, he will not have right to the reward promised for killing the Rebel,
Caravet in Prag. 1. de exul number. 134. and enemies are these who most probably
will execute this public Justice, which the Law designs. And seeing our late
Act makes no distinction betwixt such as kill upon public and private revenge;
I believe that the case now has no difficulty, and that now the killer in both
cases would be free from Punishment. Yet I think, that he who would kill a
Rebel in a Combat, might yet be Pannelled, for contraveening that Act anent
Duels; for though he might lawfully kill a Rebel, yet he could not lawfully
fight a Duel. 3. It may be doubted, if he who was Denounced Rebel, was not
lawfully Denounced, v. g. if he was out of the Country the time of the Charge,
or that the Execution was not stamped, or wanted some Solemnity, if eo casu,
the killer would be guilty of Murder: which Defense, I find likewise propon'd
in the former case, and yet repelled, and very justly, for a private Person is
not obliged to know these nullities. If any man resist the execution of his
Majesty's Laws, by Messengers, or other public Servants, in that case, the
Messenger cannot proceed to kill, as was found in John Mackintoshes case, May
11. 1673. but if the resister do also proceed, to offer violence, by drawing
upon the Messenger, in that case the Messenger may kill him lawfully, without
necessity of proving that he would have been in danger of his life, if he had
not killed; though private persons cannot kill when they are invaded, except
they be by that invasion put in danger of their life.

XX. Albeit ordinarily death, and the confiscation of Movables, is the
punishment of Murder; and that the life-rent of the Murderer does not thereby
fall; yet in some cases, the life-rent falls, as by the 118 Act 12. Par. Ia. 6.
These who are denounced Rebels, for slaying men in the Church, or Churchyard,
in the time of Prayer, Preaching, or administration of the Sacraments, their
Life-rents presently falls to the King (though regulariter Life-rent Escheits
fall to the respective Superior, and the receipters do likewise loose their
Life-rent Escheats; declarator being first past upon the receipt. It may be
here doubted, if these words, the time of Divine Service, may extend to
slaughters, committed the time of Preaching, etc. Albeit there be no Preaching,
or Prayer for the time there: the reason of the doubt is, seeing the 39. Act of
the 6. Par. Q. M. anent removing, is so interpret: for by that Act, warning of
Tennents should be used at the Paroch Church, the time of Preaching or Prayer:
which words are thus interpret, the time that Preaching uses to be, though
there be none at the time.

By the 219. Act Par. 14. Ia. 6. If either the pursuer or defender in civil
pursuits, kill one another, during the dependence, eo casu; the killer being
put to the Horn, either for not compearance at the Diet, or for not finding
Caution, he loses his Life-rent Escheat immediately upon the Denounciation.

XXI. Murder is one of the four Plea's of the Crown, Malcol. 2. c. 11. and
therefore the cognition thereof belongs to the Justices; and Commissions cannot
be granted for trial thereof, Act 74. Ia. 6. Par. 11. albeit it be now most
ordinar, to grant such Commissions: and yet this Act being alleged against
one of those Commissioners, before the Council, they did recall the same: but
if the Murderer be taken red hand, he may be judged by a Barron (having power
of Pit and Gallows) by a Sheriff, or any other Judge ordinar; betwixt which,
there is likewise this difference, that Murder is Bailable, Ia. 3. Par. 6. c.
42. But Slaughter taken red hand, is not Bailable; but the committer thereof
should be judged within that Sun, Ia. 1. Par. 6. c. 89.95. And if the Barron or
Sheriff proceed not within that time, the Cognition belongs only to the
Justices, for they are Judges to Murder upon citation.

XXII. By several old Acts, I find that the Sheriff, when a Murder is
committed, may raise the Kings Horn ( id est, the hue and cry, hoesium, as the
Latin translation calls it) upon the Murder, and follow him out of his
Sheriffdom, and send Letters to the next, and he to a third, and so till he be
taken, and that when he is taken, Justice should be done upon him, within
forty days, and that he should be sent from Sheriff to Sheriff, to the place
where the Crime was committed, which is now absolet; for if he be not taken red
hand, the Sheriff cannot proceed against him; albeit it would appear that he
may, if he be taken within forty days, Ia. 1. Par. 6. c. 89. which I find no
where abrogated, nor any thing to the contrair, except only Hops assertion, in
his lesser Practiques, and that may be interpret also of Cognitions, after the
forty days are expired.

By the 50. Act of the 6. Par. Ia. 1. It is Statuted, that Sheriffs in the
former case, may proclaim the Murderer fugitive, and forbid all the Lieges to
receipt him, under the pain of losing Life and Goods; but this power is also
absolet. And the receipting Murderers seems not any accession, except other
presumptions be adduced, as if the Murder was committed upon the receipters
account: in which case, receipting, may be arbitrarlily punished, but of this, I
find no formal Decision, only the Registers mention, that Thomas Brice, being
accused for receipting his own Son, who had Murdered Fairhop: it was alleged,
that the receipting his own Son could be no Crime, nam proximitas sanguinis
tollit praesumptionem criminis hoc casu Clar. quest. 110. number. 54. and l. 2.
ff. de recept. And receipt could only be interpret to be a Crime. In our Law,
after the committers are Denounced, and Letters of intercommuning obtained
against them* which Defense was thought so relevant, that the Justices demur'd
upon it, but this received no Decision.

XXIII. When a man is killed by forethought felony, the King can by our Law
grant no Remission for the Murder, Ia. 4. Par. 6. cap. 63. and Ia. 6. cap. 13.
cap. 169. But yet Remissions are daily granted, for such Murderers, and are
admitted in the Justice Court, notwithstanding of this objection, as in the
Earl of Caithnes case, in anno 1668. And it is alleged, that these Acts are by
the Style, but temporary Acts. But all such Remissions are null, except the
offender offer to Assith the Party: which Assithment is modified by the
Council, and the Party cannot propon upon his Remission, till he find present
Caution, to satisfy what shall be modified, within forty days, or else he
must, during these forty days, go to Prison, and if payment be not made
within forty days, his Remission is null, Ia. 2. Par. 14. cap. 75.

Assassinii crimen, or to kill a man by Assassination, is to Murder a man for
Money; and this Species was introduced, first, by the Canon Law, cap. 1. de
homicid. cap. 6. and had its name from the Assassini, who were a Tribe of the
Phoenicians; and who feigned themselves to be Christians, being truly
Mahumetans, that they might kill Christians; and therefore, and because the
foresaid Canon speaks only of Christians, it is still concluded, that only such
as kill Christians, are to be repute Assassinats; and the killer of a Jew was
found no Assassinate, Cavall. h. t. number. 475. And yet Matheus thinks, that all
killing for Money, is Assassination; for this Crime being founded upon Nature,
to kill a Jew is as far against Nature, as to kill a Christian. And it is a
greater scandal upon our Religion, to kill a Jew, because it reproaches us
amongst Infidels.

The Specialities introduced in this Crime, are, that the endeavor to kill for
Money, is a Crime, though death follow not: and that Assassination may be
proved, by presumptions; and that they cannot enjoy the benefit of a
Sanctuary, or Girth, Cabal. number. 501.515.526. And though the foresaid Canon run
only against such, as undertake to kill for Money, yet the Conducers, or such
as entreat them to kill, are also Assassinats, Gomez. 3. resol. 3. number. 10.
Math. page 521. But these are not in observance with us, except as to the
Privilege of a Sanctuary: from which, all such as committed Murder under
Trust, or per insidias (which that Act calls Assassinium only) are expressly
excluded, Act 35. part. 5. I. 3.

TITLE XII. Of Duels.
1. The several kinds of Duels, allowed of old by other Nations. 2. What Duels
were allowed of old in Scotland. 3. How the giving and receiving challenges is
punishable, though no Combat follow. 4. The way of Libelling used in this case.
5. Whether Duels for reparation of honor; be lawful, where no other reparation
can be had. 6. What must be proved in this Crime. 7. Whether he be not
punishable who kills in a rancounter only, or he who tells the provooker that
he is going to such a place. 8. The punishment of Duels, and who are accounted
art and part.
DUels are but illustrious and honorable Murders. And therefore I have
subjoyned this Title to the Title of Homicide: This is that imperious Crime,
which triumphs over both public revenge, and private virtue, and tramples
proudly upon both the Law of the Nation, and the life of our enemy. Courage
thinks Law here to be but pedantrie, and honor persuades men, that obedience
here is cowardliness.

I. We find no such Crime as this among the Romans, because that wise Nation
employed their lives against their enemies, and not against their
fellow-Citizens: And the true trial of courage among them, was fighting against
the enemies of Rome.

Duels are either Judicial or Extrajudicial: Judicial Duels were these which
were allowed by Law, for trying the innocence of such as wanted other legal
probations.

The Longabards first did allow this way of Duelling, by pulick authority, who
did regulat it by twenty several determinations: And thereafter it was renewed
by Philip, the fair King of France, Anno. 1360. but was bounded with these four
conditions, 1. That it should only be allowed in Criminal and capital cases. 2.
That it should only be allowed in Crimes treacherously committed, where the
Truth could not be otherwise found out. 3. Where there did lie strong
presumptions against the persons provoked. 4. Where it was certain there was
such a Crime committed against the provocker.

II. With us in Scotland, Duels were allowed not only for clearing of
innocence, as to Crimes, but likewise in civil cases, as when an Heir denied
that his predecessor granted a Conjunctfie. R.M. lib. 2. cap. 16. v. 47. And
when any thing was denied to be lawfully bought by the owner, Lib. 3. cap. 13.
v. 4. But thereafter I find that by the 16. cap. Stat. Rob. 3. All duels are
discharged, except in the four former cases allowed by Phillip the fair. The
solemnity of Cartels used in such cases, was the casting of Gloves to one
another, as is clear by Skeen, ad cap. 24. v. 9. R. M. Duelliones in hoc regno
hinc inde chiro thecas offerunt, which custom had its origin from the
Longohard Law above cited, as is clear by Long. de duel: and Dumhaud. tit. cod.
The place appointed by our Law for such Duels, was the Bridge of Stirling. cap.
28. Stat. David. 2. And if the appealer in ordinar Crimes was foiled and
worsted his pledges paid the King nine Cowes and a Colpindach, and satisfied
for the calumny, Stat. Alex. cap. 11. But in Treason the appealer worsted
became in the Kings will, and the party appeased, being worsted, was
disherished. R. M. L. 4. c. 1. But these Duels are Discharged by the Canon Law.
cap. monomachia. 2. quest. 4. and cap. ultim Ext. de purg. vulg. though with us
such judicial Combats, by authority, are not absolutely discharged, for, by the
12. cap. 16. Parl. I. 6. Wherein singular Combats are discharged, there is an
exception made of such as are fought with His Higness license.

III. Duels undertaken without public authority, are thought by many Lawyers,
to be lawful, when undertaken by a person who is injured in his honor, if the
party injured cannot be otherwise repaird; either because there is not a judge
in the place, or else the injurer will not appear before him, or though he
compear, the Judges refuses to do Justice, ubi enim deficit jus ibi suplet
ensis and propria ultio. Bart. in L. hosts number. 9. ff. de cap, and postlin.
revers. And many are of opinion that these private Combats are lawful, for
defense of our honor, and as we may defend our life by taking that of our
neighbors, so we may defend our honor by the hazard of his life.

But that Duels are in themselves unlawful by all Law, appears very clearly
from these reasons.

1. That the Law has justly thought fit that the Magistrate only should do
justice to all, and that no private man should revenge himself; for in so far
he commits treason, in assuming the power of the Civil Magistrate. 2. The power
of taking and using Arms, belongs only to the Commonwealth, and consequently
no private man should run to Arms, upon an imagination that he is wronged in
his honor. 3. There is no proportion betwixt the injury and reparation, in
such cases a verbal injury being too severely punished, when punished by death,
there being no proportion betwixt what may be helped, and what may not. 4.
Revenge belonging to God, it is an usurping of his power. It is the destroying
that body which is the Temple of God, the defaceing of his image (whereas to
deface even a Princes, Image, designedly is Treason) and it is a spilling of
that blood for which Christ shed his. 5. It is a crime against a man's self, and
is in effect self-murder: Nor need those who resolve to kill themselves, take a
base way, since this honorable way is easy and patent, for he may soon make
quarrels, and so kill constantly till he be killed.

It is a Crime against the common wealth, because it destroys its subjects, and
makes the hateful sin of Murder a desirable effect of Glory. It is likewise a
great offense against our friends, since it draws them, though innocent, into
the same snare, as seconds, assisters, and revengers: and it is dishonorable,
because it wrongs a man's wife, by making her miserable, and notwithstanding of
his many obligations to her. 6. It is an unjust decision of controversies,
since strength, skill, or accident, prevail oftentimes against honor and
innocence, so that this trial should neither be allowed, by justice, nor
honor: and therefore Augustus being provoked by Anthony, did nobly answer,
that if Anthony was weary of his life, he might take any other way to dispatch
himself. And Sertorius being provoked by Metellus, answered, it was below a
General to dye like a common Soldier: And therefore it may be answered to the
contrary arguments, that it is to be presumed the Magistrate will do justice in
repairing the fame of him who is wronged, nor can a Duel restore the fame that
is lost; for a Duel shows only a man to be resolute, or desperate, without being
innocent, or generous: and it is more presumable, that the provocke was justly
defamed, and finding himself unable to survive the shame, resolves to dispatch
himself by this plausible way of self-murder, nor can a man take a more easy
way of publishing that wherein he was defamed, then by killing the defamer,
whereby he will both bring himself and the occasion of that accident into the
mouths of the world. Though that act discharge only singular Combats: And that
the word singular Combat is properly only applicable to the fighting of two
single persons, which is only properly called singular certamen yet this
singular certamen, or singular Combat is properly enough extended where more
fight on a side. Cagnol. in l. Favorabiliores 86. ff. de reg. jur.

V. Since fighting of singular combats is only declared punishable, therefore
the giving or receiving challenges is not punishable by death, though even that
be likewise punishable by the Council Arbitrarie, as ending to disturb the
peace; but since the very fighting is declared punishable by death, it follows
necessarily, that such as fight Combats, are punishable by death, though
neither party be killed: And if only killing had been punishable by death, this
act had been unnecessary, since that was punishable as Murder before this act.

VI. If any person be killed, the libel is founded both upon the Acts against
murder, and this act against Duels. But the difference betwixt the way of
libelling is this; that if the libel be only founded upon the acts against
Murder, then self-defence is receiveable by way of exculpation to eleid this
libel, because self-defence there, is not contrair to any quality of the libel,
which must be expressly proved, for the quality of forethought felony must
necessarily be libelled in Murder. Yet it needs not be proved, and so the
probation of the defense and lybel, are not contrary. Whereas in Duels an
express provocation must be lybel'd and proved, and so the probation of the
libel and defense would be contrary, as was found in the case of Mackie, in
June, 1670. where it was likewise found that a challenge given and accepted,
did infer a Duel and it was not sufficient, that the party provoked, coming
thereafter to the field, was set upon, and put in hazard of his life by the
provocker; for though primus insultus, be sufficient to defend against
forethought felony in other cases, yet where there preceeded a provocation,
it is not sufficient, because he who was provoked by going to the place,
versabatur in illicito, and so should not have the benefit of self-defence.
And if this were allowed, the party provoked might easily elude this statute,
because he might accept the challenge: And yet when he is upon the place,
refuse to fight, until he were set upon by the other, and put even in hazard
of his life by him, which method being followed by one Robertson, a Soldier in
Linlithgow's Regement, he was notwitstanding found guilty of Murder, in July
1673.

VII. From this it appears likewise that such as in answer to challenges, do
declare, that they will be in such a place at such a time, and if the provocker
attaque, they will defend themselves, they fall within the compass of this
act, since by declining a formal answer, they design to cheat the Law, for by
assigning place and time, they in effect accept of the challenge; and this can
neither be called a mere rancounter, nor self defense, as is most justly
debated by Voet. de duel. cap. 33. quest. 1. but if any man getting a
challenge, shall answer, that he will not transgress the Law, but if the
challenger shall attaque him, he will defend himself, if this person thereafter
in defense kill, he will not be punishable by this act, for self defense does
not leave off to be a legal defense, because the person attaqued promises he
will defend himself.

VIII. Both the provocker and provoked, killing, are by this act not only
punishable with death, but by confiscation of their movables; and the
provocker is declared liable to such arbitrary punishments as his Majesty shall
think fit, because his guilt is greatest, for the party provoked has still
his guilt lessened with a shadow of self-defence.

Not only are Seconds art and part, but even those who carried the challenge,
though they were no Seconds: and yet it may be alleged, that these cannot be
punished with death, except they were present, since the carrying a challenge
is but an incomplete act, and nudus conatus. But yet it may be answered, that
if death follow upon a Combat, wherein they carried the challenge, they are
punishable as murderers, since the crime was completed by their accomplices. In
June. 1676. David Hamiltoun was found guilty, though it was alleged that
albeit he had come to seek the length of his gear who was to fight with his
Son, yet that was done but upon design to terrify the other to fight, as
appears, not only by the strangeness of the expression, but because he did tear
the challenge, how soon ever he got it in his hands: and albeit it was proved
that he did trip up the man's heels who was fighting with his son, yet that was
done merely to end the Combat, he having taken his own Son in his arms
immediately thereafter.

In this case it was likewise alleged, that those who were adduced witnesses
could not be received, because they had come out of the house with the other
party to the field; and being very many in number, they might have stopped the
Combat, if they had pleased: notwithstanding of which objection, they were
received. But I conceive, that since all men are obliged, as far as in them
lies, to keep the peace, and hinder crimes, it seems very reasonable, that if
many who might hinder, do tamly look on, without offering to redd or separat
the parties, they should be punished; and this should hold not only in any of
the Kings officers who are present, or in any who are commanded by them whom
Cook observes to be fineable, page 158. but even in all who are present, though
the punishment, as to them, sholud be less, then as to the others, idem est
facere, and nolle prohibere cum possis: and qui non prohibet cum prohibere
possit in culpa est.

TITLE XIII. Self-Murder.
1. Despair, nor Stoicism, cannot defend against Self-Murder. 2. Furiosity does
defend. 3. An endeavor to commit Self-Murder, is punishable. 4. Self-Murder
may be committed by omission, as well as commission. 5. What Declarator is to
be pursued by the Donators, of the Self-Murderers Escheat, and how it is to be
proved.
I. GOD Almighty has placed every man at his Post here, and he who violently
tears himself from it, deserves much worse, and is more guilty then a Soldier,
who deserts his station: and since Princes punish as Criminals, such as kill
their Subjects; much more may the Almighty punish him who kills himself; for he
who kills himself, kills Gods Subject, and therefore, Nemo est dominus suorum
membrorum. The Law likewise considers him who would kill himself, as one who
would spare none else, and condemns an humor which is so dangerous.

Upon these reasons, but especially, because God has forbid man to kill,
without making a distinction of killing our selves, or others; all Christian
Nations punish severely Self-murder, as Murder, for they confiscat their
Movables, and deny them Christian Burials: to which some Nations, for a
further mark of Ignominy, add the hanging them upon Gibbets: but this last, our
Nation uses not.

This Crime was called (...) by the Greeks, and it was condemned by Plato, l.
9. de leg. and was at first punished by the Heathens, -- Virgil. lib. 6.
Aeneid. speaking of Hell, proxima deinde tenent maesti loca, qui sibi laethum
insontes peperere manu lumenque pero si projecere animas: the English call him,
felo de se.

The Stoics who had made their Reason their God, and made their convenience
their Reason; allowed the killing of ones self, either to shun thereby Torture,
or Shame; and thought death a door, which every man might open at his pleasure:
for, since death may surprise a man when he is not ready, they resolved to be
some way equal with it, in forcing it to be ready, whenever they pleased. And
from their practice (for most of the Romans, especially the Gownmen, were of
that Sect) flowed these Roman Laws, l. 3.. sic autem ff. de bon. eor. l.
siquis. ult. ff. de pen. By which they distinguished betwixt such as killed
themselves, to evite a just punishment of the Crimes for which they were
accused; and such as killed themselves, taedio vitae, vel doloris impatientia:
for the first, they punished as Murder, but the last, they favored with a
lesser punishment. Nay, and in the Primit^ve Church, many for making themselves
away, to evite thereby Idolatry, or Pollution^, have been accounted as
Martyrs* thus the Wife and Children of Adauctus, having killed themselves,
when they were to be defloured; it was doubted, if they ought not to have been
numbered amongst the Martyrs; (...). Cedren. page 220. and the like story is
reported by Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 17. of a Noble Lady, who was brought to
Maxentius. But our Law is jealous, that such pretexts might be brought, to
color all base designs; and allowing none to be their own Judges, has made no
such distinction, as was found in the case of Thomas Dobbie, cited by Craig.
diages. de regal. and to allow this, were to feed despair, and to make
patience, and long-suffering, to be no virtues.

II. Yet furiosity and madness, ought to defend against all Punishment in this
case, since a furious Person has no will in the construction of Law; and the
will is that which makes the Crime: nor should they be more punished then
Infants are, to whom the Law compares them. Fury also defends against Treason,
Blasphemy, and Heresy, which are more atrocious Crimes, then Self-murder, and
facti infelicitas furiosum defendere dicitur, l. infans ad l. Corn. de sic: and
therefore I cannot well understand, wherefore in Dobbies case (as Craig relates
it) the Lords repelled the Defense of Furiosity, and found that even furious
Persons ought to lose their Movables, if they killed themselves; but I think,
the fury there has not been strongly qualified, and that it has been but a
Species of Melancholy: for the reason given for that Decision is, because the
Lords thought no man would kill himself, if he were not distracted: and so it
distraction could defend such as killed themselves, against confiscation of
their Movables, it would defend all who killed themselves, and so the Law
should have no effect; but this must be interpreted, of some degrees of
madness, for sure no man kills himself, except he who is somewhat mad. Nor does
Hypocondrick fits, or the first degrees of madness, defend against this
Confiscation, but a total aberration from reason, cannot but defend; which is
also clear from the Law of England, Bolton. Cap. 11. lib. 1. and the difference
betwixt these two must be inferred from the various circumstances, which
attends such diseases, and from the declarations of Physicians, who waited upon
them.

Whether one who is mad, but has lucid intervals, is presumed to have killed
himself in his madness, or lucid intervals, is not so clear, and depends much
upon Circumstances: but since none use to kill themselves, except under some
distemper; so therefore, it is more humane to refer this killing, to have been
in the hours of madness, except it can be proved that the killer used even in
his lucid intervals, to wish he were dead, or to commend Self-Murder, vid.
Cabal. cas. 289.

III. An endeavor to kill ones self is punishable, as Self-Murder, if the
killer did all that in him was, to effectuat it; as if he hanged himself, but
was immediately cut down. And by the Law of England, if a man wound himself
mortally, though he live year and day thereafter, his Goods falls to the King,
Bolton, lib. 1. cap. 10.

IV. Self-Murder may be committed by omission, as well as commission, thus if a
man would starve himself to death, he might be punished by confiscation of his
Movables; but the design must be clearly proved, since as many innocent people
might be alleged, to have killed themselves, whilst they have fasted, either
through pain or necessity.

V. When a man kills himself, his Majesty gifts his Escheat, and the Donator
pursues a general Declarator thereupon, wherein he calls the nearest of kin,
and he must prove there, that the Person, whose Escheat he has got, killed
himself; which must be proved, by clear and convincing evidences, such as the
depositions of Witnesses, or a Paper under the Defuncts hand, wherein he
declares the reasons of his discontent, and why he killed himself, which is
very ordinary in these cases, wherein they design thereby to justify to the
world, this horrid Act: But I think, presumptions are not sufficient here,
since this is a Crime except they be very strong and violent; but if they be
such, it appears, they are sufficient to infer Confiscation: for though
presumptions be not sufficient to prove a Crime, to infer Capital punishment,
yet they are oftimes sustained, to infer Confiscation of Movables, or other
civil effects. And if presumptions were not sufficient in this case,
Self-Murder could never be proved, for the committers choose retired places,
and quiet times, for executing their wicked design: and who could say, but
that if a man were known, to have expressed much despair, and thereupon to have
entered into a Room, and were found with the Door closed, and hanging in his
own Garter: but that these presumptions would infer Confiscation of his
Movables.

By our practice, their Declarators have been sustained before the Lords, upon
probation of the Self-Murder, led before themselves, without any previous trial
before the Justices: and some think such a previous trial not necessar; for all
trials before them, are by Assizers, and dead men cannot be tried by an Assize:
but it might be alleged upon the other hand, that such a previous trial before
the Justices, is more suitable to the analogy of all other Crimes, which are
all tried before the Justices; and though it may be alleged, that the Lords
jurisdiction is here founded, ratione incidentiae, and that many Crimes are
tried before them, as falling incidently in other civil cases; yet even in
falsehood, though the Lords of Session are Judges competent to the deed it self:
Yet no man's Escheat falls upon their Decree, though he be found a falsary by
them, till he be also tried by the Justices, and the Escheat falls, as an
effect of their sentence only. Nor has this exception been yet repelled, as to
Self-Murder, so that res est ad huc integrae, especially if the persons whose
Escheat is craved, to be declared, be yet alive; so that he may be tried before
an Assize, for having endeavored to kill himself: for some endeavors to kill
ones self, are punishable by death, though prevented, as has been said
formerly. And in that case, I conceive that a previous trial before the
Justices, is necessar.

TITLE XIV. Paricide.
1 To what degree reaches Paricide by the Civil Law. 2 To what degrees by our
Law? 3 Whether does the Act 220. Ja. 6. Par. 14. extend to descendents? 4
Whether does that Statute extend to Bastards. 5 The punishment of Paricide by
that Statute. 6 The 20. Act Par. 1. Chapter 2. concerning beating of Parents,
explained. 7 How the murdering of Children is punished. 8 Who are repute
accessory in this Crime, and how punished.
I. PAricide is a Crime, which is committed by killing our Parents, against
which, Solon refused to make any Law, lest he should by forbidding it, teach
the people it was possible. By the Civil Law, Paricide was committed by killing
Ascendents, or Descendents, in any degree: or collaterals to the fourth degree.
The killing likewise of Wife, Husband, or Patron, was Paricide by that Law, l.
1. ff. h. t.

II. With us, Paricide is by the Statute 220. Ia. 6 Par. 14. punished only in
him who kills his Father, Mother, Good-sir, or Good-dame; and these are by that
Act, ordained to be disherished, and their posterity, in linea recta, are
incapable of succeeding to the person killed: but the succession is devolved
upon the next Collateral, or nearest of Blood; the person guilty being convict
by an Assize.

From which Act, it is observable, that the Statute is not exclusive of other
punishments: but supposes that Paricide is capitally punishable, according to
the Common Law; for it were absurd to think, the punishment here related,
should be the only punishment, by which Paricide could be reached. And Women
for murdering their Children, are frequently either hanged, or headed, as other
Murderers. 2. This Act reaches only such, as are convict by an Assize; and
therefore January 1664. it was found, that Sir James Oliphant being declared
Fugitive, for killing his Mother, but not convict by an Assize, his Estate
could not be gifted by the King: and in effect, though he had been found guilty
by an Assize, he could not have been forefaulted, for the nearest Collateral
would seclude the Fisk. It was likewise found in that case, that the Son could
not be forefaulted, as having murdered his Mother, under Trust, for they found
that, not to be the Murder, which is declared Treason by the 11. Par. cap. 51.
Ia. 6. For the trust there mentioned is, when such as came under the trust of
others, were persons who would not have come within their reach, without
special assurance of indemnity, and protection; and it is related as a received
tradition amongst us, that this Act were first made upon Mack-donald, his
killing the Lord of Mack-clane, who came to lodge with him, upon such
assurance; notwithstanding of the feids which were amongst them. It were
likewise improper to say, that the Mother was under the power and assurance of
the Son; and if the power, and assurance betwixt Parents and Children, could
fall under that Act, Par. 11. Ia. 6. this Act had been unnecessar, and there
could have been no place for the pain therein contained; for the Estate of the
Traitor belongs to the Fisk, and not to the nearest Collateral.

III. It may be doubted, if this Act should be extended to Parents killing
their Children; and albeit the Statute does not, in terminis, express
Descendants: yet it is probable they may fall under its Sanction: Even as the
foresaid Text, in the Civil Law is extended to equal degrees, with these
expressed, ob paritatem rationis. And by that Law, the killing of Ascendents, or
Descendents, is Paricide, (...). And the Rubric of this Act, runns generally
against Paricide: nor can it be denied, but Paricide is committed by Mothers
against their Children, and Women daily are convict thereof.

Whether the foresaid Statute against Paricide can be extended, to degrees of
Affinity, as well as degrees of Consanguinity; so that to kill a father-in-law,
may be punished as Paricide, as well as the killing a father may be doubted:
but I conceive it extends not to degrees of Affinity; because 1. Laws against
Crimes should not be extended. 2. The statute discharging, Fathers, Brothers,
or Sons, to judge in the causes of these relations, is not extended to
brothers-in-law and c. though that extension would be more favorable. 3. Some
of these relations in this statute, cannot in propriety of speech, be extended
to degrees of Affinity, for we say not good-sir, or good-dame in Law, and
albeit.. 6. just. de publ. judic. uses the word adfinitatis in this crime, yet
Theoph. in his Greek instit. eod. expresses the same, by the words (...) which
signifies affectionis and non adfini^atis, and with Theophil agrees 36. eclog.
tit. 40, (...) and this shows advantages by the Greek Lawyers.

IV. Whether it does extend to Bastards, may be doubted; for though it be
certain, that since they know their Mother, it may be therefore extended
against them, if they kill her, or she them. Yet since their Father is
uncertain, nam sunt vulgo quaesiti, and patrem demonstrare nequeunt; and since
they have no advantage by their Father in law, it were hard the Law should
punish them, as Paricides. But yet Lawyers conclude they may be punished, for
paricid. Allex. ad lib. 2. de injur. voc. and since this is a Crime against the
Law of Nature, it may be punished in Bastards, who are natural Children.

V. This Crime extends not to Movables by the Act, but by our Law; wherever
the Law punishes by death, it implies confiscation, for Movables follows
still the person. And by the Law of France, (from which we have borrowed this,
and many other things) qui confisque le corpse confisque les biens.

It is probable that upon this Act, even absents may be convict of this Crime;
as the Lords then thought, if the certification of the Letters, had born the
Penalty here expressed. For albeit probation cannot be led, in absence of the
Party, to fix a Crime upon him, yet this seems to be a civil effect, which
strikes not against the person of the committer.

By the Civil Law also, all Murderers were debarred from succeeding to such
whom they murdered. l. cum ratio.. sin. ff. de bonis damnat, which is yet
observed in France, but though with us there be no contrary decision; yet with
us they are not debarred; and seeing this pain is only statuted in the case of
Paricide, we may by a natural consequence conclude, that it should not be
extended to ordinary Murders.

VI. By the Act 20. Parliament. 1. Ses. 1. Chapter 2. Beating or Cursing of
Parents, is declared to have been punishable by the Law of God, with death: And
therefore ordains, that whatsoever Son, or Daughter, above the age of Sixteen,
and not distracted, shall beat or curse his Father or Mother, he shall die
without mercy, but if they be within the age of Sixteen, and past pupilarity,
they are to be punished arbitrarily: From which it is to be observed, 1. That
this Crime is merely statutory, and therefore should not extend beyond the
degrees of the act to grandfathers, or grandchildren, albeit appellatione
filii and nepos comprehenditur in favorabilibus. 2. That arbitrary punishment
is opposed to death, and so never can be extended in other acts to death. 3.
That those who are not above the age of Pupilarity, are not capable to commit
crimes, nor should be punished, for they are here accounted as distracted
persons, and if they were punishable for any Crimes, it behoved to be for such
as are against the Law of God.

VII. It is very easy, and too ordinary for women who bear Bastards, to murder
them; And therefore to obviat this, the Law presumes so far, a woman who has
born a bastard, and has concealed her being with child, to be guilty of
Paricide, if the child be found dead, that it punishes her by some
extraordinary punishment, (but not by death) except she can prove that the
child was born dead: Thus it was decided in Savoy. 1595 vid. Cod. fab. de his
qui parent occid. Def. 11. And with us Lawson, and Ramsey, were both Scourged,
annis 1661. and 1662. even though they were assoylzied from the Murder: But I
think that this were severe, if the woman openly acknowledged that she was with
child, though none was present when she brought it forth. And in all such cases
women are admitted to be witnesses.

The taking potions also, to make one part with child, abortum procurans,
should be a species of Paricide, in my opinion, since she thus endeavors to
kill her own child: and by the Civil Law, it was punished with death. L. Cicero.
ff. de paenis. And though the Doctors distinguish here, betwixt the using such
means after the child is quick, or before it, making it capital in the one
case, but not in the other; yet they presume that the child was quick, quod
fetus erat animatus, and that in odium delinquentis, and burden the delinquent
to prove the contrair, Gomes: de delict cap. 3. number. 32. asserts that this is
presumed not to infer death, but Ecclesiastic punishment; and since to prove
the contrair, seems to me, impossible, I incline to Gomesius, his opinion: but
yet the using such means, even before the birth be quick, is arbitrarily
punishable, as is even the using means to h^nder conception. Marsil: ad l. si
mulierem ff. de. sicar. And in these cases, both the Physicians who
administrats the cure, and the woman who takes, are equally punishable, Marsil.
ibid.

VIII. So horrid is paricide, that what would be but a degree of guilt in other
crimes, makes a complete crime here; and thus a child's endeavoring to poison
his father, (...) l. 1. Basil. h. t. and to kill parents by giving them wounds,
was punished by death in Savoy, C. fab. h. t. though the wounded parent
interceeded to the contrair. And the Son who bought poison to poison his
father, though he was not able to give it: Carer.. homicidium. number. 128. for
which crime, suffered with the Son, the Phisician who furnished the drugs,
(...). l. 2. Basil: h. t. and the person who lent the son the money to buy them:
but regularly these strangers are not capitally punishable for such an
accession, except the crime take effect: and this is the present custom of
nations, though by the Roman Law, and the Basilicks, they who were conscious,
or lent the money, or were surety for money to be so bestowed, were guilty,
(...). And yet he who commands a son to kill his father, is not guilty of
Paricide, Caepol. Consil. 36. which may seem strange, since to give poison to
kill a father, seems equal guilt, to giving a Son command to kill his father.
As these circumstances highten Paricide, so there are some which restrict the
punishment, as if the father should find that his son had lain with his own
mother-in-law, and had killed him upon that account, though not in the very
act, (...): Lawyers think, that he should be only punished by banishment, but
not by death, and that generally for whatever crime, or fault, a father may
exheredat a son, that the same fault will excuse the father from death if he
kill his son. l. divus ff. de paricid and Cabal. cas. 15. Some also think that
a woman killing her husband who is banished, and upon whose head a Fine is put,
is not punishable by death, because her husband is, nullus injure, and Laws
allow all to kill such a person, without any distinction betwixt wives or
others: yet other Lawyers have concluded, that she should be punished by death,
since such sentences, loose not the wifes natural obligations, but he is still
her husband, and the Law owns so far the relations, as not to punish her for
omitting to kill him, or for cohabiting with him, Cub. consil. 278. A father
killing his son by accident, ought not to dye, and therefore, much less he who
kills him in defense of his own life, for self-defence is a duty.

This crime is so odious that is praescribes not. (...)

TITLE XIV. Incest, Sodomy, Bestiality.
1. What Incest is, and the several kinds thereof. 2. The punishment of Incest
by our Law. 3. Sodomy, how punished. 4. Bestiality, how punished.
INcest is defined by the Civilians, to be, faeda and nefaria maris and f^minae
commixtio, contra reverentiam sanguini debitam.

Incest is divided into two branches, viz. that which is committed against the
Law of Nature; and into that which is committed against the Municipal Law of
the Country. All copulation betwixt ascendants and descendants, such as
Grandfathe^, Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, etc. is by all acknowledged to be
Incest against the Law of Nature. But it is controverted, whether the Brothers
lying with the sister, be incest against the Law of Nature: And the Roman
Catholics allege it is not, Because it was allowed at the beginning; and
therefore they conclude that the Pope may dispense therewith; And this is the
first difference betwixt that Incest which is committed against the Law of
Nature, and that which is committed against the Municipal Law.

The second difference betwixt them is, that the pain of incest when it is
committed against the Law of Nature, is death: but when against the Municipal
Law, it is only deportation, l. 5. ff. de quest.

The third difference is, that Incest committed only against the Municipal Law,
is excused (in a woman, in figura matrimonii) but ignorance of the Law of
Nature is not; But the man is inexcusable in either, Matheus hoc tit. Number. 5.

The fourth difference is, that if a Marriage contracted, be rescinded, as
incestuous, all the committers goods are confiscat, if the Incest be committed
against the Law of Nature: but the Tocher and Joynter are only confiscat, if
the Incest be only committed against the Municipal Law, Matheus.

II. Our Law does not observe the above-written distinction, but it is
universally, Statut. act 14. p. 1. I. 6. That whosoever pollutes his body with
such persons in degree, as Gods word does contain in the 18. of Leviticus,
shall be punished with death; Albeit by these words of the act whosoever abuses
his body, it would seem that such as actually copulat, are only punishable by
this act: Yet I think nudus conatus, or endeavor, is punishable by death, as
it is in Sodomy; in which, endeavor is punishable, by the opinion of the
Doctors, though by the Law of England, Sodomy requires habuisse rem veneream,
and puerum carnaliter cognovisse, Cook. p. 59. albeit the manner of death is
not expressed in this act, yet practick has determined the same, to be hanging;
as in the case of Barnoch, who was hanged for committing Incest with his own
Sister, December. 8. 1641. And of Joan Knox, who was hanged for committing Incest
with her husbands brother May 1646. Sometimes it is likewise punished with
heading, as in the case of James Strange, who was beheaded for committing Incest
with his brothers daughter, the 4. of April. 1649.

III. Sodomy, is when a man lies with a man, for which both are punishable by
death, l. cum vir nubit. C. de adult. they are burnt in France and Savoy, as
Gothofred observes. By the 25. act: Henry the 8. Sodomy is declared Felony,
and the punishment of Felony by the Law of England, is in all cases to be
hanged by the neck till death.

Though Carpzovius, and the other Doctors, are of opinion, that confession
alone is not a sufficient probation in this Crime, except other presumptions
concur for clearing that the Crime was truly committed, yet with us the
confession it self, without any other adminicles, is sufficient to infer the
punishment of death except the confessor be known, or at least suspected to be
distempered.

Mastrupatio est ubi quis propriis manibus aliove instrumento se polluit and
punitur ut sodomia. Carp. Part. 2. Quest: 76. haec paena non est in usu apud
nos.

IV. Bestiality is, when a man lies with a beast, which the Romans also
punished with death, and in which some Lawyers affirm the endeavor is as
highly punishable, as the crime it self, effectus sine affectu, Papon. lib. 22.
tit. 7. art. 1. Damhaud. cap. 96. n. 16. Which opinion they found upon the
attrocity of the Crime: and it seems that he deserves not to live, who could
harbor such horrid thoughts; but especially if he did all that was in his
power to put his design in practice, and was only let by some interveening
accident, (...). But yet other Lawyers conclude, that even in this crime the
endeavor is punishable by a less severe punishment then death: which seems
clear by l. 1.. fin. ff. de extraord. crim. qui puero struprum abducto ab eo
vel corrupto comite, persuaserit, aut mulierem puellamve interpellaverit,
quidve impudicitiae gratia fecerit, perfecto flagitio punitur capite,
imperfecto in insulam deportatur. And though in hotter Countries. where
Custom, and Climat, lessens this Crime, the Crime is by their Lawyers thought
punishable less severely; yet with us death ought to punish it, if the
delinquent was only let by others.

And in both their crimes of Sodomy and Bestiality, witnesses who are liable to
exceptions will be received, because of the attrocity of the crime. Bos. de
judiciis.

We have no particular statute for punishing either Sodomy, or Bestiality, for
they are crimes extraordinar, and rarely committed in this Kingdom: but our
Libels bear, That albeit by the Law of the Omnipotent God, as it is declared in
the 20. c. of Leviticus. As well the man who lies with mankind, as the man who
lies with a beast, be punishable by death. Yet etc. the ordinar punishment in
both these, is burning, and the beast is also burnt, with which the Bestiality
is committed: as in the case of James Fiddes, who being convict of Bestiality,
was ordained to be burnt in the last of May, 1650. And Major Weir, April, 1670.
Yet sometimes it is only punished by hanging, and thus John Logie was only
hanged in July, 1642. and James Wilson was only hanged for the same crime, 15.
Feb. 1649. which last Sentence bore, that the execution should be very early in
the morning, and ordained the Mare with which the Buggery was committed, to be
drowned in any Moss or Loach.

TITLE. XVI. Raptus, Ravishing.
1. The nature of a Rapt described, and its punishment. 2. Whether the violent
lying with a woman, without the carrying her away, be a Rapt. 3. If the
carrying a woman away upon any other account then lust, be a Rapt. 4. If the
carrying her away without lying with her, be a Rapt. 5. If a woman's carrying away
a man, be a Rapt. 6. Whether a subsequent consent purges this Crime. 7. Some
instances of the punishment of this Crime. 8. Whether the parents consent, not
being obtained, makes a Rapt. 9. Whether minors, and such as force common
whores be punishable for a Rapt.
RApt or Ravishing, is that crime, which is committed in the violent carrying
away a woman from one place, to another, for satisfying the Ravishers lust: And
is in the Civil Law punishable by death, l. un. C. de Rapt. virgin, etc. In our
Law, it is one of the four points of the Crown, that is to say, the cognition
of it belongs only to his Majesty's Justices, and not to any other judge; R.
Maj. l. 1. c. 1. N. 6. and is punishable by death, and confiscation of the
Committers movables. For albeit I remember not that the punishment of death be
expressly appointed for it; Yet in the 8 cap. l. 4. R. M. It is said expressly
that it shall be punished as the other Crimes above related, and these are
Murder, Treason, and fire-raising; which are all capitally punished. And by the
Act. 4. P. 21. I. 6. it is declared, that albeit the consent, and declaration
of the woman ravished, declaring that she went away of her own free will, may
free the committer from capital punishment: Yet shall it not free him, from
such arbitrary punishment as His Majesty shall inflict, by Warding,
confiscation of their goods, or imposing upon them pecunial mulcts. Which act
insinuats that the Crime is otherwise Capital, else that act had been
unnecessar.

II. The definition given of a Rapt, l. 4. c. 8. R.M. is, that it is the unjust
oppressing of a woman, by a man, against the Kings peace, in which it differs
from the Civil Law; at least from some Doctors, who allege, that lying with a
woman, or abusing her body violently, is not a Rapt, except she be carried from
one place to another: Albeit they do confess, that this violence is punishable
by deportation, or banishment, and is, as some affirm, non Raptus, sed Stuprum,
l. 3. C. de ad leg. Iu l. de vi. But yet other Lawyers, and chiefly Mathaeus,
do conclude, that albeit the away taking, and the forcing, or violent abusing
a woman's body, be differently punished; yet they are degrees of the same crime,
and both are Rapts: But according to our Law, both are Rapts, and both
punishable by death. Neither does our Law make any distinction, inter Raptores,
and deforciatores mulierum, betwixt Ravishers, and Deforcers of women; and it
were most unreasonable, that he who defloures a woman violently, should not be
as severely punished, as he who only caries her from one place to another: for
as the person ravished looses more by that abuse, then by her transportation;
so it were absurd, that apparatus ad crimen, should be more severely punished,
then effectus criminis; that the accomplishment of the crime should be a less
guilt then the preparations to it: amongst which this transportation is but one.

III. If the woman be taken away upon any other account then that of lust, it
is not a Rapt, and so if she be very old, or if the away-taker had a quarrel
against her, it is not a Rapt, Decius council. 234.

IV. Quae. What if the Ravisher did not carnally know the person Ravished,
whether in that case, the away-taker be punishable as a Ravisher capitally? and
albeit the ordinar distinction be, that if he did not, because he could not,
then he is punishable: but if it was in his power to have defloured her, but
abstained, then he is not to be punished capitally, but only arbitrarily Clar..
raptus number. 4. Yet I think, that in our Law he is in no case to be punished
capitally, except he defloured her: For 1. In the foresaid 1. cap. l. 1. R. M.
it is said, that affectus sine effectu, is punishable in Treason, because of
the great wrong done to the whole Kingdom: but this reason cease in Rapts,
and when Rapts are spoken of, in the immediate next Verse, this is not repeated.
2. The gloss upon the word, oppressed by a man, l. 4. c. 8. interprets
oppression to be suppression, or corruption, and in the 9. Verse of that
Chapter, it is rendered corruption, and it is spoken of there, as faedatio
mulier is and pollutio. 3. By the Norman Law, with which our old customs have
much contingency, Rapt is called depucellement des femmes a force, l. 12. c. 1.
Yet I think that any such wrong done to a woman, is punishable, tanquam crimen
in suo genere, and after the crime of Rapts, or Ravishing is spok of in that
chapter, it is said v. 8. That if a woman accuse a man of any other wrong done
to her body, she will be heard.

In that Chapter also, it is appointed the woman Ravished go whilst the crime
is recent to the next Town, and there show to honest men the blood, or other
wrong done her, and thereafter go to the Mair of the Lordship, or to the
Toscheoderoch, which Skeen, ad. R. M. l. 1. c. 6. interprets to be Serjandus
curiae, but Boeth. in his History calls them latrunculatores, or the maker of
thieves: And thereafter to the Sheriff, and last of all to the Justice: But the
form now is only to raise Letters, as in other crimes, before the Justice. And
albeit of old, she was obliedged to insist within 24. hours, intra unam noctem,
else not to be heard, c. 10. l. 4. R. M. Yet that is now antiquated by custom;
Albeit it was a strong presumption in the opinion of the Doctors, and is so in
our practick, that the pursuit is malicious, when it is delayed; for it is most
presumable, that a woman would not conceal any time such an injury.

V. It is doubted much among the Doctors, if women who ravish men are
punishable as ravishers; And albeit our Law speaks still of ravishing women,
yet I think that as women are guilty of manslaughter, so women may be guilty
of this crime: and by the 9. v. c. 8. R. M. It will appear that this was
designed for both Sexes: Albeit I think it be not punishable by death, seeing it
cannot take effect, except the man pleases, and affectus sine effectu non
punitur capitaliter, in hoc crimine.

VI. By the opinion of Lawyers, the subsequent consent of the women ravished,
did not absolve the committers, Cin. in l. un. h. t. And albeit by the Council
of Trent, Marriage may be contracted lawfully betwixt them, yet the committer
is still punishable; and by the foresaid Law C. de raptu, the words are, nec
sit facultas raptae raptorem suum sibi maritum exposcere. But by the foresaid
Act. I. 6. P. 21. this question is determined with us, for that consent only
saves from capital punishment, for the committer may be put to the knowledge of
an inquest, either at the instance of his Majesty's Advocat, or the Parents or
nearest kin, from which Act it may be observed. 1. That the Advocat or nearest
of kin may insist, without one another concurse. 2. That if the nearest of kin
do not insist, they who are in remoter degrees cannot insist in this case, and
crave that the Ravisher may be put to the knowledge of an Assize, although the
woman declare that she was not ravished. Albeit I think that before any such
consent be declared, any of her friends may insist, l. un. C. de rapt, and si
pater injuriam remiserit extraneus reum postulare poterat. 3. Except it be
proved that the rapt was committed at first, without consent of the woman, and
nearest of kin, it is most punishable. It may be argued, that if either the
nearest of kin, or she, consented before the rapt, it is not punishable: and it
is probable, that if the nearest of kin consented, though the woman did not,
the away-taking is not capitally punishable; for where the nearest of kin, and
parents consent, the ravisher deserves not so severe a punishment as death. 4.
Because the woman's consent is so hard to be known, for she might have at first
consented, albeit she cried or resisted upon design: Therefore I think her
Oath should be first required, and if she be content to swear that she went
willingly along, that should, in my judgment, preclude the pursuers from any
further pursuit; or if they can prove that there was any design of marriage
amongst them, previous to the away-taking, Marsil: consil. ibi and Boss. de
rapt. N. 17.5. Since by the foresaid Act, it is said, that if any be pursued as
art and part of rapt, the woman's consent in that case shall free them from
capital punishment: it may be doubted if the woman's consent will free from
capital punishment, him who is pursued as principal actor, since the act is not
express as to him, and since he deserves not so much favor as the accomplices
do: But yet I conceive the same favor should be extended to him, both because
our Law equals principals and accomplices, and because the Doctors, and the Laws
of other Nations extend this: Before this act by the 8. cap. R. M. l. 4. And
yet it is declared there, that it shall be Lawful to the pairties to marry
with His Majesty's consent. The Arbitrary punishment allowed his Majesty by the
foresaid Act of Parliament, I. 6. is not interpret so, that his Majesty should
be personally consulted, but His Majesty's council supplies that in his
absence; as was found in the Baxters case, 1666.

Albeit this crime be capital, and that William Bannatine was hanged for taking
away the Lord of Achingters, daughter, 5. July 1596. yet I find that John
Kincaid having come in the Kings will, Feb. 1601. for ravishing Isobel
Hutchison, a widow, the King only fined him in 2500 Merks. Hary Speed was
hanged 20. Feb. 1639. quia laceravit pudenda pueri, which crime, Iul. Clar.
Gothofred, and others, affirms to be also capital in their Countries.

I find one Leivtenent Ker, pursued for ravishing and away-taking Robert
Cuninghame, 6. Feb. 1640. but this is rather a species of Plagium then of Rapt.

VII. Since minors are punishable by death for adultery, much more ought they
to be punishable by death for a rapt, since the injury is there both more
attorcious, and more unnatural; and Carp. part 2. Quest. 75. gives us several
instances where this Crime was capitally punished in minors, where he likewise
tells us, that to force even a common Whore is capitally punishable, though it
may seem that they are infralegum observantiam, and they ought not to have the
protection of the Law, who offend against it.

TITLE XVII. Adultery.
1. The definition of Adultery, and whether the lying with an unmaried woman,
or with a whore, be Adultery. 2. The punishment of Adultery, by the Law of God,
and our Law. 3. The differences betwixt single and nottour Adultery. 4. Whether
death can be inflicted for single Adultery in Scotland. 5. Whether the Marriage
ought to be proved. 6. Who can be punished as accessories in Adultery. 7. What
probation is requisite in Adultery. 8. Whether a Dicreet of Devorce before the
Commissaries is sufficient to prove Adultery in a criminal case. 9. Whether he
who hearing his wife was dead, married another, be punishable as an Adulterer.
10. Whether a pursuit being intended for nottour Adultery, and single
Adultery, only proved, if the single Adultery can be punished in that case. 11.
How adulterous children succeed.
ADultery is a Sin, whereby men not only violat the second Table, in wronging
their neighbor, by stealing from him his quiet, his good name, the affection
and person of his wife, endeavoring also ofttimes to steal his estate for the
adulterous children; But is likewise a breach of the first, in breaking of that
vow which was made to God in marriage, and contemning that holy and mighty
Majesty, who was then called upon, as Judge and witness.

I. Adulterium est vitiatio alterius thori, the violation of another bed, and
is committed by a married persons lying with an unmarried, or an unmarried
person lying with one who is married. For albeit by the Civil Law when a man
who was married, did lie with a woman who was free, that was judged to be no
adultery; And albeit the lying with a Whore, by the Civil Law, was judged no
Adultery, l. 22. Cod. hoc tit. Si ea quae stupro tibi cognita est and passim
venalem formam exhibuit ac prostitutam meritricio more vulgo se praebuit
adulterii crimen in ea cessat. Upon which Law the Doctors conclude, that though
he who first debaushed a woman with adultery, be punishable as an adulterer yet
these who did thereafter debaush her, cannot Far. Quest. 141. number. 85. Yet
this is against both the Law of God and our Law, for the Lying with another
man's wife is still Adultery, but so it is, that though she be a whore, yet she
is another man's Wife. Nor is the marriage disolved by the Adultery; And yet I
think, that if the woman with whom the adultery is committed, was at the time
when the same was committed, living as a common whore, and the committer was a
single man, who knew not of her being married, his punishment should be
somewhat moderat upon that account; But if the committer was married, the crime
is the same, whether the woman was a Whore or not, since it is still a
violation upon the man's part. To lie likewise with a man's bethrothed, or
promised Spouse, or as we say, his affidat Spouse, is Adultery, nam. nec
violare licet matrimonium, nec spem matrimonii l. 13.. diu. 6. ff. h. t. which
agrees, as I conceive, with Deu. 22.23. Where he who lies with a betrothed
Virgin, should be stoned as an adulterer, because says verse 24. he lies with
his neighbors wife. And he who lies with a betrothed Virgin, who is to be
shortly married, renders the succession as doubtful as he who lies with a
married wife.

The punishment of Adultery by the Civil Law, was death, as some think, by the
Julian Law, relegatio, or banishment, as others think; but certainly the pain
of death was the punishment to be inflicted, by that excellent constitution,
leg. quamvis Cod. hoc. tit. Albeit thereafter Justinian did by the 134. N. cap.
11. remit to the woman the pains of death, and ordain her only to be imprisoned
in a Monastry:

By the Law likewise of most Nations, adultery is only punishable by pecuniary
mulcts: Albeit by the Law of God it was punishable by stoning both man and
woman to death, 20. Deuteronomy. 22. Which punishment some think likewise to have been
abrogated by our Savior, because when the woman accused for adultery was
brought before him, he did dismiss her without any punishment; but this is
very groundless, for our Savior came not to be a Judge in such causes, as
himself declares: and though he had been a Judge, yet she wanted an Accuser.

III. Our Law divides Adultery, in that which is notour Adultery, and single
Adultery. Notour Adultery is by the 74. Act Parl. 9 Q. Mary, declared to be
punishable by death, after premonition is made to abstain from the said
manifest and notour Crime; which premonition had its origin from Auth. si quis
C. ad l. 1. de adult. by which it was lawful for the Husband to kill him who
was thrice premonish'd not to converse with his Wife. And in effect, the design
of that Act was only to punish a horrid abuse, which was then ordinar, viz. the
taking away other men's wives, and keeping them openly as their own, to the
great contempt of Law. Yet by the explication of this Act, which is given by
the 105. Act, 7. Parl. I. 6. That is only declared to be notour Adultery,
where, 1. There are Bairns one or more procreated betwixt the Adulterers. 2.
When they keep company, or bed together notoriously known. 3. When they are
suspected of Adultery, and thereby gives slander to the Kirk, whereupon being
admonished to satisfy the Kirk, they contemptuously refuse, and for their
refusal they are excommunicat: If either of which three degrees be proved
before the Justices, the committers are punishable by death. From which Act it
is to be observed, 1. That though by the first Act premonition to abstain was
still to be made in all cases, yet in neither of the two first cases here
related it is declared necessary. But since it was not lawful to kill him who
was premonished, and thereafter conversed, except they conversed in suspect
places, Gribald. de homicid. number. 11. It seems that in neither of these
Statutes conversation should be criminal, even after prohibition, except it be
in suspect places. 2. The Justices are only declared to be Judges to the
notoriety of Adultery, and therefore it may be controverted, if Lords of
Regality be Judges competent to the cognition of it. 3. This Act does not
exclude capital punishments in other cases of Adultery, but only ordains that
these three degrees shall be punished by death. And since there are other cases
more grievous to the party injured, and more scandalous to the Commonwealth;
it may be argued, that the punishment of death should likewise be extended to
them; as for instance, to commit frequent Adulteries: And it appears it is upon
this account that the sentence of death was pronounced against Sir John
Stewart, for three Adulteries, 15. August, 1628. As also, Isabel Hamiltoun
being pursued in July, 1647. for Adultery, and having enacted her self never to
return, under the pain of death; she having thereafter returned, was
immediately, without any other Process, by an order from the Justices, execute
in Anno 1649.

IV. And albeit there be no express Law for inflicting death in other cases,
upon ordinary Adulterers, yet I see no reason why the Justices may not as well,
for the good of the Commonwealth, inflict death, without any express Law here,
as they do in Theft, and other less Crimes: And in effect, Adultery includes
Theft, as I said formerly; And albeit inclusio unius est exclusio alterius, and
that it may be argued, that by the former Act, appointing death in the cases
above cited, the punishment of death is thereby excluded in other cases: yet to
this it may be answered, that the foresaid rule is only a Brocard, and has
only the strength of a presumption and therefore take only place in favorable
cases, but should not be extended in prejudice of the Law of God, which
expressly ordains Adulterers to die. And in the foresaid 74. Act, 9. Parl. Q.
Mary, It is declared that this Act shall be but prejudice of all other Acts and
Laws already made, with all rigor; but I can find no other Act made prior to
that anent Adultery, whereby the punishment is limited; and therefore I believe
that that Act relates to the punishment related to by the Law of God: At the
least I think that the Magistrate is left to his own freedom to consider
circumstances. And whereas it may be alleged that if single Adultery were
punishable by death, these Acts had been needless. To this it may be answered,
that the design of the former Acts was to necessitat the Magistrate always in
the cases expressed in that Act to inflict death, and not to empower them only to
do so: And seeing single Adultery is punishable by the Magistrate, sometimes by
banishment, as in the case of an English woman, in December 1668. sometimes
with scourging, as in the case of Ridpath, December 1642. And sometime with
fining, as in the case of that woman who committed Adultery with George
Swintoun, in Anno 1666. though there be no express Law warranting them to
inflict these punishments, and whereupon the Pursuer is forced to found his
Summonds upon the Law of God, and Law of Nature, upon which Law they are
sustained, without citing any Municipal Law, as in the case of that English
woman: I see no reason why they may not by the same Laws inflict likewise the
punishment of death. Albeit the foresaid punishment of death be appointed in
cases of notour Adultery; yet the Council does use to mitigate the punishment,
and so they ordained only Ridpath a Tinker, though he was found guilty of
double Adultery, in keeping another Tinkers Wife two years, to be only
scourged, banished, and burnt on the cheek, December. 4. 1662. But the reason
here was, because Tinkers are in effect vile persons, who are seldom ever
lawfully married: And in such I find of old, Adultery was not punished by
death, as l. 29. C. h. t. where Adultery committed with a Taverner is not
punished severely, quas vitae vilitas dignas legum observatione non credidit,
and erant infra legum curam. And some respect was likewise had here to that
absurd custom amongst Tinkers, of living promiscuously, and using one another
Wives as Concubines. The Council sometimes do likewise banish persons for
Adultery, without suffering them to come before a Justice Court, even where
notour Adultery might be proved against them, as in the case of Ieals Thyre an
English man, for committing Adultery with Margaret Hamiltoun, who at her death
confessed that the said Thyre had lain several years with her, and that he had
alienat her affection from her Husband, which induced her, though without his
accession, to kill her Husband, and that she had several Children by him; all
which in effect were great aggravations of the Crime, and he deserved well to
have dyed. From this it appears that the punishment of ordinary Adultery is
arbitrary, and uses to be inflicted, either by banishment, whiping, fyning, or
imprisonment. If a person be only banished for Adultery, and return again
without leave here, she may be execute; and thus the Justices found by advice
of the Council, in the case of Grissel Hamiltoun, December. 1649. Or if Adultery
be complicated with any other Crime, the guilt is thereby aggraged, and the
Crime may be capitally punished; Thus Margaret Thomson was execute for
committing Adultery with a Minister, and for falsifying a Testimonial, to the
end she might get her Child Baptized, May 28. 1646.

V. Since Adultery is only committed betwixt married persons, it is therefore
requisite that the Libel in Adultery bear, that such persons were married; and
one of the ordinary faults committed by the Pursuer in this Crime is, they
seldom ever lead Witnesses for proving the marriage, without which be proved,
or be notour to the Assize, they should not fyle the Panel, though Copulation
be proved. But though the marriage be not just, but only a supposed marriage,
or matrimonium putativum (as Lawyers call it) yet the violation even of that
marriage, will infer Adultery. As for instance, if a man not knowing the
relation, should marry within the degrees de fendant; though there be in that
case no lawful marriage, yet if either of these parties who are married, should
ly with any other, they will be guilty of Adultery, Cravet. Consilio 205. number.
36. The reason whereof is, because the committer did all that lay in his power
to commit Adultery, which is the main thing to be looked to in Crimes, nam
proposita maleficia distinguant. And from this I am much inclined to think,
that conatus, or an endeavor to commit Adultery, if the Adulterer did all that
in him lay to accomplish the said design, makes the committer guilty of
Adultery, if that design was brought the length of being in actu proximo, as
Lawyers call it: though in that case I think the rigor of the ordinary
punishment should be somewhat remitted: and haec attentatio est punienda paena
extraordinaria judicis arbitrio. Tira-quell. de panis, Cas. 39. and 40. He who
allowed his house to the Adulterers for perpetrating their Crime, is punishable
as an Adulterer, and he who gave them the use of his house for consulting about
the committing of it, though it was not committed, is punishable as an
Adulterer, (...), Basil. l. 11. h. t. He who retains his wife, after he finds
her committing Adultery, and lets go the Adulterer, is punishable as a Pimp, l.
30. ibid. but this is not in observance with us, except the Husband took money
to conceal the Adultery, and therefore that Law does well determine, that he
who remits the injury for money, (...), is punishable as an Adulterer, but not
he who remits it freely.

VI. He who gives warrant, and order, or hires others to commit Adultery, is
guilty, and deserves the same punishment with the Adulterer, according to the
opinion of all Lawyers. And in effect, he is more guilty, seeing he wants the
natural tentation of the Adulterer, and commits the Crime in effect out of mere
malice, and in contempt of the Law: And therefore Lawyers conclude, that the
Husband hounding out, or hyring others to commit Adultery, cannot pursue his
Wife for that Adultery which he occasioned: and yet it being alleged against
Rocheid that he could not pursue Elizabeth Muir his Wife, because in effect he
had hired others to lie with her, and so was Leno. It was answered, 1.
Lenocinium was only in the case, ubi maritus quaestum facit de corpore uxoris,
(...), or keeps a Bordel, or prostitutes her for money. 2. This exception could
only exclude the Husband from pursuing a Civil suit of Divorce, but not from
pursuing a Criminal suit for Adultery. 3. Though it excludes the Husband from a
Criminal pursuit, it could only exclude him from such a Criminal pursuit, as
was intented upon these acts of Adultery to which she was tempted, or which she
committed with her Husbands consent, but not from pursuing her upon such Acts
as she had committed formerly, without her Husbands knowledge. 4. The Advocat
concurred in this case, who, nor the public interest could not be prejudged by
any connivance or crime of the husband: In respect of which reply the defense
was repelled. But to examine this Interloquutor, It is certain that the fourth
reply was per se relevant, for certainly the Advocat might have concurred
without the Husband, the Lybel being conceived in the Advocats name, as well as
the Husbands, but not other ways: But as to the other replies, I think they
were not relevant per se, for it were most unjust that the Husband should have
liberty to pursue that as an injury, which he himself had occasioned, nor
should he be allowed to call that an injury done to his wife, the like whereof
he himself had solicited with money; And seeing in Law, that Husband who
consents to his wifes adultery, is called Leno, or Pimp, much more should he be
repute guilty of being a Pimp or Baud, who invites and hires others to lie with
his wife; and certainly as it is a greater crime to hire others to lie with a
woman, then to lie with her himself, because there is not so great temptation
in the one as in the other, so certainly there is more of crime and malice in
giving money, then in taking money in this case, since money may be taken out
of poverty, whereas it never can be given without malice.

Lawyers relate, the case of a French Man, who to prove Adultery against his
wife, did geld himself, and did let witnesses see he was gelded, whereupon his
wife being with child 15. Months thereafter was pursued by him for adultery:
but since this was an unlawful mean of probation, I would not have allowed it,
if the pursuit had been at the Husbands instance, and though it had been at the
Fisks instance, yet since the woman was so much tempted, I would only have
punished her moderatly.

VII. Adultery is ordinarily committed so privately, and so removedly from all
witnesses, that the Law allows it to be proved by strong and violent
presumptions, as the being in bed together alone, and being naked, Farin.
quest. 136. cap. 1. And the ordinary presumptions probative in this case are,
the being often alone together, gifts, love letters, closs doors, the Wifes being
abroad all night, nudus cum nuda, and solus cum sola, the intertaining persons
that are known to be Pimps, cohabitation, all which are presumptions, which
according to the opinion of the Civilians, may infer torture, though it be not
used with us, yet it is most ordinary for Assizes to fyle Pannels upon those
presumptions, with the assistance of any other probation; and in George
Swintouns case, a woman was there filed of adultery, though nothing was proved
but that the pairties were alone, and that the witnesses heard them in bed
together, and the bed shake: And in the case likewise of Elizabeth Muir, it may
be seen that she was condemned upon pregnant presumptions, without a formal
probation.

Albeit women cannot be admitted witnesses, yet they are received in adultery,
as in the foresaid Process against Elizabeth Muir, anno, 1668. and the Lords of
Session after solemn debate, found that two witnesses seeing successively the
crime committed, though they did not see it at one time, yet they were
sufficient witnesses to infer the crime; albeit it was alleged they could not
be called contestes, Feb. 1666. Lady Miltoun against the Lord.

Adultery may be pursued either Civilly to obtain a Divorce, or Criminally, and
when it is pursued Criminally the Pursuit tends either to a capital punishment,
or an extraordinar and arbitrary punishment, and according to the different
nature of these conclusions, require different probation, for in Civil pursuit
Lawyers do allow: and the Commissaries have found in the foresaid case of the
Lady Miltouns, that Witnesses deponing that they saw the persons lying together
naked in a bed, and that one Witness deponing upon an Act at one time, and
another upon another Act committed at another time, did prove sufficiently,
which (as some think) would hardly have been sufficient in a Criminal pursuit,
seeing in effect these Witnesses were but single Witnesses, and their senses did
not here agree in one and the same object, which is the reason why Witnesses
are believed.

VIII. It may be doubted here whether a Decree of Divorce before the
Commissaries be sufficient to prove Adultery in a criminal pursuit, as a
Decree of improbation before the Lords, is sufficient to infer falsehood: And
for clearing of this question, It is answered, that 1. Seeing the probation of
Single adultery is sufficient to infer a divorce, it follows necessarily that
the production of that Decree cannot prove notour Adultery. And this was
likewise found last July, anno. 1598. in an Action pursued by the Kings Advocat
against Alexander Hay of Dalgety: And certainly there was great reason for that
verdict, seeing as is very well urged there, many probations will infer single
Adultery, or a Divorce, which will not infer notour Adultery and capital
punishment: but yet I see no reason why a Decree of the Commissaries should
not infer the punishment of ordinar adultery, and an arbitrary punishment,
seeing no probation is sufficient in the one case which cannot be allowed in the
other, It being a rule amongst the Doctors, that causa civilis and criminalis
quo ad paenam arbitrariam aequiparantur quo ad probationem; And whereas it may
be objected, that probation in Criminals, should be led in presence of the
Panel, and the Assize. To this it is answered, 1. The Decree of Divorce is
approbation 2. This may be likewayes objected in the crime of falsehood, and yet
the Lords Decree is there admitted; but betwixt these two Decreets there is
this difference, that the Lords may punish falsehood themselves, and so their
Decree should be a full Probation, because they are Judges competent, even to
the Criminal part: But it is not so with the Commissaries, who can inflict no
Criminal punishment at all for Adultery.

IX. The Civil Law did excuse a man from Adultery, who apprehending upon just
reasons that his Wife was dead, married another, or the Wife who married a
second Husband, l. 11.. 12. ff. h. t. mulier cum audisset absentem virum
defunctum esse alii se junxit, and fa^sis rumoribus inducta, and quia
verisimile est deceptam eam fuisse nihil vindicta dignum videri potest, and l.
pen. dicit adulterium sine dolo malo non committi: Upon which arose a great
debate, November. 7. 1673. for John Frazer being indicted for notour Adultery with
Helen Guthrie, alleged, that he could not pass to the knowledge of an Inquest,
as an Adulterer, because he had married this Helen lawfully, after he had got
Testificats upon oath to prove that his first Wife was dead in Virginia,
whereupon he got a warrant from the Presbytery of Edinburgh to marry, and was
accordingly proclaimed and married: and if a false rumor was sufficient to
clear from Adultery, and that there could be no Adultery without Dole, and a
fraudulent design, as is clear by the former Laws, and by Farin. de delict.
car. quest. 140. he could not be guilty of Adultery who had married, Authore
Ecclesia, who is Judge competent, and who was induced thereto, not only by
report, but by Testificats. To which it was replied, that he is an Adulterer
who lies with another Woman whilst his Wife lives; and as rumors cannot
dissolve marriage, so neither can they defend against Adultery, and if this
were allowed, it were easy for every man who were weary of his wife, to raise
rumors concerning her death, and thereby authorize himself in marying another.
2. Though rumors were sufficient, they behoved to be rumors constantly and
commonly reported, but here was only one Testificar, and this Testificat could
be no warrant, since it was but a single testimony, nor did it bear that the
said Margarat Haitly, who died there, was known to him to be spouse to John
Frazer, but only in general, that one Margaret Haitly died there, and there
might have been more of that name. 3. Though rumors might excuse, yet that
could only be after a long absence, and longo tempore transacto as is clear by
the Law cited by the Panel, whereas here she was only absent three years; and
the ignorance behoved to be invincible, whereas here it was only ignorantia
affectata, for it is offered to be proved that she stayed within twelve Miles
of the Pannels fathers house, and was known by all the Country to live there,
and though her mother, and relations lived at Edinburgh in one Town with the
Panel, yet he never asked at her mother if she was dead. 4. A man whose wife
diverts from him, ought to summond her to adher, and so procure a divorce by
the Commissaries; and though rumors and praesumptions could infer a full
probation, yet that must be only understood of what is led and proved before
the judge ordinary, and the warrant of the Presbytery is not sufficient, since
they are not Judges competent to the dissolution of marriages, and this was
procured periculo petentis, no person being cited. Upon which debate, the
Justices repelled the defense, and the said John Frazer, being remitted to the
knowledge of an inquest, was found guilty, but did thereafter procure a
remission; and thus it is clear that Bigamie may be also pursued as notour
adultery. But the woman who knew not the first marriage was not punished,
(...). Basil. l. 85. hoc tit.

X. It may be here doubted likewise, whether a pursuit being intented for
notour adultery, and not for single adultery, and the probation which is led,
be sufficient to infer single adultery, though not notour adultery, if the
assize should fyle or not. For the Negative, it may be alleged, that single
and notour adultery are different crimes, and the Libels are different, and the
lybell in this case is not proved, and therefore the assize should not file,
and if they do, their sentence is null; even as in the case of George Grahame,
where the verdict of the Assize was reduced, because Theft was lybelled and
recept of Theft only proved. As also in that case the defender is precluded of
his defenses, because he would have propounded defenses against single adultery
if it had been lybelled, which would either not have been relevant against
notour Adultery, or else he thought himself, in tuto, not to propone them,
because he thought himself secure, knowing that the notour Adultery libelled
could never be proved: and it is an ordinar conclusion amongst the Doctors,
that si in libello qualificato omnes qualitates non sunt proba^ae reus est
absolvendus. And albeit for eviting this difficulty, the conclusion in their
libels uses to be alternative, yet I think that the defender should be
absolved, he taking instruments upon the Libel as it is Libelled, except the
qualities be expressly proved; though it be most ordinary to the Justices to
allow the parties to declare that they insist alternatively as said is.

By our Law, such as are Divorced for the Crime of Adultery committed by
themselves, cannot thereafter marry the persons with whom they are declared by
the sentence of a Judge to have committed Adultery, and all such marriages are
declared null, by the Act. 22. P. 16. I. 6. which has been introduced by our
Law, not only as a punishment of the Adultery already committed, by lessening
and narrowing their choice: But likewise as a mean to hinder any from
committing Adultery, in expectation (as is too ordinary) of enjoying in a
future marriage the persons with whom they have committed it. And upon which
expectation, the adulterers may be probably tempted to kill the Lawful husband
or wife of that person, with whom they have committed the same. In which our
Law agrees with the Cannon Law, by which non licebat ducere eam in uxorem, quam
quis polluit adulterio. But it must be observed, that this only holds where
there was an actual Divorce upon the adultery, prior to the marriage. And
therefore a present marriage could not be dissolved, by offering to prove, that
the contracters had committed Adultery during their former marriage.

This act of Parliament having declared such marriages unlawful, it did very
consequentially declare, the succession to be begotten by such unlawful
conjunctions, to be unhabile to succeed as Heirs to these Parents. And I have
heard it it doubted, whether they were capable to receive dispositions from
their adulterous parents. But I conceive as to this there is no difficulty: For
though the Law make them incapable to succeed as Heirs, yet it does not make
them incapable to receive a disposition: and though it may seem, that this be a
farther check upon the Adulterers; whose children could no way be gratified by
those with whom they committed the crime. Yet since quilibet est arbiter rei
suae, it were hard to deprive a man of the use of his property, because he has
committed Adultery.

I find that by the Civil Law such Bastards as were born in Adultery, or Incest
(whom in the Civil Law calls nati ex damnato coitu) could neither succed to
their vicious Parents, nor were they capable of any thing by their Parents
Testament, cum ita facilius paterna libido coercere posses censeatur l. Fin. C.
de not. lib. Bald. ad l. 1. C. de jur. Aur. Nor could they be adopted by their
Parents, l. legem C. de na. lib. Upon which principle our Parliament has been
induced to make the 117. Act. Par. 12. I. 6. but has streatched it a little
further, then the Civil Law did. For by that statute, a woman divorced for her
Adultery, marrying thereafter the person with whom she committed the Adultery
for which she was divorced: or dwelling and resorting in company with him at
Bed, and Buird, cannot dispone her lands, or set tacks thereof, in prejudice of
the Heirs, who would otherwise have succeeded to her.

From which statute it is observeable, that since the woman is only incapacitat
to dispone in this case; that therefore a man though Divorced for Adultery, may
lawfully dispone his Land, in favors of the Children Procreat in that
Adultery, this prohibition being restricted to the woman because of the
Imbecility of her sex, who may be tempted, or seduced, more easily then men can
be: and yet since the presumption did only runn against the Adulterous
Children, procreat in the second marriage, whom it was probable the mother
would have preferred to the children of the first, and slighted husband. It
seems strange, why any deed done by her, in prejudice of not only those
children, but even of any of her Heirs: would be null, though done in favors,
of neither the Adulterous Husband, nor his Children; but even in favors of
mere strangers, whom the Law needed not have suspected. But this was certainly
done to prevent the mothers fraudulent convyances, who might have transmitted
the estate to the adulterous Husband, or his posterity or friends under
borrowed names, the discovering of such contryvance being very difficult, and
the hazard of not discovering being very great. I conceive likewayes for the
same reason, that the granting of a personal Bond upon which the estate was
thereafter comprised from the mother may be quarrelled upon this statute. For
else the Law might be easily cheated: and the statute it self declares all
deeds done to the prejudice of the said Heirs directly, or indirectly to be
null, and yet since the mother remains still fiar, notwhithstanding of this
prohibition; I see not why a Bond, and comprysing led thereon for debts truly
owing by the Mother, could be quarrelled, where nothing was fraudulently
designed against this act. And though this act be only conceived in favors of
the Heirs of the prior Marriage, or the woman's Heirs whatsoever: yet I see no
reason, why this act would not militat in favors of the King, to reduce deeds
done to his prejudice as ultimus haeres, since a last Heir in the construction
of Law is a true Heir.

TITLE. XVIII. Bigamie.
1 What is Bigamie by our Law, and how punished. 2 Why Bigamie was not punished
as Adultery. 3 Whether Quakers may be punished for Bigamie. 4 Whether long
absence may excuse in this Crime. 5 Whether the marriage sine concubitu infers
Bigamie. 6 Whether a woman devorced for Adultery, marrying again, be guilty of
Bigamie.
THat a man might marry two wives, was allowed by many Nations, and Tacitus
observed, that only the Germans amongst all the Nations were content with one;
but no Nation allowed, that a wife should marry two husbands, which was done,
either because men were the only Legislators, and so were kind to themselves,
in allowing themselves that liberty they denied to poor women, or else this was
not allowed, because a woman's marrying two men prejudged the peopling the
commonwealth; Whereas a man's marrying more wives, was advantageous for it. And
the Law says, that more chastity is required in women then in men, and men
being by nature hotter then they, Bigamie is therefore more unnatural in women.

I. Yet in our Law, either a man marrying two wives, or a woman marrying two
husbands, commits Bigamy; and this is accounted by the 19. Act 5. Par. Q. Mary,
a breach of the Oath made at marriage, and therefore is punishable as Perjury,
by confiscation of all their Movables, warding of their persons for year and
day, and longer during the Queens will, and as infamous persons, never to bruik
Office, Honor, Dignity, or Benefice in time coming.

II. It may be here doubted, why Bigamie was not punished as Adultery, seeing it
may be notour Adultery, and is ordinarily so: to which difficulty, I think the
answers are, that it was contraverted amongst Lawyers, whether Bigamie was
punishable as Adultery, or as Stuprum, or Fornicatio; that it was not Adultery,
they contended, because God allowed Bigamie, but he never allowed Adultery. 2.
Many Nations allowed Bigamie, who condemned Adultery: and l. 2. C. de incest.
nupt. where it is said, that uemini licet duas uxores ducere, the punishment of
Adultery is not subjoyned, but it is only said, that praefes provinciae hoc
inultum non patietur, and it may be added, that their marrying shows some more
respect to the Law then Adultery, and obfiguram matrimonii multa non adeo
puniuntur. 3. When Bigamie was by this Act declared punishable, only as Perju^y
and not by death, even incorrigible and manifest adulteres were only punishable
by confiscation of their Movables, is clear as by the subsequent Act, and the
Act against notour adulterers to be punished by death, was not made till the 9
th. Parl. Q. Mary; I know, that Menoch. de arb. cas. 420. thinks that Big^mie
should be punished as Adultery. And I do think, that if the marriage be
contracted, upon design to palliate the Adultery, it should be punished more
severely then Adultery; and though the offender cannot be punished with death,
as a bigamist, yet he may be punished with death as a notour adulterer. The same
may be likewise said, if the persons marry against express Prohibition of the
Church, or it may be of friends, for thereby they are put in pessima fide, and
want the advantages arising, figura matrimonii: and this Statute punishes only
simple Bigamie, which was, possibly contracted, when the wife belived the
husband to be dead, or e contra, or when there was some other pretext for it,
but excludes not a further punishment due from other circumstances, or complext
Crimes. And it were absurd to think, that incestuous persons, being forbidden
to marry, because of their contingency in blood, or affinity, should not be
punishable for Incest.

III. It may be doubted, if Quakers can be punished as perjurers, seeing they
give no Oath at marriage, and certainly they should; seeing marriage implies a
Vow, though no implicit Oath be given.

IV. The husbands long absence may be a cause why the punishment may be
mitigated, but takes not away the Crime, seeing death and not time dissolves
marriage. And I remember of a Minister, who was deposed for marrying a man's
wife, after he was sixteen years absent, and albeit the first husband came
home, yet the second husband still retained the wife, which certainly was
Adultery in him, after that knowledge, that she was another man's wife; seeing he
wanted that pretext, for which Bigamie is not punishable as Adultery. From
which likewise, that general conclusion may be drawn, that when the Bigamist
knows that the other person is married, if he continues, he commits Adultery,
and if he know that it is incestuous, he commits Incest.

V. It may be doubted also, if two persons marrying, be guilty of Adultery, eo
ipso, that they marry, though because of any interveening accident, as death,
they bed not, and seeing by the second marriage, they give contrary Oaths;
certainly they are guilty of Perjury; for Perjury being the medium peccati in
this crime, and not copulatio, or coitus, as in Adultery, reatus contrahitur
per contraria vota, and he who lies with another man's wife immediately after
they come from Church, though before she has bedded with her husband, does in
our Law commit adultery, which shows that marriage is contracted with us per
(...), or benedictionem ecclesiae and ante coitum. And if after coming from
Church the persons are married, certainly they are by that also guilty of
Bigamie, and from this principle also it may be inferred, that though the first
marriage was null per frigiditatem, or maleficiationem, yet the other person
who might have declared that marriage to have been null, marying another,
before the first marriage was declared to have been null, though it was null ab
initio, will be guilty of Bigamie, because there are contraria vota in that
case, and Because he was not lawfully Divorced; for as a person who might have
got a first marriage declared null ex capite adulterii, marrying again would be
punishable, so it should be here; And if it be urged that marriages are
declared in frigidis and maleficiatis to have been null ab initio, and
therefore there having been no marriage at first, the second was no Bigamie,
and the first Oath not binding ab initio, for it was given upon the supposition
that the other person was habilis to contract a marriage, that vow was null,
and therefore there were no contrairy vows in this case. It may be answered,
that the Law considers that first marriage as a sufficient marriage till it was
declared null, and the other person who might have got the marriage declared
null, would have been punished as an Adulterer if she had lain with another,
ergo, she may be likewise punished as a Bigamist.

VI. The Act adds, except the person were lawfully divorced, From which two
questions may arise, 1. Seeing the party guilty cannot mary. v. g. If a woman be
divorced for Adultery she cannot marry. Quaeritur, then if she marrying again,
may be pursued as guilty of Bigamie, and it may be alleged that it is not
Bigamie, seeing the act says, that if persons not lawfully Divorced marry, they
commit Bigamie, ergo a contraria, where the persons are lawfully Divorced, they
commit not Bigamie, nor does the Law speak any thing of the difference betwixt
the nocent and innocent parties. 2. If a person be divorced, and thereafter he
marry, albeit thereafter that Decree of Divorce be reduced, certainly the
other party who married the person divorced, are not punishable, except the
Decree were reduced upon his fault, but the first Decree of Divorce being
reduced upon his fault who obtained it, as if he had bribed the Witnesses or
Judges, etc. eo casu, it may be alleged, that he knew that the first marriage
was not lawfully disolved, and so the second marriage was Bigamie, quo ad him,
albeit upon the other hand it may be debated, that the first marriage being
disolved authore praetore, it was no marriage at the time the second marriage
was contracted, and so not Bigamie, albeit the briber or forger may be punished
for the crimes so committed.

TITLE XIX. Theft.
1. The definition of Theft. 2. In what things can Theft be committed, and
whether it can be committed, in commodato and societate. 3. The Law of
Burdein-sack, or Theft committed for necessity. 4. Whether the taking things
belonging to no man, be punishable as Theft. 5. The division of Theft, in
furtum manifestum and non manifestum. 6. Whether Theft ought to be punished by
death. 7. The punishment of it by our Law. 8. How three Consecutive Thefts
ought to be punished, and how inferior Judges proceed, in judging Theft. 9.
How the Justices proceed, in judging this Crime. 10. How hareships, or
abigeatus is punished. 11. How Sacrilege is punished. 12. Theft in landed men
is Treason. 13. How Theft is aggravated from frequency, time, place, and other
circumstances. 14. Several extenuations of Theft. 15. Statutory Thefts, such as
breakers of Yards, stealing Fishes out of Ponds, Bees, etc. 16. Art and Part of
Theft, how punished.
ALbeit at first, every thing was made common, so that then there could be no
Theft; yet since by the common consent of all Nations, property is introduced,
Theft was forbidden as an enemy to this property, and as destructive to that
order and method, whereby God resolved to govern the World: and therefore the
Basilicks observe, that this Crime is against the Law of Nature, (...).

I. Theft is defined by Lawyers, to be fraudulosa contractatio lucri faciendi
gratia vel ipsius rei, vel etiam usus ejus possessionis ve, quod lege naturali
prohibitumest,. 1. Inst de obl. ex del. By the word Contrectatio, they
understand, not only the away taking of a thing, for Theft is committed, by
concealing what was taken from another; but likeways the using a thing
depositat, or impignorat to other ends and uses, then was agreed upon:
therefore Theft may be described, to be a fraudulent away-taking, or using what
belongs to another man, without the owners consent.

II. Theft is only committed in Movables, and thence it is, that by the Law of
England, the stealing Writs, which concern Lands, or Lead from a house, or
Fruit with the Trees whereon they grow, is not punishable as Theft, seeing these
things belong to Heretage. Nor is the taking away Dogs, Birds, or such things
as serve for pleasure, accounted Theft, seeing it is not committed oblucrum,
Bolton. cap. 20. and Theft is never committed without fraud. And albeit by the
Civil Law, the keeping of a thing lent, longer then the time allowed, or
employing it for another use then that which it was first lent be Theft by the
Civil Law, just. de furt. autem, yet in our Law it is not, l. 3. Reg. Maj. cap.
9. number. 5. and the reason there given is, because the intromission, and
possession there, flowed originally from the Master. And albeit it be a rule in
the Civil Law, that initium unius cujusque actionis semper est attendendum: yet
the former reason is not valid, because when a master gives Money to his own
servant, if he employ it to any other use, then is appointed by his master, as
if he should drink that which was given him to pay his masters Merchands, or if
he should sell his masters horse, with which he was sent to a friend; these
misimployments would certainly infer punishment, though the possession flowed
originally from the Master. And I think that Theft, in the case of a
misimployed lend; and the other cases above expressed, is more heinous then
ordinary Thefts, seeing it is agradged by the breach of Trust, or Friendship,
and it can likewise be less guarded against: For which two reasons; Domestic
Theft is still more heinously punished, then ordinary Theft; and servants
committing Theft in the cases foresaid, are hanged in these Countries, where
ordinar Theft is not Capital. But I believe, the reason of our Law above cited,
is, because we thought that this furtum interpretativum, deserved not to be
accounted such with us, where death is the punishment of Theft. Whereas,
because in the Roman Law, Theft was less severely punished: it was therefore
allowable, that it might be more extended; and so I think that our Law is more
just then the Civil Law. And even according to the Civil Law, it were unjust
that the person to whom the thing was lent, should be guilty of Theft, for
using it longer then was prescribed by the lender, except the lender had
expressly required it; for else by not requiring it, it seems that he has
tacitly consented to the farther use, sicut inta^itare locatione: and yet it
may be answered, that there is a difference betwixt locatum and commodatum, as
to this, seeing locatio contrahitur utriusque gratia and locantis, and
conductoris, whereas comodatum respicit tantum comodum comodatarii, and so he
should religiously observe the conditions prescribed by the lender; but yet I
am clear, that if a person should borrow any thing, at first for an other use,
then what he pretended, that eo casu, he is punishable. And I remember to have
read of a Banquier of Paris, who was flayed, and then quartered, for having
borrowed vast sums, upon design to break with it (which instance I have set
down, for the Merchants of our times) and seeing the lender is as much wronged,
and the seeker of the loan shows as great fraud by this pretense, as in other
theft: I see not why the punishment should not be the same. I find it observed
by Bolton, cap. 31. that though in Glanvels time (who is repute to be author of
Regiam Maj.) a furto omni modo excusabatur qui initium habuerit suae
detentionis per dominum illius rei, yet it is not so now, for if a Carrier take
out a parcel of the things delivered to him, and fell it, he is guilty of
Theft; but it is not Theft in the Carrier to give away, or embezle the whole as
he received them, because it was delivered him in the same kind, Stomf. 25. But
this last part seems absurd, for the offender designs equally to offend, and
the propriator is equally injured in both cases. It is doubted by Lawyers,
whether Theft can be committed by one of these who are in a society, or who
have right to a commonty of these things, which is the subject matter of the
commonty. It is answered, that it can, if fraud be proved in either of these
cases, l. si socius ff. de furto, and the reason is, because the using that
which is common, or that as in which the Society is constitute; otherways then
according to the rules, is in effect to employ for ons own use, what belongs to
another, which is Theft; and who doubts, if one of these who is in a Society,
as in Beer brewing, would steal away in the night, considerable quantities of
Beer, out of the Society, but he might be punished for Theft, (...). l. 46.
Basil. h. t.

III. According to the Law of Burden-sack, or Ibur anaseca, no man can be
accused for The^t, for as much meat as he can carry on his back, R. M. l. 4.
cap. 19. But I think this should be restricted, by these two limitations; 1. If
the said Theft was committed, to satisfy his necessity, l. verum ff. de
furtis, which is the meaning of that expression, necessity has no law. And 2.
if he could not intertain himself another way. And whereas Skeen observes, upon
the Word Burden-sack, the Thief should in this case, pay a Cow, or Sheep to
him, in whose Land he was taken. I think that also unreasonable, seeing that
presupposes, that the thief is not in that absolute necessity, which should get
him this privilege: and whereas he observes, that he should be scourged, I
th^nk ^t most unreasonable, because his necessity, makes it in effect, to be no
Theft: and it is contrair likewise, to the foresaid 16. cap. l. 4. Reg. Maj.
that no Court shall be holden upon Burden-sack. By the Civil Law likewise,
fraudantes filcum, or gabellum, the stealers of Customs were punishable as
thieves, Far. quest. 173. but of this I shall treat hereafter.

IV. By the Civil Law it was accounted no Theft to intromet with, or abstract
things that belonged to a succession, to which none had entered; because,
before the entering of an Heir, these things could be called no man's, l.
Hereditarie ff. de furto. And for the same reason, the taking away Rings, and
other Goods from off a dead person, out of a Grave, is not counted Theft by the
Law of England, as it was found in Notinghames case, anno 1617 where this was
only found a misdemeanour, and the defender whipped: but this holds not now in
our Practique, which is most reason^ble, for this is in effect greater then
ordinary Theft, because these things have none to guard them. And in our Law
likewise, he who finds a waise Beast, which has strayed from the owner, should
cause cry it either in the Court of his Over-Lord, or in the Church, or else he
may be pursued for Theft; and Theft is likewise punishable, albeit the person
be not known, from whom the thing was stolen, Alex. Concilio 23. And yet furtum
non fit nisi sit cui fiat, (...). l. 43.. 5. basil. h. t.

V. Theft was divided by the Civil Law, in manifestum and non manifestum;
Manifest Theft, was when the Thief himself was deprehended, in the very act, or
if he was seen with it before he did arive, at the place, to which he did
destinat to carry it. Theft not manifest, was, when either the Thief was not
taken, or seen with it: and this distinction has in my opinion, given occasion
to the difference in our Law, betwixt in-fang-Thief, and out-fang-Thief, which
concerns only the Jurisdiction where the Thief is punished, but not the
punishment it self, as shall be said hereafter; but there are several other
vestiges of it in our Law, as cap. 21. l. 4. Reg. Maj. It is said, that he who
is taken with nothing in his hand, may purge himself by 27 men, and three
Thanes. and a Burgess being accused of manifest Theft, may purge himself by the
Oath of twelve; the meaning whereof, is, that he shall give his own Oath he is
innocent, and shall get so many men to swear, that they believe his innocence,
and this manifest Theft, is called Theft with red hand, Stat. Orcar. by a
Metaphor borrowed from Murder. But with us, Theft may be divided into common
Theft (which is Theft so properly called, or Stouth-rife, which is violent
Theft) and is a complex of Theft and Robbery. And receipt of Theft, which
distinction is hinted at, in all our Laws, but most specially 50. Act. P. 11.
Ia. 6.

VI. As to the punishment of Theft, it is much contraverted amongst Lawyers, if
the Lawgivers can justly pun^sh Theft with death, and though I will not
dispute the power of Princes and States, yet I incline to think, that for
simple Theft, a Thief should not dye. For f^rst, we find by the Law of God, to
which as the Scripture says, nothing should be added, or paired, Theft is not
punishable by death, nor can this Law be called only a judicial Law fitted for
the Commonwealth of the Jews: for that it is a Moral Law, according to its
statutory part, forbidding Theft, appears from its being insert amongst the
commands, and why it should not be so, as to its Sanction, and punishment like
Murder, Incest, and these other crimes, I cannot see a reason. 2. We see that
some Thefts are capitally punished, as are the stealing things Sacred, Josh. 7.
And Theft committed in the night; Exodus 22* 2. and stealers of men, Deuteronomy. 21.7.
by which it appears, that God Almighty intended not that single Theft should be
punished by death. 3. There is no proportion betwixt the life of a man, and any
money, for all that a man has will he give for his life. 4. The life of the
Malefactor is ordinarily taken, where the Crime cannot be repaired, as in
Murder, Incest, etc. But in Theft it may, and the parties wronged, would in all
probability, be far easier secured this way, seeing many will rather want their
goods, nor have a man's life taken. Many Thieves would restore, if they thought
restoration might be made with safty of their life; and the Law would easilier
sustain the pusuers probation, if the event were only to reach goods, and not
life. 5. It seems absurd, that single Adultery, which is the worst of Thefts
(seeing the Husband thereby is robbed of his Estate, quiet, good name, and
Succession) should not be punishable by death, and yet Theft should be made
capital, and that Theft and Murder which are not equal crimes, should have
equal punishments, And albeit it be objected, that Laban, Genesis 24.9. did vow
that these who had stolen his goods, should be punished by death: Yet the
reason in that case will appear to be, because that the Theft there mentioned,
was Sacrilege. And whereas David's Oath to Nathan, is, that he who had stolen
his Neighbors Lamb, should die, is objected. It is answered, either that was
spoken in passion, which the Text bears; or otherwise that was suggested by a
special providence to David, to the end he might be his own accuser. Nor do I
deny but there was a kind of Communion of goods amongst the Jews, more then in
other Nations, as appears by their Jublee, by their not taking Pledges, nor
anual rent, so that there was less reason to make Theft capital amongst them,
then amongst us; and that according as crimes grow more frequent, the
punishment may be augmented, but I deny that they should be soaugmented, that
suitable proportion should not be kept. And it is known from experience, that
many men fear hanging, less then being constantly kept in Correction-houses,
or in the places where they may be kept working, as they do in Holland, for the
good of the Commonwealth.

VII. To descend then to our Law, the custom is, that the justices do sometimes
hang even for very small faults, as Thomas Neilson for stealing a horse, 10
December 1661. Watson hanged for stealing 40. Sheeps, though there was no
probation against him, but his own confession, and though he had restored ^he
things stolen. Sometimes by banishment, as Richard Lauder, 6. Febr. 1639. and
Alexander Cumming, and John Tailer, 25. Febr. 1639. Sometimes they are Drowned,
as Grissel Mathow, for stealing a Coffer with Writs, 23. June 1599. Sometimes
Scourged, as James Wilson, 7. Feb. 1608. Sometimes they are hanged in Chains,
if they be notorious Thieves, As Patrick Roy Macgrigor, May. 1668. etc. It is
thought that de jure there is no Law in Scotland for Hanging a man for Theft,
which is a great mistake, for Leg. Burgorum. cap. 121. It is said, if a Thief
be taken with bread worth a Farthing, and from one Farthing to four, he should
be Scourged: for four Farthings he should be put in the Joggs, and Banished;
from four to eight he should loose an ear: and if that same. Thief be
thereafter ta^^^ with eight Pennies, he should be hanged; but if any Thief
should be taken with 32. Pennies and an Farthing, he may be hanged. 2. By the
7. Act stat. Da. 2.13. chapter and cap. 13. l. 4. Reg. Maj. one defamed for Theft,
who cannot find caution, should be hanged, and cap. 16. It is said that no man
can be hanged for less then two Sheep: and by the Law likewayes of
Birthinseck, a Thief should not dye for as much meat as he can carry upon his
back: and cap. 18. a Thief being hanged and falling from the Gallows, is no
more to be punished. All which implies clearly that Theft is of its own nature
punishable by death. 3. By the 82. act. I. 6. P. 11. Stealers of Pleugh Graith,
or breakers of Mi^nes, are to be punished therefore, to the death, as Thieves.
But because our practiques, is in this, a little arbitrary and uncertain, it
will be fit to know that Theft in Scotland, is either pur^ued by accusation,
which is at the instance of a private accuser, or by way of indictment, which
is at the instance of the Procurator-Fiskal. If the pursuit be intented, by
way of Accusation, it may be judged by Barrons having power of Pit, and
Gallows, or as our Charters call, foffa and furca, or by Sheriffs: but if it be
pursued by way of indictment, the Cognition thereof belongs to the Justice.
Reg. Maj. cap. 1. Number. 7. But this distinction, is not well observed, for the
Sheriffs do proceed to judge Thefts even by Citation, and though the Thief be
not taken with with the Fang, which is certainly an error, for all processes
upon citation against a Thief, should belong to the justices,

VIII. In the procedor before these inferior Courts, they do not condemn to
death, except upon three Thefts, or that the person be taken with Fang, and he
be likewise famosus fur. As to the three Thefts, I find no express Law for it
only, stat. Da. 2. cap. 17. where it is said, if a Thief be defamed at three
Barrons Courts, and wants a Pledge, or Cautioner, then he may be hanged, or if
he be defamed, and cited in two courts, or in one, and be of ill fame likewise;
or as we say, there be public bruits and open fame that he is a Thief, then he
may be hanged. But simple fame is said there, not to be sufficient to infer
death, except that ill fame were found by an Assize upon Oath. Yet this is now
absolet, for fame is in no case sufficient to infer death.

As to the three Thefts, I find the Civilians relate, that the third The^t, by
the statutory Law of most places, is capital, and it seems to be grounded upon
very good reasons, for he who is often found committing the same crime, is
presumed by the Law to design to make it a trade, Ang. ad l. 8. devi publica,
where the committing of Theft twice, inferrs this presumption. The Law of
Holland provides, that a Thief shall be hanged for the third Theft, except it
seem otherwise just to the Judge because of his age, or any other pregnant
reason: and ordinarily three small Thefts, are by Matheus said not to be
construed such, according to the Law of Holland, as deserves death: the
Civilians do upon supposition that the third Theft is Capital, conclude, that
these three thefts should be distinct, even as to to the time, and that he is
to be punished with death for the third theft, though he had been formerly
punished for both the other two, or though the former two had been remitted to
him by the Prince: and albeit they use many distinctions for clearing whether a
Thief should be hanged for the third theft, where the first two were not
committed within his Territory or Jurisdiction, and so could not be punished by
him, yet since Capital punishment is not inferred by a statute against the
third Theft, but that the third Theft is only punishable with death, because
the committer is presumed to be irreclaimable: therefore I think, that where
ever the Theft was committed, yet for the third Theft, the thief should be
hanged; for albeit there be no express statute for that with us, yet, seeing
Gomesius Chasaneus, and other famous Lawyers, attested this to be the general
custom of the world; I think it should be followed by our Sheriffs and
inferior Judges, who being determined by that number, have some certain rule
whereby they may be both limited, and warranded, which is much safer then that
they should be allowed scop, to break out into the extremes of either cruelty,
or cowardliness.

The Law of England divides Theft or Larcenry, into petty Larcenry, when the
thing stolen, exceeds not twelve pence, and its punishment extends not to death,
and grand Larcenry, when it exceeds twelve pence, wherein the thief is
punishable by death, except he be saved by the book: and if one steal to the
value of six pence, at one time, and six pence at another time, then he is
guilty of death, but if two steal to the value of eighten pence jointly, each
is guilty.

Common bruit, and open fame, of being an ordinary thief, is likewise a good
ground of making theft puishable by death, the thief being taken with the fang,
and hi fures famosi sive infamati de pluribus furtis, are ordinarily hanged
likewise, as is clear by Clarus. Number. 8. hoc tit. Menoch. arbitrariis Casu.
295. And it is sufficient that witnesses depon of their credulity, and that
they are informed by others, our Law calls such de famiati de latrocinio; and
if he cannot find caution, the old Law appoints, that he should be proceeded
against as if he were a proven thief; for latro defamatus and latro probatus,
are still aequipollent in our Law; But I think these Laws too severe, and they
are not in use.

IX. As to the procedor of the Justices; it is because their power is more
eminent, that they are allowed to be more arbitrary; but I think the
distinction allowed by Civilians, will be very reasonable, which is that, in
furto simplici, in simple theft, the pain of death should never be imposed, but
in qualified theft, if the quality be such as agredges the crime very much;
Which aggravations are either taken from the thing it self, that is stolen, as
in our statutes, the stealers of Pleughgraith, cutters and destroyers of
Pleugh, and Pleugh-graith, in the time of telling; and cutters and destroyers
of growing trees, or breakers of Milnes, or of leading co^ns, or fuel, are to
be punished to the death, as thieves, 82. Act. 11. P. I. 6 and hoche^s and
killers of Oxen, horses, and other cattle, are punishable by death, and
confiscation of movables, as well committers as recepters, Act. 110. p. Ia. 6.
and upon this act were hanged, for killing Drumlanerk's sheep, 20. Feb. 1666.
Albeit it would appear, that that act is only to be extended to laboring
cattle. Nota, this is a case wherein Theft may be committed, without carrying
any thing away; for the doing of these wrongs, without carrying away the thing
wronged, is constantly declared to be Theft, and per constitutionem Frederici
Secundi de stat.. agricultores, the stealing Pleugh graith, is punished, as a
particular crime.

X. Herdships, likewise, which is, the driving away a great many Cattle, called
by the Civilians, crimen abigeatus, is likewise by the Law of all Nations, and
particularly by ours, punished with death; but though lex prima dig. de
abigeat: say that abigei ad gladium dentur. Yet Matheus does interpret, that
not to be meant, de ultimo supplicio, but only de ludo gladiatorio, and with
this agrees. l. 2. (...): But if they went with arms, they were punished with
death, as the Scolia of the Basilicks observe. It may be usefully observed,
that those who drive away Herdships, cum gladio, with arms, are punished by
death, because they are rather Robbers then Thieves. 2. These who drive away
great Cattle, are more to be punished, then these who drive away the lesser, l.
1. ff. de abige. 3. These are to be most severely punished, who live in a
country, where that crime is most frequent; and therefore our Highlanders are
most severely punished. 4. These that drive away cattle from the fields, are
more to be punished, then these who drive out of the houses, because Cattle in
the fields have no guard but the Law.

XI. The stealing likewise of a thing consecrated to God, aggrages so the
Theft, as to make it punishable by death, and this was called Sacrilege by the
Civil, and Cannon Laws, and was distinguished into several degrees, as 1. If a
thing Sacred was stolen out of a sacred place. 2. If a thing sacred was stolen
out of any place. 3. If a thing not Sacred was stolen out of a Sacred place: But
their two last are not properly Sacrilege. With us there are no formal
Consecrations used of Churches, Vestments, Cupps, etc. and so we have no such
formal crime, as Sacrilege; nor have we any act against it. Yet I think, to
steal any thing destinat to Gods service, and even to steal any thing out of a
Church, deserves to be punished with death. And this Theft is aggraged with us,
not only from the nature of the thing stolen, but more from the place; and thus
also Murder, or mutilation, committed within the Church or Church-yaird, is
more severely punished then other Murders; and with us these who steal out of
Churches, are still hanged, or who steal what is dedicated to, or serves the
Church, as Basins. etc.

XII. The next aggravation of Theft is from the person who commits it, and thus
Theft, when committed by landed men, is punished with us as Treason, Act. 50.
p. 11. I. 6. the words are, that if it shall happen any landed man to be
lawfully and orderly convict of common Theft, recept of theft, or Stouthreif he
shall incur the crime and the pain of Treason: The reason inductive of this act
was, because it was easier for landed men to commit theft, then for any others,
and so it should be more severely punished, and these also wanted all pretext
of necessity, or rusticity, and must be presumed to be extremely mean and
malicious persons, whom the Commonwealth might well want, and whom they should
not suffer: but it may be here doubted who are these, who are by this act to be
accounted landed men; And it would appear, 1. That only such as have
themselves, or their Predecessors, been Infest, are only such, for, nulla
sasina nulla terra, and so a disposition or charter or a resignation in
favorem, makes not a thief to fall under the compass of this Act. Yet some
think an Heir served and retoured, does fall within this signification, though
he be not Infest, because his lying out is his own fault, and so should not
defend him. 2. I think that a person who was once a Barron, if he be thereafter
denuded, falls not under it, for albeit semel baro is semper baro in our Law.
Yet that maxim holds only presumptive; and if it be proved that he was
actually denuded, that will liberat him from vicious intromission, much more a
crime that deserves forfaulter and statutory crimes, are not to be extended. By
ordinary theft in this act is meant, theft without any aggravation of violence,
herships, etc. by stouthreif is meant violent and masterful theft. And as this
kind of theft has the disadvantage of being treason, so it is just that it
should participat of all the advantages which are allowed to those who are
pursued, as traitors, ( and quem sequuntur incommoda eum debent sequi commoda)
and therefore no inferior Judge is Judge competent to a process founded upon
this species of theft, as was found in July, 1668. where a process intented
against a landed man, before the Sheriff of Wigtown, was Advocat to the
Justices upon this reason; albeit it was alleged that this act being conceived
in odium, and for repressing of theft, it was unreasonable that it should not
be quarrellable before every Judge, for thereby many would be deterred from
pursuits against landed men. And albeit the punishment was in this theft,
greater then in others; yet the relevancy and probation was no more intricat
here then in other cases. 2. It was alleged that the pursuer restricted his
Libel to ordinary theft, which the Justices found he could not do, because the
relevance, and probation would be, eadem utrobique; and albeit the pairty would
restrict as said is, yet the Kings Advocat might, at any time thereafter, found
a Process of forefaulter, and needed no more probation: as in the case of John
Wauch, though the Sheriff of Selkirk had only fined the thief, yet the Lords
sustained a declarator of escheat upon that same verdict, whereby the thief was
found by them guilty of theft; for the Lords thought that private parties could
by no declaration nor deed of theirs, prejudge His Majesty's interest, so that
from this ground, it may be debared, that when a landed man is pursued for
theft, the pursuer cannot restrict his pursuit to a pursuit of common theft.
As also, that the pursuer failzieing to prove, in this case commits Treason,
because he who pursues any man for treason, if he be found calumnious, commits
treason. It may be doubted also if the Council can mitigat the punishment here,
seeing they cannot remit Treason: Yet in their Statutory Treasons the Council
ordinarily mitigats or converts the punishment. Nor see I any reason, why it
may not be alleged that theft in landed men, is not made treason by this Act,
but is only declared punishable as treason, and Theft, that is not to be judged
as treason, though it should be punished as such, for these two are differrent.

XIII. This crime of Theft becomes sometimes atrocious, and so should be
punishable by death, because of the irreclaimablenesse of the offender, and
triple theft is capital in inferior Courts, though the things stolen be very
inconsiderable, because this shows a habit or double these, if the thing stolen
be of great moment. And by the first Statute, Da 2.. 4. A thief banished, being
taken again in these Territories, from which he was banished, may be proceeded
against with all severity; and the breaking of pink Dove coats, etc. is
punishable by death at the third rhyme, Act. 84. I. 6. P. 6.

The way likewise whereby the Theft is committed, makes it often deserve to be
capital, as the stealing by false keys, or breaking houses, and enchantments,
and if it be committed masterfully, (as we use to speak) which is called
Stouthreif with us, and Roboria, by the Doctors then it dese^ves to be
capitally punished; but of this afterward.

Theft is likewise aggraged from the time, as stealing in the night is
punishable by death, if the theif defend himself, and be armed. l. furem. ff.
ad l. Corn. de sicar, but with us generally a thief breaking houses in the
night may be killed by the person invaded, Act 22. Chapter 2 p. 1. loss. 1. which
may be extended also to such thieves as are preparing to break the house, of
who have done it already, and to steal any thing in the time a house is
burning, or when a Ship is wrackt, or in time of tumults, or general
desolation, were highly punishable by the Civil Law, either paena fustium cum
relegatione vel in metallum. And with us I think such thieves should dye, for
both they add affliction to the afflicted, and so show very much malice. As
also the committing Theft is then very easy, and to these cases I may add
theft committed in time of Pestilence.

XIV. As theft is aggraged by these, so it is extenuat by other circumstances,
as 1. In case of necessity, as said is, 2. A wife stealing from her own
husband, is not so severely to be punished as in other cases, for in effect she
has some interest, and therefore by the Common Law this was not pursuable as
theft, sed action renum amotarum. l. qui servo.. item placuit. ff. de furt.
but with us, the Kings Advocat may pursue either wife or husband stealing from
one another, though the parties cannot. For it is to be presumed that there is
too much malice in such pursuites, and that the pursuer designs in that case
rather to be free from the marriage, then to have the Crime punished. 3. He who
steals from his debtor, who will not pay him, or steals what was robbed from
him, is punishable, but not by death, Clar. number. 20. de furt. 4. He who steals
a thing of small value, de minimis non curat lex, of which formerly. 5. If the
party from whom the thing was stolen, declare that it was not away-taken without
his consent; some Lawyers think the crime is thereby purged: Which opinion
others allow not except it be also proven, that there were presumptions of a
prior consent, as the stealers good fame, his friendship to the party accused,
the relation by affinity, or consanguinity, etc. but with us if the informer
swear not the Libel, and depon that the thing was stolen, for ought he knows,
the Libel will not be sustained. 6. If the taker had probable reasons, to
presume the things taken by him to be his own, then he is excused from Criminal
punishment, (...), ad civilem questionem transmittitur, l. 1.. ult. (...).

XV. There are with us other statutory thefts, which are not so of their own
nature, but are to be punished as such, as the breaking of Milnes, etc. Act. 82.
p. 11. I. 6 A Salter, or Coalyer also, leaving his master without a sufficient
Testimonial, or at least a sufficient reason given for his removal, and
attested by the Bailie, or Magistrate of the place, are to be repute and
punished as thieves, Act. 11. p. 18. I. 6. but it would appear that such only
as receive fee and wages from others, are only punishable as such, but not
otherwise; and really it were unreasonable, that a poor Coalyer or Salter
might not leave that trade, either to take another trade, or for sickness, or
any other cause, and that act seems only to hinder their going from one master
to another.

Stealers of Pyks out of stanks, breakers of Dove-coats, Orchards or Yards,
stealers and destroyers of Hives, are punishable as thieves, and this is
ordained to be a point of dittay, and the unlaw to be ten Pound, and mends to
the party, conform to the skaith, Act. 69. P. 6. I. 4. but by the 33. Act. 2.
P. I. 1. stealing of green wood by night, or peilers of barks of trees, should
pay forty shillings to the King, and assyth the Party, Act. 33.2. P.I. 1. But
thereafter by the 12 Act. 4. P. I. 5. the breaking of Dove-coats, Coney-gairs,
Parks, or stanks (i. e.) Ponds, is declared to be punished as theft; but seeing
that appoints not that it shall be theft, it may be doubted if it should be
repute as theft, as to the other disadvantages.

I find that upon the 25. of July, 1623. two fellows called Raith and Deane,
are ordained to be hanged for breaking of Yards, stealing of Bee-skeps, and
stealing of Sybows. By the 84. Act, 6. P.I. 6. the destroyers of Planting,
haining-broom, policy, are for the first appointed to pay to the owner the
avail, and ten pound for the second, the avail and twenty pound for the third,
the avail and forty pound, and if they be not responsal, to be put in Prison,
and in the Irons for eight days, for the second, fifteen days, for the third
a Month, and to be scourged at the end of the Month. By which Act likewise,
the breakers of Dove-coats, Conyingairs, and Parks, are to be punished the same
way, if they be not responsal, they are to hanged for the third fault. It is
observable, that though these persons abovenamed were hanged for breaking of
Yards, yet there is no warrant, therefore by that Act, though there be for
breaking of Dove-coats and Parks, and so we may perceive, that the former act
is not abrogated by this Act: And this Act declares, that the punishment here
prescribed shall be without prejudice to call the defenders at Justice Courts,
and all the innovation introduced by this act, is that the offender may be
tried in their cases, by the Barron, or Lands-lord, within whose Lands the wrong
was committed, if the offender be taken reid hand, (whereas Landlords are not
Judges competent) and by the Sheriff if they be not taken reid hand. 2. There
is allowed by this Act, a power to Landlords, to Judge in the case of wrongs
done to their own Tennants, which regulariter was not lawful. It is likewise
observable, that this and the 12 Act, I. 5. p. 4. adds still without the
good will of the owner. So that I think, that albeit the owners declaration be
not sufficient to absolve the thief in other cases, yet I think it is in this
case, and that for these two reasons, because this statutory theft, is only
introduced in favors of the owners, and this Clause had else been uncnecessar.
2. It is presumable that the owner would not refuse his consent to kill a Deer
or Coney, and this we may observe, that the words invito domino, in the
definition of theft, are not absolutely ^^^ecessary, as many Lawyers carpingly
observe, and that in some cases, the consent of the owner may defend the Party.
8. It may be observed from this Act, that theft should be proved by confession
or witnesses, and though other crimes may be proved by presumptions, yet this
should not, seeing death is so exorbitant a punishment. 4. It is observable,
that the Sheriff-depute, or other Deputs, may sit in cases belonging to the
Sheriff himself, and that the Declinatur which is sufficient against the one,
excludes not the other. To take Doves also, which belongs to their Dove-coats,
or to kill them, is repute theft, l. Pomponius.. Pomponius ff. fam. erisc. and
by the Doctors, Chass. fol. 1484. for seeing these creatures are ordinarily tame
now, and that by the custom especially of the low Countries there are few or
no wild Doves, it follows that it should be unlawful to kill or shoot them, as
it is to shoot or hunt other wild beasts: The stealing likewise of Bees, which
are kept in hives, was accounted theft, l. Pomponius.. Pomponius. ff. fam.
erisc. and by the Law of Germany, Berlich. conclus. 50. For which though an
arbitrary punishment should be regularly inflicted, yet if the Bees stolen be of
great value, or if the committer has been frequently deprehended in the like
guilt, then the Doctors are of opinion, that even stealing of Bees may be
punished by death, Iac. de Bellovis. pract. crim. Cap. 20. number. 32. but I think
our Law juster, which considers more the habit of the offender, then the
greatness of the offense. Stealers likewise of Pyks out of stanks, was
forbidden, but not punished by the Civil Law, but by the custom of all Nations,
it is now punished arbitrarly according to the differing circumstances.
Berlich. conclus. 51.

XVI. Art and part depends in this, as in other crimes, upon circumstances, but
the ordinary rules prescribed by Farinaicius quest. 168. are, 1. That he who
gives counsel, or persuades to steal, ^^^unishable as the Thief. 2. He who
assists, especiall^ (...) partake of the Theft, is guilty, though he be not
actually present. 3. He who recepts the thing stolen by the Civil Law, conatus,
or a design and essay to steal, if no theft was committed, was not punishable
as Theft, l. vulgaris ff. de furt. where it is said, that he who entered another
man's Closet upon design to steal, if he touched nothing, is only punishable
action injuriarum si sine vi, vel de visi, vi intravit. And with us, I think
that essaying to steal, should not be punished with death, seeing the essayer
might have repented, and seeing furtum est contrectatio rei alienae, so before
he touch any thing, I think he cannot be called, nor conscionably punished as a
Thief. He who shows the way to a Thief is not a Thief, (...). But with us this
might be esteemed art and part by that Law likewise, if one broke the gate upon
revenge, and another entered and stole, the breaker of the gate would not be
liable for Theft, (...), l. 53. Basil. h. t. and yet I think, that he who brake
the gate would be liable for the price of the things so stolen, because he
occasioned by unlawful means the things to be stolen: Law has determined
generally, that ut furtum nemo facit sine dolo malo ita nec opem, and consilium
fert sine dolo malo, and is consilium dat qui furtum persuadet, and is opem
fert qui ministerium furto praebet, (...).

And I conceive that there is in Law and reason, a great difference to be put
betwixt these crimes, which are only committed against our fortunes, and in
cases which may be repaired; wherein actual loss should be more considered then
attempts, and these which are irrepairable, when committed, and are attrocious,
and concern the safety of our persons, wherein attempts should be highly
punished.

If he whose goods are stolen, does require the master of the Thief, or him in
whose obeisance he is or with whom he is found, to deliver him up to him, tha^
^^^tice may be done upon him, the master or sustainer of the Thief, should
either deliver him up, or present him to justice, else he is guilty of the
crime, and art and part thereof, I. 5. p. 2. Act. 2. And albeit the word
obeisance, here used, would seem to include vassals, yet it should not extend
to these, seeing it is restricted by the act to masters and sustainers, and by
sustainers, are meant such as entertain the Thief at bed and board.

TITLE XX. Theft-boot and Recept.
1. What is Theft-boot, and by whom committed. 2. What is recept of Theft. 3.
How recept of Theft is punished. 4. The principal Thief ought to be discust
before the Receptor. 5. How the husband is to be punished for what is found
with the wife, and e contra. 6. How Servants are punishable for the Masters
theft. 7. How buyers of stolen goods are liable.
THeft-boot is committed by securing a Thief against the punishment due by Law,
and properly it is when Sheriffs and other Judges who sell a Thief, or fine
with him in Theftdome, committed, or to be committed. P. 13. I. 6. Act 137. and
the Lord of regality, committing this crime, losses his Regalities and
Barronies, id est, his Offices and Jurisdictions, as Lord of Regality, and as
Barron, and the Justices and the Sheriffs loss life and goods. Theft-boot is
also committed by any other person who takes a ransom from a Thief, when he
finds him with the fang. 3. When a party who was leas'd, transacts with the
Thief, and passing from the pursuit which is punishable, because the public
being by the crime wronged as well as he, and his Majesty having jus quaesitum
to the movables of the offender; it is unjust, that any private Party should
have it in his power to indemnify the transgressor: and albeit their two last
species of Theft be not expressly contained in the Act, yet seeing the act
bears, that Lords of regalities, Sherriffs, nor others, shall not sell, etc.
under the word: others generally all transgressors are comprehended, and by the
2. Act 1. P. I. 5. it is declared, that he who transacts with a Thief, for
Theft committed against himself, shall be guilty of Theft-boot, and shall be
punishable as the principal Thief, from which it appears, that the punishment
of Theft-boot in private persons, is the same with the punishment of the thief,
whereas in the first Act. P. 13. I. 6. there is no punishment statuted against
private persons who are guilty of Theft-boot, only against Judges transacting
or ransoming, and Skeen, verb. Bote. defines. Theft-boot to be when any person
agrees with a Thief, or puts him from the Law. And yet I remember that in Ian.
1665. Angus Mackintosh, being pursued by the Sheriff Depute of Inverness, for
Theft-boot, as he who had componed with a Thief who had stolen some meal from
him; the Lords of Session did Advocat this pursuit to themselves, because they
thought this crime of Theft-boot in desuetude, and therefore they resolved to
hear it themselves, that they might clearly determine what Theft-boot was, and
how far it was to be extended.

II. The Civil Law knew not such distinct crime as recept of Theft, but it was
comprehended under the definition of Theft, for recept is defined to be
occultatio latronum vel malt ^^oorum ab eo qui latronem apprehendere poterat
pecunia vel surreptorum part accepta, l. 1. ff. de recept: it is the wilful
concealing or protecting a Thief by him who might have taken and apprehended
him, and that either for money, or a part of the stolen goods, from which
definition it may be inferred, 1. That such as lodge Thieves in Inns, are not
liable for recept, except it be likewise proved that they knew the person
lodged to have stolen goods, which ignorance will not excuse, if it be affected
and designed ignorance, as if all the neighbors knew, or if it was intimat to
them, or if any person offered to inform, and the Innkeeper would not know, or
if the guest offered an extraordinary reward, or offered to bribe servants, or
kept a very jealous watch, which presumptions may infer an arbitrary
punishment, but not death. 2. It may be inferred that the lodging a kinsman, a
wife or husbands entertaining one another, will not infer recept, because that
is presumed to be done rather, out of love, then avarice or dole, l. 2 ff. de
recept, which was extended as Chassan. observes, rubr. 1.. 5. N. 13. to a
Mistress concealing her sweetheart: In all which cases the receptors are only
to be excused, if they communicate not in the Theft, for else they are to be
punished as Thieves, for that is not the effect of love, but of fraud.

III. Recept of theft with us, is punishable as the principal thief, Stat. 21.
Alex. 2. Where it is said, that whosoever shall recept the thing stolen
willingly and knowingly, he shall be punished as the principal Thief; and from
this it may be concluded, that recept with us, is properly, when the thing
stolen is recepted, and not when the stealer without the Theft is receipted; for
to as the recepting of the Thief, it appears only to be punishable, when
Letters of Intercommuning are published, prohibiting all the Leidges to recept
or fortify a malefactor, else Letters of Intercommuning were unnecessary; nor
see I why the receptor of a Thief should be in a worse condition then the
receptor of a Murderer; and our practice speaks still of recept of Theft, not
of Thieves, at least recept of this nature falls not under this special crime,
but only under the Thief general crime of recepting malefactors, but if the
receptor of a take money, or good deed, for the recepting even his person, eo
casu, he is guilty of Theft-boot, but by the 21. Act P. 1. I. 6. It is
declared, that whosoever intercommuns with Thieves, or assists them in their
theftous stealings, or deeds, either in going, or coming, or gives them meat,
harbor, or assistance, or trysts with them any manner of way, they shall be
pursued, either Civilly, or Criminally; but this act strikes not against such
as have entertained the Thief any considerable time, after the committing of
the Theft, and before Letters of Intercommuning were execute.

IV. The receptor with us cannot be punished, or thole an Assize, till the
principal thief be first convict; for if he be assoilzied, the receptor cannot
be punished, Stat. David 2. cap. 29. but by the 83. cap. quon. attach. it was
only declared that the receptor should not be punished till the principal was
either convict or attained, i. e. accused with us. Now it is inviolably
observed, that the principal thief should be first discussed, as was found
(...) and in Anno 1663. a verdict against George Grahame, before the Justices,
finding him guilty of fraudulent using of a Bond, was rescinded, because the
principal thief was not first discussed: the case was this, Achmuty, granted a
Bond to the Lady Bairfoot, for eight hundredth Merks, she assigned it to George,
but thereafter paid him another way, and retired the Assignation, and after
this she put both Bond and Assignation in a Bonnet case; and George having come
by the bond (as he pretended from Mistress Billing, Daughter to the Lady, who
alleged she had got it from her Mother for debt) he sends it to Ireland, and
recovers payment, whereupon he was pursued for fraudulent using, and recept,
and his discharge of the former assignation was produced, and the Bond was
proven to have been in the Ladies custody. Whereupon he was convict by the
Assize, but this verdict was rescinded with the Justices Interloquutor, because
the Libel was not relevant, till Master and Mistress Billings, had been first
discust, and the verdict was unjust, because it was not proved that they saw
George Grhame deliver back the Bond, and the general discharge might have been
given, spenumerandae pecuniae: and if such using as this might be termed Theft,
all actions of exhibitions would be turned in pursuits for theft.

But it may be doubted, whether if the Principal Thief dye, the receptor may be
punished, seeing after death the Principal theft cannot be enquired into, for
though that privilege be granted, quo ad the discussion, yet it inferrs no
indemnity to the receptor; and we see, that where the benefit of discussion is
granted to Heirs or Cautioners, he who has the benefit may be pursued, if the
party who would have been first discust, be, in solvendo, and the reason of
this maxim should hold, when the Principal Thief is alive, and not when he is
dead, is, because it is presumable that the pursuer is malicious against the
receptor, for else he would doubtless pursue the Malefactor who did the most
immediate wrong to him, which it is probable the receptor knew not. It may be
also doubted, if the Thief dwell in England, or in France, whether the pursuer
must first discuss him.

V. If the thing stolen by the wife, be found with the husband, he is not to be
punished, except he expressly promise to defend his wife, or warrant her; but if
the thing stolen by the husband be found under the wifes keys, or under her
care, she is punishable as a thief, Stat. Will. c. 19. and quon. attach. c. 12.
but these Chapters are confused, and de practica both man and wife are liable,
if they were accessory to any other Thefts, but no otherwise.

Albeit the concealing of Theft be Criminal in others, yet it is not so in a
wife, ibid. And yet the husbands authority is said not to be sufficient, to
defend her in atrocious crimes, though she be obliedged, generally to obey him,
ibid. From which it may be observed, first, That theft is accounted an
atrocious crime, for that Chapter treats of Theft, albeit this be much
controverted amongst the Doctors, who after a long debate, whether Statutes
ordering the procedor in atrocious crimes, generally should be extended to
Theft, which they refer to the arbitration of the Judge, who is to Judge
according to circumstances. And certainly, picking, or petty Theft, is not an
atrocious crime, except where the Thief made a trade of it* amongst other
instances of this, I shall only cite Robert Lauder, who was only banished for
theft and pickry, anno 1638. but theft joined with violence and rapin,
stouth-reif is atrocious. 2. It is observable from that text, that in crimes
that are not atrocious, per argumentum a contrario, obedience to the husband,
excuses the wife.

VI. It is statuted, v. 9. that servants are obliedged to reveal their masters
theft, else they are guilty. From which it may be debated, that a servant who
left his masters service immediately, though he was in company with him at the
committing of theft, is not punishable for his being in company, since he might
have been brought upon the place without knowing his Masters design, and being
there, durst not to have refused concurse upon such account. I saw some
servants Assoilzied by the Council from death, they having left their Masters
service, as said is, though they revealed not the Theft, which they might have
omitted, either through fear, or want of probation.

VII. Recept then is punished as Theft, which must be meant only of immediate
recept, for the mediat sellers of goods belonging to thieves or inobedient
persons, who dare not come to Market themselves, are only punishable by
banishment, and confiscation of their movables, the half whereof is to belong
to the King, and the other half to the Suitor. And from this act may be raised
these two doubts, 1. If this act should strike against the receptors of any
other goods, then these of Highland Thieves, seeing the act speaks of thieves
who cannot come themselves to Lowland Mercats, whereby the acts made against
Sornars of Clans, cannot be put to execution, yet surely this Act strikes
against all sellers of goods belonging to any thieves, seeing the reason is the
same, Theft being thereby promoved, and the statuto^y words run disjunctively
against the Sellers of goods belonging to Thieves in general, and ubi lex non
distinguit nec nos, or inobedient persons and Clanns. 2. It may be doubted, if
this act should reach the sellers of goods belonging to any other Malefactors,
seeing the Rubric speaks generally of sellers of goods belonging to
Malefactors: And some think, that if any Malefactor be at the Horn, the sellers
of his goods may be punished by this act.

TITLE XXI. Hame-sucken.
1. What privilege the Romans gave to a man's own house. 2. What is
Hame-sucken, and the several kinds thereof. 3. The punishment of this crime. 4.
How Hame-sucken is punished, when it is only pursued by way of aggravation.
BY how much the person offended lives securely, by so much all invasions made
upon that security are the more severely punishable; and therefore, seeing a
man expects more security, and is least guarded against violence, whilst he
lives peaceable at home, the Law punishes more severely injuries done him there
then elsewhere: and it is very presumable, that no person would enter another
house, with a design to offend him, or would offend him there upon any
account, except he who had very much malice and prejudice against him: For by
injuries committed against a person in his own house, not only the public
peace, but even the Laws of hospitality are offended.

I. According to the Civil Law, no man could have been drawn out of his
ownhouse, nor could have been cited therein, l. ff. 18. de injus vocando
plerique putaverunt nullum de domo sua injus vocare licere and quia domus
tutissimum cuique refugium receptaculum est eumquequi inde in jus vocaret vim
infer videri. But I believe the reason of this Law was, because vocatio in
jus, was at that time used, not by a simple citation, as now, but obterto
collo, and by dragging the defender to the Court. For else it is not imaginable
how the citing a person at his house could infer violence, or riot against the
citer: but though this Law is now so far antiquated by custom, that any person
whatsoever, may be cited in his own house, and may be violently drawn forth
thereof by Captions in Civil cases, and warands in Criminal: Yet so pungent is
the reason insert in that Law, that domus cuique tutissimum refugium atque
receptaculum est, which is likewise repeated, l. 1. C. de praetor and honor,
praetor: That it being joined with the former reasons above expressed, has
introduced that by the statutes of the greatest part of the world, gravior
estimatur injuria alicui facta in domo sua quam alibi and ideo ut plurimum
duplicatur paena malificii commissi in domo offensi, Cabal. consil. criminal.
casu 13. Which is likewise consonant to the Civil Law, whereby of old, the
entering another man's house, invito domino, was punishable as a crime, l. Corn.
de injuriis, and thereafter was punishable, action injuriarum, l. 23. ff. de
injur.

II. The invading a person in his own house, with us is called Hame-sucken, and
is defined to be, when any person violently enters into another man's house
without license, or contrary to the Kings peace, or seeks him, or assaults him
there, and comes from a Dutch word Haime, which signifies a house, and Sucken,
which signifies to seek or pursue: Concerning which crime it is observable,
That 1. It either may be pursued as a seperat crime, or as the aggravation of
another crime; when it is pursued as a formal crime, the pursuer must Libel
that he was invaded violently, or sought after in his own house: for if the
offender did come in upon invitation, or accidentally, and thereafter upon an
emergent offended or invaded the Master of the house, this is not properly
Hame-sucken, seeing the offender did not invade or sease. 2. The wrong must be
done to a person in his own house, that is to say, where the pursuer was
staying, lying or rising night and day, Reg. Maj. l. 4. cap. 9. v. 1. Upon
which place Skeen observes, and qui insultum fecitjuxta domum hac lege punitur
Bartol, in authent. de appell.. ad haec. And I find that Clar. quest. 82.
determins that a Statute which doubles the pain of invasion, when the invasion
is made in the house of a Judge, or Magistrate, takes place not only against
invasions made in the house it self, but likewise made in the confines thereof;
And Albericus de statutis, l. 2. quest. 35. extends to crimes forbidden in
places, to crimes committed within the confines thereof, which though it be
contradicted by Vincen. de fran. decisione. 402. Because rigid and special Laws
are strictly to be interpret; yet I think, that if the invasion was made in any
place that properly belonged to the house, such as the Porch, Court, Inner
Court, or Office-houses, that invasion should be punished as Hame-sucken,
because a man is said to be at home there, and expects as much security there
(which is the reason inductive of the Law) as any other else. And thus the
ordinary form of Libels with us bears, that the pursuer was invaded within his
dwelling house, or precinct thereof. Thomas Crumbie, was hanged, and his
movables escheat, for offering to strike my Lady Traquair with a drawn Sword in
her Garden, 23. Feb. 1638. but if the place wherein the invasion was made, was
no enclosure, and so adjoined to the house, I think that though it was at the
very door of the house, that Bart. his oppinion of juxta dominum, does not
hold: And thus a Gentleman being pursued upon the 24. of July 1663. for
Hame-sucken, in swa far as he came to Alexander Provests dwelling house, and
there called him out, and forced him to yoke his Carts, and scourged him; The
Justices would not sustain the Libel as Hame-sucken, because it was not
committed in the pursuers house, though it was done at the house door, but
sustained it as oppression: And yet I think that if it had been alleged in
this case, that this invasion was Hamesucken, because the person injured was
called out of his own house by the offender, and so quo ad him must be repute
as if he had been in it; The Justices would have sustained this to have been
Hame-sucken, if it could have been proved that the wrong was done immediately
without any preveining provocation; for the Law would have presumed that the
person was called out of design to evite the quality of that crime, nec debet
fraus sua quem libet adjuvare.

It is doubted if a man's Shop is to be accounted his house, to infer this
crime, and though it may be alleged, that the security is to be expected, as
well in the one, as in the other; And that it is as much the publicks interest,
that Shops be not entered, and persons disturbed therein, as houses, for
thereby public commerce is leised, as well as private safety; yet upon the
other hand it may be alleged, that by the foresaid c. 19. v. 1. That is only
called a man's house, where he uses to rise and lie: And amongst the different
opinion of Lawyers, I find this reconcealing distinction used, that if the Shop
be adjoined to the house, and be not repute a different house, that eo casu,
invasions in the Shop infer Hame-sucken, otherwise not, Cabal. ibid. where he
likewise cites Saliset, Albericus, and others, determining, that if a man have
two houses, in one whereof he dwells not with his family, that his being
invaded in that house makes it not Hame-sucken, which is most consonant to our
own Law above cited, which requires lying and rising; And thus I remember that
in June 1669. Thomas Sydserf, having pursued Mungo Murray, etc. for invading
him in his Playhouse, that invasion was not punished as Hame-sucken, but with
imprisonment. Nota, the former Law against Hame-sucken takes place as well when
the invasion is committed in a man's hired house, as his own, if he and his
family live there, Skeen ibid. and Bartol le. ad legem jul. de adulteriis.

It may be likewayes doubted, whether the beating a man in his own Ship, can be
punished as Hame-sucken, since a man has not his Family there, and so it cannot
be called properly his name. But yet, I belive it should be punished as such,
since it is the ordinary place of a Sea-mans residence: And thus it has been
found with us, that a Skipper may prove an injury done to him in his own Ship,
by his own Servants; though Servants cannot prove regulariter for their Master,
except in the case of Hame-sucken.

It has been likewise doubted, whether an injury done to an Innkeeper, can be
punished as Hame-sucken, when done to him by such as lodged in his own Inn? And
though it was alalledged, that this was a greater Crime, then if it had been
done by a person who lodged not there, because that was a Hame-sucken against
Hospitality: yet because an Inn is a public House, and belongs as well to the
Lodgers as to the Master. The Justices did only sustain this as a great Riot,
but not as Hame-sucken, in the case of Meor of Penniglen, Anno 1675.

III. The punishment of this crime is the same with the ravishing of women, R.
M. L. 4. cap. 9 and 10. And therefore the Laws made against ravishing of women,
are ordinarily libelled upon, there being no special punishment expressed in the
Laws against Hame-sucken, should be pursued within a night after it is
committed, which time is allowed for getting the advice of friends, ibid. And
yet in the former case of the Lady Traquairs, it was sustained after two
months time, and doubtless that short prescription is now absolet, and the
reason of it has been, because it being punishable as ravishing of women, it
has borrowed from that crime, the necessity of being recently pursued. And I
think, that though the foresaid short prescription be not allowed by present
custom, yet the Judge should consider whether any considerable time has
interveined, for else, per intervallum temporis videtur dissimulari sicut
injuria dissimulatur. Nor is it probable that the person offended would have
sitten long with such a wrong, and since that crime which was not Capital of
its own nature, does become such by the circumstance of the place, it is
reasonable that the person accused should not lie long under the hazard, and
gravatus in uno levandus in alio: This crime has likewise this privilege,
that it may be proved by the pursuers own servants, friends, or other
witnesses, who are otherwise liable to exception, which is introduced not only
upon the account of necessity, but likewise in odium of the offender: Not were
it possible to prove crimes of that nature by others then are in the family.

IV. When Hame-sucken is pursued only as an aggravation, it is libelled that
such a thing was done by way of Hame-sucken, and the punishment thereof is
arbitrary, eo casu, and this is so old an aggravation of a crime, that David, 2 Samuel chap. 4. verse. 11. aggravats the death of Ishbosheth, because they had
slain him in his own house, and upon his own bed. The Libel in Hame-sucken runs
thus, that albeit by the Municipal Law of this Kingdom, the committers of the
crime of Hame-sucken, that is to say, who ever invades any of our peaceable
Subjects and Liedges violently with weapons, within their own dwelling houses,
or precinct thereof, contrair to our peace, shall incur and underly the pain
and punishment of death, as our said Laws and Acts of Parliament in themselves
proports; Notwithstanding whereof, it is of verity, that upon last bypast the
forenamed persons above-complained upon, being bodden in fear of war, with
Sword, and other weapons invasive, came under silence and cloud of night, about
ten hours at even, to the said A. B. his dwelling house, where he was quiet and
in a sober manner for the time, etc.

TITLE XXII. Breaking of Prison.
1. The punishment of breaking of Prison by the Civil Law, and ours. 2. How the
going out of Prison, when broke by another, is punishable. 3. Whether he is
punishable, if he return. 4. How an endeavor to break Prison is punishable. 5.
How the Master of the Prison is punished, if the Prisoner escape.
PRisons are ordained to keep prisoners till they be tried, and therefore he
who breaks them, does more then tacitly acknowledge the guilt, since it is to
be presumed that if he were innocent, he would think himself oblidged in
honor, as well as interest, to wait till he were absolved judicially: and
since Prisons are the greatest securities of the public peace, therefore to
break them is a kind of sacrilege: And as the Walls of our Cities are sacred,
because they defend us against our enemies, so should Prisons, because they
defend us against our wicked Contrymen, who are the greatest enemies of the
Commonwealth. His Majesty's Advocat did also in the case of Hiltoun, well call
breaking of Prison a public Hame-sucken.

I. The breakier of Prison (whom the Civil Law, calls effractor carceris) was
punished paena capitali, l. 1. ff. de effractor: But by that punishment was
meant not death, for that were too severe, but capitis diminutio est mors
civilis; and in effect he was arbitrarly punishable, except he were a Soldier,
for Soldiers breaking Prison were punished by death, l. 13. ff. de re milit.
because Soldiers having ordinarily more courage, require that they should be
overawed by greater punishments. And yet I know, the learned Matheus thinks,
that quilibet effractor carceris, is punishable by death: But I think not his
Arguments concluding, for though Ulp. l. 1. ff. de effract. says that suplicium
est sumendum, yet it follows not, that by supplicium is meant death, since all
the glossators make supplicium a genus; and when Lawyers mean death by it, they
say, ultimum simplicium. And though Cicero says, that exilium non est
supplicium sed perfugium and portus supplicii, he speaks there as an Orator;
and indeed as to these who deserved to die, banishment is a harbor and
happiness. Nor does his other Argument brought from the above-written Law,
concerning Soldiers, conclude, for Soldiers, as I observed, are more severely
punishable then others, because of the hazard of the event, and strictness of
Discipline, and because, as I observed, they fearless, and so ought to be more
threatened then others; but what need was there to have made a special Law for
Soldiers, if all breakers of Prison were punishable by death? And it is
against the nature of Arbitrary Crimes (such as this is confessed to be) to be
punishable by death: and the word capite punire, should always be interpret in
the meekest sense it can bear: Nor see I why the Law would have spoke so
generally, if it had designed that severity. By our Law breakers of Prison are
punished by banishment, or fyning, according to the nature of the offense, but
there is no express Statute determining the punishment.

II. He who fled out of Prison, when it was broke by another, should in the
judgment of Julius Clarus, be punished in the same way, as if he had been
found guilty of the Crime it self, because he confesses the Crime, and flight
is a presumed acknowledgment, Far. quest. 21. number. 25. but this seems to me too
severe, for flight is a presumption; and it is unjust to condemn upon
presumptions, and were it not absurd to condemn a man to die for a Crime of
which he is found by the trial of others to be innocent: And men may flee out
of prison, rather because of the inconveniences of restraint, then out from
the conscience of guilt, vid. Pegner. quest. 1. crim But if there had been no
violence used, a person imprisoned for a Criminal Cause, may escape lawfully,
Perez. ad tit. C. de custod. reor. because he may redeem lawfully his own blood
from hazard. If the person incarcerat was incarcerat only for a civil debt, he
going out of prison, was even in that case found punishable only by an
arbitrary punishment, July 3. 1673. In the case of Francis Irving of Hiltoun,
who was pursued for breaking the Prison of Aberdene, where the Libel was
founded upon the common Law, and the Laws of Nations, and upon our Municipal
Law and custom, without citing any particular Law: And subsuming that he being
incarcerat for a civil debt, he and others brake the Prison, at least escaped,
the Prison being broken, and therefore concluded an arbitrary punishment, and
payment of the damage done to the Tolbuith. Against which Libel it was
alleged, 1. That it was not relevant, since it condescended upon no Statute;
nor had we any Statute or Practick making the going out of Prison, when it was
broke by another, punishable, and when the imprisonment was only for a civil
debt: Nor was this a Crime by the Civil Law, which punished only effractores
carcerum, but not eos qui evaserunt: For nigrum nunquam excedere debet rubram,
that is to say, nothing in the Title should exceed the Rubric, and therefore
the Inscription or Rubric being de effractoribus, only such were criminal by
that Title, as were effractores. And as Perez. observes, number. 16. Si absit
violentia potest reus aufugere a carcere quem apertum vidit: And the reason of
punishing effractores carcerum does not militat here, since there is no
prejudice done to the Prison, nor violence committed against Authority. And it
is lawful, because natural to every man to recover his natural liberty; nor was
it ever heard that a man running away from a Messenger, was punished as
effractor carceris, and yet that is the same guilt with what is here pursued.
2. The Libel concluding art and part of the breaking of Prison, because he
escaped out of Prison, when broken, is most irrelevant, since the one may exist
without the other; for one may escape and not break, and therefore the one
cannot be necessarily illative of the other. 3. The paying damage cannot be
concluded against one who only went out, since he who goes only out of Prison
occasions no damage, and consequently ought to pay none. To which it was
replied, that as to the first, it has been the constant opinion of Lawyers,
that going out of Prison that is broken is a crime, since the Prisoner ought to
have taken no advantage of another man's crime, but ought rather to have
hindered the breaking of the Prison, and to have cried and advertised the
Keeper, whereas here the Prison was broke by a long and daily work, and yet no
notice was given; likeas, Skeen in his Annotations upon the 1. Chap. Stat.
David 2. observes, that qui effracto carcere aufugerit capite punitur, which is
consonant to 13. ff de re milit. and l. 36. ff. de paen. To the 2. it was
replied, that the Prison being broke in the night time, the pursuer could not
distinguish who broke it: And if it were necessary to prove breaking, it should
be impossible to prove the crime; and since the Panel might have stayed and
have cleared his own innocence, it was just that the Law should conclude him
guilty; and except the Panel could by way of exculpation allege that it was
broke by another, and offer to prove by whom it was broke, he who goes out
should be concluded to be art and part. Upon which debate the Justices
sustained the Libel to infer an arbitrary punishment: But yet the Assize
assoilzied the Panel, though it was proved that he was in Prison, and that the
Prison was broke, and that he came down upon a Rope, for they thought that
since his breaking of Prison was not proved, he ought not to be concluded
guilty, but here the verdict was contrair to the Interloquutor.

If the Prisoner was unjustly detained in Prison, Clarus thinks that he is not
to be punished, though he break Prison, ques^. 21. number. 26. But this opinion is
most absurd, for he ought not to be Judge to the lawfulness of his own
imprisonment, but ought to apply to the lawful Authority for redress. And l.
13. ff. de custod. reor. does expressly determine, eos puniendis esse quamvis
innocents inveniantur ex eo crimine propter quod in carcerem impacti sunt. As
also, it is very clear, that l. nihil interest, C. de captiv. Upon which the
Doctors found their opinion, is only to be understood of such as broke the
enemies Prison.

III. He who fled, having broke Prison, is not thought punishable as a breaker
of Prison, if he return, Boer. decis. 215. Clar. number. 28. But this also seems
debateable, since no man can give himself a remission: And there being jus
quaesitum fisco, by the guilt once committed, it cannot be taken off without
some deed of the power offended; and we see that Murderers and others as
punishable by death, though they put themselves in Prison, liminuit non tollit
crimen.

IV. These who broke not Prison, but essayed to break, are to be more meekly
punished then these who broke Prison, Clar. number. 27. which is also observed in
Scotland. Not only these who break Prison, but these who assisted them, and the
Keepers, by whose contrivance or negligence they escaped, are punishable, l.
8.10. and 12. ff. de cust. reor.

V. If a Prisoner escape, the Master of the Prison is oblidged to purge himself
by Oath, that he escaped without his will or consent, Stat. David 2. cap. 1.
number. 6. And by the 19. chap. number. 2. Stat. Rob. 1. the Keeper of the Prison is
to answer for the Malefactor, either in body or goods; which takes only place
where the Keeper was negligent in his duty, for else he is not liable, as was
found the 23. of November, 1675. in the case of Captain Martine, who being
imprisoned by the Lords of Session, for not finding Caution in a pursuit before
the Admiral against him, for taking free Ships, he escaped in Women's Clothes;
and the Keepers being pursued, it was alleged for him, that Keepers were only
depositarii, Prisoners being depositat in their hands, that they might thereby
be reserved to a public trial, and depositarii tenentur tantum, de dolo, and
lata culpa. And Farinacius tells us, that it was so decided at Rome, where a
person escaped thus in Women's Clothes. To which, though it was answered, that
Servants, getting a Fee, are liable, ad exactissimam diligentiam, without
which, private diligence, and public revenge, might easily be disappointed: Yet
the Lords, upon trial of the Keepers innocence and diligence, did assoilzie
him. But I have seen that Sisters have assisted their Brothers, and Wives their
Husbands, to escape, even for crimes, without being punished; and per l. 2. ff.
de recept. the receptors of such near relations are connived at, so gentle is
the Law, and so much it both follows and pardons nature. Breaking Prison in the
night, is a great aggravation of this Crime, (...) l. ult. Basil. h. t.

TITLE XXIII. De Dardanariis, OR, Fore-stallers.
1. What Fore-stallers are, and the several species of this Crime by the Civil
Law. 2. The difference betwixt Fore-stallers and Regraters. 3. The first branch
of this Crime, by our Law, is the buying up Corns to a dearth. 4. The second
is, the buying Corns coming to a Market. 5. The third is, the advising others
to commit these Crimes. 6. The fourth is, the buying Commodities in a Market,
upon design to sell the same again at any other Market within four Miles. 7.
The punishment of this Crime.
MEn having gathered themselves into Societies, they did for their own
convenience and provision grant many privileges to Mercats and to such as
frequented them, and that all persons might be the more equally provided, they
did lay such restrictions both upon buyers and sellers, as they thought fit for
that design. For albeit it be lawful for every man to use his own as he thinks
fit, and to sell his commodities where and to whom he pleases, yet seeing
common justice is to be preferred to private advantage, it was the interest of
the Commonwealth, as upon that account, they will not suffer any man to abuse
his own, to the detriment of the Commonwealth, (as is to be seen in these Laws
which concerns interdictions) so much less will they allow men to wrong the
Commonwealth for their own private gain. The great instance whereof is seen in
this crime of Fore-stalling, or regrateing.

I. Fore-stallers were by the Romans called Dardanarii a Dardano, (a Merchant
who was famous for that crime) And by the Civil Law these were accounted
dardanarii properly, who huirded up their own Corns or bought up the Corns of
others, of design to keep them to a dearth, but improperly these were likewise
called Dardanarii, who did buy up any other commodity unlawfully upon that
design, which kind of Merchants were more properly called panto poli, by the
novel of Valentinian, which crime as it was punished per legem juliam de anona,
so the punishment of it per L. sextam, ff. de extra. crim. est 20. aurei and
puniri extra ordinem.

A third sort of Dardanarii, numbered amongst the Doctors, are these who
properly are called revenditores and qui emunt ut carius vendant ex raritate
raritatis raritatem affectantis Tholosanus cap. 135. number. 10. Matheus also
makes monopolist a fourth branch of these, and surely they are equally guilty
of prejudging the Commonwealth with these above relaited.

II. Though Fore-stallers and Regraters be ordinarily taken for one and the
same, yet there is this difference betwixt them, that Regraters are only those
who buy goods, that they may sell them again at a dearer rate: But
Fore-stallers are such as buy goods before they come to an open Market; but
seeing custom uses these words promiscuously, we shall divide Fore-stallers or
Regraters into these several species or branches,

III. The first species or kind of Fore-stallers, is of such, who either
privately, or by entering into Societies, buy up all goods upon design, that by
making themselves Master of the commodity, they may exact such rates for them
as they think fit. And this is very fitly made a crime, because it is
absolutely destructive to the convenience of the people. But because this (as
all designs are) a latent act of the mind, and so is hard to be proved, where
the Fore-stallers have not entered into a Society, therefore this guilt is quo
ad this qualification and design inferred from presumptions, as if a person
should offer to buy all the Salmond in Scotland, and deal with all persons who
have any to sell, that they should not sell to any other. 2. If any of these
universal buyers should give extraordinary prices, which is presumed he would
not do but upon some design. 3. If he should boast that none else had that
Commodity to sell, or such other words as might be ground for a Judge to infer
the design; yet it may be doubted here, if the universal buying of any of these
Commodities, in order to a foreign transportation, and where none of them are
vended at home within the Country, can infer the Crime of Fore-stalling,
seeing strangers are only prejudged by hightening the prices in that case: But
seeing the Country would be likewise thereby prejudged by being absolutely
deprived of that Commodity, certainly the guilt will be extended even in that
case, which will hold likewise in strangers, who buy up the Commodities of the
Country upon that design, who may be likewise therefore punished within the
Country where they commit the guilt, being liable to that Jurisdiction,
ratione loci delicti.

IV. The second kind of Fore-stallers is of these who buy any Goods coming to
Mercats, before they come to the public stall or place where they should be
vended, and this is the reason of the denomination: And the reason why this is
made a Crime, is, because Mercats being institute for the good of the
Commonwealth, every thing by consequence behoved to be discharged, which is
absolutely destructive to it; and the buying any thing before it come to the
Market, is such. But it may be doubted here, whether Commodities may not be
bought by Merchands in public Burgh, though they be going to the Market of
another public Burgh? As for instance, if a Merchand in Burntisland may not
buy Skins there from one who says he is carrying them to the Market of
Kinghorn: And if this were not allowed, it would occasion much trouble both to
sellers and buyers. 2. It may be upon the same ground doubted, if one may sell,
finding that he is not able to stay to a Market day, which it may be, will be
but once in a week in some places. As to which difficulty, my opinion is, that
these can only be accounted Fore-stallers, against whom something of design
against the common good can be proved: As if the Burgesses of one Town should
be proved to have entered into a Contract to buy up the Commodities which were
going to another adjacent Town, or should stand in the way every Market day
upon deesign to buy up the Commodities that were going to the next adjacent
Town. And I know this to have been the opinion of some learned Lawyers, in a
case betwixt the New and Old Towns of Aberdene; but to make, that the buying of
things generally before they come to a Market, should infer a Crime, were most
hard and inconvenient. And because the design is the great thing to be looked
to, non effectus sed affectus, therefore both the Act of Parliament and
Criminal dittay in this case, speak only of Fore-stalling and Regrating; for by
the doing any thing of this nature commonly and frequently, animus delinquendi,
is most probably inferred. And by the same reason, I conclude it probable
always for the defenders in this case to allege by way of exculpation, that
what they did, was done either ignorantly, or necessarily, or generally, alio
animo quam delinquendi, v. g. If one in Burntisland were pannel'd for buying
Skins that were coming to the Market of Edinburgh, he might allege, that being
obliged under a failzie to deliver such a number of Skins betwixt and such a
day, that therefore he was necessitate to buy ^hefe: Or if any were alleged to
have bought Stockings that were coming for a Market, he might allege that he
bought them for his own use, or that he knew not there was a Market upon the
place. And I conclude generally, that the buying any thing for our own private
use, makes not the buyer in no case culpable of this Crime, since he does that
tanquam qui libet and non tanquam Mercator, and Fore-stalling is a Crime in
Merchandising.

V. The third degree of it is, the advising these who are to sell, to hight the
price, or the dissuading the sellers to come to any particular Market.

VI. The fourth is, the buying Commodities in a Market, of design to sell the
same again in the same Market, or in any other Market within four Miles thereof.

VII. All which species are expressly enumerat, Cap. 20. Parl. 4. K. Ia. 5. By
which the punishment is appointed to be imprisoning of their persons, and the
Escheating of their goods bought and sold, the two part thereof belongs to the
King, and the third to the Sherriffs, or other Judge by whom they are
condemned. From which Act it may be concluded, that any Judges are competent to
punish Fore-stalling albeit of old, the Chamberlain was, in his chamberlain
air, the proper Judge of Fore-stallers, as is clear by the Chap. 35. st. K.
Will. vid. and. cap. 78. leg. burg. And in the 143. Act, Par. 12. K. I. 6. where
the punishment is ordained to be 40. Pound for the first fault, 100. Pound for
the 2, And Escheat of all his movables for the third.

I find several persons convict of this crime, as Cairncrosse and others, 9.
June 1596. Anderson 12. June, Young and others, 11. of June, that Year; And
Halyday, 6. August, 1596. But I find no punishment to have followed in this, or
any other case: Though this crime cannot be said to be in desuetude, seeing three
are some instances of it. Yet mitius puniri debent, Because these cases are so
few, and no punishment has followed upon them.

I find it was alleged for Young, 11 June, And Halyday, 11. August, foresaid,
that the Lybel was not relevant, not condescending upon the persons to whom the
goods Fore-stalled were sold, nor the place, nor time, which was repelled,
because Fore stalling was unlawful in all places, and all times. But certainly
this reply was not relevant, for else neither time, place, nor person needed be
condescended on, seeing these are still unlawful at all times. But I think the
true reason why it should have been repelled, was, seeing common Fore-stalling
and Regrating was libelled, which is nomen habitus, and not founded upon any
particular Act, and therefore the particular Acts needed not be libelled,
though even in this case they must be expressly proved. But certainly, sometimes
the time, and place is necessary, as where it is Libelled, that goods were
bought, and presently sold, or within four Miles of the place where they were
bought: for the crime in this case is inferred from the speciality of time and
place.

It was alleged, that confiscation of Movables could not be inferred, though
for the third and fourth fault, except the Panel had been convict for the
first two: Which was spelled likewise, because the King could not be prejudged
in his interest, quo ad, the confiscation by the negligence of his Advocat, or
any private informer, by not pursuing: Nor could that negligence purge their
guilt, or procure them an impunity. And it were absurd, (seeing crimes and
punishments are to be commensurat) that these who had continued in that guilt
for many years, should be no more punished, then these who had but once
incurred the same.

TITLE XXIV. Usury.
1. In what Contracts Usury may be committed. 2. The taking of more annualrent
then the quota stated by Law, is the first branch of Usury. 3. The second is,
to take annualrents before the term of payment. 4. The third is, to take
Wodsets in defraud of the Law. 5. Whether a Clause not to redeem for a long
time, be Usury. 6. The probation of this Crime. 7. The punishment of it.
USury is that Crime, which is committed by taking more annualrent for any sum
lent, then what is allowed by the Law of the Kingdom.

I. This Crime is committed properly in Money, and in mutuo: but yet it is both
by our Law, and the Civil, and Canon Laws, extended to other Contracts: for
with us, it is committed in bargains of Victual, or Tacks, as shall be cleared
by the subsequent Acts; and therefore Lawyers divide Usury, into that which
they call direct Usury, quae obtinet tantum in mutuo; and indirect Usury, which
takes place in other Contracts.

Usury is also divided, in usuram manifestam and velatam; which co-incides
almost with the former distinction.

By our old Law, Usury could not have been pursued in the Usurers own life, but
he might have repented him of it, at any time before his death; so that it was
not the commission of the Crime, but the continuance in it, which was
punishable: but if he repented not, his Heirs might be forefaulted, l. 2. Reg.
Maj. cap. 24. And this, Skeen observes, to be consonant to the Law of England,
whereby the penalty of a living Usurer, belongs to the King, but of a dead
Usurer, to the Church.

II. The true method in this Title, is, to clear the several kinds of Usury,
determined by our Statutes. The first Species thereof is,

Whoever receives more annualrent, then ten for each hundred, shall be punished
as Ockerers, or Usurers, conform to the Laws of the Realm, already made, Par.
11. K. Ia. 6. cap. 52. And yet I find no prior Law to this, expressing the
punishment of Usury; only it is said, Par. 6. Ia. 2. Act 23. that keepers of
Victual to a dearth, shall be punished as Ockerers, and this is properly Usury.

By Act of Parliament, 1649. it is appointed, that the annualrent of Money,
should be at six per cent, conform to which Act, all annualrents were paid in
Scotland, till 1661. At which time the Parliament, 1649. was rescinded;
whereupon it was debated, in Hugh Roxburghs case, March 23. 1668. whether the
taking of more annualrent, then six per cent, after the year 1649. could infer
Usury; and that it could not, was urged from these reasons, 1. That where there
was no Law, there could be no contempt: but so it was, that the Acts of
Parliament 1649. were no Laws, that Parliament being rescinded, ob defectum
authoritatis, and without any salvo, as to what was past. 2. The Liedges might
as well be punished now for transgressing the penal Statutes, made by the
usurpers, seeing these were binding, the time of the transgression, and both
want authority equally. 3. By the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, 1. Session
1. Parl. K. Chapter 2. Such pactions are only declared usurious, quo ad futura and
inclusio unius est exclusio altetius. To this it was answered, that the
Parliament 1649. was in vigor till the year 1661. Ergo, before that time it was
Usury, to take more then the annualrent therein prohibited; and albeit the
defect of Authority might be pleaded, where the Crime committed, depended
merely upon the Authority contraverted. Yet in this case it could not; seeing
Usury was a Crime, which was prohibited by all Laws. And as to the quota, which
was all that was determined by the Parliament, 1649. It was no such thing as
concerned the Rebellion, for which that Parliament was rescinded; but was a
reasonable, and universal good for the Kingdom, and approved by the present
Parliament. And those who took annualrent during that time, at more then six
per cent, did in so far oppress their Debitors beyond others, and so should be
punished. 2. By the Act anent penal Statutes, 1661. Usury is excepted from the
penal Statutes therein abridged, which needed not, if the taking more then six
per cent, for the years immediately preceding, had not been Usury. 3. The Lords
of Session did still restrict the annualrents, even during these years, to six
per cent, which they could not have done, if that Law had not warranted them;
as in the case betwixt Wauchop and Lawder, 1665. for if that Act was in force
then, it was a Crime to take more then was therein commanded, if it was not
abrogated; then the former Act, 1648. appointing eight per cent, was in vigor,
and so the Lords could not restrict the annualrent to six, against an express
Law. This case was not decided, but the Justices inclined to think, that though
the Act 1649. was abrogated; yet it was a sufficient warrant, to regulat the
Decision of civil cases, because all bargains were then made, with respect to
the quota, thereby determined, and erat lex habita and reputata: but that being
abrogated, it could not found sufficiently a criminal Action, to infer so
severe a punishment, as that of Usury; for a Crime is mainly such, because
Authority is contemned, and contempt is the essence of a Crime; but so it is,
there could be no contempt where there was no Authority. But it may be doubted,
if a Merchant who was to employ his stock upon Merchandise, whereby he might
have got far more then the annualrent of his stock, should at the desire of his
friend, then in great straits, lend him his Money, for more then the ordinar
profit; if in that case he could be punishable as an Usurer? And albeit our Law
be general, yet here ab est animus faenerandi: and there was no advantage taken
of the Debitors necessity; for which, Usury is mainly punishable. And I find,
that Abbas c. Naviganti de usur. number. 13. and Socin. tract de usur. number. 75. do
conclude this to be no Usury. Yet I know, that some judicious Lawyers with us,
did at a consultation upon this same case, conclude, that the Justices could
not receive this exception, seeing they were tied to strict Law; but they
thought that the Council might allow some mitigation.

III. Another Species of Usury by our Law, is, to take annualrent before hand;
that is to say, before the term of payment, which was ordinarily done, by
retaining a years annualrent, when the Money was first lent, and this is
determined to be Usury, by the 222. Act Parl. 14. K. Ia. 6. and thereafter by
the 28. Act. Parl. 23. K. Ia. 6. by which last, it was likewise Statute, that
whosoever shall detain the time of the lending, or shall exict, crave, or
receive from the Debitors, annualrent at the time of the lending, or add the
same to their principal sums, or whosoever shall exact, or crave annualrent,
shall commit Usury. And this seems to be founded upon that principal of the
Civil Law, whereby puniebantur qui plus petebant and plus tempore petere
dicebatur qui petebas ante tempus debito constitutum.

Upon these last words of the Act of Parliament, forbidding the exacting, or
craving annualrents before the term of payment, there was a dittay founded
against Purdie, in the year 1666. for taking ten pounds Scots, as the
annualrents of fifty merks, upon the 18. of July, whereas no annualrents was
due, till Martimas that year. Against which dittay, it was alleged, 1. That
this Species of the dittay was merely Statuto^y, and so was not to be extended,
either beyond the interest of the Leidges, to salve which, it was inferred, or
beyond the express words of the Act; but so it is, that it was only the
interest of the Leidges, that they should not be forced to pay interest before
hand; but that they might voluntarly pay their annualrents, without any danger
to the receiver, which may sometimes be for the advantage of the payer; as for
instance, if a person who were liable for annualrents at Martimas, might be for
his own advantage desirous that his Creditor might receive his annualrents in
September, because he would not have the convenience of paying them at
Martimas, and might be either at expenses, or in hazard to send them. And
therefore, seeing the receiver here had raised no charge of Horning, nor used
no other diligence for compelling the Debitors to pay the annualrents, his
voluntar offer of them should not prejudge the receiver, especially seeing by
the narrative of the Act, it will appear that the eviting of oppression, in
exacting Money before the term, was that against which the Act of Parliament
intended only to guard. 2. Though by the first part of the Act, exacting,
craving, or receiving annualrents at the time of the lending, be expressly
forbidden: Yet when the craving annualrents before the term of payment (which
is the clause founded upon, in this dittay) the Act speaks only thereof,
craving, or exacting, but does not forbid simply receiving. 3. Consuetudo etiam
mala and injusta excusat usurarium a pena Bar. in lege siquis fugitivus, ff.
edil. edict. Socinus consilio 170. And it was very notour, that in this caise
there was nothing more ordinar, then for honest and just men in Scotland, to
take annualrent before the term, from willing Debitors, either to supply their
own necessity, or to gratify their Debtor upon occasions. And it were very
unjust, that the Panel who was a poor Merchant should ensnare himself, in
apicibus juris, thinking himself warranted in what he did, by the practice of
the country, and of the most intelligent persons therein. 4. De minimis non
curat praetor, nor should severe and statutory punishment be inflicted for
errors, where no person is any way considerably prejudged. And in which, it
cannot be presumed there was any guilt, seeing the advantage was so small, for
the only share the Panel reapt of this, was the annualrent of ten pound, from
July to Martimas, which could not exceed three shilling scots; so that to
conclude, an honest sincere Merchant, who was otherwise intigerrimae famae,
guilty of Usury; and to infer confiscation of all his Movables, and Infamy,
which is the punishment of Usury, is against all sense and reason, who are not
(as the justices) tied to strict Law.

Notwithstanding of all which, the Justices did find the dittay relevant, as
founded upon the above-written clause of the foresaid Act; but the grounds
above related, being represented to the Council, they rescinded the Justices
Interloquutor; and yet the Justice did again condemn Hugh Roxburgh, 28. of
November, 1668. upon the same Act, and like dittay; but that Interloquutor was
likewise stopped by the Council.

IV. The third Species of Statutory Usury with us, is committed by these, who
to cheat the Law, color their fraud by taking, not more anualrent directly,
then that is prescribed by the Lew, but taking wodsets of Land from the
borrower, for more then their annualrent can extend to, and set backtacks to
them for payment of what is agreed upon. To prevent which, and all such Usury
(which is called by the Law, usura velata) it is statute by the 247. Act Parl.
15. K. Ia. 6. that whoever receives such wodsets, or enters into any such
bargains, for which more is taken, either in Money, or by any other
transactions, whereby any thing that is taken, may be reduced in Money, to more
then the ordinar annualrent, upon whatsoever color or pretext, shall be guilty
of Usury. And by the 62. Act Par. 1. K. Chapter 2. It is declared, that for the
future, it shall be Usury to receive proper wodsets of Lands, and others,
exceeding the annualrents of the sums, and bearing by express provision, that
the lender shall not be liable to any hazards of the Fruits, Tennents, War, or
Trouble; for clearing of which Act, it is necessar to know, that wodsets with
us, are either proper, or improper; proper are these, wherein the wodsetter
runs all hazard of the Lands wodset to him, and is to expect no more annualrent
for his Money, then what Fruits of the Lands remains after all hazards.
Improper wodsets are these, wherein the wodsetter is only countable for what
rent he receives from the lender; nor is he liable to the hazard of
Bankrupt-tennents, Warrant Pestilence, which distinction, founded upon these
hazards, is very agreeable to reason, and the common Law; for Usury being a
certain gain, he who gets for his Money but a hazard of gain, commits not
Usury, for that is emptio jactus retis, as if I should lend Money, and get for
my security the hazard of what rent could be collected from a loading of Timber
coming from Norway, etc. And upon this ground, the Law allowed fenus nauticus,
to be much greater then all others, seeing the lender run the risk therein of
all Sea hazards. But if the hazard be not so great as may compense the excess
of the annualrent taken beyond what the Law allows, eo casu, it excuses not
from Usury, as if a wodset be granted of a Miln, or Salmond fishing, if the
said rents do ordinarily exceed the annualrents, by any considerable excess,
then the receivers of the wodset commit Usury, notwithstanding of the hazard.
And this brings to my memory, a case debated upon the 22. of January, 1672.
wherein a Gentleman being pursued as an Usurer, in so far as he had taken his
Debtor obliedged to pay him a Boll, for the annualrent of every hundred Merk,
which according to the feir of the year did, for the two years of his wodset,
extended to five Pound the Boll, and so exceeded the annualrent, by twenty
Shilling every Boll; yet this was found no Usury, because he in that case, took
his hazard of the feir of the year, which might have been much lower: and
because that the price of Victual varies much, according to the several Shires,
and Years. And lest the people should be at an uncertainty in criminal cases,
which were dangerous; therefore by the 122. Act Ia. 6. Par. 14. it is
appointed, that no man shall take more profit, then according to ten Pound,
for the hundred Pound, or five Bolls of Victual, which the annualrent being
then, at ten of the hundred, and now at six, does allow according to that
probation, two Bolls for the hundred Merks, whereas there was but only one Boll
taken here, for the annualrent for the hundred Merk; nor was this Act abrogat
by the Act 247. Par. 15. because, though that be posterior, yet it does not
expressly abrogat this Act, nor ought it to have been abrogat for avoiding of
uncertainty, as said is. And for the same reason, the undertaking of hazard
hinders the taking of advantageous Tacks, to infer Usury, as was decided
September 1668. wherein Robert Lawder was pursued as an Usurer, because he had
taken a tack of two Buts of Land, and a Dovecoat for four years, which paid
fifty Merks yearly, communibus annis, and that for satisfaction of the
annuulrents of an hundred Merks, which Tack did bear this clause, that if the
first year Robert were paid, he should defalck so much of the annualrent
proportionally; notwithstanding of which clause, he refused to count: It was
alleged for the defender, that the Tacks-man had run a hazard, because he
might have been disappointed of all duty, quo casu, he would have got no
releif. To which it was duplyed, that the same hazard was in wodsets; and yet
the taking a wodset for more then the ordinary annualrent, made the wodsetter
incur the Crime of Usury. Nor could this hazard defend, because it was not
great, and there was scarce any hazard in it; not could the danger be here
objected, seeing after expiring of the years, the receiver offered to count with
the lender, and to allow him both principal sum, and annualrents; to which it
was triplyed, that the Act of Parliament, discharging Usurary, wodsets does not
discharge Tacks; and there is a great difference, as to Usury betwixt tacks and
wodsets: for wodsetters have the liberty to require their Money from the
debtor, so that they lose not the sum, though they lose their rents; but
Tacksmen lose all, if their tack duty be not paid: and as to their offer of
compting, that being only competent after the first year, it could not be
objected thereafter, and the danger was past before the offer.

The fourth degree of usury with us, is to take budd or bribe for the loan of
money, or for continuing it, when it is lent, whereupon many debates do arise.
The cause why the debtor gives a gratuity to his Creditor, being often, actus
animi, is hard to be proven. But generally it is sustained that a proceeding
Treaty must be proved, or else it must be proved, that the receiver is
manifestus, that is an ordinar Usurer, for else to receive a gratuity is no
crime; And it were against reason, that by lending money to my friend, I should
become incapable of a donation from him.

V. The common Law also sustains it to be Usury, if a man Wodset his Lands, and
in the Wodset provide that it shall not be lawful to Redeem betwixt and a
definit time, for in that case it presumes that the wodset granter adjects this
because of some known advantage, and this is to take more advantage for money
then the Annualrent. Molm. de Censu. But this the Lords would not sustain to be
Usury. Nor did they find it an unlawful paction, in the Action betwixt, Sir
John Drummond, and Achtertyr. And in effect these pactions are allowed by Act
62. P. 1. K. C. 1. S. 1.

By the Civil Law, it was Usury to take Annualrent for Annualrent; at least it
was declared unlawful, l. ult. C. de usur And I conceive that to swell up
Annualrents thus, beyond what the Law allows, would infer Usury with us: for
else the Law might be thus cheated. But though by the Civil Law it was
unlawful, and Usury, to accumulat Annualrents with the principal sums; and to
make both bear Annualrent; which was called Anatocismus, and is discharged, l.
28. C. de usur. yet with us, such pactions are most lawful: for since, if the
Annuals had been paid, they had born Annuals, why may they not be lent out to
the debtor, as well as to others.

VI. The probation of Usury is, either by writ, witnesses, or Oath, as to writ
it may be doubted, how the pursuer may recover it for instructing his Libel,
the writs being ordinarily in the Usurers own hand, and nemo tenetur edere
instrumenta contra se. And yet I find Lawyers very clear, that hoc casu tenetur
edere contra se Bartol. and doctores ad l. praetor. Is etiam ff. de edendo
Arelat. de heretic. notabil. 21. and seeing with us, Usurers are obliedged to
swear against the common Criminal rules, because of the obscurity of the crime,
why should they not be obliged to produce there writs, for the same reason? and
as to the former maxim, that nemo tenetur edere, etc. It may be answered, that
it holds not in criminalibus, for we see that in improbations, the Pursuer will
force the Defender upon an alledgeance of falsehood to produce all his writs,
and why not in Usury? Yet I know that it is ordinarily advised in such cases to
raise an exhibition.

As to the probation by witnesses, It is doubted if the Debtor who lent the
money may be received as witness? seeing he is socius criminis, it being
unlawful to take as well as to give upon Usury, but with us these are received,
as Hissleside in Somervel's case, 18. Ian. 1667. But thereafter the Justices
declared that they would not sustain the Debtor to be a witness 11. November,
1667. His Majesty's Advocat contra Wilson, And that because by the 7. Act, P.
16. K. I. 6. It is appointed that usury shall be proved by the Oath of the
party receiver of the unlawful Annualrent, and witnesses insert, without
receiving the Oath of the giver of the unlawful Annualrent, for eviting
perjury. Nor will the Justices sustain as a reply, that the giver of the
unlawful. Annualrent in this case had paid the sum, and so was no more
debtor, and could expect no advantage, and so the fear of perjury ceased. And
as to the foresaid seventh Act, It was answered, that it was only made not to
exclude the debtor absolutely, but to correct the 257. Act, 15. P. K. I. 6.
whereby the Oath of Party was declared to be receivable as decisive of the
cause. As to other witnesses, our ordinary distinction is, that pactions in
Usury are either extrinsick to the Bond, or writ, as are the taking Bud or
Bribe for continuing a Sum, and these may be proved by any witnesses; albeit by
the foresaid 7. Act. It is said that Usury shall be proved by the Oath of the
Party, and witnesses insert. But pactions which concern the writ it self, as
that whereby more is promised then is contained in the bond, these cannnot be
proven, but by the Witnesses insert, for else writ might be taken away by
Witnesses. As to oath of Party, it is ordained to be taken by the former acts
against the common rules of Law, by which, nemo tenetur jurare in suam
turpitudinem: And the Justices accordingly do force the Pannels to swear, as in
the case of Wilson above cited. But it may be doubted if this act should not
extend only to Civil, and not Criminal cases; For that act says, that
litis-contestation being made, it shall be lawful to receive: But so it is that
there is no litis-contestation in Criminals. go. This Act cannot be extended to
these cases.

VII. Usury was allowed by the Civil Law, as the proper product, or (...)
pecuniae, but by the Canon Law it was punished, and most Lawyers think it may
be punished criminally, Decius Consil. 130. And it is called crimen utriusque
fori, because it is punishable Civilly and Ecclesiastically.

The pain of Usury with us, is, That the debtor shall be free from his
obligation, or have back his pledge, or if the debtor conceal, then the
revealer shall have right to the sums, Act, 222. K. I. 6. Par. 14. And by the
248 Act, P. 15. K. I. 6. It is appointed that the Usurary Bond or Contract
shall be reduced, and being reduced, the sums shall belong to His Majesty, or
his Donator; and the Party to have repetition of the unlawful Annualrent paid
by him, in case only he concur with the Donator in the reduction.

TITLE XXV. The Dribing, Partiality, and Negligence of Judges.
1. What is bribing by the Civil Law. 2. What by our Law, and how our Law
punishes it. 3. Crimen repecundarum and Barratriae. 4. Whether Arbiters,
Deligats, or Assessors, be punishable for taking Bribes. 5. How negligent
Judges are punishable.
IT is to no purpose to make good Laws, if the execution of them be not
committed to just and diligent persons, as it is to no purpose to have an exact
balance, if that balance be not put in a good hand: and therefore, as the Law
has been very liberal of its privileges, to just Judges, and severe in
punishing such as offended them; so it has punished with the same rigor, such
Judges as transgress either by bribing, negligence, or partiality, which are
three distinct species forbidden by the common Law and ours.

I. Bribing is the taking of money, or other good deed, either for doing of
justice, or committing of unjustice.

There are indeed some Lawyers who think, that a Judge taking money in a Civil
Cause, to do justice, does not thereby commit a Crime, but is only liable to
restitution, Menoch. 2. Arb. 342. n. 6. but this is expressly contrary to sound
reason, since if taking upon any terms be allowed, the Law may be eluded, and
Judges will be thereby tempted, not only to take bribes, but to take pains to
justify what they have done: but yet I think that this opinion is neither
proved, per l. 4. ff. de l. jul. repetund. For there it is not only said, non
excipiet quo magis aut minus quid ex officio suo fecerit, which prohibits only
an excess in justice, and not the doing justice for money, nor perl. 3. c. eod.
since that Law does only in the general forbid the taking of money, but this is
expressly forbidden, l. 2.. 2 ff. de condict. obturp. cause. where it is declared
a Crime, but the punishment there seems only to be litem suam facere, and Skeen
ad Stat. 25. Will. says, that non licet judici vendere judicium justum.

II. By our Law, the Kings Judges were to those an Assize upon what they had
done as Judges; and if they were convict, they were to be punished by the King
and his Council, according to the measure of their fault, Cap. 13. Stat. Rob.
2. and the Judges of inferior Courts, such as Regalities, were to those an
Assize before the Justices, and if they were found either culpable or remiss,
they were to escheat their movables, and their life to be in the Kings will,
or in the will of the Lords of the Regality, cap. 14. ibid.

And by the 26. Act, Ia. 3. Parl. 5. a Sheriff, or any other Officer of Fee,
that is to say, any Heritable Officer, is to be put from his Office for three
years, if he be found partial, and an ordinary Judge, if he be found partial,
loses his Office forever. And though his person's being punished at the King's
will, and the paying of the expense of the party injured, be only added to the
pun^shment, expressed against a Judge who is not Heritable yet I conceive, that
being added in the last place, it is applicable, both to the Heritable Judges,
and others. Likeas, it is observable, that though by all these Acts, the King
and His Council are only expressed to be the Judges competent; yet de practica,
the Justices are Judges competent, if partiality be committed in any criminal
cause, as for instance, if a Sheriff should execute any Panel, upon a Crime
proved only against him, by the pursuers brothers, or other inhabile witnesses,
or upon a Libel, which were palpably irrelevant; in these and in such other
criminal cases, the Justices and not the Council, would be only Judges
competent; nor is partiality in civil cases, a Crime by our Law, though it be
punishable by this Act, paena arbitraria: and by resounding of the damage
sustained by the pursuer.

The foresaid Laws strike only against partiality, in general, but bribing is
expressly discharged, by the 25. Chap. Stat. K. William, but there is no
punishment there expressed; and therefore Skeen adds in his observations, the
punishment of l. 1. cum aut hent. c. de paen. judic. And thereafter, by the 22.
Chap. 1. Stat. Rob. 1. all Judges are forbidden to take Land, or any thing
else, to Champart, either for giving, deferring, or prolonging of justice: and
the offenders are to be in the Kings will, and to lose their office for all
their life, Champart is a French word, signifying part. du champs, a part of
any Land; so that by a Metaphor, the taking any part of the advantage, arising
by any plea, is forbidden by this Statute, which the Civilians call pactum de
quota litis, by the 104. Act 7. Parl. I. 5. consulting, or giving partial
judgment, is declared bribing in a Judge, and such as diffame them as bribers,
are punished, legetalionis.

But because these Acts were not clear against bribing; therefore by the 93.
Act. 6. Parl. I. 6. the taking of bribes, is discharged to the Lords of
Session, their Wives, and Servants, under the pain of infamy, deprivation, and
confiscation of all their Movables; to all which, an arbitrary punishment is
adjected.

It is very observable, that by this Act, not only the taking of bribes is
discharged, but even the taking any goods or gear, during the depending of a
Plea; or from such, as shall have causes depending for the future: and though
it seemed very reasonable, that men should not be discharged of the effects of
their friends liberality, and should not be, by being elected Lords of Session,
put in a worse condition, then the other subjects; yet so jealous is the Law of
bribing, that it is afraid, that if Judges be allowed, to take at any rate, or
upon pretext of their friends liberality, they might abuse this pretext, to
mere bribing, l. ult. c. h. t. l. 4. ff. eod. And yet the Gloss, ad l. 1. ff.
h. t. allows a Judge to take from his relations, within the sixth degree; nor
is it lawful to take any thing, even by way of remuneration, though
remuneration be rather a paying then a gilting, Matheus P. 619. But I conceive,
that this must be understood, of a remuneration made for services, done during
a Plea, or upon the account of a Plea, or upon any publict account. But it
seems against reason to think, that if a brother, or brother in Law, should
entertain his brothers family, whilst he is a Judge, that he may not receive a
remuneration for that, or the like kindness.

The second observation from this Act, is, that it is not lawful for their
wives, or servants, to take bribes, or good deeds, which is consonant to l. 1.
C. h. t. by which the Judge is liable to pay the quadruple of what his servants
take; but it would appear, that none is liable by this Statute, for what his
servants take, except he know that his servants take by command, or
ratihabition; for this Statute discharges Judges to take by themselves, or
their wives, or their servants, which implies some Act of the masters; for qui
facit per alium facit per se, but he who is absolutely ignorant of what his
servants does, cannot be punished for another fault, against the common rules
of Law, else the master should be made a slave to his servants, who might at
his pleasure force him to what he decided, or else by taking bribes, might
ruin both his masters estate and reputation.

Since this Statute discharges only the Lords of Session, it may be doubted, if
it should extend to bribes, taken by other Judges. For Laws in criminal cases,
use not to be extended; and since the Lords of Session may by bribing, do mo^e
unjustice, and prejudge the Leidges more then others, it may be alleged, that
other Judges ought not to be so severely punished as they; and yet since the
Crime of bribing is punished by the Civil Law, and Law of Nations, in all
Judges, it seems just to extend this Act to all Judges; and the other, because
though, lex julia was made contra principales magistratus, yet it was by the
Roman customs, extended, ad magistratus urbanos, Math. P. 617.

III. The taking of bribes, or good deeds, was punished by the Civil Law, Per.
l. jul. Repetundarum. By which, tenebatur qui in magistratu, potestate,
curatione legatione vel quo alio officio munere ministeriove publico quid
acciperit quo magis aut quo minus officium faceret, l. 1, 3, 4, 6. ff. de l.
jul. Repet.

The punishment of crimen repetundarum, was death, if Money was taken, to
pronounce a capital sentence unjustly, l. 7. or banishment, and confiscation of
goods, in case no such criminal effect followed, ff. 38. de paenis, and though
some Doctors teach, that albeit it be capital to condemn an innocent man, yet
to absolve a guilty man who deserved death, is only punishable by banishment:
But if the Judge received Money, or committed gross iniquity, that should be
punishable by death also, for l. 7. h. t. does not distinguish these two cases.

This Crime is by the Doctors, called banatria, nam baratriam committit qui
propter pecuniam justitiam baractat. Farin. Q. 3. art. 10. And they conclude,
that by the present customs of Nations, it is only punished arbitrarily, not
exceeding banishment, Boss. de offic. corrupt. number. 6.

He also who corrupts the Judges, is punishable with the punishment of
falsehood, gloss. ad l. qui explicandi, C. de accus. which holds, though the
Judge accept not the bribe, he is punishable, if the endeavor pervenit ad
actum proximum, Menoch de arb. cas. 343. He also who corrupts the Judge, or
Clerk, loses the cause, Far. number. 126. But I differ from him, in that he
thinks, that a Panel who corrupts the Judge in a criminal cause, ought not
there after to be allowed a liberty of proponing a defense: for an innocent man
may by fear, be driven to offer to redeem his own life, to which inclination,
the Law indulges very much.

The Judge who judges unskilfully, per imperitiam, is punishable by a fine,
beside that, he pays the expenses of the plea, l. fin. de var. and extr. crim.
But Bossius and others, are of opinion, that he is never to be corporally
punished; and by the 17. Act 6. P. Ia. 2. only such Judges are to be punished,
as trespass wilfully in their office.

Arbiters bribing, are punished as other Judges; but some Docto^s do justly
conclude, that arbiters are not liable for their unskilfulnesse, since they
were choosed by the parties, who should blame their own election.

Delegat Judges, such as these, to whom the Lords recommend perambulating of
Marches, are punishable for bribing, but for the same reason, they are not
punishable for their unskilfulnesse.

Assessors taking bribes, are also punishable, but some think them not
pun^shable for unskilfulnesse, since the Judge is not obliedged to follow their
opinion: and though some think, that an Assessor, gett^ng a sallary, is liable
even for his unskilfulnesse, Curt. Iun. ad l. 2. ff. quod quisque juris, and he
should have known that he was named Assessor, to supply the unskilfulnesse of
the Judge. Yet I differ, for he gives only his advice, and so is liable only as
an Advocat is.

V. Judges negligent in putting Laws to execution, are punishable for their
remissness and negligence, c. 14. R. 2. by the escheating of their movables,
and their life is to be in the Kings will, which seems too severe a punishment
for mere negligence; but by the 26. Act 5. Par. Ia. 3. a Judge found culpable
(which word may comprehend negligence) is to be put from his office for three
years, if he be an Heritable Officer: and if he be not Heritable, he loses his
office. Which distinction, I find also observed by Bald. ad l. manicipia, ff.
de serve. fugit, where he says, that pro negligentia judex removetur ab officio,
sed hoc non tenet in judice perpetuo, and Farin. Q. 3. n. 423., is of opinion,
that majores officiales non removetur sed minores facile removeri possunt.

TITLE XXVI. Deforcement.
1. To whom was the execution of Law committed by the Romans and to whom by our
Law. 2. What is D^forcement, and what are the several degrees thereof. 3. The
Messenger must have his Blason, and give an execution of Deforcement. 4.
Whether may a Messenger be deforced, who wants his Caption, or transgresses his
power. 5. What witnesses can prove a Deforcement, or if the Messengers
execution can prove it. 6. These who deforce, may be pursued Civilly for the
debt.
LAws are only the idea or picture of Justice, but execution is its life; and
though those who have the execution of Laws and Sentences committed to them, be
ranked but amongst the lowest servants of Justice; yet they have the happiness
to be these who complete that great work, and amongst whose hands it becomes
perfect; and therefore the Laws having committed its most excellent part to
them; it should be, and is, in a most eminent way careful of them, and in
providing for their safty, it secures its own honor.

I. The execution of sentences was committed amongst the Romans to the
apparitors mentioned of the Codex, in three several Titles, and these were
erected in a College, which was styled, collegium, or familia apparitorum, as
our Heralds are in a fraternity, by the 125. Act. Parliament, 12. K. I. 6. The
Italian Doctors call them now, Beroarii, so that these who would know what the
doctors hold in cases of deforcement, must look to the Indexes, at these words.
According to the Roman Law, it was a species of laesae-majestie, to resist the
execution of sentences, l, quisquis ad l. Iub. majest. l. Iulianus. ff. de
officio ejus cui mandata est jurisdictio and Guide. Pap. quest. 557. observes,
that from these Laws does rise the practique of France, qua puniuntur
capitaliter verberantes apparitores, in exe cutione officii nam qui mandata
principum exaequuntur videntur vivae principium imagines ac adeo graviter
puniri debent ac injuriantes Statuas principum.

With us the execution of sentences, is committed to Heralds, Pursevants,
Messengers, Macers, and the execution of sentences of inferior Courts, to the
respective officers of these Courts; and the resisting, beating, or wounding,
of these, in the execution of their office, is in our Law that Crime which we
call Deforcement, Leg. Burgal. cap. 135.

II. Deforcement then is defined to be that Crime which is committed in
opposing Macers, Messengers, or any others, who use to execute sentences,
whilst they are executing their office; And upon that account, so that if
either the Officer was not in execution of his office, or if the Officer be
beat upon any other account, as if a scuffle should arise, occasioned unjustly
by himself, this would not infer a deforcement, as shall be said hereafter.

Though this crime be amongst the most attrocious, because the King and
Sovereign power is in their person despised, and therefore this crime is called
Dispectus Regis stat. Williel. cap. 4. verse 5. And Justice is after much pains
taken by the Judges, and expenses laid out by the Parties disappointed; yet it
is only punished by confiscation of movables, and an arbitrary imprisonment,
and the one half of the Movables so escheated, falls to the King, and the
other half to the Party at whose instance the Letters were execute, I. 6. P.
12. cap. 150. The words whereof are, If an Officer of Arms, or Sheriffs in
that part, or other person whatsoever be deforced, molested, invaded, or
pursued, to the effusion of their blood, by any person or persons, whom they
shall Summond, or others of his causing and command, the time he is executing
of any Summonds, Letters, or Precept direct by His Highness, or other Judges
that he shall loss, etc.

From which Act it is to be observed, 1. That Deforcement is committed by
troubling of any Officer belonging to any Court. 2. That those words, (to
effusion of their blood) seem to be a quality put in a sentence by it self, and
so may be thought to relate to all the former words, molested, invaded, or
pursued, yet the words of the Act are only wrong pointed, and these words, or
pursued to the effusion of their blood, should all be put in one sentence, for,
de practica, simple opposing, or molesting the Messenger, though without blood,
will infer a Deforcement. 2. Though by the Act it would seem only these against
whom Letters, and Charges are raised, or such as they hound out, can be guilty
of Deforcement, yet if any others do deforce a Messenger, though they be
neither the parties interested themselves, or hounded out by them, yet they are
likewise guilty of Deforcement: As is clear by the 4. cap. stat. Williell.
verse. 1. And by the 84. Act, 11. Parliament K. I. 6. And seeing the crime lies
in the opposition to the Messenger, whoever is guilty of that act commits this
Crime. 3. Though this act make only causing or commanding a crime, yet
certainly if any person interested does ratihabit the Deforcement committed by
any other person, by either giving him good deed, or by receiving his Letters,
or Blason taken from him, he is eo ipso guilty of Deforcement: As the Council
found in the case of the Earl of Seafort, against the Lord Mackdonald, anno.
1669. upon full debate: In which (...) lords in the Highlands should be liable
for deforcement committed upon the grounds, if they did not deliver up the
offenders. 4. Though the execution be disappointed and stopped, yet is declared
by the Parliament to be as sufficient as perfected: and it were unjust, that
the party having done all that in him say, that the disappointment, eo casu,
should be prejudicial to him. 5. Seeing the punishment of this act, is only
confiscation of Movables, and imprisonment; whereas by the Act 84.11. Parl. K.
I. 6. The lives and goods of the offenders were to be in the Kings will; It may
be doubted whether the Judge may punish by either of the Acts, seeing the last
does not expressly abrogat the first; or whether both should stand in vigor and
force. Concerning which question, the general Lawyers have very many learned
debates, but the most solid and approven conclusions are, that when a crime is
punished by several pains, in several Laws, or Acts, which Acts do not derogat
one from another expressly, that it is in the election of the Judge, to punish
the delinquent, by either of the pains, l. quoties ff. de actionibus and
obligationibus. But the Judge making election of one of the pains, cannot
thereafter make use of the other: l. ff. senatus de acusationibus, vid. Cabal.
resol. criminal. cap. 3. where this general question is fully handled; and to
the considerations there adduced by him, I would add this, that where there
are several punishments appinted by Laws, whereof the one derogats not from the
other, that the Judge should follow that of the two which is most in use: And
therefore seeing Confiscation of movables and imprisonment, is always used in
this case, that punishment should be certainly followed by the Juge: for since
custom may antiquat Laws, and is a warrant for a Judge, to proceed criminally
where there is no Law; it should much more determine betwixt two Laws, which of
them should be followed: But there is the less difficulty in this case, that
none of the acts makes deforcement to be capital. And these words, that their
lives shall be in the Kings will, do not infer, de jure, the pain of death, as
is elsewhere fully debated: but it may be doubted, if their persons may not
likewise be punishable, seeing not only by the former act are their lives to be
in the Kings will, but likewise by the seventh Act, 17. Parliament, I. 6. It is
declared, that deforcement of Officers shall be punished by the escheat of
their moveable goods, and punishment of their person according to the Laws of
before: So that there is geminatio legum, which makes the Law much stronger:
And I remember that some Sea men in Bruntisland, having rowed off their Boat
when the Customers Officers were about to poynd some unfree goods, bought out
of Captain Dewars Ship, by rowing off, of which Boat the Messenger who was to
Poynd, fell in the Sea: The Commissioners of the Thesaury did summarly in July,
1669. ordain the Seamen to be whipped, which was accordingly done.

III. Messengers have as the Badge of their Office, a Blason bearing the Kings
Arms, and a Wand of Peace if they bear not the Blason, it is believed (and
that is the first objection against the conception and relevancy of the Lybel)
they may be deforced, because by that act only people are obleidged to know
that they are Messengers, and the Wand of Peace is that whereby they touch a
Rebel, and declares him to be their Prisoner, and when they are deforced, they
use to break the Wand of Peace; but though their Libel bear always that the
Wand of peace is broken, yet if the troubling of the Messenger be proven,
though this quality be not proven, the assize will still find guilty, as was
found in the case betwixt Murray and French, 13. July, 1669. where it was
likewise found that albeit ordinarily the Messenger who was deforced, does give
in with his Libel, an exemption of deforcement, wherein after the ordinary
form, he relates how he execute the Letters, and how and by whom he was
deforced, yet that execution is not absolutely necessary for proving the
deforcement, but that the deforcement may be proven by witnesses; for else
there could be no deforcement, if the Messenger were killed, so that he could
make no execution: or if he were bribed by the deforcer, and so would give
none, but that an execution of deforcement was only necessary to the effect the
Letters might be repute as validly execute, as if they had been really execute.

It uses sometimes to be alleged against the relevancy of the Libel in this
crime, that the Libel is not relevant, because it bears not that the Messenger
had the letters of Caption in his hand, and show them to the Party whom he
apprehended be virtue of that Caption, for without seeing of the Letters, the
Party is not obliedged to obey, and if it were otherwise, any man might take a
free Liege, and keep him till he should get a Caption, though he had none at
the time of the execution. But upon the 19. of February, 1672. Gordoun of Braco
was found guilty of deforcement, though the Messenger his having a Caption, was
neither libelled nor proved, and that because the Rebel did not crave to see a
warrant, and the Messenger was answerable if he did execute without a warrant:
Neither did the Lords think that the Messenger was bound to put the warrant in
the Rebels hands, left he should destroy it: But he was bound to show it to any
disinteressed person who was present. In the same Process it was likewise
found, that a Messenger might execute a Caption under silence of night, though
it was pretended that this might give a color to Robbers to enter in to honest
men's houses under night, upon pretext of executing of Captions; though
Poyndings indeed cannot be execute after the Sun is set, because a Poynding is
a sentence, and requires formam judicii; and no Court can be kept under silence
of night. Some Judges ordain Officers to take Raes from a Mast, and arrest
Ships, without a written order, the haste of the execut^on so requiring; and
therefore I think that though such have not a written warrant, they cannot
lawfully be opposed: for it is the duty of all good Subjects to enquire first
if he who pretends to have authority, have it already, though he see no written
warrant, but not rashly to oppose what may be lawful.

Another ordinary objection against the Libel is, that the Messenger and his
assisters did transgress their power and warrant, and so it was lawful to
resist them: and thus upon the 18. of November. 1667. Mr. Archibald Borthwick
being pursued for deforcement, it was alleged, that he compeared as Procurator
for the Lord Borthwick, who had arrested Sandilands, and the Tennents Corns, as
Master of the Ground, and so alleged the Messenger could not poynd the Corns
till the Master was paid, wherein the Messenger did unjustly, and so he had
good reason to stop the poynding: This alledgiance was found relevant, but if
justly, it may be doubted. And Lawyers are very positive, that no man can stop
any execution, upon such pretense of unjustice, where the unjustice can be no
otherwise redressed, by appellation, or otherwise: which they call resistentia
licita per subsidium, Menoch. de recup. possess. remed. 8. number. 30. and 31.
Cabal. resol. crim. cas. 132. And their opinion seems most just; for it were
dangerous, to make private persons, and such also as are interessed, Judges to
the justice of what is done against themselves. 2. Nunquam recurrendum est ad
remedium extraordinarium, quamdiu locus est ordinario; but so it is, that if a
Messenger do any wrong in the execution of his Office, he is liable therefore,
ad damnum and interesse, and finds caution for that effect to the Lion at his
entry. 3. Messengers are Judges in poyndings, and it is not lawful to resist
Judges upon pretense that they judge unjustly: And this suggests to me another
distinction, which is, that either a Messenger or Executer does wrong the party
interessed, via juris, as in omitting formalities, and repelling just
allegiances, and eo casu he cannot be resisted: or else he does wrong, via
facti, by beating the party he cites, or giving him opprobrious speeches, by
apprehending him without a Caption, or after a Suspension is produced by him,
or otherwise giving rise to the violence used against him, and eo casu he may
be resisted, as was found, Mart. 166^. And is clear from the Doctors, Cabal.
ibid. It has been alleged that there could be no deforcement at the
Messengers instance against the Panel, for stopping him to poynd goods,
because the Messenger was the person at whose instance the Letters of Poynding
was raised, and therefore he could not execute them himself, seeing no man can
be Judge in his own cause, and the Messenger is Judge in all Poyndings; but
this was repelled, because the Letters of Poynding are always blank in the
persons name to whom they are direct, and so the Messenger might fill up his
own name, and no Messenger was excluded, and if the Executer did any wrong, he
was liable to a spoilzie, and his sentence was reduceable; but this wants not
its own scruple, seeing Messengers are Judges when they poynd, and no man can
judge in his own cause. 2. It was here alleged, that the Letters upon which
Execution were used, were suspended, and so could not be put to execution,
which alledgiance was repelled, because the Suspension was not intimate, and so
the Messenger nor Party was not thereby put in mala fide, Mart. 1662.

Though this be the punishment of deforce, when it is purely such, and is not
aggraged with other heinous circumstances, yet if a Messenger were executing
Letters of Caption against a Traitor for Treason, any who would deforce him
would commit Treason, and that were to be art and part of Treason: and so in
other Crimes; but whether deforcement may be punished in our Law, as breaking
of Prison, I doubt very much, though it be a rule amongst the Doctors, that
eximens aliquem ex manu familiae, and ex carcere a pari procedunt, and
carceratus dicitur non solum qui in carceris mansione dagit, sed and qui
satellitum custodia, and in familiae manu reperitur: nam eodem modo utribique
leditur majestas principis, and offenditur ministerium justitiae, Cabal. resol.
crim. cent. 1. casu. 8.

V. Deforcement then is proven as other crimes, by witnesses, and who ever may
be witnesses for proving other crimes, are admitted here, but it has been often
doubted, whether the witnesses who were carried along with the Messenger for
verifying his executions, may be sustained as witnesses to prove the
Deforcement: and the reason of the doubt was, because ordinarily they are
injured themselves in such cases, yet at last it was decided in March, 1662.
that they were very receiveable witnesses, because without these, deforcements
could not be proved: And since the execution could be proved by them, why not
deforcement. But it is a necessary caution in that case, that no injury be
pursued as done to the witnesses, for if that be once libelled, they become
parties, and will not thereafter be received as witnesses, though they should
offer to pass from the injuries, as done to themselves. And these witnesses are
so receivable, that in the case betwixt Murray and French, 13 July, 1669. It
was found that though they were within the degrees defendant to the pursuer,
yet they might be received, because in effect they were testes instrumentarii,
being witnesses contained in the execution of the deforcement; but I think,
this is debateable, because testes instrumentarii are only allowed in
obligations, though within degrees, quo casu, they are to be presumed to be
chosen with mutual consent, which cannot be alleged here, seeing the Messenger
only chooses such witnesses as he pleases.

Whether the execution of deforcement, will prove that the Messenger was
deforced, without leading any other witnesses, may it be doubted; and that it
should, appears from these grounds, 1. That it is a principle in Law, that
creditur nunciis, in his quae spectant ad ipsorum officium. 2. In civilibus,
The execution of a Messenger is always believed till it be improven. 3.
Lawyers are very clear, that creditur nuncio, si referat se fuisse percussum
vel verberatum in ipsa executione, which Guido papae decis. 628. declares to be
the custom of France in Dauphmie: And this is enacted by a statute of Florence,
13. June, 1559. Yet by our Law the ex^cution of Deforcement, will not prove
that the Messenger was deforced, and Caballus declares this likewise of most
other nations besides these abovecited, Casu 127. According to our Law, the
Messengers who were deforced, cannot be led even as single witnesses, though
the pursuit be not at their own instance, but at the instance of the party
injured, or his Majesty's Advocat; In which case it seems that all their
interest ceases; but the reason of this is, because it is presumable that the
parties who were wronged will still retain a resentment against the injurers,
and so will still be prejudicat witnesses in that case. But yet according to the
Doctors, this is doubted, and many of them conclude, that creditur nuncio se
verberatum fuisse, nam creditur ei secundum omnes in iis quae pertinent ad suum
officium and hoc est connexum relationi executionis sibi demandata. Menoch. de
Arb. cas. 112. alii vero credunt casum hunc esse arbitrarium. And according to
our Law, such as were witnesses, chosen by the Messenger to go along with him
in useing the execution, will still be received witnesses, though they were
themselves beat in the deforcement, and so are liable to the former suspicion
equally with the Messenger: and the only reason of difference that can be
assigned, is, that the Messenger is himself said in our Law to be deforced, and
so is the person formally interested, but witnesses are not in our Law said to
be deforced, and though they be received ordinarily, yet it is given as a
caution that they shall not depon upon any wrong done to themselves, for if
they do, it will make them though otherwise habit, to be rejected from being
witnesses, and the Law will eo casu look upon them as persons that remember too
much the injury (...) though the witnesses taken along by the Messenger to the
execution, cannot be rejected upon that account, after they have purged
themselves of partial counsel and malice, if they may not be rejected, if
before they be sworn they confess they continue to have a resentment of the
injury done them. And in my opinion, if this beating and injury suffered by
them, be confessed by themselves, before they be purged of partial counsel, they
should be rejected, though the parties interested, and at whose instance the
Letters were execute, cannot be received witnesses to prove a deforcement, even
though they should declare that they would never pursue the deforcement, ad
proprium interesse and vindictam: yet such as were within degrees defendant to
the party, were received witnesses, even where the pursuit was pursued by their
own friend, 13. July, 1669. Murray against French. Upon a new pretext, that
brothers and servants, etc. are habil witnesses, where they are testes
instrumentarii, and witnesses in executions are testes instrumentarii: but in
my opinion there is a great difference betwixt these two, for the reason why
testes instrumentarii, are received, though they be otherwise in habiles, is
because they are chosen of common consent of both parties who are present at
the subscription; but that cannot be alleged in such as are witnesses in
executions, who are only chosen by the Messenger himself.

After this crime is proven, the ordinary verdict is, The Assize finds the
Panel guilty of Deforcing such a Messenger. But yet where the Assize find only
the Panel guilty of troubling the Messenger in his office, and would not find
him guilty of deforceing: The justices finds these terms to be equivalent, and
punished the Panel as a deforcer, in the case of Robert Herris, July, 1667.

VI. The party deforced, has beside this Criminal action, a Civil action for
deforcement, against such as have been accessory to the deforcement, for
payment of the debt: which debt is ordained by the 117. Act, 7. Parl. Ia. 6. to
be paid, together with the modification of his expenses out of the first and
readiest of the deforcers escheat: And it is declared, that he shall be
preferred to the King. From which Act these two doubts may arise, 1. Since by
the Act it is declared that the persons convict of deforcement, shall be liable
for payment of the debt, by this Civil Action, that therefore this Civil Action
is not competent, until the Parties pursued be first found guilty of
deforcement: But yet it was found, the 25. of July, 1663. in the case of David
Mitchel, that the party injured might pursue, either Civilly, or Criminally;
and that this privilege was introduced by that Act, as a further advantage to
the party deforced; but because this Action was founded upon a Criminal ground,
therefore they ordained the deforcement to be proved by most unsuspect
Witnesses. The second doubt is, whether by this Act, the deforcers other Estate
be liable to this Action, as well as his Movables? And though it may be urged,
that that Act appoints only the Creditor to be preferred to the King, and to be
paid out of the first end of the deforcers Movables. Yet it was found, the
13. of December, 1672. in this case, Murray against French, that this Act did
allow Action for payment, simpliciter. For the Lords thought, that the Act did
in the first place ordain payment of the debt, and expense; that the
preferrence was a new superadded privilege: And it were against all reason,
that the Creditor should be frustrat of his Action, because the Deforcer had no
movables, though he had an opulent heritable Estate.

In this case it was likewise found, that the Party deforced might pursue,
either ad vindictam publicam, Criminally, or might pursue Civilly this Action
for damage and interest; and that the one Action did not consume or exhaust
the other: And therefore though the Pursuer here had prevailed in a Criminal
pursuit against this Defender, quo ad vindictam publicam, that yet he might
pursue this Civil Action for damage.

TITLE XXVII. Falsum, Falsehood.
1. The several species of Falsehood by the Civil Law. 2. The producers, or
users of false Writs, commit Falsehood. 3. The punishment of Falsehood by our
Law. 4. The Lords of Session are only thereto in the first instance. 5. The
Lords proceed in the trial of Falsehood, either summarly, or by way of action.
6. The direct and indirect manner of probation. 7. After the Writs are
improved, the forger is remitted to the Justices. 8. False witnesses, how
punished. 9. False Coyners, how punished. 10. False Weights, how punished. 11.
The assuming a false Name, and suppositio personae falsae, how punished.
Falsehood is by the Civilians, defined to be a fraudulent suppression, or
imitation of Truth, in prejudice of another; it was by them divided, in falsum
quod ipsa lege Cornelia vindicatur, and quasi falsum quod senatus-consulto and
constituti^nibus vindicabatur, Matheus hoc, tit. But suitable to our practice,
I shall divide Falsehood in these four Branches, 1. That Falsehood, which is
committed in writ. 2. That which is committed by witnesses. 3. The forging and
falsifying of Money. 4. The using of false weights, and measures.

I. As to the first Branch, he commits Falsehood, who either expresses in writ,
that which was not done, or omits to express that which was done. So that
Falsehood in writ may be committed, either in commission, or omission. Falsehood
is committed by commission, either by fabricating a false writ, or by signing
it, or causing another sign it, qui instrumentum falsum dolo malo scripserit,
signaverit, vel signare curaverit, recitaverit, mutaverit, subjecerit,
amoveritcelaverit, deleverit, interleverit, resignaverit, all which species of
Falsehood, are enumerat by Ulpian. leg. 2. ad leg. Cornel. 9.. penult l. paulus
Cod. ad legem Cornel. de falsis, which are prettily expressed, but much more
fully l. 2. Basil. (...). In these terms. (...), with which, Theophil. differs
much, inst.. 7. (...). And the punishment of Falsehood, was very different,
according to the several kinds and degrees of guilt, as will hereafter appear.

II. Falsehood in writ, is committed by producing a false writ, if they know it
to be false, which some Doctors think punishable only, if the writ produced by
them was suspect; and it is said to be suspect, if either it appear vitiat by
occular inspection, or if the writer or producer used to produce false writs,
or if it contain things that are improbable.

The user of false writs is said to commit Falsehood, l. majorem Cod. de falls.
which only holds, if he knew the writs produced by them to be false; and
therefore Clarus relates a caution used by the practitioners, which is, that
the user of the writ gets a diet affixed to him, to deliver at, if he will
abide thereby, and at the day affixt, he must either simply abide thereat,
without any qualification, quo casu, if it be improven the user is punished as
a forger. Albeit the Doctors commonly are of opinion, that even in that case,
the user is to be more meekly punished then the fabricator, Paena foilicet
relegationis, which caution is likewise in use with us, but in this we differ,
that by our practique, the user will be allowed to abide by the writ, though
not simply as a writ true, yet as a writ really made over to him; and in the
forging whereof, he had no interest, as in the Earl Levins case, 1665. but
though this qualified abiding at the writ, be allowed in an Heir, or singular
Successor, yet that it is only allowed where there is some person extant, who
abides simply at the writ, as true as Kennedy did in this case, for else the
user, though a singular successor, must abide at the writ, as a true writ
simply; without which, any false writ might be vented securely.

The counterfeiter of the King's Letters, for which Binnie was hanged. The
opener, and unsealer of private letters, from which Bart. likewise concludes,
that Advocats, Writers, and others who reveal their Clients Papers to their
Adversaries, and, the sealing other men's Letters with the Sealers own Seal; and
revealing the secrets of a Town, commit likwise^ Falsehood.

5. A Nottar who draws any unlawful writ, verb. gra. An usurary Contract,
commits Falsehood, but not in Scotland.

6. A Nottar who expresses any thing that is false in an Instrument, commits
Falsehood, as if he say the Money was numbered where it was not, or if he marked
persons to be present, who were not, but with us, a Nottar commits not
Falsehood, though he say in the writ which he draws, that the Money was paid,
whereas it was not. I find that Jacob. de sancto Georgio ad l. de quibus ff. de
Legib. observes, that consuctudo loci excusat notarium a paena falsi eo casu.

III. Falsehood in writs is committed by omission in not setting down what the
Nottar was desired to set down in his Instrument, or omitting to express the
day and place when the omitting thereof might have been disadvantagious. In our
Law he of old who falsified the King, or his Superiors Charter, committed
Treason; but he who falsified only the Charter of a private man, was only to be
punished by loss or mutilation of a member, Reg. Maj. l. 4. Cap. 13. number. 4.
and 5. or should be in the Kings will, lib. 30. cap. 8. But therefore it is
determined, Stat. Alexander 19. that the forger of a Charter is to lose the
right hand; and Clarus tells us, that in the Duchy of Millan, and several
other places, a false Nottar is only punished for the first Crime, by loss of
his hand, but all this is innovat with us, by the 6. Parl. 80. Act Ia. 5.
whereby it is appointed, that those who make false Instruments, or causes them
be made, or uses the same wittingly, shall be punished for the same in their
person, and goods, with all rigor, according to the disposition of the Civil
and Common Law; but because that Act punished only false Notars, and expressed
only false Instruments, therefore by the 22. Act 5. Parl. Q. M. It is extended
to all evidents, but it would appear that it is not extended to all persons,
but only to Nottars, both by the rubric and body of the Act; from which it may
be inferred, that in criminalibus non est argumentandum a pari ultra casum a
lege definilum. And that criminal Laws are to be most strictly interpret, for
else the former Law against Instruments, might well enough have been extended
against other false writs, which are oftimes of greater consequence, then
Instruments are. 2. The reason why Nottars are more severely punished then
others, was, because they were more trusted then others, for of old they were
Churchmen, and hence springs that custom, that they yet design themselves,
Ego, A. B. Notarius pub. Dioceseos. Andreopolitanae Rossensis, etc. And any
Paper subscribed by them was sufficient, though not subscribed by the Party. 3.
The punishment is declared to be prescription (which is an error of the
Printer, put for prescription) banishment, and dismembering of Hand or Tongue;
but because it is received amongst the Doctors, that a Statute punishing
Falsehood in a Nottar, cannot be extended to any other person who is a forger,
fulgos consil. 123. therefore by the Act 22. Parl. 23. Ia. 6. It is statuted,
that whosoever makes or uses a false writ, or is accessory to the making
thereof, shall be punished as a committer of Falsehood.

And that these and all forgers of writs may be punished, albeit they declare in
Judgment, that they pass from, or will not use the writ quarrelled. From
which it may be inferred, that seeing the forger is only not allowed by this Act
to pass from the writ, after it is used and produced in Judgment, that before
it be used in Judgment, it may be past from, and as the using in Judgment is
a further prejudice, and degree of impudence, then a simple forgery which may
be repented of; So in all trials of Falsehood, and particularly in Barclay's
case, the Lords took great pains to enquire, if the writs quarrelled were
produced in Judgment, or made use of before any Court, which had been
unnecessar, if simple forging had been sufficient, to infer Falsehood: but
although this may be alleged, for mitigating the punishment, yet Dempster was
condemned for counterfeiting a subscription, in a reversion, though he never
used the same, to the hurt of any person whatsoever, nor would abide thereby;
and a sentence was founded upon this Act, 20. April. 1620.

These who give a false Testimonial to any man, whereby it may be used as
another man's Testimonial, or forges one to himself, is punishable by death,
Act, 10. Parl. 20. Ia. 6. But this Act seems only to relate to the Borders, and
such fugitives, as run in from Scotland to England.

Though England and some other Nations, punish Theft with death, and Falsehood
only by the pillary, and confiscation of movables: Yet our own Law seems much
more reasonable, which punishes Falsehood with death. Since Falsehood is a
theft, and a degree of that crime, which deserves a much severer punishment,
then ordinary Theft, because I can secure my goods against a Thief; but no man
can against a Forger. And a thief can but at most steal our Movables. whereas
a forger can by a false writ, take away the property of our Lands, and things
of the greatest consequence.

By the Civil Law, l. 1. ff. de l. Cornel. de falsis,. ult. paena falsi, vel
quasi falsi, deportatio est, and omnium honorum publicatio: and siservus little
quid admisserit, ultimo supplicio affici jubetur, which is in terminis, renewed
in the Basilicks, only in place of publicatio omnium honorum, the Basilicks
have plenae publicatio, (...). But Theophil. ommits absolutely, publicatio
honorum, and makes it to be simply, (...), or capital; the reason whereof seems
to be, because capital punishment included necessarly publication, or escheat
of goods, l. 1. and 2. ff. de Bon. Dam. and albeit the former punishment
expressed, l. 1. holds generally in Falsehood; yet there are some kinds of
Falsehood otherwise punished, because in effect, they fall in to be branches of
other Crimes. Thus the assuming of false Arms, aut qui militiam confinxit
concutiendi causa is capital, in Matheus judgment, per l. 27. h. t. because it
is a kind of Laese-majestie. But I find by the Law it self, that the pain of
death is not expressed in that case, sed pro admissi qualitate gravissime
puniendus est. And by the Basilicks, there is no punishment expressed, to that
special kind of Falsehood, and so it is left only punishable, tanquam falsum.
And though Matheus does infer this to be capitally punished, from l. 3. l. jul.
Majest. Yet I think there is a great difference, betwixt a man's pretending
falsely that he is a Soldier, which is that Crime, which is punished l. 27. h.
t. and the taking up Arms against the State, which is punished, dicta, l. 3.

IV. Because the Crime of Falsehood, does oftimes arise upon Papers produced
before the Lords of Session, and because the trial thereof, requires an exact,
and long, and a much more tedious search, then the forms of the Justice Court
can allow (whose diet is peremptor) therefore by the Acts foresaid, it is
declared, that the Lords of Session are Judges competent, to the trial of
Falsehood. And albeit that Act does not express their jurisdiction to be
exclusive of the Justices, yet I remember, that in an accumulat accusation of
Theft and Falsehood, pursued by the Lord Blantire, against Mcculloch, his
servant, it was found by the justices, that they would not proceed to judge the
Falsehood, but remitted the same to be tried before the Lords, in an
improbation: and I believe, that the trial of Falsehood, in prima instantia,
does only belong to the Lords, as that of divorce does to the Commissaries, for
else most of all Falsehoods would be only pursued before the Justices, seeing the
trial there is much shorter, and less expensive, than before the Lords;
whereas I find not any action of Falsehood, in prima instantia, recorded in all
the Books of Adjournal.

V. The Lords do sometimes proceed to the trial of Falsehood, summarie per modum
simplicis quaerelae, upon a Bill, without any formal Summonds; and thus they
found Binnie, a falsary for counterfeiting the Signet, Iun 1666. But this they
do only in two cases, 1. When the Falsehood is committed, by a Member of the
College of Justice. 2. When the Signet or any part of a Pro^esse is ex
recenti, falsified.

The way of procedor in this Crime before the Lords, is this; a Summonds of
Improbation is raised, and continued, and three terms of old, but now two only
are by the regulations given to the defender, to produce the writ called for,
to be improved. If the Papers called for be not produced, certification is
granted against them, whereby they are declared such as can never be made use
of, as true Papers, in any time coming; but upon this presumptive Improbation,
whereby the Writs are only perfictionem juris, declared null, the party who is
called to produce them, is not repute a forger, or punished as such, for non
constat eo casu de corpore de licti, or that ever there were any such Paper, as
is called for: nor was there ever certification granted, or any further inquiry
made, into the Falsehood it self, till November 1669. at which time,
certification having been granted against some Papers, made by the Tutor of
Towie, to Captain Barclay, the Lords found they might proceed a little further,
by examining the Witnesses, albeit it was alleged, that this had never been
done. 2. That non constabat de corpore de licti. 3. That by the certification,
res erat judicata, and so the Lords, functierant officio. 4. That the Writs
being improved, were no longer dangerous, non erat amplius nociva and nullus
potest puniri defalso ubi falsum non erat nocivum; and albeit, it was alleged
that it would be very prejudicial to the Commonwealth, if a person who
falsified Writs, might destroy them, when he found they could not be
advantageous, and so escape; it was answered, that there was no hazard in this,
because, if the forger used them not, the Commonwealth, nor no Person could be
prejudged; but if he did, the party injured might force him to leave it in the
Clerks hands, and intent and Improbation.

By the 62. Act. 7. Parl. Q. M. the Judge is allowed to exact caution from such
as propon Improbation, and though some doubt whether this caution may be
exacted, as well when Improbation, is proponed by way of exception, as when it,
is pursued by way of action: yet since the danger is the same it both, and that
by the Act, this is declared to extend as well, at the raising of the Summonds,
as at the proponing of the objection, and that lex non distinguit, I see no
reason for this doubt: and this, it was decided the 25. of Iun, 1675. The Sums
for which caution is to be found in this case, is left to the arbitrament of
the Judge, and though this Statute appoints only caution to be found, yet the
Lords does ordain the Money oftimes to be consigned.

VI. There are two ways of improving a Writ, viz. the direct and indirect
manner, the direct manner of improbation, is by the Writer and Witnesses
insert, the indirect manner is by Witnesses not insert but by presumptions and
other extrinsick arguments. But it is a rule in our Law, that whilst the direct
manner of improbation is extant, that is to say, whilst Writer and Witnesses
insert are alive, no trial can be taken by the indirect manner.

As to the direct manner, we have this general Maxim, viz. that such Witnesses
as are dead, are proving Witnesses, But this holds only presumptive, for if of
five Witnesses insert, two should improve, the other three being dead, the writ
will be declared false; whereas, if these three were alive, and did formally
approve, the writ would subsist, though improven by two.

To prevent Falsehood in all manner of Evidents, our Law in place of Seals
(which were used of old, and which might have been easily counterfeited) did by
the 117. Act 7. Parl. I. ^. require that all Evidents should be subscribed by
the Party, and Witnesses, and by the 80. Act Parl. 6. Ia. 6. all writs of
Importance, are ordained to be subscribed by the principal Parties, if they can
subscribe, or by two famous Notars, before four famous Witnesses, denominat by
th^^ special dwellings, or by some evident token, by which the Witnesses may be
known, and though usually men take writs of the ^reatest importance, subscribed
before any Witnesses, yet there is nothing more imprudent for if I take a
Gentleman's two Servants, or a Fathers two Sons (when the master or father are
disponers) witnesses to their Disposition, or Bond of the greatest importance,
and one of these should deny his subscription, the writ would be null, as was
found in Commissar Fleemings case; and if both denied their subscriptions, the
writ ought in strict Law to be declared false; but yet if there were pregnant
circumstances, and adminicles to astruct the truth of the subscriptions I
conceive the writ could not be improven, even though these interested witnesses
should deny their subscriptions. From the foresaid Acts of Parliament it is
clear, that the witnesses should be specially designed, to the end they may be
known and examined; and therefore the Lords 21. Feb. 1672. Littlegil contra
Somervel; found it not sufficient that a witness in a bond craved to be
improven, was designed indweller in Edinburgh, but ordained even the assigney
to condescend more particularly though the assignay contended that he being a
singular successor, who had got a right to the bond, he could not know who were
the witnesses made use of, nor was he obliedged to consider any more when he
got his assignation, but that the bond had witnesses, without requiring who
these were; and so though the cedent who had gotten the bond might be obliged
to condescend, yet he could not; and yet improbation being pursued against a
bond granted by Sir Lewis Stewart to his son Kettlestone, in which bond one of
the witnesses was designed John Carnagy servitor to the Earl of Southesk,
though there were many more John Carnagies who then served the Earl. The Lords
found that Kettlestone was not obliedged to design more particularly which of
the John Carnagies wrote the bond, and that it was relevant for the improver to
offer to prove that at the date of that bond the Earl of Southesk had no
servant who could write such a bond, 7. February, 1672.

Another great error committed by such as take men to be witnesses to the
Writs and Evidents delivered to them, is, that they employ witnesses who has
not seen the party subscribe, nor has not so much as inquired at him whether
that was his subscription, whereas if that paper were challenged as false or
null, it would be declared null, if not false, though the witness should
depone that he was in the next room, and it was brought to him immediately
whilst the ink was not yet dry, and that he knew his masters subscription, if
he could not positively depone, that either he saw his master subscribe, or
that his master had declared to him that that was his subscription. And this
remembers me of this pretty case wherein I my self was consulted: A Gentlewoman
being to subscribe her contract of marriage desired that because she was
ashamed to writ before so many friends, she might have the Paper delivered to
her to be subscribed in another room, and the same having been sent with her to
the other room, she caused her sister-in-Law who went along with her,
subscribe the same, for her pretending that she could not write well, and
returning thereafter, she told the witnesses that that was her subscription;
which Contract being thereafter quarrelled upon the nullity of not being truly
subscribed before witnesses, the Lords sustained the Contract, the matter of
fact above specified, being offerred to be proved, though it was alleged that
this was in effect to make up an obligation of great importance by witnesses.

In the indirect manner, the Lords use to consider the presumptions adduced for
the improver in his indirect Articles of approbation, and for the party
accused, in his articles of approbation, amongst which indirect articles, the
chief are, Alibi, a false date, and comparatio Literarum. If the party who has
been said to have subscribed the writ, be proved to be elsewhere; as for
instance, to have been at Edinburgh, whereas the writ is alleged to have been
subscribed that same day by him in Cathnes this is a very concluding
presumption of Falsehood, since a man could not by the swiftest journey be at
both these places in one day, and therefore this is a most concluding
presumption to annul the Bond, but I think it is no convincing argument which
can infer that the Bond is false, since people by error or mistake, may, and
do oftentimes insert a wrong date, neglecting the date, as a matter of no
importance; and therefore the Lords did very justly assoilzie from an
improbation of a writ, which was proved to be false in the date, since the
witnesses insert were alive, and did depone upon the verity of the
subscription, 23. May, 1667. Lord May, contra Rosse, and upon the 10. of July
1669. Gardner contra Colvil, a writ was not improven, though it was proved not
to have been subscribed of the date that was insert, In respect there was a
writ of that same tenor, truly subscribed that day, which being a-missing, the
granter a long time thereafter subscribed another of the same tenor and date,
and the first being thereafter found, and both produced, the user abode by the
first simply, and by the last as to the verity of the subscription, but not of
the date, which was so insert for the reason foresaid; so that though the date
be amongst the substantial solemnities requisite to a writ, as is clear by the
foresaid Acts of Parliament, and by the 13. Act, 9. Parliament, Iam. 1. so that
the improver may force the user of a writ, to condescend upon a particular
date, if the date be blank, and that the falsenesse of the date will infer the
writ to be false, except this presumption can be taken off by a strong contrary
probation, yet that it may be so taken of, is clear from the cases foresaid,
and in this sense Craig is to be understood, who says, page 156. Si falsa data
apposita sit, totum instrumentum vitiatur, nam quod in ea data quae exprimitur
non est verum, etiamsi aliam datam substituere velit, is, qui eo utitur, non
est audiendus, and quod in data falsa non fuit factum, nunquam factum
praesumitur.

If the writ craved to be improven be unlike in its subscription, to the other
subscriptions used by the subscriber at the time when the Paper quarelled is
said to be subscribed, then it is most suspect, and if both the subscriptions
of the witnesses and granter, be found to be one hand writ, but all of them are
unlike the true subscriptions, then the writ will be improven by occular
inspection: as was found in the Earl of W^ymes case, contra Gall, July 1675.
But yet it were hard to infer the corporal punishment of falsehood from this
probation, which is but at best presumptive, for the granter of a Bond or other
writ, might upon design subscribe to strangers his name, far otherwise then
he uses to do, merely that he or his Heirs, may thereafter quarrel the same,
and therefore Cravet. Consil. 386. concludes, that comparatio sola non relevat
in criminalibus, and all Lawyers conclude, that recognitio scripturae privatae
insert plenam probationem si jungatur cum uno test vel alia somi plena
probatione, Alex. Consil 239.

In the indirect manner, the Lords uses to receive witnesses ad futuram rei
memoriam, and to receive witnesses sometimes by commission, as in Captain
Barclayes case. Albeit it was there alleged, that witnesses in the indirect
manner of improbation, are only received ex nobili officio, which could not be
committed or delegat, and which seems stranger, the Lords uses to take the oath
of the defender himself, albeit regularly in crimes the defender is not
obliedged to swear.

Before any debate upon the indirect manner, the Lords use to ordain the
pursuer to give in his articles of improbation, and to ordain the defender to
give in his articles of approbation. And albeit there be not publicatio
testimoniorum in our Law in Civil Cases, yet because improbations have a
criminal effect, and tend to take away the life of the defender, therefore the
Lords use in this case to ordain the depositions of the witnesses to be seen by
both parties, and both parties being fully heard to debate in praesentia, the
Lords do either improve or Assoylzie.

If the Lords improve, they have by the foresaid acts of Parliament power to
impose an arbitrary punishment suitable to the crime. And therefore they do
sometimes ordain the forget, to be taken to the Cross with a paper Hat, if the
cheat was but small, or the person in great necessity. And sometimes they only
ordain the forger to be imprisoned, and rebuke him without discovering the
falsehood, as they did lately to a Gentleman, who being otherwise very
discreet, was by his poverty driven to counterfit the subscription of his
friend, to a bond of Suspension. Sometimes likewise they refer the forgers to
the Council, who upon that reference, use either to condemn the forger to
perpetual imprisonment, as they did Captain Barclay, or else they use to send
them to the Market Cross with a paper hat, as they did Tulloch a Nottar for
forging a charter, 4. July, 1638. but this mitigation is only allowed, when the
forger has been induced to commit that crime by the persuasion of others, or
by his own simplicity, and has ingeniously confessed.

VII. The ordinary way of procedor taken by the Lords, when they have improven
the papers, and found them to be false, is to remit the forger to the Justices,
against whom an indictment being drawn up, and the Assize sworn, the Lords
Decree is read, without repeating any further probation, and the Assize must
condemn thereupon, else they will be pursued for error. And therefore the
verdict eo casu bears, finds the Panel guilty in respect of the Decree of the
Lords of Session. Upon this verdict the Justices are tied expressly to condemn
the defender to be hanged, as Halyday for counterfeiting a Discharge, 8.
February, 1597. James Tarbet for being art and part of counterfeiting a false
Charter, 16. February, 1600. And if the falsehood be atrocious, they sometimes
before the execution ordain the right hand to be cut off.

If the Lords remit not the case to the Justices, when they find the Papers to
be false, they ordain the Papers improven to be cancelled in their own
presence, but if they remit the forgers to the Justices then the Papers are
carried to the Justice court, and when the sentence is pronounced there against
the Panel, the papers are likewise cancelled at the command of the Justices.

VIII. The second species of Falsehood, is that which is committed by witnesses
in their depositions, which may be many ways comm^tted: as 1. By taking money
to depon or not depon. Si quis pecuniam ad dicendum vel non dicendum
testimonium acceperit, l. 20. ff. h. t. 20. by concealing the truth, or
expressing more then the truth, though they received no money, l. 16. ult. hoc.
tit. 3. By deponing things expressly contradictory, but in this case the
contradiction must be palpable, and not consequential, nam omnis interpretatio
praeferendo est ut dicta testium reconcilientur. Witnesses either are such as
were sworn, and if they swear falsely, eo casu, they are guilty of perjury (
vid. tit. perjury) or else they are such as are false witnesses, without an
oath, as witnesses in papers, and these are punishable, tanquam falsarii, Bart.
ad l. si quis ff. ad l. Corn. Clar. hoc tit. number. 11. and of these I design to
treat only at least principally in this Title.

He who depones falsely in one point, is repute false in all his deposition,
whether the points be coherent or not; But he who depones falsely only in
extrinsick circumstances, is not to be equally punished, as if he had depon'd
falsely upon the substantials of what is interrogat; and yet in both cases he is
falsarius. And thus the Lords ordained one of Barclays Servants to be sent to
the Cross with a Paper Hat, because he prevaricat only in his deposition about
the carrying of a Letter, though that was extrinsick to the debate, and was
mainly used to try the Witnesses honesty. Oblivion or forgetfulness excuses
sometimes, a paena ordinaria falsi, if it be invincibly or strongly founded,
but not otherwise.

Witnesses deponing falsely, and such as induced Witnesses, were by our Law
punished according to the disposition of the common Law, Act 80. Parl. 6. I. 5.
but thereafter by piercing their tongues, and escheating of their movables to
the Kings use, and are never to brook honor, office, or dignity, and are to be
further punished in their persons at the sight of the Lords, according to the
quality of their fault, Q. M. Parl. 6. Cap. 48. By the Lords in this Act, are
meant the Lords of Session, who may punish Witnesses ex incontinenti, during
the dependence of the Process before themselves, wherein the Witnesses depone
falsely; but if either the falsehood was committed by deponing in another Court,
or if the Lords be functi officio, as to the Process wherein the falsehood was
committed, eo casu the Lords cannot judge the falsehood, or punish the false
Witnesses. Sometimes the Lords ordain the Witnesses to be remitted to the
Council; thus the Lords ordained the Witnesses, who had confessed that they
subscribed Witnesses to a Disposition granted by the Tutor of Towie to his
Nephew, to be remitted to the Council, who ban^sh'd them: And sometimes they
themselves ordain them to be banished, or to have their tongues pierced, or to
be set upon the Cock-stool, with a Paper Hat; yet they cannot ordain them to
die, because the arbitrary power granted by this Act, cannot in Law be extended
ad infligendam paenam mortis, as is fully cleared elsewhere; and therefore the
Lords use to remit the falsarie to the Justices, if the Crime deserve death.
But it may be questioned, if the Justices can inflict the pain of death in any
case upon false Witnesses, since that Crime is not declared capital by any Act?
But to this the answer is, that they may, and do infl^ct capital punishment
upon the committers of this Crime, in some cases. And by the foresaid Act Ia.
5. it is declared punishable, according to the disposition of the Common Law,
by which is meant the Civil Law, and de practica, Wit^esses have been hanged
for bearing false witness, as Croy, and for suborning others to bear false
Witness, as Cheyn, March 15. 1605. And Grahame, March 8. 1615. At which time
also Dunlop and some others were hanged for offering themselves to be false
Witnesses, albeit they did not actually depon, because they were not received,
the offer having before their examination come to light.

IX. The third kind of falsehood is committed by falsifying money, falsum
nummartum, which is accounted so great a Crime, that it is commonly excepted
out of Remissions, as may be seen in Crightouns Remission, March 15. 1661. This
Crime is committed, 1. By forging true money without Authority. 2. By Coining
false money, and impressing Copper, Lead, or any base Metal, with the stamp of
the Prince, or of other current money. 2. By mixing and allying worset with
nobler metals, in current Coyns. 4. By venting and passing, or out-putting (as
our Law terms it) the adulterat money coined by others, or intertaining the
Forgers, or being art and part read, or of the Council with the Coyners. By
the Civil Law, qui probos nummos cudunt sed non in officina publica tenentur
lege Cornelia nummaria, l. 12. C. de falsa monet: qui adulterinos cudunt and
qui veros adulterant, radunt, fingunt, l. qui cunque and l. seque ff. hoc tit.
qui nammos probos lavant constant aut vultu principum signatos reprobant, l. 1.
C. de vet. numis. pot.

By our Law, every Burgh should have a clipping-house, (which was a house for
trying money, for the trial was by clipping) and sworn men, who should clip
evil money, who are to have a penny for ilk pound that is clipped, and the
haver was to tyne the false-money, I. 6. p. 1. c. 19. and the clipped money, if
it be evil stuff, or false coin, should be returned to the owners, I. 4. P. 4.
Act 4. They who falsifies money, or counterfeits the Kings Irons, are to be
justified ( id est punished) according to the old Law, Act 124. P. 7. I. 5. By
which Act, though it be added according to the old Law, yet we have no Law, de
falso nummario, prior to this, except Act 40. P. 5. I. 3. which punishes only
the home-bringers of black money with death. By the Act 70. P. 9. Q. M. the
home-bringers of false coyns, or lay-money, should be dilated, and the dilater
is to have the half of all his goods, moveable and immovable, for his
revealing: And it seems by that Act, that it is made treason, for confiscation
of Lands or moveable Goods, is only in the case of treason; and I find no other
Act that can be the foundation of Drummonds conviction as a traitor. Et de
practica, this Crime has been diversely punished: Reid was hanged for forging
false money with the Kings Irons, July 13. 1602. Drummond burnt for forging
false money, November. 27. 1601. And his Brother Patrick Drummond bu^nt also for
art and part, red counsel and concealing the treasonable forging, coining, and
out-putting (for venting is still a Crime, and is designed out-putting in our
styles) of false money. Meinzies also was hanged for art and part, as said is,
June 30. 1603. Thomson was hanged and forefault for bringing home and
out-putting false money, January 19. 1603.

X. The fourth species of Falsehood, is false weights and measures, adulterinae
staterae, which are punished per l. Corneliam, l. annonam, ff. de extraord.
crim. and falsae measurae, which are punished per relegationem, ibid. With us
the using false measures or weights of old was punished by a Fine, leg. Burg.
cap. 52. And the Bailies of the Burghs were declared Judges competent thereto,
for the first three faults, but the fou^th was declared to be only punishable
by the Justices, because the committers life was to be in the Kings will, cap.
74. ibid. But now such as use false measures or weights deceiving the people,
are to be indicted as falsars, Act 47. P. 4. I. 4. By which Act, havers cannot
be punished, except they use, since the Act ordains users to be punished, and
mentions only such as deceive the people, which is not done without using: And
by the 2. Act, Parl. 19. Ia. 6. the users of false weights and measures are to
tyne their hail goods and geir; which punishments derogats not from the former
Act inflicting the punishment of falsit, as has been debated more fully in the
Title of Deforcement: De practica, I find that Brown was fyn'd for false
measures by the Councils warrant in 100. merks, pen. July, 1629. And that
Porteus was found guilty, though using was not proved, since having of false
weights in the Shop presumes using, except this presumption be taken off, as by
alleging that the we^ghts were presently bought, or borrowed, or laid aside,
as light, May, 1671.

By the foresaid last Act, the Sheriffs, Lords of Regalities, and Stewarts, are
declared Judges competent to this Crime, but their Commission there is only
tempory for a year, and therefore it may be concluded that these are not
otherwise Judges competent to this Crime, else this Commission had been
unnecessary.

The using also a longer Ell or Yard, is also punishable, though it would
appear that here the Merchant himself is only prejudged, for he may receive as
well as give out by it; nor does the Law presume that a man would keep any
measure to his own disadvantage.

I find also that there was a Merchant in Elgin pu^sued before the Justices,
July ult. 1672. for false weights, in swa^ far as he going to a Market, dragged
his Tobacco after the Boat in the salt water, which made it weigh more then
otherwise it would have done, and so the people were cheated: But the diet was
deserted, and though the defender alleged that this was done for keeping the
Tobacco from drying too much, and mouldering into pieces, yet the Magistrates of
Elgin had fined him formerly for the same fault in 20. pound Scots, even for
the ill example, paena falsi arbitraria tenetur qui in sua mercatura addit
inutile ut pulverem arenam, etc. aut species aridas detinet in loco humido
Carp. page 375.

XI. Falsehood is also committed by assuming a false name, vid. Stellionatum,
and by presenting one person for another at the subscribing of Papers,
suppositio salsae personae, which is punished tanquam partum sui positum, by
the Civil Law. I find one David Donaldson hanged for this imposture, having
made use of a false person, who designed himself to be the person who should by
the agreement have subscribed the Assignation, December. 12. 1611.

The svpposing a false birth, that is to say, the laying in one child for
another, is punishable as a false deed, with the punishment of falsehood, since
thereby men are cheated out of their Estates, l. ad Corn. de falls. the words
whereof being, periculum capitis subeat, is found to extend to death, Boer.
decis. 82. And the Midwife who brought in such a false Child, is pun^shed by
death, Pegner. decis. 80. But I find that Farin. relates, that periculum
capitis, was in this case extended no further then scourging: But yet, since
this was a great cheat, and does steal away an Estate from the righteous Heir,
and adulterats the offspring, it ought to be panish'd as severely as their,
especially since it can be committed only by such as being trusted, aggrage
their guilt by their unfaithfulness. This crime is called by the Latins, partus
suppositus, and by the Basilicks, (...)

TITLE XXVIII. Stellionatus.
1. The several kinds of Stellionat by the Civil Law. 2. What it is, and how
punishable by our Law.
THe heart of man is deceitful above all things, and such as have been
conversant in business and Courts of Justice, have found that cheats do
amongst men multiply, and vary themselves into so many forms, that Legislators
were forced to invent this general name of Stellionat; under which they might
range all cheats, and thence sprung that maxim, l. 3. ff. hoc. tit. ubicunque
titulus criminis deficit illic stellionatum objiciemus: Which must be interpret
and restricted in its generality, by the preceding words, Stellionatum objici
posse his qui dolo quid fecerunt; So that to infer this crime, it is requisite
that there be a cheat or fraud used, and that the cheat want an other name, for
there are frauds which cannot be comprehended under this Title, as falsifying
W^its, counterfeiting Seals. The ordinary species of Stellionat in the Civil
Law, are to sell, or impignora^, or to give for payment fraudulently of our
debt, these things which belong to others; And to corrupt or change
merchandise, which we formerly sold: To exact likewise debt which was formerly
paid, and known to be paid, is Stellionat. l. 29. ff. mandati, but the
craving of it is most Criminal, if recept of what is craved follow not upon it.
Bartol. ibid. And so far is receiving Criminal, that the receiving payment of a
debt formerly paid, is Stellionar, though simple craving without receiving
will not infer it; but it is most observeable, that fraud is still requisite to
the construction of this crime, and its essence.

II. By our Law we have no express statute against Stellionat, except only act
140. P. 20. I. 6. Which bears, that no duty shall be disponed to two sundry
persons which is crimen Stellionatus of the Law; from which Act it is to be
observed, that our Law presupposes the Civil Law to be our Law, as to that
crime; For it does not determine what is to be accounted Stellionat, or appoint
a particular punishment for Stellionat, but only clears declaratorly, that the
disponing duties or rents of Lands to several persons, shall be accounted
Stellionatus; And therefore what ever was punished as Stellionat by the Civil
Law, may be punished as such by ours; not only a pari, or by extension, but by
approbation; the Roman Law having by the allowance of that Act become ours; and
therefore the making of double assignations or dispositions of Lands, or of any
thing else besides Rents mentioned expressly in that Act, is punished as
Stellionat in our practique, which is warranted likewise by the 105. Act, P. 7.
I. 5.

By which Act, though Stellionat be not mentioned, yet it is thereby punished,
for it is there declared, that whosoever makes double Dispositions of Lands, he
shall be called at the Kings instance, and punished at the Kings will. But it
may be doubted, why double alienations should be punished as Stellionat, seeing
qui rem unam duobus vendit falsi est reus, l. qui duobus, ff. ad l. Corn. de
falso; In answer to which, I conceive, we must distinguish betwixt these who
whilst they are selling, being desired to clear, if the thing offered to be
sold, has been formerly sold, or not: say that it was not, In which case he is
guilty of a manifest lie, and so of Falsehood; But if he only sell one thing
twice, without denying that it was formerly sold, or was not his own, then he
is only guilty of Stellionat, seeing though there be a cheat in this case, yet
there is no lie: An instance whereof fell out into my own experience, for there
being two Writers to the Signet of one name, and money being directed to one of
the two, the bearer delivered it to the other, as due by his Master to him,
which case was thought by those who consulted it, to be Stellionat, seeing
though the receiver had not said to the bearer that his Master was his debtor,
yet he should not have received the money, for he was obliedged to know that
the same was not due to him; And yet according to Farinacius opinion (who
thinks that dolus in committendo tantum insert stellionatum, sed non dolus in
ommittendo) It might be debated that this case was not Stellionat, seeing the
receiver of the money was only guilty of omission, in not clearing the bearers
mistake: But I differ in this from Farinacius, For seeing Dolus in ommittendo,
may be a great cheat in it self, and that the party wronged is as much lesed
thereby, I know no reason why the one may not infer stellionat as well as the
other: And albeit dolus in ommittendo, were not Stellionat, yet this case was,
seeing the recept of money sent to another is more then omission.

By that Act James 5. It is likewise declared, that Superiors receiving double
Resignations, shall be punished as these who grant double Dispositions: And
certainly that part of the Act was most just, seeing if the Superior was
conscious to the design of making these double Resignations, he cannot but be
art and part of the cheat of making the double Dispositions, whereupon the
Resignation flowed; and so should be equally punished; and in effect, a
Superior granting new Infestments, upon diverse resignations, to diverse persons,
does grant double Rights: for to grant a new Right upon the old Vassals
Resignation, is to dispon. And seeing the buyer is prejudged more by these
Resignations, then by these Dispositions, upon which they slowed, (that being a
more complete act then the other) it were unreasonable that the Superior should
not be punished as well as the Seller; and yet because it is not presumed, that
any would cheat where there is no gain, and that the Superior in receiving
resignations, in favorem, gains little, therefore this part of the Act is now
in desuctude.

I find likewise, that other species of Stellionat are punished by our Law, as
in Anno 1634. James Clerk was pursued, because a Sword being sent by
Cuthbertson to Moubray a Swordslipper, Clerk did say to the bearer that he was
Moubray, and so took the Sword, which Libel the Justices would not sustain, to
infer falsehood, but tanquam crimen in suo genere; and yet, L. 13. ff. ad L.
Cor. de falso assumptio falsi cognominis est crimen falsi.

The punishment then of this crime could not be certain and determinat, seeing
the crime is various in its own nature, but it is arbitrary and punishable at
the discretion of the Judge, according to the circumstances and measures of the
fraud committed. And it is called Stellionat, from a Serpent called Stellio,
which is beautified by Starry spots, stellatis guttis distinctum, and is the
most subtle of all Serpents, plin. lib. 30. not. histor. cap. 10.

TITLE XXIX. Perjury.
1. What is Perjury, and the several kinds thereof. 2. Whether he who swears
only that he believes what he depones to be true, be punishable for Perjury. 3.
Whether he who promises upon Oath, and performs not, be punishable for
Perjury. 4. Whether these who perform not their Parents Oaths, are punishable
for Perjury. 5. Whether Witnesses who depone falsely, can be convict of Perjury,
upon the depositions of other Witnesses. 6. Whether a Judge or Advocat
violating his Oath, de fideli, be punishable for Perjury. 7. The punishment of
Perjury by the Civil Law, and ours.
Since Witnesses can by their depositions, take away the Lives, or ruin the
Estates, of such as are the greatest men, or have the greatest Fortunes; the
Law which reposed that trust in them, does very justly overawe them, in
deponing by the reverend fear of an Oath, and by threatening them with the
severe punishment of Perjury, if they swear falsely.

I. Perjury is defined by Lawyers, to be a lie, affirmed judicially upon Oath;
but because it is not presumeable, that any person would both be so mean as to
lie, and so wicked as to call God to be a Witness thereto: Therefore Lawyers
have very justly delivered us a Brocard, that Perjury is not committed without
fraud, interpretatio facienda est ut evitetur perjurium; and from this
Principle they have deduced, that 1. he who swears that which is false,
believing it to be true, is not to be punished as a Perjurer; for in effect he
does not then lie, add ad Clar. number. 13.2. If the Perjury could have prejudged
no man, Clar. number. 11. because it is not be presumed, that a person would
perjure himself, while he could have no design: And from this may be likewise
inferred, as a consequence that Perjury should be hardly fastened upon any
person, for matters of very small consequence, seeing as de minimis non curat
praetor, so it is not presumeable that a man, especially of any integrity or
honor, would incurr that guilt, and this was alleged, for Mr. James Row a
Minister, when he was pursued for Perjuring himself, by Sir Thomas Stewart, in
anno 1667. for the matter of five Pound Scots; but this point was not decided.
And albeit I think where this is joined with other circumstances, which may
render the decision dubious, the Council may either mitigat or remit the
punishment; yet if the Perjury be clearly proved, I think it should be
punished: and in no case should the Justices refuse to put the Panel to the
knowledge of an Assize* because the matter wherein the Perjury is alleged to
have been committed, is very small: but it is punishable, if at first it might,
though thereafter, ex eventu, it proved not prejudicial, as if the writ was
improven by a certification; yet the false Witnesses are thereafter punishable,
though at the time of the inquiry, that Paper could prejudge no man, because of
the certification. It was found in Barclay's case, February 1670. 3. Where the
matter is difficult, it is presumed that the swearer did not understand then
that he did perjure himself, Clar. number. 10. but if the swearer did not take
pains to understand the matter upon which he was deponing, I think the
difficulty should hardly excuse him.

II. It is controverted among the Doctors, if he who swears per verbum credo, I
believe, can be punished for Perjury. And in Mr. James Row's case, it was
alleged, that it should, because in effect all Oaths are but oaths of
Credulity, where the matter falls not under sense; and in this case where it
was referred to his own Oath, if he was paid of his Stipend, and he deponed
upon Oath, he believed he was not paid, hoc casu, the word, believe, should
have inferred Perjury, because he should not have believed except he had
certainly known, and belief presupposes a certainty, for faith and belief are
all one, so that in effect, to depon, he believed it was paid, was to depon,
it was certainly paid, or that in faith it was paid, either of which would
have inferred Perjury. But 2. Perjurium est affirmare quod dubit as arg. L.
vinc. ff. nihil nov. apel. and indiscrete jurare est instar perjurii. Gregor.
Tholosan. h. t. And if the adjecting such a dubious word as this, were
sufficient to evite Perjury; that crime should never be incurred, and certainly
it is in it self a great undervaluing of the Diety, ( quod est medium
inductivum hujus criminis) to depon without information, where information may
be had; and it is very presumable, he would little value perjury, who did value
little to get such information, as was requisite for satisfying the Judge, in
clearing what was just: And seeing the Law designs by punishing Perjury, to
come to the exact knowledge of all private cases, wherein Judgment is to be
given, to the end judex may ubicunque suum tribuere, it follows necessarily,
that it should very severely punish such as depon without previous information,
especially where the matter of the deposition is in facto proprio, as in this
case, for by this rash, or affectate omission, both the Law and the Judge are
equally disappointed of their ends, as much as if the Deponer had willingly
perjured himself. 2. A witness deponing falsely, per verbum credo, is in Law
punished with the punishment of falsehood. Bald. Salicet in l. de tut. C. de in
integrum restitut. Alexander Concis. 28. vel 6. Angel. consil. 3. The deponing
per verbum credo, would have gained the deponer the cause; and assoilzied him
from the pursuit; and therefore it should infer Perjury against him, because
the reason why Perjury is punished, is that there may be something to over-aw
such to whom the verity of any cause is referred. 5. It is doubted amongst the
Doctors, if he who promises upon Oath in a Bond, to pay a Sum, or perform a
deed betwixt and a day, be guilty of Perjury if he failzie, and Math. de
aflictis, relates a Neopolitan decision, wherein it was found, that Perjury
could not be inferred upon the breach of such an Oath as this, the words of the
obligation being to pay, sub fide dal Gentilhomo, because says he, this is
fides and consequently cannot be punished, but only paena extraordinaria,
though Bertrand be of another opinion, Consil. 126.

III. But the question remains yet entire notwithstanding of that decision,
whether they who promise under an express, formal, and religious oath, as that
by God himself, or Holy Trinity, they shall pay a sum, or do such a deed,
betwixt and a perfixed day, may not be pursued for Perjury: and that they
should not, may be argued from this, that these being extrajudicial oaths, the
Law should not encourage the giving, or exacting of them, so as to punish the
not implement of them with Perjury; for this would make every man exact an oath
of his debtor when he lent him money, or upon every slight occasion, which
were most inconvenient. 2. The Laws do not punish extrajudicial oaths, given in
depositions of Witnesses, and sic testes deponens in judicio contrarium ejus
quid dixit extrajudicium non punitur de falso. Alexander lib. 1. Consil. 74.
Covar. in repit cap. quantis de puit vid. Monoch de arbitrar. Cas. 312. Much
less should it such extrajudicial promises: Yet some think even such
contravertions as these, should, ob despectum numen, be punished arbitrary, but
if this promise be given judicially, as in cautione juratoria, in removings,
whereby the party obliedges himself to remove, and pay the violent profits, or
whereby he binds himself to report the Criminal Letters to the Justice-Clerk,
in these and such other cases.

I think the not implement of the promise, unless a reasonable cause can be
assigned, should infer Perjury, both because this is a judicial oath, and
because in contemplation thereof, the Law remits the necessity of finding
another Cautioner, and the Party concerned has no other security nor what is
founded upon this juratory caution.

IV. 6. It is doubted among the Doctors, whether these can be accounted
perjured, qui non impleverunt vota parentum juramento confirmata, who perform
and fulfill not their Parents oaths. In which cases Grotius distinguishes
betwixt those oaths, whereby the Father bound himself only to God, and in these
the Son for not implement, is not guilty of Perjury, because in effect, illud
non est onus haereditatis, but is personal, and so the Son represents not the
Father in it, but if the vow were made to a particular person, then that vow
being in unus haereditatis, the not implement of the Fathers vow, will infer
Perjury, for quo ad the estate haeres and defunctus sunt una and cadem persona.
Matheus distinguishes in this case, si juramentum parentis sit in rem conceptum
and eo casu tenetur sed si non fit in rem conceptum sed in persona tenetur,
arg. l. 7.8. part. ff. de part. It may be likewise doubted upon the same
ground, whether the oath of any people in public affairs, relating to the
State, does tie their children, and the example of Readiness being punished for
not observing the oath whereby the people of Israel were tied to the 2 Samuel 21.
Seems to evince, that the contravention of these national oaths given by
Parents, is punishable upon children, in foro divino, but whether the Civil
punishment can be inflicted for contravention of National Oaths, such as the
Covenant and Declaration, either in the case where the Oath is given, either by
the predecessor, or the giver himself, is not decided. And I should incline to
think, that the contravention of these National Oaths, cannot infer the Civil
punishment of perjury, both because the design of perjury is only to punish
such as do prejudge the private interest of these, concerning whom they swear,
and such a contravention cannot be properly called mendacium, the Swearer
having designed at that time to fulfill what he Swore, though he thereafter
alter his judgment: Nor can dolus be alleged in this case, nor that the
interest of a third party is thereby prejudged, all which are requisite for
inferring Perjury.

V. 7. When witnesses depon with us in any private case, it was of old doubted,
whether the depositions might be reprobated, and themselves punished for
Perjury, by the depositions of other witnesses, and of late these conclusions
seem to be regularly allowed. 1. That a witness deponing verba initialia
falsely, such, as of what age he is, whether he be married, or where he dwells,
eo casu, he may be punished for perjury, if if he depon falsely, for these
questions are proponed, not only to the end it may be known what age the
witnesses are of, but likewise to the end it may be known whether the Deponer
be a person of such veracity, as may be trusted, and that by these, his
veracity may be traced and examined. 2. That a witness may be convinced of
Perjury by writ. But 3. whether a witness may be convinced of Falsehood and
Perjury, by the deposition of other witnesses, was contraverted in the case of
Balcanquel against Rig a Minister, and that he could not, it was urged, because
if this were allowed, daretur progressus in infinitum, for else if two
witnesses deponing that such a thing were done, might be convinced of Perjury,
by other two or more witnesses, these witnesses might again be convict by
others, and those by other, in infinitum, for the other part, it was alleged,
that 1. There being nothing to overaw witnesses in Scotland, but the fear and
hazard of Perjury to free witnesses from this trial, was in effect to render
them Libertines, and to encourage them to depon falsely. 2. It was absurd to
think, that if two witnesses should depon that which were notourly false, as
that such a man was killed, who thereafter was seen by a whole Judicatory, and
all the members of Session and Parliament, to have been alive, that eo casu,
witnesses should not be found guilty of Perjury. 3. Assizers who are in effect
Witnesses, as well as Judges, and may proceed to a Sentence upon their own
private knowledge, may be tried by an Assize of error consisting of twice as
many; Whereas, if the depositions of witnesses could not be reprobated by other
witnesses, no Assize could be convict by an assize of error, as temere
jurantes super assiza. To the foresaid argument it is answered, that 1. The
same did only evince the probation, should be more exact in that then in other
cases, but did not at all conclude, that such witnesses could no wise be
convinced of Perjury; and the ordinary rule given by Lawyers, is, that twice as
many are requisite to reprobat, as to prove: Which conclusion could not take
place, if the reprobation of witnesses by witnesses were not sustained. 2. This
argument would evince, if it had any weight, that even, circa initialia,
witnesses perjuring themselves, could not be pursued for perjury, because these
might be convinced by other witnesses, and these by others, and sic daretur
progressus in infinitum, so that either witnesses cannot be convict of Perjury
in no case, or else they may be in every case, where they swear falsely:
Notwithstanding all which the Justices by Interloquutor found, that witnesses
could not be pursued for Perjury, upon the deposition of other witnesses, upon
the day of 1677. but yet it remains doubtful, whether one witness may not be
pursued for Perjury, upon the deposition of others, though two cannot, because
the joint depositions only make a full probation. 8. Clarus, number. 12..
perjurium, is of opinion, that when any thing is referred to Oath judicially,
that eo casu, the party who swears, can never be challenged for Perjury, sed
Johan, deum habet ultorem; which Boerius does also assert to be the common
opinion, decis. 305. And the reason which moves them to this, seems to be, that
a party having made his Antagonist absolutely Judge of his own cause, he has,
as it were, submitted to him, and juramentum debet esse ultimum refugium, and
this seems to be the case decided, per. l. 2. C. de rebus credit: religionem
contemptam juramenti satis deum habet ultorem sed majestatis crimen vel
periculum corporis and si per principis venerationem quodam calore fuerit
perjeratum, inferri non placet, for in the immediately preceding Law, it is
said, that causa jure jurando ex consensu utriusque partis delato decisa, nec
perjurii praetextu retractari potest, so that adding both Laws together, the
sense is, that when the cause is referred to any Parties Oath, it being decided
conform thereto, that Decision can neither be retracted upon pretext of
Perjury, nor can the Perjurer be corporally punished. And this seems a much
more reasonable answer, than those many given by the Doctors; but yet I cannot
assent to the conclusion it self: nor is it at all conform to our Law, nor
perhaps to reason; for interest and avarice are sufficient baits to Perjury,
though impunity be not thereto added, and when the Party defers an Oath, he
intends thereby to submit finally to him, to whom the famine is deferred; but
not so, but that if thereafter the swea^er shall be found Perjured, he may be
still challenged: Nor perhaps would he have deferred the Oath, if he had not
concluded himself secure, as to what should be deponed, not only out of respect
to Religion, but likewise because of the hazard of Perjury; and seeing in this
case, there is mendacium juramento affirmatum, I do not see how it should not
be Perjury: Is there any ground why at least His Majesty's Advocat should not
be allowed to pursue it, for the reason which is urged for the speciality in
it, cease in him. And as there is no Decision in favors of Clarus his
opinion in our Law, so in Mr. James Row's, and other cases, where this might
have been proponed, this defense was never proponed; yet in some cases, the
deponer, in juramento delato, craves that the Lords may declare, that he shall
not be liable for Perjury, when any Oath is necessarily so deferred to him,
which the Lords in some cases use to grant, as in facto antiquo: And by so
doing, they show that Perjury is punishable, regulariter, even in him to whom
an Oath is deferred: but I believe, that the Doctors have more justly
concluded, that where an Oath is deferred in Criminals, though the Panel needs
not swear, yet if he do swear, he is not punishable as a perjured person,
though he swear falsely, quia licet cuique suum redimere sanguinem, Clar. number.
12. And yet it may be debated, that this holds not with us in Usury, and other
cases, because there the Law obliedged him to give his Oath; and Matheus does
think, that it should in no case, but rather that the Perjurer should there be
punished with a double punishment, both for concealing the Crime, and also
Perjuring himself. And it may be alleged that this is rather punishable then
ordinary Perjury, because the Defender needed not swear, and was in no hazard
by not swearing, and the less the temptation be, the sin is always the
greater: nor needed the Defender redeem his own Blood by swearing, as is
pretended, or at least, licet hoc liceat, licere tam debet per modum licitum,
sed non perjurio.

VI. It may likewise be doubted in some cases, whether the violation of an Oath
does infer Perjury, as when a Judge gives his Oath that he shall administrat
Justice impartially, or an Advocat that he shall be honest in his employment,
without discovering his Clients secret, or betraying his business; if that
Judge, taking Money as a bribe, or that Advocat thereafter prevaricating, may
be upon these accounts pursued for Perjury. And this was, I remember,
controverted in the case of one of His Majesty's Officers of State, who was
pursued upon the foresaid Act of Queen Mary, for Perjury; because he was
alleged to have taken Money from the defenders, in cases wherein they were
pursued at His Majesty's instance; and that this could not infer Perjury, was
argued from this, that our Law having made some particular Statutes, as to
Perjury, it designed thereby, that the Subjects of this Nation, should not in
this Crime be left to the common Law; and seeing it had only punished Perjury in
the case of Witnesses, Assizers, and Bigamy; it did clearly follow, that
Perjury deum tantum habet ultorem, in all other cases. 2. If Perjury were
punishable in this case, Tutors and Executors who find caution, might be always
punished for Perjury, where they are pursuable for Mal-administration, which
were absurd, and was never practiced in any Nation. 3. When such Oaths as these
are given, these words, As ye shall answer to God, are ordinarily adjected,
rather to impresse a fear of the Deity upon the swearer, than to subject him by
the Oath to the hazard of Perjury: and the fear of Perjury is neither thought
upon considered by the Administrator, nor the swearer, so that non de hoc
agitur, at that time, which is one of the many things, that is always looked to
in punishing of Crimes. 4. If consequential Perjury had been punishable as
formal Perjury, there needed no Act to have been made, declaring that Bigamy
should be repute, and punished as Perjury, seeing it was such by consequence
before that Act. For the better clearing of this case, it will be fit to divide
Perjury in Formal and Consequential Perjury: and to conclude that formal
Perjury, which is in these cases declared Perjury by an express Act, should be
punishable as a Crime; But that consequential Perjury, as may be instanced in
the cases above-written, should not be punished as a Crime, but as an
Aggravation: for seeing in these the Perjurer did not formally design to commit
Perjury, is were not very rational to think, that he should be punished by the
formal punishment of that Crime: which distinction, I find likewise allowed by
the Civilians; for albeit formal Perjury was only punishable by Banishment, and
Infamy: Yet if any man died by that Perjury, as in false-witnessing in capital
Crimes, the Perjury was eo casu, punishable by death; and if it was mixed with
Treason, it was punishable as Treason.

Margaret Wood was in February 1631. pursued, for having perjured her self as a
false Witness, in so far, as she having been cited before the Privy Council,
and examined by them, she had deponed many false things against the Lord of
Pitcaple, and Richard Mowat: Against which pursuit, it was alleged for her, 1.
That she could not be pursued as a false Witness, because a Woman in our Law
cannot be a Witness, and consequently she cannot be a false Witness. 2. She did
not depon upon oath before the Council, and consequently she cannot be guilty
of Perjury, since, nemo sine juramento est perjurii reus; Nor is a person
deponing for the information of the Council, obliged before an oath be
administrat, to consider what she is deponing, as liable to the certification
of Perjury, and if it were otherwise, there needed no oath be administrat; so
that before the administration of an oath, the deponer being neither a witness,
nor sworn, can neither be guilty of perjury, nor false witnessing: much less
can she be guilty of perjury, in having deponed falsely, which is a complicated
crime, made up of perjury and falsehood. 3. She is but one single witness, and
so could not have prejudged by her testimony, the persons against whom she
deponed, and semper perpendendum est damnum, quod ex perjurio resultat, Carpz.
quaest. 46. n. 47. Likeas, here she retracted her own deposition her self,
before any pursuit was, or could be intented against those Gentlemen: and that
she deponed was the result of the confusion she was put in, by her appearance
before the Council, being a young Girl, not exceeding 18. so that her age and
sex should excuse her, si quis calore iracundiae, aut forte lingua lapsus, aut
praecipitatus, perjurium commisit, ei eo casu ignosci debet, Rens. lib. 3.
decis. 2. And there is nothing more natural, or less dangerous, then that a
guilt arising from a deposition, and mere words should be taken off in the same
way, especially, before any person be thereby prejudged, as in this case. 4.
This Libel could not be warrantably founded upon the Act of Q. M. which
punished only perjury committed in marrying two wives, but no other species of
perjury. To which it was answered, that as to the first defense, it was not
relevant, since she being cited before the Council, ought to have depon'd
truly, even for informing the Supreme Judicatory of the Nation, who use, and
must examine women for the good of the Commonwealth: especially in such
atrocious and occult crimes, as in the burning of the House of Frendraught. And
though the defender may in some cases cast a woman from being witness, yet that
excuses her not if she be examined. To the 2. Lawyers are clear, that a witness
may depon without being sworn, for the swearing them is not essential, since
the pursuer may remit it: And yet the witness who depones falsely, even though
not sworn, is a false witness, Bart. in l. si quis ff. ad l. Cornel. de falls.
Clar. h. t. number. 11. To the 3. it was not relevant, since she informed against
these Gentlemen in a treasonable point, and might have prejudged them: nor did
her retraction proceed from repentance, but confrontation; nor did she
accidentally only, or by confusion lapse into this error, she having spread
these misreports before she was cited, and having reiterated her confession
after citation. To the 4. the practice of the Kingdom was oppon'd, which is the
best interpreter of Laws. And in Anno 1615. Grahame of Long-boddom, and in Anno
1622. Turnbul of Belshes, and lately Dempster of Muresk, were punished with
death for deponing falsely, or seducing others to depon. But these points were
not decided.

VII. The punishment of Perjury by the Civil Law, was Banishment, l. ult. ff.
de crimine Stellionatus and fustigatio, or Scourging, l. si duo. si quis
perjuraverit. By our Law, Act 19. Parl. 5. Q. Mary, Bigamy is declared
punishable as Perjury, which is declared to be confiscation of all their
moveable Goods, warding of their Person for year and day, and longer during the
Kings will, and that as infamous persons they shall never be able to bruik
Office, Honor, Dignity, nor Benefice in time coming. As to which Act, it is
observable, 1. That Perjury is not formally punishable with us, but only
declaratorly Perjury being in it self so heinous a Crime; but the reason of
this seems to be, that Perjury was before this Act punishable, after this
manner, for by the 4. cap. lib. 1. Reg. Maj. it was appointed, that temere
jurantes super assisa spoliabuntur mobilibus and in carcerem detrudentur per
annum and diem adminus and infamiae notam incurrent and amittent legem terrae,
which Skeen interprets to be, non habere personam standi in judicio, and not to
be receivable as witnesses, either in judicio, or extrajudicium, which Act is
likewise ratified, by the 47. Act, Parl. 6. K. I. 3. where it is said, that
wilful or ignorant Assizers, Man-swearing shall be punished after the Kings old
Law, in the first Book of the Majesty.

Where Perjury is to be inferred from a Deposition, either as Party or witness,
it is necessar, that the Deposition be subscribed by him; and the Lords found
that Mr. James Row could not be convict of Perjury, upon his Deposition
subscribed by the Clerk.

Sometimes the Council change the punishment of Perjury into banishment; as in
the case of Galbraith, who came in will for Perjury. 23. July. 1625.

TITLE XXX. Of Injuries, Personal, and Real; And of infamous Libels.
1. Injuries are either verbal or real. 2. The requisits in Libelling verbal
injuries. 3. What are real injuries. 4. Who are Judges to verbal or real
injuries. 5. Infamous Libels, how punished. 6. Leasing-makers, how punished by
our Law.
I Have oftimes thought that men should walk legally, not only in obedience,
but gratitude to Law, since the Law takes so much pains to secure not only our
lives and estates, but even our honor and reputation, and will humor us so
far, as that because we will think railery a misfortune, it will therefore
punish even these who offend our imagination.

I. Injury then, in its more comprehensive sense, may give a name to all
crimes; for all crimes are injuries, but injury as it is the Subject of this
Title, is the same thing with contumely or reproach: It is divided by Lawyers,
into such as are committed by thoughts, deeds, words, and gestures; but the
more received division is, that injuries are either verbal, or real.

II. Verbal injuries are these which are committed by unwarrantable
expressions, as to call a man a cheat, or a woman a whore; but because
expressions vary according to the intention of the speaker, therefore except
the words can allow of no good sense, as Whore, or Thief, or that there ly
strong presumptions against the speaker, the injuriandi animus, the design of
injuring, as well as the injuring words, must be proved, and the speaker will
be allowed to purge his guilt, by declaring his intention, l. 5.. octavo, ff.
de injur. and his declaration will, without an oath, be sufficient, except the
offender be burdened with contrary presumptions, Berlich. conclus. 60. number. 18.
Lawyers therefore require in Libelling injuries, 1. That the particular
expressions be distinctly condescended upon; nor is the general, you called me
a Cheat, or said some such thing sufficient, seeing not only words but even the
pointing of them does alter the estimat of Injuries. 2. The pusuer should Libel
the design of injuring, except the words infer so clearly an Injury, that there
is no necessity to Libel the design. 3. That the pursuer who was injured, did
presently resent the injury, and took what was spoke for an Injury, which the
Lawyers call revocatio injuriae ad animum. And it is sufficient, that this
dissatisfaction be signified either openly and expressly, or by some other Acts
which testified discontent, ex incontinenti quis injuriam debet ad animum
revocare alias ex intervallo nihil facit sed injuria remissa censetur. ult.
just. de injur. And the reason of this seems to be, because the essence of a
verbal injury consists in dissatisfying the person to whom the words were
spoken, and words are only Injuries, if they be so taken, and therefore if they
were taken at first to be no injury, they were then no injury: And if they were
not then an injury, they could not afterward become such.

Since then Injuries are estimat according to the design of the offender, it
follows naturally, that men who are Fools, Idiots, very young, or very drunk,
are not punishable for verbal Injuries, except the offender did become drunk
upon design to offend, si non ex proposito sed ex impetu deliquit. And great
passions which break off all designing, justa and non affectata ira excuses
also in this case. As also for the same reason, the objecting true Crimes are
no injury, if the objecter designed principally not to offend the person
guilty, but to inform the Commonwealth, or to defend the speakers own honor.
And upon the first account, it was found, that the detecting what the
Commonwealth was not much concerned in, was an injury, Cravet. consil. 145.
And upon the last account, it is thought, that to give a man the lie, is an
injury, but that it is no injury to say you speak not truth; for in the one we
defend our own honor, but in the other we offend the honor of the speaker:
and custom has made the expression pass for an expression to be used when we
design to offend. The relating likewise what we heard from good Authors, who
designed no prejudice, is sufficient also to defend against the punishment due
to Injurers, as was found in the Court of Savoy Cod. fab. de injur. def. 5. Yet
sometimes injuries are inferred not only from express words, but even from the
presumptive meaning of the speakers; as to look in a man's face, and to say, I
am not a liar as others are, Afflict.. injuria. tit. de parjur. firm. or to
say, flauntingly, you are a fine Churchman, Jacob. de bello visu lib. 1. cap.
3. number. 31.

III. Real Injuries are committed, by hindering a man to use what is his own, by
removing his Seat out of its place in the Church, by giving a man medicaments
which may affront him, by Arresting his stoods unjustly, by wearing in contempt
what belongs to another man, as a mark of honor, by Razing shamfully a man's
hair, or beard, by offering to strike him in public, or by striking him, or
riving or abusing his clothes, or his house, and many other ways related by
Berlich. conclus. 69.

VI. According to our Law, verbal injuries, are punished only by the
Commissars, who are judices christianitatis: Scandal being a Church censure,
And the Commissars do inflict pecuniary mulcts, and make the offender do
penance at Church doors, or otherwise: nor, do ordinarily the Lords of
Session either Advocat such Actions, or modify their penalties.

The Council do use to remit to the Commissars such pursuits, and refuse to try
verbal injuries done to private persons, as in the case of Strauchan and
Straiton; but if the verbal injury was done to a Magistrate, as if any man
should call him a knave, or a fool, then the Council use to fine and to punish
even verbal injuries, as in the case of George Campbel, and the Bailiffs of
Inverary, 1666. Or to a Privy Counselor, as in the case of Mr. Alexander
Spotswood and the Justice Clerk. And though verbal injuries are extinguished by
the Civil Law, if they be not pursued within a Year, or by posterior
friendship; for the Law is most desirous to pass by such imaginary Crimes, yet
in George Campbels case, a subsequent reconciliation was not sustained as a
relevant exception, because it was not very express, they punish also
scandalum magnatum.

The Criminal Courts likewise punishes verbal injuries, if against Magistrates,
but will not sustain a pursuit against private persons, for though II. of
November, 1672. Aikman against Carnagy; nor would they sustain a Criminal
pursuit, for calling a Minister perjured, vid Stock. decis. 108. where he tells
us that it is the present custom of Brabant not to sustain Criminal Actions for
words, except they be spoken against Mag^strats in the exercise of their
employment, vid. l. ult. ff. de priv. delict.

Real Injuries may be pursued before the Council, or Justice Court, and the
punishment is arbitrary.

V. Infamous Libels, libelli famosi, are the most permanent of all Injuries,
and therefore are most severely punished; and in it the offender, shows more
design, and therefore is more guilty.

He who writes, dictats, or affixes infamous Libels, or causes writ, dictat, or
affix them, is punishable.

He who finds an infamous Libel, and shows it, though to one only, is
punishable, if malice or design can be proved, else not; for there is nothing
more ordinary, nor more innocently done for the most part, then to show such
Libels: whether dolus malus and animus iniuriandi, (a design to offend,) be
presumed in this delict, or must be proved, is much contraverted, Bertaz.
consil. 237. affirms that it is presumed. Farin. quest. 295. affirms it is not
presumed, but must be proved. And I incline to this last opinion, seeing
infamous Libels are not now so much resented as formerly, custom having much
allayed the picque which used to ensue thereupon, and that custom defends from
all guilt in this case, is most learnedly maintained by Coler. decis. 154.
where it was found that Stationers were absolved, though they sold infamous
Libels, because all Stationers use to sell such.

Many things do likewise in this case lessen the punishment, as that the Panel
is a minor, was provoked, did tear it before it was fully written, or after it
was affixt, or confessed his fault, and said he did it only out of passion, or
curiosity, or if what was said was true, Berlich. conclus. 67.

The punishment of this delict was of old arbitrary, Paul. lib. 5. sent. tit.
14. but was made capital by the edict, valentiniani and valentis l. unic. C. de
famos. libel. but Clar. makes it arbitrary by the present custom of Europ; And
so it is with us at present in Scotland, except where the Prince is abused, or
where a capital Crime is alleged against any man, for eo casu, infamous Libels
are justly punishable by death: And thus Fleeming was hanged for saying that he
wished that the King would shoot to dead and dye of the falling Sickness, 17.
May, 1615. but in this the words were maliciously spoken, for the speaker
utterred them because he had lost a Plea. But sometimes the speaker is only
Scourged and Banished, as Tweedy was 13. March, 1612. for abusing Constables
and bidding the King, the Council, and them, kiss his arse, and swearing he
cared not a fart for them, which words appeared both by the speaker, and the
contexture of the words, to have rather flowed from folly, then design. And
Spotswood in his History, relats, that the Schoolmaster of Edinburgh was
hanged for dispersing Libels against the Regent, wherein he charged him with
being guilty of capital Crimes.

Leasing makers.
VI. Like to this Crime, if not the same with it, is Leasing making, whereby
hatred and discord may be raised betwixt the King and his people, which was
punished with tinsel of life and goods, by the 43. Act, Parliament 2. King
James the 1. Likeas any misrepresentation (or evil information, as our Law
calls it) of the King to his people, is punishable in the same way, by the 83.
Act, Parliament 6. King James the 5. And though the slandering of His Majesty
might have been punished, by the reason of the first Act, yet we see that our
Predecessors did not think paritas rationis sufficient in punishing Crimes;
Upon which Acts a great person was found guilty of death, for writing a Letter,
wherein the Parliament was slandered, Anno 1662. But this was thereafter
rescinded by his Majesty. Likeas by the 20. A. of the 14. P. KI. 6. the hearing
and not revealing, and not apprehending of such Leasing makers, if it be in the
hearers power, is equally punished with the Leasing making; but because these
Acts could not reach to slanderers of His Majesty to His people in England, or
misrepresenting them to the King, or abusing any Privy Counselor of that
Kingdom, therefore the misrepresenting them is declared punishable at His
Majesty's pleasure, by the 9. Act, 20. Par. K. Ia. 6. By the same last Act,
dispersing or making Cockalands, or other infamous Libels against Counselors
of England, is punished as Leasing making.

TITLE XXXI. Poinding of Oxen, in time of laboring.
1. How this Crime is punished by our Law. 2. How by the Civil Law. 3. The
explication of our Act of Parliament in this case. 4. How the Civil Law and
ours differs in this point.
BY the 98. Act 6. Parl. Ia. 4. it is Statute, that no Sheriff, or Officer,
shall poind, or distreinzie the Oxen, Horse, or other goods, pertaining to the
Plough, and that labors the ground, the time of the laboring of the same,
where any other Goods, or Lands are to be Apprized, or Poinded, according to
the Common Law.

II. The Common Law, to which this relates, is l. 8. C. quae res pig. oblig.
possunt, pignorum gratia aliquid quod ad culturam agri pertinet auferri non
convenit, and by the subsequent, authent ibid. agricultores terrarum securi
sunt, ita ut nullus inveniatur tam audax; ut personas boves and agrorum
instrumenta aut si quid aliud, quod ad agrorum rusticorum operam pertineat
invadere aut capere praesumat: and siquis hoc statutum violare praesumpserit,
in quadruplum ablata restituat and infamiae notam ipso jure jucurrat, imperiali
animadversione nihilominus puniendus, and Maranta de ordine jud. part. 6. Act
3. number. 31. relates, that this Law is confirmed in Sicilie, by an express
Statute; and all these Laws seem to be founded, on Deuteronomy. 24. verse. 6. No man
shall take the upper nor nether millstone to pledge: for he takes a man's life
to pledge. (...). as Grotius observes, out of Philo. which are called mola and
catillus, l. cum de lanionis. idem consultus. ff. de instructo vel instrumento
legato.

III. By the foresaid Act of Parliament, the Poinding of such Goods is forbid,
in the time of laboring, but it is not declared to be a Crime; and the Lord
Renton having, in January 1666. pursued the Officer of the Court of
Coldinghame, for poinding one of his Plough Oxen, when they were laboring,
before the Criminal Court, is was alleged that no criminal pursuit, could be
founded upon this Act, seeing nothing could be criminally pursued, but that
which was made a Crime, by a special Statute, and to which a special sanction
was annexed. Likeas by the constant custom, many actions of Spoilzie were
founded upon this Act; but no criminal pursuit was ever thereupon intented: To
which it was replied, that the contempt of a Law, was in it self a Crime; seeing
disobedience to Authority, was in effect the basis of all Crimes. 2. Illegal
intrometring with another man's Goods, was a Crime, especially ubi lex non solum
non assistebat, sed and restistebat, for theft is nothing else but an
unwarrantable intromission, and as the taking of His Majesty's free Liedges is
a Crime, where the same is not warranted by Law; so the poinding of these Goods
should infer a Crime, that being another species of unlawful execution. 3. This
Act discharges such executions, conform to the Common Law. And by the Common or
Civil Law, this is a Crime, as is clear by the Law above cited; and whereas, it
was alleged that no sanction was annexed: It was replied, that where the Law
annexes no sanction, the punishment is there arbitrary; and there are many
Crimes, both in the Civil Law and outs, to which no sanction is annexed. The
Justices sustained the Libel, and ordained the Panel to go to the knowledge of
an Inquest: The express words of the Interloquutor were, that the poinding an
Ox, in the time of laboring, is an injury and wrong, punishable by the Law,
paena aplicanda filco. And thereafter, the three Pannels were found guilty,
though it was not expressly proved, that the Ox was laboring actually, the
time of the poinding, but only that he used to labor, and was in the Plough
the week before, and the Country was then laboring, all which are necessary
qualifications of this Crime, and so are necessary interrogators after
pronouncing of which doom, the Justices fined each of the three Pannels, in
forty Pound Scots. And yet in June 1674. a reply against lawfully poinded,
being proponed in a pursuit for theft; the case was by the Justices referred,
to be first civily pursued. It was here also alleged, that by the 34. Act. 4.
Parl. I. 5. where Crimes may be criminally, and civily pursued, the civil
pursuit ought first to be discus'd, which was repelled, because, though a civil
pursuit of spoilzie were intented, there could no defense, such as lawfully
poinded, authore praetore, etc. which are usual in other cases, be proponed
here, seeing though the executions were formal, and the Decree whereupon they
proceeded irreduceable; yet to poind a laboring Ox, in laboring time, is in
all cases unlawful, and itacessat hoc casu ratio legis. 2. The defender could
not plead the benefit of this Act, except he first acknowledged, that the
wrong here committed was a Crime, for the Act runs only in such cases, as may
be civilly, or criminally pursued.

IV. It is observable, that albeit this Act relate to the Common Law, yet they
differ in many points, as 1. The persons of laborers could not be apprehended
by that Law, but by ours they may. 2. By that Law no distinction is made,
whether there were other poindable Goods or not; but by ours, these particulars
may be poinded, or Lands may be apprized; and therefore such as raise Criminal
Letters upon this Act, should libel, that such Goods were poinded in laboring
time, and that the owner, or debtor had other Goods and Lands, against which
the creditor could have had execution: Albeit I think, he is not obliedged to
prove this; but that this is, ex eorum numero quae allegari sed non probari
debent, yet if the Messengers execution be produced, bearing, that he searched,
and could find no other Movables, I think, that eo casu, the Messengers
execution should make Faith, except the pursuer offer instantly, to condescend
upon these other Movables, that were extant, and be ready to prove the same. I
find, that if the Messengers executions bearing in an Apprizing, that he
searched, but could find no Movables, they are so far believed, that no
contrary Probation will be received, for else all Comprizngs might be reduced;
yet I think, that the case is not alike here, for the Act being so express, it
should be sufficient to defend against a crime, (though not to reduce a real
diligence,) that other Movables were extant.

Under the prohibition of this Act, are comprehended, not only the Goods that
are in the Plough, but these Horses which lead foggage, for without these, Land
cannot be labored; and so the reason of the Law extends to them: likeas, the
Act of Parliament expresses separatly, and distinctly, Goods pertaining to the
Plough, and that labors the ground: nor are these words that labors the
ground, exegetick only.

By these words, in time of laboring, are mean'd, not only when the beasts are
actually laboring, but the season of laboring, and that from the time of
strieking, to upseed time; and therefore Goods that had once tilled, though in
October, seem not poindable, for then laboring is as necessar as in the
Spring; and yet the contrary was found, the 15. of November, 1627. and the 22.
of November, 1628. because as is there alleged by Durie, October is not the
season of laboring.

It may be doubted, whether Horse leading foggage in June and July, can be
poinded, for that is the season of that kind of laboring.

TITLE XXXII. Bearing of unlawful Weapons.
1. What is the punishment of this Crime by our Law. 2. What by the Civil Law.
3. Who are Judges competent to it.
I. BEaring of Hagbuts, Pistols, and other Fireworks, were punished of old by
amputation of the right hand, but by the 6. Act, Parliament 16. Ia. 6. the
bearing of such weapons is forbidden, though no prejudice be done by the
wearers, who may be pursued, either before the Council, or Justice Court, and
the punishment by the Council is declared not to be corporal, but only
confiscation of their movables, or syning and imprisonment; but prejudice of
any pursuit before the Justice Court, who it appears may inflict the former
punishment of cutting off the right hand.

It would seem that by this act the Panel is oblidged to give his oath before
the Justices, which is not usual in any crime, except that of Usury, for the
probation by oath is indefinitly subjoyned to pursuits before the Justices or
Council. And albeit the Council does immediately preceed, yet that probation by
oath seems not to relate solely to the procedure before the Council. For when
the procedure before the Council is repeated, the probation by witnesses is
only there mentioned. Yet I think there is an error in the printing of this
Act, for it is very unreasonable, that when this Crime is proved before the
Council by witnesses, that no amputation shall be remitted, and yet this
privilege should not be extended to those against whom it is proved by their
own oath.

It is observable from this Act, that the Council may force such as are pursued
before them to give their oaths, albeit it may be alleged, that nemo tenetur
crimen contra se probare.

By this Act likewise, all licenses to bear their Weapons are ordained to be
past in Council, and to pay a composition to the Thesaurer, and to pass his
Register and all the Seals, else to be null.

II. By the Civil Law, the bearing of these Weapons was a crime also. l. 11. C.
ut armorum usus and by the Feudal Law, c. 1.. si quis. de pace tenenda. and
tenebatur paena legis juliae de vi publica, which was arbitrary: And the Gloss
observes, that the carrying of such Arms was repute public violence, though no
prejudice was done, which is consonant to the Act of Parliament. But it is
strange that only Fireworks, or ingines should be forbidden by that Act. Nor
can the carrying Pikes, Swords, or any other weapons, be punished by that Act.

By the Civil Law likewise, the prohibit Arms were confiscat, and Marsil. in
prac. pro complemento, N. 12. Carerius and Clar. declared, that by the custom
both of Spain and other places, the Arms are confiscat, albeit there be no
express warrant for that confiscation by the Statute, but it may be doubted if
the true owner having lent them without being conscious to the crime, will
loss them, and I think, not

But keeping of such Weapons at home is not punishable neither by the foresaid
Act, nor common Law, by which likewise it is lawful for such as travel to bear
such Weapons, for their own preservation, and generaliter licet portare arma
defensiva; but our Law allows no such distinction. And I remember that John
Macknaughton, being pursued before the Council for bearing forbidden Weapons,
they repelled this defense, viz. that he was traveling (unless the journey
could have been alleged necessary, for else the Act might still be eluded) and
that it was the custom of the Highlands to go still well attendded and armed,
which defense seemed to some ill repelled, for self-defence, and the custom of
the Country, excuses still from this crime, Farinac. de diver. crim. questi.
108.

By the common Law, offensive Arms, such as Swords and Pistols, were forbidden,
and the bearers punished, albeit no prejudice followed; but the carrying Stones
and Trees, and such other things as were not, ex sua natura offensiva, was only
punishable, if violence was done by the bearers, l. armorum ff. de verb. sig.

III. Their pursuits are more ordinarily before the Council, than the Justice
Court, and is ordinary Libelled as an aggravation, rather then a crime. Thus I
find William Hamiltoun pursued for wearing of Pistols, and presenting one to
the Provost of Edinburgh, whereupon he came in will, and was banished the Realm
during his lifetime, 1. Novem. 1597.

The prosecution of this crime concerns only his Majesty's interest. And
therefore the diet was deserted, because His Majesty's Advocat, nor none to
represent him, did not concur, nor was the Libel raised at his instance, 20.
July, 1596. Mr. James Leask, against Andrew Red.

TITLE XXXIII. Beggars and Vagabonds.
1. How Beggars and Vagabonds are to be punished by our Law. 2. How by the
Civil Law.
OUr Law has been so charitable, as to provide for Beggars, by special
Statutes, Ia. 1. Parl. 1. cap. 25. Ia. 1. Parl. 1. cap. 42. Ia. 4. P. 6. Parl.
cap. 70. Ia. 5. Parl. 4. cap. 21. But sturdy Beggars (our Law calls them
Egyptians oftimes, as the French calls them Bohemians) and Vagabonds should be
proceeded against by the Sheriffs, and other Judges, and they may exact caution
of them, and if they find none, they should be denounced fugitives, Ia. 6.
Parl. 1. cap. 97. and may be sent to public Workhouses, or put in the Stocks,
Ia. 6. Parl. 12. cap. 124.144. and 147. Item. Ia. 6. Par. 15. cap. 268. and if
they be recept after they are denounced fugitives, their receptors are liable
for the prejudice sustained, and the parties damnified, will have action
against the Magistrates, within whose bounds or jurisdiction these Vagabounds
are recept wittingly, Ia. 6. Parl. 11. cap. 97. But this Act determines not,
whether this wittingly relates to the receptor, or Magistrate; yet by the common
Law, the adverb scienter, is still applicable to the person, against whom the
penal Statute runs; so that except the Magistrate know that the Vagabond was
harbored within his bounds, it were severe to sustain action of damnage and
interest against him, though the receptor knew the Vagabond, and did wittingly
recept him. But I think, that if the Magistrate did either omit his duty, he
will be liable, nam scire and scire debere aequiparantar, or if he was
willingly ignorant.

I find that A. B. -- being pursued criminally, for general recepting
Vagabonds, this action was not sustained, but he was referred to the Kirk
Session, which it seems was done, because of the 147. Act, Parl. 12. Ia. 6.
whereby Ministers, Elders and Deacons, may nomin^t any two of their number, to
enquire into this crime, and whom His Majesty makes, and constitutes Justices
as to that effect. It appears by a Proclamation, emitted by the Council, in
Anno 1603. these Egyptians were ordered to leave the Kingdom, upon pain of
death, which is ratified by the 13. Act Parl. 20. Ja. 6. and upon that Act of
Parliament, Moses shaw and other Egyptians, Sorners and Vagabonds, were hanged
the last of July, 1611.

II. Our Law has in this, followed exactly, the Civil, for there is a title in
the Codex, de mendicantibus validis, our sturdy Beggars: and the novel. 80.
this Crime was also called by the Athenians, (...) sive otii ignavi de quo vide
heigium, l. 2. quest. 27.

TITLE XXXIV. Robery, Oppression, vis publica and privata.
1. The several Epithets given to Robbery, and how it is distinguished from
other Crimes. 2. Common Theft, and Stouthrief, how punished by our Law. 3.
Several decisions, as to this Crime. 4. How the assisting of Robbers is
punished by our Law. 5. In what cases is it lawful to join against Robbers. 6.
The punishment of oppression by our Law. 7. In what cases the civil right is to
be discussed, before the violence can be criminally punished. 8. How Oppression
was termed by the Civil Law, and how it was thereby punished. 9. What
Concussion is, and how punished. 10. Black mail how punished.
MEn may by diligence and circumspection, defend themselves against Theft, and
these who steal clandestinely, show a reverence, even to that Law which they
transgress; but Robbery and Oppression are Crimes, against which there can be
no fence: and in which, these who violat the Law, contemn the Legislators. To
defend them against these, men did associat themselves under Government, and
renounced their native liberty, for the protection of Law: nor can Law justify
the severity of its punishments, and the great exactions it requires, but by
returning to these it commands, a sweet and pleasant security, against all
rapine and violence.

I. When Theft is aggraged by violence, it is called Robbery, from the Germane
word Raube; and is with us called Stouthrieff, Stouth signifying Theft, and
Rieff signifying violence: In which Crime, our Persons are endangered as well
as our Estates, and so is ordinarily punished by death, even in these
Countries, where Theft is only punishable by pecunial mulcts, or whipping, and
thus it was punished with death amongst the Jews, as is clear, by David's answer
to Nathans Parable, though Theft was only punished by restitution; and though
Calistratus, l. 28.. grassatores, ff. de paenis, seems to make such only
punishable, if they Robb frequently, and in high ways, and with Arms,
grassatores qui praedae causa id faciunt proximi latronibus habentur; and si
cum ferro aggredi and spoliare instituerunt capite puniuntur. Utique si saepius
atque in itineribus hoc admiserunt caeteri in metallum dantur, aut in insulas
relegantur. Yet by the custom of all Nations, Robbery is punished with death,
though it be not reiterated; and I think, that Law must be only understood of
such, as designed to Robb, qui instituerunt, who are punishable, though they
actually Robbed nothing, and had no design to kill, but to plunder, predae
causae, if they went out frequently, and to high ways with that design, for if
they actually Robbed, or had a design to kill, though they killed not, yet they
are still punishable by death, by all Laws, (...).

II. The quality of frequent and common committing Theft and Robberies, is not
only a quality that raises the Crime of Theft alone, from being punishable by
restitution, to be punishable by death in other nations, but by the 51. Act,
11. Parl. I. 6. It is declared, that landed men who are convict of common
Theft, Recept of Theft, or Stouthreif, shall incur the crime and pain of
treason; upon which Act, it was contraverted, whether the word common, was a
quality and adjunct to be added to the Recept of Theft, and Stouthreif as well
as Theft, since the Act says but only common Theft, not common Recept of
Theft, nor common Stouthreif; and it was urged, that it was reasonable, that
this should be understood of all, seeing it was that quality, which rendered
them Treason. For simple Recept, would not have been declared treasonable of it
self; and by the foresaid l. 28. the reiterating this crime, aggraged it from
banishment, to death, and in the o^dinary way of speaking, men cease not to
repeat such words: Likeas it was just, that as the crimes were in Landlesse men
punishable, only by restitution, or death, if repeated so in Landed men, the
punishment should grow proportionally, and infer death or Treason, if commonly
committed.

To which it was answered, that the words of the Act of Parliament, are
conceived disjunctively; Likeas it seems, that if the Parliament had designed,
to add the word common, to Receipt and Stouthreif, they would have added the
same to prevent this objection: and it seems indeed, that Stouthreif, which is
that species of Theft, that we call Robery, deserves to be punished as Treason
in landed men, though they do not commonly commit the same, because it being
easier for landed men to commit Robbery, and it being more probable, that they
would Rob than steal, this crime ought to be as severely punished in them, as
common Theft; and accordingly the foresaid alledgiance being proponed for James
Wood, the 21. May 1601. it was repelled.

III. In this process likewise, the said James, having been pursued for robbing
the writs and evidents belonging to Bonitown, It was alleged, that the pursuer
ought to condescend upon the Lands, to which these evidents belonged, because
if that were condescended on, the Panel would prove, that the said Lands, and
consequently, the evidents did belong to himself, which alledgiance was
likewise repelled, nor was it found necessary, that a Civil precognition should
proceed in this case; and in June 1668. it was found that a Libel was relevant,
bearing in general, that Jewels or Pearls were stolen, without condescending
upon the particular number of them; and it being alleged for the Macgibbons,
December. 8. 1676. that the Libel was not relevant, not condescending upon the
persons from whom the goods were robbed, nor what goods were robbed, but only
in the general, that the Pannels did frequently rob the houses of Garntilly,
and Strathurds tennents.

To this it was answered, that though where private parties pursue, ad interesse
privatum; such a condescendance is nessary, because the informers may know, nor
can the private damnage be repaired, except his loss be liquidly proved; yet
when the pursuit is at His Majesty's instance, and that an habitual, and
constant trade of robbing, and sorning, is libelled, It is sufficient to libel
in general, and if the speciality be not proved, the Pannels have no prejudice,
for they will not be found guilty, nor will the probation be conc^uding; but it
is all one to His Majesty, which of His subjects be robbed, or what be taken
away, it being His Majesty's interest, that no constant, and habitual Robbery
be committed in his Kingdoms; nor is there any thing more ordinary, then to
sustain Libels against such as are guilty of open rebellion, without
condescending upon the particular persons who were killed or robbed in that
Rebellion. And whereas it was urged, that if the particular goods alleged to
be robbed, were condescended on, the Libel might be elided by this suitable
defense, viz. that they had a right to the goods, or had the consent of the
owner; It might have been answered, that they were not precluded from such
defenses, by the generality of the Libel, for the Pannels might allege that
the taking away of such and such goods could not infer Robbery, because they
had a right to these goods, or were warranted to take them away by the consent
of the owner.

The Justices sustained this Libel, notwithstanding of the generality foresaid.

Alexander Steil being pursued in August 1669. for stealing and Robbing,
evidents, writs, and clothes, out of Captain Barclays house, who was his Master
at that time.

It was found that the pursuer, behoved to prove, that the said evidents were
taken away by force, or breaking up of doors, and that the servants having of
them was not sufficient to infer Theft, though he had delivered them to a third
party: and albeit this should be proved, yet the Justices found this
alledgeance relevant, viz. that this deposition alleged to be stolen, being
given to the Panel, that he might counterfeit the subscription, and he having
no freedom to comply therewith, he did run away to the Lord Fyvie, and
delivered up the same to him without any reward, which alledgeance was found
relevant, as said is, though it seems to be contrary to the Libel, and as to
the wearing clothes, the Libel was not found relevant, except it had been
proved that they belonged to Captain Barclay, and were under his locks at the
time, since it was offered to be proved, that the servant had worn these
clothes publicly in his Masters service, which purged the presumption of
Theft. It may be doubted what a poor servant could do, if he had broken up the
doors really at his Masters desire, who had sent him home to bring papers,
though he could not prove the command otherwise then by his masters oath, for
his master might always easily prove the breaking up of the doors.

IV. So odious is this crime, and so frequent was it, that by the 21. Act,
Parl. 1. Ia. 6. all such as recept, fortify, maintain, or give meat, harbor,
or assistance to any such Robbers, are declared art and part, but it would
appear that this Act strikes only where there are Letters of Intercommuning,
and that because the Act it self bears, to the effect it should be known to
what purpose they Intercommuned, and because it were too severe to punish men
as thieves, except they were put in mala fide, so to do, by public
Proclamation, or Letters of Intercommuning.

V. By the 227. Act, Parl. 14. I. 6. It is declared (for the same hatred
against Robbers) lawful to all his Majesty's Leidges to concur and join
against Clann and Border Thieves, and to take and execute them; all Magistrates
and Freeholders, being made Justices for that effect, by the said Act. But
this part of the Act is now in desuetude; and it appears to have been but
temporary, quo ad the power of executing, but Robbers may be lawfully seized on
without authority.

VI. Oppression is ordinarily but a quality of other crimes, but yet there are
sometimes special dittayes founded thereupon, per se; and there are some
particular Acts declaring several species of it to be punishable, as reif, or
by other specific punishments mentioned in the said Acts; and thus it is
oppression to compel the Kings proper Tennents to ride, or do service of
Avarage, Carriage, Shearing, Leading, etc. and should be punished accordingly,
Act 21. P. 2. I. 4. It is oppression to take Caups (that is to say, a duty for
protection to be given by private men to such as thieves, and other great men)
Acts 18. and 19. Parl. 2. Ia. 4. vid. de verb. signif. It is oppression for a
Crafts-man to take custom, or any other taxation, from another of that same
Craft, or for them to make private Acts among themselves, prejudicial to the
people, Acts. 42. and 43. Parl. 4. James. 4. Act. 111. Parl. 7. I. 5. and Act.
4. Par. 19. Ia. 6. It is oppression for Customers to exact more then their due,
Act. 46. P. 4. I. 4. It is oppression to molest Magistrates of Burghs, and other
Merchands to use their privileges and liberties, Act. 26. Parl. 4. Ia. 5. It
is a kind of Oppression, to exact more fraught from Passengers, or greater
prices for Weavers and handiwork, then what is allowed and usual. Acts 21 and
23. Parl. 5. Q. M. It is oppression to stop or make impediment of common high
ways, to, or from Burghs, Act 54. Parl. 6. Q M. It is oppression for Officers
to extort the Leidges, Act 33. P. 5. I. 3. and Act 83. Parl. 11. I. 6. or to
put out, or put in the Roll of Assizours given to him by the pursuer. Act 88.
Parl. 11. I. 6. In which last Act common oppressors are punishable by death:
Oppression is also punishable by death, Act. 42. Parl. 4. Ia. 4. Act 88. Parl.
11. Ia. 6.

VII. Because oftimes in their cases, the Panel pretends, that what he did take
by force, was his own, or that he had a right thereto, therefore except the
violence be very great, the Justices use to ordain the matter of right to be
first discussed before the Civil Judge, as was found in November. 1675 in the
case of Inglis of East-sheilds, and in many other cases: and by the 33. Act. 4.
Parl. I. 5. It is declared, that as for depredation, masterful reiffs, and
spoilzies, particular dyets shall be set therefore at the discretion of the
Lords, the matter being first Civilly discussed before them. Upon which Act it
is oftimes alleged before the Justices, that the cause must be civilly
discussed before the Session, in all masterful reiffs, before they can proceed
to cognosc thereupon; but notwithstanding of this the Justices do constantly
sustain Criminal processes for Reiffs and Robberies, without any previous civil
precognition; and they find this Act to be now in desuetude, as in the case of
Monimusk 27. of November 1611. And I think, that by Lords, in that act are not
meaned the Lords of S^ssion, for that Act is two Years prior to the institution
of the Session, but that by Lords, there, are meant the Justices themselves,
for there being no Session at that time, the Justices were Judges competent to
many Civil cases, originally such as perambulations, etc. and to all Civil
cases, if they had a necessary connection with, or dependence upon criminal
cases. And therefore, where the person who was alleged to have committed
masterful reiffs, or spuilzies, could pretend that what he did was in
prosecution of his own right. The Justices had a latitude to try the matter of
right, first Civilly, but this was never necessary, for it is by the Act left
to the discretion of the Judge.

It remains then, to be considered, how far the taking away by violence what is
really a man's own, can infer a guilt against him. Which difficulty may be
cleared in these few conclusions, 1. That the thing violently possessed, though
by a common spuilzie, and much more by a masterful reiff, ought to be restored,
nam spoliatus est ante omnia restituendus, and that though he who took away
what was his own, could instantly prove his right; and since this holds, where
the violence was only committed by a simple Riot, it should by a stronger
consequence hold, where the thing was taken away by such violent means as
amounted to a crime, and so this should be no good defense, either against a
Criminal, or Civil pursuit. 2. Not only ought the thing to be restored, but
even the true Proprietar who intrometted with his own, by open force and
violence is punishable, for the Law will not allow that any man should be Judge
to himself, but much less that he should use violence, and force upon any
account, and this were to invade or assume Jurisdictions, which is in it self a
crime.

The third conclusion is, that if any man do by force or violence, extort from
another, a writ, or obligation, which he could have obliedged him in Law to
grant, that force is not only punishable Criminally, but the deed so extorted
is reducable by a Civil pursuit: as was found in January 1675. Though it was
alleged there, that such force might be Criminally punished, yet the deed so
granted could not be reduced, since such deeds were only reduceable, where
something might be restored, but here nothing was to be restored; since the
deposition alleged to be extorted by force, depended upon a former minut, by
virtue whereof the granter could have been compelled to have granted the same;
and this was the same case, as if a Creditor should compel his Debtor by
force, to pay him what was his own, in which, though the force be punishable,
yet the Debtor could not repeat what he had justly paid, as is clear, not
only by common sense and reason, but l. 12. ff. quod met. cause. Iulianus ait
eum qui vim adhibuit ut debitori suo ut ei solverit hoc edicto non teneri
propter naturam actionis metus causa quae damnum exegit quamvis negari non
possit in Iuliam eum de vi incidisse and jus crediti amiss. To which it was
answered, that there could be nothing more disadvantagious to the interest of
the Commonwealth, nor a greater usurpation against authority, then that every
man should be his own Judge, and force the Executioner; and the Law justly
presumed, that he had no legal right, who would not pursue i^ in a legal way,
and if this were allowed every man would discuss his own Suspension himself,
by forcing his Debtor to pass from it, and would force the Heir of his
Debtor, to give him Bond, or his Debtor himself, to fulfill all minutes without
any regal pursuits; every Master would thus thrust out his Tennents, and every
Creditor force his Debtor to pay, by carrying him away Prisoner, and when he
were that length he would allege that nihil illi deest, and as to the former
Law, it was answered, that the Civil Law in detestation of force and violence,
did allow three several remedies to the person violented. viz. Edictum praetor
is quod metus causa, etc. Lex julia which punishes the force as a Crime, and
decretum divi Marci, all which three are expressly mentioned in that Title, and
though by the old edict, and the Lex julia, he who forced his debtor to pay
what was justly due, could not be by these remedies restored, quia nihil decrat
vim passo, as the Law formerly cited does prove; yet, ex decreto divi Marci,
which was posterior to these remedies (as Marcus Antoninus was long posterior
to Julius Caesar) even he who took payment of his own, could not defend himself
by alleging upon his right: which excellent Law is set down, l. 13. ff. quod
motus causa. Quisquis igitur probatus mihi fuerit rem ullam debitoris vel
pecuniam debitam non ab ipso sibi sponte datam sine ullo judice tempore
possidere, vel accipisse, isque sibi jus in eam rem dixisse, jus crediti non
habebit. And Faber upon that Law does excellently conclude, that this was a
just supplement of the former Law: and Cujacius allows this remedy, not only to
the public, but even to the private party, for qui sibi jus dicit jus crediti
non habebit, which implies an annulling of the deed, quo ad privatum interesse.
And Cujacius observes well that the party forced, potest condicere, and how can
it be imagined, that the Law would ordain the extorter to be punished, and yet
not restore that which was extorted, the publicks interest resulting only from
the private injury done to the Party, and as the Fisk uses not to pursue without
an informer, so the private party injured, would not inform, nor concur, since
he could not expect any reparation, and thus the Crime and injury would remain
unpunished: But even according to the l. 12. and 14. so much founded on, it is
most clear, that they were not in the case of these Laws, but on the contrary,
that even by these Laws, the foresaid principle is just, since restitution is
still to be granted, ubi actori aliquid abest and ubi damnum intervenit; but so
it is, that in this case the pursuer is extremely prejudged by this disposition
craved to be reduced, ex capite metus, since if it were reduced, he would
easily defend himself against the alleged minut, upon many grounds then
represented. It was also urged, that though in the restitution of Minors, the
Law restores them only when they are Leas'd, since that remedy is mainly
introduced for their advantage; yet in reductions, ex capite metus, the Law
designs mainly, that no man should have advantage by his own oppression, nor no
man be obliedged without his own consent, and so it rescinds the deed, though
the party be not leas'd, and the edict it self says, quod metus causa gestum
erit ratum non habebo, without considering laesion, and quod ratum non est,
irritandum est, that is to say, is reduceable. And whereas it was pretended,
that the former brocard, Spoliatus est ante omnia restituendus, did only hold
where the thing was taken away, vi ablativa, because that could be easily
proved, but not in deeds extorted, vi compulsiva, which force depending upon
inward Acts of the mind, could not so easily be discovered, and could be easily
mistaken.

To this it was answered, that though those two differ in themselves, yet
either of them infer restitution, as we see all alongs the Title, quod metus
causa, and in the practice of our reductions, ex capite metus. In both which,
deeds extorted, vi compulsiva, are reduceable, and the persons injured restored
against them, and since vis compulsiva, can infer more prejudice, then vis
ablativa, since vis ablativa can only robb us of movables, whereas vis
compulsiva, can robb us of our estates; it were strange that the Law should not
assist the injured persons, most where they may be most injured; nor can it be
denied, but that compulsion, falls as much under sense, and so can be as easily
proved as a spuilzie can. For though it may be doubted whether some degrees of
force, should always infer restitution, yet the probation of these degrees, if
once admitted, is always easy.

The Crimes answering in the Civil Law to oppression, were vis publica, vis
privata, and concussio. Those were punishable, l. julia de vi publicae, who
raised Arms, or did violently eject men out of their houses, or lands, (...) l.
4. Basil. h. t. these who assisted the Oppressors with men, are guilty thereof,
and the punishment was, aquae and ignis interdictio. These were guilty of vis
privata, who oppressed upon a private account, and the punishment was the
confiscation of the third part of their goods, with infamy.

Concussion was that Crime, whereby money or any thing else was extorted by
open force, or who employed their power and authority as the instrument of
Oppression. I have seen processes and remissions relating to this crime with
us, and the punishment of it is arbitrary, both by the Civil Law and ours.

The taking of black-mail, is a kind of Concussion in our Law, and by
black-mail is understood, the paying of money, or any gratuity to thieves, for
their protection, and by our Law not only the takers but the payers of
black-mail, are punishable as thieves and Robbers, by the 21. Act Par. 1. Ia.
6. and dittay is ordained to be taken up against them, Act 102. Parl. 11. Ia.
6. and the reason why the givers are liable, is because they maintain the
Thieves, and keep correspondance with them, and do not dilate them. But yet
except there be something of compliance, or a long tract of payment libelled,
the Justices do not use to sustain payment of black-mail by it self, as a crime
to infer any severe punishment, much less to infer the pains of Theft and
Robbery, conform to the fore^aid Acts, that payment being ordinarily more the
effect of fear, then of compliance.

TITLE XXXV. Art and Part, Open and Consilio.
1. These words, Art and Part, explained. 2. The Act of Parliament, ordaining
that Libels bearing Art and Part, shall be relevant, fully considered. 3. How
far advice and counsel, do import accession. 4. How far the giving order to
commit a crime, imports accession. 5. How far the command of a Superior
excuses. 6. How far the command of a Father excuses. 7. Who are constructed
in Law to be assisters. 8. How a Crime may be ratified, and what is the import
of Ratification. 9. Whether accessories can be pursued, till the principal
actors be first discussed. 10. Whether accomplices and accessories are to be
punished by the punishment due to the principal Malefactor.
NOt only these who are the actual committers of crimes, but these by whose
counsel, direction, or assistance, any crime is committed, are likewise
punishable, else the Law might be easily eluded, and the chief contrivers might
escape.

I. These who are assisters by counsel, or otherwise, are in our Law said to
be Art and Part of the crime, by Art is meant that the crime was contrived by
their art or skill, eorum art; by part is meant, that they were sharers in the
crime committed, when it was committed, and quorum pars magna. The Civilians
used in place of Art and part, open and consilio: and these who assisted, and
are art and part, are by our Law called Accomplices, which word is borrowed from
the Doctors, for the call Consiliarios fautores and instructores accomplices,
Carer. pract. crim.. homicidium, number. 14.

II. By the 151. Act, 11. Parl. I. 6. It it ordained, that nothing can be
objected against the relevancy of that part of the Summonds, which bears, that
the persons complained upon, are art and part of the crimes Libelled; by the
relevancy of the Libel, our Law means that the Libel is rite libellatus. And I
find the term relevant, used by the Doctors themselves, in the same sense that
it is used by us: and thus Gail. l. 1. obs. 86. judex debet tantum admittere
articulos relevantes.

The reason of the former Act is there rendered to be, because diverse
exceptions were formerly propounded against the relevancy of the Summonds,
whereby parties were frustrat of justice; and it appears by that Act, that the
pursuer was before the making of that Act, obliged to Libel, that the defender
was accessory to the committing, and so guilty of the crime, in swa far as,
etc. and so was forced to condescend upon the manner of the accession, which
seemed unjust to the Parliament, because (as I conjecture) the accuser could
not know all the accession, before the examination of the witnesses; for it is
not lawful to witnesses, prodere testimonium, to declare what they will depon:
and this made it impossible for the pursuer to condescend exactly; whereas if
he erred in exact Libelling, the Panel or defender was assoilzied, because the
probation did not quadrat with the Libel. As for instance, if a person was
accused for accession to the murder of one, in swa far as he gave direction to
A. B. to kill him, possibly the defender was guilty of accession, though not by
giving direction; yet by counselling A. B. or by directing P. or any other, to
commit murder. In these and the like cases, the Panel was guilty, and yet
could not be condemned, because the Libel was not proved. Yet, upon the other
hand, it seems hard, that such a general Libel as this, should be relevant;
since it were as reasonable to Libel in general, that a person is guilty of
murder, which generality would not be allowed: Likeas, the defender seems by
this precluded of many defenses, which would be competent to him, if the Libel
were more special. And by the practice of other Nations, the Libel must
condescend specially upon the manner and nature of the accession: But that
which seems to me most inconvenient, is, that the Assizers are Judges to the
relevancy of the condescendency, which infers art and part. Albeit many
questions, in jure, are there started, which are very intricat, and which have
troubled the greatest and most accurate Doctors; for by our practique, the
pursuer, who Libels art and part, will not be obliged to condescend how the
defender is art and part, or accessory to the Crime committed, as was found in
the pursuit at Sinclars instance, against Captain Barclay: But the Libel being
relevant, when art and part is Libelled, the defender must go to the knowledge
of an Inquest, and probation is thereupon led; in which many impertinent and
irrelevant Interrogators are propounded; whereas, if the Justices were Judges
to the relevancy, no impertinent Interrogator would be allowed, since nothing
could be interrogated, but what were found to depend necessarily upon the
accession, which was found relevant. As also, after the probation is closed,
the Advocats upon both sides are forced to debate the relevancy of the
probation, and how far the accession is relevant; and here Laws, decisions, and
Doctors, are alleged to Assizers, who understand neither. As for instance, if
art and part of murder be Libelled, probably the pursuer will interrogat if the
witnesses heard the defender say, that it were no fault though the person who
is killed were stabbed, or approve the murder, after it was committed; upon
which much debate might arise, for the defenders Procurators would contend that
the Article was not relevant: And though the Justices did allow, or the
Assizers did desire, that the witnesses should answer to these Interrogators,
as they usually allow all Interrogators, reserving the relevancy to be debated
after probation is concluded; then a learned debate would ensue before the
Assizers, after closing of the probation, upon these points: So that the
Assizers are against the intention even of our Law, Judges to the relevancy,
and to the points of Law; by whose ignorance also the Liedges are ofttimes much
prejudged. But when the pursuer designs to have the relevancy of his
condescendency judged by the Justices, he uses to Libel, that the defenders are
art and part of the Crime Libelled, in so far as they gave order, or advised
the committing of it, etc. quo casu, the relevancy of art and part being
specially condescended upon, is decided by the Justices, who are Judges to all
that is in the Libel.

Though it be sufficient to Libel generally, that the accomplices are art and
part, yet the Libel must bear expressly who are accomplices; for it is not
sufficient to Libel who are accomplices generally, but their names and
designations must be specified, K. Ia. 6. Parl. 6. Act 76.

Because the Assizers are Judges to the relevancy of Art and part, and that the
debates made to the Assize are not upon record, being only delivered, viva
voce, therefore it is that there are but few decisions here adduced for
clearing the relevancy of this part of the dittay.

To the end that all the Leidges who may be assizers, may understand what
accession is relevant to infer a guilt, they will be pleased to understand,
that one may be art and part by deeds preceding the crime, either by counsel
or command, consilio aut mandato, by deeds concomitating the Crime, as by help,
or by countenancing, open and assistentia, or by deeds subsequent to the
committing of the crime, as by ratihabiting or recepting, all which I shall
treat separatly.

III. How far the advising, and counselling a man to commit a crime, is
punishable as an accession, and art and part of that crime, is thus resolved by
the Doctors; if (say they) the committer of the crime, would have committed it
however, and though he had not been advised thereto, then the adviser is not
liable, so as to suffer the same punishment with the committer, but it is to be
less severely punished: whereas, if the committer of the crime would not have
committed, and perpetrate the crime, if he had not received that advice, then
the adviser and committer are equally to be punished, Clar. quest. 89. But I am
not satisfied with this opinion, for since the adviser did all that in him lay,
to have the crime committed, and that the effect followed, he is surely as
guilty, as if he had committed it; seeing in crimes we look to the design, and
not to the event, in maleficiis spectatur voluntas non exitus and maleficia
propositum distingut, at least the adviser is equally guilty, whether it had
been committed, with, or without his advice, even as he had been guilty, in
case of assistance, though the crime would have been committed without his
assistance; nor is guilt spared by lessening: And it is impossible to know
whether the committer would have committed it, without the advice and counsel
given. Other Doctors are of opinion, that in atrocious crimes, the adviser and
committer are equally punishable, which certainly holds in Treason; but that in
lesser crimes, the adviser is to be less severely punished then the actor: and
this distinction I like better, and is more consonant to our Practique. In our
Law advice and counsel comes under art, for advice is a species of contrivance
and art; and therefore advisers may appear in our Law to be punishable, as the
principal offenders, seeing art and part is punishable, as the principal Crime
with us; yet the Council uses to mitigat the punishment, where the crime is not
atrocius: And the Judge should here consider, whether the adviser gave the
counsel, upon the account of former malice, conceived by himself: or if it was
only given in resentment of any wrong done to the committer, and he is to be
more severely punished in the first case, then in the last. 2. In the case or
advice, the advisers age is much to be considered; for though Minors, and these
who are drunk, may be punished for Murder, yet it were hard to punish them for
advice. 3. The words in which the advice were conceived, should still be
interpret most favorable for the adviser, for words are capable of several,
and distinct senses, accordingly as they are understood by the speaker; and
words do vary by the accent, or punctation. 4. If the adviser retreated his
opinion, he ought not to be punished, if he thereafter dissuaded the committer:
but some require, that eo casu, he do intimat to the person, against whom the
advice was given, what danger he is in, for else the advice once given, may
occasion the Murder, though thereafter disowned.

IV. He who gives order to commit a Crime, is in our Law, art and part of the
Crime committed, as was found in John Mackintoshes case, the 11. of May 1673.
And is in the Civil Law punishable, in the same way and manner, with the
Principal Party, whether that Principal, or chief Committer, would have
committed the Crime or not, without that mandat, nam quando mandatum cadit in
delictum non queritur an mandatorius perse commississet Gomes. in. penales
just. de actionibus. And seeing this distinction holds not, in mandato, I see no
reason why it should hold, in confilio.

Not only if one give order to commit the Crime, is he liable as art and part,
but if he give order to do that which which is inseparably joined to the
commission of it; and even if he give order to do that, which being unlawful in
it self, may produce the crime; and thus, if one give order to wound a man, it
is thought, that if the person die of the wounds he receives, the giver of the
mandat is guilty of the Murder, except the order be restricted to wound with a
Stone, Club, or some such Weapon, as is not mortal; for in that case, the
committer is only punishable, paena extraordinaria, and by an arbitrary
punishment, not reaching death, Clar. quest. 89. number. 5.

What words will infer a command, cannot be determined; but it was found in
Mackintoshes case, that his desire to bring Druchdarg, who was killed, dead or
alive, did not infer his being art or part of the Murder; for he having a
Caption against Druchdarg, he might desire the Messenger, or his sons to pursue
him, if he resisted the Caption. And yet if the words can import properly no
other sense, then such as would infer a crime, the speaking of them will infer
art and part* and thus Fraze^ of Culhockie, being pursued on the 9. of July
1675. for deforcing a Messenger, he was found guilty, because it was proved,
that after he was apprehended by the Messenger* he cried to his natural Son to
come up and help him, and to give these men their reward; whereupon his natural
Son did invade the Messenger, and he thereupon escaped. And in general, I think
words should be very clear, and spoke too by a person, who has previous
malice, else they ought not to infer death, for words are often spoke in jest, as
when one of our Kings desired those of Caithness, to go and sup their Bishop in
Broth.

It is determined also by the Doctors, that if the giver of the mandat refer
the committing of the crime to a third person, and he to a fourth; if the crime
be committed by the third or fourth, that all of them are punishable, with the
same punishment Bald. in l. 1.. nec autem, C. de cad^^. tollend. but seems
hard, seeing the person was not killed, in that case, by the order of the first
committer, and possibly the discretion of the person, to whom the first mandat
was given, was considered to be such, that he would not excuse the mandat; and
many cases may fall out, whereby it might have been, that the giver of the
mandat, would not have given the mandat to any other, and therefore, Capoll.
Gautela. 39. and Menoch. de arb. caesu. 353. are of opinion, that if the Murder
was committed by any other then him, to whom the commission was granted, that
the giver of the mandat is not liable in that case, and generally they
conclude, that if the receiver of the mandat, did exceed his mandat any manner
of way, that then, if the crime which was ordered to be committed, was a mean
and small crime, the giver of the mandat is no way to be punished: but if the
crime was atrocious, then the giver of the warrant is to be punished, paena
extraordinaria, by an extraordinary punishment, for he who gives order to
commit as atrocious crime, incurrs a punishable guilt, in the very giving of
the order, Menoch. ibid. number. 9. They likewise determine from this reason, that
the commanding to kill A. ^ he be not killed, but B. be killed, is punishable
by an extraordinary punishment: the like also holds, if the command (...)
mandat did bear to commit the crime in one Month, and (...) was not committed
in that Month, but many other, Menoch. ibid. number. 21. Though mandats in civil
cases are only probable, scripto vel juramento, yet in crimes they are probable
by witnesses, as all crimes, and art and part are.

V. How far the mandat, warrant, or command of our Superiors excuses, is
variously debated by the Doctors; But their dictates may be resolved in these
conclusions, 1. The commands of the Prince excuses altogether in lesser crimes;
but in atrocious crimes, it excuses only from the ordinary punishment, metus
paenam attenuat. non in totum tollit, for the committer in this case does not
commit the crime, dolo malo and quicitra dolum deliquit ordinaria paena non
punitur and illi qui aliquid adversus suam voluntatem agit crimem non
adscribitur sed cogenti, cap. 1, 2. and cap. 32. quest. 5. The command of the
Magistrate, acting as a Magistrate, or a public Person, excuses or defends the
committer, from the ordinary punishment, in atrocious crimes, and from all
punishment in lesser crimes, l. quanquam and l. quod principis ff. de aqua
pluv. arcend. A mandat given by a Master to his Servant, excuses him from the
ordinary punishment, when the crime is atrocious, and the Master is known to be
cruel. And thus I have seen the servants of one who was hanged for Robbery
banished only, because they knew not that their Master was a Robber, and that
was the first act; whereas if these had continued in his service thereafter,
they had been hanged, notwithstanding of both his command, and known severity,
seeing how soon they knew him to be a Robber, they should have deserted his
service; and by the 19. chap. number. 9. stat. Will. the Servant is punishable
though he obey his Master, if he do not desert his Master, or desert his
service. In lesser crimes the command of the Master excuses altogether, l.
liber homo, ff. ad l. aquil.

VI. The command also of a Rather excuses the Son, in lesser, but not in
atrotious crimes, except other favorable circumstances concur; and thus John
Rae was not put to the knowledge of an Inquest, because he was young, and had
concurred in the Theft, at the command of his Father, 1. January 1662. All
which is most fully treated by Menoch, de arbitr. Cas. 353. And I find in our
Law, that a wife is liable to the ordinary punishment, though she obey her
husband, in committing atrocious crimes, Stat. Will. cap. 19. number. 8. From
which I conclude, that by the same Statute, she had not been liable in lesser
crimes.

VII. The assister is art and part of the Crime by our Law; and assistance by
the Civil Law, and Doctors is variously punished, for these who give assistance
before the crime be committed, are punishable in the same manner with the
committer, l. nihil ff. ad. leg. Cor. de siccar nihil interest occidat quis an
causam mortis praebeat, but this conclusion holds, only where the assister knew
not, that the assistance he gave, tended to the commission of the crime; which
knowledge is not presumed, but must be proved: This conclusion also holds, only
where the assistance did influence the crime immediately, but not in remote
assistances, such as the lending of Arms, for remote assistance is only
punishable paena extraordinaria Menoch. de arbitr. cas. 349.

Assistance given during the Commission of the crime is also punishable in the
same manner as the principal crime, except the assistance given be very remote,
or that the assister was ignorant, as if one should assist a person to drive
away Cattle, which the driver said to be his own Cattle.

It is here resolved by the Doctors, that he who was in Arms upon the place
where the crime was committed, is repute an assister, if he stood very near the
place, and was a known Enemy to the person killed, or a known Friend to the
Committer, and had no business else in that place, at that time; or if the
invader waxed bolder, or the person invaded weaker by their presence: But if
these or such like circumstances concur not, a mere by stander is not art and
part. And I remember, that it was decided in the case of John Mackintosh, that
naked presence was not accession, si navabat operam rei licitae, as the
assisting a Messenger; and in the case of a Baxter, who was pursued for the
tumult, in Anno 1666. at which time, nuda assistentia, was not found
punishable. And it is so ordinary for people to run together, where noise or
confusion is, and the assistance is ofttimes too advantageous, either to
relieve the weaker, or to seperat and red, as we say, both parties; that if
were unfit, I as well as unjust, to punish mere bystanders: but this depends
upon many circumstances, and est quastio arbitria addit, ad Cl. quest 90. number.
17. yet I would advise the redder, or assister, to cry, that he intends to do
no prejudice to either party, or not to interest himself, except he be known to
be very neutral.

These who kept the clothes or baggage of the committers, are guilty of
assistance, Ioh. de Annan, as are these also who hindered others to rescue the
persons invaded.

Assistance given after the Crime is committed, scarce deserves the name of
assistance, as Bartol. observes, ad l. 3.. 51. quisquam ff. ad Sillan. And
therefore the Laws of Millan do only inflict a pecuniary mulct in this case, as
Menoch observes, cas. 349. And I have seen the Council inflict only an
arbitrary punishment upon him who assisted to make the escape of a person who
had recently committed a murder. But in general, I approve Bartol's Doctrine,
who thinks, that whether the help and assistance was given before the
committing, at the time of the commission, or after it, yet the assister is
punishable as the chief actor, if the commission of the Crime was resolved upon
by both at the beginning, and before the Crime was committed, and ita spes data
auxilii ad evadendum dicitur auxilium ad maleficium committendum, Bartol. ad l.
furti. ff. de furto, else the Crime is not punishable in him who assisted only
after it was committed, as severely as in the chief actor. But the Doctors do
not distinguish here, whether the Crime would have been committed by the
principal party, though the assisters had denied their help; yet does this
lessen the assisters guilt, though it does not distinguish it, Clar. quest. 90.
number. 7. and so lessens the punishment in many cases.

VIII. The ratifying a Crime is not punishable, according to the Doctors, in
Crimes which are chiefly committed to satisfy the lust of the offender, as if
one should ratify the Adultery committed by another, merely to affront the
Husband, quo casu, the Doctors think, that the ratifier may be punished
arbitrarly; but the ratifying Crimes which are chiefly committed to offend
others, as Murder, Theft, etc. is punishable, if the Crime was committed by the
actor, in the name of the ratifier, and if the ratifier knew it was committed
in his name, when he did ratify it; but except these two concur, Lawyers think
that the ratifier is not punishable: and yet in the general, the approving or
owning Crimes, seems to be of ill example and therefore punishable in some
degree, by the example of that excellent Law, l. si quis,. qui Abortionis, ff.
de paenis.

By our custom, ratification, or ratihabition of a Crime, as we call it, falls
not properly under art and part, no more then under the general word auxilium,
except the ratifier had done some deed, or been in some accession to what was
done before the Crime was committed, as was found in Mackintoshes case, 11.
June 1673. For it were hard to infer a Crime from any words approving the deed,
it being most ordinar for men to say it was well bestowed, or I am glad, when
they heat of the murder of him whom they would not have killed, as Bart.
observes; and therefore it seems not to be punishable by our Law, which
punishes only either the Crime it self, or these who are art and part. And I
remember, that when the Lord of Assint was pursued as accessory to the murder
of Montrose, in swa far as he had at least ratihabited the Crime, having
vaunted, that he had taken him Prisoner at his own house, and jactatio, and
gloriatio, were punishable, as Menoch observes, de arbitr. casu, 331. Yet the
Parliament inclined not to punish him, if nothing else could be proved. But
whatever may be said of ratihabition in general, yet certainly, ratihabition of
Treason, is punishable as Treason; and it may be also contended, that the
excepting of a reward by one, as if the Crime had been committed by him, is
punishable, since that reaches further than a naked ratihabition; so that
certainly Assint had been punished as a Traitor for that accession, if he had
not been secured by an Act of Indemnity.

IX. There remains yet two practical questions to be resolved; The first is,
whether such as are accessory can be pursued, till the chief actors be first
discust, and either found guilty, or assoilzied. And that the chief or
principal actors ought to be first discust, seems most reasonable, 1. Because
it is the nature of what is accessory, to follow, and not to preceed that to
which it is accessory. 2. The principal party might have a defense, which the
assister does not know, at least cannot prove. As for instance, if a man be
pursued as art and part of driving away Cattle, possibly he was but a servant
to the person who did drive them, and who, if he had compeared, had proved that
the goods were his own; or if he were pursued as art and part of convocating
the Liedges, or of rising in Arms; possibly if the principal convocator were
pursued, he would allege he had done so by warrant from Authority, and would
produce his warrant, which none else could have in keeping. 3. By the opinion
of Clar. quest. 90. number. 6. and other Doctors, quando proceditur contra aliquem
tanquam quod prestiterit auxilium delicto debet primo in processu constare
principalem deliquisse. 4. By the 26 Chap. 4. Book, Reg. Maj. entitled, Of the
order of accusing Malefactors for Crimes, it is said, that the principal Thief
should be pleaded and discust before him who commanded the same to be done, or
before the resetter. And in the 4. verse. of that Chap. it is generally said,
and swa it is manifest, that the commander or resetter shall not be charged,
till the principal doer be first convict by an Assize. From which words, and
from the general Rubric, it is clear, that this conclusion holds, not only in
Theft, but in other Crimes. Likeas, Skeen in his Annotations upon these words,
observes from this Text, that accomplices criminis non possunt accusa^i ante
pricipalem malefactorem nam sicut re^^oto principali removetur accessorium, ita
absoluto malefactore absolvuntur accomplices and consentientes, and cites for
this opinion, Gloss. in cap. 1. de offic. jud. de legate. which conclusion is
also clear, as to Theft, from the 83. Chap. quon. attach. Upon which Law a
verdict fyling George Grahame, as receptor of Theft, was rescinded, by warrant
from the Council, because the principal Thief was not first discust. And as to
all Crimes, by the 29. Chap. Stat. David 2. entitled, The accomplices should not
be punished before the principal malefactor. It is also observable from the
last verse. 26. chap. lib. 4. Reg. Maj. that the principal malefactor should be
not only accused, but convict by an Assize, before the accomplices can be
accused; so that it is not enough the principal actor be declared fugitive,
which is likewise conform to Clar. quest. 90. number. 6. nam non sufficit, says
he, contumacia ficta, which answers to our denouncing fugitive, as I formerly
observed. I find likewise that by the Law of England the principal ought to be
attained after verdict or confession, or by outlawrie, before any judgment can
be given against the accessory; but the principal must be surely kept until the
accessory be attainted, Bolton cap. 24. number. 38.

Notwithstanding of all which, Charles Robertson being pursued as accessory to
the casting down of a house belonging to Iollie, which house was libelled to
have been cast down by his sons and servants, at his command. The Justices
found that he might be put to the knowledge of an Inquest, albeit the children
and servants were not first discus'd, because the Act appointing a Libel to be
relevant, bearing art and part, did abrogat the foresaid, 4. verse. 26. Chap. l.
4. R. M. since such as are pursued as art and part are all principals: And the
Advocat alleged, that it were absurd that the King should be prejudged by the
absence of the principal party. To which it was answered, that the Act of
Parliament, and the Law cited out of R. M. were in materia diversa, and very
consistent, since the one determined only the manner of procedure, and the
other what Libel was relevant, and since that Act it was constantly found that
the Thief behooved to be punished before the Resetter, which shows the foresaid
Law of the Majesty is not abrogated; nor was the King prejudged, seeing if the
principal party were discus'd and denounced fugitive, the accessory might be
proceeded against, but on the contrary, the Liedges would be much prejudged, if
this order were not observed, for probation might be led against absents, eo
casu, contrair to the fundamental Law of the Nation. V. g. if A. B. were
pursued as hounder out of C. D. to commit a Murder, probation behooved to be led
that C. D. committed the Murder, albeit absent, else the hounder out could not
be punished, nam primo debet constare de corpore de licti: Nor can any man be
guilty of hounding out, except where the Crime is committed. And it were not
only against our Law, but against reason, to suffer Witnesses to be led for
proving that the person who was absent committed the Crime: For in that case
his greatest enemies may be led as Witnesses, and his strongest defenses may be
omitted; and though the probation led against him in absence will not be
concluding, yet semper gravat famam, and leaves still a disadvantagious
impression.

In this case it was likewise found, that ratihabition of a Crime might be
inferred from the said Charles Robertson his resetting the committers of the
Crime, though they were neither declared fugitives, nor Letters of
Intercommuning against him: And his saying these words, They did too little,
and I wish that they had taken a Collop out of his Cheek, was a ratifying of
the Crime, since the Crime was committed by his own sons and servants.

X. The second Question is, whether the accomplices, and such as are art and part
of a Crime, should be punished by the punishment due to the principal
Malefactor? That they should, seems clear by the Act 151. Parl. 12. K. I. 6.
where the Libel bearing art and part, is ordained to be found relevant, which
implies, that art and part should infer the punishment concluded in the Libel;
for that is only relevant which can infer the conclusion. 2. It is said, cap.
38. quon. attach. and then it shall be conform to that which is said,
Consenters and doers should be punished with the same pain. 3. By constant
custom in all Criminal Courts, art and part is punished as the principal
Crime. Notwithstanding of all which, I think, the foresaid conclusion very
rigorous, for paena est commensuranda de licto; and to punish the more and the
less guilty equally, seems against nature and justice: And by the Laws of all
other Nations, and the opinion of all Doctors, accessions are punishable
according to their proportional degrees of guilt; and albeit the Act above
cited, sustains the Libel, yet it ordains not the punishment of art and part,
to be the same with the punishment of the principal offenders; but though the
Act did bear the same expressly, yet by the opinion of the Doctors, a Statute,
bearing that such as are accessory shall be pun^shed as the principal
malefactors, is to be restricted, ad opem quae dedit causam maleficio, and non
de quolibet modo auxiliandi annot. ad Clar. quest. 90. number. 28. It would
therefore seem just, that not only the Justices, or parties, should make
application to the Council, and interpose that the punishment should be mitigat
according to the degrees of the guilt, as the custom now is, but that the
Justices should have an innate power to propo^tion the punishment to the guilt
proved; for none can understand so well the nature of the guilt, as the
justices who hear the probation: and it is hard that the poor Panel should lie
under so great hazard, as to be exposed to a capital sentence, whereas it may
be the Council will not sit so soon, as that he may interpose with them.

Some Crimes punished amongst the Romans, which are not directly in use with us.
HAving finished in the last Title what belongs to those Crimes, which our Law
pun^shes directly, I resolved here to touch overly even those crimes which are
little considered among us, not only that we might thereby know the genius of
that wise Nation; but that we may consider how far it were fit to renew amongst
us these excellent Laws.

The Romans considering how destructive those were to the Commonwealth, who
endeavored by all indirect means to screw themselves into publict employments,
did therefore make this indirect dealing to be a Crime, and called it Ambitus,
which punished lege julia, those who gave money, for making themselves
Magistrates, or that they might attain to honou^s.

It is commonly thought, that how soon the power was transferred from the pople
to the Senate, and from the Senate to the Prince, this crime ceased, because
the Prince having the sole power of bestowing Magistracy and honor, is still
presumed in Law to bestow them upon those deserve best, who Groneveg de leg.
abrogat. ad h. t. but yet I see not why the Prince may not justly cause punish
such who have wronged both the public interest, and his favor, in
prostituting both to so unworthy a sale: and since Commissioners for
Parliaments, and Magistrates of Towns are still elected by plu^ality of
suff^^ges, I see not why such as bribe the electors may not be liable to the
same accusation.

The pun^shment of this crime, was depo^tation which was much like our
banishment, and in the less. Towns it was punished by a Fine of an hundred
Crowns, and infamy; and since it is a kind of bribing, I think it should be
punished with us as such.

Residuorum crimen, was committed by him who converted the public money with
which he was entrusted to his own private use, and was punished, by fyning him
who was guilty in a third more then he owed.

This crime is punished by no express Law with us, but that this is a crime
with us, appears clearly from its being excepted from the late Act of Indemnity
amongst the other Crimes. The words whereof are, Excepting all private murders,
etc. and the accounts of all such persons, as have intrometted with any of His
Majesty's Revenues, public impositions, Excise, Fines, Forf^itures,
Sequestrations, and all other public money, for which they had not order,
warrant, or assignment, (for their own private use) or for which they have not
duly counted, and received discharges thereof from such as pretend to have
authority for the time to do the same.

I doubt not but the Exchequer might be Judges competent to this crime, if
committed by their own members, and the Council, if done by any of His
Majesty's servants, since there can be no greater injury done to His Majesty's
Government, then to abstract or invert his money, which is the nerves, not only
of War, but of all power.

Peculatus, is a stealing of the public money, as the other was a concealing
of it, and this was punished in public Ministers capitally, l. un. c. h. t.
Though other thefts was not capitally punished among the Romans, so attrocious
a crime did they judge the breach of trust, and so easy a thing it is for
public Ministers to steal public money if they please.

This crime is certainly punishable with us by death, since all theft is so
punishable: Plagium, was the stealing of men, and was punishable by death, l.
7. and ult. c. h. t. which agrees with the Law of God, Exodus 21.16. Deuteronomy. 24.7.
and with us Egyptians and others stealing children, have been likewise
punished by death, and such as force away men to be Soldiers, should be liable
to the same punishment, though the Council uses to punish them only by an
arbitrary punishment; and such as take away men's childeren upon pretext to
marry them, before they come to the years wherein they may give a legal consent
(which is 12. in women, and 14. in men) ought in my Judgment to be so
punished. I have treated crimen repetundarum in the Title Brybing, and crimen
annonae, in the Title Fore-stallers.

I shall end this first part relating to crimes, with Theophils apology
Subjoyned to his Title of Crimes. (...).

FINIS.
PART II.
TITLE I. Of Jurisdiction in general.
1. Jurisdiction defined, and divided, in imperium merum, mixtum and
Jurisdictionem simplicem. 2. Jurisdiction is either ordinary, or delegat. 3. It
is either cumulative or privative. 4. How a Jurisdiction may be prorogat.
THe Civilians do treat of Jurisdiction very learnedly and profusely, but since
most of their Dictats are very remot from our practice in Scotland, I resolve
to clear only such general terms as are borrowed by our Law from that of the
Romans.

I. Jurisdiction may be defined to be, a public power granted to a Magistrate
to cognosc upon, and determine Causes, and to put sentences following thereupon
in execution, in such way and manner as either his commission, Law, or
practique do allow.

Jurisdiction was by the Civil Law divided in merum imperium, mixtum imperium,
and jurisdictionem simplicem. Merum, imperium est abere potestatem gladii ad
animadvertendum in facinerofos, and potestatas etiam appellatur, Mixtum
imperium est potestas qua jure proprio Magistratui competit cui jurisdictio
inhaeret and inest, and dicitur mixtum quia cum jurisdictione est conjunctum.
Iurisdictio simplex differt secundum Bartolum a mixto imperio in hoc, quod
imperium mixtum expediatur judicis nobili officio, jurisdictio judicis
ordinario. With us the Justices have only a criminal Jurisdiction, the Lords of
Session and Commissars, a merely civil Jurisdiction, Lords of Regality, and
Sheriffs a mixed Jurisdiction, partly Civil, partly Criminal. But in all
Jurisdictions, though merely civil, there is still an innat power, to punish
even criminally, such as offend and disturb even the Civil Jurisdiction. Thus
the Lords may ordain such as strike any in the Parliament House whilst they
sit, or falsify Papers produced before them, or abuse any of their own number,
to be degraded, or banished, or to pay a Fine, or to have their Tongue bored,
etc. according to the nature and merit of the offense. For in Law, when any
power is granted, every thing is also granted which is necessary for
explicating or executing that power.

II. Jurisdiction is divided likewise, in ordinariam and delegatam, and here it
may be doubted, whether the power of Judging crimes which is merum imperium can
be delegat? according to the Civil Law it could not, l. 1. and l. 70. ff. de
regulis juris, and seeing crimes are of so great concernment, that industria
personae in electiono judicis respicitur, there is no reason why they should be
cognosced by Deputs. Ordinary commissions with us, also bear a power of
delegation which were unnecessary if the power of delegation were inhaerent
naturally in Jurisdiction. And albeit I have seen Justice deputs delegat others
to represent them in the Justice Court, yet this practice seems to want both
warrant and reason. And it is observed by Craig, page 192. that potestatem
gladij qui ab alio quam a principe habet nemo potest delegare: and by Balfour,
cap. 63. that a Barron cannot delegat any person to judge in the matter of
blood, except the said power be specially allowed him. But the Law allows even
to Deputs, though they have no power, to delegat others, a power to appoint
another to judge for them in cases of necessary absence, l. 1. ff. de off. ejus
cui mand. which Lawyers do also allow, ex paritate rationis, to such as are
sick, Bart. ibid. and the reason of both is, least the Commonwealth suffer by
their absence or sickness, for it is necessary that crimes be presently tried.

III. Jurisdiction is divided by our Law, in cumulativam (for so we call that
Jurisdiction which is competent to several Judges, and whereby they may preveen
one another, and thus Sheriffs, and Barrons have a cumulative Jurisdiction in
blood weits) and privatam (for so we call that Jurisdiction which is competent
peculiarly to any one Judge.) This distinction is used very much in our Law,
and especially by Craig, page 192. who lays it down as rule, that omnis curia
delegatur tantum cumulative, sed nunquam privative; non est enim quasi
translatio juris ex una persona in alium sed tantum mandata jurisdictio quae
non obstante jurisdictione sive mandato ad huc remanet in delegante nec minus
dominus post juvestituram vassallo factam retinet jurisdictionem and curiam
quam antea. And thus albeit His Majesty grant commission to a Sheriff, yet he
ofttimes appoints other Deputs, as Mr. William Wallace in Edinburgh, Sir
Gilbert Stewart in the Sherifdom of Perth. And it was found, that though a
prelat had appointed an heretable Bailiff, yet he was not thereby excluded from
sitting himself, although he was thereby excluded from appointing any other
heretable Bailiff; as is observed by Hadd. 1. February 1610.

IV. Jurisdiction is said to be prorogat, when a defender does willingly submit
to the judicatur before which he is cited, though otherwise not altogether
competent, and affirmare judicium, is to submit to a Judicatory altogether
incompetent.

It is a received conclusion amongst Lawyers, that a Delinquent may prorogat
his Ju^isdiction: who has a Criminal Jurisdiction, but that by an Act of his,
as by compearance, and answering before an incompetent Judge, the Delinquent
cannot prorogat that Judges Jurisdiction, who has no Criminal Jurisdiction at
all, Clar. quest. 42. And thus if a man were pursued for Theft before the
Commissars, their Decree would be null, though the Delinquent declined not the
Court, but if before a Sheriff, the sentence would be valid, though the
Delinquent were not of his Territory; and though he were pursued for a crime to
which the Sheriff were not othe^wise Judge competent; but a private delinquent,
by prorogating the ^udges Jurisdiction; as said is, can only prejudge himself
by his own compliance, but cannot prejudge any other Judge of his casuality.

TITLE II. Of the Judge Competent, de foro competenti.
1. In what place may a Delinquent be tried. 2. Who is Judge competent, to
crimes committed by strangers. 3. Where are Vagabonds to be pursued. 4. Who is
Judge competent to Ecclesiastic persons. 5. Prevention amongst Judges
competent, explained and cleared.
I. FOr understanding who is Judge competent in general, to punish crimes, and
what founds his competency; or as the Civil Law and Doctors speak, quod est
forum competens; it is fit to know, that he who commits a crime, may be judged
either in the place where the crime was committed, which they call, forum
delicti commissi, or in the place where he was born, which is called forum
originis, or in the p^ace where he dwells, which ^s, forum domicilii.

The place where the fault was committed, is of all the three the most
competent, for it is most just and fit, that crimes should be punished where
they were committed, that others who have seen the crime, may by that
punishment be deterred from committing the like; and that the parties injured
may be somewhat repaired, by seeing the Law justly reveng their wrong; and in
the place where the crime was committed, accusers can most easily attend, and
probation can be soonest and best heard, Act 6. P. 6. I. 1.

Not only where the crime it self was fully committed, may it be tried, but
where any part of it was committed; and therefore a thief may be judged, not
only where he first broke the House, but by the Judge of that place where he
was taken with the things stolen, Carleval de judiciis, page 156. But the Judge
of the place where he was taken, can only proceed against the thief in that
case, if he be present, but cannot cite him if he be absent; whereas the Judge
of the place where the House was broke, may cite him though he be absent: And
if the Judge of the place where the House was broke, or the thing was first
stolen, pleases, he may require the other to remit him, or send him back to him
to be judged. But this last would not hold in our practice; for with us,
wherever a thief is taken with a fang, he may be hanged; nor is that Judge
obliged to send him back, except either in the case of prevention, or
repledgiation.

There are some crimes which may be comm^tted in several places, and yet be the
same crime, as being begun in one place, and perfected in another; and for
knowing who is Judge competent, for trying those crimes, I think we may thus
distingu^sh, either the crime is begun in one place, and perfected in another,
both in respect of him who commits the crime, and of him against whom it is
committed; as if one should wound a man in one Territory, and should follow and
kill him in another, or take away a woman in one Territory, and deflour her in
another; in which cases, the Judges of either Territory are competent, but so
that there is place for prevention, for the scandal is committed in both
places, and the peace of both is injured. The other case is, when the crime is
begun in one place, and perfected in another, only in respect of the committer,
as if a man in one Territory should stand and shoot one in another; in which
case, the Judges of both Territories a^e competent, l. 1. C. ubi de crim. or
the crime is begun in one, and perfected in another place, as if a man should
in one p^ace, give order that the crime should be committed in another place,
or should ratify in one place, what was comm^tted in another place; and in
that case, Clar. Bartel. and others, are of opinion, that the crime should be
tried only in the place where the crime was consumat, because it is not the
giving of the mandat, or order to commit the crime, but it is the commission of
the crime which infers the guilt: But I crave leave to differ from them, and to
think that other Judge is competent, and that because oft-times the giving of a
mandat, or order to commit a crime, is of it self a crime; and because he who
gave the order, having offended the Jurisdiction where he lived, he ought there
to be punished, and the crime committed in the other place, not being his own
who gave the order, but because of the order: it must therefore be drawn back
to the order, and so he ought to be punished in the place where he gave the
order, which should the rather hold with us, that the giving order is art and
part, and so is in our Law punishable in the same way, as the principal crime.

If any man commit a crime, in the confines of two several Jurisdictions, or
Territories, he may be punished in either, though some Lawyers are so subtle,
as to conclude, that if a man be murdered in the confines of two Jurisdictions,
the murder ought to be tried in that Jurisdiction, within which the head of the
murdered man fell; but if the committer of the crime dwell also in either of
the Territories, or if the Judge of either of the Territories be founded upon
any other ground of competency, then that Judge who is so founded doublely,
ought to be preferred, quia duo vincula magis stringunt Decian tract. crim.
lib. 4. cap. 17.

II. So well founded is the Judge of the place, where the crime was committed,
as to his competency, that some English Soldiers having in Anno 1662. killed a
man in Edinburgh, the Justices here were found Judges competent, though it was
alleged that they being Soldiers, could only be tried by a Council of War;
and being English Soldiers under English pay, and a part of the English Army,
they could only be tried in England, all which was repelled, because the crime
was committed here; and it was strange why any of the English did think this
hard, since they had execute Queen Mary, though a Queen: and the Bishop of
Ross, though an Ambassador, for alleged Treasons committed in England.

The reason why the Judges of that place where the delinquent dwells, is Judge
competent to the trial of the cri^^ is, because it is fit that the Judge purge
his own Land, and Territory, of evil doers and malefactors, lest they affect
others by their example, or fall themselves to commit the like crimes there
also; and the reason why he who is Judge of the place where the malefactor was
born, is Judge competent, is because the malefactor may and will probably
return to the place of his Nativity, and it is most reasonable that a man may
be Judged as to his life, where he first received life; and Judges ought to
consider the life and conversation of the delinquent, which none can do so
well, as judex domicilii: And therefore these two, domicilii and originis, are
still equiparat in the Law, and what founds the Jurisdiction of the one, founds
ofttimes the Jurisdiction of the other, and their joint competency may be
understood by these conclusions,

First, the Judge of the place where a man dwells, or was born, may beyond all
controversy, proceed to take trial of the crime committed within their own
Territory, if the person be found within the Territory. 2. If he be not found,
some think they can proceed if the crime was not committed in their own
Territory, but others do more justly distinguish, thus, that either he is
pursued by way of accusation, at the instance of a private party, and then
judex domicilii, is competent, but that neither of these Judges can proceed to
enquire into a crime committed without their own Territory; and though the
first part of this distinction be very just, because an accuser has always
election where to pursue, yet the last part of it may be justly controverted,
for these reasons, 1. Because every Judge should endeavor to cleanse his own
Land of Malefactors who dwell there, and who may either infect his people, o^
commit the like crimes, as was said formerly. 2. It would encourage the
committers of crimes, if they might go out of their own Territories, and commit
crimes elsewhere, and could not be punished upon their return by the Magistrate
where they live, whereas it is probable, that the poor party injured could not
follow them to a place so far distant. 3. We see that fathers do, and are
obliedged to punish their children for faults done by them, even without their
own family: And a Judge is in Law instead of a father to his own people, and
should endeavor that they keep themselves free of all guilt. 4. Per. l. 1. C.
ubi de crim. dicitur quaestiones posse institui apud judicem loci ubi ipsa
commissa sunt, aut loci ubi reus ad est.

And with us, Criminal pursuits are sustained at the instance of the Procurator
Fiskal of the Territory where a man dwells, for crimes committed without the
Territory, though no private party inform.

I find likewise that Calderas does distinguish thus, if (says he) both the
place where the crime was committed, and the place where the delinquent dwells,
be under the same Prince, though the Jurisdictions be under different private
Judges, and the private Territories be different; Yet the Judge of that place
where the Delinquent dwells, may proceed to try a crime committed without his
own territory, though the party injured do not insist.

Against which distinction, though it be more plausible then the other
distinction, yet the former argument do likewise conclude.

The third conclusion is, that the Judges of the place where the Malefactor
dwells, may proceed against him, not only if they find him present, but though
he be absent, l. 1. and authen, qua in provincia C. ubi de crim. and by the
customs of Castil, and Naples, Carlev. number. 747. and thus the Lords sustained
an improbation against Burghtown in July 1672. though the deed forged concerned
an Irish Estate, and though Burghtown dwelt then in Ireland, though he was
cited in Scotland.

III. Vagabonds may be punished where ever they are apprehended, for having no
certain domicile, every place is in ipsorum praejudicium allowed to be their
domicile, Boss. de foro compet. number. 69. and he is said to be a Vagabond, who
has no certain dwelling, licet habeat domicilium originis, these our Law calls
Dustifoots, and such are our Egyptians, study Beggars, who though they may
pretend to have a dwelling, to which they may sometime ret^re, yet since
ordinarily they use to wander, and do things unlawful, they ought to have no
benefit by that domicile.

IV. By the Cannon Law, and in all the Romish Church, as Ecclesiastic person
cannot be in the first instance juged by the secular Judge; but though this
subject might afford matter of curious inquiry, yet I will not dip into it,
since the Parliament did in Anno. 1662. find that Mr. James Guthry might be
tried by the Parliament in the first instance, for words spoken by him in
Pulpit. And as a Minister, albeit he alleged that this Doctrine should have
been tried, first by a Church Judicatur, for the Parliament thought that this
might give too great liberty to Ministers, and might encourage them by adhering
no one another, to enveigh against, and disturb the Civil Government at their
pleasure: for if Eclesiastick persons could not be Judged by the secular power,
till first the Church Judicaturs did consider the Doctrine; then if these
Church Judicaturs did approve the Doctrine, it could not thereafter be found
Treason, or any other crime.

V. Where many Judges are competent, they may preveen one another, and
prevention is defyned to be anticipatio sive praeoccupatio usus jurisdictionis
alicujus judicis circa causam aliquam, antequamalius judex circa eam
jurisdictione utatur, Prevention is, when one Judge interposes his authority,
or when a trial is entered upon by one Judge, before another Judge do exerce
any action of Jurisdiction about that subject.

Prevention may be made, either by the Judge, or by the Party. And prevention
is not inferred by raising of a Libel without citation, Decian: lib. 4. cap.
21. but it is inferred by a citatio^, or by the first citation in writ, where
more citations are requisite and by apprehending the Malefactor, because, as
Carleval. de judiciis, number. 881. observes, deeds are stronger preventions then
word or writ. Prevention is likewise inferred by the receiving of witnesses in
order to an inquisition, ibid.

It seems that the allowed and stated deeds, from which prevention is inferred
by our Law, are only these which are enumerated by the 29. Act 11. Parl. K. I.
6. viz. apprehending of the offenders person, and executing a Summonds against
him, to underlay the Law, and therefore no mention being there made of
receiving of witnesses, or inquisition, it appears that these are not
sufficient to infer prevention in our Law.

In the competition of this preventions, when one Judge has done one deed, and
another Ju^ge has done another, the ordinary conclusions for peference are, 1.
That when one Judge use first real citations, that is to say, appehends the
offender, and the other a verbal, or citation by writ, the real is preferred.
2. When the one does at the same time use a real, by capture, and the other a
written citation, he who has taken the Malefactor is preferred. 3. Where the
one has first used the citation, and the other has apprehended the Delinquent,
though many Lawyers do prefer the Judge who apprehended, yet the Judge who
first cited, will be preferred in our Law: and if a citation be a way of
prevention, as was said formerly, I see not why the jus quaesitum, by that
prevention, can be thereafter taken away; for though it may be p^etended, that
Judges would be thus encouraged to take Malefactors, which is a greater
benefit, then the citing them is; Yet I think it is the duty of all Judges, to
concur to take Malefactors, though cited by other Judges; and yet by the
foresaid Statute, the Judge who apprehends the Malefactor, before the other
cite him, does preveen the citer.

It is agreed to by the Doctors, that when two competent Judges do both proceed
to a trial, and both are equally founded in their Jurisdiction and diligence,
that then he who pursues for the greatest crime, ought first, to proceed in his
trial, because the Commonwealth is more concerned to have a great crime
punished, then a small crime, which they extend not only where the crimes are
different, but even where the one is aggradged by more atrocious circumstances
then the other; as if the one should pursue for wounding, and the other for
wounding in the night, or in an ambush, Boss. hoc. tit. number. 102. And he who
preveens by citing one of many accomplices, does preveen quo ad all. As also he
who once cites him who gave order to commit a crime, does likewise preveen all
Judges, quo ad the Committer. Because it is fit that the cognition of the crime
be not divided, and ordinarily the defenses are common defenses, Boss. number.
109. But I think this conclusion should not hold, except the other Judge be
presently ready to pursue, for it is the interest of the Commonwealth, that
crimes be speedily punished.

Though a Judge competent have once fixed his process by prevention, yet if
thereafter he be in mora, the other Judge, who has a cumulative Jurisdiction
with him, may proceed; for thereby it appears, that by prevention he has
designed to exclude the other Judge, merely in collusion with the delinquent,
Novem 9. 1672. Scot contra Riddel.

If Prevention be not proponed either by the Party, or the Judge, the process
and sentence will be valid, though led before the Judge that was preveened.

When Judges ought to remit delinquents to others who are more competent is
fully set down, Title Regalities.

TITLE III. Jurisdiction of the Parliament in Crimes.
1. The Parliament are Judges competent to the trial of Crimes, even where the
Panel is absent. 2. Forefeitures in Parliament cannot be quarrelled before any
Inferior Judge. 3. Whether Decreets pronounced by Commissioners of Parliament
can be quarrelled by any Inferior Iudicatory.
I. Since the Parliament is the Supreme Judicatory, it may certainly cognosce
all Causes, in the first instance. And of old, if a person accused for treason
did absent himself, the Criminal Court, not no other Inferior Court could
proceed to take trial by probation against him, and so all they could do, was
only to denounce him fugitive for his absence, upon which denounciation his
escheat did only fall, but he could not be forefeited; and therefore since it
was unjust that he should by his own absence procure to himself an impunity and
exemption from forefeiture, the Parliament did by their supreme power cite the
person guilty, to appear before them, and did lead probation in absence against
him, and forefeit him in absence, though guilty. But it being found
inconvenient that Parliaments behooved either to be called, or such Delinquents
pass unpunished, therefore by the 11. Act 2. Parl. Chapter 1. It is Statuted, that
the Justices may proceed to try Crimes by probation, even when the person cited
is absent; in cases of treasonable rising in Arms* and open and manifest
rebellion against his Majesty, or his Successors and their Authority: so that
the Parliament are yet only Judges to the trial of all Crimes by probation
against absents, except only Perduellion, o^ open and manifest treason. And
albeit it may seem strange that the Justices should have been allowed to lead
probation against absents, in this which is the greatest of Crimes, and not in
Crimes of lesser importance; yet this proceeded from the just detestation which
the Parliament had of this Crime, and that the punishment thereof might not be
delayed, where the delay might prove so dangerous.

II. If the Parliament forefeit any person after cognition of the Cause, their
sentence cannot be quarrelled by any Inferior Judge, Act 39. Parl. 11. K. I.
6. And though it be added to that Act, that no forefeiture law^ully and orderly
led in Parliament shall be quarrelled by any Inferior Judicatory; for these
words, Lawfully and orderly led, seem unnecessary, since after cognition of the
cause by the Parliament, no Inferior Judicatory can quarrel a Decree of
Parliament, even though it be pretended that the said Decree was not lawful
and orderly: yet if a person be only denounced Fugitive by the Parliament, the
Lords of the Session may suspend in that case, if the Process was not orderly
led; but whether they can reduce, even in that case, est altioris indaginis.
And some think, that though it were very inconvenient that such a ^ecreet
should receive present execution, where possibly the party was not lawfully
cited, yet that such respect is to be paid to the Parliament, as that the
illegality of that procedure before them, though not objected before sentence,
should remain undecided till the next Session of Parliament.

III. If the Parliament should remit any such Process for Crimes, to any of
their own number, to be decided finally before them, it has been doubted
whether their decisions could be reduced by the Session: And this Act of
Parliament reaches only to decisions in Parliament. But yet since Decreets
pronounced by Commissioners of Parliament, are reputed with us Decreets of
Parliament, and since Decreets pronounced by Commissioners, for valuation of
Teinds, are not reduceable, because these Decreets are repute Decreets of
Parliament, as being pronounced by such Commissioners of Parliament; it seems
that Decreets pronounced by such Commissioners, in Crimes, after probation,
could not be quarrelled and reduced by the Session, or other Inferior
Judicatories.

TITLE IV. The Jurisdiction of the High-Constable in Crminals.
1. The Original of the word Constable, and his power. 2. The Office of petty
Constables. 3. The Jurisdiction of those who are Constables of His Majesty's
Castles.
I. SOme describe the word Constable, from the word Coning, which signifies a
King; and Staple, which signifies a Stay or Hold in the Saxon language, because
Constabularies were only erected in those places where the King kept House;
and thus the Constable was judge of old, to all crimes committed within twelve
Leagues of the Kings House, and Habitation, l. Malcol. c. 6. Though Skeen there
observes, that the best Manuscripts bear only two Leagues, or four Scots Miles.
Our Craig, and other Authors, derive the word Constable, from the Comes
stabuli, under the Roman Empire, nam Constabularius (says he) nihil aliud est
nisi praefectus aequitum, since the Reign of King Robert the Bruce, this Office
of High-constable, stands heretably in the noble Family of Errol: and their
being some debates concerning his Jurisdiction, Francis Earl of Errol,
obtained Commission under the great Seal, dated the 23. of Iun 1630. Sealed
penult March 1631. to the Persons therein specified, or any nine of them,
impowering them to search the Acts of Parliament, consuetude, Monuments and
Registers of the Kingdom, and all Evidents that the Earl of Errol, or the Lord
Hay his Son, should produce concerning their Honors, Hostilogies, Privileges,
and Immmunities belonging, or which had belonged to the Office of Constabulary,
from the first institution thereof: This Commission I have seen, with the
report thereof, dated the 27 of July 1631. bearing the Commissioners to have
met with the Earl of Errol, and his said Son, and to have considered their
Instructions, Warrands, and Customs of other Countries, anent the Constables
Privilege; and in the third Article of the report (which relates to the
Criminal Jurisdiction only here treated of) they set down these words, The
Constable is Supreme in all matters of Riot, Disorder, Blood, and Slaughter
committed within four Miles of the Kings Person, or of the Parliament, or
Council representing the Royal Authority in his absence, and that alse well
within the Court, as outwith the same. And the trial and punishment of such
crimes and offenses, is proper and due to the Constable and his Deputs, and the
Provost and Bailies of that Center or Burgh, and all other Judges within the
bounds, where the said facts are committed, are obliedged to ride, concur,
fortify and assist the Constable and his Deputs, in taking the said
Malefactors, and to make their Tolbooth patent for receiving them therein. As
was clearly evident, by production of Warrands granted by His Majesty's
Predecessors to that effect: and which likewise appeared by the Exhibition of
certain Bonds made by the Town of Edinburgh to the Constable, for the time,
concerning that purpose, the King having seen this report, did approve it in a
Letter directed to His Secret Council of this Kingdom, from the Court at
Theobals, the 11. of May 1633. Registrat in the Books of Secret Council, the
15. day of that Month; and in the Commission report, and Letter foresaid, the
Constable is designed High-constable, and his Office the High-office of
Constabulary.

The Constable is still in use since that time, to judge Riots within the
bounds foresaids, and to interrupt the Town of Edinburgh, when he knows of
their meddling, providing the Riots be committed in time of Parliament: and I
was told, that in time of Parliament holden at Edinburgh, Anno 1640. and 1641.
the Earl of Errol was found by the Lords of Secret Council, to have the sole
criminal Jurisdiction, and did repledge servant to Sir Thomas N^colson, the
Kings Advocat, arraigned before the Magistrates of Edinburgh for a Slaughter,
and Assoilzied him upon production of a Remission. And upon the 5. of September
1672. Gilbert Earl of Errol, did repledge James Iohnstoun Violer, arraigned
before the Magistrates of Edinburgh (as Sheriffs within themselves) for stabbing
of his Wife the day before Easter, the Magistrates had taken his judicial
confession, and summonded the Assize: there was no formal repledgiation,
because the Magistrates passed from him upon the Constables application; and
upon the 6. of that Month of September, the Constables Deputs sentenced him to
be hanged, and to have his right hand, which gave the stroke, cut off, and
affixed upon Lies wind Port, and ordained the Magistrates of Edinburgh to cause
put the sentence to execution upon the 9. of that Month.

Likeas, the Coachman of a Nobleman, having about the same time wounded a
Child, the Constable commanded the Towns Guards to apprehend the Delinquent,
which they accordingly did, till he was freed by a Remission.

II. Out of this high Magistracy of Constable (says Lambert an English Lawyer)
were drawn those inferior Constables of hundreds, which Office we borrowed
from them, and they are with us subservient to the Justices of Peace, and are
to be chosen by them two out of every Paroch, and as many in Towns as may be
proportional to the greatness thereof; and they have power to apprehend all
suspicious, idle, or guilty persons, and may require the neighbors to assist
them; and if the guilty persons flee, they may require the master of the house
to make open doors: all which, with many other particulars are entrusted to
them, by the 38. Act. 1. Par. Chapter the 2.

III. His Majesty's Predecessors used of old, to build Castles in the
considerable Towns of the Kingdom, and for preserving the Peace both in that
Town, and in the adjacent Country; and the Governors of those Castles were
called Constables, though they were more properly Castellains, or Chastellains,
as the English Lawyers observe, these had the power of riding the Fairs, and
having had the Keys of the Tolbooth delivered to them, they exercised a
criminal jurisdiction, during those Fairs: but it was found, that this
jurisdiction did not extend to Fairs that were granted posterior to the Office
of Constabulary, nor to the customs thereof, as was found the 18. of July
1676. betwixt the Earl of Kinghorn, and the Town of Forfar; but these Offices
depend absolutely upon prescription, use, or custom, which either
extinguisheth, or limits them most variously: but because those Constables use
to extort customs at those Fairs, it is therefore appointed by the 60. and 61.
Acts 13. Parl. Ia. 2. that the Constable shall not exact any such customs,
except his Festment bear him thereto, and that old use and custom shall not be
sufficient: Which Acts are ratified, by the 33 Act 5. Parl. Ia. 3. But if the
Infestment in the general bear, cum feudis and devoriis, etc. Possession by
virtue of that general Right, will be found sufficient, though the particular
Casualities be not expressed in the Infestment, as was found in the former case,
betwixt the Earl of Kinghorn, and the Town of Forfar,

This Officer was amongst the Athenians, called (...).

TITLE V. The Jurisdiction competent to the High Chamberlain, and Magistrates of
Burghs Royal.
THe Chamberlain was an office to whom belonged the judging of all Crimes
committed within Burgh, and he was in effect Justice-general over the Burrows,
and was to hold Chamberlain-Aus every year for that effect; the form whereof is
set down in Reg. Maj. in a Book entitled the Chamberlain-Air, Iter Camerarii,
he was a Supreme Judge, nor could his Decreets be questioned by any Inferior
Judicatory, Iter. Came. cap. 35. and his sentences were to be put to execution
by Bailiffs of Burghs, ibid. cap. 37. he made the prices of all Victual within
Burgh, cap. 33. and of these who wrought in the Mint-house, Statute Da. 2. cap.
38.

He is called Camerarius a Camera, (id est. testudine sive fornice,) quia
custodit pecunias quae in Camer is praecipue reservantur.

This office belonged heretably to the Duke of Lennox, but its privileges are
by his absence run in desuetude: Magistrates of Burghs, as such, have no
Jurisdiction but what is competent by their Charter of erection, wherein
ordinarily they have power of Pit and Gallows; but sometimes they are Justices
within themselves, as Edinburgh, who have right also to all escheats of their
own Burgesses, or other Criminals judged by them, for crimes committed within
their own Burgh: Sometimes they are Sheriffs within themselves, and ordinarily
they are Justices of peace within their own Jurisdiction.

The King may erect a Burgh Royal within the bounds of another Jurisdiction, as
of a Regality; but in that case, though the Lord of Regality consent to the
erection, yet it will not prejudge the Bailie of Regality, whose Right of
Bailiery was constitute, prior to the erection of the Casualities, that were
formerly due to him: albeit it was alleged that the Lord of Regality might
disolve, and dismember that part from the Regality, without the Bailies
consent; and so it not being in the Regality, it could not be subject to the
Bailiery, the 27. of February 1666. Lord Colvil contra the Town of Culross.

TITLE VI. The Jurisdiction of His Majesty's Privy Council in Criminals.
1. In what consists the Jurisdiction of the Council, their President and
number. 2. Their procedur in punishing Ryots. 3. Whether a power to eject, be a
sufficient defense against a Riot. 4. The punishment of Riots. 5. Precognitions
fully considered. 6. The Council name Assessors to the Justices, and sometimes
review their Sentences. 7. They grant Letters of Intercommuning, and
Commissions for Fire and Sword. 8. They sometimes ordain Houses to be
delivered, under pain of Treason.
I. THe Affairs of this, as of all other Nations, are either such as concern
the policy of the Kingdom in general, or such as respect the distributing of
Justice betwixt private parties; the policy or government of the Kingdom, is
regulated by His Majesty's Privy Council, in which the Chancellor is President,
if he be present, but in his absence, the President of the Council precedes.
This Office of Precedent of the Council is a distinct employment, and it gives
him the precedence from all the Nobility. The number of this Judicator is not
definit, depending upon His Majesty's Commission, but all the Officers of State
are Members of it, ratione officii, it has its own Signet, and its Letters past
by a Bill, subscribed by any one of the Council: upon which warrant, the
Letters are in their several forms, extended and subscribed by the Clerk of the
Council; and they bear also to be, ex deliberatione Dominorum Secreti Consilii,
they must be execute, at least upon six free days, and a full Copy must be
given, because all dyets here are peremptor, and not with continuation of
days; the reason whereof, is, ut reus veniat instructus ad defendendum,
whereas before the Session, a short Copy is sufficient, because the Summonds is
given out to see, and a time allowed to answer: The dyets are here so
peremptory, that if the defender be cited to a day, whereupon the Council sits
not, if he appear at the day, to which he is cited, and take Instruments at the
Council Chamber, he will not be thereafter obliged to attend, nor can he be
denounced Fugitive for being absent; for seeing it is peremptory against him,
it is reasonable that it should be peremptory for him.

Where many parties are cited as defenders, upon a Bill to the Council, any one
or two will be allowed to answer for the rest, they finding caution, and
enacting themselves to be liable for whatever shall be discerned against those,
for whom they undertake; which privilege is granted if no personal punishment
be concluded against the defenders; but if either the complaint conclude, or
that the crime will in Law infer a corporal punishment; then the offering to
find caution to answer, will not be allowed, nam noxa caput sequi debet, and no
man can bind his body for another, nam nemo est dominus suorum membrorum, the
pursuer may appear by his Procurator; but the defender must either be present,
or send a testificat of his sickness, upon Soul and Conscience: And yet it is
the privilege of any Counselor, that he may undertake to answer for any
defender that is cited, quo casu, the defender will not be unlawed, or
denounced fugitive upon his absence, but his defenses will be received, as if
he were present; nor can any Bill for receiving a complaint, pass against a
Councellor, but in presentia.

The Council by the first constitution, were only to take cognizance of what
concerned the publict Peace, and were neither Judges in civil cases, nor
crimes, but in so far as these impinged upon, or were violations thereof: but
now that Judicator does under the notion of Riots, and breaches of the publict
Peace, hear to many causes Civil and Criminal. But seeing the design of this
Treatise, aims only to illustrat our criminal Law; I shall only-consider the
procedor of the Council, in so far as they can cognosce upon crimes.

II. The most ordinar crimes which are punished by the Council, are these,
which we call Riots in our Law. A Riot is a breach of the Peace, committed by
oppression, or wronging His Majesty's Lieges, by force and violence; instances
whereof, are the dispossessing any of His Majesty's Subjects, by a convocation
of the Liedges, or otherwise; the affronting of Magistrates, by raising tumults
against them, etc.

For the better understanding of which crime, it will be fit to consider, that
jura maxim oderunt violentias and rapinas and pluribus modis succurrant vim
passis and spoliatis, for here the public is wounded, in breaking its Peace,
and private persons are wronged, by the prejudice done. Upon which account, the
Law has furnished more remedies against this, then any other crime; for either
it may be pursued civilly, per interdictum unde vi, so called from the first
words of the Edict, which runs thus; unde vi tu illum dejecisti terestituere
cogam, which interdict, restored only the possession of immoveables; whereas
movables being spoilzied, were craved back, action vibonorum. Justinian, also
introduced, that he who rest, and violently took what was his own, should lose
it, l. 7. C. unde vi, for in this the resumer usurps the power of the
Magistrate, whose ministry is requisite, in inverting the present possession. The
Canon Law likewise has introduced, beneficium, cap. redintae grandae 4. cap.
3. quest. 1. and Menoch relates 17. remedies, and Philip. Franc. 24. for
recovery of possession; and seeing the thing possessed, is still presumed to
belong to the possessor; and that hardly the right of movables can be
otherwise proved, then by possession: the Law did most reasonably, both for
securing Property, and punishing Violence, establish that great rule, that
Spoliatus est ante omnia restituendus, and conform thereto, the Council (who
are never Judges to Property, but only to Possession, so that in effect, all
their sentences, are interdicts) do still restore the possession to the person
ejected; and likewise punish arbitrarly the violence committed, for we have no
express Statute taxing the punishment. By the Law of England it is accounted
no Riot, or routs except three at least were present, and that something was
done, ad terrorem populi, for breaking of the Peace, Bolton. cap. 31.

III. The two ordinar defenses, which are propon'd against riotous ejections,
are, that by a Writ it was lawful, and agreed upon betwixt parties, that the
defender might have ejected the pursuer, if he removed not at the day
appointed, which will defend against a Riot: and yet Craig relates a case, P.
198. where one who had granted a Tack only for a Year, having ejected the
Tacks-man, after expiring of that Year, was pursued, action unde vio, in an
action of ejection, and was forced to transact, albeit he contended, that the
word (only) was exclusive of any future possession; but where by express
paction, it is declared lawful for him who enters, to enter brevi manu, without
process, or hazard of ejection; it would appear, that this paction is
unlawful, seeing no man can warrant violence, and this seems as unlawful, as if
one should oblidge himself, never to pursue for any injury to be done him:
which paction, the Law declares expressly unlawful, and nemo potest renunciare
juri publico, and this were to allow private persons the power of Jurisdiction:
Nor can it be thought, but this paction was extorted; and albeit the party
injured, were excluded by this paction, yet His Majesty's Advocat may certainly
pursue, vindictam publicam, if opposition was made, and violence used:
Notwithstanding of which, I remember that the Earl of Argile having obtained a
Decree of removing against George Campbel, and it being suspended till the
next Term, The Lords ordained it to be insert in the Bill, that the Earl might
eject him, brevi manu, the next day after the Term, by his own authority; but
the Earl was Sheriff here himself, and so his Jurisdiction was only prorogat,
and the Law is express, that privatus potest ex consensu prorogare
jurisdictionem ejus qui aliqualem habet, sed non potest privatus consensus
tribuere jurisdictionem ei qui nullam habet vid. Hanc quaestionem, apud Bart.
ad l. creditores, C. de pign. and hipoth. But here also, the Lords warrant to
eject, was a delegating of their own Jurisdiction.

I conceive also, that where there is no violence, nor opposition made, the
voluntar consent may allow the ejection, especially in a Master, toward his
own Tennent, who has a natural Jurisdiction in that case; and that his
ejection is also allowable, if the Tennent after count, oblidge himself to
remove, and declare that it shall be lawful to his Master to enter, brevi manu,
if he pay not what is declared to be due; for there the preceding count, is
equivalant to a declarator, and the party ejected is not prejudged otherwise
then by his own not payment: And therefore the Lords, the 19. of December 1661.
found not the Countess of Murray liable to aspoilzie, for ejecting Dewer her
Tennent, because Dewer had by a count declared that he was debtor, in such a
sum, and by a bond oblidged himself to remove, betwixt and a particular day,
and if he failed, declared it should be lawful for the Countess to enter, brevi
manu, to the possession. By the Civil Law, he who violently intromitted, even
with what was his own, lost thereby his property in it.

The next defense is, that the pursuer had immediately before, possessed himself
violently, and it was lawful for the defender, to recover his possession, ex
incontinenti, nam vim vi licet repellere, and the Law sustains this defense, l.
3. ^. 9. and l. 17. ff. eod. and explains that to be, ex incontinenti factum
quod factum est priusquam ad aliud negotium fuerit recessum, what time should
be allowed for repelling violence, is arbitrary to the Judge; for violence
committed by a great man, requires more time for reparations to redress it,
then when it is committed by a private person, for friends must be convocat, and
arms prepared, as Bart. and the Glos. instances upon the former Law: But in
personal injuries, id tantum diciturex incontinenti fieri quod fit in ipso
flagranti crimine.

IV. The violent ejection of His Majesty's Liedges, out of their possession, is
pursued, either by an action merely civil, which in movables is called
spoilzie in Lands ejection (which the Civil Law terms still, dejectio and non
ejectio) or criminally as a Riot, which is a mixed action, partly civil, partly
criminal. When spoilzies, or ejections are civilly pursued, the conclusion is
violent profits (which is the double Rent of the Lands, and restitution of the
thing craved: But when this is pursued as a Riot, the punishment is arbitrary,
as is also the criminal punishment, The civil action prescribes in three Years,
K. Ia. 6. Parl. 6. cap. 8. But the action of riot or Criminal Action prescribes
not; and yet it may be doubted, if these Actions prescribe not, quo ad, the
conclusion of restitution, seeing that is a civil conclusion; and it may be
debated, that the maxim, spoliatus ante omnia est restituendus loses its vigor
after that time, so that one pursued for a ryotous ejection, or spoilzie, may
allege that no riot can be concluded, seeing the thing or land controverted was
his own. We shall speak of the Criminal pursuit in its own place.

Whether the one of these actions does exclude the pursuer from all other
reparations, so that he who pursues the action of spoilzie, or ejection, cannot
thereafter pursue a riot, or a criminal pursuit, may be controverted; and the
Civil Law decides it thus, that quando and una and altera tendunt ad vindictam
tunc una agitur ad vindictam altera vero ad prosecutionem rei familiaris: and
thus the having obtained a Decree of ejection, impeds not the pursuer to
intent an action or Criminal pursuit; but after a Decree obtained for the
riot, a criminal pursuit cannot be intented for these, recipient vindictam.

V. The Council cognoses likewise upon Crimes, by way of precognition, which
they do in two cases, 1. Where considerable persons are interested in the
crimes committed, as Noble men, or Clanns, where there is a hazard of
alimenting the feuds, by remitting the criminals to the ordinary course of
Justice: Wherefore to prevent future resentments, and cement old differences,
the Council in quorum tutela est pax publica, cognosce upon the crime, and
remit much of the ordinary rigor.

The 2. case is, when the crime is so ci^cumstantiat, that it requires (...),
and lessening of the ordinary punishment: The forms in precognitions are, that
either the friends of the parties give in a Bill to the Council (which cannot
be granted but in praesentia) deducing the case, and representing what danger
is like to ensue, quo casu, Letters are direct, ordaining the other party to be
cited, and both ^arties to cite such witnesses, and probation, as they will
use, or else if no application be made, the Council ordains Letters to be
direct, citing both parties. His Majesty having with consent of Parliament
appointed that the Justice-court should be served by many of the Lords of
Session, did, because of their number and ability, discharge all precognition
in their Commission; and yet because these precognitions were not discharged in
the Commission granted to the Council, the Council did sustain themselves
Judges competent to precognitions, their Commission bearing to be as full, and
to give them as much power as any former Council had. But really it were happy
for this Nation, that we wanted all precognitions, since thereby the Delinquent
has power to choose such dyets as he pleases, and so may pursue his
precognition when he knows the witnesses who could prove his guilt are absent,
or may prevail with them to absent themselves for some time; and this is
ordinarily practiced. Nor have I ever seen any who pursued a precognition
brought to condign punishment; and whereas it is pretended that there are some
cases wherein the severity of Law ought to be remitted, upon the considerations
of lessening circumstances, wherein equity may be allowed to blunt the edge of
Justice. It is answered, that this may be done by the Justices, either upon a
special commission for trying the merits of the Pannels pretenses, or alter
that the Justices have heard all that will be legally urged by either party, in
a full trial they may delay the execution, and make report to his Majesty of
the just state of the case.

The Council likewise sometimes inflict punishments without recognition, by way
of citation, as in the case of Giles Thyre Englishman, who being incarcerat as
accessory to the death of Mr. Bedford in Lies, and as guilty of Adultery with
Mistress Hamiltoun, wife to the said Bedford, Thyre did upon a petition to the
Council, wherein he confessed the Adultery, but denied the murder, (which
Mistress Hamiltoun had likewise at her death acquit him of) obtain himself
banished, without being put to the knowledge of an Inquest, by whom he had
certainly dyed, as guilty of notour Adultery, 1665.

VI. The Council name likewise Assessors to the Justices before the trial,
these the Grecian Lawyers called (...), And sometimes they discharge or
continued yets.

After sentences also, the Council, upon application made to them, do either
mitigat the punishment, not only where it is arbitrary, but even where it is
statutory, as in the case of Brown, whom they ordained only to pay 100. Merks,
though she was found guilty of nottour adultery, which is death by our Law.
Sometimes they ordain no sentence to follow upon the verdict of an inquest, as
in the case of Purdy, who was condemned for Usury, in so far as he had taken
Anualrent a month before the term of payment, upon his Debtors voluntar offer;
And sometimes they ordain some of their own number to revise the process and
verdict; Which Assessors do ranverse the whole Process, and ordain it to be
torn out of the Criminal Registers, as in the case of George Grahame, who being
pursued for theft; it was alleged that the Assize had found him guilty of
recept, and so the verdict was found disconform to the Libel, and consequently
the whole process was null. Yet when Mr. William Somervel was found guilty of
Murder, upon the deposition of one witness, the Council refused to review the
verdict, as unwarrantable; for they found that they could not quarrel an
Assize, which condemned, seeing Assizers can only be quarrelled for error, when
they assoilzie. And when his Advocat cited to them the 47. Act. Par. 6. K. Ia.
the 3. Whereby it is ordered, that where a party finds himself grieved by an
Assize, by partial malice, or ignorance, it shall be lawful to him to cite them
before the Council, and if the error be proved, the party shall be restored to
the condition he was in before the sentence. To this it was answered, that this
Act speaks only of Civil cases, and that by the Council here, is meant the
Session: To which it was replied, the Rubric and Act are general, and treats
of all persons wronged, and qui totum dicit nihil excipit: And the reason of
the Law is comprehensive of both. -- From all this some do conclude, that if
the Justices err in judging the relevancy, or if the Assize find that proved
which was not remitted to them, that in either of these cases the Council may
review the sentence, but that they cannot quarrel the sentence, upon the
account that the verdict is not sufficiently warranted by the probation.

Sometimes also the Justices are concluded by the Decree of the Secret
Council, which is repeated to the Assize as full probation; So that the
Justices have only the execution of their sentence remitted to them: Thus
Fleeming was convict before the Council, of having uttered most disdainful
speeches against the King, and therefore was remitted to the Justices to be
examplarly punished; and upon production of their Decree (which Decree is
still expressed in the dittay) he was hanged, 17. May, 1615.

VII. If the Law cannot receive full execution and obedience, via ordinaria, by
the Criminal sentence, then the Council upon production of Letters of Horning,
following upon any Criminal sentence, and duly execute and registrat, use to
grant Letters of Intercomuning, whereby all His Majesty's Liedges are prohibit
to intercomune with any of the Rebels so denounced; which Letters must be
published at all the Mercatcrosses of the Shyrs, and Jurisdictions within which
such persons reside, whose intercomuning is suspected, and registrat there: And
if need be, the Council will likewise grant a commission for Fire and Sword, to
such persons as they will name, against the persons who are disobedient in the
Criminal Letters, as said is: And ordinarily this commissions of Fire and Sword
are given to the persons interested, which occasions many great abuses. And
these commissions are sometimes granted against parties who were never cited,
but upon a naked complaint exhibit to the Council, which is most irregular.

The Council do sometimes grant commission to bring in parties dead or alive,
and that upon naked Petitions, without any previous trial, as they did against
the Lord of Dinbaith, upon a Petition, wherein it was represented, that he had
run away with the public money delivered to him by the Shire, for paying their
Cesse and Excise; But this seems hard, and it were to execute a free Subject
before he be heard, or sentence pronounced against him: for these private
petitions may be most unwarrantably founded.

VIII. If any person keep out his House in Garrison against his Majesty, the
Council first uses to issue out Letters against him, to deliver up his house,
under pain of treason; and they ordain a Herald to go and summond him for that
effect, and if he refuse, they ordain him to be processed before the
Justice-general, and do immediately, before any criminal sentence, grant a
commission of Fire and Sword against him, as in the case of Burgie, June, 1668.

They used likewise of old to ordain Noblemen and others, who could not be
apprehended by Captions, for civil Debts, to deliver up their persons in any of
his Majesty's Castles, under the pain of treason; which though, it be now
indesuetude, yet it was most reasonable, and of excellent use, seeing it is most
absurd that any of his Majesty's Liedges should contemn his Laws, and that such
poor persons as pay his Majesty's Taxes and Impositions, and who are obliedged
to venture their lives for him, should not likewise have the assistance, as
well as the protection of his Laws. So that when the ordinar^ remedies of
Caption, Comprysing and others fail, these and other extraordinary remedies
should be allowed, until his Majesty's Laws be obeyed, and the party so
injured be fully and finally repaired.

TITLE VII. Of the Exchequers Jurisdiction in Criminals.
THE Exchequer are only His Majesty's Chamberlains, and have no Jurisdiction in
criminals; and yet they fine, and confiscat such as transgress pecunial
Statutes, or wrong His Majesty's Rents; quo casu, they do in effect judge
crimes: for it is a crime to abstract customs, or cheat the public; and
without this Jurisdiction they could not manage His Majesty's Rents; so that
this is jurisdictio emanat^, founded upon that rule, quando aliquid conceditur
omnia concessa videntur sine quibus hoc explicari nequit, but is seems, de
jure, they should not, even eo casu, cognosce: for by the 89. Act, 1. Parl. Ia.
6. It is statute, that such as commit fraud, in transporting forbidden Goods,
shall be punished at Justice Airs, at least the Justice also have powers.

I remember that in July 1668. the Exchequre did fine a very intilligent
Person, for filling up a blank Signature, subscribed by the King, and ordained
to be filled up by the Exchequer: which some thought irregular: for either he
had committed a Crime, and eo casu, he should have been remitted to the
Justices; or if he had committed none, he could not have been fined. And albeit
the Exchequer, or any other Court may fine, or imprison such as injure their
Jurisdiction, or may ordain damage and interest to be repayed to the party
injured, in any thing before their Court; yet no person having here been
prejudged, and the injury having gone no fu^ther, then a simplex conatus, there
could be no damnage and interest incurred. But it seems the Exchequer are still
Judges, in criminibus repetundarum and de residuis

The Commissioners of the Thesaury did, in June 1669. ordain two Skippers in
Bruntistand, to be scourged at that Market Cross: because, when a Customer came
to enter a Boat wherein unfree Goods were were alleged to be, they did put off
the Boat from the Rock where it lay, whereby the Customer fell into the Sea,
and had almost drowned.

TITLE VIII. Of the Jurisdiction of the Lords of Session, in Crimnials.
1. The Lords of Session use to pass Bills for Criminal Letters. 2. They
Advocat Causes belonging to the Justice Court. 3. They are Judges, in crimine
falsi. 4. They have made Statutes for regulating the Justice Court. 5. Whether
they can review the Sentences of the Justice Court. 6. They suspend the
Sentences of the Justice Court. 7. They are Judges to such as kill, or wound
one another, during the dependence of a Process before the Session. 8. They
grant Warrant to Advocats, to compear for such as are pursued for Treason.
I. THE Lords of Session have regularly no jurisdiction in criminals; and yet
they pass the Bills whereupon all criminal Summonds are raised: For all
Summonds in criminals must have a Bill, which must pass under the Hand of His
Majesty's Advocat, and for which he gets ten Merks, and his servant one,
thereafter it is carried to the ordinar upon the Bills, and is subscribed by him
as a common Bill.

The reason, why their Bills are past by the Lords, seems to be, because the
Justice-deputs were not ordinar residenters in Town (their sallaries not being
sufficient for defraying that charge) or else, because the Clerk of the B^lls
is a Member and Servant of the College of Justice; yet this was one of the
grievances given in by the Justices to the Parliament, Anno 1662. And it is
very unreasonable that those whose employment it is to understand criminal
cases, should not have the passing of these Bills; and many of the Lords refuse
to pass these Bills, whereby the Liedges are preju^ged. And it is most
unreasonable, that the Justices should not know what they are to judge;
especially this warrant being a part of the Process, and so falls naturally
under the cognition of these who are Judges to it. And it is probable, that if
any of the Justices would pass their own Bill, it would sustain. But now the
Justices use ordinarily to pass their own Bills: because the Justices are now of
the Session: but still other Lords who are not Justices, may pass such Bills.

But albeit these Lores cannot judge crimes, yet they may and do punish
injuries committed against any of their own Members, by fining or confining.

II. They likewise Advocat Cause, from the inferior Courts to the Justices:
thus in Anno 1664. Mackintosh, being pursued before the Sheriff of Inverness
for theft-boot, they Advocated the cause to the Justices; albeit it was
alleged, that they could not be Judges to the Cognition. To which it was
answered, that the consequence was ill inferted; for the Council did Advocat,
and could not cognosce; and the Lords of Session did Advocat Breivs, for
serving Airs, and yet they were not Judges themselves; for both in this, and
that case, an Inquest was necessar.

III. They are likewise Judges, in crimine falsi; and their sentence is a
sufficient warrant to the Assize to condemn, without repeating the probation;
and when the Inquest refuses to condemn upon that warrant, they are of new
enclosed: as was done in Binnies case; and will be liable to an Assize of
error, if they assioilzie; and their Decree bears the Lords remit him to the
Justices, to be punished, tanquam falsarius, and to underly the Law criminally,
and ordained that ordinance to be insert in their Books of Sederunt. And that
order is in the Justice Court, called an Act of Sederunt, the 2. of July 1662.
Albeit the Act of Parliament, Ia. 6. Parl. 11. requires that all probation in
criminals, should be led in presence of the Assize; yet the answer is, that the
Lords Decree is only probation here, and that is read in face of the Assize.

The Lords likewise determine the punishment in falsehood, and remit in their
Decree, the party to the Justice, to be only banished, or scourged, or have his
Tongue boar'd, according to the quality of the guilt. And I have seen a
Gentleman, whom I will not name, in Anno 1664. only imprisoned by the Lords,
for forging of a false Bond of suspension, because he was ingenuous, and in
necessity. And albeit this may seem irregular, yet seeing the Lords are only
privy to the Depositions, it is necessar they should have this allowance. I
find it one of the rules set down by the Doctors, that ubi cunque iudex
principaliter cognoscendo reperit incidenter crimen esse comissum potest de
crimine illo cognoscere, C. si adversus liber. l. pen. And the example of this
rule is instanced, in Charta falsa. l. pen. C. de probat. And upon improving an
Instrument, or Writ, they have ordained, omnes testes instrumentarios, and
falsi fabricatores, to be fall sari^s, and remitted them to the Justices, the
16. of February 1660. Fern, Innes and Tarbat hanged. But I remember not that
they have in any other case cognosced upon crimes incidenter; albeit the
foresaid rule would give them an incident Jurisdiction in all cases.

IV. I find that the Lords have made Statutes to regulat the Justices Courts,
for upon the 1. of June 1593. they declared, that all landed men should be
esteemed pares curiae, and might sit upon Noble-mens Assizes, being pursued,
tanquaritemere jurantes sup. assisa: and the Council uses to consult them in
intricat cases, which are referred to them by the Justices. And thus in Anno
1667. they were consulted, whether the West Country Rebels, might be
forefaulted in their absence

V. But whether they be Judges competent to reduce, or review what is done by
the Justices, or in the Justice Court, in any case, is not yet decided; but I
have seen a reduction of a Verdict, of an Inquest, pronounced against Mr.
William Somervel, whereby he was found guilty of Usury. The reason of reduction
was, that the Inquest had erred, in calculo, and it was contended, that the
Lords were competent Judges to review errors, in calculo, for that was in
effect but a civil Medium; and, where no criminal conclusion was craved, nor
could follow, they were Judges, as in the case of Reductions of Retours, where
the verdict may be reduce, as past upon ignorance.

It was also urged, that, seeing the Lords made Statutes to regulate the
Justice Courts, and past their Bills, they might cognosce upon palpable errors,
committed ignorantly by Assizes; and it were hard that the Liedges should not
be repon'd against Errors of such ignorant persons, as Assizers ordinarily were.

VI. The Lords of Session do suspend the execution likewise, of all sentences
in the Justice Courts; but these Suspentions, when once raised, are discust
before the Justices.

They likewise, sometimes discuss these Suspentions before the Session. And
thus an Assithment modified by the Justices, being exorbitant, the Lords, by
way of Suspension, did lessen the sum. The reason of which Decision was,
because they found this case to be but of the nature of damnage and interest,
and not to concern corporal punishment, the 16. of December 1664. Innes contra
Forbes.

VII. By Act of Parliament 1555. such as kill, or wound, to the effusion of
blood, or any other way, one another, during the dependence of a criminal
Process (which dependence is declared to continue, from the execution of the
Summonds, till the complete execution of the Decree) that the pursuer
committing the said crime, shall for ever loss the cause, and the defender
being guilty, is to be condemned in the plea. The pursuer, or defender, being
convict before any competent Judge in criminals, without any probation, except
summar cognition, to be taken by conviction, or putting the committer to the
Horn, and denouncing him fugit^ve. By this Act the committer losses his
life-rent Escheat immediately, after denounciation, without being Year and Day
at the Horn; and giving of counsel, is art and part in this crime.

This Act was to continue only for three Years, and is prorogat for seven
Years, by the 138. Act Parl. 8. Ia. 6. and is thereafter made perpertual, by
the 219. Act 14. Parl. Ia. 6. I have often seen Process intented upon this Act
before the Lords. But it is necessar, albeit not observed, that cognition be
first taken by the Justices, or other criminal, and competent Judge. Yet
without this, Process was sustained by the Lords, in prima instantia; but this
defense was not there alleged; and Process was sustained, albeit no effusion
of blood followed, the 29. of July. 1662. Harper against Hamiltoun; where it
was debated, whether the Lords might summarly receive probation of it
themselves, or remit the trial to the Justices; for which doubt, I thought,
there was no great ground: because, by the Act foresaid, the Justice is only
Judge, in prima instantia. And yet, in Sleiches case, 1673. It was found, that
no previous trial before the Justices was necessar.

The Earl of Niddisdale pursuing the Tennents of Duncow, February 1672. they
alleged absolvitur, because the Earl had beat some of them, who were sent to
execute a Summonds at their instance against him, at least he had given order
to beat them, or ratihabited the beating of them: To which it was answered,
that 1. The beating some of them, could only found an exception to such as were
beat; and this the Lords found relevant, though the Summonds execu^^d was for a
common Cause: and so in effect, those who were beat, represented all the
pursuers. 2. It was alleged, that order to beat them was only probable,
scripto vel juramento: for, though a crime ordinarily, in a criminal Court, be
probable, pro ut de jure, yet here, quo ad civilem effectum, it could not be so
proved: for else a Noble-mans whole and ancient Heritage, might oft-times be
taken away by Witnesses, since Processes depending, might extend to a
Noble-mans whole Estate. 3. It was alleged, that ratihabition, or any deed, ex
post facto, did not infer the contravention of this Act, which required
explicit deeds, as beating, bleeding, etc. The Lords, before answer to these
two last alledgiances, ordained Witnesses to be led, before answer, for
clearing the nature of the Act, and violence committed against them; but in
this case, as in all others, if the one party beat, the other being forced
thereto by self-defence, the striker will not, eo casu, fall under the
certification of the Act of Parliament, as was found the last of January 1673.
John Sliech against Swintoun. In which case, the Lords also found, that the
certification of this Act, did reach such as wounded one another, during the
dependence of a pursuit, before an Inferior Court; though it was alleged,
that this respect was only due to the Lords of the Session, and that the Act
should only reach, such as pursued Actions before them, for, to lose the whole
Pley, was too great a punishment for an incident Riot, before an Inferior
Court.

I find likewise, that one Weir having been pursued for slaughter, the 15. of
June 1591. he alleged, he was absolved by a Rolment of Court at Aberdene. To
which it was replied, that the King had given a warrant for a further trial,
which reply, founded upon His Majesty's Warrant, was repelled, as contrary to
Law, and because it was but a private Rescript, not subscribed by the
Chancellor, nor past Council: And in respect, the Lords of Session had given a
Warrant to proceed, notwithstanding of the Kings private Warrant. It is also
observable (though I think it irregular) that Ludwharn having raised, in Anno
1596. a pursuit against Momat, and others, for taking him out of his House,
without a lawful Warrant, gave in a Bill to the Lords, complaining that the
Duke of Lennox, as Leivtennent of the North, intended to repledge; whereas that
Jurisdiction was only cumulative with the power of the Justices: and that he
had a Letter from His Majesty, ordaining the Justices to proceed; wherefore, he
craved that the Justices might be commanded to proceed, which Petition was
granted.

VIII. Albeit regulariter, the Parliament, or Council grant Warrands to
Advocats, to appear for such as are Pannell'd before the Justices: yet I find
that the Lords granted a Warrant in Balmerinochs case, to Advocats to compear
for him. And seeing Advocats are subject to the Jurisdiction of the Lords, it is
most reasonable, that the application be made to them: for the same reason
likewise, I find, that when any of the Lords are appointed Assessors, in
Criminal cases by the Council, that they must have a Warrant also from the
Lords, for sitting there, as in Toshes case, 1637.

TITLE IX. The Admirals Jurisdiction in Criminals.
1. The Jurisdiction of the Admiral, extends to all Crimes committed within
Flood-mark. 2. Our Admiral has execute Pirates. 3. Whether it be lawful for such
as apprehend Pirates, to execute them by their own Authority, in the Ocean, or
when Judges refuse. 4. Any Nation may Judge Pirates. 5. Whether the Justices
have a cumulative Jurisdiction with the admiral.
1. THe Lord high A^miral and his Deputs, are by the Laws of all Nations Judges
competent to the trial of all crimes committed at Sea, and by an unprinted
Statute with us, the Admiral is competent in all controversies, actions and
quarrels concerning crimes, faults, and trespasses upon Sea, or so far as the
same flows, or ebbs, vid. Ship-laws corrected by Balfour. tit. Admiral, etc.
cap. 2. Our Learned Countreyman, King in his Treatise which I have, says,

Admirans habet merum imperium, mixium, and jurisdictionem simplicem; potest
enim non solum jus dicere, quod est jurisdictionis simplicis, exequi, imperare,
judices dane, coercere; quae sunt meri imperii, sed est in facinerosos
animadvertere, quod est meri imperii, de omnibus igitur contraversiis marinis
cognoscere potest Amirans. marinas intelligo, quae negotiationis causa
ineuntur, sive extra mare, sive in mari celebrantur delicta tamen ex
necessitate intra mar is fluxum perpetrari debent.

In Scotland, the Deans of Gild were, as Walwood observes tit. 23. ordinary
Judges of old betwixt Mariner and Merchand; Likeas, the Water-Bailiff betwixt
Mariner and Mariner, and the Justice-general was Judge in Criminals, but now no
judge may meddle (says he) with the Admiral causes, but only by way of
assistance, and that by Commission in difficult causes, as was found in that
action, Antoni de latour against Christian Marteis, 6. of November, 1642.

II. In October 1635. Bernard Gilermo, and some Spanish, Dutch, and French
Pirates, being apprehended, Mr. James Robertson then Admiral-deput, craved that
the Council would name Assessors to him in the trial of these foreigners, and
they being named, a Court of Justiciary of the Admirality (for the Registers of
the Admirality give it that Title) was kept at Irwine, and these Pirates
indicted and hanged for Piracies committed by them upon French, Spanish, and
Dutch Merchands, the parties injured are received witnesses, else these crims
at Sea could not be proved; this trial was by an Assize, as before the Justice.

III. By the Martim Law of England, it is lawful for any man who takes a Pirat
in the Ocean, to hang him at the Mainyard, because as it seems to me the Ocean
is within no man's Jurisdiction, and so every man is left to his own natural
liberty; but this may prove very dangerous, for thus men may execute their
revenge in place of Justice, and may make innocent men Pirates, for their
private advantage; and Judicaturs are established to prevent such injuries; and
upon that pretext men may as well adjudge Prizes taken upon the Ocean: but yet
if a Ship be on her voyage to remot places, as the Indies, so that the takers
cannot keep the Pirates till they come to a Harbor, they may in that case
execute them at Sea, for that is a kind of self-defence; and necessity makes
Law. But I think this necessity must be proved, vid. Grot. de jur. belli. lib.
2. c. 20. 14. And for this same reason, I differ from that Author, who asserts,
number. 12. that if the taker bring a Pirat to a Port, and the Judge refuses, or
delays Justice, so that the taker must lose, then the taker may execute
Justice himself; for this were to make every man Judge, not only of the Pirat,
but of the Judge to whom application was made, and a Private person might as
well pretend, that if a Judge delayed, or denied Justice against such, as we
pretend did either rob or affront us, we might do Justice upon them our selves,
contrary to many Laws, and particularly to l. nullus C. de judaeis. The same
learned Author, Iuris Maritimi, does tell us, cap. 4. number. 14. that if a
Spaniard rob a Frenchman on the high Sea, both their Princes being in amity
amongst themselves, and with England, and that the Ship is brought into the
Ports of Enland, the Frenchman may proceed against the Spaniard, to pun^sh him
but if the Ship be brought, intra prasidia of that Prince by whose subject the
same was taken, it may be doubted if he can proceed Criminally; but the taker
must resort to the Pirates own Country, or where he carried the Ship. But in my
opinion, a Pirat may be Judged by the Judge of any Nation, for he is an enemy
to all Nations, and though he be not deprehended committing a crime in the Sea
of that Prince, or State, within which he is deprehended, and so seems not
liable to their Jurisdiction, nec ratione loci delicti, nec originis, nec
domicilii, yet he who is of no Nation, is of all nations, as Vagabonds are; and
he who is an equal enemy to all Nations, commits a crime against every Nation.

IV. Though the Admirals Criminal Jurisdiction extends no further then crimes
committed at Sea, or within Flood-mark, yet he is some times Judge, ratione
contingentiae and ob continentiam causae, as if a man rescue a Pirat out of
Prison, though this Crime be committed without Flood-mark, yet the Admiral is
Judge, because it has dependence upon, and arises from the principal Crime to
which he is Judge: and if the Admiral begin to present Pirates, or Malefactors
at Sea, he may continue his pursuit, and apprehend them at Land, and without
his own jurisdiction, but he must in that case seek concurrence from the
Magistrate of the place, Locen. cap. 3. number. 2.

V. Though the Admiral has a Criminal Jurisdiction, yet some allege that he
has not this properly as Admiral, but by virtue of a Commission of Justiciary
contained in his Gift; and therefore when the Admiral proceeds to thy Crimes,
the Court is not called the Court of Admirality simply as in other cases, but
the Court of Justiciary of the Admirality.

It is likewise doubted, whether the Admiral has the sole power of judging
Crimes committed at Sea, or if the justices have a cumulative jurisdiction with
them, and may preveen; and that the Justices have a cumulative jurisdiction is
clear, for I find, that in Anno 1613. the Justices did hang one John Davidson,
and John Lowes English Pirates, and in Anno. 1610. they hanged Peter Love, John
Cock and others. Likewise, English Pirates, which last were hanged, upon their
own confessions emitted before the Privy Council, and all of them were hanged
within Flood-mark. I have likewise seen the Justices Advocat Causes from the
Admiral Court, but whether the Admirals sentence in Criminals can be reduced by
the Criminal Court, as their sentences in Civils can be reduced before the
Session, I will not determine.

TITLE X. The Jurisdiction of the Commissars in Criminals.
1. The Jurisdiction of Churchmen. 2. Our Commissars are Judges competent to
verbal injuries. 3. How far they are Judges competent to improbations.
I. Churchmen are discharged to sit Judges in Crimes, and the Canons of the
Greek Church give them; (...) A bloodless Jurisdiction, upon which account, the
Law gives them, audientiam, sed non jurisdictionem, tit. C. de Episcop.
audient. With us these Bishops abstain from votting in criminal Processes
brought in to the Parliament, though there they sit as Heritors, rather then as
mere Churchmen, and so might pretend to a voice, upon that account.

II. The Commissars are the Bishops Officials, and so have least criminal
Jurisdiction of all other Courts; but yet they are Judges competent to verbal
injuries, which are by the Law accounted crimes: and the reason why they are
the only Judges competent to this crime, is, because that Court, as being an
Ecclesiastic Court, and curia christianitatis, considers these verbal Injuries
as Scandals, and so they are allowed, not only to punish the same with
Pecuniary Mulcts, but with Church Censures, such as to make the offender stand
at the Church Doors to expiat a Slander: though it was alleged, that the
inflicting of such punishments, was only proper to Kirk Sessions, the 15. of
February 1669. But though they be the only Judges competent to verbal Injuries,
where they are Scandals; yet in verbal Injuries done to persons of quality,
which are called in Law, scandala magnatum, the Council sustains it self Judge
competent; the King being as the Author, so the Protector of all the
privileges of the Peerage; and in verbal Injuries likewise done to Magistrates,
the Council are also Judges, Magistrates representing the King, and being his
Instruments in the Government.

When verbal Injuries are done by Members of a Court to one another, that Court
is likewise Judge competent, all Courts (how inferior soever) having an innat
Power to chastise its own Members, and to preserve the esteem due to it self;
and therefore, if any stranger who has a Process, depending before any other
Court, as the Session, Sheriff, etc. do abuse contumeliously any third Party,
though no Member: yet these respective Courts may punish the same, if the
injury be done in face of Judgment, and if it be done to any Inferior Judge
extrajudicially, that Judge if he be in the actual exercise of his Office, he
may likewise punish the same, except the offender be a Member of the College
of Justice, for in that case the Judge extrajudicially injured, must complain
to the Lords, but cannot imprison them summarly, because, if this were allowed,
these Members might be abstracted from serving the Liedges, as an Advocat when
he is to plead a Cause, or a Clerk when he is to give out a Decree: and this
last has been frequently so decided.

Though verbal Injuries amounting to Scandals, are only to be punished by the
Commissars, yet where they have nothing in them of Scandal, but are rather
reflections upon the Honor of the party injured, as to call a Gentleman a
Puppy, or an Ass; it may be the Privy Council, and not the Commissars are
Judges competent.

The Commissars are also Judges competent to Adultery, in so far as concerns
Divorce, vid. tit. adulterii.

III. How far the Commissars, and Inferior Judges, are Judges competent to the
improving of Writs, and declaring them false, has been variously decided; but
they may be reduced to these conclusions, 1. No Inferior Judge is competent,
to try the falsehood of Writs, by the indirect manner of improbation, that is to
say, by presumptions, for that way of trial being in effect, nobilis officii,
is only competent to the Lords of the Session. 2. Commissars, and other
Inferior Judges, are only competent to improbations, even where the direct
manner is extant, if improbation be propon'd by way of exception, or reply; for
then the trial of Falsehood falls in necessarily as a part of the Process, and
without this were allowed to these Inferior Judges, they could proceed in no
case; for if a pursuit were intented before them, upon a Bond, they behoved to
sist, if the Bond were alleged to be false; or to stop, if the defender should
offer to improve the execution of the Summonds: but yet they are not competent
by way of Action, even where the direct manner is extant: as was decided the
last of November 1630. Williamson contra Cushney. 3. If the Commissar, or other
Inferior Judge, pronounce once a Decree, he cannot thereafter reduce his own
Decree, as having proceeded upon false executions; though the executions were
given by his own Officer, since they are only Judges competent to such
forgeries, incidenter: but after sentence, they are functi; as was found the
29. of January 1677. Cowan, contra the Commissar of Glasgows Phiscal, and
according to these conclusions, the late instructions given to the Commissars,
are to be interpreted.

TITLE XI. The Jurisdiction of Regalities in Criminals.
1. The Origin of Regalities. 2. They are accounted Inferior Iudicaturs. 3.
Why the Heritor of a Regality, is called a Lord of Regality. 4. Whether His
Majesty may erect Regalities within the bounds of Heritable Jurisdictions. 5.
They cannot repledge in case of Treason, nor from Justice Airs. 6. The
difference betwixt Ecclesiastic and Laick Regalities, and from whom they may
repledge. 7. The form of a Repledgiation. 8. Regalities must have a Burgh of
Regality, and to what that Burgh is tied. 9. The effects of a Lord of
Regalities power.
I. BY the Feudal Law (to which Regalities owe their origin) alia erant
regalia, alia erant feuda regalem dignitatem habentia, which is the same
difference in our Law, betwixt Regalia, and Regalities. Regalia, are such
privileges as immediately belong to the Crown, and do not originally belong to,
nor can be communicate by any else; such as to Coin Money, to open Mines of
Silver, Gold, etc. But Regalities are Fews, which are granted by the King to a
Subject, they have as large a Jurisdiction, as the Sheriffs have in Civils, or
the Justices in criminals; the habilis modus, of granting which Rights, is by
Signator, whereupon a Charter follows, which passes the great Seal.

II. Regalities are accounted inferior Judicaturs, cap, 76. quon. attach. by
which it is Statute, that no inferior Judge shall judge the Pleys of the
Crown: and Regalities are expressly numbered amongst inferior Courts, Act, 173.
Parl. 13. K. Ia. 6. By which it is likewise Statute, that he who strikes any
person, in presence of the Justices, shall incurr the pain of death; but he who
strikes any before the Sheriffs, Lords of Regality, or other inferior Judge,
shall only pay a hundred Pounds; but though they be accounted inferior Judges,
when compared with the Justices, or Commissioners of Justiciary, yet they have
greater power in the way of their procedor, and in the proportioning of their
fines, then Sheriffs, or other inferior Judges have; for they may fine in a
hundredth Pounds, though Sheriffs and others cannot, as was found the 30 of
January 1663. Stewart against Bogle. And generally they have the same power,
and the same allowance with the Justices, except when an express Law makes a
difference betwixt them.

The 43. Act, 11. Parl. K. Ia. 2. appoints that no Regalities should be
granted, without deliverance of Parliament; which nullity, of old, could not
have been received, opt exceptionis, if it was clad with possession, Hadd.
1610. and they were still subject to Revocation by the King, if they were
otherwise granted, as may be seen by the Revocation, 1633. and all preceding.

III. He in whose favors the Regality is granted, is still called the Lord of
Regality, though he be otherwise but a Barron; the reason of which, I take to
be, because by the Feudal Law, tria erant tantum feuda regalem dignitatem
habentia, and quibus inerat jurisdictio regalis, viz, Ducatus, Marchionatus,
and Comitatus, and by the same reason it is, that no Lands can be comprehended
under this jurisdiction by our Law, but such as belong to him, in whose favors
that jurisdiction was granted, either in Property, or Superiority; and
therefore it was found, that His Majesty's Palaces, (though situated in Burghs
of Regality,) were in Law no part of the Regality, but off the Royalty, and
that such as lived in these Palaces, could not be cited at the Head Burgh of
the Regality, but at the Head Burgh of the Shire, the 11. of January 1662. L.
Carnegie against the Lord Cranburn.

IV. Whether His Majesty may erect Regalities within the bounds of Heritable
Sheriff-ships, is controverted with us; and if he may, certainly he may thereby
evacuat the Office of Sheriff-ships, though bought with real Money, which is
hard. And yet the Exchequer past a Signator of Drumlanrigs, albeit Niddisdale,
within the bounds of which Sheriff-ship it is erected, be an Heritable
Sheriff-ship, and the like decision is related by Hop. M. h. t. and the reason
seems to be, that His Majesty by granting an Heritable Sheriff-ship, alters not
its nature; and the nature of a Sheriff-ship, is, that His Majesty is not
thereby divested of Jurisdiction, and the Sheriff appointed, being but His
Majesty's Deput, his Creation cannot hinder His Majesty to erect a new
Jurisdiction within its bounds, as he may erect a Burgh-royal therein, or a
Justiciary, etc. When Lands are dispon'd in Conjunctsee, the Heritor retains
still the Office of Regality, Hop. hoc. tit.

V. Albeit it be regularly true, that Lords of Regality have the same
jurisdiction with His Majesty's Justices: yet this rule suffers two exceptions,
1. In the case of Treason, to which the justices are only judges competent, and
that not only where the Treason libelled, amounts to the crime of Perduellion;
but even in Statutory Treasons, such as firing of Coal-heughs, theft in landed
men, etc. And some Lawyers are likewise of opinion, that these crimes which are
declared to be the four Points of the Crown, viz. Robbery, Murder,
Fire-raising, and Ravishing of Women, should not be liable to their
jurisdiction; which opinion is founded upon the 2. cap. leg. Malcolm. 2. By
which it is Statute, that all Robbers, Forces of Women, Murderers of Men, and
Burners of Houses, shall answer before the Kings Justiciar; and are therefore
called Pleys of the Crown. And by the 14. cap. Stat. Alex. 2. it is ordained,
that in all the Courts of Bishops, Abbots, and the Lords whatsomever, these
four Pleys shall be reserved from their Court, to the Kings own Court, because
they belong to the Crown: which is confirmed by the 76. cap. quon. Attach.
Likeas Skeen de verb. signif. Upon the Word Placitum, is clear, that these four
Pleys of the Crown, belong only to the Crowns jurisdiction, or Justice-general,
in the same manner with Treason he there likewise observes, that they are
called placita, from the French Word placitare, which signifies Litigare, as
Mollineus, observes, Sup. cur. Parl. parti. Primo cap. Sexto: And yet de facto,
Lords of Regality do ordinarily judge upon these crimes without any Commission.
And I find that the 22. of July, Brown is assoilzied from a pursuit of
Fire-raising, because he had been formerly pursued before the Marquess of
Hamiltoun, and assoilzied. Actions of Deforcement also, in my opinion, being
intented before the Justices, cannot be repledged, for the Kings Messenger
being then Deforced, it is not fit that His Majesty should be obliged to seek
justice from inferior Judges, where His Officers of State cannot attend to
pursue, and cap. 27. l. 4. Reg. Maj. it is said, that ad solam curiam Regis
pertinet placitum de namo vetito, and this the Justices sustained, the 23. of
November 1675. in the case of William Crighton, though the debate was not
allowed to be booked.

The 2. exception is, that no Bailie of Regality can repledge from Justice
Airs, Act 29. Parl. 11. Ia. 6. which was likewise Statute formerly, by the 26.
Act, Ia. 2. Parl. 6. But in this case, the Bailie of Regality may sit with the
Justice-general, yet seeing the forsaid Act of the 11. Parl. King. Ia. 6 allows
only no Repledgiation to be from Justice Airs, holden by the Justice-general,
it may be doubted, if when Justices Airs are holden by the Justice Deputs, or
others, by virtue of particular Commissions, there may not be Repledgiation
allowed in that case; but I think there cannot, seeing the Act of Parl. Ia. 2.
is general: and Skeen remarks this as a privilege of the Justice Air, qua
talis.

VI. Regalities are divided with us, in Ecclesiastic, and Laick; Ecclesiastic
Regalities were such, as were erected in favors of Bishops, Abbots, etc. And
there are but very few Abbacies in Scotland which were not erected in
Regalities; and when these were annexed to the Crown, by the foresaid 29. Act,
Parl. 11. K. Ia. 6. It is declared, that the Bailie, or Stewart of the Regality
shall have the same power he had before to Repledge, from the Sheriff, or
Justice-general, in case he have prevented the Justice-general, by
apprehending, or citing the Person, before he be apprehended, or cited by the
Justice; but, if the Justice have prevented, as said is, then the Bailie, or
Stewart of the Regality, shall not have power to Repledge, but he may sit with
the Justice-general, if he pleases: so that in effect, by this act, there is
difference betwixt Ecclesiastic and Laick Regalities; that in Laick
Regalities, there is a Right of Repledging still, as said is; whereas
Ecclesiastic Regalities have not this privilege, except they preveen the
Justices; but otherwise, the Bailie of Regality may only sit with them: Which
difference seems to ^e acknowledged in the debate, at His Majesty's Advocats
instance, against several Fore-stallers, upon the 26. of June 1596. And thus
Mr. John Prestoun, then Depute to the Regality of Musselburgh, was not allowed
to Repledge, but to sit with the Justices, in the trial of some Witches, upon
the 29. of July 1661. The reason of this difference was, that the Regalities
having been only granted, in favors of the Religious Houses which were
suppressed. The Regalities became extinguished with them, and His Majesty having,
ex gratia, only renewed their Offices to the Lords of Erection, he thought that
they were abundantly gratified, by this new concession, without allowing them
the power to exclude his own Justices, in case of prevention; and this was also
a favor to the Liedges, in not troubling them with two Courts. Nor were the
Lords of Regality much prejudged; for by this same Act, they retain the whole
right to the Escheats, and Fines, even of these who are condemned by the
Justices. And therefore the Lords found, that the Lord of Regality had right to
the Escheats of such as were condemned by the Justices, or Justices of Peace,
the 22. of July 1664. Elizabeth Sutherland contra Conradge: so that this holds
not only where the Justices sit with the Lord of Regality: but likewise where
the Justices condemn without the others concourse; and yet it may be urged,
that since the Lord of Regality serves not in that case, he ought not to get
these Casualities, which are the reward due to these who do justice, and the
Lord of Regality has himself only to blame, who did not either preveen, or
repledge.

Bailies of Regalities may likewise repledge from the Kings Lievtenent, as was
found the 19. of August 1596. And as is clear by the foresaid Act of
Annexation: and likewise from any Commissioners appointed by the Council, as
was found in May 1568. And from the Justices of Peace, in Riots, and Bloods: as
was found by the Lords of Session, July 1617. though these causes being of
small moment, and requiring summar and unexpensive cognitions, seem to require
easier, and less solemn trials in the procedor, then repledgiations will allow.
And yet by c. 11. de appell. I find that licebat in remimina appellare; nor can
the parties injured complain, since they might have made their application to
the Lord of Regality: Nor should their error prejudge his jurisdiction.

VII. The manner of repledgiation from any Court, is, that either the party
himself, who has the power of repledging, or some other having a Procurator
from him, compears and produces his Charter of Erection; from the production of
the Seasing is not sufficient, seeing that is but assertio Notarii: yet
sometimes without production of the Charter, repledgiation will be sustained:
because it is notour that the repledger has a Regality; as in the Duke of
Lennox case, 1637. As also, repledgiation will be sustained, upon production of
the criminal Register, bearing, that it was formerly sustained to the same
persons, May 1668. Arducaple against the Commissioners of the High-lands: Yet
it may be doubted, whether the production of a Lord of Regalities retour, will
be sufficient to instruct that he has a Regality: and it appears it should,
since a retour is a sentence, and so is a sufficient instruction, till it be
reduced.

He who offers to repledge, must find Caution of Culrach to do justice, within
year and day, upon the person whom he repledges; and if the Judge to whom he is
repledged, does not justice within year and day, he tines his Court (as we call
it) for year and day; and the Culrach (for so the Cautioner is called) who
has, upon his becoming Cautioner, borrowed the Defender, is in an unlaw, and
the Judge from whom he was borrowed, or repledged, may proceed to do justice,
as formerly: Skeen, de verb. sig. The Panel likewise, who is repledged, must
find Caution for his own appearance before the Lord of Regality, to underly the
Law, for the crimes laid to his charge, the 16. of May 1599. Patrick Mckalla,
against the Regality of Lennox.

No person can be repledged, except he be present at the Court, from which he
is desired to be repledged: for a party, who is absent, cannot find Caution to
sist himself before the Court, to which he is repledged; as was found in the
case of Armstrong, who being pursued for murdering some Customers, was desired
to be repledged by the Earl of Annandale, Anno 1666. Nor can a person be
repledged after defenses are proponed for him: for this being, recusatio
judicis, it must be, ante omnia, propon'd, dum res est integra.

VIII. When Regalities are erected, there is a Burgh of Regality expressed
therein; and though that Burgh may choose Bailies, yet the Bailie of Regality
has still a cumulative jurisdiction with those Bailies of the Burgh of
Regality, in that same way that other Superiors retain still a cumulative
jurisdiction with their Regality; as was found the 24. of January 1668. betwixt
the Bailie of Killimure, and the Burgh thereof. This Burgh is obliged to
maintain a sufficient Prison, not only for Criminals, but for Debitors, by the
273. Act, 15. Parl. Ia. 6. And all Captions bear the Letters, to be direct to
Bailies of Regalities, etc. And yet by that Act, these Burghs seem only to be
obliged to intertain Prisoners, where there are Provost, Bailies, and
Common-good, Nota, that these words of that Act, by the Sheriff to Stewarts,
and Bailies of Regalities, are ill printed; for the word to should be or, The
Lords likewise decided thus against the Bailies of Regalities, the 7. of July
1668. Hamiltoun contra Callender. In this Burgh all Courts must be holden, Yet
defenders are obliged to compear at any other place within the Regality, to
which they were expressly cited: As Had, observes in a case, the 16. of March
1622. Or, if the Lord of Regality was in use to hold his Court else where, for
a considerable time, without interruption, the Vassals, or any other Defender,
is obliged to appear thereat, though it be not the place designed, in the
Charter of Erection, as Had. observes, December 1624. And if the party, who is
desired to be Repledged, dwelt within the Regality, the time of the committing
of the Crime, the Repledgiation will be sustained, though at the time of his
being accused, he be removed without the Regality: as was found, the 21. of
November 1632. in the case of one Weems, who was desired to be Repledged, to
the Regality of Methwen.

Lords of Regality are oblidged to hold Justice-Courts twice a Year, 3. Parl.
K. Ia. 2. Act. 5. and if they be negligent in causing rest and stolen Goods be
restored, the Sheriff may fulfill their place, Act 11. Parl. 15. Ia. 2. And when
Erections fall into the Kings hand, the Inhabitants thereof may be justified,
id est, judged by the Justices, Act 26. Par. 6. K. I. 6 but this Act can only
take place, till a Stewart, or Bailie be appointed. For Regulariter, the Kings
own Stewarts of Regalities may repledge from the Justices.

A Lord of Regality cannot fit himself in his own Court, but must administer by
a Bailie, who is sometimes admitted by a simple Commission, during his life; or
otherwise he is admitted to be Heritable Bailie: which Right passes by
Infestment; but this Bailie is in Lands belonging to the King, and is properly
called the Stewart of the Regality: though sometimes the Kings Deputs in
Regalities, are likewise called Bailies, as in the 5. Act. 3. Parl. K I. 2.

IX. Lords of Regality cannot cite Witnesses, without their own jurisdiction,
but they must have Letters of Supplement for that Office; though generally they
may proceed in the same way that the Justice-General does; but they may exact
Caution to enter as Law-will, from the defenders, after sentence is given, as
was found the 7. of October 1668. betwixt Mr. John Prestoun, and Mr. John Pape,
which seems to be a greater privilege then the Justices have, who cannot
presently exact Caution of any person, for paying an unlaw, but can only raise
Letters of Horning upon the Act of Adjournal.

The Lords of Regalities have right to the single Escheat of rebels, living
within their jurisdiction; as also to the Escheats of all persons, condemned
for crimes, committed by the Inhabitants within their jurisdiction, albeit
condemned by the Justices: from which general rule, Hope in his lesser
Practiques, excepts only the case of Treason; but it may be doubted, whether
exception may not be likewise made of all other Pleys of the Crown, seeing the
Lord of Regality is no more Judge competent to these, then he is to Treason.

I was once consulted, whether a Lord of Regality might place a Gallows upon
any part of his Vassals Land, lying within his Regality? and at first it seemed
that he might: for, unaquaeque gleba servit: and what was lawful in some part,
was, where there is no restriction lawful in any part: but if there was a
former place fixed upon by custom, I think the Lord of Regality could not
alter the same. 2. If there were any apparent design of affronting the Vassal,
I believe he could not use this privilege; as if he did offer to place the
Gallows, at his Vassals Gate, or at his Garden-door, or any such places: for,
where the Law says, that quilibet potest uti jure suo, it adds, modo hoc non
faciat principaliter in aemulationem alterius. 3. Even in other places, there
is some moderamon and decorum, to be observed: and I doubt not, but upon
application to the Council, they would appoint some persons to choose an
indifferent place: for even in these servitudes, ubi unaquequae gleba servit;
hoc accipiendum est ^iviliter (says the Law) and non judaice. for if a man
should grant me a servitude of a way to my house through any part of his
ground, yet I could not compel him to throw down his Garden walls, or to suffer
me to go thorrow his Corns, if there were, or might be another passage found,
though it were not so near.

TITLE XII. The Jurisdiction of Sheriffs in Criminals.
1. The origin of this office, and how it is conveyed in Scotland. 2. He is
the chief preserver of the peace, and so many convocat the Liedges, apprehend
sayers of Mass, false Coyners, etc. 3. He is not Judge to the four Pleys of
the Crown. 4. The way of procedure before the Sheriffs. 5. Whether he may judge
where no private party complains? 6. He should attend the Justice Aires. 7. How
he is to be punished if he transgress in his office?
ALluredus, in the League made with Guntherus King of Denmark, divided England,
in Satrapias, centurias, and decurias, and called Satrapiam a Shire, that is to
say, a Section or division of Land, from the word Shire, which signifies to
cut, so that a Sherifdom is a Jurisdiction within the bounds of a particular
limited Country: It is called in our Latin style, vice comitatus; and though
most of the Shires in Scotland be erected in Sherifdomes by particular Acts of
Parliament, yet by an unprinted Act in Anno 1504. It is declared that His
Majesty may erect, unite, or divide Sherifdoms without consent of Parliament:
And though his Majesty erect a Burgh-royal, or Barrony within the Sherifdome,
yet they still continue to be under the Jurisdiction of the Sheriff, and they
have a cumulative Jurisdiction with him; but not privative of him. Sheriffs in
Scotland, are either during life, and then the office passes by a signatour,
and passes the great Seal, or otherwise it is conferred as an heretable right,
quo casu, though it be transmitted in the same way and manner with other
heretable rights, yet because it is merum jus incorporeum, it requires no
seasing, but albeit all these heretable offices were upon good reasons
discharged by the 44 Act 11. Parl. K. I. 6. seeing industria personae respicitur
in judice; And albeit. K. I. 6. and King Charles the first, did design to buy
in all the heretable Sherifships, and bought in many, yet there are many of
them to this day enjoyed by Noblemen and others.

II. The Sheriffs of Scotland, have a Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction, but the
last of these, is that which we are only to consider as peculiar to this
Treatise.

The Sheriff is in effect the supreme Justice of peace, to whom is mainly
entrusted by the Law, the securing of the quiet, and tranquillity of that part
of the Kingdom which is subject to his Jurisdiction; and therefore though no
other person be allowed to ride with gatherings of the Liedges, yet the
Sheriffs is, nor can he be pursued for a convocation upon that account; seeing
he may convocat at his pleasure for repressing of tumults, and upon many other
accounts, as was found in February 1664 betwixt the Earl of Seaforth, and the
Lord of Ballingown, for it does belong to his office, to discharge all
convocations of the Liedges, and if they refuse, he should continue his Court,
and advertise the King. K. Ia. 3. Parl. 14. Act. 104.

Albeit, in civilibus, neither the Sheriff, nor Barrons, can hold Courts in
feriat, or close, time of vacance. Yet in Criminals he may hold Courts during
the time of vacance quia periculum est in mora, as is observed by Haddingtoun,
the 19. January, 1623. And Sheriffs has not power to exact caution from a
Malefactor to underly the Law, for he cannot proceed except either the defender
be cited, or, deprehensus inflagranti crimine, 25. Mart. 1628.

The Sheriff is Judge competent to the crime of Witchcraft, Quen Mary her 9.
Parl. Act. 37. albeit de praxi, none used to judge Witchcraft, but the
Justices, or such as have a particular commission from the Council. They should
apprehend the sayers and hearers of Mass, Act 5. Pa. 1. K. I. 6. And the
strikers of false Coin, I. 3. Pa. 3. cap. 18. but they are not allowed by the
Law expressly to proceed in either of these cases; from which it may be argued
that they are not Judges competent thereto, for else the Law had expressly
allowed them the same, ( and inclusio unius est exclusio alterius:) They should
apprehend, punish and banish Sorners, I. 2. P. 6. cap. 22. Egyptians, I. 6. P.
12. cap. 124. Idle-men, Ia. 1. P. 3. cap. 66. Shooters with fireworks. Q.
Mary. Par. 4. cap. 9. Fore-stallers, I. 5. P. 4. cap. 20. Transporters of Neat
and Sheep, and other Cattle, Ia. 6. Par. 7. cap. 124. Ia. 6, Par. 12. cap. 129.
The destroyers of Planting, K. I. 6. P. 6. cap. 84.

III. Sheriffs may at any time condemn for Blood-weits, but the penalty cannot
exceed fifty Pounds.

The Sheriff nor no other inferior Judge, can Judge the four Pleys of the
Crown, viz. open Robbery, Fire raising, and ravishing of Women, and Murder. Yet
of old, Sheriffs might sit upon Slaughter, if the committers were attactht
within forty days thereafter, cap. 59. quon. attach. And Act 89. Par. 6. I. 1.
And if he be taken red hand, he should be execute by the Sheriff within that
Sun, ibid. And yet by the 28 Act, Parl. 3. K. I. 4. Three Suns are allowed
conform to the old Laws; and if the committer of the Slaughter flee, the
Sheriff shall acquaint the next Sheriff, and so from one Judge to another,
until the committer be apprehended, and when he is taken, he is to be sent back
to that Sheriff where the crime was committed, where justice is to be done upon
him, and if he be found guilty of Forethought Felony, he shall dye; therefore
Act 89. Par. 6. Ia. 1. Ratified Act 28.3. Par. K. Ia. 4. with this addition,
that if any heretable Sheriff omit his duty in prosecuting of this crime, after
this manner, he shall lose his heretable office for three years, but if he have
only that office for the time, he shall lose it during all that time. From
which Acts, it may be concluded, that the Sheriffs is not only Judge competent
to Slaughter, but to murder, and both to the one and to the other at any time,
if he has either apprehended the person, or has ex in continenti, done
diligence for apprehending him, but the Sheriff is not Judge competent to
murder, though committed within his jurisdiction, except in either of these
cases.

IV. The way of procedure before the Sheriff, is by an Assize, and the
Procurator-Fiskal is pursuer in place of His Majesty's Advocat; Yet sometimes
the Sheriff, or Barron may condemn upon the Pannels confession, without an
Assize, as Dur. observes, penult January 1622. but if the party be present, the
Sheriff cannot condemn him, as holden, pro confesso, though he refuse to depon;
but co casu he must put him to the knowledge of an Assize, as was found 24.
July 1633. Dickson contra Halyday. And albeit a blood proven by confession, may
be punished by an unlaw of fifty pounds; yet when blood is punished upon
contumacious refusal to swear, the unlaw cannot exceed ten pounds, 17. February
1624.

V. The Sheriff may pursue, when any person compears and insists with him in
the pursuit, but if the crime be pursued by way of indictment without the
concurrence of any party, the Justice general is only Judge competent thereto:
Skeen verbo Sheriff, but that rule is too general, and may admit of this
distinction, viz. that either the Thief is taken with fang, and then the
Sheriff may proceed to judge him, though no private pursuer insist against him.
Nor needs there three fangs for justifying that pursuit, Albeit Sheriffs now
never proceed, but where three fangs are proved. Or else no fang is found, and
eo casu, the Sheriff cannot judge the thief, except there be a pursuit
intended at the instance of a private party.

VI. The Sheriff should assist in all Justice Aires holden by the Justice
General, or the Chamberlain, and should produce the verifications of all the
Summonds which is made to the Justice Air, and should make prov^sions at the
Justice Air, and his Clerks, which should be allowed in the first end of his
accounts to the Exchequer, and he should arrest such persons as the Crowner
cannot arrest, and should those an Assize upon the last day of the Justice Air,
anent the execution of his office. Ia. 3. Parl. 14. cap. 102. and if he be
found culpable, the Justice General may remove him from his office till the
next Parliament, and put another in his place, to officiat in the interim. St.
Rob. Bruce, ex lib. Sconen. related by Skeen, ibid. but much of this is
antiquated by custom, for the Thesaurer sends along with the Justice Air, a
person specially commissionated by them, who defrayes the charges of the
Justices and Justice Clerk.

VII. If the Sheriff fail in his duty, he was punished of old by the loss of
his office during his life, and imprisonment during His Majesty's pleasure, St.
David Cap. 13. and 69. but now for negligence in his office, he tines the same
for year and day, and is punishable in his person, and goods, at his Majesty's
pleasure, Ia. 2. Par. 14. cap. 37. And yet the Lord Yester, having suffered two
Thieves negligently to escape, and his heretable office of Sheriffship, being
upon that account taken from him by King James the fifth, that Decree was
reduced, for it was found too small to infer the loss of an heretable office,
Stat. Sessionis, page 34. which is observed by Hop. likewise in his larger
Practiques.

If the Sheriff absolutely refuse to do Justice, he loses likewise his office,
and is punishable at his Majesty's pleasure, but if he do injustice, he loses
his office, if it be heretable, for three years; but if it be not heretable, he
loses it during the time he was to enjoy it formerly, and in both cases he is
punishable arbitrary in his person, and is obliedged to refound the damnage and
interest sustained by the parties laes'd, K. I. 3. P. 5. cap. 26. but if he
bribe, or give partial counsel, he forefaults his fame, honor and dignity, and
is likewise punishable in his person and goods, K. I. 5. Par. 7. cap. 104. If
the case be difficult, the Lords of Session will somet^mes Advocat the cause
from the Sheriff to the Justices, as in the case of Theftboot, pursued by
Connadge, the Sheriff deput of Invernesse against Makintosh, And sometimes the
Council will discharge the Sheriff to proceed without Advocating the Cause, if
they find either the case to be difficult, or the Sheriff and his Deputs to be
suspected.

TITLE XIII. The Criminal Jurisdiction of Barrons.
1. In what cases Barrons may judge. 2. The Clerk of that Court needs not be a
Nottar. 3. Whether he may punish Theft, or Fire-raising.
I. A Barron, in our Law, is generally understood to be one who is Infest in
any Lands, though not erected in a Barrony; in which sense he has no
Jurisdiction, but only that he can unlaw his own Tennent for Blood committed
upon his own ground, as was found the penult of January 1622. Iohnstoun against
the Lord of West-nisbit: but a Barron properly, is he who is Infest with power
of Pit and Gallows, fossa and furca.

A Barron Judges crimes in the same manner, as they are judged by the Sheriff,
and may like him proceed in time of vacance, to judge these crimes, to which he
is otherwise competent. But it has been controverted whether Barrons have been
Judges competent to Processes, for penal Statutes; since the penalty there was
to be applied to the Kings Fisk, and so should be judged in his own Court: but
the Lords found the 3. of February 1674. that they were Judges competent to
penal Statutes, by the constant custom of this Nation.

Albeit in civil cases, Barrons may appoint Bailies; yet Balfour cap. 63.
observes, that in criminalibus, no person below the degree of a Barron, may sit
upon Blood, nam potestas gladii est meri imperii quae nullo modo delegari
potest, except there be an express power given by the Sovereign for that
effect, as in the case of Justices, and Sheriffs, who have power to Deput; and
that power of Deputation were unnecessar, if it were otherwise competent.

II. The Clerks of all other Courts must be Notars, but the Clerk of a Barron
Court needs not be a Nottar; and yet the Decree of a Barron for an unlaw will
be sustained, founded upon a confession, though the confession be not
subscribed, as is observed by Durie, the penult of January 1622. But by an Act
of Sederunt, it is ordained, that no sentence of any Inferior Court, for above
an hundredth Pounds, shall be sustained, except it be otherwise warranted, then
by the consent of the Clerk.

Albeit by the 75. Act Parl. 6. K. Ia. 5. the Barrons Precepts (for Summonds in
that Court is so called) should be execute, as Summonds before the Lords, and
Coppies should be left, and they indorsed upon; yet the 11. of July 1634. Hay,
against Airth, it was found, that executions by a Barrons Officer are valid,
though not given in Writ, and that the same are probable by Witnesses.

III. A Barron having power, may judge of Theft, if the Thief be taken in the
fang, quon. attach. cap. 100. where it is Statuted, that baro qui libertatem
habet de sock, and sack, toll. and theme possunt judicare furem sasitum de
aliquo furto manifesto: sicut haud haebband, and back beirand. de praxi:
Barrons do not punish Slaughter; yet it may be urged, that they have power to
do so: because, 1. The power of Pit and Gallows would import, the power of
judging life and death. 2. By the 77. cap. quon attach. omnes Barrones qui
habent furcam and Fossam de latrocinio, de hominis occissione habeant furcam,
id est curiam, as the marginal note bears: and by the 13. cap. Leg. Mal. 2. It
is Statute, that Malefactors, who hold of Barrons, may be condemned after the
same manner, that other Malefactors are, except in the four Pleys of the Crown,
in which, Barrons have no power; from which it may be very clearly inferred,
that quo ad, other crimes they have, nam exceptio firmat regulam in non
exceptis. 3. By the 91. Act, Parl. 1. I. 2. It is Statute, if a man be slain in
the Barrony, if the Barron be Infest with such freedom, he may proceed as the
Sheriff does. And albeit Hope in his larger Practiques, observes, that these
words of the Act (if he be Infest with such freedom) may receive various
interpretations; yet I see no interpretation they can properly receive, except
this, that these words are meant, if he have the Jurisdiction proper and
competent to a Barron, which is Pit and Gallows, nam verba generabia
interpretanda sunt secundum subjectam materiam.

Albeit wilful Fire-raising be one of the Pleys of the Crown, yet a Barron may
cognosce upon, and punish the raisers of Fire rashly, within Husband Towns in
the Barrony, I. 1. Parl. 4. cap. 75. The words of which Statutes, are, if Fire
happen within Husband Towns of Barronies, we leave them to be punished by their
Lords, in like manner, as Bailiffs in Towns do within Burgh; in which Act, by
the word, Lords, are meant Barrons, for they are in several Acts of Parliament,
called Lords of their own Land, or Barrony.

A Barron may unlaw for absence, for ten Pounds, but not above, and for blood,
he may unlaw for fifty Pounds, but not above.

VITLE XIV. Of Justices of Peace.
OUr Justices of peace, were called Irenarchae, which signifies in the Greek,
the keeper of the peace, irenarchae erant qui ad provinciarum tutelam quietis
ac pacis per singula territoria faciunt stare concordiam, dicebantur etiam
latrunculatores, sen latronum expulsores. Their Office was to apprehend Rebels
and Thieves, whom they could only examine, and send to the President of the
Province, but could not judge them themselves; their office is more fully
described, lib. 10. C. tit. 75. but to speak properly, latrunculatores, were
our Constables called by the Greek Lawyers, (...)

Justices of peace, and Constables were once fully settled amongst us by K. I.
6. but their office having fallen in desuetude, it was revived by 38. Act, 1.
Parl. 1. Sess. K. Chapter the 2.

By this Act they are allowed to meet four times in the year, and to adjudge of
Servants fees, and of mending the high ways, they have power to punish the
cutters and destroyers of planting, green wood, slayers of red and black
Fishes, makers of moor-burn, keepers of Crooves, wilful Beggars, Egyptians and
their receptors, Drunkards, prophaners of the Sabbath, as to all which His
Majesty promises to give them ample commissions: and to the end, their power
may not prejudge any other Court formerly erected, it is appointed by that Act,
that fifteen days shall expire after the committing of the fact, for which the
committer is to be conveened. Which interval is given to the Judge competent to
do diligence, and if he omit the same during that time, then the Justices may
judge the same, and one Justice has power to bind the party complained upon, to
the peace, under such pecunial Sums as he shall think fit, and that either at
the instance of a complainer, who shall give his oath that he dreads harm or
the Justice himself may exact the sum, though none complain. And if any person
being charged to make his appearance before the Justice of peace shall refuse,
it he be a landed man, whose rent exceeds a thousand Merks, or ten Chalders of
Victual, then he shall inform any of his Majesty's Privy Council, or if he be a
meaner person, he may cause bring him by force before himself.

If the Sheriff, or Bailiff condemn any person in blood-weit, or any other
pain, but not proportionally to the offense; then the Justices shall inform the
Privy Council, that they may take order therewith; but if there be no
satisfaction made by the Sheriff or Bailiff to the party, the Justices may
modify a reasonable satisfaction.

If the Sheriff or Bailiff do by collusion, clear the Delinquent of an Assize,
the party once cleared is not to be further questioned, but the Judges are to
be punished by the Privy Council.

The Justices of peace are declared Judges competent to all Ryots, and breaking
of peace, if the committee^s be under the degree of Noblemen, Prelates
Councillors, and Senators of the College of Justice, who may refer the
Summonds to the parties oath, if he be personally Summoned, and thereupon hold
him as confessed, but if the Summonds be not personally execute, then the
defender is to be summoned of new at his dwelling house, and these two
citations at his dwelling house shall be equivalent to one that is personal: if
the committers be above the foresaid quality, then the Justices, though they
cannot judge them, may for preventing of Ryots, command them to find caution
for keeping of the peace, and to compear before the Privy Council, and though
they compear not, yet whatever breach they commit in the interim, shall be
repute as great a contravention, as if they had found caution: At the end of
every quarter Session, the Justices of peace, are to send to the Clerk of the
Council, a Catalogue of all such persons, as they either have committed, or
have under surety, with a short abreviat of the cause thereof (which is that
which the Civil Law in the former Title calls transmittere cum elogio) to the
end that the Council may determine betwixt and the quarter Session what shall be
done with them.

TITLE XV. The Jurisdiction of the Justices, and of the several employments of
the Officers of that Court.
1. Who were Judges to crimes in Greece, and at Rome. 2. The jurisdiction of
the Justice Court with us. 3. The power of the Iustice-general, and
Iustice-deputs. 4. The Office of Iustice-clerk. 5. What Actions are peculiar to
the Iustice-court. 6. The Macers, and Crowners of the Iustice-court.
I. ALL Nations have committed the cognition of crimes, to the wisest of their
Judges, because our lives are our greatest concern, and if the Judge err
there, his error can seldom be repaired. The Athenians had the Areopage for
their Criminal Court, which was the most famous Court, then in the World, of
whom the Grecians used to say, (...). And they judged Homicide, in a particular
place, (...), it was very numerous, and the (...), institute by Solon, for
judging crimes, were likewise 50. At Rome, Praefectus Urbis, judged all the
crimes that were committed within the Town, and intra centesimum lapidem, and
the Proconsuls, and Presidents, judged crimes in the Country. But the
praefectus praetorio, praefectus augustalis, Comes Orientis, and vicarius
praefecti praetorio, had also a criminal jurisdiction.

The Justice Court with us, had for its Members, the Justice-General, the
Justice-Clerk, the Justice-Deputs, the Clerk-Depute, the Dempster, the Officer,
and the Macers.

II. The Justice-General is constitute by a Gift under the great Seal, either
ad vitam, or by a temporary Commission, but still under the great Seal; his
Sallary of old, was five Pounds for every day of the Justice Air, leg. Malcol.
cap. 2. number. 3.1. but now it is arbitrary, and the ordinary Sallary, by his
Gift, is two hundredth Pound Sterling, to be uplifted by himself, out of the
Fines of Courts, and if he cannot attain to payment that way, out of the
Exchequer.

The Justice-Court of old, was the only Sovereign Court of the Nation, and had
then a great part of that Jurisdiction, which the Session has now; for they
were Judges to Recognitions, Brieves of Mortancestrie, Dissasine, Purpresture,
and districtions for debts, Reg. Maj. lib. 1. cap 5. number. 2. and lib. 2. cap.
74. quon. at. cap. 52. and 53. lib. 3. cap. 28. And after the constitution of
the Session, they remained still Judges to Perambulations, and Brieves were
directed in Latin, for trial thereof, and the reason hereof seems to be,
because as the Civil Law observes, ad armacurritur in sinibus regundis, and the
fittest person for compeseing such tumults, was the Justice-general; but now
the She^^ffs, and Lords of Session cognosce such cases: and I having caused
raise an Advocation from the Sheriff of Tividale, at the instance of some
Iedburgh men, to the Justice-general, ex hoc capite, the Lords would not
sustain the Advocation; but remitted the case back to the Sheriff, whom they
found also competent, so that such Brievs may yet be directed to the Justice
general, though he have not a privative jurisdiction therein.

III. I find the Justice-general, called the chief Justice in all the
Registers, Annis. 1637. and 1638. and the principal Justiciar, Anno 1503. The
Justice-Deputs were not limited to any definit number, but usually they were
two, and have each a pension from His Majesty, when they were constitute, by a
Gift from him, which passes the Privy Seal only, and these were still called
His Majesty's Justice-Deputs, and are not Deputs to the Justice-general; for
else they could not sit in judgment with him as they do, and in effect they
have an equal power, and voice with him: but when he makes a Deput, he should
not sit with him, nam delegatus non simul concurrit. And I find Mr. Alexander
Colvil, called in his Gift, General-justice-deput, which is done to denotat the
universality of the Jurisdiction; and to distinguish them from Justices in that
part, such as are these Noblemen and others, who have the power of Justiciary
over their own Lands. And in Binnies case, the Lords having remitted him to be
tried by the Justice-general and his Deputs; the Justice-deputs declared, that
they accepted only of the remit, as meaning they were His Majesty's
Justice-deputs: and when His Majesty directs any Letter to them, he directs it
to our trusty and well beloved Cozen and Counselor, to our trusty and well
beloved, our Justice-general, and Justice-deputs.

Of old, I find there were eight Justice-deputs. The Justice-deputs had
formerly the privilege of being Present at the Council, which was very fit,
because many criminal cases comes in before them, and they retain still the
privilege of being Present at Parliaments: they were called attornati
justiciarii, quon. attach. c. 61. and assis. R. David. c. nullus. By the 1.
Article of the Regulation, 3. Session 2. Par. Chapter 2. the Office of
Justice-deputs is suppressed, and five of the Lords of Session are adjoined to
the Justice-general, and Justice-clerk, four of the number being a Quorum,
except at Justice Courts, because then the Justices are divided, and two may be
a Quorum; their present Habit is Scarlet, adorned with white; and this I find
the Kings of old, had vestem purpuream sed albi habens non nihil admixtam.
Perion. de magistr. Romans page 574.

IV. The Justice-Clerk has his place from His Majesty by a Gift, under the
great Seal, with power to appoint Deputs, for whom he shall be answerable, and
is called in his Gift, clericus nostrae justiciariae; but whether the
Justice-clerk be a Judge, or a Clerk only, has been doubted; and that he is a
Judge, appears not only from our inviolable present custom, wherein he sits
and presides, when the Justice-general is not present, and takes precedence
from the other Justice-deputs; but likewise by the 87. Act 11. Parl. I. 6.
expenses are ordained to be modified, to the party cleansed, by the justice,
Justice-clerk, and their Deputs, sed ita est, that modification of expenses, is
a judicial sentence, at least, is actus jurisdictionis and jurisdictio tantum
explica^i potest per judicem and non peractuarium vel referendarium. As to the
reason of the name of justice-clerk, it is received by Tradition, that because
clerici, or Churchmen of old could not sit in Criminal Courts, seeing the Law
gives them, (...), a bloodless jurisdiction, therefore they were allowed to
nominat a Clerk, who might represent them; who was therefore called, non
clericus justiciarii, the Clerk of the Justice Court, but justiciarius
clericus, yet this seems a groundless conjecture, for in no Municipal Law,
could Churchmen sit upon blood, and therefore could not Deput, and qui facit
per alium, facit per se, and what necessity was there, for their having an
interest in the criminal jurisdiction, and to evidence that he was Clerk of the
Court: the Clerk who officiats, has his place by Deputation from him, and is
called Deput to my Lord Justice-clerk; nor could he deput Clerks, except he
were principal Clerk. But I believe this invasion, has been made by the
Justice-clerk, upon that Court, after he was created an Officer of State: but
to solve this doubt, my Lord Rentoun, at his admission, is found, by Act of the
Secret Council, to be a Member, and one of the Judges of the Justice Court, and
to have a Vote there, the 10. of December 1663. and now he sits in the
Justice-generals Chair, when he is absent.

The Justice Court have a Seal, which they append to public Acts, and is kept
by the Justice-cle^k-deput. This Deput is admitted by the Justice clerk, by way
of Commission, giving him power to be Clerk to all Cou^ts, holden by His
Majesty's Justice-general, or Deput, or any having particular Commissions,
either at Edinburgh, or else where: and therefore no justice Court, either in
the border, or elsewhere, is lawful; except it be served either by the
Justice-clerk-deput, or any having Commission from him. It seems, that of old,
the Writers to the Signet, did use to write criminal Letters, without receiving
Caution; but that is discharged by the 34. Act 4. Par. Ia. 5. And now, though
Writers to the Signet may subscribe the Letters, yet the Justice-clerk-deput
can only write the deliverance upon the Bill, and receive caution. And
therefore he writes upon the Bill, soverty is found; and subscribes the famine.
H^s receiving caution is likewise warranted, by the 78. Act 6. Parl. Ia. 4.

V. The Justices are only judges competent to these crimes, which are called
placita coronae, the Pleys of the Crown, which are four with us, wilful Fire
raising, ravishing of Women, Murder, and Robbery, or Reif, l. Malcol. 2. cap.
13. and the cognition of these belongs not to Burghs leg. burg. c. 6. nor to no
other inferior Courts, Quon. Attach. c. 76. leguntur. St. Alex. c. 14. faemina
efforciata arsione rapina and murdrum. Molineus in still. cur. paris part. 1. c.
13. observes, that in France, three crimes belong to the cognition of the High
Justices, wilful Fire, ravishing of Women, and Murder; nor can any other Judge
proceed to judge these Crimes, except they be particularly warranted by a Gift
from His Majesty, to that effect, Skeen verb. murder.

VI. The Justice Court has its Macers, in which they are not stented to a
particular number; and though of old amongst the Romans, a pursuer might be his
private authority and force, draw the defender before the judge, in jus rapere,
in jus trahi, which they borrowed from the Grecians, as they did most of their
Law, for Demosthenes, their great Lawyer, tells us, in orat, (...), etc. Yet
ordinarily, even the Grecians had their (...), or Apparitors (as the Romans
called them) who were the same with our Macers, qui volentes vocabant
recusantes urgebant. The Mace used by these with us in the Justice Court, is an
Iron Rod, which was the symbol of power, as appears by the verse 2. Ps.

The Coroner was an Officer, who took inquisition of Murders, in corona populi,
the Lord of Ednam was the heretable Coroner in Scotland; but this Office is
absolet now, except at Justice Airs, where the Coroner yet presents all
Malefactors, and takes them to, and from Prison.

TITLE XVI. The Jurisdiction of the Justices over Soldiers, and of Militiary
Crimes
1. When are the Iustices-Iudges to Soldiers. 2. A debate concerning free
quarter. 3. Haddo's case. 4. Sometimes Commissions are granted for trying
Soldiers. 5. How deserters are punished. 6. Who were Judges competent to
Soldiers amongst the Romans.
I. ALbeit Soldiers should be tried by a Court martial, for crimes committed
by them, in a Military capacity, as deserting their Colors, resist^ng their
Officers, etc. yet when they comm^t other Crimes, they are liable to a t^yal
before the Criminal Court. For as Voet. observes, delicta militum sunt vel
communia, vel propria, lib. 2. de remilit. And thus French, and two other
Soul^iers under Morgan in the English Garrison of Leith, were put to the
knowledge of an inquest, for killing a Burgess of Edinburgh, albeit Morgan,
offered to repledge them, January 1662. and yet in anno 1666. the Justices
would not proceed against some Gentlemen, for the slaughter, because they were
both Soldiers, but it seems the Crime should have been tried before the
Justices, seeing the crime, and not the persons determine the Jurisdictions, and
their Crimes was only a Combat, which is no specific crime to Soldiers: and
this is conform to a decision, November. 1627. Where Captain Bruce having been
pursued for killing Captain Hamiltoun, did petition the Council, showing them
that this crime was committed in Flanders, and that he was asso^lzied therefra
by a Council of War, upon which probation the Council commanded the Justices to
desist. But Sir William Bellenden being challenged before the Council, for many
Ryots and Crimes committed when he was in the West, they would not remit him to
a Council of War, albeit that declinator was proponed. August 1667. And Militia
Soldiers were judged by the Justices, for Murder committed by them in the
execution of other Officers commands. the 3. of February, 1674.

II. The most considerable Military questions, which I remember in all the
Adjournal books: are first, that which was debated, 5. December. 1666. the case
whereof was, some west country men had formed themselves in an Army, and were
declared Traitors by the Council, and being thereafter beat at Pentland hills,
Captain Arnot, Major Mackulloch, and others, were taken, by some of his
Majesty's inferior Officers, upon quarter, but being pannelled before the
Justices, as Traitors, it was alleged for them, that they could not be put to
the knowledge of an inquest before the Justices, because they having been
modelled in an army, and taken in the field fighting as Soldiers, they behoved
to be judged by the Military Law, and by that Law, such as get quarter in the
field, are by that quarter secured therein for their lives, and cannot be
hereafter qu^rrelled. To which it was replied, that there can be no quarter,
but where there is a bellum justum, and it is not the number, nor form of the
Army, but the cause that makes bellum justum, and public insurrections of
subjects against their Prince, are rather Sedition, then bellum; and these
insurrections, being Treason, none can remit Treason but the King, and
therefore quarter could not be equivalent to a remission, but all the effect of
quarter in this case, is to secure these who get the same from present death.
To which it was duplyed, that all who got quarter from any who are authorized
to be Soldiers, are by that quarter against that authority from whom these
Soldiers derive their power, and these who get the quarter, are not to
dispute, whether these Soldiers had a sufficient power to give quarter, or
whether bellum be justum or injustum, for that were in effect to destroy
quarter in all cases, and to make all such as take up Arms, to be desperate and
irreclaimable; and the power of giving of quarter is naturally inherent in all
Soldiers, as such: and as the Council, without express remission from the
King, upon submission might have secured their lives, so might Soldiers by
quarter, for they have as much power in the field, as the others at the Council
Table. 2. Lawyers are very clear that quarter should be kept, though given to
subjects, who are Rebels, Grotius lib. 3. Cap. 19. where after he has fully
treated that question, de fide servanda, concludes, that sides data etiam
persidis and rebellibus subditis est servanda. And this has been observed in
the civil Wars, in Holland and France, and by his Majesty, and his Father at
home, during the late troubles. 3. Quar^er is advantageous to the King, and so
should be kept, for these who were taken, might have killed his Majesty's
General or Officers, and by giving quarter to his enemies, he redeemed his
Servants; and if the only effect of quarter, were to be reserved to a public
trial, none would accept quarter.

Notwithstanding of which reply, the defense was repelled, and the Pannels
condemned, and thereafter execute.

The second question was, that which was debated in Haddo's case, 16. March
1642. At which time that Loyal Gentleman Haddo, being pursued, for killing Mr.
James Stalker, Servitor to the Lord Frazer, he alleged that the said Mr. James
was killed in the open field, in a conflict betwixt the Convenanters, and
Ante-Covenanters: All which Acts of ostility were remitted by the pacification.
To which, (...) was replied, that the Pacification did only secure against acts
of hostility, which were done in furore belli; but this was a private murder;
for the said Mr. James having been taken a Prisoner, Haddo did come up to him,
and asked whose servant he was, and hearing that he was servant to the Lord
Frazer, he said, your masters man is the person that I am seeking, and
thereupon ordered to kill him, which was accordingly done; by which it clearly
appears, that this was a private murder done in cold blood, and upon premeditat
malice, and Mr. James Stalker, being a Prisoner, any who killed him; was liable
for his murder, ex jure militari, and the pacification could no more defend the
committer, then if he had gone into a prison and killed a prisoner, or if he
had committed a Rapt upon a woman; likeas Murderers are expressly excepted from
the pacification. 2. Haddo was no general person, and so could not give order
for his execution; and so the killing of the defunct was not warrantable by the
Law of Arms. To which, it was duplyed, that the pacification did secure
against all deeds whatsoever done upon the field, by persons engaged in either
party, without debating, whether the deed was lawfully or unlawfully done, and
the occasion, and not the manner of killing, is to be considered. And as to the
manner, it is answered, that Mr. James had never got any quarter, and so was
not a Prisoner in War; and therefore might have been killed by any engaged in
the quarrel, whether general person, or other. But the truth is, the said Haddo
did command that party which was equivalent to his being a general person; and
albeit the pacification did expressly except murders, yet that behoved only to
be interpret of such murders, as had no contingency with the troubles, nor were
occasioned by them: this debate was not decided, but was remitted to the
Parliament; and that worthy Gentleman executed, for rising in arms against the
Estates of Parliament.

III. I find, that there was a Commission granted by the Parliament, in Anno
1644. to two Bailies of Edinburgh, to sit, and hold justice Courts, upon such
Soldiers, as were runaways, and that upon this Commission, James French was
condemned by them, for running away from his Colors, contrary to the Act of
Parliament 1644. and was hanged accordingly. From which, these observations may
be made, 1. That the Justices are not Judges competent to crimes, that are
merely Military. 2. That we have no standing Law for executing runaways, beside
the Martial Law; nor was there any Law founded upon this indictment, except the
Act of Parliament 1644. which is now abrogat. 3. It is observeable, that one
Mr. Alexander Henderson, as Procurator Fiscal, and not His Majesty's Advocat,
was here pursuer. From all which, it seems somewhat strange, that this Process
should have been insert in the Adjournal Books.

IV. But albeit deserters were here punished with death; yet regulariter milites
gregarij, or listed Soldiers, are only punishable in time of Peace, with
degredation, and in time of War, with death, because the hazard is then
greater, l. 5.. 1. ff. de remilit. and by that Law they may be killed by any
man, lib. 2. Cod. quando liciat. unic. etc. But this arbitrary killing is not
now in use, as Voet de jur. militat. very well observes, if superior Officers
leave their charges, they commit Treason, l. 2. ff. ad leg. jul. majest. vid.
tit. Treason.

V. Constantine, having extinguished the Office of praefectus Praetorio, who was
the Supreme Judge in all Military cases, The Magistri militum succeeded, and
were sole Judges of all crimes committed by Soldiers, both in Civil, and in
Military cases; and if Soldiers had offended, the Civil Magistrate might have
secured, but he was obledged to remit them, cum elogio, to their own Officers,
l. 9. ff. de custod. reor. vid. tit. C. de remilit.

TITLE XVII. Advocations of Criminal Causes.
1. Advocations defined. 2. No Advocation from the Justices. 3. How Advocations
are raised from inferior Courts, and the forms thereto relating. 4. The
ordinary Reasons of Advocations examined. 5. Whether the Justices are proper
Judges to their own competency.
I. ADvocation is the away calling of an intended cause, or pursuit, from an
inferior, incompetent judicatory, to a higher, and more competent; and is the
same thing with us, that recusatio judicis, was with the Romans, and is by the
Doctors, called advocatio, or evocatio, which is by them defined to be, litis
pendentis coram inferiore ad superiorem absque provocatione facta translatio
Gail. lib. 1. obs. 41, number. 7. and is founded upon cap. ut nostrum de appell,
and l. jud. solvitur ff. de jud.

II. Their is no Advocation raised of pursuits, intented before the Justices,
but if there be any design of stopping a pursuit depending before them, there
uses to be a Petition given in to the Lords of Secret Council, who, if they
find the desire of the Petition just, will ordain the Justices to stop all
further procedor, or will remit the inquiry to any other Court, as they did in
a pursuit, intented at the instance of the Earl of Caithness, against some
Vassals of the Earl of Sutherland, which they stopped, as to the Earl himself,
and ordained his Vassals to be pursued before his own Regality Court: sometimes
also, they ordain Assessors to be Justices, so that there is never a cause
formally Advocat, from before the Justices; albeit those courses, and
Repledgiations be equivalent to Advocations.

III. Advocations may be raised from inferior criminal Judges, by the Lords of
Session, as in the case of Theftboot, before the Sheriff of Inverness, and
Advocat by the Lords, because of the intricacy of the case; albeit, it was
alleged there, that the Lords were not Judges competent, in such Advocations,
because they could not be Judges to the crimes pursued. To which it was
answered, that though they could not be judges themselves, yet they might remit
the pursuit, to these who were competent; even as Brieves raised, for serving a
person Air, may be Advocat to the Lords, who may remit the case to another
Inquest: But Durhie observes, the 9. of January 1629. that Kincaid of
Waristoun, craving that the Process against him, for slaughter, might be
Advocat by the Lords, to the Justices, because of the ignorance of the Barron
Bailie, or else that they would grant Assessors; the Lords continued the Diet,
till application should be made to the Council, but if the Council would not
interpose, then they should do justice therein, by remitting the same to the
Justices, or otherwise. But Advocations in criminal cases, are ordinarily raised
by the Privy Council, who have the most natural power in such cases.

Advocations are raised upon Bills, and the Letters pass the Signet of the
Session, if the Bills be past, by the Lords of Session; or of the Council, if
the Bill be past by the Lords of Council.

This Advocation must be execute by a Messenger, and a full Copy must be given
of the Letters, as in other Summonds; for in effect, an Advocation is a
Summonds, and the Diets in Advocations are peremptor, as in all other criminal
pursuits: Neither is the Advocation given up to see, as in other criminal
pursuits, at the day of compearance; and therefore a full Copy should be
given, to the end, the defender may be ready to answer. The pursuer of the
Action must be cited, and the Judge from whom the Action is to be Advocat, must
be also cited, to the effect, he may defend his own jurisdiction; and if both
these be not cited, the Advocation will not be sustained.

When the day of compearance comes, if the Advocation be raised before the
Session, it is called before the Session, and if the reasons of Advocation be
found relevant, the cause is remitted to the Justices; but, if that Advocation
be raised before the Council, it is called before the Justices, and they are
Judges to the relevancy of the reasons, and both pursuer, and defender, must
prove all that they allege instantly.

The Advocation of a criminal pursuit, does contain the reasons upon which it
is founded, as in civil Advocations; but though in civilibus, the raiser of the
Advocation will be allowed to add a reason, though it be not libelled, which is
called an eiked reason; yet that is not allowed, in criminalibus, because all
must be proved, instanter, and the defender is not able to prove his answer
instantly, if he know not what is the reason, which he must answer, whereas, in
civilibus, he will get a term to prove his answer, to the eiked reason.

IV. The ordinary reasons of Advocation, are, 1. Consanguinity, or Affin^ty
within degrees defendant, viz. cousins german, or nearer, for whatever is a
sufficient reason to cast a Witness, should (in my opinion) much more be
sufficient to decline a Judge, since there may be penury of Witnesses, so that
the Witness challenged may be necessary; whereas, if a Judge be suspect, he may
be supplied by another Deput, or a superior Judge; and a Judge may by himself,
ruin a Cause, which one Witness cannot do; and though we have no exp^esse Law
for this, yet the Lords incline ordinarily to sustain this, and particularly in
the Month of December. 1676. Ross contra Collodine, where a Decree was turned in
a Libel, because, pronounced by a Nephew, albeit it was there alleged, that by
the 212. Act, 14. Parl. I. 6. a Brother, Father, and Son, were only to be
declined as Ju^ges: for that Statute relates only to the Lords of Session, who,
because of their great Eminency, and Trust, are not to be as easily suspected
as inferior Judges.

It may be doubted, whether the Justices, or any of them, may be declined, as
within degrees defendant; for though they must now be Senators of the College
of justice, yet they sit not there as such, nor are the Justice-general, or
Justice-clerk always of that number; but yet I think, that since the Justice
Court is a supreme Judicatory, in its own kind, and that this respect that is
put upon them, is, because of their Eminency, and presumed integrity, that
therefore they being the same persons, ought to have the same privileges, and
the Justice-general, and Justice-clerks being superior in order to the Lords of
Session, who are Justiciars, ought at least to have as great trust: but though
the Admiral be a supreme Judge also, yet it may be doubted, if this Statute
should be extended to him; because men of meaner parts may officiat there.

It may be also doubted, whether this declinator against fathers, brothers, and
sons, should extend to the degrees of affinity, as well as those of
consanguinity, so that a father, or brother in Law may be declined, and though
the Lords lately would not decline one of their number, though brother in Law
to the pursuer; yet it may be argued, that albeit Acts of Parliament must be
strictly interpreted, yet where there is a parity of reason, and the words may
in propriety admit of the extension, there the extention is to be allowed; but
so it is, that here a brother in Law, is to be suspected, and a brother in Law,
is in propriety of speech, a brother: Likeas, since witnesses may be cast upon
the suspicion of affinity; why may not Judges? especially seeing in the Statute
1621. against dispositions made by Bankrupts: and in the opinion of Lawyers,
degrees of affinity, and consanguinity are still equiparat, and so wise are we
in this point, that a pursuit, at the instance of a Procurator-fiskal, was
Advocat upon this Statute, because the Procurator-fiskal, was brother to the
Judge, though he was only pursuing ratione officii, and had no interest
himself, and expressly renounced all interest in the pursuit, 28. January, 1629.

Whether this statute is to be extended to unlawful relations; so that a
Bastards brother, etc. may be declined, vide, my observations upon the Statute
1621.

Another reason of Advocation like to this, is that one of the members of the
Court is pursuer; as for instance, the pursuit is at the instance of one of
two Sheriff deputs, before his own colleague: habet quippe Societas jus quoddam
fraternitatis in se l. verum ff. praesocio vid. c. insinuante de offic. deleg.
and cap. Postr. de appel. and that none should judge where the colleagues
pursue; but that the pursuit should be carried away to another Judicature, is
appointed by a Statute in France, anno. 1560. but we have no such Statute, and
one colleague with us, may be witness for another, and why not then Judge.

A third reason of Advocation is, that the Judge is suspect, as if he had given
partial counsel, or if he has repelled a just defense, or as being severe,
above what the Law allows. 4. That he is incompetent, the case pursued being
only proper to be tried by the Justices, as being one of the four Pleys of the
Crown, viz. Treason, Murder, Fire-raising, and Ravishing of Women; but
sometimes, though the first Libel have inferred Treason, as in the case of
Peddies, January, 1667. yet if the pursuer will restrict his action to damnage,
and interest; but will desert the diet as to the criminal pursuit it may be
sustained. 5. That the case is very intricat, as in a pursuit of Theftboot,
which was Advocat from the Sheriff-deput of Invernesse, eo ex capite.

Members of the College of Justice also pretend, that they cannot be pursued
before any other Court, because this would draw them from attending the
Session, but the Act 39. Pa. 6. Q. M. whereon this is founded, seems only to
hold in Removings, so that no Action concerning Removings, should be Advocat,
but in these cases, viz. deadly fead, where the Judge ordinary is party, or the
defender a member of the Session and yet de praxi, that part of the Statute is
extended to all Advocations But they cannot Advocat from the Justice Court.

If the cause be Advocated, the pursuer of the first Libel, which is Advocated,
must find caution de novo, to insist in the pursuit, else the Justices will
desert the diet, which caution is necessary, because the Judicature before
which the caution was found, is altered, and neither the pursuer, nor his
cautioner, are bound to insist before any other court.

The defender likewise of the first cause, and who raised. the Advocation, is
obliedged to renew his caution, that he will underly the Law, else the Justices
will imprison him.

The taiser of the Advocation must intimat to the pursuer of the principal
cause, that he has raised an Advocation, to the end, that the said pursuer may
be ready to insist at the day, to which the advocation is raised, and when the
Procurator-fiskal, is the pursuer before the Court from which the cause is
Advocated, the raiser of the Advocation should intimat to His Majesty's
Advocat, to the end he may be ready to insist, for His Majesty's Advocat is in
the Justice-Court, what the Procurator fiskal is in inferior Courts: The
office of both, being to pursue vindictam publicam.

V. The old custom was (as some allege) that the Lords of Session judged all
the Advocations, which were raised in Criminal causes, from inferior Judges,
even to the Justice Court and very judicious Lawyers do yet hold, that the
Justices cannot judge, whether they be competent Judges in causes Advocated
from inferior Criminal Courts, but that the Lords of Session should cognosce,
whether the cause should be Advocat; and if they sustain the reason of
Advocation, that they should remit the cause to be tried by the Justices, or
remit the trial to the Court from which it was Advocated; if the reason of
Advocation be not relevant: for they think it unreasonable, that the Justices
should be Judges of their own competency; but since the Justices are supreme
and soverain Judges, as well as the Lords of Session, and since the Justices
are now many, and are Lords of the Session also, it seems reasonable, that they
should be Judges to their own competency, especially since these reasons of
Advocation do very frequently did upon Subtilties of the Criminal Law, and
cannot be well judged, but by such as understand that Law exactly: as for
instance, I have seen an Advocation raised of a Libel in the case of Treason,
from before a Lord of Regalities Court, upon this reason, viz. that the ground
of the accusation was for drowning a Coal-heugh, which was Treason in our Law,
to the which crime of Treason, none but the Justices were Judges competent. In
which Advocation these points were necessarily debated, 1. Whether Lords of
Regality were Judges to Treason. 2. Whether though they were Judges competent
to Treason, founded upon the common Law, yet if they were Judges to Statutory
Treason. 3. Whether though burning a Coal-heugh was Treason by Statute, yet if
drowning of it fell under that Statute: all which po^nts were indagationis
criminalis, and these who could judge such points, might judge any criminal
case: Likeas, both by the old and new style of Advocations, raised either by
the Council, or Criminal Court, the Letters bear, that the reasons are to be
seen, and considered by the Justices, and immediately upon the Advocation,
caution is found in the books of adjournal, and to answer before the Justices,
and the Justices have been in constant possession of judging such reasons.

And whereas it may be alleged, that though the Lords of Session are not
Judges to crimes; yet the case of competency, in the matter of Jurisdiction is
merely Civil, and so it would seem proper to be judged by the Lords, especially
since it is nor just, that the Justices should be Judges in their own cause. To
which it may be answered, that though this case be civil, yet it has so
necessary a contingency with what is criminal, as I have observed, that they
ought not to be divided, since the Lords of Session are judges competent to
Advocations, wherein their own ^urisdiction is controverted; why should this be
denied to the Justices, who are a part of themselves, and such supreme Judges,
are above suspicion, especially since they can gain nothing by their
Jurisdiction.

TITLE XVIII. Of Inquisition.
1. The nature of Inquisition, and when it is competent. 2. The King and Party
may pursue separatly. 3. Citations, super inquirendis, when competent.
I. WHen a crime is committed, the Council, or the Justices, did of old, take a
previous Inquisition of it, by examining Witnesses, and taking such other
information, as they thought fit: And these depositions, and ex^minations, are
called informationes by the Doctors; but though they may examine Witnesses,
before the intenting of a criminal pursuit: yet after it is once intented, the
Justices found the 8. of January 1672. that they could not examine Witnesses;
for the Inquisition ends by the intenting of the pursuit, and ubi incipit
accusatio desinit inquisitio.

The Doctors are very profuse on this subject, but I shall only excerpt from
them, what is most suitable to our forms and practice; they define Inquisition
to be an information of the crime, taken by the Judges own authority, and ex
officio: and they divide it in a general Inquisition, which is taken of the
crime in general, without taking notice of any particular informer, or
defender. And a special Inquisition which is taken against a particular person,
of whose guilt they are informed. By the Civil Law, no Judge could proceed
against any private person, without an accuser; for Inquisition was by that Law,
an extraordinar remedy, and no recourse could be had to an extraordinar remedy,
till accusation, which was the ordinary remedy, were first tried. But by the
Canon Law, Inquisition was declared to be an ordinary remedy: and all the
Doctors conclude, that generally, a Judge may now, by the practice of Nations
inquire, ex officio, in all crimes, Farin. de inquisit. quest. 1. number. 10.
which is consonant to our Law; by which the Council, or Justices, may inquire
into all crimes, without waiting for an accuser, which is done with us, without
citation of the party, or other formalities; but nothing can follow, till after
information be taken, an Enditement, or Summonds be raised, which is followed
according to the ordinar rules. But yet, I think, that the Judge should not
enquire, or take any previous trial, even in our Law, where an accuser offers
to insist, except he has just reason to fear collusion, for non recurrendum est
ad extraordinarium remedium dum locus est ordinario: and albeit Inquisition be
declared by the Doctors, to be an ordinary remedy, yet it is only declared so,
to the effect, that a Judge may inquire, without any accuser, and that the
Inquisition so taken, be not ipso jure null; but naturally, every man should
have liberty to pursue the private wrong done to himself, which may be
prejudged, either by the want of information, or zeal of the Judge ordinar, and
sometimes by collusion; and thus I have seen many Decreets, of inferior
Courts, wherein the defender was by collusion, fined at the Procurator-fiskals
instance, reduced by the Lords, and not sustained by the Council; when it was
alleged, that the party wronged appeared, and offered to pursue, but was not
admitted. And albeit, because of the wrong which is done to the public, a
Judge may likewise inquire: yet he who is principally wronged, should be
allowed to be chief in the prosecution. And therefore, albeit the Council may
in public crimes, where the peace of the Country is chiefly concerned, take
precognition of it, and stop accusations, raised before the Justices, at a
private parties instance, as they did in the pursuit, at the instance of the
Stranaver men, against the Earl of Caithness. And others for Fire raising, and
Depredations, in August. 1668. yet they refuse to stop accusations, and will
not grant precognitions, in private murders, or such like crimes, where private
persons are principally wronged, except the rigor of Law require some
abatement.

II. It appears also, that pursuits at His Majesty's instance, are only
subsidiary, Ia. 1. Par. 13. cap. 140. by which Act it is clear, that crimes may
be punished at the Kings Majesty's instance, if no private follower appears, and
Ia. 6. Parl, 11. cap. 76. where it is Statute, that the Thesaurer, and Advocat,
may pursue private crimes, although the parties be silent, or would agree. From
which Acts, two things may be concluded, 1. That of old, it was doubted if the
King could pursue private crimes, without an accuser. 2. That pursuits at His
Majesty's instance, for private crimes, are yet only subsidiary, and allowable,
if parties be silent, or collude. Which distinction, does in my oppinion, solve
that great debate amongst the Doctors, utrum accusatio cessare facit
inquisitionem.

Nota, that albeit by the said Act, it is Statute, that the Thesaurer, and
Advocat, may pursue without concourse of the party, yet de practicae, the
pursuit is only raised at the Advocats instance, and so the particle ( and)
seems to be disjunctive, as and is very often in the Civil Law. And it is
probable, that a pursuit at the Thesaurers instance, would be sustained,
without concourse of His Majesty's Advocat, if the Advocat should refuse his
concourse

III. The Doctors conclude, that a Judge cannot enquire summarly, and necesse
est ut, vel indicia, vel delator, vel diffamatio aperiant viam inquisitioni,
for else every Judge might diffame the best and most innocent men, at their
pleasure, so that if a Judge have not some rise for his inquiry, I really
believe he is punishable in our Law, for putting a person to Inquisition for a
crime, and sindicandus est ex eo capite, but the malice of the Judge must be
very clearly proved in that case.

Of old, Judges did appoint Delators, whom might inform, denunciatores
dicebantur; but of late, this employment does belong to the Fisk, and ejus
sindicis. And by our Law, to His Majesty's Advocat, in the Justice Court, and
to the Fiskal, in inferior Courts; and they may pursue, or inform in
Inquisitions, sine paena calumniae quia cessat in iis suspicio calumniae ex eo
quod denunciant ex officio.

By the 13. Act 10. Par, Ia. 6. Charges super inquirendis, are discharged, but
it is a mistake to think, that by that Act, the King, or other Judges, cannot
examine men, without a formal Process: for the design of that Act, is only to
discharge the denouncing men Rebels upon such charges, without previous trial;
and yet if the chief Officers of State, or at least four of them concur. It
would seem that by that Act, even such charges are yet lawful. And where the
King, or Magistrate has previous information of crimes latent, it were against
the interest of the Commonwealth, that they should not be allowed to clear
themselves of these, by particular interrogators.

TITLE XIX. Of Accusations, and Accusers.
1. The difference betwixt an accusation by way of Summonds, and an indictment.
2. Who may accuse, by our Law. 3. A minor cannot pursue without the consent of
his Tutors and Curators. 4. In what cases a woman may pursue. 5. Whether a
person excommunicated, or at the horn, may pursue. 6. Infamous persons cannot
pursue, and who are such. 7. Whether more crimes may be pursued at once. 8. The
pursuer must find caution and be punished, if he be calumnious. 9. The pursuer
must aliment.
I. AFter inquisition is taken (which is not necessary, but is still arbitrary
with us) the party is either imprisoned, and then he is proceeded against by
way of inditment, or he is still at liberty, and then he is proceeded against
by a formal Summonds Indictment comes from the French, enditer, defer nomen
alicujus, and by the Law of England, it differs from accusation, in that an
indictment must be always at the Kings instance, and is but a bill, and the
preferrer of the bill is no way tied to the proof of it, upon any penalty,
except there be conspiracy, vid. Blunt. dict. Angl. verb. enditement. But an
enditement with us, is a scedule containing the accusation given to the
defender, so called, as Skeen says, from the French word dict tu, what say
thou, for alter the indictment is read, the Judge asks the Panel what he can
answer to it; and it differs only from a Libelled Summonds in that it begins
thus, A. B. Ye are indicted and accused, that albeit by the Laws, etc. yet, ye,
etc. or thus, forasmeikle, as by such particular Acts of Parliament, etc.
Murder, etc. is prohibit, and the pain declared to, etc. yet you, A. B. did
upon the 27. day, at least month, etc. And it is writ only by the Justice
Clerk, without a bill, and passes not the Signet, nor needs it be executed with
the solemnities requisite in Libelled Summonds by Messengers in ordinary
crimes, and Heralds in Treason, but may be given by the Clerks servant; as was
found in a pursuit of Treason, pursued by way of indictment against Mackulloch,
Gordoun, and others, 5. December. 1666. it needs not likewise these, inducias
deliberatorias, allowed to such as are at liberty, and are pursued by a
Libelled Summonds, but a day or two is sufficient, and sometimes they may be
pursued without any time to be allowed, for this procedure is in effect the
same with that inquisition specially treated of by the Civilians.

There is likewise this difference betwixt an indictment, and an accusation,
that an indictment properly is a Libel raised at the Kings instance, and not at
the instance of any private person; for in accusations, or Libels raised at the
instance of private persons as pursuers, there must be a formal libelled
Summonds under the Signet, so cap. 1. R. M. lib. 1. number. 7. and 8. it is said,
that Theft and Murder by indictment belongs to the justice, because there the
King or his Advocat pursues, but where a certain accuser appears, a pursuit
upon these Crimes may be intented before the Sheriff, and Skeen upon that
Chapter, and likewise upon the 2. cap. number. 2. David Stat. 2. does observe,
that all Criminal accusations are either by an indictment, or by a certain
accuser; and from this difference arises that other difference, that crimen
per indictamentum, is only pursuable before the Justices, which is clear both
by the forecited places, and the whole tract of the books of R. M. But this
last difference is now absolet, for of late before the Sheriff, or at inferior
Courts, malefactors may be pursued either by a libelled Summonds, at the
instance of any particular accuser, or at the instance of the Procurator
fiskal, by way of indictment; which practique is most reasonable, for it were
against the interest of the Commonwealth, that Sheriffs, and inferior Judges,
whose great duty, and chief employment it is, to advert to crimes, should not
have liberty to pursue, without the concurse of an accuser.

It is indeed the interest of the Commonwealth, ne crimina maneant impunita.
And therefore in Crimes which immediately concern the welfare of the State; such
as Treason, Sedition, etc. every man may be an accuser, but it is likewise the
advantage of every private person, that it shall not be lawful to every
malicious enemy, upon the pretense of a public good, to trouble and vex such
against whom they carry malice, upon a pretense of a criminal pursuit, and
therefore according to the the common Law, in privatis delictis non
admittebatur ad accus^ndum, nisi qui suam aut suorum injuriam insequebatur: and
Farinac. states suorum injuriam, to extend, ad quartum gradum, and it seems to
be extended with us within degrees defendant, and that every person may not in
our Law, pursue any private crime, appears from the former Chapter.

III. A minor may not by the Civil Law accuse, without the consent of his
Tutors and Curators. And where it is said, l. 4. R. M. c. 2. that a Major being
of lawful age, he may accuse, it insinuats, that Minors regularly cannot accuse.

And suitable to this, the Justices refused to grant process, at the instance
of William Umphray, against John Meldrum, because the said William was Minor,
and had no legal concurse, 29. of July 1597. which is founded upon most
convincing reason, for Minors may by ill governed youth, and imprudence, either
pursuing injustly such as are most innocent, or else by managing unwisely the
Criminal pursuit, if it were competent to them, they might prejudge both
themselves and the Commonwealth, in suffering the defender to be cleansed by a
verdict. After which Absolvitour the defender could not be again brought to a
trial, nor would the Minor be restored against the sentence, and yet a Minor
may crave at the Bar, that the Justices would allow him Curato^s, ad lites,
which desire, the Justices will grant, 24. July 1600. Spence contrae Bannatine.

IV. A woman according to the Civil Law, could not accuse in no case, except
where she was revenging the injury done to her self, husband, or relations; and
in the former Chapter it is said, that a woman can accuse none of felony,
except in some particular cases, which appears to be by the 5. chap. number. 8.
the Murder of her own husband, quia una caro fuerunt vir and uxir, and N. 9. it
is generally ordained, that a woman may be allowed to pursue any injury done to
her own body. From which we may generally conclude, that she may pursue, suam
sed non suorum injuriam, wrongs done to her self, but not wrongs done to her
relations.

V. Whether a person at the horn, or excommunicat, may pursue, appears to be
debateable, for the one opinion it may be alleged, that it is for the
advantage of the Commonwealth, that crimes remain not unpunished. 2. Civil
Rebellion, or excommunication, non tollunt jura naturae, amongst the chief
whereof, Lawyers esteem the liberty of pursuing the wrongs done to relations,
and much more the wrongs done to ones self, in his person or good name. 3. Such
as are Rebels for Civil pursuites, non possunt impunae offendi, and therefore
it appears most reasonable, that they should not be debarred from pursuing
wrongs done them; for if a person at the Horn, could not pursue the wrongs done
him, then any person might injure him at pleasure, seeing the fear of pursuit,
and the punishment depending thereupon, is that which ordinarily overaws the
pursuer; but on the other hand, it may be alleged that, 1. By the 11. cap.
Stat. Will. These who contemn the Statutes of the Church, shall not be admitted
to accuse. 2. It is a Rule in Law, that frustra legem implorat qui coptra legem
peccat. 3. A person at the horn, is by the English Law, always and oftentimes
in our Law, said to be outlawed, and to be outlawed, imports the losing all the
privileges of Law; and in our Law, they are said, non habere personam standi
in judicio. Nor puts our Law any distinction betwixt Civil and Criminal causes:
for reconciling which difficulty, it may be alleged, that there is a
distinction betwixt the being outlawed for a Criminal or Civil cause, and that
these who are denounced Fugitives upon any Criminal account, cannot be pursued
till they be relaxt, which is incontravertedly true in our Law; seeing if a
person be denounced for not finding caution for his appearance, to underly the
Law, he will not be admitted to propon any defense till he be relaxt; but
though a person be at the horn for a civil cause, it appears most unreasonable,
that because a person is not able to pay a great Sum, for which he is
denounced, that he shall not therefore be admitted, do defend his own innocence
against a crime laid to his charge. It seems likewise reasonable, that some
distinction should be made, betwixt a pursuer and a defender in this case; for
it seems unreasonable, that he who accuses another for a crime, should debar
him from self-defence, though the debarring him from pursuit, be not so
unfavourable, and upon this account, in a case betwixt Ninian Spence and Hector
Bannatine, the Justices found, that the pursuer in a Criminal pursuit, could
not by horning debar a defendendo, the person whom he himself had called. It
may be likewise alleged, that though the Kings Advocat may debar a Panel from
his defenses, when he is at the horn, that no private party can, seeing they are
not prejudged by the Rebellion, as the Fisk is; but this last distinction, is
rather reasonable then legal, and therefore I mention it rather as a good
overture, then a standing Law.

VI. Infamous persons cannot accuse, according to our Law, and what persons are
accounted infamous, is particularly enumerat in the foresaid 11. cap. Stat.
Willielm.

1. Infames dicimus omnes illas personas esse, qui pro aliqua culpa damnantur
notabili.

2. Et omnes qui christianae legis normam abiiciunt, and ecclesiastica statuta
contemnunt; omnes sures, sacrilegio.

3. Omnes capitalibus criminibus irretitos, Sepulchrorum violatores,
Apostolorum, Successorumque eorum and Reliquorum Sanctorum Patrum, libenter,
violantes Statuta.

4. Et omnes qui adversus Patres armantur, qui in omni mundi part, infamia
notantur.

5. Similiter incestuosos, perjuros, homicidas, receptatores malefactorum;
adulteros, raptores; maleficos, de bellis publicis fugientes; e^ qui injusta
vel indigna sibi petunt loca teneri; aut sacrae ecclesiae auferunt facultates;
and qui accusant, and non probant, et qui contra innocents principum animos,
ad iracundiam provocant, and omnes qui pro suis sceleribus, ab ecclesia
expelluntur.

6. Et omnes quos ecclesiasticae and seculares leges infames pronunciant: Item
servos ante legitimam libertatem abeuntes, public paenitentes, bigamos, omnes
qui non sunt integro corpore; qui sanam mentem non habent vel intellectum, qui
furiosi manifestantur.

7. Hi omnes supra dicti, nec ad sacros ordines promoveri debent, nec ad
accusationem, vel Testimonium admit^i.

VII. A person accused, was not oblidged to answer of old, but for one crime in
one day, except there were several pursuers, quoniam attachiamenta, cap. 65. by
which, accumulation of crimes was expressly unlawful, sed hodie aliter obtinet,
for now there is nothing more ordinar, nor to see five or six crimes in one
Summonds, or Indictment, and to see one accuser, pursue several Summonds; and
yet seeing crimes are of so great consequence to the defender, and are of so
great intricacy, it appears most unreasonable, that a defender should be
burdened with more then one defense at once; and it appears, that accumulation
of crimes is intented, either to laese the same of the defender, or to distract
him from his defense.

VIII. To the end that persons may not be unjustly pursued, the Civil Law did
appoint two remedies, 1. That the pursuer should find Caution to insist. 2.
That he should be pursued as a calumniator, if his pursuit was found to be
malicious. As to the first, the form amongst the Romans, was, that the accuser
was oblidged, de far nomen rei apud praetorem atque se inscribebat libello
judici porrecto vel incodice publico, quaerela deposita cui inscriptioni
subscribebat and ad talionis paenam se obligabat in casum calumniae.
Inscriptionis formula apparet, l. 3. ff. de accus. Consulibus illis, die illo
apud praetorem illum Titius professus est se Meviam legem julia de adult. ream
defer quod dicat eam, cum seio in civitate illa domo illius, mense illo,
consulibus illis adulterium Commisisse. Which inscription was only necessar in
attrocious, but not in lighter crimes, nam illa de plano discutiebantur, l.
levia ff. de accus. but in some cases, the necessity of inscription was
remitted, even in attrocious crimes, as when a Woman, suorum injuriam
prosequitur and parents filii necem and e contra. And generally, where the
pursuer could not be pursued for calumny, he needed not, in scribere, because,
inscriptions were onl^ ^^^essar, to the end the pursuer might be punished, if
he were found guilty of Calumny. Nor were these inscriptions necessar in
reconventions, and ante categoriis, because, in these, the pursuer intended not
to calumniat, but only to defend himself, by recriminating the pursuit.

The inscriber was, according to the Civil Law, oblidged to find Caution, se
perseveraturum in accusatione usque ad sententiam, l. 7. ff. de accus. the
reason whereof, is by one of the Greek Scoliasts, said to be, (...). ne facile
quis ad accusationem per currat. Suitable to this, our Law has ordained, that
the pursuer, when he raises a criminal Libel, shall find Caution to insist, in
the intended pursuit; and this Caution is found, either by the Cautioner
enacting himself in the Journel Books, which Act is to be subscribed by him, or
else if the Cautioner be absent, he sends a Bond, bearing a clause of
Registration in the Journal Books, which is accordingly therein Registrat; this
Caution was first appointed by the 34. Act, Parl. 4. Ia. 5. by which, the
Justice-clerk is oblidged to take sicker surety, that the pursuer shall bring
back the criminal Letters indorsed, and execute: but the Cautioner is not
oblidged with us (as he is by the Civil Law) that the pursuer shall insist, and
the penalty appointed by that Act, is, an Earl, or Lord, two thousand Merks, a
great Barron one thousand Merks, a Fermer five hundred Merks, an unlanded
Gentleman two hundred Merks, a Yeoman two hundred Merks: But of old, accusers
behoved to find Caution to insist, Reg. Maj. cap. 1. l. number. 6. and if he
cannot find a Cautioner, it is said there, that his Oath may be taken, in all
cases of felony, and the reason given, is, lest too much severity, in exacting
of Caution, deterr the prosecution of a public crime: and it may be doubted,
if Cautio juratoria, cannot properly come in under the notion of sicker
security, and there can be little h^zard to the Commonwealth, seeing the Law
presumes, that His Majesty's Advocat will be still so just, as to pursue the
public revenge, where the party is unable. Whereas, by admitting this, cautio
juratoria ansa praebetur perjurio, and the defender is disappointed of his
damnage, and interest, if the party fail. By the 29. cap. Stat. Rob. 3.
pursuers before the Sheriff, should still find Caution to insist: but with us,
those ubi suam vel suarum injuriam prosequuntur and etiam in anticategoriis,
the accuser must still find Caution; wherein we do very reasonably differ from
the Civil Law, for the defender is as much prejudged, and may be as easily
troubled, if these pretexts were allowed, to palliat the pursuers malice, as
generally he could be in other cases: in this likewise we differ from the Civil
Law, that the defender is oblidged to find Caution for his compearance, which
he is commanded to do by the Letters: by which the Messenger is commanded to
denounce him Rebel, if within six days after the Summonds is execute against
him, he find not Caution in the Books of Adjournal, to the effect foresaid;
which Caution, though it be found, yet if it be not intimat to the Messenger,
the Messenger may still denounce him Rebel, for not finding of Caution. And
though by the Civil Law, and ours, the Advocat may pursue without consent of
the private party: yet he is not oblidged to find Caution, nam in eo non
praesumitur calumnia: yet the Advocat in our practique, does ordinarily oblidge
his informer to find Caution, else he refuses him his concourse.

If the accuser be found to have been calumnious, or as our Law terms it, in
the wrong, he is oblidged to pay to the party, an unlaw of ten Pounds, Ia. 3.
Parl. 6. Act, And if there be more deeds then one, he is liable in twenty
Pounds; and likewise to pay the defenders expense, Act 78. Parl. 6. Ia. 6.
Which Acts, speaks only of not prevailing, though there be no malice, and
though there be no probabilis causa litigandi, but if their pursuit be found to
be (...) it is arbitrary to the Justices, to inflict what punishment they
please, either in that same sentence, wherein the defender is absolved, or upon
a separat Bill, or pursuit; as also, he is by the Justice constantly ordained
to pay what damnage, and interest, or expense the Justices pleases, both to the
parties, and to the Assizers. And albeit, according to the Civil Law,
Procurator fisci non praesumebatur calumniosus; yet si procurator fiscalis
calumniose instigat judicem ad inquirendum tenetur in damna action injuriarum
and concremari debet, l. universi C. ubi causa fiscal, etc. And according to
the opinion of the Doctors, hodie and judex and procurator fisci affectate
consequentes crimen extraordinary sunt punendi, Q.

IX. The Justices ordain, that because many poor persons were maliciously, or
ignorantly imprisoned, that the Magistrates of Edinburgh should imprison none,
but where one should find caution, in the Books of Adjournal, to insist against
them, and to aliment them; and that they should appoint a Procurator, dwelling
within Edinburgh, to whom the Justices might intimat, when they desired the
pursuer might insist, the 5. of July 1661. which should be done, and exped very
speedily; and for this end, the Bishop was appointed to visit the Prison every
Friday and Wednesday, (...), celeriter judicari. Basil. l. 21. de custod reor.

TITLE XX. Of Advocats and Procurators.
1. Whether a Procurator should be admitted for the pursuer in his absence. 2.
His Majesty's Advocat may deput when he is pursuer, he has also other
privileges. 3. In what cases Procurators are admitted in defense. 4. What Oath
of Calumny is allowed in Criminals.
THe Doctors make a difference, inter simplicem allegatorem, who can only
propon what is nottour, as that the party cited is known to be sick, and
procuratorem, who must have a mandat, and may propon declinators, or dilators,
and defensorem innocentiae, who not only can propon dilators, but may likewise
defend, et Advocatus semper neputatur defensor, and needs no mandat, but his
Gown is his warrant, and yet in Criminals he must have a Procuratory.

I. According to the Civil Law, Procurators were neither admitted to pursue,
nor defend, l. ult.. ad crimen ff. de publ. jud. but by the Law of most
Nations, a Procurator is admitted to pursue; for paena talionis is now taken
away, which was the reason the pursuers personal presence was requisite. Clar.
fin. quest. 14. N. 22. the defender must still be present, ne judicium reddatur
elusorium.

With us, Procurators are admitted for the pursuer, and yet this appears not to
want difficulty, for if the defender should desire, that the pursuer should
swear the Libel, the diet would desert, if this were refused by the Procurator,
and though in Civilibus, a day may be taken to produce the pursuer, to give his
Oath of Calumny, which Oath of Calumny is the same thing we call swearing the
Libel in Criminals, yet seeing all Criminal dyets are peremptor, so that there
cannot be a day allowed to the pursuer to give his oath, it were unreasonable
but he should be present, for else the defender is precluded from a very great
advantage, such as is the pursuers oath of Calumny, which if the pursuer
himself were present, and refused, no pursuit would be sustained at his
instance, likeas, if the pursuer were present, it might be referred to his
oath, that he gave the witness good deed, or that he knew the defender to be
alibi; by all which it would seem, the pursuer should still be present; yet
this was expressly repelled, 4. August, 1652. Where Ballindalloch, was pursuing
John Grant, but there it was answered, that Ballindalloch was one of the
pursuers himself, and the remanent were his Servants.

II. Albeit the Kings Advocat be pursuer in most cases, yet he uses ordinarily
to constitute a deput, who should produce a written warrant under his own hand,
else cannot be admitted, and this deput can desert a diet, though his
Procuratory do not instruct him with a particular power for that effect. 29.
November 1638. Mr. George Norvel Procurator for Mr. John Rollo, which is
constantly the opinion of the Doctors.

His Majesty's Advocat uses not to pursue a Summonds of Treason, without a
special warrant under his Majesty's hand, or a particular order from the
Council, which he uses to produce ante omnia, and is still marked by the Clerk,
as may be seen in all adjournal Books, but particularly in the cases of the
Lords of Ochiltree, and Balmerinoch.

His Majesty's Advocat, with us examines parties, and witnesses, before the
Process be intented, which he does upon pretext, that he may thereby know how
to Libel exactly, and to the end he may not vex parties, if he find no ground
for the pursuit; but many learned Lawyers, have always thought this Procedur
dangerous; for his Majesty's Advocat is still a party interested, and so should
not be allowed to deals with the witnesses; for thereby he may strain from them
what otherwise they would not depon. And if in our last reformation of the
Justice Court, it was found that the Kings Advocat should not make the roll of
Assizers, because he is too much interested, much less should he for the same
reason, be allowed to examine the witnesses, since that is not allowed to the
Advocats for the defenders.

Advocats with us in Criminals are called Proloquutors.

3. No person should ^lead or consult in reduction of forefaulter, without
leave granted by the King, Act 135. Ia. 6. Parl. 8. But in other pursuits of
Treason, no Advocat is obliedged to crave a license, and even the foresaid act
is abrogated, Act 38. Parl. 11. Ia. 6. Which grants only liberty to plead in
all Treasons pursued before the Parliament: but by the 90. Act. Parl. 11. Ia.
6. Advocats are allowed before all Courts to plead, without license, and power
is granted to Judges, to compel them to plead in such cases, and the former
restriction has been founded upon C. falicis de paenit. in 6. where to plead
for Traitors is discharged, nisi concedatur licentia.

When Advocats-assist Pannels, especially in Treason, they use to protest that
no escape of theirs in pleading, may be misconstructed; since what they say, is
rather ratione officii, then ex proprio motu, as we see in Balmerinochs case;
and it were hard to be severe in such cases to Advocats, since they are
accustomed to much freedom, and are oftentimes transported by the heat of
opposition, and zeal to there Client, nor would men have any to engage in their
defense, against such pursuits, if this liberty were not allowed, and it is
against reason not to allow it, where they are forced to plead, as they
ordinarily are in cases of Treason, and yet if any Advocat will defend his own
escapes against authority, he may be punished by deprivation, but his
punishment extends no further, even where he speaks Treason, as was found in
the Senate of Savoy, Cod. fabr. tit. de paenis defin. 19.

By the Civil Law Procurators were admitted for the defender, where the pain to
be inflicted was not corporal, for the reason why personal presence was
requisite, viz. that the defender might undergo what was inflicted, did here
cease, and yet with us, the defender must still be present, even where the pain
to be inflicted is pecuniary, such as in cutting of green wood, stealing of
Bees, etc. because the certification of the Letters with us is still to compear
to underly the Law, under the pain of Rebellion, and has not those words
adjoined, or to show a reasonable cause, which being added in Summonds, for
Civil causes, is a sufficient warrant, for the constituting a Procurator.

Noblemen, likewise might by the Civil Law, and the opinion of the Doctors
compear by their Procurators, but this is not allowed with us. Procurators
might likewise by that Law, be admitted to propon the incompetency of the
Judge, even in the case where there is a Statute appointing the defender to
compear personally, which should much more be allowed with us, where there is
no such Statute, but where this necessity is imposed by the will of the
letters: Boss. tit. an incrimin. number. 13.14. Fa^in. de var. quest. 99. number 168.
and yet I have seen those who killed Armstrong the customer, outlawed, July
1668. Albeit it was alleged, they dwelt within the regality of Annandale, and
so they should be repledged, which was repelled, because they were not present;
yet the reason might be, because the Justices were Judges competent, eo casu,
and the replegiation was a privilege, with which the Lord of Regality might
have dispensed, and so was competent only to him, and to the defender, who
should have compeared, in omnem eventum.

Procurators are also allowed to propone excuses for absents, etc. sine
mandato, si excusationes illa sunt facti, and necessariae, as is sickness,
imprisonment, etc. Sed ad allegandum causas probabiles, and necessarias
absentiae, such as the want of a safe conduct, requiritur mandatum; quia absens
iis renunciare potest, and non constat de ipsius voluntate, nisi per mandatum,
which distinction, I think unnecessar; because it is always presumed, that the
defender would willingly have himself defended; and with us, a Mandat is not
necessar, if an Advocat be employed, for his Gown is his warrant: and where an
Advocat is employed, I think, the Cautioner may be admitted, albeit he have no
warrant, quia qui satisdat dicitur habere mandatum de jure farin. ibid. part.
2. number. 283. and the Cautioner defends himself, eo casu, seeing if the reason
of absence, or Essoinzie (as we call it, be found relevant, he will not be
unlawed, and where a Mandat is necessar with us, which is, where an Advocat is
not employed) it may be doubted, if the Mandat be sufficient, if subscribed
only by one Nottar, where the party cannot write, which though it be ordinarily
sustained, yet it would appear, that eo casu, it should be subscribed by two;
for the Act of Parliament requires two Nottars, and four Witnesses, in all
cases of great importance; yet seeing quaelibet levis probatio absentiae
sufficit, it would appear, that quodlibet mandatum hic sufficiat.

IV. Albeit where the pursuer is a private person, he is oblidged to swear the
Libel; yet where the Kings Advocat pursues, he is not oblidged to swear the
verity of the Dittay; because he pursues only, ratione officii, but I find, in
the same Decisions, that the Advocat is not oblidged to depone, whether the
party has given partial counsel, the 10. of August 1598. Advocatus contra the
Lord of Dalgety, nor yet to declare who is his informer, the 20. of April
1599. Advocatus contra John Connel, and others, but this seems unreasonable,
seeing the defender should not be prejudged, by the intenting of a pursuit, at
the Advocats instance; and jure naturali, the pursuer, or informer, which is
all one, should not be a Witness, nor can it be known who is pursuer, without
the Advocat declare: it is also a great encouragement to unjust pursuits, that
any person may inform at random, without being known, and the informer is
liable in damnage, and interest, if he inform without any ground, even though
the pursuit be only raised in the name of His Majesty's Advocat, Act 78. Parl.
6. Ia. 6. but if the Advocat may conceal lawfully the informers name, then the
defender is precluded from all these just advantages. This privilege of the
Advocats not swearing the Libel, seems to be founded upon the opinion of the
Doctors, who contend, that Procurator ex officio non tenetur prestare
juramentum calumniae, Gail. obs. lib. 1. obser. 88.

TITLE XXI. Of Libels, and the forms of Process thereto relating.
1. A Libel is a Sylogism. 2. It ought to condescend upon time, and place. 3.
Whether the qualities Libelled may be passed from. 4. The style of a criminal
Summonds, and Indictment. 5. How a criminal Summonds ought to be execute. 6.
Whether a person who is banished, may safely appear before the day, in the
citation. 7. How criminal Actions are to be called, and the forms thereto
relating.
I. A Libel is generally by Lawyers thought to be a Syllogism, wherein the
proposition (as we call it) is founded upon the Law, and though the proposition
be ofttimes generally conceived thus, that albeit by several Acts of
Parliament, the crime of, etc. be expressly forbidden, etc. Yet it is more
regular to express the particular Acts, whereupon the proposition is founded.
The subsumption of the Libel, is the matter of Fact, which should condescend
upon the actors names, and designations, and upon the place where the crime was
committed, either expressly, as the House of such a man, or per cohaerentias, as
Lawyers speak, as that it was done near such an Hill, Water, etc.

II. That the place must be designed, is expressly required, l. libellorum, ff.
de accus. But whether the Day, or Month must be expressed, is more controverted;
and by the formula, expressed in the former Law, the Place and Month, are
necessar, and to that formula, is there subjoined, their words, neque diem neque
horem invitus comprehendet, but according to the opinion of the Doctors, if the
defender compear, and crave that the pursuer should express the Day, because
he offers to prove, alibi, then the Judge should force the accuser to express
the Day; for else the defender would ^e precluded from proving his innocence,
Bart. in l. is qui reus, ff. de pub. Iud. But though in that case the accuser
is oblidged to express, yet he is not obliedged to prove the same; because the
expression thereof is not necessary, for the relevancy of his Libel, but only
for the clearing of the others innocence, Bertr. and lib. 6. Consil. 61. As
also, if the pursuer can upon Oath depone, that he does not remember the Day,
and that he does not omit the same maliciously, eo casu, he is not obliged to
express the same, Clar. q. 12. number. 13. But the former difficulty in this case
still remains, which is, that the defender loses the benefit of this defense,
and is prejudged by his accusers ignorance, which seems to be unjust: and
therefore Cook 7. rep. Calvin's case observes, that an indictment should be most
curiously, and certainly penned, and by the 37. Stat. Hen. 8. the Day, Year,
and Place must be insert. By the 80. chapter quon. attach. these seven are to be
expressed, the Names of the Parties, Day, Year, and Place, Cause of the
Complaint, and Damnage. According to our Law, either the crime is such, as
depends upon time, as is the striking one in the Session-House, whilst the
Lords sit; or the wounding, or killing one in time of Divine Service, and in
these the particular time must be both libelled, and proved; because the time
is not there a mere circumstance, but it is the medium concludendi; and
therefore a Libel in Deforcement, was not found relevant, because it
condescended not upon the time, since it was lawful, if the Rebel had been
apprehendded upon the Sabbath, 1671. but I think that this might have been
propon'd as a defense, and that the Libel without the Day, was relevant; but
there also, the Year was not insert, nor would the Justices allow the filling
up the same at the Bar, as in civil cases; but in other cases, where the crime
depends not upon time, we use to Libel in the Months of May, June, July, etc.
or one, or other of the Months, Weeks, or Days of the said Months, but the
expressing of the Day, is not found necessary, as in the case of one Hay I was
found the 5. of November 1612. and likewise upon the 8. of July 1615. where a
dittay of theft, was found relevant, though neither condescending upon the Day,
nor the marks of the Goods: And in my Lord Argyls case, the Parliament found it
not necessary to condescend, even upon the Month, but the ordinary Caution
allowed the defender, in that case, is, that the defender may offer to prove,
that quo ad, some particular Days of these Months, he was alibi, and quo ad
these, the Libel will not be relevant, nor he pass thereupon, to the knowledge
of an inquest, but will get a precept of exculpation: as for instance, if one
should be accused of killing a man, in the Month of March, upon the Street of
Edinburgh, he might allege, that quo ad, the first fourth-night he was at
London, quo ad, so many other days thereof he was at New Castle, etc. And if
the Witnesses, when the Libel comes to Probation, do depone, that upon any of
these days the crime was committed, in which alibi is proved, the defender
will not be thereupon convict; for though the pursuer needs not condescend upon
the Day, yet the Witnesses must condescend upon it, in the case where alibi is
offered to be proved, but otherwise it may be controverted whether a Libel be
relevant, bearing in the general, the committing of the Crime, but not
condescending upon the particular manner: as for instance, if it should be
subsumed upon the Acts against fore-stalling and regrating, that the defender
did forestal, but did not condescend upon the particular persons, from whom the
corns were bought; or in usury, if the pursuer should not condescend upon the
particular way how the usury was committed; and in my opinion, regulariter, the
crimes should be particularly subsumed; because else the relevancy cannot be
debated before the Justices, and the assize should be constantly judge of the
matter of Law, and the Panel should be put often to the knowledge of an inquest,
upon irrelevant crimes, all which were absurd; but yet there are some crimes,
such as fore-stalling, and regrating, in which it is sufficient to libel the
Crime, without condescending upon the particulars, for in this crime it is
declared by 148. Act, Par. 12. K. I. 6. that a Libel bearing common regrating,
or fore-stalling, in the general shall be relevant, without condescending on
the time, and way of committing the same. And accordingly upon the 11. June
1596. A Libel against Young and others, for fore-stalling was found relevant,
though it condescended not upon the particular persons against whom this crime
was committed: And it may be debated, that a person being pursued for common
usury, if that crime of common usury, may be sustained without any particular
condescension, because both the relevany, and probation is referred to his own
Oath, and so he is not precluded from any defense, but since it was necessary
by a particular Law in regrating, to appoint the Libel to be found relevant
upon that general, it seems to follow, that regularly the particular way, and
manner must be condescended upon; else that particular dispensation had not
been necessary. Whether a conclusion be necessary in Criminal Libels, is
likewise debated amongst Lawyers; but the common opion is, that it is not,
because though in Civil cases, the pursuer may crave more, or less, nor what
is due to him, yet in Criminal, either the penalty is determined by a Law,
which the Judge must follow, though it be not craved, or otherwise the pain is
Arbitrary, and there the pursuer cannot by his petition determine the same, but
must leave it to the Judge, l. 1.. quorum ff. ad S. C. turpil. l. ff. de private
delicti l. ordine ff. ad unicipalem, and in the form set down l. 3. ff. de
accusatio: by Paulus, there is no conclusion expressed, but yet with us, there is
always a conclusion in every Libel, though it be general, and I perceive that
most of the practitioners are of opinion, that at least a general conclusion
should be added.

III. Whether a Libel being libelled qualificate, the pursuer may pass from
the quality, has been thus determined by Lawyers, that if the quality amount to
another different crime, it cannot be past from, but if the quality amount only
to an aggraging circumstance, it may be past from. As for instance, if the
pursuer Libel upon the Act of Parliament, whereby murder under trust, is
Treason, and subsume that the Panel is guilty of murder under trust, in so far
as the person murdered, was father to the murderer, if when the case is to be
tried, the pursuer should declare, that he insists against him as a Murderer
simply, because he is not sure to prove, that the person killed was father: I
think eo casu, the pursuer could not so reform or declare his Libel, for that
makes the crimes to differ, the one being Murder, the other Treason, and the
defender was only obliedged to prepare him to defend against Treason, and
finding that he was secure, as to the crime libelled, he needed not prepare
other defenses, or raise exculpations for that effect; but these qualities
which amount only to aggravations, may be past from, as was decided, 11.
November 1672. For Aikma^ having pursued Carnegy of Newgate for oppression,
conform to the 25. Act 4. Parl. K. I: 5. because he had beat him, who was a
Magistrate, in the exercise of his Office, the Justices having found, that the
pursuer could not in the construction of Law be repute a Magistrate, because he
had not taken the Declaration, it was thereafter alleged, that the Libel being
only founded upon the foresaid Statute conceived in favors of Magistrates, and
the conclusion being against oppression, and not against beating the pursuer,
could no more insist upon that Libel, which was repelled, for the Justices
found, that the beating any man, was a crime, and the pursuer might insist
against the defender for beating him, since his being a Magistrate was only an
aggraging circumstance: Yet this seems a hard decision, since the proposition
of the Libel, did not bear, that beating was punishable, nor did the conclusion
bear, that at least the Panel was punishable for beating a free Liege: and if
this were universaly allowed, alternative Libels were unnecessary, and this
would occasion much looseness in Criminal Libels, whereas Lawyers treating of
Criminal Libels, have laid it down as a principle, that in criminalibus non
licet vagare, and the crimes of oppression, and beating, are different. Nor can
it be denied, but that a private person differs from a Magistrate, so that this
quality made the persons, the crimes, and the medium concludendi to differ,

IV. For the better clearing of our custom in these cases, I have set down the
form both of the Criminal Letters, and Criminal Indictment now in use with us.

A Criminal Summonds.
CHARLES, etc. humbly meaned and complained to Us, by Our Lovits, A. the
relict, B. sister, daughter, and nearest kins-woman, C. as Mr. with the
remanent kin of Umquhile Main, Servant to the said C. and Our right trusty and
well beloved Councellor, our Advocat, for our interest in the matter
underwritten upon Listoun, without any just cause, offense or injury done to
him by the said umquhile Man, having conceived a deadly hatred, and evil will
against him, with an settled purpose, and resolution to bereave him of his
life, one way, or another, lately, upon the last day of (...) where the said
Main was in quiet, and sober manner for the time, expecting no harm, injury
nor pursuit of any person, but to have lived under Gods peace, and ours. And
the said Listoun being bodden with a great Batton, or rung in his hand, and
with knives and other invasive weapons, first upbraided the said Main with
words, alleging that he was a common Thief, and had stolen, etc. And
thereafter, because the said Main had purged himself of that calumny, and said
he was as honest a man as himself, he thereupon ran and rushed the said Main
(being an aged man of 74. years of age) to the ground under his feet, struck
him in the head, craig, shoulders, and side, with the said Batton, lap upon his
breast and belly with his feet and knees, beat him upon the heart, and thereby
broke, and bruised his whole intrals, and noble parts, thereafter heased and
drew him by the heels, off the said lands, by the space of a quarter of a
mile, to a low Vault in, etc. and imprisoned him therein, tanquam in privato
carcere, he being in the dead thraw: Likeas, within three hours after his
imprisoning in the said Vault, the poor aged man dyed of the said strokes and
hurts; likeas, to suppress the Murder, the said Listoun with his accomplices,
buried him in an obscure place in the night time, and swa the said Main was
shamefully, and cruelly murdered, and slain, and secretly buried by the said
Listoun, and his accomplices, and he is Art and Part thereof, committed upon set
purpose, and provision, and forethought Felony, in high and manifest contempt
of our Authority and Laws, in evil example of others to commit the like; if swa
be, OUR WILL IS herefore, etc. and in Our name and authority, command and
charge, the said Listoun, committer of the said Barbarous murder, in manner
foresaid, to come and find sufficient Caution, surety to Our Justice Clerk, and
his deputs, acted in our books of Adjournal, that he shall compear before the
Justice, or his deputs, to underlye the Law for the samen in our Tolbuith in
Edinburgh, on the Day (...) of (...) in the hour of Cause, under the pain
contained in Our Acts of Parliament, and that ye charge him personally, if that
he can be apprehended, and failzing thereof, at his dwelling house, and by open
proclamation, at the Market Cross of the head Burgh of the Shyre, Stewatry, or
Regality where he dwells, to come and find the said soverty acted, in manner
foresaid, with in six days next after he bees charged be you thereto, under
the pain of Rebellion, and putting of him to the Horn, the whilk six days
being by past, and the surety not being found, that ye immediately thereafter
denounce him Rebel, and put him to our Horn, and escheat and in bring all his
moveable goods, to our use, for his contemption, and cause Registrat their our
Letters, with the executions thereof, in the books of Adjournal, within fifteen
days thereafter, conform to our Act of Parliament made thereanent, and if he
find the said soverty, initimation being always made by you, to us, of the
finding thereof, that ye Summond an assize hereto, not exceeding the number of
45. persons, together with sick witnesses as best knows the verity of the
premises, whose names ye shall receive in the Rolls, subscribed by the
complainers, or either of them, ilk person under the pain of a 100. Merks, as
ye will answer to us Ex deliberatione.

The form of an Indictment is thus.

An Indictment.
FOr sameikle as the abominable, vile, and filthy vice of Incest, being so
odious, and detestable in the presence of Almighty God, and be the same eternal
God, his express word so clearly condemned; Therefore our sovereign Lord, out
of his godly disposition, and zeal, by diverse his Acts of Parliament, expressly
Statute, and ordained, that whatsoever person, or persons, commits the said
abominable crime of Incest, shall be punished to the death, as the said Acts
of Parliament, in themselves proports: Notwithstanding, it is of verity, that
the said A.B. being married with his lawful Spouse, Daughter to C. most
shamefully, but fear of God, or respect to our Sovereign Lords Laws, has given
the use of his Body to D. His Wifes ^ister, in the Months of (...) in his and
her journeying, betwixt the Burgh of Edinburgh, and the Town of Elgin, and
within the said Town of Elgin, in the which filthy, and incestuous copulation,
she has procreat a Bairn, committing there-through the said filthy crime of
Incest, and Adultery, to the high offense, and displeasure of Almighty God,
violation of the Kings Majesti's Laws, and evil example of others, to run in
the like filthy and abominable vice, if the famine be suffered to remain
unpunished, as at length is contained in the said Dittay, produced against him,
etc.

V. The Summonds should be execute only by a Messenger at Arms, or by an
Officer of the Court, except in the case of Treason; in which case, it is
appointed by the 125. Act Parl. 12. K. Ia. 6. that Letters, and Summonds of
Treason, should be execute only by Heralds, and Pursevants, bearing Coats of
Arms, or by Macers, which must be understood only of Macers of the criminal
Court; for the Macers of the Council, or Exchequer, or Session, cannot execute
any other Summonds, but what is pursued before these Respective Courts, to
which they are Macers. The form of the Execution, is, that there be a full
Copy of the Letters delivered to the defender, if he be personally
apprehended, or if he cannot be personally apprehended, to his Wife, or
Servants, or affixt upon the Gate of his dwelling House, if he any has, and
Proclamation at the head Burgh of the Shire, where a Copy is likewise to be
fixed at the Market Cross; but if there be more persons then two, and all be
called for one deed, and crime; in that case, two of the Copies are to be
delivered, to two of the Principals, named in the said Letters, or their Wives,
etc. In manner foresaid, is sufficient, Q M. 6. P. cap 33. but if the Persons
live in Shires, or Countries, ubi non patet tutus accessus, the Bill whereupon
the Letters pass, use to contain a privilege, for citing them at the head
Burgh of the Shire, and to the end of the Letters, bearing their words, and
failzing thereof, by open Procamation, at the Market Crosses of our Burghs of,
etc. because they are broken men, having no certain dwelling, and haunts, and
frequents with other broken men, where our Officers dare not resort, for fear
of their lives, with the whilk Charge, swa to be given, We, and the Lords of
Our Council, by their Presents dispenses, and admits the famine to be as lawful,
and safficient, as if ilk an of them were personally apprehended, this is by
the Doctors called, citatio edictalis, but if the party be out of the Country,
he must be cited at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Peir and Shore of Leith, as
in other cases. Nota, though the Act of Parliament foresaid, bear not a full
Copy, yet it is absolutely necessar, that a full Copy be given; for the Dyets
in the Criminal Court being peremptor, the Summonds is not given up to see, as
in other Courts; and therefore the defender should have a full Copy, that he
may come instructed how to defend, and that he may timeously raise exculpation,
and if a full Copy be not given, the Executions have been found null, in totum,
and the Acts of Parliament appoints they should be null, Anno 1665. Livingstoun
contra Leith: And though some think, that in the case where a short Copy is
given, the Summonds should be only given up to a short day, but the Execution
should not be null: yet I think that opinion is not found 1. Because the Act of
Parliament appoints the Execution to be null, where a Copy is not given. 2. The
giving up to see, cannot be sufficient, for if the party had gotten a full
Copy at home, upon the place where he lives, he had raised Exculpation, and
cited the Witnesses therefore upon the place. Their Executions should be
subscribed by the Executer, and stamped, and Sealed before Witnesses, else they
are null, Act 32. Parl. 5. I. 3. And Letters should not be direct generally,
against Accomplices, but the particular crimes of every defender should be
expressed, Ia. 6. Parl. 6. cap. 76. and Ia. 6. Parl. 11. cap. 85. And by this
last Act, all Criminal Letters, which import tinsel of Life, and Moveable
Goods, when they are execute by open Proclamation, at Market Crosses, should be
execute betwixt eight Hours of the Morning, and twelve Hours at Noon: Though
formerly, when a party was in Prison, his Indictment might have been given him
upon twenty four Hours; yet it was found in the case of Robertson, in July
1673. that a Panel in Prison, should have fifteen Days at least, that he
might within that time, either raise a Summonds of Exculpation, or might take
out diligences, for proving his Objections against Witnesses, or Assizes, and
that conform to the eleventh Article of the Regulations, concerning the Justice
Court, though it was alleged then, by His Majesty's Advocat, that there was no
express Warrant for that Indulgence, in that Article, And Correctory Laws,
such as the Regulations were, ought not to be extended beyond the Letter;
especially in this case, where the Panel was a Murderer, taken with reid hand,
and Justice was to be done against such, by our old Law, within twenty four
Hours: which replies were repelled, in respect it was duplyed for the Panel,
that though the Law did not express the time that is to be indulged, to such
as are criminally pursued; yet it having expressed the reason, for which this
indulgence is to be given, viz. that the party might either exculpat himself,
or cast the Witnesses, or Assizers, that were to be used against him, the Law
could not but allow a time sufficient for doing that diligence, it being a Rule
in Law, and a Principle in Reason, that quando aliquid conceditur, omnia
concessa videntur sine quibus hoc fieri nequit, and though where a party is
taken reid hand, and confesses, the Judge ought to do present Justice upon him;
yet that is only introduced to make Judges diligent, but not at all to preclude
poor Pannels from their just defenses, and it were a thing very inhumane, and
unwarrantable, if a poor Panel were taken reid hand, but could prove that he
was forced to kill in self-defence; or if he could prove, that one of the
Witnesses had been one of the Aggressors; that in either of these, or such like
cases, he could not have time to cite Witnesses for that effect.

VI. Whether a person who is cited to compear in a criminal Court, as defender,
at a particular day expressed in the Summonds, may not before that day appear in
Edinburgh, though he be banished, was doubted, in the Action pursued at His
Majesty's instance, against several Gentlemen, in Anno 1674. and that they
might come to Edinburgh, was allowed; because being cited, they were commanded
to come. 2. Their coming to Town was necessar, in order to their defense, and
thus, when men are indicted, they have the liberty of a free Prison, though till
then they were ordered to be kept in close Prison; and yet some thought that
this might be doubted, since they were once formally banished, and so the
banishment should be formally taken off, and the raising of a dittay is no
discharge of the banishment, for else the Kings Advocat might discharge
banishments when he pleased, and inditements bear not to appear betwixt and
such a day, but at such a day. 2. When men are under Caption, they may be
taken, if they appear before the day of compearance, if they have not a
Protection, which shows, that a mere citation does not take off the dangers, to
which the person cited is liable. 3. Protections were needless, if this were
allowed, for the citation would be a Protection, and yet Protections are
ordained to be granted to defenders in such cases.

As also it was doubted there, if such as were cited upon sixty days, might
compear with others of their accomplices, who were cited upon six days, for it
was urged, that the appearing upon sixty days, was introduced in the defenders
favors, and so he might renounce it, and possibly he cannot compear at the
long Diet; and yet it may be urged, that the pursuer has chosen his own Diet,
and it may be his true interest sometimes to divide the defenders, and
sometimes his Probation cannot be sooner ready.

When there are more pursuers, each Libelling a distinct interest, as three
brothers pursuing for the murder of their deceast brothers, though they were
all three killed at the same time, and in the same action. It has been found,
that two of the pursuers being absent, the third could not insist: and so the
diet was deserted, upon pretext that the Libel was complext, but I conceive,
that the interests there were very distinct, though in the same Libel, and that
though they had been all joint pursuers, yet the absence of the rest should not
prejudge any one, who has a sufficient interest, per se.

VII. When the day of compearance comes, which is peremptor, and not with
continuation of days, by the Act I. 6. the Justice-clerk calls the Summonds,
and if the pursuer be present, and the defender be absent, he is declared
Fugitive, and his Cautioner is unlawed, but if the pursuer be not present, then
the Clerk calls upon the Act, for reporting the Criminal Letters, and the
Cautioner is unlawed, for not reporting the Criminal Letters: And in either
cases an Act is extracted; and if both pursuer, and defender be absent, the
pursuers Cautioner is unlawed, for not reporting the Criminal Letters, and the
defender is outlawed, and his Cautioner is likewise unlawed for not presenting
him; but if either, or both compear, the Cautioners takes Instruments upon
their reporting the Letters. If the defenders Cautioner present him at the day,
but if the Judge be absent, or the day feriat, as if it be a public Fast, then
I think the Cautioner is not free; but he should present him at a day wherein
he may be pursued, for his obligation must be interpreted to be, cum effectu,
especially if the Panel would have been imprisoned, if he had not found that
person Cautioner.

Upon their presenting the Panel, then the defender enters upon Panel, and
the Clerk marks, curia affirmata die mensis per and marks such a man entered
upon the Panel, such a day accused for the crime, etc. and marks who were
pursuers, and who were Proloquutors in defense, and the Dittay is read, and the
Justices ask whether the Panel be guilty, or not; which is conform to l. 3.
ff. quam aniss non possint, and l. and adulteram ff. ad leg. jul. de adult. and
the Advocats for the defender, dictat both the Dilator, and peremptor defenses,
as the Advocats for the pursuer, do his repleys and triplys, which has been
originally introduced amongst us, as I conjecture that the Judges might not be
seduced, by the passionat, and well acted Eloquence of Advocats, Quintil.
Athenis (speaking of the Areopage) affectus movere etiam per praeconem
prohibebatur orator, (...). By dictating also, the Advocat considers more
gravely what he asserts in these cases, which are of so great concern, and the
Judge has more permanently under his consideration what he is to do, and
succeeding ages may better judge of the grounds whereupon he proceeded

TITLE XXII. Of Exculpation, and the other privileges competent to the
defender.
1. The rise and progress of exculpations with us. 2. Whether exculpations may
be admitted, though contrair to the Libel. 3. How alibi should exculpat. 4.
Witnesses liable to exceptions may be admitted in exculpations. 5. Witnesses
for exculpating may be admitted, though not cited. 6. Whether a man may be
punished, though he has not fully proved his exculpation. 7. How the defender
may exculpat if the pursuer insist not. 8. Whether the Justices, or Assizers
are judges to exculpations. 9. What if the pursuer cite as parties, the
defenders necessary witnesses.
ALbeit after a crime is proved, the Panel is most unfavourable, yet till
then, he is still presumed innocent, and praestat nocentem absolvere, quam
innocentem condemnare, and Petr. de Anach. consil. 23. observes well, that the
Court deserves much more honor, when they absolve, then when they condemn. The
reason of which is, because when an innocent person is condemned, the wrong
cannot be repaired, but when a guilty person is absolved, yet God will either
suffer him him to fall in a second snare, whereby the first crime may be also
punished, or at least, his infinite Justice will punish him eternally if he
repent not.

When any person was Criminally pursued, he had by the common Law the benefit
of exculpation, for so they term the defenses of the Panel, as is clear by
Clar. quest. 51. But I find not this term used with us, till the Year. 1661. at
which time, it was used first in Argyles process. The English call this, to
traverse an Indictment, from the French word traverser (as I suppose) which
signifies to oppose, or cross.

When a Panel before that time, was pursued in Scotland, he behoved presently
to propon his defenses, and have witnesses there present, for proving it, or
else he behoved to refer it to the pursuers witnesses, for our Ancestors
thought that the pursuers Witnesses being present, could not but know all the
matter of fact exactly, and so were as fit to prove the exculpation, as the
Libel; but this was a mistake; for witnesses might have been present when the
wound was given, who were not present at the beginning, when the occasion of
the wound was given, whereupon the exculpation of self-defence was founded; so
that other witnesses are oftimes necessary, beside these adduced by the
pursuer, and it is not safe to presume, that these will come without a
citation, or if they come without a citation, they are ultroni^, and so are
suspect.

In anno. 1661. the Justices did begin to grant precepts of Exculpation, which
were drawn by the Clerk, and expressed, that in respect there was a pursuit of
such a nature, intended against such a man, and that he had defenses to propon
(here the defenses were expressed) therefore the Justices granted warrant to him,
to cite witnesses for proving thereof. etc. That

This precept was subscribed only by one of the Justices, yet thereafter in
anno 1666. the Justices ordained, that a formal Summonds, past under the signet
of the Session should be granted for citing witnesses for Exculpation, and they
are called now Letters of Exculpation, which contain the defense, as formerly
the precepts did, but because the Lords of Session use to scruple, to pass
such Bills; therefore the Justices first consider the defense, and if they find
it probable, they use to subscribe the warrant for a Bill, which Bill is past
by one of the Justices amongst the common Bills, and that Bill is the warrant
of the Letters.

When the Panel is accused, and the Libel read, his Advocat does propon the
defense, or exculpation, v. g. if the Libel be Murder, the defense is inculpata
tutela, etc. and after the defense is debated, and either admitted, or
repelled, by an express signator of process, then the witnesses are
accordingly admitted.

If the Justices refuse to pass a warrant for Letters of exculpation, the
defender ought not to be thereby prejudged, but the diet will be continued,
till Letters of Exculpation be raised, as was found in my Lord Rentouns case,
against the Lord of Wedderburn, December, 1669. And though the summonds of
Exculpation should be execute to the same diet with the Principal Summonds, yet
if the Justices find it reasonable, they may continue the diet, and allow a
competent time for raising Exculpation, as they did 13. July, 1676. In a case
pursued by Mackintosh, against Grant, for in remote Shires, the defender has
not time to raise and execute Exculpations to the day of compearance in the
principal cause.

The ordinary defenses are to be seen in the respectiv Titles to which they
relate, and it would swell too much, and too unnecessarily this Title to repeat
them here.

II. It is ordinarily replied to defenses of Exculpation, that they are
contrary to the pursuers Libel, and so ought not to be admitted to probation,
and thus Mr. William Sumervel being pursued, for murdering of Bessy Rentown, it
was alleged, that it was offered to be proved, that the wound was not mortal,
as appeared clearly to many who saw the same immediately after it was given,
Likeas she went that night to her brothers house, three miles on foot, and
never took bed, but wrought as a servant in her ordinary employments, for
twelve weeks, And at last having gone to attend her brother, who dyed of a
spotted Fever, she was by him infected, and dyed of a Fever; which defense of
Exculpation was repelled. December. 1669. as contrary to the Libel, wherein it
was expressly Libelled, that he gave her a mortal wound, that she died of the
wound that he gave her, and I find it formerly repelled. 15. July, 1642. Cheyn
against Mowit, But this principle, viz. that exculpation directly opposite to
the Libel, should not be admitted, seems not to be allowable, for all defenses
of Exculpation might be thereby precluded, for the pursuer might so
circumstantiat his Libel, upon design, as that the only exculpation which he
feared, behoved to be contrary to his Libel, and since in Scotland the pursuer
is not precisely obliedged to prove all the qualities which he Libels, but it
is sufficient that he prove the Libel it self, the poor defender might easily
be cheated; for the pursuer might Libel all the circumstances exclusive of the
exculpation, which he feared, and after he had thereby excluded the defense, he
might contend, that albeit the qualities were not proved; yet the fact it self
being proved it was sufficient. 2. In Civil cases, some defenses are admitted,
though contrary to the Libel, as in Ryots before the Council, and in Spuilzies;
and therefore they ought much more to be admitted, in Criminal cases, wherein
the defender is more favorable, then he is in civil cases. 3. If this
principle did generally hold, then self-defence, and casual homicide could
never be allowed as Exculpations, for both these are directly contrary to the
Libel, used in the case of Homicide; which bears still premeditation, and
fore-thought-fellony. But to reconcile these differences, that which I find
more suitable to reason, in these indigested discourses, which the Doctors make
upon this Subject, may be comprehended under these conclusions, 1. Where the
defense i^ not absolutely contrary to the Libel, it ought only to be admitted
to probation. 2. Though it be contrary to the Libel, yet according to the
Doctors, a conjunct probation should be granted, for besides the former
reasons, I find the Civilians debate very learnedly, whether when the pursuers
probation of the Libel, is expressly contrary to the probation led by the
defender, the pursuers, or defenders probation ought to be preferred, Bossius
tit. defens. reor: which question were needless, if a mutual probation were not
allowed, eo casu, and Boss. there advises the defender, capitulare direct
contrarium ejus quod libellatur, and when the probations differ, the ordinary
rules to be followed are, that 1. The defenders probation is to be preferred,
Gloss in cap in nostris detest; because it is admitted by the presumption, that
nemo presumitur diliquisse, Boss. ibid. But if the probation be not equal, the
greater number, or these who depon what is most probable, or the worthiest
persons ought to be believed, Boss. ibid.

How far this Doctrine is allowed by our practique, will appear, from a case
decided in Iun 1670. In which, William Mackie, being pursued for killing Hoom,
in a single Combat, did allege, that if he did kill him, it was in his own
defense; in swa far as Hoom fell upon him, with a drawn Sword. To which it was
replied, that selfe-defence could not be receaveable; because it was expressly
Libelled, that there past a mutual provocation: and though he went to the Park
without his Sword, yet having been thereafter provoked, and fighting, and
killing the Defunct, he cannot be said to have done this, se defendendo, else
the Act of Parliament against Duels, might be easily eluded; and though, if the
Libells did only bear fore-thought-fellonny in general, self-defence might be
receiveable to eleid the Libel; yet where the Libel was founded upon a special
qualification of provocation, self-defence was never sustained, to eleid the
Libel, and the reason of the defense, is, because in the first case,
self-defence is not contrary, substantiae libelli; but only eleids it in a
quality, which is presumed, and so needs not be proved, viz.
forethought-fellony, whereas, in this case, if self-defence were receiveable,
to eleid a Libel, founded upon provocation, and Duelling, it would be expressly
contrary to the Libel, and to the quality of provocation, which is a quality
that must be proved. In respect of which reply, the self-defence was repelled

III. But since defenses expressly contrary to the Libel, cannot be sustained in
our Law; it may be doubted, if the exception of alibi, be relevant: for since
the Libel bears, that the Panel was actor there, it is contrary to the Libel
to allege, that the Panel was else where, than where the crime was committed;
for that is the same thing, as to allege, and offer to prove that he killed
not there. But I think in this case, alibi should be strongly qualified, and if
it be, then both the Libel, and defense ought to be admitted to probation; but
so that if the Judge find alibi, not to be clearly proved, then only he should
allow the pursuer to prove his Libel, for to admit contrary Probations, were to
open a Door to Perjury, and not to allow the pursuer to prove also, were to
infer a crime without Probation; for the Pannels not proving his defense, does
not, in criminalibus, relieve the accuser from the necessity of proving his
Libel, as it does in civil cases. And this seems to be our Law, and more just
and Christian, then conjunct Probations are.

IV. According to the opinion of the Doctors, Exculpation is so favorable,
that many who could not be received as Witnesses to prove the Libel, would be
admitted to prove the defense, as a Brother, or a Domestic, Jason. in leg. ut.
vim. ff. de just. and jur. and Clar.

And Bocerus, de duel. cap. 8. number. 82. g^ves it for a rule, that probantur
articuli pro in culpata tutela testibus alias minus idoneis ut frater pro
fratre affinis pro affine, etc. Idem asserunt Mascard vol. 1. conclus 490.
Gail, de pac. publ. cap. 16: For though it would seem that the presumption lies
still against the killer, and so he should be burdened with the stronger
Probation, yet it may be answered, that that rule holds only against the
accuser, but not against the defender; as also, it may be answered, that he who
killed in his own defense, was not doing what was unlawful, but what was lawful
and necessar; and therefore the Law should presume in his favors, and not
against him. And in Rutherfoords Process, in January 1664. it was found, that
Women might be admitted to prove self-defence, if there were Women upon the
place.

V. It is very ordinary for some Judges, not to admit Witnesses to exculpat,
except they be cited, and all the formalities be observed, in their citations,
that are observed in other citations; But I should rather think with the
Civilians, that as testes in defensam, are admitted, though they be not
habiles, so Witnesses may be admitted, though not cited, for this was our
ancient practice, and the benefit of Exculpation, is mainly brought in to
favor the defender: And is it not strange, that if a man were Pannell'd for
Murder, and saw two persons present, who knew that what he did, was done in his
own defense, it should not be lawful to him, to desire them to be examined;
this were to profer mere formalities, to real truth: And whereas, it is
observed, that these testes, are ultonei, who came without being cited, and so
ought not to be received. To this it is answered, that all such as come without
being cited, are not testes ultronei, but only such as offer themselves without
being required, by Judge, or Party, as if a man should step out, and desire to
be examined: And whereas, it is urged, that they must be presumed partial, who
come there merely to be examined, and this is the same thing, as if they
offered themselves; it is answered, that the presumption is very groundless,
for they might have come there without any such designs; and if they had such a
design, they might safely have eluded the formality objected, by causing cite
them. Others use a strange evasion in this case, for though they confess that
Witnesses may be examined in Exculpations, though not cited; yet if a Summonds
be once raised, they conceive that none should be allowed to depon, but such as
are cited; because, say they, the defender can only in that case blame himself,
who used not the remedy, that was competent to him. 2. If the contrary were
allowed, there needed no Summonds of Exculpation be raised. 3. It is
presumeable, that the defender has, ex post facto, corrupted that Witness;
for if he had been able truly to depon any thing, he would have cited him at
the beginning. Notwithstanding of all which, I humbly conceive, that even
though no Summonds of Exculpation have been raised, it is lawful to examine
such as are not cited, for the same arguments urge for their examination, that
were urged for examining such as were not cited, where there is no Summonds
raised. And as to the contrary arguments, it is answered, that as to the first,
there may be cases wherein the defender is not to blame; as for instance, if he
knew not the names of such as were present, when he was forced to kill; so that
he could not cite them, but yet he knew their Faces, and so was forced to call
them out, to be examined when he saw them in a Justice Court. As also, knowing
that citations were introduced in his own favors, and to compel them to
compear; he might have omitted the citation, or possibly knew not where they
were to be found, or wanted Money to cite them; and this answers likewise the
third argument. To the second, it is answered, that Summonds of Exculpation,
will be likewise very necessary in other cases, as if the Witnesses be
unwilling to compear, or design to go abroad, etc. And whereas it is pretended,
that if a citation had been given, the pursuer would have gotten the names of
the Witnesses, who were to be used in the Exculpation, and so might have been
ready to object against them. To this it was answered, that if this argument
proves any thing, it would prove that no Witnesses could be received in
Exculpations, except they were cited, which were absurd; and the reason why
Witnesses names were ordained to be given with the Libel, was introduced in
favors of the defender, and that he might not die upon Depositions of suspect
Witnesses; and so it were unjust to detort this to the defenders prejudice: Nor
is there such hazard of corruption in Exculpations, as in pursuites, for no man
is to die, no Estate to be forefeited, nor no man's Fame to be tainted by the
Depositions, of exculpating Witnesses.

But I find no such speciality in our Law, nor is that privilege reasonable,
for men are prone, though they have no relation, to depone in favors, rather
of the Panel, then of the accuser; and therefore it is, that our Law allows an
Assize of error against such as absolve, but not against such as condemn.

VI. The Doctors also allow Exculpation to be proved, per conjecturas, and
judicia, l. merito. ff. pro. socio Boss. tit. de favor. de fens. but this is
likewise reprobated by our Law, and if it were allowed, punishments should be
absolutely arbitrary. But it is questioned what punishment should be inflicted
upon the defender, who has proved his defense, but not fully: as if he prove
by one Witness, that the murder was committed in defense, etc. For resolution
of which doubt, they distinguish, whether the imperfect Probation of the
defense, be Diametrically contrary to the pursuers Probation, and in that case
they think it ought not to be respected, both because it is in it self
imperfect, and because it is contrary to a concluding Probation: but if it be
not fully contrary, but tending only to prove somewhat that is different from
the Libel, as if the pursuer prove wholly the murder, and the defender that it
was done in self-defence, then they think that the Probation, though not full,
does obsuscat, and weaken the pursuers Probation; and consequently the defender
ought not to be punished with death, which punishment ought only to be
inferred, per probationem omni exceptione majorem, Bart. in l. Admonendi ff. de
jur Anchar. council. 285. And I think, that albeit the Assize behooved to file,
eo casu, yet the Council ought upon a favorable representation from the
Justices, to remit somewhat of the ordinary punishment.

VII. If the pursuer insist not, so that the defenders Probation of
self-defence may perish in the interim, or if he who may accuse, will raise no
accusation, then the person to whom the Exculpation would be competent, may
intend a Summonds, wherein he must cite the party injured, or his relations,
and His Majesty's Advocat, and in it he may conclude, that the depositions of
the Witnesses, ad defensam, may be taken to ly, in retentis, ad futuram rei
memoriam.

VIII. When Witnesses are led, they should presently depon, and the Justices
should be Judges to what they depon, and it ought not to be remitted to the
Assizer; because, non constat, till the probation be led, whether the
Exculpation be exclusive of the Libel, or eleids it; and so the Libel cannot go
to the knowledge of an Inquest, as was found after much debate in Barcleys
case, but this (in my opinion) should only hold where the defense is exclusive
of the Libel, but where both the Libel, and Defense are admitted jointly to
Probation, I think that both should be referred to the Inquest; because the
Probation must be jointly considered, and the Justices cannot be Judges
competent to the Probation of the Libel, and so not to that which is joined
inseperably with it.

If the defender propon a defense, but prove it not, it is doubted, if by
proponing the defense, he acknowledges the Libel? The reason of the doubt, upon
the one hand is, that in all civil Processes, he who propones a defense,
acknowledges the Libel, and in reason it appears that this should hold in
criminals; for he who alleges that he murdered a man in self-defence, does
acknowledge that he killed him: but upon the other hand it seems hard, that if
the defender prove not his defense, that he should therefore die: seeing that
were to condemn the Panel, per judicia, and without Probation upon a mere
formality, and ante quam constat de corpore delicti, neither is the pursuer
prejudged by the Pannels not proving his defense; seeing his Witnesses must
still be present at the same time, whereas in civil cases that danger is not so
great, and the pursuer is prejudged; for he is not obliged to have Witnesses
ready for proving his Libel. To which last I incline, vid. tit. Confession
where I have debated, how far a qualified confession ought to operat.

IX. It is ordinary for the violent pursuers of crimes, to cite as Accomplices,
all such as may be led as Witnesses by the Panel, for proving his Exculpation,
or other Defenses, upon design to decline, or set them from being Witnesses,
when they are led; for one Panel cannot be led by another, as a Witness for
him. And yet upon the other hand, if this were allowed as a sufficient
exception, it should still be in the pursuers power to cut the Panel off from
proveing even his justest defenses. To reconcile which, I remember that the
Lords of Session in a spoulzie, pursued before them, the 24. of Feuary 1662. at
the instance of Mackertney, against Irving, ordained these Witnesses, against
whom the exception was propon'd, to be first insisted against; to the end if
they were found innocent, they might be allowed as Witnesses against the other
Panel, if not, they might be declined. Which Method was very just before them,
but seems more difficult in Criminal Courts, where diets are peremptor, and
where Courts cannot be continued: but to this difficulty it may be answered,
that though Courts cannot be continued by the Justices, regulariter, as in
civil cases; yet in many cases, incidents may occur, whereby continuations are
necessary, and all Laws must yield to necessity.

The exception of self-defence is treated, Title Murder. And it is fit to
observe that in the Areopage, if the Panel confessed he committed murder, but
that he killed lawfully, he was not tried, (...), where murder was tried, but
(...), Perion. de magistr. athen. cap. 25.

TITLE XXIII. Of Assizes.
1. The origin of Assizes and Inquests. 2. The form of citing Assissers, and
who makes the Roll. 3. Sometimes there needs no Assise. 4. What is propper to
be tried by the Judge, and what by the Inquest. 5. The difference betwixt an
ordinary, and a great Assise, and the number of Assizers in both. 6. The Oath
of Assisers, and the objections by which they may be declined. 7. Every man
must be judged by his Petrs, and who these are? 8. Whether Assisers may judge
upon proper knowledge. 9. All Probations should be led in presence of the
Assizers. 10. The Assize after enclosure can speak to no man. 11. How the
Assize ought to proceed after they are enclosed. 12. Wilful error in Assisers,
how punished: and by whom.
I. ALL judgments were at first pronounced by neighbors, and thus amongst the
Romans, were centum viralia judicia, and amongst the Feudalists, pares curie,
were only Judges; in place of which last, came our Assizes in France, England,
and Scotland, they are called a condign inquest; because these should be, pares
^uriae and ita condigni.

The Word Assize is originally French, and signifies properly siting, or
Session, les assizes sont les grands jours plaids solemnels, Roy Charles, Anno.
1413. vid. judicem Regean verb. assise, where it will appear, that Assize in
French, signifies a Judicator; and in our Law it is often taken for a
constitution, or Statute which is made by that Session, or sitting of the
Judges, and thus the Statutes of King David, are called assisa regis Davidis,
and assisa terrae, is called the Law of the Land; Assisa is likewise sometimes
called a measour, and thus it is said, Ia. 3. Pa. 14. cap. 110. that the Barrel
should contain the Assize, and measour of 14. gallons, and the assisa hal^cum,
or assize of Herring, signifies a certain quantity, and measure of Herring,
which pertains to the King, as a part of his Customs, Ia. 6. Pa. 15. cap. 237.
And in the French Law, it signifies a Tax also, Regean ibid. But the proper
acceptance of the Word Assize, as it is now determined by custom, is to
signify those who are chosen by our Law to determine, either in civil, or
criminal cases, the matter of Probation, and are in effect neither properly
Judges, nor Witnesses, but both.

II. For the more exact clearing of the Office of Assizers in criminal cases,
the Reader may take notice, that the Libel always beats, that the pursuer
shall Summond an Assize, not exceeding forty five persons, which shall be
given up in a Roll to the Messenger, and should be subscribed by the pursuer,
which Roll shall be annexed to the end of his execution, Ia. 6. Pa. 6. cap. ^6.
But albeit this Act appoints, that the Roll shall be subscribed by the pursuer;
yet it is sustained as valid, though not subscribed by him, if he homologat,
and ratify the execution given in by the Messenger, albeit it may be alleged,
that the Summonding of Assizes, is, eo casu not lawful, seeing it wants a
warrant; this subscribed list being by the foresaid Act of Parliament, and
Summonds it self, appointed to be the warrant: as also, albeit by the Act, the
Messenger is prohibit to cite any more then forty five, under the pain of five
hundred Merks, yet the execution is not eo casu, declared thereby to be
unlawful, and by that Act it is likewise declared that upon supplication, the
Lords may allow more persons to be cited then forty five,

Why the pursuer should have had the choice of the Inquest, may be doubted. And
if Assizers may judge, ex propria scientia; it would appear, that to allow the
pursuer the choice of the Assize, were to put the defender absolutely in his
will: And I find that Gail. l. 2. obs. 34. concludes, that the custom of some
places allowing, domino electionem parium (pares apud nos, signifies Assizers)
is most unreasonable, quia dominus ita, est quodam modo judex in propria causa,
nam est procul dubio eos electurus, per quos se victoria potiturum sperat
Alvarot. ad cap. 1. de contrav. send. To which difficulty it may be answered,
in defense of our Law, and Practique, that 1. Where the Advocat is pursuer, it
is presumeable, that he will be most just, and that he will proceed without
interest, or malice. 2. These Assizers are in effect, either Judges, or
Witnesses, and the pursuer has still the choice, of both Judges, and
Witnesses, if they be otherwise competent. 3. As the defender may decline them,
if there be any reason for it, so they are sworn; nor is it presumeable, that
any will be so impious, to condemn a man to die, to please others: Upon which
presumption, our Law leans so much, that though Assizers condemn unjustly, they
are not liable to an Assize of error, as is believed. But by the third Article
of the Regulation, 1670. the list of the Assizers, is to be made by a Quorum of
the Justices, and that list should express, not only the names, but the
designation of the Assizers.

When the day of compearance is come, and the Letters are called, and the
Assizers are likewise called, and each absent Assizer is for his absence fined
in an hundred Merks, and their unlawes are to be taken up without any
composition, Ia. 6. Par. 12. cap. 126. by which act it is likewise appointed,
that an act is to be extracted upon their said absence, and is to be delivered
to the swearer, or his Clerk, within six days thereafter, that Letters may be
direct thereupon, for taking their unlawes, but the pain of ilk absent Assizer
at a Justice Air, is to be forty Pounds, Ia. 6. Par. 11. cap. 81. If the
Assizers Summond be not present, others may be Summoned at the Bar, or
apudacta, as we call it, Ia. 4. Par. 6. cap. 94. When the Assizers are called,
fifteen of them are marked, and then the dittay is read; for the debate upon
the relevancy must be in presence of the Assize, Ia. 6. Par. 1. cap. 90. seeing
albeit they be not Judges to the relevancy; yet since they are Judges to the
Probation, which depends much upon the relevancy; and seeing the Justices remit
several defenses, which are propon'd against the relevancy to the Inquest, it
is most reasonable they should hear the debate.

III. The defense against the relevancy begins thus: it is alleged by A. C. as
Procurator for the Panel, that the Panel should not go to the knowledge of an
Inquest; because etc. And after all the defenses are discust, the words of the
Interloquutor bear, that the Justices either sustain, or repel the defense, and
find, or find not, that the Panel should go, or not go to the knowledge of an
Inquest; and if the Justices find the Panel should go to the knowledge of an
Inquest, either the Panel confesses, and quia in confessum nullae sunt parts
judicis, therefore he may be banished, or scourged, without being put to the
knowledge of an Assize, as in Rutherfoords case, the 9 of July 1622, and in
Jobs case, who was scourged, and banished for Bigamy, without an Assize, 19.
January 1650.

But if the crime be capital, or the Panel do not willingly acquiesce to the
punishment, it is still securer to put the Panel to the knowledge of an
Inquest; because the Justices are only competent Judges to the relevancy, and
the Inquest only can find the Libel proved.

IV. Albeit it be a received principle in our Law, that the Justices are only
Judges to the relevancy, and Assizers to the Probation; yet to distinguish the
limits of their different cognitions, becomes very often difficult upon these two
accounts, 1. By express act of Parliament, Ia. 6. Par. 12. cap. 151. it is
Statute, that because parties were oft-times frustrat of Justice, by alleging
irrelevancy against criminal Libels; therefore when the persons complained
upon, are libelled to be art and part, no exception, or objection shall take
away that part of the Libel in time coming; so that albeit the greatest debate
concerning relevancy, amongst Lawyers in criminal cases, did arise upon these
common places, cujus open, auxilio, assistentia, mandato, etc. ea crimina erant
commissa, and from what circumstances these could be inferred, yet now the
debate upon all this, falls not by that act, under the cognition of the Assise,
all these being branches and qualifications of art and part. 2. The Probation
requires oft-times in it, somewhat of relevancy, to be previously debated, as
for instance, whether an extrajudicial confession is binding, or what Witnesses
in Law are receiveable, or not; all which cases, do oft-times confound the
cognition of the Justices, and Assisers; but for clearing of these limits, their
following conclusions are to be observed, 1. That in Dubio, all that concerns
Law, is to be judged by the Justices, and what concerns fact by the Assise. 2.
Regulariter, all that is in the Libel falls under the Cognition of the
Justices, and therefore I will recommend it as a caution to Advocats, that when
they are jealous of the ignorance of Assisers, and find the case intricat, that
they do not simply libel, that such persons were art and part; but that they
libel them to be art and part, in so far as they rescued the malefactors, etc.
For when the qualifications, from which art and part are inferred, are expressly
libelled; the Justices are Judges to the relevancy of the inference, but if
these condescend not that they are art and part, in so far as etc. then the
Assizers are only Judges competent thereto, though the same be, in apicibus
juris; because of the former act, as was found in Captain Barclays case,
November 1668. where they refused to force the pursuer to condescend, quo modo,
art and part; albeit this be very dangerous, seeing Assizers are oft-times
ignorant persons, and yet they forced the Panel to condescend upon the
particular qualification of self-defence, and would not refer to the Assise to
consider the qualities of self-defence, which would arise from the Probation,
as to which I could never find any reason of disparity, but that by the act of
Parliament, the one case is appointed to be decided by Assisers, whereas there
is no Statute as to the other; but to speak ingeniously, I find no act of
Parliament more unreasonable then this; for the Statuto^y part of that act,
committing the trial of art and part to Assisers, seems most unjust, seeing as
has been said before, in committing the greatest questions of the Law, to the
most ignorant of the Subjects, is to put a sharp Sword in the hands of blind
men, and the reason ^^nductive of this act specified in the narrative, is
likewise most inept; and no ways illative of what is thereby Statuted; since
debates upon the relevancy could very little have hindered, and never have
hindered justice, for the relevancy is debated now, as copiously as before that
act, with this only difierence, that it was then debated before Judges, who
could have kept Advocats at the point, whereas now it is debated before
Assisers, who know not how to bound, or how to stop them. But a better reason
for this Law had been this, viz. That the pursuer is not allowed to examine the
witnesses, and so is not presumed to know what they can say, and therefore he
cannot exactly know all the circumstances, which are necessar for founding a
clear condescendency in Art and Part, until he hear the Witnesses depon. And
seeing the Assizers are only Judges to the deposition of the Witnesses,
therefore they ought likewise to be Judges to the qualification of Art and
Part, but I think that after the Witnesses have deponed, the Justices should
still determine, what is Art and Part, and should not leave the same to the
Assizers, and as they are founded, quo ad, this upon the former principle, that
they are only Judges to the matter of relevancy; so they are not excluded
therefrae by the foresaid act of Parliament for it only ordains, that Art and
Part being libelled, no objection shall take away that part thereof; And thus
if a man be pursued as Art and Part of Murder, the Libel should doubtless go
to the knowledge of an inquest. But when the probation is led, the Judge when
he hears the Probation to run upon rescue, mandat, or ratihabition, should
tell the inquest what Acts in Law do infer either of these, and then to leave
it to them to judge, if these Acts which he declares to be relevant, be proved;
And it is much fitter, then to leave poor ignorant Assizers, to the impression
of Advocats, who may byasse them by their repute, authority, or confidence. 3.
Albeit the Assize be Judges of the Probation, yet what manner of probation is
requisite, belongs to the cognition of the Justices, and thus the Justices
determined in Balcanquels case in Anno 1665. That witnesses could not be proved
to have perjured themselves, by the depositions of other witnesses, but only by
writ, or reexamination. And in the Action of Usury, pursued against
witherspoon, March 1666. They found, that Usurary pactions, being extrinsick to
the writ, could be proved by other witnesses, then the Witnesses insert: And in
the case of Wilson, November 1667. they found, that the receiving more then the
ordinary Rent, was not probable by the Oath of the payer, and yet if any of the
Assizers pleases, he may desire ad informandam conscientiam judicis, any
probation whatsoever to be taken; and thus often times in the criminal
Registers, Assizers have caused read Testificats from Chirurgians, and others,
licet regulariter testibus, non testimoniis est credendum. The last rule is
that before the Assize be sworn, all the cognition belongs to the Justice, but
after they are sworn, the Justices functi sunt officio, and all thereafter
falls under the cognition of the Assizers, as is clear, by the very words of
the Justice Interloquutor, which runs thus, the Justices finds the Libel
relevant, notwithstanding of the defenses, and ordains the Panel to pass
thereupon to the knowledge of an inquest.

But to prevent all their difficulties, I wish that the Justices were Judges
both to relevancy, and probation, which overture seems most fit, and
advantageous for these subsequent reasons.

1. That there is such a contingency, betwixt relevancy, and probation that
they should not be disjoined, and sure they must best understand what probation
is requisite, who have considered the relevancy, upon which it depends, and for
this cause it is, that even our Law appoints all the dispute upon the
relevancy, to be in presence of the Assize.

2. The Assize is often stumbled at what is referred to them, and do very often
mistake what is found relevant, and what not.

3. Assizers with us, are oftentimes ignorant persons, at least seldom or never
are they so judicious, as to understand such intricat matters, as Advocats
represent to them, especially in Circuit Courts, where few have seen Assizes
before, and they are oftentims but mean persons, or persons who have interest.

4. By our Law the Libel is relevant, if Art and Part be Libelled without
condescending that they are Art and Part, in swae far as, etc. and the Assizers
are only Judges to what is Art and Part, so that in effect they are Judges to
the relevancy of almost all cases, and are put to decide what has troubled the
ablest Doctors and Authors, and so often times they return unformal verdicts.

5. Assizers are troubled in their commerce, and abstracted from their affairs
unnecessarily, being obliedged frequently upon continuation of dyets, to wait
whole years and are oftimes absent, whereby dyets are deserted, and they
oftimes syned.

6. By this means, Assizes of Error would be suppressed, with which Assizers are
still threatened by the pursuer, before they be enclosed; and it seems
Barbarous, that persons who absolve should be punished, whereas there is no
punishment for concondemning, which inconveniency would also be taken off by
this overture.

7. Assizers may in our Law judge according to their private knowledge, without
Lawful probation, which seems dangerous in Criminal cases.

8. Though of old when Judges, and Assizers were equally ignorant, Assizers
were appointed, yet now when Law is formed to a Science, and that judges are
presumed to be learned, and Assizers not, it seems reasonable they should be
suppressed, as well in Criminal cases, as they are already in Civil, and since we
have receeded from the present custom of England, and our own old customs, by
not allowing Assizes in Civil cases, why not rather in Criminal cases, these
being both of more intricacy and weight; especially seeing in England the
probation is before neighbors in the Country, who know best the matter of
fact, but with us Assizers are seldom or never choosed from the place where the
crime was committed, but are Burgesses of Edimburgh who are as great strangers
to what past, as the Judges themselves; and if Assizers were to be brought from
the Country, it would be very expensive.

9, The most learned and polisht Kingdoms, and Common wealths, who have formed
their Laws in calm and learned ages make there Judges discuss both relevancy,
and probation; and it is thought that either assisers have been introduced by
us, when we and England were both barbarous, or else the Justices have invented
this Act at first, to relieve themselves of a burden.

V. The Assize is either an ordinary, or great Assize, the great Assize is
that, whereby an ordinar is tried, if they do wrong, and I find some
foundations for their terms, par la custum d. langumois, Act 4. and de la Rochal
art. 1. la grand assise est du seneshal la petit du juge prevostal. An ordinary
Assize uses to consist of fifteen persons, but they may consist of more, or
fewer if the number be unequal, and thus the penult of June, 1614. Ronald was
tried, and convict, for dismembering Donaldson, by an Assize of thirteen
persons. The reason why the Assize must be unequal in number, is, least by
equality of Vots, affairs be not terminat, and brought to a speedy issue; for
which cause likewise, lib. 2. Reg. Maj. cap. 5. and by the 87. Act 6. Parl. K.
Ia. 1. it is appointed, that arbiters should be appointed in an unequal number,
and yet I find, that in the civil brief of right, an Assise should consist of
twelve sworn men.

Albeit according to the Law of England, the Assizers must all agree in one
voice; yet with us the major part may condemn, or absolve; but if six, of
fifteen be only positive, and eight, non liquets; it may be doubted, if this
verdict should condemn; for else if one did condemn, and fourteen were not
clear, that one would condemn, which were most absurd; and in July 1675. a
verdict in a Perambulation, betwixt, Walstoun, and Sr. John Cheesly, being
quarrelled in an Advocation, as unjust; because the greater number, were non
liquets, the Lords did Advocat the cause to themselves, which employed that they
did not sustain the verdict as valid.

VI. The Assizers are ordinarily called by sives, and the Oath administrat to
them, is That you shall all the truth tell, and nae truth conceal, in so far as
you are to pass upon this present Assise; swa help you God. Which I find
likewise to have been the form of old, Reg. Maj. lib. 1. verse. 12. And albeit
by the 138. Act 13. Parl. Ia. 1. it is ordained, that all Judges shall cause
Assisers swear, when they take their Oath, that they have not taken any Buds
from the Party, yet they do never tender to them this Oath; except either the
Judge, or Party be jealous of the Assisers.

Assisers are party Judges, partly Witnesses, as has been said before, they are
Judges in so far as they consider the Probation led by others, and judge
whether proved, or not proved: They are Witnesses in so far as they may
condemn, upon proper knowledge, without any other Probation; And therefore
whatever exceptions may be propon'd, either against Judge, or Witness, are
admitted against Assisers; and thus an Assiser was set (for that is the term of
declining used in this case) because he was not twenty five Years of age, which
is the age required in a Judge, Act 132. Parl. 12. Ia. 6. vid. 7. June 1616.

But because the exceptions against Assisers, are ordinarily coincident with
these, that are against Witnesses; therefore we shall remit them to the Title
of Witnesses. Only it is fit to take notice that the Cherurgians of Edinburgh
are exeemed, by Q. Mary, from being cited upon Assizes; because of the
peremptoriness of the employment, which was sustained by the Justices, July
1671. both as to Assizes within the Town, and without the Town, though our
learned Craig being a Justice-Deput, had formerly sustained it as to Assizes,
without the Town only.

VII. It was a principle in the feudal Law, that all men should be judged per
pares curiae, the meaning whereof was, that a Vassal should be judged per
convassallo; because it was presumed that these understood best the person to
be tried, and the knowledge of the Pannels former life and conversation is a
great help toward a sound judgment of the case; and from this feudal custom
rises our maxim, that every man should be judged by his Peers quon. attach.
cap. 67. The words are, It is Statute, that no man shall be judged by a lower
person then his Peer, an Earl by an Earl, a Barron by a Barron, a subvassal by
a subvassal, and a Burges by a Burges, but a lower person may be judged by a
higher, and by the chap. 2. Stat. Alex. 2. A Knight should be judged by
Knights, or free holders, but by an Act of Sederunt. 1. June 1591. The Lords of
Session declared all such as were landed men, sufficient to pass upon Assizes
of Error, though the old Laws required noble men, and Gentlemen only in such
cases: And albeit of old it was uncontravertedly received, that none should
pass upon the Assize of Noblemen except Noblemen, Nor upon the Assize of
Barrons, except Barrons, yet of late it has been much debated, and especially
in the case of Douglasse of Spot, 9. May, 1667. at which time he being accused
for killing Home of Ecles it was alleged, that Spot was a Barron, and so could
not be judged but by Barrons, holding of the King conform to the citations
above duced.

It was replied by His Majesty's Advocat. 1. Neither the books of quon. attach.
or the Statutes of King Alexander, are binding Laws, but only books of
Apocripha. 2. Though they were Laws, yet they are not in viridi observantia,
seeing Burgesses and others are daily admitted by the late practique, to pass
upon Barrons Assizes, and at the time of the making of these Laws, Assizers
were Judges both to the relevancy, and probation, whereas now in effect, they
are but witnesses; and therefore since the Law reposes much less confidence in
them now, then formerly, it should not now be so scrupulous in their election.
3. Burgesses are in Parliament allowed to sit upon the Assize of, and forefault
Noblemen, and it were against reason that they should be admitted to the more
solemn Judicators, and be rejected in Judicators where cases of less
importance, are ordinarily judged, and in which the Sentence pronounced may be
easier repealed. 4. Dyets before the Justice-Courts being always peremptor, it
is probable that dyets behoved very frequently to be deserted, if only Noblemen
were to be Judged by Noblemen, Barrons by Barrons. 5. By the state of King
Alexander, above cited, it is only requisite that Knights be judged by Knights,
but it is not added there, that Barrons should be judged by Barrons, which
shows that that privilege, was not allowed to them, even in those days, and
lastly, seeing all men's lives are of extraordinary concernment, it is not
reasonable to think that he who can be judge of any man's life, may not be Judge
of the lives of all men.

To which it was duplyed as to the first. That debate is opponed, whereby it is
evinced in the Title, by what Laws Crimes are judged in Scotland, and the Books
of quon. attach. and Reg. Majes. are our Law, and the Act of Sederunt
abovecited, dispencing with that privilege in some cases, does demonstrat,
that regularly this privilege takes place with us: Likeas Skeen in his
Treatise concerning the procedure before the Justice General. cap. 4. sect. 3.
cites these Laws as binding, and gives for a rule that no man can be judged in
that Court but by his peers.

To the second it was duplyed, that this being a declinatur, and being
arbitrary for parties, to plead the benefit thereof, it cannot be said to be
antiquated, unless it had been alleged that it had been pleaded, and
repelled: But as this citation out of Skeen, who is but a late Author, did show
the same to be in viridi observantia, so Noblemen have lately had the same
indulged to them, as in the cases of the Earl of Traquair, and Lord Ochiltree,
which was allowed to them upon the Laws here cited. To the third founded upon
Burgesses sitting upon forefaulters in Parliament; the same does not meet the
case, seeing the Parliament may abrogat Laws and so are not in their procedure
tied to them: and though Burgesses singlie, be not Peers to Noblemen, yet the
collective body of the Parliament, by which they are condemned are much more
their Peers.

To the fourth, it was duplyed, that inconveniences are only to be looked to in
the making of Laws, but not after, and the inconveniences of the other side are
much more pressing, it being very inconvenient, that an Assize of 15. mean
Tradsmen, should be admitted to try a Duke, or Marquess; and it was a vast
mistake to think that Assizes are only witnesses, and not Judges; seeing they
vote, and their verdict is called a Sentence, and if Art and Part be Libelled,
the relevancy is in these cases, (which uses to be of all cases most intricat)
Simply referred to them without any debate. To the fifth it was duplyed, that
the inference is merely conjectural, but if the Text be considered, it will
appear that by Knight, there is meaned Vassal, or free holder, for the Latin
translation renders the word Knight, not eques but miles, and it is said there,
that a Knight shall be judged by Knights, or free holders; So that the particle
(or) is in that place exegetick, and not disjunctive. And to the Last it is
duplyed, that all men's lives are not equally precious in the eyes of the Law,
for even by the Roman Law, mean people were judged to dye for many crimes,
which were not capitally to Noble Romans, and though with us the punishment may
be the same, yet the way of procedure against Noblemen is justly allowed to be
more solemn. Upon which debate, the Justices ordained a new Assize to be
summonded, whereof the most part should be Barrons, and the remanent landed
Gentleman.

It was thereafter doubted, whether an apparent Heir of a Barron, has the same
privilege, so that none can pass upon his Assize, who are not Barrons or
Landed men; and it was alleged, that the apparent Heir, had this privilege,
and was a Barron in the construction of Law, for his marriage, or escheat would
fall, though not entered, and as a Barron though denuded, remained still a
Barron, or a Prelat, though for age demitting, would be still a prelat; so the
apparent. Heir of a Barron, though not entered, should be still a Barron, as
was found, 23. December 1674. To which it was answered, that an appearent Heir,
was not nomen juris, and privileges ought to be strictly interpreted, and the
appearing Air of a Barron, would not have an Heir, as was lately found in Sir
Allexander Seatons case, que^ sequitur in comodum, etc. Whereas in Law, all
Barrons may have Heirs, nor did the instances adduced from the Casualities of
marriage, or escheat militat in this; seeing these proceeded, ex natura feudi,
non ex vi privilegii and was introduced in favors of the superior, and not of
the appearent Heir. Upon which debate the Justices, 19. of July, 1675. repelled
the objection against the Assizers, and found the privileged extended not to
the appearent Heirs of Barrons; Mackintosh contra Frazer of Culbokie. Not is
this privilege extended to Landed men, though infest, if their Lands be not
erected in a Barrony.

VIII. Albeit it be ordinarily received, that Assisers may Judge upon their
proper knowledge, yet the truth of that principle may be doubted, upon these
reasons, 1. Because by the foresaid Act of Parliament, par. 11. K. Ia. 6. All
Probation should be led in presence of an Assise, and Panel; but so it is,
that the private knowledge of Assisers, cannot be laid to be led before them. 2.
If Probation were led publictly, defenders might propon interrogators, whereby
the matter of Fact might be more fully cleared, and even the Witnesses own
mistakes might be removed; of all which just advantages, he is precludit by
that principle. 3. The great reason why by the act, Probation should be led in
presence of the Panel, is, because in Law its presumed, a Witness will stand
more in aw to depon falsely, in presence of the Panel, then otherwise: for
which cause, confronting of Parties, and Witnesses amongst themselves, when
they are contrary, is much used, and treated of by the Doctors, 4. If assisers
may give their verdict upon private knowledge, then they could never be pursued
for error; because if private knowledge be the rule, I can hardly understand,
how men can be convict, as having transgressed against that rule, seeing albeit
it be easier to judge what a man should know, yet it is impossible to judge
what a man does know. 5. By the Civil Law, and the opinion of almost all
Divines, and Nations, judices debent judicare secundum allegata and probata.

IX. From the foresaid Act Parl. 11. ordaining all Probation to be received,
and used in the presence of the Assisers, and Panel, it may be deduced by a
necessary consequence, that no Witness should be examined in criminals, ad
futuram rei memoriam, and that no witnesses should be examined by Commission:
and albeit, it may be objected, that in crimine falsi, the Probation led before
the Lords, is not repeated before the Justice, and Assisers, before whom
nothing is used to instruct the falsehood, but the Decree of improbation
pronounced by the Lords, for in that case, the Lords being by Act of
Parliament, declared Judges competent to the cognition of Falsehood, their
sentence, habetur pro veritate, and is probatio probata; so tha^ the producing
of it, is the leading of Probation before the Assise. This privilege, that no
Probation should be led, but in presence of the Panel, and Assise, may be past
from by the Panel, seeing it is introduced in his favors: and therefore it was
found, the 9. of March 1671. that the diet could not be continued against
Charles Robertson, because of the absence of the Witnesses, seeing he was
content to stand to the Depositions formerly taken; but they caused him
subscribe his consent.

After the Probation is closed, the Pannels Advocats makes a speech to the
Assise, wherein the terms they use to them is, good men of inquest, and after
they have ended, His Majesty's Advocat speaks, but there are no Duplys, or
Triplys used; and it was the privilege of His Majesty's Advocat to be the last
speaker; which privilege was assumed likewise by all other Advocats for the
pursuer: but by the tenth article of the Regulations, 1670. the defenders
Advocat is now the last speaker, except in the case of Treason, and Rebellion;
so that this privilege holds only in Perduellion, but not in ordinary Treason.

X. When both these discourses are ended, then the Assize are enclosed; but
before they be enclosed, they should endeavor to be satisfied of any doubt;
for if after enclosing any person speak to them, or if any of them come out of
the place where they are enclosed, until the verdict be pronounced, the Panel
is eo ipso, clean and innocent, Act 91. Parl* 11. Ia. 6. the reason inductive
of which act, seems to be, fear of impressing, or suborning the Assize, and
therefore, the practice allows Assizers sometimes to send out some of their
number to the Justices, to receive informations, in matters of fact, and finds
that in so doing they transgress not this act, as in Kennedies case, August
1662.

And after a full debate, upon the 24. of December 1672. It was found, that any
of the Assizers disclosing, and coming out of the house, after they had past a
vott, though the verdict was not subscribed be the Chancellor, was not
sufficient to annul the verdict, albeit it was here alleged, that there might
be great debate upon the wording of the verdict, and so the Assize should not
have disclosed, until the verdict was subscribed. By this act likewise the
Assizers, and not the Justices are Judges competent to this exception against
the verdict, as was found in the foresaid decision, 1672. wherein the Justices
found, that themselves were Judges competent to the relevancy of any such
alledgeance; but that it belonged to the Assize to judge the Probation of that
exception, though it was alleged, that the Assizers could not at all be Judges
thereto, seeing they were the delinquents in that case, and if most part of the
Assize had disclosed, it were absurd, that they should be Judges to their own
Delinquency. At that time the Lords did likewise declare, that if any Assizer
should disclose before the vots were complete, so that the vrdict might be
thereupon anulled, they were punishable by the Justices, and should be obliged
to repair the loss, which either the King, or Party incurred.

So that Assizers are allowed to speak to Judges, or Advocats, but are not
allowed to make any address to them after enclosure, as said is. It is likewise
observable from this act, that albeit the Clerk be discharged to enter in where
the Assize sits, after they have chosen their Chancellor, yet defacto, the
Clerk sits still with them, and it was thought fit he should do so; because
they being often ignorant, and unaquanted with the forms, and procedure of that
Court, they should have some person to regulat them, and none so fit to do it,
as the Clerk; yet by the late Regulation, 1670. it is appointed, that the Clerk
shall not be present, and sure the Clerk was worth ten, and did influence too
much.

XI. After the Assize are enclosed, they choose a President, who is called
Chancellor of the Assize, and proceed to read, and thereafter to reason upon
what is debate, and their determination is called the verdict of the Assize,
which is subscribed by the Chancellor, it is called verdict, quasi vere
dictum, and sometimes it is called, warda curiae quon. Attach. cap. ubi aliqua.
thereafter the Assizers enter again into the Court, and there the verdict is
read, and the Chancellor stands up and owns the same, after the verdict is
read, it should, and is by the 9. Act of Regulations, 1670. closed, and sealed
with the Seals of the Court, of the Chancellor of the Assize, and of so many
of their number as the Chancelour shall think fit, never to be opened, but by
orders from the Judge; of which verdict, the Clerk is to have the keeping, and
if he open the same, he is to be deposed, and further punished as the Judges
shall think fit.

It was thought of old, that Assizers behoved presently to determine, after
Probation was led, and that it was not lawful to dismiss them until they did
enter, and return their verdict, and the reason of that opinion is, because
after the Probation is led, there may be hazard of suborning the Assizers, if
the matter were continued to a new day, and it were to be feared likewise, that
the pursuer finding that the Witnesses which he had led, did not prove, he
might be tempted to suborn others, and I think this opinion strongly founded;
but yet in Anno 1665. etc. a Baxter being pursued for Sedition, the Justices
did, at my Lord Advocats earnest solicitation, dissolve the Court after
Probation was led, and continued the matter to a new diet, but the accusation
was never further prosecute, and that procedure was thought, mali exempli; yet
thereafter His Majesty's Advocat continued an Assize, who sat upon Macknab for
theft, for not being clear to condemn upon an extrajudicial confession, they
proposed the case after they were enclosed, whereupon the Justices continued
the diet till the next day, and having consulted the Council, they thereafter
found the confession sufficient, and enclosed the Assize, notwithstanding of
this objection, November 1669.

XII. When the Advocat closes his discourse for the pursuer, he protests for an
Assise of error against the Inquest, if they assoilzie, which Protestation he
causes to be marked by the Clerk, and it may be doubted, if the pursuer, or His
Majesty's Advocat can pursue the Inquest for error, if this Protestation be
not used, even as a qualified Oath is not allowed, except it be protested for.
And it was debated in the case betwixt the Lady, and Lord of Milntoun, if a
reprobator could be raised, where the party laesed protested not for it, seeing
Protestations were such solemn Acts as the Law required in such cases, and they
were unnecessary, and superfluous, if what were protested for, could be
allowed, without being protested for, and the party to whom such Protestations
were competent, does, eo ipso, pass from his right, and seems to acquiesce in
what is to be done, if he use them not, vid. Durand specul. tit. reprobat in
initio, but this case was not decided; yet the Lords inclined to allow a
reprobature if there was reason for it, though no Protestation was used; and I
believe that action of error may be raised, though it be not protested for, if
the verdict be quarrellable, though a Protestation be both more secure, and
formal, and really there is good reason why it should be used, seeing the
Inquest is by that solemn denunciation, and intimation warned of their hazard,
and their error, because it becomes thereby more wilful then otherwise it
would be.

A Summonds of error is always raised in Latin, and upon Parchment, and is
direct out of the Chancery.

Wilful error is that crime which Assizers commit, in pronouncing an unjust
verdict, and by our Law, an Assize condemning, cannot be pursued, tanquam
temere jurantes, supra asisa, as is commonly believed, by the 63. Act 8. Par.
Ia. 3. the reasons of which opinion may be three. 1. It is not presumeable,
that indifferent persons would condemn an innocent out of feid or favor,
though there be some reasons to be jealous, that they might be induced, out of
either pity, or clemency to assoilzie from a crime fully proved. 2. No person
would be found to go upon an Assize, if they might be punished for condemning.
3. The penalty of such as temere jurarunt super asisam, is only confiscation of
the moveable goods, cap. 14. lib. Regiam. Maje. whereas death would be
oft-times the punishment, if such as condemned might be punished; yet I am of
the opinion, that if the Assizers did condemn an innocent, without any
Probation, or by palpable iniquity, that eo casu, they might be punished: And
my reasons for this opinion, are 1. That else the people would be stated in a
very unfortunat condition, if not only they lay open to the hazard of being
condemned, upon the deposition of any two men, but likewise to the
arbitrarinesse of an Assize, who might condemn without any clear probation. 2.
Assizers are Judges, and Witnesses, and therefore must be liable to all the
errors, for which these are accountable; but so it is, that if a Judge condemn
unjustly, or if a person be condemned upon the deposition of any Witness, who
depones falsely, that Judge, or Witness so deponing, are liable to a capital
punishment, why then should an Assizer be exempted, seeing there is no express
Law, upon which he can found that exemption: And in answer to the contrary
arguments, it may be contended: That as to the first, it is not concluding,
seeing, else it might by the same argument be concluded, that no Judge, or
Witness could be pursued, when they condemned unjustly, seeing omnis homo
praesumitur bonus, at least Perjury should never be punished in a Witness, nor
injustice in a Judge, deciding unjustly, and by that unjust decision, murdering
the person pannelled before them; because forsooth it is not presumeable, that
a Witness, or Judge would murder an innocent by their sentence, or deposition.
To the second, it is answered, that all men may be forced to pass upon
Assizes, upon their perril, and thus Assizers are forced, though there is
hazard also in assoilzing, and Witnesses are forced, though there be great
hazard in Perjury, if they depon falsely. To the third, it is answered, that
there needs no Law to punish Assi^ers, condemning unjustly, seeing they are
punishable by the Common Law. But that it was necessary there should be a
particular Statute, to punish such as assoilzied unjustly, both because the
Common Law was not so express as to this, and because men might be induced to
think, that there was no great hazard in it.

This error in Assizers, is to be tried by a great Assize, of twenty five
Noble Persons, Act 63. Parl. 8. Ia. 3. but the person assoilzied is to be free,
ibid. And by an act of Sederunt, of the Session, Anno 1591. it is declared,
that all landed Gentlemen shall be in a capacity to pass upon an Assise of
error, though they be of Quality, and Estate inferior to the Panel, and
wilful error is only punishable in this case, quaelibet probabilis causa
ignorantiae excusat, Spot. tit. Retours, Ker against Hartwood-mires, and by the
47. Act Par. 6. Ia. 3. It appears, that no Probation can be adduced, to infer
this action of error, but what was at first produced the time of their
verdict; whereas any Probation may be adduced in fortification of the verdict
quarrelled, ( tantus est favor innocentiae) the punishment of such as are found
guilty by an Asssize of error, is the escheating of the Movables, and a Years
imprisonment, cap. 14. l. 1. Reg. Maj. which is ratified by the 47. Act 6.
Parl. Ia. 3. where it is Statuted, that wilful, or ignorant Assizers, shall be
punished after the form of the Kings Law, in the first Book of the Majesty,
Skeen observes upon that place, Reg. Maj. that amittere legem terrae, is the
same, with non habere personam standi injudicio, and they can never be admitted
thereafter as Witnesses, neither in Writs, nor in Judgment, vid. tit.
perjurie. But to the end it may be known which of the Assize assoilzied, it is
by the 9. Article regul. 1670. appointed, that the Chancellor of the Assize
mark upon the same Papper, upon which the verdict is write, who condemned, and
who assoilz^ed, which Paper is to be sealed, and kept till a Summonds of error
be raised.

The Council sometimes rescinds verdicts, without any action of error, in
criminalibus, as in George Ghrahams case, where they ordained the verdict of
the inquest, whereby he was found to be Art and Part of recept of stolen Bonds,
to be unjust, and restored him against the same; but it may be doubted, whether
these who are unjustly condemned, may be restored against that verdict, though
it be found unjust; seeing these who are unjustly assoilzied cannot be
thereafter pursued, though the absolvitur be found unjust, per argumentum a
contrario, vid. titl. of the Council, where this question is fully debated, and
determined.

TITLE XXIV. Of Probation by confession.
1. Probation defined. 2. Probation by confession if judicial, is the strongest
of all Probations. 3. In what case is an extrajudicial confession allowable. 4.
What are the effects of a qualified confession. 5. The effects of a confession
emitted before an incompetent Judge. 6. How far a minors confession obliedges.
PRobation is so fully treated of by the Civilians, and Cannenists, and we
differ so little from them, that I shall only treat of it here in relation to
our own Law.

I. Probation is defined to be, that whereby the Judge is convinced of what is
asse^ted; and it may be divided in probation, by confession, by Oath, by Writ,
by Witnesses, and by Presumptions.

II. Probation by confession is the most secure of all others, and therefore it
is said in Law, that in confitentem nullae sunt parts judicis, suitable to
which, such as confess are oftimes condemned without the knowledge of an
Inquest, as I have more fully treated in the Title of Assizes, but because men
will sometimes confess a Crime, rather out of weariness of their life, then a
consciousness of guilt, therefore the Law has required, that if there appear
any aversion for life taedium vitae, or any signs of distraction, or madness,
that these confessions should not be rested upon, except they be adminiculat
with other probation: as also because confessions are oftimes emitted
negligently, the confessors thinking that their private confessions cannot
prejudge them, therefore the Law does only give credit to judicial confessions,
and not to these that are extrajudicial, and extra bancum, which maxim is
stronger with us then elsewhere, because by a Particular Act of Parliament, Ia.
6. Parl. 11. cap. 90. All probation should be led in presence of the Assize.

III. This Maxim does admit in Farin icius opinion, many limitations, as 1.
That if the extrajudicial confession be adminiculat by other presumptions, it
is sufficient, but except the presumptions be very violent, I cannot allow this
limitation, seeing confessio extrajudicialis in se nulla est, and quod nullum
est non potest adminiculari, and therefore some approve, Bossius who admits
this confession, though adminiculat only to infer, paenam extraordinariam Sed
non ordinariam, for certainly such prevarication, and abusing of truth, and
Judges deserves some punishment. The second limitation, is, that if the
confession be admitted in presence of the accuser, and accepted by him, then it
is valid, though extrajudicial; but this I allow not, because it is still
extrajudicial, and the confessor knew that he should not die upon such a
confession; for which reason likewise, I approve not the third and fourth
limitations, which are, that if the extrajudicial confession be geminata, and
reiterated, or emitted in presence of a multitude, or ad exonerationem
conscientiae, that then it should be valid; and I remember, that though Major
Weir confessed Sodomy, and Incest to Ministers, and Magistrates jointly, for
exoneration of his Conscience, in presence of many persons, that His Majesty's
Advocat took great pains to bring him to a judicial confession, as thinking the
former not sufficient: and yet Frazer was condemned upon a confession, emited
before the Assembly at Aberdene, and other Noble men, though retracted, 1641.
where this limitation is alleged upon, out of Farinacius, and this being
represented to the Parliament, they refused to give their opinion, and referred
all back to the Justices, who sustained the confession adminiculated, as said
is.

The sixth limitation is, that an extrajudicial confession is valid, if upon
Oath; but I allow not this, seeing Oaths are not allowed in criminal cases, nor
can the Panel be forced thereto; and if he swear ultroniously, and undesired,
the confession would appear to me, to be suspect, as emited, either per
surorem, vel ex taedio vitae.

The seventh limitation, is, that an extrajudicial confession is sufficient,
when the crime confessed consists, in animo, as for instance, if it were doubted
upon what reason a person accused fled, or shot a Pistol, etc. But I neither
allow this limitation, for else it should be as large as the rule, seeing all
crimes require, animum delinquendi; and yet I think that some circumstances of
a crime, may be proved by an extrajudicial confession, and so this limitation
may be true in that sense. All these limitations are largely, rather then
exactly set down, by Farin. de reo confesso, quest. 81. Reg. 10.

Confession though extrajudicial, may be sufficient (if adminiculat) to subject
the confessor to the torture; but this is rarely practiced with us: But I
remember to have seen Mitchel lately tortured, upon his retracting a confession
emitted by him, in presence of His Majesty's Privy Council, and a confession
extorted by torture, is in no Law sufficient, so that except it be adhered to,
after the person tortured is removed from the Rack, for two or three days, it
makes no Faith, Farin. de reo. confesso. cap. 3.

The custom with us, is, that the Advocat does in presence of the Justices,
examine the party to be accused, and if he confess, either he subscribes his
confession, if he can write, or else the Justices subscribes for him, or which
is securer, makes two Nottars, and four Witnesses subscribe; and albeit a
confession thus subscribed by two Nottars, before four Witnesses, was found
sufficient, upon the 7. of December 1669. in the case of Finla Macknob, who was
pursued for Theft, yet it was then alleged, that the confession was not
sufficient, and that for these reasons. 1. Because all Probation should by the
Act of Parliament foresaid, be led in presence of the Assize; and therefore
when the Probation was founded upon confession, the confession should have been
originally emitted in presence of the Assize, or at least adhered to before
them, and the testimony of two Nottars, and four Witnesses, was not equivalent
to a verbal confession; seeing they could not thereby know all the circumstances
which are necessary to be known, such as whether the confession was voluntar,
or extorted, or if it proceeded upon a mistake, or if it was founded upon
promise of life, etc. 2. The party who confessed might have emitted that
Declaration, upon a confidence that the same could not operat against him,
being extrajudicial, as said is. 3. That must be accounted an extrajudicial
confession, quae non emanavit in judicio, and this is such; because there was
no Court fenced here, nor yet an Assize sworn, whereas that is only called a
judicial confession, which is emitted before those who are Judges, and whilst
they are sitting in Judgment, Boss. tit. de confessis. 4. The confessor here
was an ignorant person, and did not understand the Scottish Language, and so
might be very subject to mistake; upon which reasons, the Assize having
demured; the Justices made application to the Council, but the case being by
the Council remitted entirely back to themselves, they did find the foresaid
confession sufficient, and Macknab was thereupon convict accordingly, and
hanged; but if the confession had only been subscribed by a Judge, I think it
could not have been valid, for that were to confound the Office of a Judge,
Witness, and Clerk, and would tend to make all Judges arbitrary; so that the
life of the Leidges should depend upon one single Testimony, which were very
dangerous, especially in inferior Courts, where it is very well known that
persons of very little integ^ity sit as Judges, and which Judges are oftentimes
interested, to get the Panel condemned, because thereby the Escheat, at least
a part of it falls to themselves.

So far does our Law require judicial confessions, that it has been debated,
that even a confession taken by all the Justices sitting in Judgment, was not
a sufficient warrant, for the Assize to proceed in condemning the party, except
the confession had been renewed before them, though the confession it self was
subscribed, and the subsc^iption acknowledged, for the foresaid Act of
Parliament requires, that the hail Probation should be used before the Assize,
in presence of the party accused; but so it is that the emiting of the
confession is a chief part of the Probation, since Law has laid great weight
upon the way and manner, how a confession is eli^ite, measuring exactly the
degrees of constancy, or fear, appearing in the Panel, as well as considering
the motives by which he was induced to confess, and what difference is there,
quo ad the Assize, Whether the confession be emitted before the Justices, or an
inferior Judge, or why should not the deposition of Witnesses, or confessions
of Parties, taken by way of precognition proved? and yet their confessions taken
before the Justices prove. But to this it is answered, that confessions emitted
in presence of a Judge competent, prove in all Nations, from which the foresaid
Act should not be made to derogat, except it designed the same clearly: but so
it is, that it is clear by the foresaid Act, that it was not intended, that any
Probation that was formerly good, and Probative, should be discharged; but only
that the way of using the same should be regulat, and so subscribed Papers are
not rejected, for we daily see that Papers prove Treason, and Usury, though
they be not subscribed before the Assize; but that Act only discharges a former
wicked custom, of carrying in Papers claudistinely to the Inquest, which had
not been openly used before the Panel. Likeas, Assizers do frequently condemn
with us upon such confessions.

The second question which may be here debated, is, whether when a person
confesses a crime with a quality, and not simply, if his confession may be
divided, so that he may be convict upon the confession, notwithstanding of the
quality, except he can prove the quality, this was debated the 13. of March
1668. At which time, one Dumbar, being pursued for wounding Colonel Innes,
confessed that he wounded him, but he did it in defense of his own life, being
assaulted by the said Colonel; upon which confession it was alleged, he could
not have been found guilty; since a confession can no more be divided, then an
Oath, and it is a brocard in Law, that quod approbas non reprobas: As also,
seeing the crime could never be proved, but by the confession, the confession
being qualified, was no confession without the qualification, and therefore
there was no Probation beyond the quality; I know that the Doctors do in this
case, distinguish betwixt such qualified confessions, as are omitted, sub unico
structu verborum, as if the confession did bear, I did kill in my own defense,
vel sub duplici, as I did kill, but I killed in my own defense; in the first,
they think the quality cannot be disjoined from the confession, but in the
second it may; yet I think this but a subtilty, for poor persons especially,
when they are tried for their lives, take not such pains to order their
expressions, and their design in both is the same, but I approve more that
other opinion of these, who think, that such qualified confessions may infer an
arbitrary, though less punishment, paenam non ordinariam, sed extraordinariam,
as is asserted by Decius in cap. cum venerabilis extra. de except vid. Far. de
reo confesso quest. 87. cap. 4. And albeit I think, that if there were strong
presumptions against the confessor, as there was in the above related case, he
behoved, cocasu, to prove that quality of self-defence, otherwise then by
adjecting a quality; because Presumptions transfer the necessity of Probation,
upon him against whom the presumption is brought, Cod. fab. de sicar. def. 6.
non scinditur confessio in criminalibus nisi adsint contraria indicia. Yet I
think, that such qualified confessions as this is, which imply a defense,
should either prove the defense, or else they should not prove the Libel, and
either should be altogether believed, or altogether reprobated, for as it was
not the design of the confessor, to bind a guilt upon himself by the
confession; So it is to be presumed, that he who is so ingenuous as to confess
a guilt against himself, would be likewise so ingenuous as to confess the Truth
really, and sincerely, or if he omited this confession by a secret impulse, of
a Superior Power forcing him to confess the Truth, we may rationally conclude,
that the same impulse would likewise have enforced him to confess the Truth in
its fullness, and simplicity, and homicidium indubio non dolose sed ad
defensionem factum praesumitur and sic qualitas adjecta habet pro se
presumptionem, Mascard. deprobat, l. 2. concluss. 867.

I do likewise think, if the quality, was not annexed to the first Deposition,
that it should not afterward be received, since it is presumeable, that it
would have been adjected at the beginning, if it had been true; every man being
more mindful to defend himself, then to confess a crime; and that
notwithstanding of such a quality adjected, ex intervalo, the confessor may be
punished, pena ordinaria, which is also the opinion of Clarus Quest. 55.

V. The third Question is, whether a confession emitted before a Judge, who was
not competent to punish corporally, be sufficient for a Judge to proceed who is
competent, and this is often contraverted with us, if a Confession, or Probation
le^ before a Kirk-Session, be sufficient, if it be repeated before the
Justices, and the Council being consulted lately by the Sheriff of the Merse,
concerning a man who had confessed witchcraft, before the Presbytrie, they would
not decide it, albeit Lawyers who were Members of the Council: And others were
of opinion, that he should die, except he could allege a sufficient reason for
varrying in his confession, but this is against a received position amongst
Lawyers; quod confessio emanata coram judice incompitente non sufficit ad
condemnandum Farin. de reo. confess. cap. 6. licet sufficiat ad torturam and
habent vim extrajudicialis confessionis, the reason of the foresaid Rule is,
that the confessor knows that he could not die upon that confession, and men
will confess many times to free themselves from trouble, or evite
excommunication, who would not acknowledge a crime, if they were capitally
accused; Some also have confessed to Kirk-Sessions, crimes, of which they have
been innocent, as Adulteries, for obtaining a devorce, and Fornication, to
obtain a consent of the Father, and whatever may be alleged against
extrajudicial, may be alleged against confessions, before an incompetent
Judge: By this also it may easily appear, what should be answered to another
Question, which differs little from this, viz. If a confession of a crime taken
incidently, in another Process, and not taken in Process, wherein the confessor
is pursued for life, be sufficient to infer death.

The Lords of Session would not sustain a confession omitted by a man before
the Kirk-Session, ad exonerationem conscientiae, to operat against him in any
other Court; because they thought that this would continue men in impenitency,
and retard their repenting; which Decision was much applauded, licet, (...).

VI. By the Civil Law, l. clarum C. de authoritate prestunda, minors accused,
could not prejudge themselves by their own confessions; but this is innovat by
the custom of all Nations, Boer. decis. 63. and Boss. tit. de confessis: and
with us, Minors confessing crimes, are thereupon execute; and I find in the
Jou^nal Books, instances thereof, in very young persons, but I think there is
much left in this case to the Arbitrariness of the Judge, who should
distinguish betwixt such crimes as fall under sense, as Murder, and such as
principally require Judgment, as Blasphemy, Witchcraft, etc. In which last,
hardly should Minors be punished, paena ordinaria, upon their own confession,
and scarce after they confess, for a Minor is presumed to have no solid
judgment.

Though a Minor may bind a crime upon himself by his own confession, and may be
thereupon condemned, and executed: yet whether he may revoke this confession,
and be reponed against the same, because of his minority, was debated the 28.
of February 1676. in the case of a young boy called Kennedy; and that he might
be reponed, was urged from these reasons, 1. A Minors lubricity of judgment
might prejudge him as much in criminals, as in civil cases, and therefore he
ought to be reponed against the one, as well as against the other; and it were
absurd, that a Minor should not be able to bind himself in the value of ten
Pounds Scots, and that yet he should by his confession make himself liable to
death. 2. Lawyers are very clear, that a Minor may revoke a criminal
confession, l. 4. C. de authoritat. prestand. Clar. quest. 53. and Gomez. gives
an instance of a Minors being reponed against the confession of Incest. 3. In
this confession, a Minor might have much more easily lapsed into a fatal error,
then in any other cases; the subject matter of this confession being a
contrivance to poison by Droggs, and Medicaments, in which, non constat de
corpore delicti, since the Defunct might have dyed of another disease, and as
to which, a Minor might easily have been mistaken, since to give a solid
judgment, in such cases, or to confess what relates thereto, requi^es not
only more reason, but more skill and art, then can be expected from so young a
boy. To which it was answered, that since Minors may be punishable crimes, they
may consequently b^nd a guilt upon themselves, by their confessions, for if the
Law did not consider them as so far, doli capaces, that they understood the
hazard of a crime, it would not punish them, and if they understood the nature,
and hazard of a crime, it is unreasonable to think that they may not understand
their hazard in confessing it, since in committing crimes, the judgment of the
wisest is ordinarily blinded with passion, and error; but in confessing, men
have time and leisure to be judicious, and serious; and if Minors confessions
could not ty them, they might still in absence of Witnesses commit crimes at
their pleasure. 2. Lawyers as well as reason are very clear, that a Minor
cannot be restored, except he show that he was circumveened, or lees'd by his
confession, as for instance, if he should confess simply that he killed a man,
but should forget to add that he killed him in self-defence, or should confess
that he committed Incest; but should forget to add that he was ignorant, that
the person with whom he committed the same, was within the degrees that
inferred Incest: which opinion is to be seen, in Oddo. 5. Fortia. quest. 23.
number. 9. Or if he had confessed upon the promise of indemnity, or by the fear of
threatenings, and were able to prove either, and by this just temprement, the
interest of the Commonwealth, and the imbicility of Minors are both salved:
and therefore when Law, or Lawyers say that a Minor may be restored against his
confession, their meaning only is, that he may be restored if he can prove his
error and mistake. 3. This being a confession twice emitted, and adhered to,
and adminiculated by the confession of other dying persons, who could not clear
themselves by fyling him, there can no doubt of its truth remain with any
disinterested person. This case was not decided, but I conceive that a Minor
cannot be restored against his own confession, except he show, wherein he was
either circumveen'd, or mistaken. And if a person past 21. years of age, can
prove, that he has confessed what was not true, he ought to be restored: as for
instance, if he can prove that the man whom he confessed he did kill, is still
alive. In which sense I take l. 1.. D. severus. ff. de p^nis, D. severus
rescripsit, confessiones reorum pro exploratis criminibus haberi non aporteri.
And when the Eclog. says, cap. 4. (...). suitable to l. 4. ff. de confessis.
(...), qui servum occisum intermisse se fatctur, licet non occiderit; ex
confesso tenetur. This is to be so interpreted, that a man past 21. may be
executed upon his own confession, without enquiring whether what he confessed be
true. But it does not follow, that if the confessor can prove he confessed what
was false, he ought not to be repon'd.

TITLE XXV. Probation by Oath, by Write, and by Presumptions.
1. In what cases is a Panel obliged to give his Oath. 2. Whether a Panel is
obliged to depon^, when the Judge declares that his deponing shall not infer^ a
corporal punishment. 3. In what cases can crimes be proved by Write, and
Whether a Write that is null can prove a crime. 4. How far can a crime be
proved by presumptions.
I. PRobation by Oath, is not regularly admitted in criminal cases, for the
pursuers Oath is never probative, even in civil cases, except it be adduced in
supplement; but the Oath of supplement by the pursuer, is used upon no occasion
in criminals: Neither is the defender forced to give his Oath in criminals, as
he is in civil cases, both because it is unjust, to force a man to condemn
himself, and because it is most probable, that he who is accused for a crime,
would hazard his Soul by Pe^jury, to redeem his Blood, by an Oath. But because
the excessive love which we bear to life, is the occasion of this exemption;
therefore where the punishment is not corporal, and corporis afflictiva, the
defender will be forced sometimes to give his Oath, as in the case of Riots,
and Blood-wyts. Sometimes likewise the Law, because of the scantness of the
Probation, obliges him who is accused to give his Oath, as in the case of
Usury, which is a crime odious in it self, and cladestinely carried on, Ia. 6.
cap. 247. Par. 15. And in the case of Simony, Ia. 6. Parl. 21. yet neither of
these crimes are corporally punished, and therefore these rules may still hold.
1. That Probation by Oath of the defender, is never allowed by Law, neither ubi
paena est corporis afflictiva, nec ubi infamia irrogatur, quia nemo tenetur
probare suam turpitu d^nem, and fama and vita quoad hoc aquiparantur. 2. That a
person accused may be obliged by an express Law to depon, though the crime for
which he is accused, may infer Infamy. 3. That no Law should force the defender
in a criminal Process to swear, where the crime may infer death, nor have we
any such Law in our Kingdom.

II. It is often contraverted, both in the Council, and Criminal Court, whether
though the crime be in it self, such as deserves a corporal punishment, yet if
the pursuer, and His Majesty's Advocat likewise declare, that they will not
pursue the same criminally, and ad paenam corporalem infligendam, if eo casu,
the defender may not be forced to depon, which question may be resolved, by
these conclusions, 1. That though the pursuer declare that he will not insist
criminally, yet that declaration is not sufficient, because His Majesty's
^dvocat may pursue. 2. Though His Majesty's Advocat concur with the pursue^, in
the declaration; yet it is not sufficient, seeing His Majesty's Officers cannot
prejudge His Majesty by any Declaration of others, for else they might by such
Declarations as these, in effect remit crimes. 3. The Declaration of the
Council is not sufficient, because they may not prejudge a criminal action,
which may be intented before the Justice Court, as was found in the case of
some Gentlemen, and others, who being pursued before the Council, as
Plagiaries, for taking away Anna Gibson, it was found by the Council, that they
were not obliged to swear, though both the pursuer, and Advocat declared they
should never be criminally pursued. 4. I conceive that neither the Declaration
of the pursuer, nor defender, even in a criminal pursuit before the Justices,
though agreed to by the Justices, would not be sufficient to force the defender
to swear; for I think, that though the defender should, co casu, upon Oath deny
his guilt, that he might be of new pursued, and convict upon clear Probation;
for His Majesty, and the Publicks interest can never be prejudged by any
Declaration of His Officers, nor can any remit crimes, as I said formerly.

III. Crimes do not ordinarily use to be proved by Write, and when they may be
so proved, there is little difficulty as to the Probation; only it may be
observed, that it was found in the crime of Falsehood, pursued against Captain
Barclay, that a Write may be proved false, without p^oduction of it; and in
Purdies case, that a discharge was sufficient, to prove Usury, though it wanted
both Writers name, and Witnesses, seeing the pursuer offered to prove the
subscription by his Oath; but it is observable that Pannels are in Usury
obliged to swear, and therefore it may be doubted, whether a Write not
subscribed before witnesses, does prove a crime, since all writes of
importance, are by Act of Parliament decla^ed null, if they want the Writers
name, and Witnesses, and if they be not believed, quo ad, a civil effect, much
less in a criminal; nor is the Panel here oblidged to make up the same by his
Oath, as in civil cases: And yet the Marquess of Argile was convict of Treason,
upon Letters written by him to General Monck; these Letters being only
subscribed by him, and not Holograph, and the subscription having been proved,
per comparationem literarum, which were very hard in other cases; seeing
compara^io literarum, is but a presumption, and men's hands are oft-times, and
easily imitated, and one man's write will differ from it self at several
occasions.

IV. Presumptions are divided, in Presumptions that are violent (for strong
Presumptions are so called) and these that are not violent, they are likewise
divided, in praesumptiones juris, and presumptiones juris and de jure.

Whether crimes may be proved by p^esumptions, is much contraverted, both in
Law, and Practique, and that they cannot be proved by presumptions, is inferred
from these reasons, 1. Presumptions are only founded upon verisimilitude, and
what may be, may not be; whereas all Probations, especially in criminals,
should be infallible, and certain, and conclusio semper debet sequi debiliorem
partem. 2. If crimes could be proved by presumptions, Judges would be arbitrary
in all cases, seeing the Law cannot determine the number, and weight of
Presumptions, as it does in other Probations. 3. The Doctors universally
conclude, that Presumptions do not prove crimes, as is clear by Mascard. Farin.
etc. Upon the other hand it may be argued, that a crime may be inferred from
Presumptions, and that for these reasons, 1. l. ult. Cod. de probationibus ubi
asserit p^sse crimina vel idoniis testibus vel apertissimis documentis vel
judiciis judubitatis probari and l. 2. ff. quon. apell. non recip. ubi jubetur
curialis observare ne quis homicidarum Adulterorum, etc. Argumentis convictus,
testibus superatus, vel voce propria confessus audiatur apellare. 2. Since
Witnesses are only believed, because it is presumed they will not damn
themselves; why may not other Presumptions be likewise received? 3.
Presumptions are in many cases allowed as a sufficient Probation, as the
presumption of Cohabitation, after the parties are discharged, is sufficient be
Act of Parliament, to infer Adultery. 4. The depositions of Witnesses are
oft-times founded upon Presumptions, as when they depon upon dolus malus,
ebriety, or any other thing which depends upon acts of the mind. 5. Many have
been condemned upon Presumptions, as Ianet Brown, who was convict for Murder of
her own Child, upon presumptions, and hanged accordingly, the 25. of June 1614.
And Scot was convict, and hanged for killing of Drumlanrigs Sheep, the 20. of
February 1616. And after a solemn debate, how far Presumptions could prove in
criminals: in Alexander Kennedies case, he was convict, and hanged for
falsehood, upon Presumptions in Anno 1662.

This difficulty has forced some of the Doctors to conclude, that this case is
arbitrary; and others to conclude, that Presumptions may infer, paenam
extraordinariam, sed non ordinariam, Cod. fab. tit. de paen. which last
opinion, is upon the matter coincident with the first; for in arbitrary cases,
the Judges can never proceed to death, and it seems that both these opinions
are well founded, because not only the committing of crimes, but even the
giving of scandal, and the doing that which is like a crime, deserves to be
some way punished; but this arbitrariness should only in my opinion, be allowed
to the Council, who are a supreme Judicatory, and are in such extraordinary
cases, tied to no express Law.

TITLE XXVI. Probation by Witnesses.
1. How witnesses are cited with us. 2. Who are testes ultronei. 3. What
witnesses are not worth the Kings unlaw. 4. When women may be admitted to be
witnesses, and when not. 5. How minors are to be admitted witnesses. 6. Persons
guilty of crimes cannot be admitted. 7. Persons within degrees defendant, are
not admitted, and who these are. 8. Domestic servants, when admitted. 9.
Moveable Tennents. 10. Socius criminis. 11. Defenders cited as parties. 12.
What time is considered in the hability of a Witness. 13. Whether Witnesses
inhabile, may be received at His Majesty's instance. 14. Who are testes
singulares. 15. The contrariety in depositions considered. 16. Causa scientiae.
17. Witnesses, ad futuram rei memoriam. 18. It is now necessary to give in a
list to the defender, of the witnesses names who are to be led against him. 19.
Absent witnesses how punished and compelled. 20. What number may be cited for
proving each crime.
IF the crime be pursued by raising of a Summonds, that Summonds contains a
warrant to cite witnesses; but if the pursuit be by way of indictment, the
Justices grant warrant by precept for citing of Witnesses.

At the day of compearance, the pursuer gives in with his execute Summonds,
executions likewise against the Witnesses, and if the executions against the
Witnesses, be not legal, the diet is deserted; But if the witnesses be lawfully
cited, and compear not, of old, there was a warrant given to apprehend them,
and the diet was continued, but now there are formal Letters of Caption, given
under the Signet of the Session, and not of the Justice-Court, and the Letters
are still raised by the Justice-Clerks deput^ who is the ordinary Clerk of
Court; And if the Sheriff refuse to apprehend the Witnesses by virtue of the
Caption, the Letters will be direct against himself, as in civil cases, and
this was first observed in the cases of Mackalla against Lindsay.

After the Justices have found that the Panel should go to the knowledge of an
Inquest, he asks the pursuer what way he will prove his Libel: and if the
probation by witnesses be chosen as the manner of Probation to be used.

II. The Justices desire the Clerk to call the Witnesses, and if any be given
in, in the list, against whom there is no formal execution; it is alleged they
cannot be received, and this is the first objection against the witnesses, and
is founded upon this reason viz. that he who offers himself to depon, without
being lawfully cited, is presumed to be too desirous to depon, and so to have
malice. These the Civil Law calls testes ultron^i, yet I find that the Justices
sometimes receives witnesses cited, apud acta, as Alexander Forrester against a
Witch, the 3. of August 1661. So though they will not receive a witness, who
appears upon an unlawful citation, and which he knows to be unlawful, yet they
will receive some, though not at all cited; for the first show a compliance,
but not the last, all the objections against the Wittesses are discust before
they be sworn, for it is below the Majesty of an oath, to administrat the same
unnecessarily, before it be known whether the person to whom the oath is to be
administrat will be received.

To object against a witness in our Law, is called to cast a witness, or to set
him; and by the Doctors it is called to repel a witness, but because
objections against the witnesses, or oppositiones contra testes, as Farinacius
calls them, are so largely treated of by him, and others, I shall therefore
only take notice of some particular objections, which are mentioned, and made
use of frequently in our Law, and practique. And in Law these objections are
divided into such as are used contra personas testium, and these which are used
contra dicta testium, I shall therefore first treat of these objections which
are used contra personas testium.

III. Witnesses are not admitted with us, if they be not worth the Kings unlaw,
which we interpret to be ten pounds; and because no man can know the value of
another estate, this objection is found therefore only probable by the oath of
the witness himself, as was found in the case of Ruchead against Muire, the 9.
of December 1668. But this seems strange; for since the Law is jealous that he
will depon unjustly, why it should believe him as to his own quality; and
therefore I think that in Criminal cases, when the hazard is so great, the
being known to be an actual beggar, should be sufficient, per se, to cast a
witness, without referring the same to the witnesses oath.

This objection is founded upon the presumption, that such as are poor, are
liable to impression. And such as are poor are expressly repelled from being
witnesses, by the 34. cap. stat. 2. Rob. And they were likewise repelled by the
Civil Law.

IV. Women regulariter are not witnesses, neither in Civil nor Criminal cases
with us, nor should they make as much faith with us in criminalibus, as is
allowed by the Civil Law, and Doctors; seeing with us they are excluded from
being witnesses even in Civil cases, ergo a fortiori, they ought to be rejected
in Criminal cases; for albeit the Doctors allow them sometimes to prove in
Civil cases, yet they reject them in the same causes, when they are Criminally
pursued, as in Furto, etc. Farin. quest. 56. number. 31. and by an express Act 1.
Agust 1661. The Justices ordained, that no women should be examined as
witnesses in Theft, for the future, except ex officio, and cum nota: and that
same day they rece^ved Elisabeth Watson, as witness in Theft against
Bruntfield. 2. Women are sometimes received witnesses in some cases, ob
atrocitatem criminis, as in Treason, by an express act of Sederunt 1591. And
in Witchcraft, most ordinarily, as is to be seen by the Books of Adjurnal, and
particularly in the Process of Margaret Wallace, the 20. of March 1662. where
Margaret Grahame, and Marion Wear, are received witnesses. 3. They are admitted
in criminibus domesticis, because of scantness of probation; and thus they were
received against George Swintoun, who was accused for murdering his own wife,
within his own house, 21. Agust 1664. 4. Women are received witnesses, where
women use only to be present, as in the being brought to bed, murdering of
Children, and in partu supposititio, etc. very many instances whereof are to be
seen in the Adjurnal Books. And yet Farin. quest. 59. says mulier non potest
esse testis, and quo ad suppositionem partus si inde agitur criminaliter, ad
suppositionem corporaliter puniendam: And by these we may conclude that women
are not regulariter admitted witnesses in Scotland. Likeas by the 34. cap. Rob.
1. These are expressly excluded from witness bearing; yet Matheus concludes
they may be received witnesses, ex hoc, quod mulier adubterii condemnata non
admittatur, ergo in aliis mulieres admitti debent; But this opinion is contrary
to all the Doctors, vid. Farin. quest. 59. casu, 1. where he gives it for a
rule, that mulier in criminalibus testis esse nequit, which rule extends so far
that according to his judgment, three or more women cannot prove a crime, number.
29.

The reason why women are excluded from witnessing, must be either that they
are subject to too much compassion, and so ought not to be more received in
Criminal cases, then in any Civil cases; or else the Law was unwilling to
trouble them, and thought it might learn them too much confidence, and make
them subject to too much familiarity with men, and strangers, if they were
necessitated to vague up and down at all Courts, upon all occasions.

V. Minors if they be past fourteen years of age, and no otherwise, may be
admitted to be witnesses, by the foresaid Act of K. Robert, and it being
alleged in the Process of Margaret Wallace, 1622. That Margaret Graham could
not be received a witness, because she was not past eighteen years of age, this
was repelled, because a Testificat bore, that she was past fourteen years of
age, and might be manned. The reason of this objection, is, because Minors
understand not to answer all circumstances, which must be necessarily
considered by the Judge; nor yet the nature of that Oath, which should overaw
them, and they are very subject in their youth to corruption; a clear instance
whereof, I saw my self, in a little boy, against Towie, who after he was
received, did first depon many improbabilities, and s^emed terrified with every
question, and thereafter confessed that he was bribed, with a very small and
childish bribe. In many cases likewise, witnesses are to depon upon that which
requ^res judgment, as in proving self-defence, ratihabition, etc. And in these
cases, it is repuisit that the deponer be of a more advanced age then fourteen.

VI. By that Act likewise of K. Rob. such as are Furious, Adulterers, Robbers,
Thieves, Perjured, Scourged, and Servants cannot be received witnesses; not yet
Laiks against Churchmen, nor yet Churchmen against Laiks: whereas according
to the Cannon Law, cap. de cetero decret. de testib. Laiks are forbidden to be
received against Churchmen, sed non contra. The reasons of which constitution,
are given to be partly the reverence due to Churchmen, and partly the hatred
whereby Laiks do persecute them; but this objection is justly reprobat by our
custom: by which likewise Servants are received to be witnesses,
notwithstanding of the former Law against it; but not for their Masters: but
whether he who has redeemed himself from Justice by a Remission, should be
received a witness, may be contraverted? and that he should not be received,
may be argued, 1. Because of this Law of K. Rob. which does expressly repel him.
2. A Remission takes not away the guilt, but is only a defense against the
punishment, l. Fin. C. de gener. abolit.: And semel malus semper praesumitur
malus, which wicked disposition cannot be altered by a Remission; and since the
King cannot make a man good, it follows, that he cannot make him a sufficient
witness. 3. It has been found by several Decisions, that a person convict, and
brought off by a Remission, redemptus a justitia, as this Law calls him, has
been therefore set, from being a witness, as in the case of Tossoch, who was
condemned as a false Nottar, and was thereupon set from being a witness, in the
Process, for burning the House of Frendraught; and yet I my self have objected
this against an English Captain, in Argiles case it was repelled. But to
reconcile these two opinions, I think we should distinguish betwixt such as
make use of the Remission, before they be convict, and these who are convict,
and thereafter make use of the Remission; for those who propon upon the
Remission, do eo ipso, acknowledge the guilt; yet that it is only fictione
juris: And therefore the foresaid Law says, copulative that convicti, and
redempti a justitia non possunt esses testes.

Guiltiness which casts a man from being witness, must be proved by a sentence,
and it was not found relevant, that the Theft was offered instantly to be
proved, the 10. of February 1673. in Ashintillies case; but it would appear,
that sometimes the Theft is so recently committed, that there could be no time
for convicting him; and yet it were hard that a person so guilty, should be
received. The dependence also of a criminal pursuit against a witness, should
cast him, if it was intented before his citation, to be a witness, else every
witness might be cast, by intenting a criminal pursuit against him.

VII. These within degrees defendant, by blood, or affinity, are likewise
repelled by the foresaid Act. Degrees defendant, are by our Law the fourth
degree, or Cosen Germans, as is expressed in the foresaid Chapter, and this
term comes, in my opinion, from the French word, defendre, to forbid, so that
degree defendu, is the true expression, though we say defendent, by corruption
of the word. Excommunicat persons cannot by that Law be witnesses, nor such as
are incarcerat: yet de practica, such as are incarcerat, are received, except
they can be cast by some other objection. Nor such as are accused for a
criminal Cause, during the dependence of the Process: nor such as are of the
pursuers Counsel: which objection is, de practica, called the giving of partial
counsel, and this is only proved by the defenders own Oath, properly, yet the
being present at a consultation with the pursuer, or the solisting for him, are
likewise branches of partial Counsel, and are probable by witnesses.

VIII. Domestic servants cannot be received witnesses for their Masters,
albeit they may against them, but if they be not servants the time of the
deposition, they may; except their Master has put them away dolose, that he
might use them as witnesses; but it may be contended, that if he put them away
since the Citation, to depon, they cannot be witnesses. Nor removeable
Tennents, but Tennents having taks, or Cottars of their Tennents, de practica,
are still received; because the Law presumes they are not so liable to the
Masters impressions; and yet it is generally said in the former Law, of K.
Robert, nec aliquis tenens terram de eo adfirmam, vel ad annuum reditum, and
Farin. does, regulariter, conclude, that Colonus non ^dmittitur ad
testificandum pro domino suo; and yet Glossa ad ca^. in literis extra de
testibus adheres to the distinction allowed in our practice, and concludes,
that aut coloni sunt tales quibus imperare potest dominus, and tunc
repelluntur, alias non, sed its tantum creditur Farin. is likewise of opinion,
that though Vassals who are not subject to the Jurisdiction of their Superior,
may be received witnesses for him; yet that where his Superior, habet merum, et
mixtum imperium, in vassallos, the Vassal there cannot be received witness for
him, but with us, Vassals of Regalities, are received witnesses for the Lord of
Regality, which seems very unjust; seeing as Farin. there observes, Dominus
intales vassalos minacem terrorem, et timorem incutere potest.

IX. Though moveable Tennents cannot be witnesses, yet Cotta^s may, as the
custom now runs, whether they be Cottars to Tennents, who are not receiveable,
or not, 11. December 1632. For our custom thinks Cottars independent; yet I
conceive if this were well debated, it would be found, that where the Tennent
is not receiveable, neither can his Cottars, especially in criminal cases,
where exact probation is requisite; for it is not imaginable, but that the
Cottar will stand in aw of him, whom his Master fears.

X. He who was sharer in the committing of the crime, with the person accused,
or socius criminis, cannot be received a witness, nor yet he, qui fovet
consimilem causam, or who may win, or gain by the event of the pursuit; but in
Falsehood, socii criminis, are received witnesses; because without these, that
crime could not be proved; and thus Barclay being accused for forging a Bond,
and Disposition, the witnesses who subscribed the same at his desire, without
seeing the principal party to whom they are witnesses, subscribe, were received
to prove the Falsehood, and the forger of the Bond was also admitted.

In the pursuit of Charles Robertson, it was alleged, that socii criminis
might be witnesses, where the punishment was pecuniary, et sententia non
irrogabat infamiam; for the reason why socii criminis were not admitted, was,
because they were infamous, et intestabiles; to which it was answered, that the
reason was, because they were under fear of the pursuer, and there was greater
reason to repel them in small crimes, then in atrocioribus; seeing in these
lesser crimes, the Commonwealth was not so much concerned, which was the
reason why the strictness of probation was relaxed in Treason, etc. And in
these the Panel might be forced to depon; but could not in greater crimes. In
respect of which answer, the Justices the 9. of March 1671. would not admit
socios criminis, though in a Delict, which was only punishable by a pecuniary
mulct, and though they were not found to be socii, by a sentence, seeing there
being socii, was offered to be proved by their own Oaths, and by the foresaid
Statute, socius criminis, and infamis are two different objections, which had
been unnecessar, if socius criminis had been only repelled, because he was
infamis.

XI. It is ordinary for any person who is pursued for a crime, to raise a
reconvention, and to call therein all such as defenders, whom they think may be
led as witnesses against them; and it is ordinarily controverted, whether in
such mutual pursuits, seu ante categoriis, may be received as witnesses? To
which the solid answer is, that though it seem that they may; because else it
should be in the power of the person accused, to set all such witnesses as may
be led against him; seeing he may raise a reconvention, or it may be intent the
first criminal pursuit, upon design, and call all these as defenders; yet it is
thought they cannot be received witnesses, until that Process depending against
themselves be first discussed; by the event whereof, it may appear, whether
that pursuit be just, or unjust: And by the former Law of K. Robert, none can
be received witnesses, against whom there is a criminal pursuit intented.
Notwithstanding of all which, I have seen the Lords receive witnesses in this
case, but cum nota.

Witnesses who may be received, are called testes habiles, and they are
distinguished, in idoneos, or sufficient witnesses, or testes omni exceptione
majores, who deserve yet a further degree of Faith, and against whom there is
not only no objection, but even no suspicion, et testes optimae opinionis, who
deserves the highest degree of Trust; Sometimes likewise, witnesses are
received, though they be not altogether habiles, and these are called with us,
testes cum nota, who in our Law prove not fully, either the Libel, or defense;
albeit by the Civil Law, testes inhabiles, were admitted to exculpat, or prove
a defense propon'd for the Panel, if there did not ly presumptions of guilt
against them.

XII. If a witness was not habilis, to be a witness, when the crime was
committed, he will not be admitted to be a witness, though he be habilis, and
major, at the same time of his deposition; because a witness must be such as
did then know what was done: thus Wilson was repelled, in the Process against
Cask, the 10. of September 1661.

XIII. It is oft-times controverted with us, if such witnesses as could not be
received at the instance of the accuser, may be received at the instance of His
Majesty's Advocat, which question may be answered by these conclusions, 1. If
the objections against the witnesses be such, as make the witnesses inhabiles,
as that he is Minor, or infamous, then these witnesses cannot be received at
the instance of the Fisk. 2. If the objections be such as tend to cast the
witnesses, merely because of his relation to the party wronged, as that he is
Servant, or within degrees defendant to the party wronged, then though the
party wronged insist not; yet these witnesses cannot be received, if any
advantage may accress to the party wronged, by their deposition; and except he
declare that he shall thereby reap no advantage, and except the crime be such
as did no affront to the party injured, for eo casu, it is still presumed, that
his relations will retain a private grudge, or malice, whereupon they may
prejudge in their depositions, both the truth, and the defender; and yet
ordinarily with us the relations of the persons injured, are received at the
instance of the Kings Advocat. Thus Neilson was received against Margaret
Wallace, for Witchcraft, though he was brother in law to Nicol, who gave
information in the dittay, because the Summonds was not raised at his instance,
the 20. of March 1622. and yet in that same Process, Stirling was not admitted
to be an Assizer, because he was brother in law to Muir, who was one of these
who was alleged to be malificiat by her, albeit the Libel was not raised at
the instance of Muir, nor none of his relations, which I think both irregular,
and dangerous.

Albeit these be relevant objections against witnesses, yet if the proponer of
the objection, cite them also at his own instance, eo ipso, he acknowledge the
witnesses to be, habiles testes, but sometimes he may notwithstanding, propon
objections, even against those himself cites, v. g. though I cite a man to be
witness for me, yet I may set him from being witness for my adversary; because
he is brother, or servant.

IV. The objections, contradicta testium, are singularity, and contrariety, and
the not giving a sufficient causa scientiae.

Singularity is, when the witness who depons, has no concurring witness, and
this singularity is divided, in obstativam, adminiculativam, and
diversificativam.

Singularitas obstativa, is, in acta non reiterabili, an instance whereof they
give in Susanna, and the two Elders, who deponed upon the same Adultery, but
differed in the place, and therefore did not prove. And it is a general rule,
that where the crime is not reiterable, or reiterated, that two witnesses
varying upon the time, or place, as if one should say, a man were murdered at
Edimburgh, and the other at Haddingtoun, these depositions could not be
conjoined, for proving the murder.

Singularitas adminiculativa, is, where the witnesses do not concur in their
depositions, yet they are not contrary, and the one assists the other, as in
the proving that a Horse was stolen, one should depon that he saw the Thief go
in without a Horse, another saw him take the Horse, but no more, which
singularity in depositions, does not hinder the witnesses to prove, neither by
our practiques, nor in the opinion of the Doctors.

Singularitas diversificativa, is, when witnesses depon different Acts, as in a
crime which is reiterable, and thus the Adultery against John Maxwel, was found
by the Lords to be sufficiently proved, though one of the witnesses deponed
only upon an Adultery committed at one time, and another, of an Adultery
committed at another time, February 1666. for the Lords thought, that if one
witness should peep in through a hole, and see Adultery committed, and
thereafter another witness should peep in, and see the Adultery likewise
committed, yet they were contestes, and did prove sufficiently, etiam ad paenam
mortis infligendam, as was found in the probation of Adultery, led against
George Swintoun; (but in my opinion) this case differs from the former, for in
George Swintouns case, both the witnesses concurred in one Act, but they did
not so in the case of John Maxwel, and therefore, though the depositions were
conjoined against him, by the Lords, for sustaining a Decree of Divorce; yet
it were hard that these different Probations could have been conjoined, if the
case had been criminally pursued, as is clear by Farin. quest. 64. de
oposition. contra exam. testium. number. 55.

XV. Witnesses who depon things that are contrary, do not prove, if that
contrariety be in things that are substantial, but though they differ in some
extrinsick circumstances, yet they prove, and verba sunt improprianda, nut
testes concordentur, and etiam concordari debent aliquando a judice per
interpretationem supletivam, but though contrariety be a great defect in
depositions; yet too formal an agreement amongst the witnesses, who depon all
in the very same words, and per praemeditatum sermonem, is suspect, v. g. If
two, or more witnesses should tell over a long story, in the very same words,
as Farin. well observes, quest. 64. number. 24.

XVI. Lawyers have taken so great pains, to secure the lives of poor Pannels,
that they will not believe witnesses, though concurring, except they can render
a sufficient causa scientiae, if the thing deponed fall under sense, as the
seeing a man killed; if it fall not under a sense absolutely, as that a person
was drunk, mad, or repute a thief, etc. Betwixt which two, there is likewise
this difference, that in these things that fall not under sense, the ratio
scientiae must be given, whether it be asked or not, because in effect, it is
the ratio scientiae, and not the deposition, which proves in that case.

Witnesses must in our Law be received in presence of the Panel, and Assize,
that the Pannels presence may overaw the deponer, and that the Assize may judge
by the deponers countenance, gestures, and assurance, how far he should be
believed, and Advocats are to be present, that they may interrogat upon
emergents, and this is much juster, than the Laws of other Nations are, who
allow neither Advocat; nor party to be present, whilst the witnesses depons,
Gomes. de delict. cap. 1. number. 65. And in this also we agree with the Civil
Law, l. Custodias ff. de publ. judiciis.

XVII. Witnesses are sometimes received, in criminalibus, ad futuram rei
memoriam, for the defender, but never for the accuser; and that because the
accuser may blame himself, for not pursuing sooner, which is not in the
defenders power, and testibus non testimoniis creditur, whereas depositions, ad
futuram rei memoriam, are only testimonia; And yet with us, the Justices
sometimes declare in Court, when they continue dyets, that they will receive
the depositions of witnesses, to lie in retentis; but this form is not
allowable in my opinion, except both parties consent; because by Act of
Parliament, all probation should be led in presence of the Assize.

XVIII. It was a defect in our Law, that albeit it allowed the Panel to object
against witnesses; yet it did not allow him to cite witnesses to prove his
objections: as for instance, if the pursuer adduced a witness, who was convict
of Theft by a sentence at Aberdene, this would be relevant, but the Panel
could not prove his exception, both because the diet was peremptor, and because
he was not allowed to have a diligence for proving thereof; for remedy whereof,
by the 11. Article of the Regulations of the Justice-Court, it was appointed,
that when the Libel, or Summonds of Exculpation is execute, the names of the
inquest, and witness should likewise be given to the defender, to the effect
he might know what to object against them, and diligences are thereby allowed
him for proving his objections. Against this Article it was murmured, that
first this would be very difficult; for the pursuer could not know what
witnesses were to be adduced, and much less what Assizers might be present,
for they could not assure their attendance. 2. This might prove a mean of
corrupting witnesses, and Assizers, who if known, might be practiced.

But to these it may be answered, that no man should raise a Criminal pursuit
to vex men in their fame and fortune, till he were secure that he could prove
hi^ Libel, which infers necessarly that he knew the witnesses who were to be
adduced: And seeing the pursuer might cite 45. he might be confident fifteen of
them would obey, and be so wise as to evite the penalty: And this objection
would tend much more against all continuation of Assizers for a whole year,
which is very ordinary. To the second it may be answered, that either the
witnesses to be adduced, are honest, and then there is no fear of practicing,
or they are false and obnoxious to corruption, and then they should not be
received at all: And it were inhumane that a man's life and fortune should be
laid open to the depositions of these, whom the Law durst not allow to be
known, for fear of being bribed, and corrupted. And this inconveenience could
hardly have been evited before their regulations, for ordinarily the defender
knows who were present, and needed suspect that none will be adduced, who were
not present. As likewise when dyets are continued (as frequently they were) the
witnesses were still known, but these jealousies are by very much less
dangerous, than the inconveniences which attend the not allowing the Panel to
know what witnesses are suspicious, and should be declined. And our Law should
either not have allowed objections against witnesses, or else should have
allowed a diet, and means for proving them: nam quando aliquid conceditur omnia
concedi debent sine quibus ad hoc perveniri nequimus.

XIX. If witnesses compeared not of old, the diet was immediately deserted, but
now Caption will be direct against them, and the diet will be continued, for it
is unreasonable that the pursuer or Fisk, should be prejudged by the contumacy
of the witnesses; but if two compear, it may be doubted if eo casu, if the diet
should be continued, for two are sufficient for proving the Libel, but because
more witnesses than two are oftimes requisite, there being many circumstances to
be proved, therefore it seems hard, that the diet should not be even eo casu,
continued: And at other times there may be objections which may cast such as
are present, and therefore the Justices continued the diet against Braco
Gordoun, the 11. of November 1671. Because the defender would not declare that
he would use no objections against such as were present.

Though regulariter the Justices will grant warrant to apprehend and secure
parties who are suspect of crimes, till they find surety; yet they refused to
secure or attach, such as were cited to be witnesses, lest thereby they should
discourage men from compearing to bear witness, December 1672. In answer to a
petition given in by the Marquess of Montrose Tenants.

XX. By the custom both of the Council, and Criminal Court, ten witnesses are
allowed to be cited upon every separat matter of fact; and Article of the
Libel, and no more, to evite confusion; nor wants there precedents for the
number of ten in this case, since cap. 5. Legis Mamimiliae, inque eam rem is
qui hac lege judicium dederit testibus public duntaxat in res singulas december.
denunciandi potentatem facito: and I find in Valerius probus, this to be an
Article, edicti praetorii testibusque public dumtaxat december denunciandi
potestatem faciam, to which number witnesses are stinted, by a Statute of Lewis
the 12. of France, Langlaus. semestr. lib. 3. cap. 5. from which Statute, our
custom seems to have flowed:

TITLE XXVII. Of Tortour.
1. By whom can Torture be inflicted in our Law. 2. Torture purges all
Presumptions. 3. Whether may persons who are condemned, be thereafter Tortured.
4. Who are exeemed from Torture. 5. How should such be punished, who Torture
unjustly?
I. TOrture is seldom used with us; because some obstinat persons do oft-times
deny truth, whilst others who are frail, and timorous, confess for fear, what
is not true: and it is competent to none, but to the Council, or Justices, to
use Tortour, in any case; and therefore they found, that Sir William
Ball^ndene, as a Captain, could not Torture, though it was alleged, that this
was necessar sometimes, for knowing the motions of the enemy, and might be
necessar, and allowed in some cases to Soldiers, for the good of the
Commonwealth. And the Council are so tender in Torture, that though many
presumptions were adduced against Giles Thyre, English man, suspected of
Murder, and Adultery, they refused to Torture him; albeit it was pressed
zealously by His Majesty's Advocat.

II. It is a brocard amongst the Doctors, that he who offers to abide the
Torture, purges all other presumptions, which can be adduc'd against him; and
yet Alexander Kennedy being pursued for forging some Bonds, and nothing being
adduced for proving the crimes, save presumptions, offered to abide the
Torture, but th^s was refused.

Torture likewise being adduced, purges all former presumptions, which
preceeded the Torture, if the person Tortureed, deny what was objected against
him; but yet he may be put to the knowledge of an inquest, upon new
presumptions, as was found after a learned debate, in the case of Toshoch, who
was Tortured, for the alleged burning the house of Frendraught, August 1632.
for it was alleged, that Torture is intended for bringing the verity to light,
and as he had been condemned, if he had confessed, so he should be assoilzied
when he denies, else no man would endure the Torture, if they were not
persuaded, that upon denial, they should be cleared, but would confess, and not
endure so much torment unnecessarly; so that the inquisition would be the
occasion of much sin, and make men die with a lie in their mouth; and therefore
To^ture is called, probatio ultima vid. Clar^ quest. 64. Yet Spot Maxwel of
Garrery, and others were condemned after Torture, upon other probation then was
deduced before the Torture.

III. I remember it was debated in Council, Anno 1666. If the West-countrey-men
who were condemned for Treason, might after sentence be Tortured, for clearing
who were their accomplices, and it was found that they could not, nam post
condemnationem, judices functi sunt officio; yet all Lawyers are of opinion,
that even after sentence, criminals may be Tortured, for knowing who were the
accomplices.

IV. One of the privileges of Minors, is, that they cannot be subjected to
Torture, lest the tenderness both of their age, and judgment, make them fail,
(...). Eclog. de quest. cap. 9. ad, yet l. 15. ff. de quest. Judges are
discharged only to Torture such as are under fourteen; persons very old were
not to be Tortured, for the same reason, l. 3. ff. ad S. C. sillan. which was
by some extended to women, sick persons, and such as had been eminent in any
Nation, for Learning, or other Arts, but all this is arbitrary with us.

V. These who Torture, if the person Tortured die, are punishable as murderers,
but though they die not, yet by the Civil Law they were punished, deportatione
in insulam, or by banishment; and with us they are punished according to the
quality of the crime.

TITLE XXVIII. Of Remissions.
1. Whether he who uses a Remission acknowledges the crime. 2. How Remissions
are granted. 3. For what should no Remissions be granted. 4. Letters of Slames,
and Assithments, when necessary. 5. Persons condemned, are sometimes restored
by way of justice.
WHen the Judges has pronounced his Sentence, he is functus officio, and the
punishment irrogat by him, can only be remitted by the Prince, though the
Council may moderat, or delay it.

The party condemned is restored either by way of grace, or of Justice,
restitution per modum gratiae, is with us called a remission.

I. Remission then is the pardon of the crime, graciously allowed by the
Sovereign, and it may be given, either before, or after the Panel is convict.

If it be given before conviction, the Panel by making use of it, does per
fictionem acknowledge the guilt, and it he do not acknowledge the same, the
Remission is null, and will not stop the execution, as was found in Alexander
Kennedies case, and this is a received maxim with us, yet ex sententia
Doctorum, non videtur fateri crimen, qui gratia utitur, Alexander. consil. 70.
Bossius de remed. ex clem. number. 29. nec potest judex dicere ei, qui vult ea uti
oportet fatearis delictum, alias non uteris; yet Bossius tells us, that by the
custom of Milan, he who uses a Remission, must acknowledge the crime, ibid. but
our Law in its foresaid maxim may be reconciled with these Doctors, for even
with us, the taking a remission does not prove the crime, since that may be
done sometime, rather upon the account of security, then guilt, and licet se
redimere a lite* and therefore Braids escheat, as an adulterer, was not
declared, January 1662. by the Lords of Session, there being no probation of
the Adultery, but the Adulterers taking a remission; but the using a remission
does certainly prove, as was formerly observed from these Statutes.

This Remission is granted by a signatur under his Majesty's hand, and is
presented in Exchequer, which is equivalent with us, to that iterinatio
mentioned by Perez. ad tit. de sent. Passis number. 16. Clarus. ^. fin. quest. 59.
Number. 10. quae est approbatio senatus, quae in causa cognitione versatur ne
impetrentur gratiae per obreptionem, vel subreptionem; and therefore if the
Remission be granted upon a misrepresentation, the Council will upon a Bill
stop the same, till his Majestis further pleasure be known, as they did in
Murray of Burghtouns case: and though by the 13. Act. 10. Par. I. 6. The writer
of such signator^, should subscribe his name upon the back of the signator, to
the end, that he may be answerable, if it contain any thing that is
unallowable; yet the said remission granted to Burgh^oun, was sustained, though
it had not been so subscribed, when it past his Majesty's hand, yet being
aledged to be in desuetud, but rather because the writer did thereafter
subscribe. Ian. 1666. and these remissions are ordained to pass the great Seal,
of design that the Seal should be a check upon them, but if they pass the
Seal, they cannot be recalled, tanquam surreptitia. Boss. ibid. number. 36. for,
says he, they are ordained to be presented, in senatu, ne sint surreptitia,
and ut inquiratur: And therefore it is appointed by the fourth I. 4. Par. 6. c.
62. that the Remission should contain the greatest crime for which the
Remission is craved, and if the greatest crime be not expressed, the general
clause remitting all crimes, will not defend against a pursuit for any crime
that is greater then the crimes specified in the Remission suitable to which
Lawyers assert, that qui petit gratiam, debet non solum delictum exprimere, sed
and qualitates ejus, aliter uti subreptitia, nihil valet, sed non debet
exprimere omnia delicta separa^a Boss. ibid. number. 33.

III. Remissions should not be granted for Slaughter committed premeditatly, or
by Fore-thought-fellony, Stat. Dav. 2. cap. 50. where it is ordained, that no
Remission shall be granted for homicide, till inquisition be first made,
whether the Slaughter was committed by fore-thought-fellony, and if it was so
committed, the Remission shall be null, and hoc concessit rex, as the Text
says, This is confirmed by K. Ia. 4. P. 6. c. 63. which Act is declared to
endure, till his Majesty recall the same, and yet it is repute a temporary Act,
and notwithstanding thereof, remissions are ordinarily past for murder, as in
the Earl of Caithness remission 1668. Against which, this was objected; but
repelled. Yet in Flanders, and other places, this Law is still in force.

No Remissions should be granted for burning of corns in stacks, or barns, Act.
18. P. 7. I. 5. Which Act is not temporary, and yet is not observed, as was
found in the foresaid remission.

All Remissions should be componed, and subscribed by the Thesaurer, Reg^strat
in his Books, I. 6. P. 13. c. 169. Albe^t his Majesty may remit what injury is
committed against him, yet he cannot prejudge thereby the interest of third
Parties. This satisfaction is by the Civilians called reparatio damnorum, by us
an Assithment, and the obtainer of the remission, must find caution to refound
the party injured, of all his damnage and interest, within forty days after
he produces his Remission, else his Remission is null, Act 75. P. 14. I. 2.
Act. 136. P. 8. I. 6. and Act. 154. P. 12. I. 6. but these Acts are only
temporary. But by the Act 174. P. 13. I. 6. Remissions granted to any persons,
passing to the horn, for Theft, Rief, Slaughter, Burning, or Heirship, are
declared null; if the party laesed, be not first satisfied: and albeit it would
seem by this Act, that Assithment subsequent to the remission, is not
sufficient; yet the meaning of the Act is, that the Remission shall be of no
avail, till the party laesed be satisfied.

Notwithstanding of these Acts, it is de practica very dangerous to challenge a
Remission, and I am informed, that one of the learnedest Lawyers of his time,
was sent to the Castle for quarrelling the Kings power, in granting a remission
for fire-raising; yet I find a Remission produced by John Bell, quarelled as
null, because 1. It was given for murdering Cristopher Irving, and so is null
by the foresaid Act. 2. The remission should contain the greatest crime, and
Slaughter is not so great a crime as murder, Nor was the quality of
fore-thought-fellony expressed. 3. It was not subscribed by the Thesaurer. The
Justices delayed to give answer, but I find not the person was punished, 1643.
As also Mackie being convict for falsit, and having enacted himself never to
return under pain of death; thereafter he returned, and being pursued for his
life, alleged upon a Remission. To which it was answered, that the remission
was null; because he returned before it was obtained, and past the Seals, nor
was it yet past. Upon which the diet was continued, the 23. of Febr. 1622. But
it is observeable, that the pursuit was here at the Advocats instance only, who
could not quarrel his Majesty's remission upon no account.

IV. If the party does willingly grant a discharge of all grudge, or revenge,
in the crime of murder, this discharge is called a letter of Slants, and is
called by the Doctors, litera pacis, and thus, Plot. consil. 78. says, that
gratiafacta parti nocenti a principe non valet, nisi fiat reparatio damnorum,
and interesse, vel nisi pax sit prius habita, ab haeredibus offensi.

This rule has some exceptions, both by the Common Law, and by ours, for by
ours, exception is made of remissions granted for pacifying the Highlands, and
Borders, which are valid, though the party laesed be not satisfied. Act 174. P.
13. I. 6. Which is introduced in favors of the public quiet, and is founded
upon the same reason, from which acts of indemnity are granted, without
gratifying, or repairing these who were ruined by the persons indemnified. And
for that reason also, rex potest gratiari nocentem, sine pace privati interesse
habenti, quando damnandus laborasset pro bono reipublicae and fecisset illud,
per quod multorum salus causata esset. l. non omnes.. fin. ff. de re militari.
By their Remissions, the party is not restored to his good fame, l. 3. C. de
genesis abolit indulgentia patres conscripti quos liberat, notat, nec infamiam
criminis tollit, sed paenae gratiam facit. And though I think this should hold
in such as are remitted, after they are condemned, because they are known to
have diffamed themselves, by contracting that Criminal guilt; yet it should not
hold in such, as secure only their own innocence by a remission, and redeem
themselves rather from hazards, then from guilt.

V. The Kings Majesty sometimes restores the person condemned, by way of
Justice, per modum justitiae, which he does by rescinding the sentence, that
stands against him as injust; and this is done, either in Parliament, if the
person was condemned by them, or by a review, in the Justice Court, if he was
condemned there; and in this case the party is restored, not only to his Fame,
but likewise to all his Estate, even though it was bestowed upon a third party,
as was afte much debate, found by the Parliament, 1661. in the case betwixt the
Marquess of Montrose, and the Marquess of Argile.

TITLE XXIX. Of Prescription in Crimes.
1. How crimes did prescrive by the Civil Law. 2. Whether do crimes prescrive
by our Law.
I. ACcording to the Civil Law, crimes did prescrive in twenty years, L.
querela. C. defals. And Clarius does assert, that generally all the Doctors are
of opinion, that all criminal pursuits prescribe in that time, but this
prescription did not run in some atrocious crimes, such as Sodomy, Paricide,
Apostasy, etc. Wherein they err, for where the Law says, that either semper
paricidii accusatio permittitur, as l. ult. ff. de leg. Pompei. ad paricid or
that nullus temporibus arcetur apostotarum accusatio, that must be interpret,
de prescriptione vigniti annorum, which is in Law, called longissum tempus, but
the crimes of Adultery, and peculatus, prescribe in five years.

II. It may be doubted with us, if prescription has place at all; and that it
has not, may be urged from these grounds, 1. That prescription has no place
with us, except where it is warranted by a particular Statute, and there is no
Statute warranting prescription in criminals. And if prescriptions founded upon
the Civil Law, had been sufficient in Scotland, there needed not any particular
Acts to have been made in civil cases; but since our Law thought necessary to
make Laws as to presc^iption^ in civil causes, they had much more determined
this po^nt, by Law in criminal cases, if they had thought it fit to extinguish
crimes by prescription: but on the contrair, our Act of prescription in
heritage, 1617. has excepted the crime of Falsehood from prescription. 2. There
being jus quaesitum to the King, by the committing of the crime, both quoad
vindictam, et bonafisco applicanda, that Right cannot be taken away from him,
but by a public Law, or His own private Remission. 3. It seems unreasonable,
that because a private party will not inform, being either afraid, or
negligent, that the public should therefore suffer. 4. There is no instance in
all our Practiques, where prescription has been sustained; but one the
contrair, crimes of an old date, even after forty years, have been punished.
5. ^emel malus, semper praesumitur esse malus in eodem genere malitiae; and
therefore it is unjust, to suffer a person to live in the Commonwealth, who
will be both doing wrong himself, and inciting others to do so, by his example.
Yet for the other part, it may be urged, 1. That the only end of punishment,
is, that the crime committed, may be punished, to preveen the error of others;
but so it is, that after a long time, both the public is presumed to have
forgot, that any such crime was committed, and the parties injured, or presumed
to have forgot, and remitted their private revenge, for satisfying whereof,
punishments are inflicted. 2. After so long a time, any probation that could be
led, against the Malefactor, either fails, or the witnesses after so long a
time, may have forgot the exact circumstances; and it were very hard upon
testimonies, that have so unclear a causa scientiae, as these witnesses can
give, to take away a man's life. Likeas, the witnesses, and other probation will
probably perish, whereby the defender might have exculpat himself, and
mantained his innocenc; so that the Fisk, or any private party, may by their
negligence, or upon design, prejudge the Panel of his defenses, against the
common rules of the Law, whereby men's negligence can only wrong themselves, and
they have only themselves to blame, that did not make use sooner of the remedy
appointed by the Law, for satisfying either public, or private revenge. 3.
Since our Law does punish Perjury, and poinding of Oxen, Usury, Stellionatus,
and others; according to the Civil Law, it seems to be most agreeable to
reason, that as these crimes are punished, according to the Civil Law, so they
should be extinguished by the Civil Law, nam nihil est tam natural, quam
unumquodque eo modo dissolvi, quo colligatum est, and quem sequitur incommodum
enim sequt debent commoda: And the Act 1617. did introduce prescription with
us, as the Act it self bears, because it was allowed by the Civil Law, and the
Laws of other Nations. 4. It were absurd, that in the case of Treason, which
may be inquired into after the defenders death, there should be no period of
time, whereby Families might be secure; and that it should be lawful, after
two, or three hundred years, to vex Families, of great Honor, and Interest
upon pretext of crimes committed by their Predecesso^s. 5 This prescription is
very justly introduced, to punish the negligence of such, as will not pu^sue
crimes; and it is most presumeable, that if they pursue, after they have
delayed for so long a time, that any pursuit thereafter intented, is rather
intented upon some supervenient quarrel, and picque, then upon the account of
the crime. 6. The fear of punishment, and conscience of the guilt, for so long
a time, is in it self a sufficient punishment; And so GOD Almighty himself
thought in the case of Cain; and therefore to punish after so long a time, were
to punish twice. By our Law, recent crimes are more severely punished then
others, as murder with red hand, and the thief taken with the fang, and by how
much the crime grows older, by so much it should be the less punished. 7 The
necessity of example, which is the reason inductive of punishment, fails in old
crimes, so the punishment should then also be remitted, as unnecessary.

To the contrary arguments, it may be answered, to the first, that our criminal
law, being much more founded upon the Civil Law, then any other part of our Law
is (as shall be clearly proved) there needed no particular statute in this case
with us, especially seeing this prescription of twenty years in crimes, has in
effect become the Law of Nations, and several other Nations, who have many
Statutes in other cases, have yet allowed of this prescription without any
particular Statute. 2. There seems to be greater reason, that an Act should
have been necessary for prescription, in civiltbus, then in crimes, because in
civil cases, the Roman Law was very various, and quoad, the particular periods
of time was altered by all Nations, according to the particular state of their
affairs; but in criminals, their prescription was exactly observed, by all
Nations, and was very reasonable; and there being exp^esly, jus quaesitum
incivilibus, to every private person, it was necessary that should have been
taken away by an express Statute; but it is not so in crimes, where in effect.
At first there was no express, jus quaesitum, either to the King, or any private
party, but only a ^otestas acquirendi; for the jus qu situm, is only by the
sentence, for before sentence, the Fisk could not dispon upon; and so had no
right to the Malefactors goods, and this answers likewise the second reason.

To the second, third, fourth, and fifth, it is answered, that doubtless, the
wise Romans, and other Nations, could not but have these inconveniences under
consideration, when they introduced the foresaid prescription in crimes; and to
the third, it is particularly answered, that if private parties will not pursue
their revenge, they justly lose the capacity by their negligence, and His
Majesty having so many sworn Officers, in every corner of the Land, it is not
presumeable, that any inconvenience will arise through want of information, but
if there do, it is much more reasonable, that these negligent Judges should be
punished, especially seeing there are express Laws, appointing negligent
Officers, in such cases, to be punished. To the fourth, it is answered, that
negative Arguments, brought from the not being of a Law, or a custom, is not
concluding, for as in many other cases, so this might have been argued, as
strongly as here against His Majesty's Advocat, when he of old craved, that the
Heirs of Traito^s might be forefaulted, for their Predecessors guilt. And when
he of late craved, that probation might be led against Traitors in absence; in
either of which cases, there was neither Act, nor Practique; nor could any
thing have been alleged, but the Authority of the Civil Law, and the consent
of other Nations. To the fifth, the crime being taken away by so long a time,
it were unjust to take away a man's life, upon the former prescriptions; and the
fear of punishment, is a sufficient punishment, for all the malice arising from
that prescription: neither is it presumed, but that if a Malefactor continue to
be ill, he will be pursued within twenty years; and if he did for twenty years
live so soberly, and discreetly, as that the Law thought not fit to take notice
of his former crime, there is little hazard of any future malice.

And to this opinion I rather incline, because Carpzov. relates, that albeit by
the Statutes of Saxony, prescription is only introduced by express Statute,
in movables, and heritage, and that there is no express Statute, as to
prescription in criminals, yet these prescribe also in twenty years; because
that prescription introduced by the Civil Law, is not expressly abrogated
amongst them, nam non praesumendum est totam praescriptionum observationem
tantis vigiliis excogitatam, Saxoniae legislatorem evertere voluisse, ut in
simili casu dicit Imperator. l. 34. C. de in offic. test. and Petr. Heig. part.
1. quest. 26. number. 47. vid Carpzov. part. 3. quest. 141.

TITLE XXX. Of Punishments, de paenis.
1. The design of punishment. 2. Whether crucifying, or banishment, be lawful
punishments. 3. Whether a man can bind himself under the pain of death. 4.
Whether arbitrary punishment can extend to death. 5. The loss of life is still
followed by loss of movables. 6. How far can ignorance, anger, drunkenness, or
command, either excuse from punishments, or lessen them. 7. How far does
Nobility, or great Merit, excuse, or mitigat punishment. 8. How far does the
inconsiderableness of the transgression mitigat, or lessen the punishment.
I. PUnishments are inflicted, not only to satisfy, either the public revenge
of the Law, or the private revenge of the party, but rather to deter others for
the future; and yet they are rather inflicted upon either of these designs,
then to punish the offender, and make him insensible, for what is done can no
more be helped.

Some crimes are so horrid, and so unknown to the world, that it is not fit the
Malefactor should be punished publicly: thus some crimes have been tried in
Scotland, at midnight, and the Malefactor immediately drowned in the North-loch,
without inserting any part of the Process in the Journal Books, wherein also I
found, that Malefactors were ordained to be execute very early in the morning,
for bestiality, which was occasioned by the confession of one, who asserted,
that the reason of his committing that crime, was a curiosity he contracted at
his seeing one execute for it. And in such crimes no man needs to be detered,
nor w^ll terror restrain him, whom nature cannot. Since then executions for
some crimes, incite some to curiosity, and vex others with horror, and are
necessary to none, some may be more properly punished privately, then publictly,
and thus such persons as are popular, and are execute only for crimes, for
which the people have a kindness, will be more happily execute privately, then
publicly, because the persons executed, are by public executions obleidged to
die rebelliously, and the people are confirmed in their good opinion of them,
by their courage at death.

II. Constantine did forbid, that any Malefactor should be crucified, and this
he did, because of his respect to the Cross; he likewise did forbid, to
stigmatize the face, l. 17. C. de paenis, because the face is Gods Image.

Martyrus was of opinion, that banishment was not lawful, lest the person so
punished, should be forced to live amongst Turks, and others, by whom he might
become more flagitious, then formerly; and I have often thought it inhumane, to
send our Malefactors to our neighbors, and imprudent, because it will occasion
the sending of theirs from home, whereby we may be likewise troubled with such
as they have banished: and it is probable, that Correction-houses would be both
safer, and more advantageous, for in these they may serve the public, whom
they have offended; but with us, no Judge can confine a man, whom he banisheth
to any place without his Jurisdiction, because he has no Jurisdiction over
other Countries, and so cannot make any Acts, nor pronounce any sentences
relative to them.

Torturing punishments at death, are also very inexcuseable, for they oft-times
occasion blasphemies in the dying Malefactor, and so damn both soul and body,
whereas the soul should be allowed to leave quietly this Earth, and go in peace
to the Region of Peace; nor does these terrify others from the like offenses,
for these who fear not death, will fear nothing.

III. It was a rule amongst the Civilians, that no man could obliedge himself
to any thing under a corporal pain, quia nemo est dominus suorum membrorum. But
with us, it is most ordinary for a man who is guilty of a crime, to obliedge
himself never to return to Scotland, under the pain of death; thus Hamiltoun
was hanged, Anno 1649. for returning to Scotland after she ha^ enacted her
self, never to return under pain of death, and her dittay was only founded upon
that contravention; and certainly, contempt being added to the former guilt,
may make a crime that was not capital, become so: and this contravention
implies in effect, paenam effracti carceris, which is oft-times capital; so
that though a person cannot bind himself, when he is guilty of no crime, to
perform any thing under pain of life, or limb; yet if he be guilty of a crime,
he may consent, and enact himself, as said is.

IV. Whether when Law allows a Judge an arbitrary power in punishing, that
Judge may inflict death, in that case is much contraverted. Chassan. and Socin.
think that he cannot, and this seems clear, 1.4. qui vexant annonam debent
puniri extra ordinem non tamen animae amissione Inst. de publ. ind. And Pappon.
relates, a Decision of the Parliament of Paris, finding that it could not. 2.
This would make Judges very arbitrary, and render the Lives, and Fortouns of
the Leidges very unsecure. 3. Seeing Lawyers are of opinion, that no man's life
can be taken away without an express Law, it seems very consequential to this,
that no man's life can be taken away upon so general a Law. 4. By the 20. Act
Parl. 1. Sess. 1. Chapter 2. death, and arbitrary punishment are opposed: For these
who having past sixteen years of age, beat, or curse parents, are ordained to
die, but if they be within sixteen, and past pupilarity, they are ordained to
be arbitrarly punished. Whereas, if arbitrary punishment might be extended to
death, this difference would be ineffectual, and the Law thereby evacuat. And
by the 5. Act 1. Parl. Ia. 6. the punishment of saying, and hearing Mess, is
escheating of their goods, and an arbitrary punishment of their persons, for
the first fault, banishment for the second, and death for the third; so that
arbitrary punishments is looked upon, as less then death, else the first fault
should be as seveerly punished as the third, against both the principals of
reason, and the design of the Lawgiver. 5. Arbitrary punishment is appointed
ordinarily for so mean, and inconsiderable faults, that it were inhumane to
think, that these could be extended to death: Skeen also, de verb. sig. verb.
iter. says, that if the Panel come in will, it is lawful for the Justice to
fine him, according to his offense, but he speaks not there of his power to
infl^ct death, eo casu; and yet Skeen ad cap. 6. l. Malcolimbi. verse. 2.
Wherein it is statute, that the Marischal, and Constable shall punish
offenders, according to the quality of the offense, observes, that paena
extraordinaria, may be sometimes extended to death; because of the aggradging
circumstances, and cites for this, l. ult. ff. de priv. delict. and 16. de
paenis, but these Laws are ill cited, as will appear by reading them. When the
pain is by Law, or custom arbitrary, and the defender comes in will, he must
presently find caution to satisfy the Kings will, betwixt and such a day, this
is the constant custom, and was practiced the 22. of November 1600. Advocatus
contra Patrick Mc. creif, and others, but where the crime is punishable by an
express, and determinat punishment there, though a defender come in will, it
ought not to be received, and thus the Marquise of Argile being pursued before
the Parliament for Treason, offered to come in will, but his submission was not
accepted.

V. It is uncontraverted with us, if when any crime is punishable by death, the
Movables falls to the King, though the Act bear not, that the crime shall be
punishable by death, and confiscation of Movables; and according to the Civil
Law, proscriptus eratis cujus bona expressim confiscabantur, damnatus vero
cujus bona tacit, publicatio enim bonorum sequebatur tacit paenam capitalem,
Matheus cap. 2. de Sicartis, number. 2. And albeit the Judge should omit in his
Sentence, the punishment due by Law; yet ipso jure, there is by the damnation,
jus quaesitum fisco, as was found after a large debate, in the case of Wauch,
who being a landed man, found guilty of Theft, though he was only fined by the
Sheriff in a thousand Pounds; yet the Donator to the Escheat was found to have
right to all the Estate, and that without any new sentence, which is conform to
l. 1. and 2. ff. de bon. damnat. and l. 2. C. de bon. proscrip. But it seems
hard, that confiscation of Movables, should still follow upon all crimes,
though the Law express not that way of punishment, seeing this is to punish
the Children, and not the committers only, and since this having been only
invented by Julius Caesar, as Suet. observes, Justinian did hereafter by his
Novel. 117. cap. 5. appoint that the offenders Goods should only be confiscated
in Treason, for that crime taints the Blood; nor have we any Law with us,
appointing confiscation in all capital cases: Live. tells us, that this seemed
barbarous in the Roman decemviri. lib. 3. and Herodot. assures us, that even
the Persians would not confiscat the offenders Estate, in the Crime of Treason,
lib. 3. Nor would the Emperor Aurelian, allow it, lest it should be thought,
that he pursued rich Malefactors, merely for their Estates, and really some
Judges are to be jealous'd upon that account. But though men's escheat should
not fall without express Law, yet custom has supplied Law with us in this.

Since a person who is interdited cannot, dispon upon his Movables, the
question is, if they can fall under his Escheat, or if he can prejudge himself
by his confession, for tantum facit quis de linquendo quantum facere potest
contrahendo; And therefore since he cannot alienat them by contracting, so
neither should he be able to alienat them by delinquency, especially if the
interdiction be judicial, by the authority of a Judge, and founded upon the
persons being prodigus, or of a weak judgment: the like may also be doubted,
in the case of one who is Proprietor of Lands by a Tailzie, bearing a Clause,
de non alienando, irritanter, and resolutive concepta, who may evacuat the
Tailzie, if it may be forefeited upon his delinquency; As to the first of which
cases, Lawyers are of opinion, that since Prodigals are esteemed as Pupils,
that therefore their Goods cannot be confiscated upon any confession emited by
them, without the consent of these to whom they are interdited. Cabal. Cas. 48.
Bald. ad l. 1. C. de confess. But they think that if the crime be proved
against them, then their Goods may be confiscated, for this privilege of
interdiction being introduced in their favors, ought not to be advantageous to
them, in defending them against guilt, Castrens. ad l. etiam. ff. Solut. matr.
And with us, since interdiction cannot defend against Captions, much less ought
it to defend against crimes. As to the second question, it is clear, that such
Tailzies, how ever conceived, cannot defend against forefeiture, for it is not
in any Subjects power to secure his own Estate against crimes; and if this
could hold, then no man's Estate should ever forefeit, for all men would adject
such conditions, and this would invite them to commit crimes, whereas the Law
endeavous by all means to deter them.

Because many of our Laws appoint crimes to be punished, according to the
prescript of the Civil, and Common Law, as Falsehood, Perjury, etc. And that
many punishments there used, are now in desuetude: therefore it is fit to know,
that in place of damnatio ad bestias, succeeds heading, or decollation, in
place of damnatio ad metallum, Succeeded the Galleys in Erance, and the
Correction-house with us. Deportatio with them, is ban^shment with us; and
relegatio with them, is confinement with us.

When two Laws inflict different punishments, upon the same crime, how far the
one innovats the other, I have debated fully, Tit. Deforcement.

Paenae sunt temperandae (pun^shments are moderated) in the opinion of Lawyers
in these cases.

VI. Ignorance, which excuses none, if it be of the Law of Nature, but
ignorance of the mere positive Law, excuses in some cases, Women, Pesants, or
Bours, rustici quando agitur de dolo praesumpto secus vero ubi agitur de dolo
vero, nec excusantur ubi clam deli querunt. Ignorance also, in matter of fact,
excuses persons, though judicious, if they followed the faith of such as
understood, si crediderunt viro fide digno, as Counselors, Lawyers, etc.

2. Just anger, and grief lessens the punishment, sive proveniat exfacto
adversarii, sive tertii, licet hoc non sit sine scrupulo Farin. quest. 91. But
I think that it should only lessen the punishment in arbitrary cases, but not
in statutory punishmen^s.

3. Youth, and great age, sometimes excuse, but of these formerly, Part. 1.
Tit. 1.

4, A man who is drunk, if he used not to be so, is somewhat excused, and is
not punished for having committed the crime (seeing it is presumed, he
understood not what he was doing, because he was drunk) but if the defender
fell drunk upon design, or gloried in having committed the crime, he is not
thereby excused. Love also excuses in what is done, ex subito and improviso
amoris impetu, secus si praemeditate, but even in the fi^ft case it only
mitigats the punishment.

5. The custom of the place excuses, or at least lessens the punishment, when
the crime is not committed against the Law of God, or Nature, for Laws abeundo
in desuetudinem fiunt non leges, and non est in mala fide, qui facit, quod
omnes faciunt. But this was repelled in the Marquess of Argiles case; who
alleged, that he complied only with the usurpers, in the same manner, tha^ all
the Nation complied, and yet the Council ordinarily admit this, to defend
Highlanders, when they are cited for traveling with Guns, and other Arms,
because it is the custom of their Country. And I think this may be alleged,
to defend such as are accused for Witchcraft, in consulting such as can tell
where they may find what they lost, or was stolen from them, but not from all
punishments.

6. The command of a Superior or such as a master excuses, his servant, as has
been said in the Tittle of Theft, and of a Magistrate excuses Burgesses in
Insurrections, has been observed in the Title Sedition, and Messengers in
executing Decreets, as has been observed in the Title Deforcement, a son also
is to be excused if he obey his father, and in atrocioribus a paena ordinaria
and omnino in laevioribus, as is observed in the Title Art and part.

7. Noblemen should get some allowance during the dependence of the process,
and are never to be sent to correction houses, Pillories, etc. and as in no
crime they were punished by the Civil Law, till the prince was first consulted
(which we observe not) so if they commit a delict, or lesser Crime, innecessary
defense of their honor they are to be excused a paena ordinaria, and
generally, the Doctors think, that where others should only be banished, except
when by their crime, they have foresaulted the Title of Nobility, as in
betraying the Country, in stealing, etc. For in these cases, they are to be
more severly punished then others.

8. Great merit, and skilfulness, excuses some crimes, and good success is
also an ordinary defense, as if a Soldier who disobeyed order, should beat the
enemy by that disobedience.

9. These who are pursued at the Kings instance, for crimes committed in
another Country are to be more gentlely punished, because the scandal was not
given there, and so the offense was less in that country, and some Lawyers
are of opinion, that the punishment should be still less, where the private
party injured insists not, Cod. fab. tit. de paenis def. 22. and because the
scandal grows weaker, as it grows old, therefore after long silence, the
punishment is to be moderated, (...). l. 25. ff. h. t.

For where the Law States a definit punishment, the Justices can neither
augment, nor lessen it, else to what purpose should the Law specify
punishments in some Statutes, and allow the Justices an arbitrarinesse in
others. l. 244. ff. de verb. sig. mulctae potestas judicis est quantum dicat,
sed hoc ita verum, si non lege sit constitutum, quantam dicat, and since men
are punished because they transgress the Law, therefore they should only be
pun^shed according to the Law, and the due observance of this, will keep Judges
from being arbitrary, and the Liedges from being oppressed,

VIII. Whether the meannesse of the transgression, should defend against
punishment, or should only mitigat the punishment, seems to be dubious; because
of the undigested discourses, of such as treat that subject; yet I think they
may be solidly reduced to these three conclusions, 1. That where there appears
to have been dole, or contrivance in the committer, there the smalnesse of the
transgression, does only lessen the punishment, if it be arbitrary by the Law,
as for instance, if a man should paction for sex Shilling, and two pence per
cent, where the Law allows only five Shilling, per cent though the Sum lent,
were very inconsiderable, and the excess be there very Small; yet it should
infer Usury; because a clear design of offending the Law, did there appear, by
the express paction: and in such cases our Judges find the Libel relevant, but
reserve to themselves the consideration of the Smalnesse of the excess, when
they shall come to tax the punishment. 2. If the punishment be severe, and that
it cannot be remitted by the Judge, As if the Law appoint Theft to be
punishable by death, it were unjust that an indictment of Theft, should be
found relevant for stealing two pence. 3. If it appear by the meanness that
there was no design of transgression, and that the Co^mitter designed not for
so small a matter to commit a crime, in that case, the meannesse of the
transgression ought to defend against the relevancy; For as Lawy^rs have well
observed, minimum non attenditur in delictis dolosis Cravet. Consil. 46. nec
praesumitur. Cardinalis Simoniam commisisse pro re minima. siquestio est de
simonia. And to these cases only, does that Law extend, de minimis non curat
praetor. l. scio ff. de in integrum restit. And therefore if a person should be
endited for committing Usury, in so far as he took Annualrent before the Term,
if the excess were small, because the Annualrent was very inconside^able and
was taken, but a Month or so, before the Term of payment, the Libel should not
be sustained against him; for it is not presumeable, that he took that
Annualrent out of avarice, but negligently, looking upon it as no breach of the
Law; or upon some other innocent account, as because the Debtor and he were to
fit other accounts, or the Debtor was to go out of the Country, and thus the
Council decided in the case of Purves Anno. 1666.

Where the punishment is arbitrary of its own nature, the Council may moderat
the punishment determined by the Justices. 2. Where the punishment is
statutory, and determined by a special Law, as in Treason, etc. it may be
argued, that there the Council can no more mitigat, then they can remit. 3.
Though custom be equivalent to statute in other cases, yet in cases where the
punishment depends upon custom, as theft, I have often seen the Council alter
the punishment from death to banishment: But it were surer, that even in this
last, the mitigation were procured betwixt the reading of the verdict, and the
pronouncing of doom; for after doom, jus est quaesitum Regi, as to all the
Movables, and life.

TITLE XXXI. Of Criminal Sentences, and their Executions.
1. The form of a criminal sentence with us, and how it is pronunced. 2. The
debate is not insert in the Sentence. 3. Whether the Sentence be null, in
totum, if the Judge punish in less, then the Law allows. 4. Whether Criminal
Sentences may be pronunced in the night time. 5. Whether the verdict of an
Assise, be necessar in all cases with us. 6. Within what time should a Criminal
Sentence be put to execution 7. Whether Magistrates may force men to be
executioners. 8. How absents are to be proceeded against, and when Letters of
Intercommuning, and Commissions of fire and Sword are granted. 9. Whether does
all punishment cease, by the death of the party. 10 If a criminal Judge may
retract his own sentence.
I. AFter Probation is led, the Assize is enclosed, who return their opinion,
which may be called their sentence, and this sentence is called a verdict, or
verdictum, nam sententia pro veritate habetur, but that which is properly the
sentence in a criminal Cause, is that deliverance of the Judge, whereby the
Panel is condemned, and punished, or absolved from all punishment: and this
Sentence is in criminals, by our style, called an Act of conviction, or an Act
of absolviture: But acta, in the style of Lawyers, expresses only the middle
Acts of the Process, acta judicilia, but not the Sentence. Sometimes likewise
the criminal sentence is in our Law called a doom, especially in forfeiture;
yet to speak strictly, these two differ, for that part of the sentence, which
finds the Panel guilty, or innocent, is called the Act of conviction, or
absolviture; but that part of it, which irrogats the punishment, is called the
doom; and these two are sometimes separate, which falls out when a long time
interveens, betwixt the finding a person guilty, and the pronuncing of his
punishment: but ordinarily they are conjoined. All which will appear more
clearly, by the several forms here expressed.

An Act of Conviction, and Doom, Curia, etc.
THe which (...) day being entered upon Panel, dilated, accused, and pursued,
be virtue of Our Sovereign Lords Letters, raised at the instance of A and B.
Advocat to Our Sovereign Lord, for His Highness interest, who compeared
personally, to pursue them for the crimes following; that is to say, for so
much, as be diverse Acts of Parliament (...) as in the said di^^ay at more
length is contained, after reading of the whilk ditta^, and diverse alledgeances
proponed be the Panel, (...) and their Procurators, and writes produced for
instructing thereof, that the said matter should not pass to the knowledge of
an Assize, and answers made thereto, be Our Sovereign Lords Advocat, and writes
produced be him, for veryfying thereof. The Justice fand the dittay relevant,
and did put the samen to the knowledge of an Assize, of persons following they
are to say, (...) whilks persons of Assize being chosen, sworn, and admitted,
and the said (...) being accused of the dittay of the crimes above-writen,
which were verrified be their own depositions, and confession in Judgment,
they removed al^ogether forth of Court, to the Assize house, where they be
plurality of vots, elected, and chosed the said C. reasoned, and voted upon the
points of the said dittay, and being ripely, and at length advised therewith,
together with the depositions (...) and other writes produced be His Majesty's
Advocat, for the verification thereof, entered again in Court, where they all
with one vot, be the report of the said Chancellor, fand, pronunced, and
declared the said D. to be filed, culpable, and convict of the crimes
respective, above-writen, contained in their said dittay, for the whilks cause,
the Justice be the mouth of (...) dempster of Court, decern'd, ordained, and
adjudg'd the said (...) to be taken to the Castle-hill of Edimburgh, or Market
Cross, and there to be hanged till he be dead, and his hail moveable goods to
be escheat to His Majesti's use, or their heads to be stricken from their
bodies, and the said (...) to be taken to the Market Cross of Edimburgh, and
there his Tongue to be pierced with an hot botkin, and thereafter banished this
Realm, not to be found thereintil under the pain of death: Or to be scourged,
and all their moveable-goods to be escheat, which was pronunced for doom,
extracted.

Act of Conviction.
THe whilk day (...) entered upon Panel, dilated, accused, and pursued be
(...) be virtue of Crimes purchased be him, against them, of Art, and Part of
demembring of (...) of the middle finger of his left hand, nearest his little
finger, committed the (...) day of (...) upon the Street of (...) which was put
to the knowledge of an Assize, of the persons following, they are to say (...)
whilks-persons of Assize, being chosen, sworn, and admitted, after accusation
of the A. of the crimes foresaid; removed altogether forth of Court, to the
Assize house, where they be plurality of vots, elected and choosed the said in
Chancellor, reasoned, and votted upon the points of the said dittay,
above-specified, and being advised, re-entered again in Court, where they all
in voice, be the mouth of the said Chancellor, fand, pronunced, and declared
the said (...) to be filed, culpable, and convict of Art, and Part of
demembring the said (...) of his middle finger, nearest his little finger, of
his left hand, committed the time foresaid, whereupon the said (...) asked
Instruments, Extractum, etc.

Doom for Demembring.
THe whilk day, etc. being entered on Panel, to hear doom pronunced against
them, as they that were convict be an Assize, in a Court of Iusticiar, holden
within the Tolbooth of Edimburgh, the (...) day of (...) instant, for Art, and
Part of he demembration of (...) ut supra, the Justices be mouth of (...)
dempster, decerned, and ordained the said (...) to content, and pay to (...)
the sum of three hundred Merks, in full satisfaction, and assithment, of the
demembration of him of the said finger, and to find caution for payment of the
said sum, to the said (...) upon condition that the said (...) should deliver
to the said (...) sufficient Letters of slaynes, for demembring him of his
little finger, who fand (...) with themselves, conjunctly and severally,
soverty, and cautioner fore-payed of the said three hundred Merks, to the said
(...) in full satisfaction, and assithment, of demembering him, of his middle
finger, he grant and, and giving a sufficient Letter of slaynes, as said is,
and als decern'd all the said (...) their moveable goods, and geir to be
escheat, and inbrought to Our Sovereign Lords use, as being convict of the said
crime, whilk was pronunced for doom, and ordains Letters of Horning, upon a
simple charge of ten days, and poynding to be direct hereupon.

Dempster our countryman, hist. eclest. page 235. relates this solemnity,
which is now in desuetude, lapidem tollit magistratus signatumque quaerenti
tradit, ille adversarium and testes citat, si quid ambiguum, and majoris
momenti, ad 12. (quos claves appellant) refertur, atque ita sine scriptis aut
impensis lites dirimi sunt solitae.

II. By the former styles it will appear, that the debate is not insert in the
Criminal Sentence, as it is in Civil Process, with us, but it contains
oft-times the whole Summonds, which Decreets for Civil Causes do not. These
Criminal Sentences likewise, express still the manner of the Probation, which
is the because of the Decree, as we speak in civil causes, and this the
Doctors confess to be the custom in other Kingdoms, inferitur enim causa in
sententia, ut quod talis accusatus est de tali malificio, and quod constat per
tefles vel per ejus confessionem, quod illud, maleficium commisit and ideo
condemnatus est, etc. Clar. 93. number. 21. After the Sentence is pronunced by the
Judge, it is written by the Clerk, who reads to the dempster, the manner of
punishment, and it is by him repeated, and the manner of punishment is called
the doom, because it is pronunced by the dempster, who adds after he has
pronunced the pun^shment, and this I give for Doom. And I find, that by the
custom of Italy, the Clerk reads the Sentence, and the Judges adds, ita
absolvo vel ita condemno Clar. ibid.

III. Albeit the Sentence bear a punishment, less then what the Statute
irrogats, eo casu, the Sentence is not by our Law null, but the Fisk has, by
virtue of the conv^ction, contained in the Sentence, ^ight to put in execution,
or to exact what the Law appoints, though the Sentence does not. And thus John
Wauch in Selkirk, being found guilty of theft, by the Sheriff of that Shire, he
was ordained to pay two thousand Merks, or to go to Barbodoes, in obedience to
which Decree, he paid the two thousand Merks. Notwithstanding whereof, the
Exchequer gifted his liferent-escheat to Mr. Andrew Hedderweik, who pu^sued a
declarature; in which the Lords found, that Wauch being once found guilty of
Theft, there was jus quesitum Regi, which the Sheriff could not prejudge, by
any Sentence, no more then he could remit the punishment altogether, for in so
far as he did mitigat the punishment, in so far he remitted it. To which it was
answered, that Theft was arbitrarly punished by our custom, sometimes by
death, sometimes by fyning, according to the several degrees of the guilt,
which was punishable; and custom had in this prorogat the power of inferior
Judges. 2. If the Sheriff had done wrong, he was liable, ex sindi catu, and
might be punished for exceeding his power, but the party was free by his
Sentence; and if the Sheriff had absolved him, though injustly, he could not
have been pursu^d again; so much more should the Sentence of the Sheriff,
absolve from a greater punishment, then that which the Law appoints; nam qui
potest majus potest and minus.

IV. Some Lawyers declare all Criminal Sentences, pronunced in the night time,
to be null, but others declare, that custom has allowed them; and though some
allow inferior Judges to proceed in the night time; but not Supreme Judges,
Alber. ad l. non minorem, C. de transact. And some allow delegat Judges to
pronunce their Sentences in the night, but not ordinary Judges; because the
dyets of an ordinary Judge are fixed, by the custom of his Predecessors:
whereas a deleg^t Judge, is tied to no time, nor place, except he be tied to it
by his Commission, Castren. ad D. l. minorem. number 4. Yet I would rather choose
to define, that albeit regularly, a Judge ought to proceed in open day, to
sentence criminals, yet he may pronunce Sentences lawfully in the night time,
in these cases. 1. If the case require have, as in mutinies, and conspiracies
falls often out. 2. If the crime be so abominable, that the Prince, or Judge is
unwilling that the people should know that there was such a crime committed, as
was done twice by the Justices, in the reign of King James the 6. by his own
special recommendation, and then all the Process, Sentences, and Executions,
was at midnight. 3. If there be just ground to suspect, that force will be
used, for rescuing the Panel 4. Some add, that if the Judge be so busy, that
he cannot proceed in the day time, he may proceed in the night time; but this
seems hard, vid. Cab. res. crimin. cas. 218.

V. Though a formal trial, by a Process, and Assize, be the regular form of
trials, yet in cases of lesser consequences, the Justices, and other crim^nal
Judges, punish Malefactors, in lesser Crimes, sine strepitu, and forma judicii
sumarly, by ordaining them to be scourged, or banished; instances whereof, are
given in the Titles of Murder, and Witchcraft; and the Justices allowed this
custom in the procedure of the Magistrates of Edinburgh, which as it is
conform to reason, so is warranted, per. l. 2.. 51. publico ff. de adulter. l.
2. C. de abol. l. levia ff. de accusat. (...). And though Durhie observes, that
the Lords found, that Sheriffs, and other inferior Judges, could not fine in
Bloodwites, for above ten Pounds, without an Inquest; yet now Sheriffs fine,
and imprison for all Bloodwites, and lesser delicts upon probation, led before
themselves without an Inquest.

VI. Within what time a Criminal Sentence should be put to Execution, is not
generally determined; and the learned Matheus has showed much reading in this
point, yet I might beg leave to use some liberty, being now so near the end of
this Treatise; to show what may be added, to his learned Observations, from
which I have hitherto abstained, because my design was rather to inform
others, then to raise in them any esteem for me. By l. 5. C. de custod. reor.
It is ordained, that convictos velox paena subducat; But l. 20. C. de paenis,
it is said, nollumus statim eos aut subire paenam, aut excipere sententiam, sed
per triginta dies super statu eorum, sors and fortuna suspensa sit. In
reconciling which Laws, Cujac. thinks, that generally the punishment should be
presently inflicted, and that thirty days are only to be allowed where the
Prince himself has imposed a severe sentence, which seems to be allowed by that
learned Greek Scoliast Thalalaeus si princeps statucrit paenam in aliquens non
statim punitur, sed dierum triginta dilatio datur, forte enim princeps interim
paenam revocabit, (...).

And though l. 19. Basil. de custod. reor. and cum fuerit conv^ctus, non statim
paenam pendere; sed rursus conjici in custodiam, iterumque eductum audiri, nam
haec dilatio iram judicum moderatiorem reddit. Yet by the word Convictus, there
is not meant, the last Sentence, but the being so convict, that he may be put
in Irons, which was not allowed, till the prisoner be thought guilty, was by
the Judge, as Thalalaeus excellently observes, (...). It may be likewise
observed, that the former, l. 5. does not ordain that the Sentence shall be
presently put to execution, but that prisoners shall be presently tried, for
the words are, de his quos tenet carcer inclusos, sancimus ut aut convictos
velox paena subducat, aut liberandos custodia diuturna non maceret; And
therefore that Law proceeds, to ordain the names of the Delinquents, to be
given up to the Ju^ge, within thirty days. And the Basilicks translate this
Law thus, ne diu is qui comprehensus est, mancat in custodia opportet enim eum
cito absolvi, vel puniri.

The reason of allowing their thirty days, was, because Theodosius having
executed many Inhabitants of Thessalonica, whilst he was in passion, and for
raising of a slight tumult, he was so sensible of this frailty, that at St.
Ambroses desire, he did endeavor to bridle that rage, in succeeding Princes,
which he did then so abominat in himself, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 11. cap.
18. And yet I find, that this same Law indulging thirty days, has been much
older, as appears by Quintilian declamatione de falso caedis damnato, the words
are, and mihi videtur ideo constituta esse lex, quae damnatum post tricesimum
diem puniri voluit, quia modo videbat legumlator possi fieri; ut deciperetur
accusator, modo ut calumniaretur. And though it may be urged, that a present
Execution is convenient; because that prevents the prisoners escape, by tumult,
or killing himself; and that the more speedy the Execution be, the Justice is
the more remarkable, and can be the less interrupted by appeals, and
intercessions; Yet certainly a Christian Magistrate, should allow sometime to
the Malefactor, for setting his Soul, and House in order; lest he else by his
precipitancy, destroy the Soul, with the Body, and punish the innocent
Posterity, with the guilty Panel, who gets not this time to settle his
affairs: and it has been often found, that persons thus too hastily Execute,
have been thereafter found innocent; great examples whereof, are set down by
Valor. Max. lib. 9. de temeritate: And Seneca de jra lib. 1. It is likewise the
interest of the Prince, that he may have time to interpose; and for this cause,
Tiberius being offended, at the Senats too speedy Executing Caius Lutorius,
ordered, that no man should be Execute within ten days after the Sentence,
Dion. in Tiber. lib. 57. vid. Sidon. Epist. 7. lib. 1. By this delay likewise,
the persons convict, have oft-times been induced to discover their Accomplices,
and to confess the Crimes, which others have denied in a rage, or confusion,
occasioned by the shortness of their respite.

With us, a Sentence may be presently put to Execution, and the Judge is
confined by nothing, but by his own discretion; yet where pecuniary Mulcts are
inflicted, either the Panel is returned to Prison, till he pay his fine, or
the Act of Adjournal, bears ordinarily, that payment should be made within six
days, and though Barrons cannot poynd in Civil Cases, upon less then fifteen
days; yet it was found that they might presently poynd, sine ullisindiciis
legalibus, upon Criminal Sentences.

VII. Sentences were execute of old, amongst the Romans, either by the Common
Executioner, or by Soldiers, l. 7. C. de Cohort. an instance whereof, is
clearly to be seen in Our Saviors Passion; and these Soldiers were called,
optiones and speculatores, l. 6. ff. de bon. damnat. And yet I rather think,
that the Soldiers were only Guards, and never Executioners, and were called
Speculatores, because they were appointed to oversee the Execution, and to
restrain Tumults. Especially seeing common Executioners were so infamous, that
they could not be advanced ever thereafter to any sacred orders, C. clericum
distinct. 50. And I remember to have seen the Executioner of St. Iohnstoun,
repelled by the Lords of Session, from being a witness.

That the Justice may force any of the Magistrates of a Town, to supply the
place of an Executioner, if they want one, is I think, without all warrant;
seeing officium nemini debet esse damnosum: And no man would be a Magistrate, if
that were allowed; but I think that the Magistrates may be fined for negligence,
if they omit to appoint one; and for the same reason, I think that the
Magistrate cannot force any mean person, who leads an honest life, to be an
Executioner: albeit Clar.. Fin. quest. 99. number. 4. And Gomes. lib. 3. cap. ult.
number. 5. do assert, that the Judge may force any, ex infima plebe, to officiat
in that employment; and yet their opinion agrees with our custom. The
Executioner has right to the Clothes ( pannicularia) of the person executed,
by our custom. And per. l. D. Hadrianus ff. de bon. dam. But by the Civil Law,
the Bodies of the persons executed, could not of old be buried, without the
permission of the Prince, ff. de cadav. punitor, which is antiquated, per. l.
obnoxious C. de relig. and sumpt. fun. And by our custom, wherein the persons
execute, may be buried, in all cases, though the friends of the person
condemned for Treason, cannot assist on the Scaffold, or wear mourning, by our
customs, except the Council give express consent.

VIII. If the defender be absent, then upon an Act of Adjournal, he is to be
denounced rebel, or outlawed, (as the English, and our old Statutes call it)
and though if the punishment be capital, or the fine be for His Majesty's use;
the Clerk of the Justice Court, can only write the Letters; yet if the fine be
to be paid to any private person, any Writer to the Signet may write the
Letters; and though the 126. Act, 1. Parl. Ia. 6. appoints that all Criminal
Letters should not be registrat, as other Letters, but returned to the
Adjournal; yet de praxi, such Hornings are sometimes Registrat, in the ordinary
Register of Horning; likeas, albeit the Escheat of him who is denunced, cannot
fall upon a denounciation, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, though Caption
may be raised upon such an Execution, yet Criminal Letters may be execute at
Edinburgh, or any Market Cross where the Justice Court did sit, in which the
Sentence was pronounced, Act 140. Parl. 8. K. Ia. 6. upon production of the
Reg^strat Ho^ning, Letters of intercommuning are granted, upon a common Bill,
past by the Lords of Session, by which all the Leidges are discharged to
intercommune with the Rebel, which must be execute at the Market Cross of the
respective Shires, and Registrat there, or in the general Register.

Upon the denunciation immediately the single escheat falls, and after remaining
at the Horn for year and day, the life-rent escheat falls; which custom we have
borrowed from Saxony (with most of our other forms) for with them, si reus
fugitivus in primum sive simplex bannum sit declaratus nec intra annum and diem
se purgaverit sed annum and diem prorogare passus sit, in bannum superuis
incidit vid. Carpz. pract. crim. part. 3. quest. 140. number. 80. From whom also
we have our style of declaring escheats.

Upon the registrat Horning Caption is raised, and if the Messe^ger be deforced
in the execution thereof; then the Council grants commission of fire and sword.
which is But a Caption for inbringing the Malefactor, who resists the ordinary
course of Law. And in my opinion, Letters of fire and sword may be granted,
though the Malefactor has not deforced, if it be not our that the Malefactor
be not to be reduced in the ordinar way: for it is unreasonable to expose His
Majesty's Laws to contempt, and His Officers to certain hazard, as in the case
where a person is denounced fugitive for deforcing Messengers, or has convocat
loose men, and lives in open rapine: it were against sense, that a new
deforcement were necessar. But their commissions are never granted but in
criminal cases; and yet I remember, that one was granted to Mackintosh, against
Lochiel, after that Mackintosh had obtained Decreets of removeing, and had
raised Letters of ejection, but the Sheriff had declared that he durst not
eject, for the Council thought ti not just to expose the Sheriff to certain
hazard. And yet the ordinar course is, that the Sheriff should offer to eject,
and if he be deforced, then the case becomes criminal; and some think that the
execution of deforcement is not sufficient in that case, without a sentence
ensuing on it, and that the deforcers be registrat at the Horn thereupon. But
others think, that as in civil cases, Letters of second Caption are granted,
where the first Caption cannot take effect; so in cases of extraordinar
opposition to authority, Letters of fire and sword are granted, upon a mere
execution, that the ordinar course of Law cannot take effect.

IX. It may be doubted what a Judge ought to do, if after sentence, the
innocence of the person condemned, should be convincingly cleared; in which
case, the answer is, that the Judge cannot rescind his own sentence, (...), l.
56. Basil. de paen. but he ought to acquaint the Council, and they may
interceed for his Remission, l. 27. de paen. l. 1.. ult. ff. de quest. the
Council may prorogat also the dyets appointed for execution; but I think the
Justices, and much less inferior Judges cannot prorogat dyets appointed for
execution, even by themselves, since they are functi, by the pronouncing of the
doom, though some ignorant Judges, de facto, prorogat executions, and as they
cannot even before sentence remit, so neither can they prorogat for any long
time, for else prorogations may be lengthened, so as to become Remissions upon
the the matter. The other side of the doubt, viz. whether a person once
absolved, may be thereafter pursued for the same crime, is more intricat, but
may be somewhat cleared by these positions, 1. The same party cannot upon new
probation, much less upon the old probation, accuse a person once assoilzied by
an Assize, though he may accuse the Assize who assoilzied him of wilful error,
and that even though he should thereafter willingly confess the crime, for
which he was formerly accused, though Farin. quest. 4. number. 43. thinks that he
may be again pursued, and I should think that confession savoured too much of
madness, to be the foundation of a criminal sentence. 2. Though the pursuit was
at the instance of the party injured, yet His Majesty's Advocat cannot again
pursue upon the pretense of, res inter alias acta, for that were to keep people
in a constant suspense. 3. If the pursuer did collude with the defender, so
that the defender was assoilzied by a white Assize, in abstracting the
necessary probation; I think in that case, his own fraud should not secure him,
Reg. Maj. lib. 4. cap. 28. si per calumniam procedat vid. cap. 2. de collus. de
teg. but though the defender was assoilzied by collusion, betwixt the defenders
friends and the pursuer; yet I think the defender cannot again be reconveened
for the same crime, since he was innocent, though the collusion was
advantageous to him.

X. By the death of the offender, all punishment ceased, except in Treason, and
crimine repetundarum, or, missimployment of public Money, in ceteris vero
criminibus, ita demum pro delictis paena ab haerede incipere potest si vivo reo
accusatio mota est, l. ex judiciorum, ff. de accus: so that by that Law, if the
pursuit was intented against the Father, it might have continued against the
Son, to infer a pecunial Mulct; but this last holds not with us, amongst whom
no Probation can be led in absence, except in Treason; but yet I think that a
Civil pursuit, may be sustained for damnage, and interest, and expenses of a
Crimin^l pursuit, even against the Malefactors Heir, as was also decided by the
Senate of Savoy, Cod. Fab. tit. de accusat. def. 15.

FINIS.

