A MEMENTO FOR English Protestants, Containing the following Particulars, viz.
An Epitome of the Massacre in Piedmont. An Epitome of the French Massacre. An
Epitome of the Irish Massacre. A Speech of Pope Sixtus Quintus. A Collection of
the most Remarkable Passages of Queen Mary's Reign.


Together with A PREFACE by way of Answer to that part of the Compendium, which
reflects on the Bishop of Lincoln's late Book.

Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for
the word of God, etc.

And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood? etc.

And it was said unto them, That they should rest yet for a little season,
until their fellow servants also, and their brethren, that should be killed as
they were, should be fulfilled.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Sampson, next to the Wonder Tavern within Ludgate,
1680.

THE PREFACE.
THE Papists have of late given us such fresh Occasions by their horrid and
damnable Conspiracies against the Person of our King, our Government, and our
Religion; to renounce and detest the Communion of that Church, which does not
only allow men, but teaches them to be Murderers and Traitors. And we have yet
so great reason to apprehend the dismal Consequences of their secret and
hellish Machinations, that I am confident no Discourse which tends to heighten
and improve the just Prejudices of Englishmen, against that impious and absurd
Religion, will be thought at this time unnecessary by any good Protestant. I
shall not therefore make any Apology for the Collecting and Printing this
Epitome of the three grand Massacres in Piedmont, France, and Ireland, which is
intended chiefly for the Instruction of ignorant and unlearned People; for we
fear not that Scholars and men of Sense should be made Papists, except such
whose Morals are so wretchedly debauched, that they are ready at all times to
sacrifice their Consciences to their Civil Interests; and I hope there are not
so many of those desperate Prostitutes as the Papists are apt to imagine, and
as the Manners of the Age we live in, may (I confess) give us just cause to
apprehend: No, it is the ordinary Rank of men, who have not had the advantage of
Learning and a generous Education, to defend themselves against the studied
Fallacies and specious Pretenses of the Romish Agents, who commonly become the
prey of those Wolves in Sheeps clothing.

To provide therefore for their Security, that they may not fall into the
snares that are laid for them, ought to be our chiefest care, since as it is
more charity to strengthen the hands of the weak, than to add force to the
strong; so in this case it is more prudent too, in order to the support of the
common cause of Protestant Religion, the ignorant being by far the greater
number. Nor is this to be done a better way, than by furnishing them with such
plain Arguments as they are able to apprehend and manage themselves, to the
confusion of the common Enemy. And these can be no other than such as are drawn
from matters of fact, they being easiest to be understood, and hardest to be
answered.

For this reason it was, that this short Narrative of the bloody Butcheries and
inhuman Murders heretofore committed upon the persons of Protestants, by
Italian, French, and Irish Papists, in cold blood, and by the instigation of
their Church, was prepared for the Press at the desire of a worthy Gentleman,
(whose Zeal for the Interest of his Country and the Protestant Religion
deserves a public mention, would his Modesty permit it) in order to the being
by him bestowed among his Country Neighbors, who some of them perhaps have
never heard of, and others may have forgot the story of these holy Popish
Cruelties, these Religious Villainies; the design being to let such sort of
people see what a horrid thing Popery is, when her Varnish is taken off; what a
deformed and frightful Face this gaudy painted Whore, Rev. 17.2, 9, 6.
With whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, this mother of
abominations, made drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus; I say, what a deformed and frightful Face she has when
her Paint is laid by, and she appears by true Lights in her proper Colors;
what monstrous and abominable Actions Papists are capable of, when the Interest
of that Idol of theirs (their Church) requires them. By which as well as by
their late Plots here in England, it is not hard for men of the meanest
Capacities to perceive, that their Religion cannot be the Religion of Christ,
while it justifies them in the grossest Immoralities, and engages them in the
most unchristian practices. That those detestable Doctrines of Deposing and
Killing Kings, and extirpating Heretics, which have been so often objected to
the Church of Rome by Protestant Divines, are not Speculative Notions and
Propositions Problematical, as some of the Popish Writers, and particularly the
Author of that Lying Libel, called Compend. page 77.
The Compendium, would make us believe; but such settled Maxims of their
barbarous Ecclesiastical Policy, as too often have been, and again will be put
in practice, whenever that proud uncharitable Church has a safe occasion to do
it; though at other times they must be disowned with the usual Popish
Impudence, especially to such Protestants as have so little wit to take what
they say on trust, or so little reading not to be able to disprove them.

I hope no man will understand me here, as if from the bare Actions of Papists,
and nothing else, I argued to the Principles of Popery, and concluded the one
from the other; this were bad Charity, and worse Logic, and one of their own
constant Topics in their Writings against Protestants: 'twere (to say the
worst that can be of it) to fall directly into the ridiculous way of reasoning
used by the Compendionist, when he pretends to answer the Bishop of Lincoln's
Book, that admirable and learned Discourse; a Discourse of so great use at this
time, and which does with such undeniable Evidence convince the Religion of
Papists to be guilty of all their traitorous and bloody Designs against Kings
and Protestants, that I cannot but take this occasion to correct that
troublesome Impertinent, who has made such a senseless Buzze, and raised such a
dust about it, with design to puzzle and darken those Truths, which the Bishop
has there made so plain and clear, especially since the Bishop himself has not
thought him (as indeed he is not) worthy of his notice, and no body else that I
know of, has yet exposed that part of his impudent Pamphlet, which concerns
this truly Venerable and Excellent Person.

First then, what a foolish Flourish does he make against the Bishop,
endeavoring to throw that wicked Principle of Deposing Kings upon Protestants,
with this gross Fallacy of Arguing from men's Practices to the Principles of
their Religion? Is not his Lordships meaning, says Compend. page 77.
he, in truth this, that Protestant Principles (when really believed) are
destructive to all Kings, especially to Catholic ones? since we see that the
lawful Monarchs of England, Scotland, Swedeland, Denmark, the United Provinces,
Transylvania, Geneva, etc. have been actually deposed by their Protestant
Subjects. This (etc.) here I guess to be a Lie of the lowest price in their
Book of Rates for Sin; it is so pitiful and inconsiderable a Trick. He puts it
down as if there were a vast and tiresom number of Countries behind, which in
kindness to his Reader he forbears to mention, where Princes have been deposed
by Protestants; when he know in his Conscience be could scarce have named one
more, if it had been to gain the Popedom; if he could, I doubt not but we
should have had it at full length. Well; but in those Countries he has named,
Princes (it seems) have been actually deposed by their Protestant Subjects. And
what then? Does it therefore follow, that the Protestant Religion teaches the
Doctrine of Deposing Kings? Or may it not indeed teach the quite contrary for
all that? Did this wretched Trifler never hear of men who have acted contrary
to the Principles of their Religion? Where has he lived? In a Convent without
doubt, among the most Seraphick Saints of his Church; Dr. Stilling fleet's
Phanaticism of the Church of Rome, page 276.
I me an those mad Phanaticks of the Sect of Abbot Joachim, who according to
their new Evangelium Aeternum, have been in a state of perfection ever since
the Year 1260. I wonder when his hand was in, and while he was industriously
stuffing out his thin Discourse with big and sounding words, he did not bring
all the Protestant Criminals, and other ill men, who have been any way famous
since the Reformation, upon the stage, and then charge the Protestant Religion
with Felony, and Murder, and Treason, and Adultery, and Perjury, and what not?
The Consequence had been altogether as good, and the Triumph as just. We do not
reason at this loose and absurd rate, when we accuse the Church of Rome of
Principles which justify the Deposing and Murdering of Princes, and the
Massacring of millions of innocent people, whom with a ridiculous affectation
she terms Heretics. But we first prove her (as my Lord Bishop of Lincoln has
unanswerably done) to have such Principles; and this not only from the Books
of her most eminent Writers, (upon those Testimony we always lay the least
weight) allowed and commended by her self, but from that Law which is the Rule
of Justice in her Ecclesiastical Courts, from the Authentic Bulls and
Decretals of her Popes. And lastly, (which is the greatest Evidence that is
possible in the case) from the Canons of her General Councils. Then we urge
matters of fact, conformable to them, to show that they are not things of bare
speculation and despute among Casuists and Schoolmen, but such necessary Rules
for the support of her Hierarchy, as have been frequently put in practice, to
the great scandal of the Christian Profession.

To come to particulars: We should not lay to her Charge the Murders of Henry
III. and Henry IV. of France, because they were committed by Members of her
Communion, if, besides the public Applause of the one by the then Pope, in a
set Speech to the College of Cardinals, we had not first convinced her of
holding such Principles as justify both. We should not accuse her of the
several Conspiracies of Papists here in England against the Lives of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, King Charles I. and His present Majesty, if, besides the
proving upon her the before mentioned Principles, she had not actually and
formally (as for as it lay in her power) Excommunicated and Deposed them all,
and Absolved their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. We should not
accuse her of the Massacres of Paris and Piedmont, because her Sons were there
the Brethren in iniquity, the Sons of Violence, that acted unprovoked those
dismal Slaughters, if, as an additional proof of her holding the forementioned
Principles, she had not Thuanus Hist. l. 53. p. 837.
commended the one, giving thanks to God for it, and History of the Waldenses.
commanded the other. Lastly, we should not place to her account the late
Rebellion of Ireland, and all those Murders which were the Consequences of it,
because the Rebels were Papists, if, besides that the History of the Irish
Rebellion in Folio, printed 1680.
Pope's Nuncio was known to be the chief Guide, and Romish Priests the chief
Contrivers and Fomenters of that desperate and bloody Revolt, it were not most
notorious, that she has always ready an Armory of execrable Principles, suited
to such occasions, to satisfy the Consciences and encourage the Madness of her
Jewish Zelots.

This I am confident all impartial men will judge fair Dealing and just
Discourse, and far different from the Method of the Compendionist; the Reader
may see we ground not our Charge of Popery upon the bare Actions of Papists,
but having found this degenerate Church teaching the most disloyal and inhumane
Doctrines; and then observing her Followers in several famous Instances, to be
guilty of Facts which directly answer to then: We think we have reason to
conclude the one to be the cause of the other, and that many Papists had not
been so bad men, if their very Religion had not debauched them. May we not now
justly turn the Compendionist's own words of foolish Triumph upon himself and
his Party? Compend. page 77.
What Parity is there between us and our Adversaries, either in our Actions or
Books of this nature? Though the Actions of many Protestants have been too had
to be justified, yet did they never go to the Church for Sanctuary. Though
Protestants have been Deposers and Murderers of Princes, (there are Rogues of
all Persuasions;) yet had they never any Encouragement from their Religion so
to do? nor did any of them ever so much as pretend it, except such Bedlam
Phanaticks as Fifth Monarchy Men, a Venner, or a John of ^eyden; and these are
(properly speaking) as far from being right Protestants; as Papists are from
being right Christians. But can he show us where the Protestant Religion allows
the Deposing or Murdering of Princes, or gives the least intimation of such a
Power in the Church? Can he show it us, where only it ought to be looked
after. viz. in the Confessions of our Faith or in the Articles of our
Communion? Or lastly, can he show it us in the Writings of any considerable
Protestant Divines? though their private Opinions unlicenc'd and unauthoriz'd
by the Church, of which they are Members, cannot properly be a Charge against
the Protestant Religion, but (because we will give him more than he can justly
ask in this Controversy) I say, can he show it us even bare? I know indeed he
does affirm, That the Compend. page 76.
prime Leaders (as he styles them) of the Reformation, Luther, Calvin,
Zuinglius, Bez^, etc. have in express terms held, that Princes might be Deposed
upon the account of Religion. But he has not quoted any of their Books to
direct us where this scandalous Tenet, which he fixes upon them, might be
found, but leaves us to hunt after it at large among the Voluminous. Writings
of those Authors. I do not therefore think my self obliged to take any more
notice of this Slander of his, than if he had never vented it. What does he
expect to be believed upon his bare word?

-- sic notus Ulvxes? Does he think we know them no better than to trust them?
But we will not use all the Advantages that we have against so bad a Cause, and
so weak an Adversary. Let us suppose then for once that Luther, Calvin, and as
many more as he has a mind to take into his etc. have held, That Princes may be
deposed upon the Account of Religion. By what new Logic can he make this
pertinent to the present Discourse? Does he think it the same thing to hold
indefinitely, That Princes may be deposed upon the Account of Religion; and to
hold, That the Church has a Right to depose them upon that account? to hold
that they may be deposed by an Authority Civil, and to hold that they may be
deposed by an Authority Ecclesiastical? Let him now speak his Conscience
without a Dispensation. Does he in good earnest think these two Propositions
equivalent, or at least equivalent as to the point in controversy between him
and the Bishop of Lincoln, and that they equally disgrace the professed
Religion of him who affirms them* He cannot fare be so void of the ordinary
reason of a Man, though he has swallowed down never so many Roman Catholic
Doctrines, as not to perceive as palpable difference between them. It Is not but
that the former of these Position is a very bad Principle, dangerous to
Princes, and destructive to the Peace and Settlement of a Nation, though not so
much as the later, because it wants the Enforcements of Conscience and Religion
to fix it in the Mind, and thrust it out upon occasion into Action with that
violence, which usually accompanies a pretended Zeal for the Honor of God. But
how bad soever it may be, still it is a Civil, not a Religious Principle; and
though it may be Sedition in the highest degree, it can never be Heresy; a
man's Life and Estate (who maintains it) is answerable for it, not his Religion.
To make this a little clearer I say, It Is one thing to hold, that Princes may
be deposed by the State, though upon the account of Religion, ( i.e, for being
of a Religion different from the established) grounding this Opinion upon the
Laws and Customs of some particular Civil Constitutions, or upon the ends of
Government in general; and quite another thing to hold, that they may be
deposed by the Church, grounding this Opinion upon the Laws of Religion, and a
Power supposed to be delegated to her by Christ. This last is the Principle we
charge, and the Bishop of Lincoln has proved upon the Church of Rome, which
makes her Religion it self dangerous to Princes. On the other side, though
Luther, Calvin, or any other Protestant Divines should hold the first, though
it be a false and a bad, yet (as I said before) it is a Civil Principle, and
their holding it could no more reflect on the Protestant Religion, than an
Error they might be guilty of in History or Mathematics. The Protestant
Religion therefore remains clear from any suspicion of allowing the Doctrine of
Deposing Princes, (the point I undertook to make good) though it should be
granted the Compendionist, that Luther and Calvin, etc. have had ill Principles
in relation to Civil Governments. If he could prove indeed that Luther and
Calvin, or any other Protestant Divines, have held The Lawfulness of Deposing
Princes, as a Principle of their Religion, and placed the power of doing it in
the Church, he would say something that were to the purpose, and parallel to
what we accuse the Church of Rome of, but in the Method he has taken, he does
but beat the Air, and fight with Shadows.

I shall explain this Distinction a little further by some famous Examples, in
order to meet with the other Cavils of this idle Wrangler, and make the
Inconsequence of his Arguings (if it be possible) yet more apparent. He may
remember then, that here in England Edward II. and Richard II. were actually
deposed in times of Popery, and by Papists; yet did our Writers never charge
the Church of Rome, (though she held then the same Doctrines, and had the same
pride to trample on Princes that now she has) with those two disloyal and
unjust Usurpations upon the Sovereignty of the Kings of England. And for what
imaginable reason but this only, viz. because they were both Acts of the Civil
Power, and carried on by mon who grounded what they did upon Principles (though
grossly false and mistaken) drawn from the Constitution of the English
Government, and the Rights of the two Houses of Parliament; and the Church of
Rome, contrary to her Custom upon such occasions, was only a bare Spectator,
neither her Authority nor her Principles being made use of to further or
justify those Proceedings. I would now ask this Collector of Impertinencies,
this tedious Compendionist, whether he thinks this a good reason to clear the
Church of Rome from being concerned in the deposing these two unfortunate
Princes. If he says it is, as no doubt he will, with what face can he pretend to
charge the Church of England, (as he would be understood to do page 76. lin.
38.) with the Endeavors that were used to keep Queen Mary from the Crown, the
Death of the Queen of Scots, and the B^ll of the late House of Commons against
the Duke of York's Successi^n, since the Cases are directly parallel; I mean
parallel in all that concerns the present question. Were they not every one of
them Acts of the Civil Power, and carried on by men who grounded what they did
on Civil, not Religious Principles? Was not the setting up of the Lady Jane
Gray, and the raising an Army to oppose Queen Mary, an Act of the Privy Council
in pursuance of King Edward's Will, and a Law made in the Reign of Henry VIII.
for the illegitimating of this Princess, as the Lords of the Council themselves
declare in their Answer to her Letter writ from Baker's Chron.
^ramingham Castle? Was not the Death of the Queen of Scots most notoriously an
Act of the State, justified by the Laws of the Land? Was she not indicted for
Treason; and known to pretend a better Title to the Crown than Queen Elizabeth?
Lastly, was not the Bill against the Duke of York grounded on a supposed Legal
Power in the King and the two Houses to alter the course of the Succession when
they think fit? Have not all the Pamphlets that have been writ in Vindi^tion of
that Bill argued the Lawfulness of it from the Constitution of the Civil
Government, and wholly disclaimed the interesting of Religion at all in the
business, as to the justifying of it in the least degree, endeavoring with
great pains to prove, that true Religion does not meddle with the Civil Rights
of Princes, but leaves them to be determined by the Laws and Customs of
particular Countries? By what strange consequence they can he entitle the
Church of England, or the Protestant Religion; to things that are so perfectly
of a Civil nature, unless he will make them answerable for all the Actions of
Protestants of what kind soever, and resolve to maintain that childish Sophism
I first took notice of, as the chief ground of all his extravagant Raving
against the Bishop's Book, viz. The concluding the Principles of a Religion
from the practices of her Professors? Which is the very Dregs of Folly, the
last Running of Impertinence.

It Is true, the Protestant Religion ( i.e. the care of preserving it) was, no
doubt, the great Motive of doing what was done in every one of these three
Cases, but that is not here to the purpose; for it is not the Reason for which,
but the Authority by which, a Prince is deposed, and the kind of Principle ( i.
e. whether Civil, or Religious) it is justified upon, that must condemn, or
acquit a Church of the Guilt of it; though this man endeavor all along to
insinuate the contrary, by such a fallacious way of representing the Position
charged on the Church of Rome, as makes that seem to be the chief Point in the
Controversy between her and the Bishop of Lincoln, which is in truth no part
of it, viz. the Motive or end of deposing Princes. But it is not the Business of
this little Pamphlet ^to state things fairly, and reason clearly, but to amuse
the Reader^ and puzzle the Question; a close way of arguing will not suit
either with his Cause, or his Understanding: a good proof of which he gives us
at the very first in these words; See the Compend. page 76.
If on the other-side (says he) the Bishop means that there have been Popish
Doctors of the opinion, that Princes might be Deposed upon the account of
Religion, what Advantage, I would fain know, can that be to his Lordship, or
his Treatise, since not only all the prime Leaders of the Reformation, etc? Is
it to be imagined now, that a man should get so far out of his way, unless he
purposely designed to ramble, or write things so grossly impertinent to the
matter he was treating of, unless he studied to confound it, and render it as
little intelligible as was possible? Never did any man take more true pains to
understand a Discourse difficult in it self, than he has done to misunderstand
the Bishop's, which was plain and easy, or a least to make his Reader do so;
for he cannot be so dull himself in this Point as he would seem. It Is not
possible that he, or any man who has read the Bishop's Book, should think it
was the Bishop's meaning only to charge the Popish Doctors with holding
indefinitely, that Princes might be Deposed upon the account of Religion, when
it is so palpably evident in a hundred places of his Book, that he only brings
their Opinions as a collateral proof of his Charge of their Church and
Religion, and that with a quite different Tenet, as I have already showed. And
as it is the Roman Church, and not the Doctors, only, or chiefly, which the
Bishop charges with holding, that Princes may be Deposed by her Authority, not
with holding indefinitely that they may be Deposed upon the account of
Religion: So it is the present Popish Canon Law, the Bulls, the Decretals of
Popes, and the Canons of General Councils, which are the Testimonies he relies
upon for the making good of his Charge, and not the private Opinions of Popish
Doctors, though being cited out of Books licensed and approved by that Church,
they are of considerable weight in the Argument. Now what says the
Compendionist to these strong and most convincing Proofs? Why in fine ( as Mr.
Bays says upon another occasion) he wont tell us. He has not one word, not one
syllable of Answer to them, but passes them over with as deep a silence, and as
good a grace, as if they were, like most of his own, not at all to the purpose.
This discreet and necessary Resolution being taken, he bends all his little
Wit, and with a great deal of cheerfulness, goes about to invalidate what the
Bishop urges from the Writings of the Popish Doctors, which yet the poor
impotent Scribler is by no means able to do; as I have made appear in my Answer
to his Charge of Luther and Calvin. The Attempt however was just as wise, and
as likely to satisfy reasonable men, as if a General, who had a great and well
disciplined Army to fight with, should neglect the Main Body, and with his
whole Strength set upon the Forlorn Hope.

For his Objections of the Protestant Rebellion in Hungary, the late Rising in
Scotland, the Murder of the Archbishop of S. Andrews, and that Home-Blow of
his, the Gazet Advertisement of The Trials of Twenty nine Protestant Regicides,
they are of the same nature, and grounded on the same pitiful Falacy with those
I have already answered; and when he can show us any Principle of the
Protestant Religion that justifies Rebellion or Murder, especially that of
Princes, or does but in the remotest degree encourage men to commit these
detestable Crimes, I shall again consider them: In the mean time, let him not
wast his Paper, and tire his Reader with the Repetition of such fulsom
Sophistry.

But perhaps it may not be amiss to give a more particular Answer to his
Home-Blow, because he has such an opinion of its force, and does so triumph
with the conceit of his Victory, I shall endeavor therefore to take him down
in the height of his Rapture, and show his ignorant malice. The Reader will
remember the Point he should prove, is, That Protestant Principles are
destructive to Kings; for those are the very words of the Introduction to his
terrible Argument of Instances of Fact. Now did the Twenty nine Protestant
Regicides ever pretend to justify their abominable Villainy by any Principle of
their Religion? Nay, did they not pretend the quite contrary, and ground it
wholly upon a Civil Authority? Did they not argue the lawfulness and justice of
it from a Power they fancied in the People, to call the King to an Account for
his Actions? Though in this they were as absurd Logicians as the Compendionist
has all along showed himself, and reasoned not only against the very first
Principle of Civil Policy; but point blank contrary to the most fundamental
Maxims of the Law of England, which says, That the King can do no wrong; and
therefore makes his Ministers questionable for the Miscarriages in Government,
because he himself is in his own Person, inviolable and sacred: but this
concerns not the present Business. These men I say, (as bad as they were) had
not the Impudence to Interest the Protestant Religion, or any Protestant Church
whatever, in the guilt of their impious Treason, by pretending to derive any
Warrant or Encouragement for it from them; or if they had, it would have
signified nothing to the Compendionist's purpose, since there is no
King-deposing, or King-killing Principle to be found in any Protestant
Confessions of Faith, or Articles of Communion, (which are the only proper
Evidences to convince a Protestant Church of any Principle or Doctrine that is
laid to her charge) and so it would have amounted to no more than their
particular mistaking or perverting the Principles of their Religion, as grossly
and as wilfully as they did the Laws of their Country. But this is not the
case; for they did not so much as pretend any Warrant from the Protestant
Religion for what they did: How then can He charge Protestant Principles with
the Personal Crimes of these men? Or what does this Home-Blow, and all his
other Instances prove, except this only, viz. That several Protestants have
been Rogues, very great Rogues, Murderers, Rebels, Traitors, etc. Does He not
know that they are all mortal men too, and subject to many other Vices, which
he might very clearly have proved upon them (if he had pleased) by undeniable
Examples? There Is not a Sin the Pope pardons, of what Price soever, but it is
too sadly true, that Protestants have been guilty of it at some time or other,
if that will do him any service. But now, in the name of a little common sense,
Who, or what does this Raver oppose in this strenuous Argument? Did ever any of
our Writers assert that all the Protestants in the world were good Men, and
pious Christians? Or is there any sort of people among us besides Quakers, i.
e. mad men, who hold a state of Absolute Perfection in this Life? He has put
himself into an extraordinary Heat, and made strange violent Assaults, and yet
no Enemy appears near him. What ails the man? he has sure been combating some
Giant in imagination, like Don Quixote when he hacked down the Walls of his
Chamber. Well, who ever he be, though it were Malambruno himself, I Will warrant
him he is killed outright, this La Mancha has so laid about him with Home-Blows.

Another great quarrel he has to the Bishop is, that he does not answer four
Books (named in the Compendium's margin) writ (it seems) by the Catholics of
England since the King's Restoration, about the Deposing Power of the Church;
Compend. page 78.
His Lordship (says he) is so far from answering these Authors, that he never
so much as cites them to this purpose, (a great fault indeed) so that we must
conclude them unanswerable. Well argued of my word; I see he deals in nothing
but Home-Blows. Mr. Bays and this Compendionist would have made a couple of
rare Disputants, if they had not been spoiled by their Tutors, and ill grounded
at first; they have both an admirable natural talent at Reasoning, all the
difference between them is, Bays loved it in Rhyme, and this man's altogether
for it in Prose. But without Raillery, does he believe the Bishop of Lincoln
obliged to take particular notice of every idle Pamphlet of theirs, that keeps
a Pudder about the deposing Power of the Church, (with design to make the
business intricate and dark) and to think them as considerable, as his Party
always do their own Books? No doubt he takes it monstrous ill too, that the
Bishop has not thought him worth his Answering, and perhaps concludes himself
unanswerable. But I hope I shall hinder him from falling into that mistake, and
make him sensible what an Impar Congressus Achilli, what a poor contemptible
thing he is, when he appears in the Lists against so great a Scholar as the
Bishop of Lincoln. For the Pamphlets he mentions, they are more than answered
in the Bishop's Book, though it does not particularly name them; and when he,
or any other Factor for Popery, gives a tolerable Answer to those clear
Testimonies I told him of before, ( and which he never so much as cites to this
purpose) by which the Bishop does so plainly prove the Doctrine of Deposing
Kings upon the Church of Rome, I here engage my word to him, these Pamphlets
shall be made ridiculous by name, and their Authors showed to the people in the
Fools Coats they deserve.

In the next place be tells us, Compend. page 78.
That the Venetians have openly in their very writings denied this Deposing
Power of the Church without Censure: And, That several Authors have been
censured in France and elsewhere for writing for it. In answer to which, First,
we know very well, that the Church of Rome does always accommodate her Allowing
and Condemning of Books to the circumstances of her present condition; and as
Princes are sometimes forced by the necessity of their Affairs to disavow the
Actions of their Ministers, though done by their most express command; so is
this interested Church frequently reduced to connive at Books which she does by
no means like, and to Censure others which she does not only approve, but
(underhand) directs. A good Instance of this we have in the case of
Sanctarellus's Book (one of those he mentions) which though at first printed by
the Approbation and special License of See Sanctarellus himself.
Mutius Vittellescus, then General of the Jesuits, and by the Order of the
Master of the Pope's Palace; yet when the Pope found it would not be endured in
France, but that both the Sorbonne had condemned it, and the Parliament of
Paris had ordered it to be burnt, he thought fit (after it had been out so
long, that the Copies were almost all bought up) to forbid the Sale of it at
Rome, but without any manner of Censure, either upon the Author or Doctrine;
See more of this in the Preface to the Jesuits Loyalty.
which is generally their way of condemning those kind of Books, when Civil
Considerations at last oblige them to it, viz. a bare Prohibition of them,
after every body has read them that cares for them. Such a Condemnation as this
did Mariana meet with in Spain; and of this gentle nature was Becanus's
Correction at Rome, not for the Doctrines he maintained, but for Overlashing,
(as Bishop Montague expresses it in his Preface to King James's Works). i. e.
for speaking the mind of their Churchmore plainly than was at that time
convenient. For* Secondly, we know well enough that these Principles of
Deposing and Killing Kings, and Extirpating Heretics are thought too precious
Truths, and too high Points to be ordinarily expo^'d to the ^ulgar, and pross'd
upon all occasions; they are the Ar^^na Imperii. of their Kingdom of Darkness,
and kept like Warrants Dormant among the Cabala of their wicked Mysteries, to
just^fie Rebellions, Assassinates, and Massacres, when the Church has very
great need of them, and finds it her Interest to own these Doctrines of Devils;
as other times it may suit better with her Designs to preach up Loyalty and
Obedience to Princes, and universal Charity to Mankind. Lastly, we know that
the Venetians and the French have been always Opposers of the Pope's
Encroachments upon Civil Sovereigns, and that they do not submit to these sort
of Doctrines, which are so directly calculated for his attaining an Absolute
Dominion over the Christian World, a long projected Fifth Monarchy, at least in
the same degree, that other Countries which are more Jesuited and enslaved to
the Pope, are forced to do; which by the way may serve for good a Argument to
convince them of Differences among themselves, and overthrow their glorious
pretense of Union, which they do so magnify upon all occasions to our
reproach, but cannot signify any thing to the purpose, for which the
Compendionist here intends it, viz. to show the Bishop of Lincoln, in Answer to
his Challenge at the end of his Book, That the Church of Rome has by public
Acts and Declarations disowned and condemned those Principles which His
Lordship charges upon her. He very confidently indeed affirms, that the
Censures of those Authors he mentions p. 78. l. 32. are such. But what does he
hope by Positiveness to face us down, that the Venetians and the French are the
Roman Church? Or that the Universities of France and the Parliament of Paris
are her Representatives? Is it possible he should believe we have not Logic
enough to distinguish between the Parts and Branches of a Church, and the
Church her self in her public Authority and Representations? Does he indeed
imagine, that he can at this time of day make the Judgments of particular
Universities and Civil Assemblies pass upon us for public Acts and
Declarations of the Church of Rome? He must needs pardon us; we have been too
often told it upon other occasions; to be ignorant now, that nothing but the
Decrees of a Pope or a General Council are the public Acts and Declarations of
the Church of Rome; and he has not so much as pretended to show either of
these, for the Condemnation of those Principles which the Bishop has proved
upon his Religion by both. What scorn then can be vile enough to throw upon his
impudent Claim of the Bishop's conditional promise of turning Papist, when the
terms upon which that promise was given are so far from being made good? And
why does he run over such a Bead-role of names -- The College of the Sorbonne,
Paris, Caen, Rheimes, etc. I say to what end does he stun us with this vast din
of insignificant Words, and rattle in our Ears with empty ^ounds?

I thought to have passed by this Quibble upon the Bishop's Title, it is so very
senceless and thin a conceit; but because I find he is apt to think every thing
unanswerable that is not particularly taken notice of, I shall do him the
favor to make the Reader observe this ridiculous Criticism: Who could think
(says Compend. page 76.
he) that His Lordship's Heat against us should force him even to a Title that
has confuted his whole Book, viz. That Popish Principles and Positions (when
really believed) are destructive and dangerous to all Kings, especially
Protestants; for he cannot term them Principles of Faith, because they were
never thus believed, etc. I suppose by Principles of Faith here, he means what
is commonly understood by Articles of Faith, i. e. Points necessary to
Salvation; for the words are equivocal, and may bear several senses: but
because this is most favorable to his Objection, I shall understand them so.
Now why cannot the Bishop term these Positions Principles of Faith? He has
proved them to have been decreed both by Popes and Councils, and if that be not
enough to make any Point a Principle of Faith in their Church, I know not where
or how we shall find any Principles of Faith among them. He says indeed here
(and in other places would insinuate the same) That they were never thus
believed by any Catholic, nor never thus approved of by the Church. But that is
only his word against the Bishop's Proof, and signifies nothing but to
convince the world of the shameless Impudence of Popish Writers, who can even
in Print, and in the face of a learned and inquiring People, affirm things
contrary to direct Proofs, without ever so much as endeavoring to answer those
Proofs. I see no reason therefore why the Bishop might not have termed them
Principles of Faith, if he had pleased, but that it was not at all material to
the design of his Discourse so to do; 'twas enough for his purpose to prove
them Principles of their Religion, (which he has most clearly done) no matter
whether they hold them necessary to Salvation, or not; their very holding them
as Principles of their Religion, does make that sufficiently dangerous to
Princes, which was what the Bishop undertook to show. But let us suppose now,
that the Bishop cannot term these Positions Principles of Faith, I Will engage it
shall do his Title no more hurt, than it is plain it would his Book; indeed
neither of them any at all. This Title (says he) That Popish Principles and
Positions (when really believed) are destructive, etc. has confuted his whole
Book. Why? Because he cannot term them (pray mark the Reason) Principles of
Faith, etc. Can any unprejudiced man now, whose Brains lie in their right
place, perceive any sort of Consequence in this Argument? for my own part I can
find none. But if there be any little sense at the bottom of this awkard
Blunder, it must be this, viz. a supposal, that the real Belief of any
Principle of Religion makes it immediately a Principle of Faith, ( i. e. in his
sense of those Terms, a point necessary to Salvation) though it was not so
before: which is certainly the most extravagant Whimsey that ever got hold of
any man's Imagination, but our confused Compendianists; and if this be not his
meaning, he talks Wild Irish, and is utterly unintelligible. I think I need not
go about to confute such self-evident Foolery as this; the very Offer were an
affront to the meanest Reader's Understanding; there is hardly a Schoolboy, but
knows that Christian Religion teaches many useful and true Doctrines, which are
not necessary to Salvation, that yet are really believed by all those that are
really of the Christian Religion. The Bishop's Title therefore is very proper,
and very consistent with the design of his Book, and this man's exception to it
most assurd and frivolous. It Is indeed not only proper, but charitable and
modest; it implies the Bishop does not believe, that all who live in the
external Communion of the Church of Rome, are either so disloyal to their
Prince, or so unmerciful to their Friends and Neighbors, as those Doctrines he
charges upon her, really and heartily assented to, must needs make them. He
hopes possibly, that Humane Nature it self in some may check at their
harshness, and a particular sweetness of temper of others, very much allay the
Malignancy of their Poison, and hinder them from having their full effect upon
the Understanding, at least such an effect as is justly to be dreaded from
them, when they seize upon the minds of melancholy Recluses, or sink deep into
the affections of her ignorant hotheaded Devoto's, those Christian A Sect of
Religious Murderers among the Turk^. See an Account of them in Tav^ni^r's Six
Voyages, page 199.
Faquirs.

For the Promise he makes us at last, in imitation of the Bishop's. Compend.
page 79.
That he himself will turn Protestant, if the Bishop shows him but one single
Paragraph in all his Book, in relation to their dangerous Principles that he
has not fully answered, etc. I will be so civil to him at parting, to let him
know be need not be in any pain about it; for though the Condition of his
Obligation be not in the least measure, nor is ever likely to be performed, yet
I can assure him there is no body intends to take any advantage of the
Forfeiture. Though he has been so far from answering every single Paragraph of
the Bishop's Book, that he has not in truth answered one single word of it to
any purpose, as I have already showed him; yet we will not be so unmercifully
rigorous to require a Person of his Form of Parts to turn Protestant, and force
him to be a reasonable man, and a good Christian against his Conscience; no,
no, let him stay where he is; we are not at all fond of his Company, and the
Religion he has will best suit with his Wit.

I have now done with the Compendianist, and shall enlarge this Preface no
farther but to join with all good Englishmen in offering up my hearty prayers
to God Almighty, that He would still preserve the Preotestant Religion among
us, and continue to render fruitless the contrary Endeavors and Contrivances
of wicked and unreasonable Men; fallacious Writers, and Traitorous Plotters;
that He would keep the most knowing, and best civilized Nation in the World
from falling again under the Barbarism of Popery, from being oppressed by the
Tyranny, and cumber'd with the Weight of this huge unwieldly Mass of Nonsense,
and Puppetry. This farce of Ceremonies, this Counterfeit Christianity, this
Enemy to true Learning, and free Philosophy; this Discourager of Trade, and
useful Industry, this Troubler of agreeable Conversation, and reasonable
Living, this Prohibiter of good Sense, and this Extinguisher of good Nature; in
a word this Un-Christian, and this Immorall Religion, or rather this new
Species of Irreligion, which by her Doctrines of dispensing with Oaths, and
absolving from all manner of Crimes upon slight and ridiculous Penances, as
well as by those the Bishop of Lincoln has convinced her of, has not only
overthrown the Foundations of real Goodness, and true Piety, but even of
necessary Faith, and common Honesty, loosen the very Bands and Ligaments, and
undermining the Props of Civil Communities.

Errata in the Preface.
Page 1. Line 11. for grand read great. Ibid. l. 17. for those r. these. p. 3.
l. l. 9. r. Compendianist; and so in all other places where that word is used,
it being mistaken throughout the whole Preface. p. 4. l. 17. after these words,
Does he expect to be believed upon his bare word? the sense is left imperfect
by omitting these which follow, viz. Upon the honor of a Popish Controvertist?
which the Reader is desired to add. p. 10. l. 5. r. and Decretals. Ibid. l. 30.
for these r. those. l. 36. for show r. shame. Many other Errors there are in
the Printing, which for their too great number I will not trouble the Reader
with, though in many places the Style is not only prejudiced by them, but the
sense corrupted and debased.

In the French Massacre, p. 2. l. 5. for Son r. Cousin. In the Irish Massacre,
p. 2. l. 25. dele not. In Q. Mary's Reign, p. 2. l. 7. for has r. had. Ibid.
l. antep. dele by. l. ult. for Winchester r. Worcester.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Chief Passages of the MASSACRE IN The Valleys of Piedmont,
in the Year 1655.
WHEN the following Sheets had passed the Press, and the Preface was ready for
it, a certain Gentleman, who had set me on work to collect and publish them,
signified his desire that I should add one Sheet concerning this Massacre; but
because it may be though most proper to conclude with Domestic Occurrences,
and because the notice of my Friends desire came too late for placing this
Sheet next after the Irish Massacre, where in reference to Time it should have
been placed, I was obliged to put it in the Front.

Before I come to treat of this Massacre in particular, it will be necessary to
give you an Account of the Antiquity of the Reformed Churches in the Valleys of
Piedmont, with the causes of this and other Persecutions, which have been
raised against them by the Bishops of Rome, since the first Apostasy of the
Roman Church.

As for their Antiquity, I affirm that the Christian Religion, which was
planted in Italy by S. Paul, has ever since been retained in the Primitive
Purity of its Fundamental Doctrines and Divine Worship, in the Churches of
Piedmont to this day. And for the Proof of this Assertion I must acquaint you,
that though many of their most ancient Records, and other Authentic
Manuscripts, were destroyed by Popish Perseeutors in the years 1559 and 1560;
yet a great number no less Authentic (diverse of which are now to be seen in
the University of Cambridge) were most wonderfully preserved, and give as full
and clear a Testimony to this Truth. Besides, we have the concurrent
Testimonies of the most eminent Popish Authors, who were the bitterest
Adversaries of these Churches; and yet (which is almost miraculous) they have,
by a strange overruling Providence, unwittingly confessed in many places of
their Writings this Antiquity, for the concealing of which, and to make the
World disbelieve it, those very Books were purposely written and designed. To
demonstrate these Particulars by some Instances, I must inform you, that it is
a Truth generally received by all those who profess to be versed in
Ecclesiastical History, that before the Year 800 the differences between the
Roman and Reformed Christian Churches, were not publicly established by any
General Councils or Decrees, in any part of Italy. As for the first 500 years
after Christ, there cannot so much as one clear Sentence be produced out of any
one Father or Council for the Papists against the Protestants. In the next
Century, viz. in the Year 600, Boniface the Third of that name, Bishop of Rome,
(with the consent and approbation, if not instigation of the Usurper, Traitor,
and Murderer Phocas, the Emperor) took upon him the Title of Universal Bishop,
in which he was confirmed by a Council held at Rome the Year following. After
this, Corruptions and Heresies crept apace into the Church of Rome, which were
still opposed by some famous Writers of these Churches, both in this and the
seventh Century, about the end of which, viz. in the Year 794, the Emperor
Charles the Great having called a Council at Franckfurt, did with the Western
Churches jointly endeavor to have drawn Pope Adrian and the Church of Rome out
of that gulf of Superstition and Idolatry, into which it was fallen, by
persuading them to embrace the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. But this
design proving then ineffectual, Lewis the Emperor. Son and Successor to
Charles, undertook, and prosecuted the same in the eighth Century; and in order
thereunto amongst other things he preferred to the Archbishopric of Turin, of
which the Valleys of Piedmont are part, one Claudius, a chief Counselor to
Charles the Great, and one of the most renowned men of his Age as well for
Piety as Learning, in the Year 815. But this good man finding that he could not
resist that mighty torrent of Superstitious and Idolatrous Blasphemies, which
were taught and practiced in the Church of Rome, endeavored to keep his own
Dioceses from being infected with them; and to this end he told his People,
That they ought not to run to Rome for the Pardon of their Sins, nor have
recourse to the Saints or their Relics; that the Church is not founded upon
S. Peter, much less upon the Pope, but upon the Doctrine of the Apostles; that
they ought not to worship Images nor so much as have them in their Churches,
etc. These words we find in a Book written by a grand Adversary of his. Also
the same Author, and others of the same stamp confess, That Claudius and his
Disciples and Successors, were People of good Lives and Principles, and that
nothing could be objected against them; for (says one) whereas all other Sects
render themselves horrible by reason of their Blasphemies against God, this
has a great appearance of Piety, in as much as they live justly before men,
they believe aright concerning God in all things, and hold all the Articles of
the Creed; there is only one thing against them viz. that they deny the Church
of Rome to be the holy Mother Church, and will not obey her Traditions. Another
says, That these men did own the Christian Church in all other points, and
that he reckoned and esteemed them true Members of it. I shall quote one Popish
Writer more, who was very famous in his time; he in a Book published in the
year 1632, with approbation and privilege says, That the aforesaid Doctrine
(which he calls Heresy) continued throughout the ninth and tenth Centuries.
And afterward in another Book printed at Turin in the year 1649, dedicated to
the Duke of Savoy, speaking of the Doctrine which the Churches of the Valleys
then held, he says, It is the same which Claudius Archbishop of Turin (and
consequently of the Valleys being within that Diocese) maintained in the eighth
Century.

And thus you have seen the constant and uninterupted Succession of the
Doctrine of these Churches from the times of the Apostles to that of Claudius,
and so through the ninth and tenth Centuries, till the Waldenses came into
these Valleys, which was in the eleventh Century, where they have professed and
taught the same ever since. I need not take the pains to prove the continued
Succession of this Doctrine in those Churches from the eleventh Century till
now, because all Popish Writers do unanimously confess it; but seeing diverse of
them have had the impudence to tell the World, that the Waldenses who escaped
the Massacre in France, in the year 1165, and came from thence into the Valleys
of Piedmont, were the first Founders of that Religion, which the Inhabitants
there own and profess at this present, I cannot but answer such Writers by
telling them, that it is not at all probable that the Waldenses, who knew that
the Seat of their grand Adversary was in Italy, could have been so void of all
sense and common prudence, as to have undertaken so long and tedious a Journey
over the Alps, had they not been well assured beforehand, that tho Natives of
those Valleys had professed the same Religion with them, and would receive and
embrace them as Brethren. I shall conclude this subject with a passage
mentioned in the Preface of a French Bible, which these Inhabitants caused to
be printed at their own charge in the year 1535, and dedicate it to God
himself, where speaking as it were to him they say, That they had always fully
enjoyed that Heavenly Truth contained in the Holy Scriptures, ever since they
were enriched with the same by the Apostles themselves.

I now come to give you the Causes of the Massacre in the Year 1655; and though
many might be assigned I shall mention two only, viz. the one general, and the
other particular; the general Cause was the implacable Hatred and Malice of the
Bishop of Rome and his Clergy, against the Reformed Churches in the Valleys of
Piedmont; and in truth this has been the Cause of all the other Massacres and
Persecutions which have happened not only in those Valleys, but in all other
parts of Europe, ever since the Apostasy of the Romish Church has taken place,
and her tyrannical and usurped Power prevailed in the World. The particular
Cause of this and other Massacres and Persecutions that have happened in these
Valleys, is the yearly allowance of Pensions, Prebends. Bishoprics Abbeys, and
Priories by the Court of Rome, to the most eminent persons of the Duke of
Savoy's Court, upon condition of doing their utmost to destroy the Protestants
and their Religion.

The principal means made use of by these Courtiers, for effecting their
design, were the same which had always proved successful formerly, viz. they
incensed the Duke of Savoy against his Protestant Subjects by many calumnies,
and false suggestions, too tedious to be here inserted, in so much that he
published an Order dated the 25th of January 1655. by which he commanded all
his Protestant Subjects of what age, sex, or condition soever, inhabiting
certain Valleys therein mentioned, to depart to other Valleys therein also
named, in three days, upon pain of death, unless they should turn Papists
within twenty days, etc. And though these poor Christians endeavored by their
humble Addresses, and Supplications to have obliged him to revoke this unjust,
and tyrannical Order, yet he utterly refused to do it. However he was not able
to answer one of those many Arguments urged in their Petitions to induce him to
grant their desires. I shall name three.

First, They urge the several Concessions made to them, and their Ancestors by
the Duke and his Predecessors for the free exercise of the reformed Religion
in the Valleys of Piedmont, and the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their
civil Rights and Privileges.

Secondly, They urge that their Religion was planted in those Valleys by the
Apostles, and has ever since their days been retained there, and that their
Ancestors inhabited those Valleys a very long time before the first Duke of
Savoy possessed any part of Piedmont, and therefore that this Duke could not
without great and palpable injustice, deprive them of their ancient Civil, or
Religious Rights.

Thirdly, They urge that th^se Valleys to which they were Ordered to go, did
scarcely afford a Subsistence to the Inhabitants that were there already.

To this they added, that if his Royal Highness would grant them a hearing,
they would be content to submit to this severe Order, provided their
Adversaries could prove any one thing against them by which they might deserve
so great a punishment, or the least unkindness from his Royal Highness, etc.
But all this proving ineffectual, at last they desired only so much time as
might be sufficient for the disposal of their Goods, before their Removal; but
this being also denied them, those distressed Christians refused diverse
advantageous Offers made them by the Duke, in case they would turn Papists,
choosing rather to suffer all the miseries of humane life, and of a shameful and
painful death, and therefore quitting their Houses and Goods, they retired
according to the Order with their Wives and Children, great and small, old and
young, whole and sick, with many lame, blind, and Idiots, dragging those that
were infirm by reason of Age or Sickness, through the Rain, Snow, Ice, and a
thousand difficulties, by which a great many of them perished. And this they
did to testify their Obedience to their Prince, thereby cutting off all manner
of pretense from their Adversaries, of branding them with Rebellion.

I shall now conclude with a few Instances of Popish Cruelties exercised upon
the Bodies of those Protestants that remained in the Valleys of Piedmont during
the Massacre, which begun in the Month of April 1655.

A Woman who had seen several Protestants cruelly put to death by the Popish
Soldiers, was her self ravished, and then had her Breasts and part of her
Privities cut off by some of them, who carried the same to the next Town, where
they caused it to be fried, and set before some of their Comrades, telling them
they were Tripes.

A poor man that was a Servant being taken prisoner by the Soldiers, some of
them gave him diverse Stabs with a Dagger in the Soles of his Feet, and in his
Ears; afterward they cut off his Privities, and then applied a burning Candle
to the Wound, frying it with the slame thereof, that so the Blood might be
stopped, and his Torments prolonged. This being done to their minds, they tore
off his Nails with hot Pincers, to try if they could by any means force him to
renounce his Religion. But when nothing would do, they tied one of his Legs to
the tail of a Mule, and so dragged him till he was almost dead, then binding
his Head about with a Cord, they strained and twisted the same with a Staff so
hard, that his Eyes and Brains dropped out of his Head; and at last having
satiated themselves with all the Cruelties they could devise, they threw his
Body into a River.

They tied a man about 80 years old neck and heels together, and hurled him
down a vast Precipice; but as he was falling he lighted in a cragged Branch of
a True, where he hung several days till he languished and died.

They cut in small pieces a man of 90 years old, and did the like to a Woman,
and then strewed the Giblets and Mammocks of the torn Carkases along the High
Way, and hung some of them on Hedges.

They cut off the Nose, then the Fingers, and last of all the Hands, of an
ancient decrepid Woman, and then left her to languish and die in this
deplorable condition.

Another Woman was found in a Cave, whose Flesh was all sliced from off the
Bones, so that she appeared as a mere Skeleton. A most dreadful Spectacle!

They took a Maid, and having driven a long Stake through her Body, some of
them carried her about upon their Shoulders as an Ensign, and at last they
stuck one end of the Stake into the ground, and so left her in the High Way to
be viewed by Passengers.

They put two men into a Dungeon, and having stripped off the Skin of their Arms
and Legs by long Slices like Leather Points, they afterward suffered them to
starve there in that condition.

They took a beautiful young Girl of ten years old, and because her Age and
Stature had rendered her incapable of the ordinary course of Nature, some of
them forced her Body in so brutish and inhumane a manner, that she was found
afterward half dead, and wallowing in her own blood.

Another young Girl about the same Age, they took as she fled from them upon
the Snow, and having thrust a Pike or Halberd through her Body, they roasted
her alive.

They hung one man upon a Gate by the Hands which they had tied to his
Privities; and because they could not make him renounce his Religion, they took
him down, and having exercised many other Cruelties upon him, they at last
dispatched him.

They also hung two other men by their Privities, (having first tied their
Hands behind them) till at last the weight of their Bodies had almost torn out
their Bowels, and so they died in horrible pain.

They cut off the Nose, Ears, and other parts of a man of 80 years old, and
left him in that condition in the Snow, where having lain a long time he at
last died.

Having taken several Men and Women, they crammed Gunpowder into their mouths,
and down their throats, and then putting fire to it they tore their Heads in
pieces.

They pulled out a man's Eyes, then cut off his Privities, and having thrust his
Yard into his mouth, they exposed him in this posture to public view several
days; and not content with this, they afterward fley'd him alive, and then
cutting his Skin into four parts, they hung the same in the Windows of the four
chief Houses of a Town.

Having taken eleven men, they heated an Oven red hot, and then forced these
poor Creatures to throw one another into the Oven successively; and when it
came to the last man, they themselves threw him in.

Having torn off the Nails of a certain Schoolmaster, and prick d his Hands
full of holes with a Dagger, they stripped him, and putting a Cord about his
middle, dragged him naked through a Town, and almost every step he made a
Soldier on the one side cut off a piece of his Flesh with a Hanger, and
another on the other side gave him a blow with a Staff, crying, Well, what
say thou now, will thou yet go to Mass? To which the poor man with an
incredible constancy, as long as he was able to speak, answered, Much rather
Death than the Mass; dispatch me quickly for the love of God. Whereupon one of
them gave him a great blow on the head, and then cutting it off they threw his
Body into a River.

I want both time and paper to mention any more particular Acts committed by
Popish Miscreants in these Valleys, only I shall observe, that having
barbarously butchered diverse Protestants, they did (Canibal-like) cause the
Brains, and several parts of the Bodies of these poor Martyrs to be fried, or
otherwise dressed, and did then eat the same.

By what has been said it is evident, that though the Irish and French
Massacres might exceed this in respect of the Numbers that were killed
outright; yet in respect of the variety of savage Cruelties, it is as evident
that this Massacre is without parallel.

If you desire a large and full account of the Antiquity of these Churches, and
of their many Sufferings under the Papacy, I refer you to that excellent
History entitled, The History of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of
Piedmont, published by Sir Samuel Morland in the Year 1658.

FINIS.
A RELATION Of the Barbarous and Bloody MASSACRE OF ABOUT An Hundred Thousand
Protestants, begun at Paris, and carried on over all France, in the year 1572.
I Am confined to a Sheet of Paper, and therefore shall be obliged to relate
only the most remarkable Passages that occur in the best French Historians,
concerning that Hellish Butchery, which take as follows:

The French King, Charles the Ninth, being a sworn Enemy to the Protestant
Interest, was exceedingly troubled to find, that notwithstanding all the
endeavors he had used to destroy his Protestant Subjects by force of Arms, yet
their number, instead of being diminished, did still increase; and having
likewise found all his politic artifices vain and unsuccessful, he at last
resolved to accomplish his wicked design against them by Treachery, Perjury,
and breach of Faith, Which he effected thus;

After 12 years Civil Wars, the King concluded a Peace with the Protestants, by
which he granted them the free exercise of their Religion, and to make them the
more secure, he proposed a Marriage between his Sister and the King of Navar,
foreseeing, that if this Proposal should take effect, great numbers of
Protestants would resort to Paris, to attend the Nobility and Gentry of their
Party, especially to attend the Queen of Navar, the Prince of Conde her Son,
the Admiral of France, with others of the highest Rank, all which (the said
Marriage being soon after concluded) were invited to the Wedding. The Queen of
Navar came to Court in confidence of the King's sincere Intentions toward the
Protestants, according to his often repeated Oaths and Protestations to that
purpose, and was received with all the outward expressions of kindness and
affection that could be, as the Admiral had been, who came to Court a little
before her; but in a few days she fell sick and dyed, having, as is said, been
Poisoned by a pair of perfumed Gloves.

Also the Cardinal de Chastillon, Brother to the Admiral, (who had newly before
lest his Red Hat, and turned Protestant) was Poisoned at the same time.

Though these Poisonings were then only suspected, yet some of the Admiral's
Friends gave him diverse reasons why they doubted the King had some evil design
against the Protestants, but the good Man would not believe if, because of the
King's reiterated Oaths, that he had a Kindness for the Protestants in general,
and above all, for the Admiral in particular.

On the 17th of August, 1572. the King of Navar was Married, and the 24th was
the fatal Day of that Horrid Massacre, which cannot be paralleled in History,
unless by that of Ireland, which afterward happened, Anno 1642.

The Duke of Guise, with a great crew of his Hellhounds went to the Admirals
Lodgings early in the Morning to dispatch him first; when they had broken open
his Gates, he rose out of his Bed, and as soon as he had put on his Nightgown,
he commended his Soul to God, and b^d his Friends and Servants that were about
him to shift for themselves, for that they could do him no good by staying any
longer with him. Which words he had no sooner uttered, but some of the
Murderers were come up to his Chamber; to the foremost of whom he said, Young
man you ought to reverence my gray Hairs, but you cannot shorten my life much.
They all stood a while amazed at such undaunted Courage, and so composed a
behavior, which one of them said, was the most extraordinary thing that ever
he saw in his whole life. But they soon dispatched him; and the Duke of Guise
being below, called to them to throw him out at the Window, which was done, and
his Head being out off, was presented to the Queen Mother, and then Embalmed
and sent to Rome. Then all manner of Popish barbarity was exercised on the dead
Corpse, viz. his Fingers and Hands were cut off, his Body dragged about the
Streets three days, then thrown into the River of Seine and taken out again,
and hanged in Chains by the Feet, etc.

But the King not content with the Murder of this noble Admiral's body, for
(to cover the infamy of so foul and damnable a fact) he resolves to murder his
reputation also; and therefore he pretends that the Admiral had conspired
against his Life and Crown: Also the Parliament of Paris did (by the King's
Order) adjudge the Admiral guilty of the said Conspiracy (though they had no
Proofs at all of it) and thereupon ordained his Body to be hanged, if it could
be found; or if not, that he should be hanged in Effigy, his House to be
razed, and a Pillar set up with an Inscription to defame his Memory; his Blood
was also attainted, and his Children declared ignoble, and incapable of any
Privileges in France. This Sentence concluded with an Order for celebrating St.
Bartholomew's day in all time coming with Processions and public Thanksgivings,
for the discovery and punishment of this Conspiracy.

Two other Persons of Quality were also condemned for this pretended
Conspiracy, and for refusing to accuse the Admiral of being guilty thereof.
They were drawn in Hurdles to the place of Execution, and having by the way
endured with admirable patience the reproaches and dirt cast on them by the
rabble, they were Hanged, together with the Noble Admiral in Effigy, having
asserted both his Innocence and their own to their last breath. After their
death, their Bodies were barbarously mangled by the accursed multitude; and the
King (who delighted in such bloody spectacles) did not only behold it himself,
with the Queen Mother, and the Court, but forced the King of Navar to be
present likewise.

The King, who had drawn the chief of the Protestants to Paris as aforesaid,
upon the occasion of the Wedding, (telling them that he did not so properly
give his Sister to the King of Navar, as to their whole Party, etc.) and had
caused them and all the other Protestants of what rank or condition soever that
could be found in that City to be murdered, he sends immediately secret Orders
to his Governors and other principal Officers throughout his Dominions, to
cause the like Massacres to be committed upon the Protestants in all Places,
without exception; of which I shall forbear to give you a particular account
here, because I intend to mention the several sorts of barbarous Murders,
invented by Papists, and by them exercised upon the poor Protestants in
Ireland; for there was no kind of Butchery practiced in France, but was
repeated, with additions in Ireland, Anno 1642. to which Story I refer you, and
shall proceed to acquaint you, that together with the King's secret Orders for
the Massacres, were sent his Letters to be Published in all Places, signifying,
that his Majesty intended strictly and inviolably to observe the Treaty of
Peace conoluded with the Protestants, whereby the free exercise of their
Religion was granted, for by this means he designed to surprise them, by
rendering them secure, and fearless of danger, which accordingly fell out, for
they depending on the King's Faith, Honor, and Justice, had not the least
suspicion of any Treachery intended against them, otherwise a great many of
them might have escaped that general destruction, in which they were involved.

The French Popish Historians differ much about the number of those that were
Massacred, but the most Famous of them tell us that there were no less than
100000 Men, Women, and Children, which is likewise asserted by the Bishop of
Rhodes, (who was Tutor to the present French King) in his Book lately published
of the Civil Wars of France.

I will give you but two Instances more of this King's Perfidiousness toward
the Protestants; one of which is, That although he had Sworn to the King of
Navar, and Prince of Conde, that they should not only enjoy their Lives and
Liberties, but their Religion too; yet as soon as the Massacre in Paris was
over, he sent for them; and told them that they must turn Roman Catholics, or
they should be Massacred as their fellow Heretics had been. Whereupon, after
some resistance, they went to Mass, and wrote Letters full of submission and
obedience to the Pope, though they were no sooner out of that snare, but they
renounced their new Religion, saying, that what had been obtained of them, was
extorted by force.

The other instance is, that while he was making the deepest Protestations,
seconded with many dreadful Oaths, that he would in all points exactly observe
the Peace he had made with the Protestants, he did at the very same time
privately assure the Pope's Legate, that notwithstanding the Peace and
Marriage, all he was doing was for the Interest of the Catholic Religion. And
one day, taking him by the hand, he desired him to assure the Pope, that his
design in this Marriage was, that he might be revenged on those that were
Enemies to God, and Rebels against himself, and that he would either cut them
in pieces, or lose his Crown. All which he would do in compliance with the
Advices he had received from the Pope, who had (as he said) continually set him
on to destroy them; and that he saw no way of doing it so securely, as by
getting them once to trust him, having tried all other Methods in vain, etc.

But though this wicked Prince was scarce inferior to any one recorded in
History, for Treachery, Dissimulation, Perjury, breach of Faith, Cruelty, and
Blood thirstiness, and though he was successful in his wickedness; yet he
failed in his last design of fathering a Plot against him upon the Admiral and
the Protestants; for the Popish Writers of that time in France, do confess,
that there was not the least color to oblidge a Man to believe the said Plot,
and that it was invented to take away the Scandal of so black and hellish a
Massacre, as has been already said.

A certain Historian, writing of this Massacre, ends with these words; Thus
were the Protestants destroyed in Paris, with a Treachery and Cruelty that the
uncivilized Nations had never showed to one another, nor had the Heathens been
ever guilty of any thing like it toward the Christians. The Precedent which
the Church of Rome had formerly given in the Massacre of the Albigenses, was
the likest thing in History to it for Barbarity; but never had Treachery and
Cruelty met together in such a manner before this execrable day. And one of the
French Writers adds, that besides 100000 Protestants Slain, there were as many
sent a Begging.

But there is no Crime or Villainy so execrable, which his Holiness cannot
Consecrate, and therefore his Legate grants a Jubilee to all that had been
employed in that Butchery, and they were commanded to go every where to Church,
and bless God for the success of that action. And so great was the Blasphemy
that the Murderers presumed to address to that merciful Being, who abhors
cruel and blood-thirsty men, and that with hands defiled with Blood; and also
boasted of it as a Sacrifice to God, which had been a sitter Oblation to him,
who was a I yer and Murderer from the beginning, than to the God of Truth, and
Father of Mercies.

The King also Gloried so much in this Massacre, that he caused Medals to be
made, to represent the Memory of it; but this was only a false show of joy and
triumph, for he was inwardly tormented with the horror of a guilty Conscience,
which the effusion of so much Blood did justly raise in him; so that being
often troubled with Visions, he was frequently heard say; Ah, my poor Subjects!
What had you done? But I was forced to it. The strange manner of his death,
seems a signal Judgment from Heaven for that Bloody day; for after a long
Sickness, Blood not only came out through all the passages of his Head and
Body, but through the very Pores of his Skin, so that he was sometimes found all
bathed in Blood; and he that had made his Kingdom swim with Blood at last died
wallowing in his own. An Instance scarcely to be paralleled.

You have seen the Cruel, Perfidious, Tyrannical, and Barbarous Practices of
the French King, Charles the Ninth, against his innocent Protestant Subjects,
being the effects of his execrable and bloody Principles, and those Principles
founded on the abominable, and hellish Doctrines, and Maxims, taught by his
Holy Mother, the Apostate Romish Synagogue, as will appear by the following
instance, viz* As soon as the tidings of this Massacre was brought to Rome,
(being Sept. 6. 1572.) a Consistory of the Cardinals was presently called, and
the Legate's Letter, that contained a Relation of the Massacre being tend, they
strait went in Procession to St. Mark's Church; where they offered up their
solemn Thanks to God for this great Blessing to the Sea of Rome, and the
Catholic Church. Two days after, another Procession was made by the Pope and
Cardinals, to the Minerva, where they had High Mass, and then the Pope granted
a Jubilee to all Christendom, and one of the reasons was, That they should
thank God for the slaughter of the Enemies of the Church, lately executed in
France. Again, two days after that, the Cardinal of Lorain had another great
Procession of all the Clergy, the Ambassadors, Cardinals, and the Pope himself,
who came to St. Lewis's Chapel, where the Cardinal himself celebrated Mass.
Then in the name of the King of France he thanked the Pope and the Cardinals
for the help they had afforded him, both by their Counsels, and Prayers, of
which (he said) he had found most happy effects. He also delivered the King's
Letter to the Pope, in which he wrote, That more Heretics had been destroyed in
that one day, than in all the twelve years of the War.

Nor did the Pope think there was yet blood enough shed, but that which all the
World condemned as excessive cruelty, he apprehended was too gentle. Therefore
he sent Cardinal Vrsin, his Legate, in all have to France, to thank the King
for so great a Service, done the Church, and to desire him to go on, and
extirpate Heresy, root and branch, that it might never grow again. In order to
which, he was to procure the Council of Trent to be received in France. And as
this Legate passed through France, in his Journey to Paris, he gave a Plenary
Absolution to all that had been actors in the Massacre.

The best Picture Drawers, and Workers of Tapistry, were employed to set off
this Action with all the Glory possible, and a Suit of these Hangings continue
to this day in the Pope's Chapel; so that they seem to like the thing so well,
that they preserve the Memory of it still, even in the place of their worship.
And indeed such a representation does very well agree with their Devotion,
whose Religion and Doctrine led on their Votaries to the thing so expressed. By
this we may easily gather, what is to be expected from France and Rome, if ever
we should lie at the mercy of Men, whose Religion will not only bear them out,
but also set them on to commit the most treacherous and bloody Massacres.

I conclude with this Protestation, that whatsoever has been mentioned by me
in this Relation, as matter of Fact, has been faithfully collected out of the
most famous Popish Writers at that time in France, and from none else. which I
am able to prove, if required so to do.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Most Remarkable Passages OF THE Irish Massacre, Anno 1642.
THAT the Irish Papists do hate English Protestants more because they are
Protestants, than because they are English, will clearly appear if we consider,
that this Massacre was acted by the Instigation of the Jesuits, Priests, and
Friars; and also that not so much as one English Papist was killed with the
Protestants, but on the contrary, both English and Irish Papists were joint
Actors in the said Massacre, which was so bloody and barbarous, that I think it
cannot be paralleled in History, and I hope never will be.

Though the Irish Papists did unanimously resolve to destroy all the
Protestants in Ireland, yet when they began to execute their damnable design,
they only turned Protestants out of doors, and stripped them, but afterward
finding that they every where prevailed, they at last murdered Men, Women, and
Children, without sparing any, as you will see by what follows.

The Priests gave the Sacrament unto diverse of the Irish, upon condition they
should spare neither Men, Women, nor Children of the Protestants. One Hulligan
a Priest read an Excommunication against all those, that from thenceforth
should relieve or harbor any English, Scottish, or Welsh Protestants, or give
them Alms, whereby many were famished. The Friars exhorted them with tears not
to spare any of the said Protestants.

The day before this Massacre began Anno 1642, the Priests gave the people a
Dismiss at Mass, with liberty to go out and take possession of all the Lands of
the Protestants, as also to strip and rob, and despoil them of all their Goods
and Cattle.

The Irish, when the Massacre began, persuaded many of their Protestant
Neighbors to bring their Goods to them, and they would secure them; and hereby
they got abundance peaceably into their hands, whereof they cheated them,
refusing to restore them; yet so confident were the Protestants at sust of
them, that they gave them Inventories of all they had, and dug up their best
things that were hidden in the Ground, and deposited them in their custody.
They also got much into their hands by fair promises, deep Oaths and
Engagements, that if they would deliver them their Goods, they would suffer
them with their Wives and Children quietly to depart the Country; and when
they had got what they could, they afterward murdered them.

Having thus seized upon their Goods and Cattle, ransacked their houses, got
their persons, stripped Man, Woman, and Child naked, they turned them out of
doors, strictly prohibiting the Irish under great penalties not to give them
any Relief. By means hereof many miserably perished through Cold, Nakedness,
and Hunger.

In the Town of Coleraine, of these poor people that fled thither for succor,
many thousands died in two days, so that the Living could not bury the Dead,
but laid their Carcasses in ranks in waste and wide holes, piling them up as if
they had been Herrings.

One Magdalen Redman deposes, That she and diverse other Protestants, amongst
whom were two and twenty Widows, were first robbed, and then stripped naked, and
when they had covered themselves with Straw, the bloody Papists threw in
burning Straw amongst them, on purpose to burn them; then they drove them out
into the Woods in Frost and Snow, where many of them died with extreme Cold,
and those that survived lived miserably by reason of their many Wants.

Yet though these bloody Villains exercised such inhumane Cruel ties toward
the poor Protestants, they would commonly boast, That these were but the
beginning of their sorrows; and indeed they made it good, for having disarmed
the English, robbed them of their Goods, stripped them of their Clothes, and
having their persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner
of abominable Cruelties, horrid Massacres, and execrable Murders.

For there were Multitudes murdered in cold blood, some as they were at Plough,
others in their Houses, others in the High Ways; all without any provocation
were suddenly destroyed.

In the Castle of Lisgool were about one hundred and fifty Men, Women, and
Children consumed with fire. At the Castle of Tullab, which was delivered to
Mac Gutre upon Composition, and saithful promises of Fair Quarter, as soon as
he and his entered, they began to strip the people, and most cruelly put them
to the Sword, murdering them all without mercy.

At Lissenskeath they hanged and killed above one hundred of the Scottish
Protestants. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were
more numerous, their Murderers were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty.

Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissenskeath, desired to speak with Mr.
Middleton, who admitted him in; he first burnt the Records of the County, then
demanded one thousand pounds which was in his custody of Sir William Balfore's,
which as soon as he had, he caused Mr. Middleton to hear Mass, and to swear
that he would never alter from it, and then hanged him up with his Wife and
Children; hanging and murdering above one hundred persons besides in that place.

At Portendown Bridge there were one thousand Men, Women, and Children carried
in several companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River; yea, in that
Country there were four thousand persons drowned in several places.

In one place an hundred and sorty English were taken and driven like Cattle
for many miles together. Other companies they carried out to a place fit for
execution, and then murdered them. One hundred and fifteen Men, Women, and
Children, they sent with Sir Philem Oneal's Pass till they came to Portendown
Bridge, and there drowned them.

At another time one hundred and forty Protestants being thrown in at the same
place, as any of them swam to the Shore, the bloody Villains with the Butt-ends
of their Muskets knocked out their Brains.

At Armagh O Cane got together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to
conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were gone a days journey they were
all murdered, and so were many others, though they had Protections from Sir
Philem Oneal. The Aged people in Armagh were carried to Charlemont, and there
murdered.

Presently after the Town of Armagh was burnt, and five hundred persons
murdered and drowned. In Killoman were forty eight Families murdered. In one
House twenty two Protestants were burnt. In Kilmore all the Inhabitants were
stripped and massacred, being two hundred Families. The whole Country was a
common Butchery; many thousands perished by the Sword, Famine, Fire, Water, and
all other cruel Deaths that Rage and Malice could invent.

At Casel they put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, kept them
twelve Weeks in great misery; some they barbarously mangled, and left them
languishing; some they hanged up twice or thrice, others they buried alive.

In Queens County an Englishman, his Wife, and five Children, and a Maid, were
all hanged together. At Clowns seventeen Men were buried alive; some were
wounded and hanged upon Tenterhooks.

In Castle Cumber two Boys wounded, and hung upon Butchers Tenters. Some hanged
up and taken down to confess Money, and then murdered. Some had their Bellies
ripped up, and so left with their Guts about their Heels.

In Kilkenny an English Woman was beaten into a Ditch, where she died with her
Daughter about six years old, whose Belly they ripped up, and let out her Guts.
One they forced to Mas^, then they wounded him, ripped his Belly, took out his
Guts, and so left him alive.

A Scottish Man they stripped and hewed to pieces, ripped up his Wifes Belly so that
her Child dropped out. Many other Women they hung up wi^h (...) ^llies and let
their Infants fall ou^* some

In the County of Armagh they robbed, stripped, and murdered abundance of
Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the Sword, some they
hanged, some they starved to death; and meeting Mrs. Howard and Mrs. Frankland
with six of their Children, and themselves both with child, they murdered them
all, ripped open the Gentlewomens Bellies, took out their Children and threw them
into a Ditch. A young Scottish Woman's Child they took by the Heels, and dashed
out its Brains against a Tree; the like they did to many other Children.

Anne Hill going with a young Child on her back, and sour more by her side,
they pulled the Child off her back, trod on it till it died; stripped her and
the other four Children naked, whereby they died of cold.

Some others they met with, hanged them up upon a Windmill, and before they
were half dead cut them in pieces with their Skeins.

Many other Protestants, especially Women and Children, they pricked and
stabbed with Skeins, Forks, and Swords; slashing, cutting, and mangling them in
their Heads, Faces, Breasts, Arms, and other parts; yet killed them not, but
left them wallowing in their own blood, to languish, starve, and pine to death.

The Castle of Lisgeole being set on fire by these merciless Papists, a Woman
lept out at a Window to save her self from burning, whom they presently
murdered. Many fled to Vantls and Cellars, where they were all murdered. One
Joan Addis they stabbed, and then put her Child of a quarter old to her Breast,
and bid it Suck English Bastard, and so left it to perish.

One Mary Barlow had her Husband hanged, her self with six Children stripped
naked in Prost and Snow, after which sheltering themselves in a Cave, they had
nothing to eat for three Wecks but two old Calves Skins, which they beat with
stones, and so cat them Hair and all.

In the cold weather many thousands of Protestants of all Ranks, Ages, and
Sexes, being turned out naked perished of Cold and Hunger. Thousands of others
were drowned, cast into Ditches, Bogs, and Turf-pits. Multitudes miserably
burnt in Houses. Some that lay sick of Fevers they hanged up; some Men, Women,
and Children they drove into Boggy Pits, and knocked them on the head.

Some aged Men and Women these barbarous Papists enforced their own Children to
drown; yea, some Children were compelled unnaturally to execute their own
Parents, Wives forced to hang their own Husbands, and Mothers to cast their own
Children into the Waters, after which themselves were murdered. In Sligo they
forced a young man to kill his Father, and then hanged him up. In another place
they forced a Woman to kill her Husband, then caused her Son to kill her, and
then hanged the Son. Yea, such was their malice against the Protestants, that
they taught their Children to kill Protestant Children.

The Irish Trulls that followed the Camp cried out, Kill them all, spare
neither Man, Woman, nor Child. They took the Child of Thomas Stratton, being
about twelve years old, and boiled him in a Caldron. One Good Wife Ian and her
Daughter they carried into a Wood, first hanged the Mother, and then the
Daughter in the Hair of her Mothers head.

In some places they plucked out the Eyes, and cut off the Hands of the
Protestants, and turned them into the Fields, where they perished. The Women in
some places stoned the English Women and Children to death. One man they shot
through his Thighs, dug a hole in the ground, set him in upon his feet,
filled up the hole, left out only his Head, where he languished to death. They
held another man's feet in the fire till he was burned to death.

In Munster they hanged up many Ministers in a most barbarous manner. One
Minister they stripped naked, and drove him through the Town, pricking him with
Darts and Rapiers till he sell down dead.

These barbarous Villains vowed, That if any Parents dug Graves to bury
their Children in, they should be buried therein themselves. They stripped one
William Loverden naked, then killed him before his Wife and Children. Diverse
Ministers Bones that had been buried some years before they dug up, because
they were (as they say) Patrons of Heresy.

Poor Children that went out into the Fields to eat Weeds and Grass they killed
without all pity.

A poor Woman whose Husband was taken by them, went to them with two Children
at her Feet and one at her Breast, hoping to beg her Husband; but they slew her
and her sucking Child, brake the neck of another, and the third hardly escaped.
And all this Wickedness they exercised upon the Protestants without any
provocation given them. Alas, who can comprehend the Fears, Terrors, Anguish,
Bitterness, and Perplexity that seized upon the poor Protestants, finding
themselves so suddenly surprised without remedy, and wrapped up in all kind of
outward miseries which could possibly by Man be inflicted upon human Creatures!
What Sighs and Groans, Trembling and Astonishment; what Shrieks, Cries, and
bitter Lamentations of Wives, Children, Servants, and Friends howling and
weeping, finding themselves without all hope of deliverance from their present
miseries! How inexorable were their barbarous Tormentors, that compassed them
in on every side, without any bowels of compassion, or the least commiseration
or pity! Yea, they boasted of their Cruelties.

These merciless Irish Papists having set a Castle on fire, wherein were many
Protestants, they rejoycingly said, O how sweetly do they fry!

At Kilkenny when they had committed many cruel Murders, they brought seven
Protestants Heads, one the Head of a Reverend Minister; all which they set upon
the Market Cross on a Market day, triumphing, slashing, and mangling them: they
put a Gag in the Minister's mouth, slit up his Cheeks to his Ears, and laid a
Leaf of a Bible upon it, and hid him Preach for his Mouth was wide enough.

At Ki^more they put many Protestants, Men, Women, and Children, into a
Thatched House, and there burnt them. They threw Mrs. Maxwell into the River
when in Labor, the Child being half born when the Mother was drowned.

In one place they burnt two Protestant Bibles, and then said, It was Hell fire
they burnt. Other Bibles they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them, saying,
They would do the like to all Puritan Bibles. They took the Bible of a Minister
called Mr. Edward Slack, and opening it they laid it in a Puddle of Water, and
then stamped upon it, saying, A plague on it, this Bible has bred all the
quarrel.

At Glastow a Priest with some others drew about forty English and Scottish
Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then told them, They
were in a good faith, and for fear they should fall from it and turn Heretics,
he with his Companions presently cut all their Throats.

In the County of Tipperary near the Silver Works some of these barbarous
Papists met with eleven Englishmen, ten Women, and some Children; whom they
first stripped, and then with Stones, Pole-axes, Skeins, Swords, etc. they most
barbarously massacred them all.

In the County of Mayo about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were Ministers,
were upon Covenant to be safely conveyed to Galway by one Edmund Burk and his
Soldiers; but by the way this Burk and his Company began to massacre these
poor Protestants; some they shot to death, some they stabbed with their Skeins,
some they thrust through with their Pikes, some they drowned; the Women they
stripped naked, who lying upon their Husbands to save them, were run through with
Pikes; so that very few of them escaped with Life.

In the Town of Sligo forty Protestants were stripped and locked up in a Cellar,
and about midnight a Butcher provided for the purpose was sent in amongst them,
who with his Ax butchered them all.

In Tirawly thirty or forty English, who had yielded to go to Mass, were put to
their choice, Whether they would die by the Sword, or be drowned; they chose
the later, and so being driven to the Seaside, these barbarous Villains with
their naked Swords forced them into the Sea, the Mothers with their Children in
their Arms, wading to the Chin, were overcome by the Waves, where they all
perished.

The Son of Mr. Mentgomery a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with his
Schoolmaster, who drew his Skein at him; whereupon the Boy said, Good Master,
whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me. Yet this merciless Tiger
barbarously murdered him without all pity.

In the Town of Sligo all the Protestants were first robbed of their Estates,
then cast into Gaol, and about midnight were all stripped naked, and were there
most cruelly and barbarously murdered with Swords, Axes, Skeins, etc. some of
them being Women great with child, their Infants thrust out their Arms and Legs
at their wounds. After which execrable Murders these Hell Hounds laid the dead
naked Podies of the Men upon the naked Bodies of the Women, in a most immodest
posture, where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish,
who beheld it with great delight. Also Isabel Beard great with child, hearing
the lamentable Cries of those that were murdering, ran out into the streets,
where she was murdered, and the next day was found with the Child's Feet coming
out of the Wounds in her sides. Many others were murdered in the Houses and
Streets.

About Dungannon were three hundred and sixteen Protestants in the like
barbarous manner murdered; about Charlemont above four hundred; about Tyrone
two hundred and six.

One Mac Crew murdered thirty one in one morning.

Two young Villains murdered one hundred and forty poor Women and Children that
could make no resistance. An Irish Woman with her own hands murdered forty five.

At Portendown Bridge were drowned above three hundred. At Laugh were drowned
above two hundred. In another place were drowned three hundred in one day. In
the Parish of Kill^men there were murdered one thousand and two hundred
Protestants.

Many young Children they cut in quarters; eighteen Scottish Infants they hanged
upon a Clothier's Tenter-hooks; one fat man they murdered, and made Candles of
his Grease; another Scottish man they ripped up his Belly, took one end of his
small Guts, tied it to a Tree, and forced him round about it, till they had
drawn them all out of his Body, saying, That they would try whether a Dog's or
a Scottish man's Guts were the longer.

By the command of Sir Philem Oneal Mr. James Maxwell was drawn out of his Bed
being sick of a Fever, and murdered, his Wife being in Childbirth, (the Child
being half born) they stripped naked, drove her about a Flight shot, and drowned
her in the Black Water; the like or worse they did to another English Woman in
the same Town. One Mr. Watson they roasted alive. A Scottish Woman great with
child, they ripped up her Belly, cut the Child out of her Womb, and so left it
crawling on her Body.

Mr. Starkey Schoolmaster at Armagh, being above one hundred years old, they
stripped him naked, then took his two Daughters being Virgins, whom they also
stripped naked, and then forced them to lead their Aged Father to a Turf pit,
where they drowned them all three.

To one Henry Cowel a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his Life if he would
marry one of their Trulls or go to Ma^s but he chose Death rather than to
consent to either.

Many of the Protestants they buried alive; solacing themselves whilst they
were digging down old Ditches upon them.

They brake the Back bone of a Youth, and left him in the Fields; some days
after he was found, having eaten the Grass round about him; neither then would
they kill him out right, but removed him to better pasture.

In the County of Antrim they murdered nine hundred fifty four Protestants one
morning, and afterward about twelve hundred more in that County. Near
Lisnegarry they forced twenty four Protestants into a House, and burnt them all.

Sir Philem Oneal boasted, That he had slain above six hundred at Garvah; and
that he had left neither Man, Woman, nor Child alive in the Barony of
Munterlong. In other places he murdered above two thousand persons in their
Houses, so that many Houses were filled with Dead Bodies.

Above twelve thousand were slain in the High Ways, as they fled toward Down.
Many died of Famine, many died for want of Clothes, being stripped naked in a
cold season. Some thousands were drowned.

Anne Kinnard testified, That fifteen Protestants being imprisoned, and their
Feet in the Stocks, a Popish Boy (being not above fourteen years old) slew them
all in one night with his Skein.

An English Woman, who was newly delivered of two Children, some of these
Villains violently compelled her, in her great pain and sickness, to rise out
of her Bed; and took one of the Infants that was living, and dashed his Brains
against the Stones, and then threw him into the River of Barrow. The like they
did by many other Infants; many others they hanged up without all pity.

The Lord Mont Garret caused diverse English Soldiers that he had taken about
Kilkenny, to be hanged, hardly suffering them to pray before their death.

One Fitz Patrick an Irish Papist, enticed a rich Merchant that was a
Protestant, to bring all his Goods to his House, promising safely to keep them,
and to redeliver them to him; but when he had got them into his possession, he
took the Merchant and his Wife and hanged them both. The like he did by diverse
others.

Some Englishmens Heads they cut off, and carried them to Kilkenny, and on the
Market Day set them on the Cross, where many (especially ^he Women) stabbed,
cut, and slashed them.

A poor Protestant Woman with her two Children going to Kilkenny, these bloody
Miscreants baited them with Dogs, stabbed them with Skeins, and pulled out the
Guts of one of the Children, whereby they died. And not far off they took
diverse Men, Women, and Children, and hanged them up; one of the Women being
great with child, they ripped up her Belly as she hanged, so that the child
fell out in the Cawl alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down
till their Bowels were torn out.

How many thousands of Protestants were thus inhumanely butchered by sundry
kinds of death we cannot ascertain.

As for the Protestant Ministers whom they surprised, their manner was first to
strip them, and after bind them to a Tree or Post where they pleased, then to
ravish their Wives and Daughters before their Faces, (in sight of all their
merciless Rabble) with the basest Villains they could pick out; after that they
hanged up their Husbands and Parents before their Faces, and then cut them down
before they were half dead, after dismember d them, and stopped their Mouths
therewith, then quartered them.

They basely abused one Mr. Trafford a Minister in the North of Ireland, who
being assaulted by these bloody Wolves of Rome's breed, that know not God, nor
any Bowels of mercy; this distressed Minister desired but so much time as to
call upon God before he went out of the world, but these merciless Wretches
would admit no time, but instantly falling upon him hacked and hewed him to
pieces.

Sir Patrick Dunstan's Wife they ravished before him, slew his Servants,
spurned his Children till they died, so bound him with Match to a Board that
his Eyes burst out, cut off his Ears and Nose, tore off both his Cheeks, after
cut off his Arms and Legs, cut out his Tongue, and after run a red hot Iron
into him.

Lastly, these infernal Miscreants, to express their malice against the
Protestants, did not only kill all the Cattle belonging to the Protestants
that they could come at, (if they could not drive them away) but did commonly
take great delight in tormenting the Beasts, for they would not dispatch those
poor Animals presently, but would either cut off a piece or two of their
Buttocks, or cut off one of their Legs, and so leave them roaring and
bel^owing, till at last they languished and died.

These particulars with many more were attested before the Commissioners
appointed to receive Informations of this nature.

What Number of Protestants was slain in this Massacre is not found upon
Record, but certainly it was very great, for about one hundred and fifty
thousand were butchered in the Province of Ulster, and you may guess at the
vast Number of those that were murdered in Munster, by some passages in a
General Remonstrance of the distressed Protestants of that Province, viz.

We may (say they) compare our woe to the saddest parallel of any story: Our
Churches are profaned by Sacrifices to Idols, our Habitations are become
ruinous heaps. No Quality, Age, or Sex, privileged from Massacres and lingering
deaths, by being robbed, stripped naked, and so exposed to cold and famine. The
famished Infants of murdered Parents swarm in our streets, and for want of sood
perish before our faces, etc. And all this Cruelty that is exercised upon us we
know not for what Cause, Offense, or seeming Provocation it is inflicted upon
us, (sin excepted) saving that we are Protestants, etc. We can make it
manifest, that the Depopulations in the Province of Munster do well near equal
those of the whole Kingdom, etc.

FINIS.
THE SPEECH OF Pope Sixtus Quintus MADE To his College of Cardinals in the
Consistory at Rome, Sept. 11. 1589. upon the News of the Death of Henry III. of
France, who was stabbed by James Clement, a Dominican Friar.
The said Speech was Englished front the Latin Copy sent from Rome, and
Printed at Paris the same Year, with Approbation of the Doctors of the Faculty
there; by which it appears, that the horrid Practice of Murdering Kings is not
only owned, allowed, and justified, but also taught and commended by the
Church of Rome.
COnsidering oftentimes and seriously with my self, and applying the utmost of
my Understanding unto these things which now of late by the Will of God are
come to pass, I think I may fitly use the words of the Prophet Abbakuk, saying,
I have wrought a work in your days, which no man will believe when it shall be
told him, Abbak. 3.5. The French King is slain by the Hands of a Friar.

For unto this it may truly be compared, though the Prophet spoke of another
thing, namely, of the Incarnation of our Lord, which exceeds all other
Wonders and Miracles. As also the Apostle Saint Paul refers the same words
unto the Resurrection of Christ, Acts 13. v. 41. When the Prophet says Awork,
he means not by it some common or ordinary thing, but a rare and notable
matter, and worthy to be remembered, as that of the Creation of the World, The
heavens are the work of thy hands; and again, He rested the seventh day from
all the works which he had made. When he says, I have wrought, with these
words the Scripture is wont to express things not to come to pass casually, by
fortune or accident, but things falling out by the determined Counsel, Will,
Providence, and Ordinance of God. As our Savior says, The works that I do
shall ye^ do also, and greater works than these, Joh. 14. v. 12. and many more
in Holy Writ to the like purpose. Now that he says, that it is done in times
past, herein he follows the use and manner of the other Prophets, who for the
certainty of the Event are wont to predict things to come, as if they were past
already; for as the Philosophers say, Things past are of necessity, things
present of being, and things to come only of possibility: so do they speak.
For which certainty the Prophet Esaias long before prophesying of the Death of
Christ, has thus spoken, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a
lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth, etc. as it is
likewise repeated Acts 8.

And this of which we are now speaking, and which has happened in these our days,
is a very famous, memorable, and well nigh incredible thing; not done or
accomplished without the particular providence and disposition of the Almighty.
A Friar has killed a King, not a painted one in paper, nor pictured out upon a
wall; but the French King in the middle of his Armies, encompassed round about
with his Guard and Soldiers: which truly is such an Act, and done in such a
manner, that none will believe when it shall be told them, and perhaps our
Posterity after us will account and esteem it but a Fable.

That the King is dead, or else slain, it is easily to be believed; but that he
is killed, and taken away in such sort, is hardly credible: Even as we
presently assent that Christ is born of a Woman; but if we further add, of a
Virgin Woman, then according to Humane Reason we cannot assent unto it. And so
we can readily believe that Christ died, but that he rose from the dead to life
again, this to man's natural understanding is impossible, and therefore
incredible, because there is no return from a Privation to an Habit. That one
is awakened again out of a Sleep, Ecstasie, or a Swoun, because it is not
against Nature we naturally believe it; but to be risen again from the dead, it
seemed so incredible a thing to Nature, that Saint Paul disputing with the
Athenian Philosophers about this very point, was disgusted for it, and accused
to be a Setter forth of new or strange Gods; and some (as S. Luke reports)
mocked him, others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. Of such things
therefore which befall not according to the Laws of Nature, and the ordinary
course thereof, speaks the Prophet, viz. That none shall believe it when it
shall be told them. But we give credit unto it whilst we consider the
Omnipotency of God, and by submitting our own Understandings to the Obedience
of Faith, and the Commands of our Savior Christ; and by these means what was
incredible before by Nature, becomes credible by Faith: We therefore that as
mere Men cannot believe Christ to be born of a Virgin, when this is further
added, that it was wrought supernaturally by the Operation of the Holy Ghost,
then we truly assent to it, and faithfully believe it. So likewise when it is
said that Christ is risen again from the dead, naturally we believe it not; but
when it is affirmed that this was done by the Power of the Divine Nature,
(which was in him) then we readily and without any kind of doubting believe it.

In the same manner, though to Natural Reason and Humane Capacity it may seem a
thing incredible, or altogether improbable, that such a mighty King should be
slain in the midst of his Army, environed round with his Guards and Soldiers,
by a poor, simple, weak, Religionist or Friar. Yet considering on the other
side, the great and grievous sins of this King, and the special Providence of
the Almighty herein, and by what a strange and wonderful way he has
accomplished his most just Will and Judgment against him, then we fully and
most firmly believe it; and therefore this great and miraculous Work we are to
ascribe to a particular Providence of God only; not as those that erroneously
refer all things unto some ordinary Causes, or unto Fortune, or such like
accidentary Events, but as those who (more nearly observing and looking into
the course of the whole matter) do easily see that there were many things in
tervening in it, which could not have been brought to pass, and dispatched,
without the special help of God. And truly the state of Kings and Kingdoms, and
all other such rare and weighty Affairs, should not be thought to be Governed
of God rashly, and unadvisedly; there are some Instances in holy Writ of this
nature, and none of them can be referred unto any other cause, but God only:
but yet there is none wherein the celestial operation more appears, than in
this, whereof we are now speaking.

We read in the first Book of Macchabees, c. 6. how Eleazer run himself upon a
certain Death, to Kill the King that was an Enemy and Persecutor of the People
and Children of God: For, in the Battle, espying an Elephant higher and more
stately than the rest, whereon it was like the King rode, with a swift pace
casting himself into the midst of his Enemies Troops, here and there making his
way by force, he came to the Beast at last, and went under her and thrust his
Sword into her Belly, and slew her, who falling, with great weight of her Body
pressed him to death, and Killed him out of hand. Here in this Instance we may
see something not unlike to ours, viz. as to zeal, valiantness of mind, and the
issue of the Enterprise; but in the rest there is no Comparison to be made.
Eleazar was a Soldier exercised in Weapons, and trained up in Wars, set in
Battle, emboldned with courage, and inflamed with rage and anger: This a Friar,
not inured to fighting, and so abhoring blood by the Order of his Profession,
that perhaps he could not abide the cutting of a Vein.

He knew the kind of his Death, as also the place of his Burial; namely, that
he should be Entombed under the fall of the Beast, and so buried in the midst
of his triumph and victory. This Man looked for a certain death, and expected
nothing but unknown and most cruel torments, and did not doubt before, but that
he should want a Grave to rest within. But there be many other things wherein
these two Instances can suffer no comparison. The famous History of the holy
Woman Judith, is sufficiently known, who determined with her self (God no doubt
immediately moving her to it) that the might deliver the City and the People of
God, to Kill ^phernes, the General and Chief Commander of the Enemies (...),
which she most effect^y accomplished. Wherein although appear many and most
manifest signs of Heavenly Direction, yet far greater Arguments of God's
Providence are to be seen in killing of this King, and the delivering of the
City of Paris, far more difficult, and harder to be brought to pass, than was
the Enterprise of Judith. For this holy Woman discovered her intention to some
of the Governors of the City, and passed through in sight and presence of the
Elders and Princes of that place; and by that means was not subject unto their
examination and searching, (which is always used so strictly in time of Siege
and War, that a Fly can hardly without examination escape them.) She being come
to the Enemy, through whose Company and Watches she was to go, and oftentimes
searched and examined, being a Woman, and carrying no Letters nor Weapons about
her, from whence any Suspicion might arise, and withal yielding Reasons for
her coming thither, and abandoning her Relations, was easily discharged; and
not only upon the forementioned causes, but also for her Sex and exquisite
Beauty, being brought before this lewd and unchaste Prince, she might perform
that which she had determined before. This is Judith's Case.

But this Religious Man undertook and performed a matter of greater weight,
encompassed with so many Impediments, Difficulties, and Dangers, that no
Subtilty of Man, no humane policy, nor any worldly wisdom, but only the clear
and visible Providence of God, and his special Aid could bring it to pass.
First, Letters Commendatory were to be procured of the contrary party, then was
he constrained to go through that Gate of the City that led to the Enemy's
Camp; the which without doubt was so narrowly kept and watched in the Extremity
of that Siege, that every trifle bred suspicion, and none were suffered to go
forth without narrow searching before touching their Letters, Messages,
Business, and Affairs they ^ad. But he (a wonderful thing) passed through the
Watch unexamined, yea with Letters Credential unto the Enemy; which if they had
been intercepted by the Citizens, without any delay and further trial he should
have been executed presently. And therefore this is a manifest Argument of Gods
Providence. But this is a far greater Miracle, that he without searching went
also through the Enemies Camp, by diverse Watches and Sentinels, and (which is
more) through the King's Guard du Corpse; and finally, through the whole Army,
which was made up mostly of Heretics, he being a Religious Man, and clad in
the Habit of his Order, which was so odious a Garb to those men, that they
either killed or severely treated all those Friars, whom they found in those
places, which not long before they had taken about Paris. Judith was a Woman,
and nothing odious, yet examined often; she carried nothing that might have
turned to her danger and destruction. This man a Friar, and therefore hated,
and most suspected, having also a Knife prepared for that purpose, not in a
Scabbard, (which might have made his Excuse probable) but naked and concealed
in his Sleeve; which if it had been found about him, he would questionless have
been put to death Immediately. All these are such clear Arguments of the
particular Providence of God, that they cannot be denied; neither could it
otherwise be, but that God blinded the Eyes of the Enemy, that they could not
see nor know him. For (as we have said before) although some do absurdly
ascribe this unto Fortune or Chance, yet none can refer the whole matter to no
other cause, but the will and holy purpose of God. And indeed I could not
believe this to have been done otherwise, unless I should captive or submit my
Understanding to the Obedience of Christ, who determined by these miraculous
means to deliver and set at liberty the City of Paris, which as we have heard
was in great danger and extremity, and to punish the notorious sins of that
King, and to deprive him of this Life by such an unhappy and infamous kind of
Death; and we truly (not without great inward grief) have oft-times foretold,
that as he was the last of his Name and Family, so was he like to have and make
some strange and shameful end of his Life. And that I have several times said
this thing, not only the Cardinals J^iosa, Lenocortius, and ^siensis, but also
the Orator at that time here resident, can sufficiently testify. For we mean
not to call the dead to attest our words, but the living; some whereof at this
very present do yet well remember them. But whatsoever we have been forced to
speak against this unfortunate King, we would by no means have it thought to be
intended against the noble Realm of France; which we shall em^race and foster
hereafter, as we have hitherto always done, with all Fatherly Love, Honor, and
Affection. This therefore which we with grief have spoken, concerns the King's
Person only, whose unhappy and unlucky End deprives him also of those
Honorable Offices and Respects, which this Holy Seat (the tender Mother of all
Faithful, but especially of Christian Princes) is wont to pay to Emperors and
Kings; which we most willingly would likewise have bestowed on him, if the Holy
Scriptures in this case had not altogether forbidden it.

There is (says S. John) a sin unto death; I say not that any should pray for
it, which may be understood either of the Sin it self, as if he should say for
that Sin, or for the remission of that Sin, I will that none should pray,
because it is not pardonable: Or else (which comes to the same sense) for that
Man who commits such a Sin unto death, I say not that any should pray for.
Of which Sin our Savior himself has spoken in S. Matthew saying, That he that
sins against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world,
nor in the world to come; where he sets down three sorts or kinds of Sins,
to wit, against the Father, against the Son, and against the Holy Ghost; and
that the two first are less heinous and pardonable, but that the third is
altogether unpardonable. All which difference proceeds from the distinction
of the Attributes, (as the Schools teach us out of the holy Scriptures;) which
severally are appropriated to every several Person of the holy Trinity. For
although as the Essence of all the three Persons is but one, so also is their
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, (as we have learned out of S. Athanasius his
Creed, when he says, Tho Father Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost
Almighty;) yet by Attribution Power is ascribed unto the Father, Wisdom unto
the Son, and Love unto the Holy Ghost; whereof every several, as they are
termed Attributes, are so proper unto every several Person, that they cannot be
attributed and referred unto any other. By the Contraries of which Attributes
we come to discern the distinction and greatness of Sin; the Contrary to Power
(which is attributed to the Father) is Weakness or Infirmity; and therefore
that which we do amiss through Infirmity, or Weakness of Nature, is said to be
committed against the Father. The opposite unto Wisdom is Ignorance, through
which when any man sins, he is said to sin against the Son; and therefore
what we commit through natural Infirmity or Ignorance, is more easily forgiven
us. The third Attribute, which is the Holy Ghost's, is Love, and has for its
Contrary Ingratitude, a Vice most detestable and odious, which causes men not
to acknowledge the Love of God, and his Benefits bestowed upon them; but to
forget, despise, yea and to hate them; and from hence at last it comes to pass,
that they prove obstinate and impenitent. And thus to sin against God is far
more dangerous and dreadful, than if it were done either through Ignorance or
Natural Infirmity, and therefore it is termed a sin against the Holy Ghost; and
because such Sins are seldom and hardly, and not without great abundance of
Grace pardoned, in some sort they are said to be unpardonable. Whereas Final
Impenitence only is really and simply unpardonable. For whatsoever is done
amiss in this Life, although it be against the Holy Ghost, yet by Repentance it
may be wiped out, or done away before we die; but they that persevere therein
till Death, are excluded from all grace and mercy hereafter. And therefore for
such Sins or Sinners the Apostle has forbidden to pray after their Decease.
Now therefore because we understand (not without great grief) that the
aforesaid King departed this Life without repentance, or impenitent, to wit, in
the Communion and Fellowship of Heretics, (for all his Army was made up almost
of none other but of such men) and that by his last Will he commended and made
over his Crown and Kingdom to the Succession of Navar, long since declared an
Heretic and Excommunicated; as also in his Extremity, and now ready to yield
up the Ghost, desired of him, and such as he was then standing by him, that
they would revenge his Death upon those whom he judged to be the Cause thereof.
For these and such like manifest Tokens of his Impenitency, we have decreed not
to solemnize his Death with Funerals; not that we presume any thing by these
concerning God's secret Judgment against him, or his Mercies toward him, who
could according to his good pleasure convert and turn his Heart, even when his
Soul was leaving the Body, and deal mercifully with him: but this we have
spoken, being thereunto moved by these external Signs and Tokens.

God grant that all being admonished and warned by this fearful Example of
Heavenly Justice may repent and amend, and that it may further please him to
continue and accomplish that which he has thus mercifully begun for us (as we
firmly hope he will) to the ^^d we may give everlasting thanks to him, that
has delivered his Church from such great and imminent Dangers.

When His Holiness had thus ended his Speech he brake up the Consistory, and
dismissed them with his Benediction.

From this Speech I shall only infer two things: First, That it is the
Interest of all Protestant Princes (if they love their Lives) to suppress
Popery in their Dominions. Secondly, That it is more particularly the Interest
of His Majesty of Great Britain, utterly to extirpate the Romish Religion out
of England, Scotland, and Ireland; there being a most damnable Hellish Plot
against His Majesty's Royal Person and Government and his Protestant Subjects,
still carried on by the Papists.

Some of the most Remarkable Passages of Q. Mary's Reign.
HAving given you the most famous Instances of the execrable Principles and
Practices of Papists, that I have met with in Foreign History, and showed you
that these Principles and Practices are derived from the Diabolical Doctrines
of the Romish Church, I shall now conclude with some Instances of the like
nature that occur in the Reign of Q. Mary being the most considerable on Record
in our own Chronicles.

As soon as Q. Mary heard of her Brother K. Edward's Death, and that he had by
his Will (with the consent of his Council) excluded her, and nominated the Lady
Jane Gray to succeed him, (the said Q. Mary having been before Bastardiz'd by
her Father K. Henry VIII.) she rode 40 miles in one day, from Norfolk to her
Castle of Framingham in Suffolk; where taking upon her the Name and Title of
Queen, she gave notice to the Protestant Nobility and Centry of the County,
That if they would assist her ingetting the Crown, she would not any ways
attempt the least Alteration of the Religion established by her Brother K.
Edward VI. This Declaration caused many of the prime Protestants to repair to
her, and she having given them her Royal Word and her Faith for performance
thereof, did likewise as a further Confirmation sign certain Articles of
Agreement to that effect. Whereupon the Protestants assisted her, and she
presently wrote Letters to the Council in which she claimed the Crown, and
required them to proclaim her Queen of England in London, which was done
accordingly.

But she was no sooner got into the Throne, than she broke her Word and Faith
given to these Protestants, and (which is very strange and remarkable) did
afterward prosecute them more severely than she did any other Protestants in
the Kingdom; though she kept her Faith with all of them alike, as you will see
by and by.

In the mean time I shall give you a particular Instance of her Ungratitude,
and Breach of Faith toward a Protestant, that has faithfully served her, and
the story is briefly thus. Sir James Hales, a Justice of the Common Pleas, who
had been a great and eminent Stickler for her Succession, having given a Charge
at a Quarter Sessions in Kent, upon the Statutes of Henry VIII. and Edward VI.
in derogation of the Primacy of Rome, he was by her order committed to prison;
of which ill requital of his Services he grew so sensible, that through
discontent and trouble of Mind he once endeavored to stab himself; and though
he was then prevented in his design, yet not long after he drowned himself.

Now you shall see how she proceeded by degrees against the Protestants.

1. On the third of August 1553 she rode through London to the Tower, and on
the fourth and fifth began to turn out the Protestant Bishops, and to put
Papists in their places; and presently after she displaced all the rest of the
Beneficed Clergy throughout the Kingdom, that were either married or refused to
turn Papists.

2. On the twenty seventh of the same Month the Service began to be sung in
Latin in S. Paul's Church.

3. The same Year the Pope's Authority was restored in England, and the Mass
commanded to be used in all Churches.

4. The same Year she caused a Synod to assemble, which restored the Romish
Religion, and ordained Mass to be celebrated after the Romish Fashion.

5. The fourth of February Mr. John Rogers, the first Martyr of those times,
was burnt at London.

6. Presently after her Coronation she pretended to show Mercy, by granting a
general Pardon but it was so interlaced (as an Author says) with Exceptions of
Matters and Persons, that very few received benefit by, but many were trepanned
by it.

7. In October 1554 she caused Ridley Bishop of London, and Latimer Bishop of
Winchester, to be sent from the Tower of London (where they were Prisoners) to
Oxford, upon pretense that they were to dispute with the Papists about the Real
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; but when they were brought thither,
instead of being disputed with they were both burnt.

8. The next thing she did, was to set up again the Pope's Supremacy in
England; and to this purpose she sent for Cardinal Pool from Rome, who being
arrived with the Pope's Authority as Legatus a latere, made a Speech to the
Parliament, exhorting them to return to the Bosom of the Church, for he was
come (as he said) to reconcile the People to the Church of Rome. And in order
to a Reconciliation he required them presently to repeal all Laws that had been
made in derogation of the Catholic Religion. When the Speech was ended, the
Parliament begged Pardon for their former Errors, and told the Queen they would
repeal all such Laws; whereupon the Cardinal accordingly gave them Absolution.
And so was all England in one day subjected again to the Romish Yoke by this
Popish Queen.

9. On the twelveth of March 1555 she restored all the Lands formerly belonging
to Abbeys and Monasteries that had been invested in the Crown, and did leave
them to be disposed of as the Pope should think fit.

10. It Is thought that she had once resolved to put her Sister Flizabeth to
death, for diverse of the Privy Council had signed a Warrant to that purpose;
yet when the Lieutenant of the Tower had received the said Warrant, he went to
the Queen, and solicited her for her Sisters Life, she protested she knew
nothing of such a Warrant. However it is believed that she would have consented
to her Sisters Death, had her own Life been continued a little longer.

11. In her fourth Year Monasteries began to be rebuilt and restored, and no
doubt she had in a short time caused all the Abbey Lands in England to be
restored, had not Death prevented her design.

12. To sum up all; it is recorded, That in less than 4 Years of this Queens
Reign 277 Protestants were put to death for their Religion, without any regard
had to Age, Sex, or Condition, viz. 5 Bishops, 21 Divines, 8 Gentlemen, 84
Artificers, 100 Husbandmen, Servants, and Laborers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows, 19
Virgins, 2 Boys, and 2 Infants; also near as many died in Prisons through
Hunger and other Hardships. So that Dr. Heylin says, that though many
Persecutions lasted longer than this, yet none since Dioclesians time raged so
terribly.

You have seen the horrid Actions committed by Charles IX. of France, and Mary
Queen of England; and yet History tells us negatively, that he was not of a
bloody or cruel disposition; and positively, that she was of a mild and gentle
temper: so that we must necessarily conclude, that the Doctrines of the Romish
Religion do infallibly debauch both the Consciences and Morals of all such as
believe them.

From what has been said I infer:

1. That English Protestants of the meanest capacities may (without the help of
Prophecy) be able to foretell what will become of them, if (which God forbid)
Popery should again prevail, and be reestablish'd amongst us.

2. That it is no less the Interest than the Duty of all true English
Protestants, to pray for the long and prosperous Reign of our present
Protestant Prince in whose Life (next under God) are bound up our Lives,
Religion, Laws, Government, Liberties, and Properties.

Lastly, That it is our Duty, for the good and welfare of Posterity, to pray,
That all His Majesty's Successors in the Government, may be Protestants to the
end of the World. Amen.

FINIS.

