The New Art of Gardening, WITH THE Gardener's Almanac: CONTAINING, The true
Art of Gardening, in all its Particulars.

I. Site of a proper Plat of Ground, for Planting Fruit Trees; with the manner
of Planting, Grafting, Imbuding, Inoculating, and Ordering all Sorts of
Fruit Trees, and Fruits in all Seasons. The Art of making Cider, Perry, and
Wines of diverse Sorts of Fruits. II. Of the Kitchen-Garden, and what Things are
proper to be done in it, as to Herbs, Plants, Roots, Berries, Fruits, etc. III.
Of the Flower-Garden, how to order it, and rear choice Flowers, Slips, Layers,
sow Seeds, make off-sets, and Plant them in their proper Earths, Seasons, and
due Waterings; with the Names, and Description of the most Material ones. IV.
Of Greens, how to Order and Preserve them; with Rules for the Conservatory, and
Green-house.
To each Head is added an Almanac, showing what is to be done every Month in
the Year.

By Leonard Meager.

London, Printed for R. Ware, at the Sun and Bible in Amen-corner. And sold by
T. Norris, at the Looking-glass on ^^^^^ridge: S. Bates, at the Sun and Bible
in Giltspur-street: A. Bettesworth at the Red Lion in Paternoster Row.

THE Preface to the Reader.
GArdening, and the pleasant Delights of a Curious Orchard, has been the
Delight of many great Persons, and Wise Men of all Ages; who have therein
contemplated the Wonders of God in Nature, and refreshed their Minds, as well
as sollaced their Bodies: There, by the help of Art, the Handmaid to Nature,
are produced such Things as are highly worthy of Admiration, whilst the
traveling Sun labors to impregnate the Earth with a kindly Heat, and enables
her to produce such various kinds of Fruits, Herbs, Plants, Flowers, Shrubs,
etc. of different Kinds, Tastes, Colors, Scents, Shapes, and Virtues;
ravishing to the Eye, pleasing to the Taste and Smell, and nourishing to the
Body, all which taking with admirable Delight, should incite Men not only to
covet them, but to Labor in moderate Exercise for improving and propagating
them.

A Method, to do which, I have in this Book laid down, the better to invite the
Ingenious and Industrious, to what must needs yield them a great measure of
Pleasure and Profit, having labored in every Thing to advance this Art, as
near as may be to its highest Perfection, omitting nothing that can be grateful
to my Countrymen, as to what relates to Fruit Trees in all their Particulars;
ordering Fruit when ripe, and making curious Liquor, and Wines of them.

Also every Thing that is proper in the Kitchen-Garden, Flower-Garden, and
Green-House, not only as to English, but Outlandish Fruits, Herbs, Plants,
Flowers, curious, Per-annual-greens, and others; Oranges and Lemmons, Citrons,
Aloes, and every Thing that is proper, for even a Royal Garden, to delight the
greatest Princes, as well as Nobles, Gentry, and private Persons; with Monthly
Observations upon every Particular, throughout the whole, never so exactly done
in any Work yet Extant, taken from long Experience, and upon the Judgment of
those that are Practicers in this Art; some for their Pleasure more than Gain,
and others, who employ themselves therein for Annual Advantages. Having
considered all Things for making a complete Gardener, either to serve himfelf
or others, and be grateful to Gentlemen and Ladies, who are curious in these
Matters, worthy of all Persons Care, of what Degree soever.

A good Orchard and Garden, by all prudent Physicians are held much to
contribute to the Health, as well as Pleasure of those that often frequent them
in their refreshing Walks and Vmbrages. Herein likewise, I have given
Directions to make in the newest Method, Knots, Borders, Walks, Green-plats,
Arbors, Hot-beds, preparing Manure of all Sorts, and ordering every Thing in a
proper Season.

Reader, may the Bookseller have so much Profit in Selling it, and thou the
same Pleasure and Profit in Buying it, that has accrued to me by Collecting,
and Experience therein; I am thine to serve,

Leonard Meager.

The CONTENTS.
THe New Art of Gardening, with the Gardener's Almanac: In what is necessary
for the well ordering of Orchards and Gardens, etc. Page 1 Chap. I. Of the good
site of a piece of Ground, intended for an Orchard, etc. 3 Chap. II. What soil
is most fit for an Orchard, and the ordering it in that kind. 4 Chap. III.
Quantity of Ground, and shape, manner of Fencing, and other Matters tending to
the preservation of your Orchard. 6 Chap. IV. Sets, how to be chosen and
ordered, either to grow up to Trees, or to be grafted on, etc. 7 Chap. V.
Proper Times for planting and removing; with the manner of setting the
distance, and placing of Trees, etc. 10 Chap. VI. General Directions for the
right ordering, keeping, and preserving of an Orchard 12 Chap. VII. Rules and
approved Directions for Grafting after the best and most thriving Method 15
Chap. VIII. Times proper for Grafting; how to choose the best Grafts; the way of
keeping and ordering them 17 Chap. IX. Other ways relating to grafting, as
incising, Packing on, Inoculating, Grafting in Scutcheon, etc. 18 Chap. X. Of
the Apple Tree, how grafted and ordered, the Advances accruing thereby, etc. 20
Chap. XI. Of the Pear Tree, how grafted, ordered and improved, etc. 22 Chap.
XII. Of the Quince-tree, how ordered, grafted, improved, etc. 23 Chap. XIII. Of
the Medler and Service-tree, how ordered, grafted, improved, etc. 25 Chap. XIV.
Of the Pomegranate-tree, how it must be ordered, grafted and improved 26 Chap.
XV. Of the Citron, or Limon-tree; how planted, and improved 27 Chap. XVI. Of
the Mulberry-tree, how ordered, planted, grafted, and improved 28 Chap. XVII.
Of the Orchard, Hazelnut, and Philbert-trees, their improvement 30 Chap. XVIII.
Of the Walnut-tree, and common Nut-tree, how to order them 31 Chap. XIX. Of the
Chesnut-tree, and Pine Tree 32 Chap. XX. How to order and improve Cherry-trees
33 Chap. XXI. Of Plum-trees, and how to order them 34 Chap. XXII. Of the
Peach-tree, and its ordering, etc also of the Apricot-tree 35 Chap. XXIII. Of
the Date-tree, and how it may be propagated 37 Of the Almond-tree. Of the
Barberry-tree. Of the Gooseberry, and Currant-trees 38 Of the Rasberry-tree. Of
the Fig Tree 39 Of the Cornelian Cherry-tree, and Orange-tree 40
Chap. XXIV. Wall-fruit-trees, how best to order them their Virtues, etc. 41 Of
the Apricot-tree 42 Of the Peach-trees, Nectarins, Malacottoons, etc. 43 Of
Plumb-trees. Of the Fig Tree 44 Of the Current tree, as Wall-fruit 45
Chap. XXV. The well ordering and right dressing of Fruit Trees, for their
better thriving ibid Chap. XXVI. Soil proper for remedying Diseases i^
Fruit Trees, and destroying Vermin and Insects that infec^ them, etc. 4^ Chap.
XXVII. Of Nurseries for Stocks, and their improvement 5^ Chap. XXVIII. Some
farther Observations in transplanting of Fruit Trees, with the Errors of some
therein discovered 53
The Gardener's Almanac; containing what is to be done in, or relating to the
Orchard in their proper Seasons throughout the Year, in each particular Month,
from 56, to 72 The best and safest way to gather Summer and Winter-fruit for
keeping, and how to order them for that purpose 73 To gather and order other
Stone-fruit. To gather Pears the best way 74 To gather and order Apples in the
best manner 75 To gather and secure Quinces from rotting, etc. To gather and
keep Medlars and Services 76 Of the Fruit-loft, stowing and managing Fruit for
keeping 77
To make Cider 78 Perry, the best way to make it 79 To make Wine of Grapes. To
make Wine of Cherries 80 To make a good Wine of Currants. To make excellent
Gooseberry Wine. To make Rasberry Wine 81 To make Mulberry Wine. To make Wine
of Services 82
Of Gardening; and first of the Kitchen-Garden. What is necessary to be done
and observed therein for setting, sowing, rearing, and bringing to perfection,
Seeds, Herbs, Plants, Roots, etc. 83 Further Directions for the well ordering
this kind of Garden in many material particulars: In its side and furnishing
with Herbs, Plants, etc. 86 Several growths of Herbs and Plants distinguished,
to know the better how to place them 87 Sundry sorts of useful Herbs, their
increase, well ordering, and preserving, etc. 89 Rules in general for ordering
Herbs, etc. 91 Of Roots proper for the Kitchen-Garden, their well ordering and
improvement 92 Beans, Pease, Artichoaks, Asparagus, Cabbages, Colliflowers,
Savoys, Lettice, etc. to order and improve 94 Hot Beds, how to prepare and fit
them for such Things as require to be set in them 99 Watering, the proper time;
and what Plants, Herbs etc most require it, and in what seasons 101 The several
sorts of Strawberries, the manner of setting, transplanting and improving them
102
The Gardener's Almanac: or, Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden in
the several Months of the Year 104, to 120 How to know particular Flowers that
will alter for the best ibid. Choice Directions for sowing of Seed and setting,
etc. 122 Things convenient to be considered to the Manner of laying, etc. 123
Artificial Sets, how to make them. To change the Color of Flowers when in
Blossom, etc. 124 A few useful Observations from Astrology ibid. The Gardener's
Almanac; directing what to be done i^ the Flower-Garden, etc. in the several
Months throughou^ the Year, etc. 120, to 136 Flowers blowing this Month, or
continuing 129 Flowers, Shrubs, and choice Plants, enduring several degrees of
Cold, how they are to be preserved. Flowers and Plants not dying but by extreme
Cold 136 Flowers and Plants enduring the second degree of Cold Flowers and
Plants the least of all enduring Cold 137
A further Description of Flowers as to their Shapes and Colors 139, to 148
The Gardener's Almanac for what is necessary to be done in the Green-house
and Conservatory, in preserving and well ordering choice Shrubs, Plants,
Flowers, etc with the Time of Housing, etc. 148, to 15^
The Green-house and Conservatory for the preservation o^ Plants, Shrubs,
choice Flowers, etc. from Winds, Frosts or cold Airs that would otherwise chill
and destroy them 157, to 160
New ART of GARDENING, WITH THE Gardener's Almanac: In what is necessary for
the well Ordering of Orchards and Gardens, etc.
The Introduction; or an Incitement to the Planting, and well ordering
Orchards, and Gardens.
AS Orchards and Gardens are exceeding pleasant, and desirable for Sight and
Beauty, when well, and seasonably ordered, so they likewise bring with them
large Advantages, being ^n extraordinary way o^ improving Lands to a vast
Va^^e, even to Twenty-fould in a few Years, in well Ma^uring, Cultivating, and
other good Management, by which our Ancestors have enriched Posterity, in
leaving ^ehind them Orchards Planted with stately and regularly ^lanted Tree,
whose Example minds us of Imitation, that succeeding Ages may know our
Industry, by what ^e leave in this Nature as lasting Monuments behind us.

Kings, Princes, and the wisest Men of all Ages, ha^ some or other of them,
taken singular Delight in the Exercise of Planting, Setting, Sowing, and what
el^^ is requisite in the well ordering of Orchards, and Ga^dens, and rejoiced
to see the Fruits of their Labou^ Solomon among the many Toyls of State and
Affairs (...) his Kingdom, took exceeding delight in it, and to st^dy the Works
of Nature; so that it is said of him, (...) knew the Use and Virtue of all
Plants, even from t^^ Shrub to the Cedar; that is, from the smallest to t^^
greatest.

The Planting of Trees for bearing the various Kin^ of Fruits, is undoubtedly
one of the greatest Improv^ments that can be made of a considering part of o^
English Soil, as Worchesteshire, Kent, Gloucestershi^ Herefordshire, and other
places can plentifully testifi^ and this is more Universal than any other
Improveme^^ because most Land will bare one sort other of Fru^^ Trees, Herbs,
Plants, Flowers, and such things as Or^^mentally, or Profitably, as to
accommodate Orchar^ or Gardens, for the Pleasure and Sustenance of Man.

As for the Charge of raising and planting Fruit-Tre^ considering the Years
they must stand, and the contin^^ Increase, I look upon it as Trivial,
considering the R^compence they will soon make, besides the abundan^ of
Pleasure it must be to any generous and active Mi^^ to see flourishing Trees of
his own Setting, and pea^ably enjoy himself in Contemplation, under the co^ing
Shades of their spreading Branches, to admire a^ adore the wonderful Goodness
of God, in giving su^^ Virtue to the Earth, for the producing rare and vari^
Kinds of things conducing to the Food and Pleasure Man. And that it must be of
singular use on sundry o^casions, as appears by God's first placing Man in a
G^^den, which himself had caused to spring up, and b^ Fruits, as the fittest
place for the Reception of him, ev^ in his State of Innocence; and no doubt,
Adam was ^^ceedingly grieved to part with it, when his Disobedien^ had
forfeited the Possession.

These, and many other things I might urge, to pro^ote this part of Industry,
accompanied with so much ^leasure, and Profit; but designing this only as an
In^oduction to the Practical part, which immediately ^ollows in all its
Generals, and Particulars, so that no^ing useful, or necessary, being omitted,
I shall not ^etain you longer from entering, as it were into (if I ^ay so term
it) another earthly Paradise, where every ^ing Smiles, and looks Gay to the
Imagination, even in ^eading. How much more then will it exhilerate the ^ind,
when by Practice it is enjoyed in its Perfection, and flourishes to gratify
the Sight, Taste, and Smell of ^^e Beholder, with a fair Prospect, pleasant
Fruits, and ^agrant Flowers, wherein Nature is refined by Art.

CHAP. I.
Of the good Site of a Piece of Ground, intended for an Orchard, etc.

THE Site, or standing of an Orchard, greatly advantages it, that the Sun and
free Air may have ^ower over it, and yet so well defended with Shelter, ^^at
Storms and bleak Winds may be in a great Measure ^ept from the injuring it; and
this good Site or standing ^ill help even a bad Soil.

The best Site I account to be in plain Ground, laying ^ot so low, as the wet
and dampness may too much in^st it; nor so high as to lie liable to too much
dryness, ^^e injury of Storms, or sharp Air to ^n^p the tender ^ranches, and
Buds; high Grounds are not naturally ^ertile, and if they be Manured with Dung,
the Rains (...) a little time wash down the futness, and leave them ^^or, so
that the one part will have overmuch, and ^e other grow steril for want of it;
and it will be convenient it be sheltered with wild Trees round t^ Verges of a
good growth, if possible, that they m^^ break the turbulent Wind, especially
the S uth-We^^ and North-West Winds, which are usually violent March, and
September, when the Air is free from e^tream Heat, or Colds; and a fitter place
cannot be ch^sen for an Orchard, if it may be done, than on a cu^ous Level by a
Riverside, or some pleasant Brook, (...) too near a Marsh, or Moory Ground,
whence frequen^ Fogs and Mists arise, which hinder the growth of t^ Plants, and
much injure them by ingendering poysono^ or infectious Air, at certain Seasons.

The Suns long lying on the Trees greatly refresh a^ enliven them in Winter, as
well as Summer; let it (...) therefore so chosen, that it may not be destitute
of (...) Morning and Evening Sun at any time when it shin^ and this appears by
such Trees as are placed again^ Walls, where the refracted Beams give a greater
heat make them Blossom, and Leaf very early, and to spre^ their Branches so
Luxurant, that they require very of^ cutting; or they take up so much Sap, as
not only hind^^ the Fruit in growth, but in kindly ripening, as shall more
plainly showed in the Progress of this necessa^ Work.

CHAP. II.
Which Soil is most fit for an Orchard, an^ the ordering it in that Kind.

WHEN you have found a proper and commo^ous Site for Planting of Fruit Trees,
then ^quire into the Nature of the Soil, and though Fru^^ Trees will grow in
almost all Soils, yet they will ^bundantly better thrive in one sort than in
another; f^ Apple, Pear, red and white Plumb, Philberd, Da^ (...), Bully,
Barbery, and the like, require a black, fat, ^ellow, and clean tempered Soil,
wherein they may ^ther plenty of good Sap.

The Soil may be bettered by digging, breaking and ^ell melting, being cast up,
or laid level, which with (...) little Dung, destroys those Weeds that are
Enemies to ^ants: If the Ground be much overgrown with Weeds, (...) subject to
any Encumbrances of the like Nature, than ^re up the Surface with the Root of
them, lay them in ^aps to dry, with a hollowness underneath like an Oven, (...)
Furnace, and when by turning, the Air and Sun have ^ssed on them, that they are
pretty dry, put Fuel a^ongst them, and burn the Weeds and Earth, then ^eak the
Cumbers, and scatter them with the Ashes o^r the Ground, and they will prove
good Manure; then ^rinkle a small sprinkling of Sea-cole-ashes, or unslacked
^me, and when the Rain has pretty well soaked them (...) dig up the Ground, and
Trench it with a little Dung, ^d if it be indifferent good Soil, it will be
excellent for (...) Production of Fruit Trees, and if your Orchard be ^bject to
dryness in extreme Droughts, it will be very ^vantagious, if it so lie, that by
Sluices you can over^w it with Water twice in the Summer: and let the ^^ter pass
over it twenty four Hours, and then draw it (...); and fine Grass growing in an
Orchard, keeps the ^ound very moist, but let it not grow thick about the ^ots
of the Trees, lest it breeds Mots, shelter Vermin, ^in^ure them, or they be
prejudiced by keeping the heat (...) the Sun from them, for the Sun's coming to
the Roots ^n enlivener of the Tree. It is not proper to dig very ^r Fruit Trees
that are well grown, unless by a careful (...) skilful Hand, for fear of
cutting, or wounding the ^ots that spread in the Ground, which often makes the
^ees languish, abate of their growth, and yield less Fruit.

The Crust of the Earth tempered with Heat, Cold, (...) Moisture, is a great
helper to Trees, for in that ^y chiefly spread their Roots, especially those
parts ^t mostly suck in, and set up the Sap; and this is in some Soil Eighteen
Inches, and in others less; for low the Ground is not so fertile.

CHAP. III.
Quantity of Ground, and Shape, manner Fencing, and other Matters tending to t^
preservation of your Orchard.

AS for the quantity of Ground to be employed (...) an Orchard, I account the
larger the better, for (...) Trees growing up, fence each other; and if the
Verge^ blasted, the rest are frequently sheltered as well from as the Winds
shaking down the Fruit when ripe, (...) hurting the Trees when young, by
losening their Ro^ but the proportion of Ground I cannot limit, beca^ it must
be according to Convenience, the Planter's A^lity, or Pleasure; and in the same
Manner I mus^ general leave the Form to his Discretion, for that wh^ pleases
one, another dislikes; some Round, some Squ^ some Triangular, others Long; and
indeed, Plats (...) Grounds cannot be every where exactly chosen, but (...)
must be contrived as they fall out, to the best Adv^tage.

As for Fencing, in this you must be diligent, as (...) to preserve your Fruit
from Thieves, as Trees fr^ Spoil, by the breaking in of Cattle, and likewise
(...) it may be a good shelter to the young Plants; Sto^ Walls, where Stone is
plenty, may be cheaply rai^ or those of Brick; but above all, I recommend a g^
thick and well grown Quickset of white Thorns, (...) thickening Brambles; black
Thorn, or dwarf She at the bottom, especially where Wall Fruit is not re^red;
and by skilful Setting, and Continuance, it (...) grow so thick, that it will
be a great security, more than Pailes, Railes, or Walls of Earth; and grow
high, it may on the top be cut with Shears, in Turfs and Piramids, and become a
pleasant Ornament to the ^rchard: As for Walks, I shall describe them in that
^art of this Book, that particularly relates to Gardening; ^ho' in Orchards,
curious green Walks kept short by ^lowing, and Rolling in Summer, are of good
Esteem; and such may be raised so above the common Surface, that the Wet may
have little influence in staying on them, even in Winter, after a shower of
Rain is past. A ^ote or large wet Ditch round an Orchard is very ser^iceable,
if it can be conveniently done, and continued with Water: But from these things
I proceed to what ^omes somewhat nearer to my purpose, viz. The get^ng,
ordering, and planting of Sets, etc.

CHAP. IV.
^ets, how to be Chosen and Ordered, either to grow up to Trees, or to be
Grafted on, etc.

THE best and most usual kind of Sets, are young Plants, which have been
brought up in a Nursery, ^hether of Apples, Pears, Plumbs, or the like, has
^ing good Roots, for they are more certain than Slips: ^r such suckers as were
taken from the Roots of grown ^rees; and in removing them, get all the Root ^ou
can out of the Ground, for if a main part of the ^oot be lost, as some regard
it not, then it follows, the Tree cannot thrive so well, though upon the
transplant^ng, some of the Top be taking off; for the Root has a ^ympathy with
the Branches, as to the greatness, ^r smallness; and when the Sap is straightened,
or lessen^d, then is it that the Tree pines for want of its free ^urrency and
Communication; and when you take up ^he Root, divest it not, as little as may
be, of the Earth (...) grows in; for that, upon the transplanting, will be
nourishing to it, till it become better acquainted wi^^ the new Ground. Too
much Topping, or Stowing, approve not of, because it very much hinders the
growt^ of the Tree; and when you cut off any Branches, d^ it upwards, that
slanting it may shoot off the Wet, an^ not any way rive or split; and if Clay,
and fine siste^ Horse Dung, or Cow Dung, were well mixed, and clapped on the
Cuts of the Branches, it would be very proper to keep them from the Cold and
Wet, till they grow and begin to thrive, unless you intend these Plants for
Grafting, and then you may let the Tops grow till yo^ cut the Stem for
Inoculation, in which you shall here after be instructed, with all that is
proper relating to it and set these in Rows by a Line, in such Holes as yo^
have prepared, laying the Earth then lightly upon them after they are well
placed in the Hole; and heap it highe^ then the Surface, that it may well
settle by Degrees, and keep the Tree from the Roots, being much shaken by the
Wind; to which end, whilst the Trees are young, yo^ must also use Stakes, or
Poles well fixed in the Ground fastened to the Plants by Hay-bands, and some
Moss, o^ soft thing clapped between, to prevent the fretting tha^ may accrue by
the rattling or shaking of the Wind.

Slips which some use, are not so good by much, to plant, for either many of
them miss to take Root, or i^ they do, the Root being the main Wood, doats and
rots i^ the Ground, when the Tree comes to growth, so that they are but of
short continuance, or at least-ways, will bu^ weakly bare, and those chiefly in
Apple Trees; yet a Burknot kindly taken from an Apple Tree, is much better and
surer, and this you must cut close at the Roots-end a handful under the Knot,
then cut away all the Twigs except the main one, and set it deep in the Ground,
tha^ it may only rise a little above the Surface, and it will shoot up, and
become a good Stock, especially for Grafting on, if you like not the Fruit
otherways.

As for large Fruit Trees, there is danger in transplant^ng them, for many
times they do not thrive, by reason ^f the injury they receive in the Roots;
for if some of ^he lesser Spums take, they generally do not all; so th^^ ^he
Body not having sufficient Nourishment, the Heart ^rows blackish, or of a
yellow color, and many times ^ho they bring forth fair Blossoms, they have not
strength enough to form their Fruit in the natural Perfection.

It has been Experimented, that a Bough has been taken from a thriving Tree of
a good bigness, and grown to be (...) Tree; the manner thus: Take off the Bark
in a round Circle, when the Sap is in it, and make a Mortar of Clay, ^ine
Earth, and a little Dung, and clap on the bare place, ^o the higness of a
Football, and let it lie till the Sap ^escends to the Root of the Tree, then
cut off the Bough ^^anting on the hither side of the Mortar, next to the Tree,
and immediately put it into good Ground, the Mortar and all, and cover it up
close; Water it sometimes, and ^f this be done in October, it will take Root,
and shoot forth in the Spring; and if these stand, they need not ^e Grafted on,
but will bear good Fruit of their own.

You may Sow the Kernels, or Nuts of Trees in Nurseries, and when they come up,
shelter and keep them Warm, and in time they will afford you good Stocks, and
Plants, either to bear of themselves, or to Graft on; though Suckers taken from
the Roots of Trees, grow ^aster than these, till they get a Head; but above
all, beware that Cattle come not into your Plantations, or Nurseries, to
destroy them.

You may lay young Scions in the Ground, where many sprout from one Master-top,
when cut near the Earth; and by keeping them down with Sods, one end being at
liberty, and growing upward, they will be apt ^o take Root, and so you may have
four or five out of one in a little time, and this is called a running Plant.
As for the buying of Sets ready Grafted, you may mainly be deceived in them, as
having only another Word, what manner of Fruit they are, and so you may be at
most Cost and Labor about the worst Trees, besides, hinders the Experience you
may gain, in raising and o^dering them to the many singular Advantages.

CHAP. V.
Proper times for Planting and Removing with the manner of Setting the distanc^
and placing of Trees, etc.

WHEN you have made choice of your Sets, t^^ the Ground being ready for
Transplanting, the next thing to be considered, is the time this is m^ Proper
to be done in; and this account to be soon aft^ the Fall of the Leaf, in or
about the change of the Moo^ when the Sap is most quiet, for then it is about
turning but upon occasion it may be done all Winter, in op^ weather, and early
in the Spring, when the Buds are ju^ putting out; though as I have said, the
sooner you r^move them in Winter it is the better; some indeed (...) remove
them before the Sap is at a stand, or about return, that is, in Autumn, before
the Leaves are fallin^ but this I hold not so good; and were it not for the
fal^ of brevity, could give you here many convincing reason to the contrary.

In setting, make the Holes sufficiently large to ^^ceive the Roots, and more,
that they may have n^thing at first to contend with, but the tender Mould shake
that you have dug out, lightly in, when the Pla^ is conveniently placed, and in
the mean while let another move the Plant, that the Earth may fill into the
cranies, and settle better about the Root, so press (...) gently down, that the
Plant may be well fixed, and (...) a dry Season water it, which being a
settlement of the Earth, will make it take the sooner. As for the distance of
Trees, you must consider the nature of them as to what greatness in time they
may grow, how spread their Branches; as the Apple Tree (or aspire more upright
than the Pear tree) if they be such as you intend shall continually stand; for
if they too much drop upon one another, or the Boughs are galled by fret^ing or
rubing, then Injury comes thereby, and the underling Trees that are
overshadowed, will be stunted and spoiled; and therefore according as you
conjecture their Growth may be, so place them, and the Sun and free Air coming
in among them, will make them thrive the better, and this distance must be as
far as you conceive two Trees can spread their Boughs when grown up.

As for the placing them, let Philberts, Damsens, Bulliss, and such like, the
lower Trees, stand on the outside, next the fencing: Your Cherries and choice
Plums, for the Sun the sooner to ripen them, may be planted in the openest
places; your Apples, Pears, and Quinces, in the most substantial place of the
Orchard, possessing the best Soil. The Trees of greatest growth may be planted
further from the Sun, and those of the lesser, nearer to the S^uth, that they
may not be a hindrance to one another, but all receive warm alike: As for the
Wardens and Winter Pears growing high, they will do very well Northward,
because being hard latter Fruit, they ripen leasurely, and the blasts cannot
hurt them: As for the Medlers, Services, Pomgranets, Citrons, and such Trees,
though they are not often seen in Orchards, yet they are very graceful and
pleasant, and must be planted where the Sun has great power, and free from the
droping of other Trees: Almond-Trees are hardy, and will bear the Blasts, but
not give their Fruit kindly, unless well sheltered: Set the Wallnut-trees on
the highest ground, if it may be without overshadowing others.

CHAP. VI.
General Directions for the right Ordering, Keeping and Preserving of an
Orchard.

THE first thing that will be required, as most necessary for an Orchard, will
be Dunging and Watering; for the Fruit Trees, a very few of them being only to
be excepted, require these; and herein you must also be careful that you do it
in the heat of the Sun, and that your Dung be neither too new nor too old;
neither must it be laid close to the foot of the Tree, but a little distance
off, that the fatness of the Dung may be drunk in of the Root: Pidgeons-dung,
and Hogs-dung do also heal the hurts and wounds of Trees: The water wherewith
we water them, must not be Fountain water, or Well water, if other may be had;
but drawn from some muddy Lake, or standing Pool. Moreover, you must be sure
that your Trees stand a good distance asunder, that when they are grown up,
they may have room enough to spread, and that the small and tender be not hurt
of the greater, neither by shadow nor dropping. The nature also of the Soil,
is herein much to be regarded: for a Hill requires to have them stand nearer
together; in windy places you must set them the thicker: you must set your
Plants in such a manner that the Tops be not hurt, or bruised, or the Bark, or
Rind flawed off; for the Bark being taken away round about it, kills any kind
of Tree. You must also have a regard of the shadow, what Trees it helps, and
what Trees it hurts. The Wallnut-tree, the Pitch-tree, the Firr-tree,
whatsoever they shadow, they injure; the Pine Tree with his shadow likewise
destroys young Plants, but they do resist the Wind, and therefore good to
enclose Vineyards: The Cypress, his shadow is very small, and spreads not
far, and therefore it may safely enough grow amongst Vines, and so for many
others; the dropping of all Trees is naught, but worst of all those, those
Branches grow so that the water cannot readily ^^ss through: For the drops of
the Pine, the Oak, and ^e Martholme, are most hurtful, in whose company ^ou may
also take the Wallnut: Moreover pruning and ^tting is very good and necessary
for Trees, whereby ^e withered Boughs are cut away, and the unprofitable
^ranches taken off; but to prune them every Year is ^ught, though the Vine
requires cutting every year; (...) also the Myrtil, the Pomegrancte and the
Cherry, ^hereby they will sooner yield Fruit; the others must (...) seldomer
pruned; Cherry-trees may be pruned in the ^ll of the Leaf, after the setting of
the seven Stars: and first, they must be well dunged, and as a help against
their hurts, you must cut down the old rotten ^ranches that grow in the midst,
and such as grow ^ick, and are tangled together, and all the water-boughs, and
unprofitable Branches about them: The old ones are (...) be cut close to the
stock, from whence the new Springs ^ill arise: Scarifying also and Launcing, is
very whole^ome for the Trees, when they are screined with their ^eafs, and
dryness of their Barks; at which time use to ^unce the Bark with a sharp Knife,
cutting it strait ^own in many places; which, what good it does, ap^eareth by
the opening of the Rhind, which is straitways ^lled up with the Body
underneath; you must also trim and dress the Roots of your Trees after this
manner; you ^ust open the ground round about them, that they may ^e comforted
with the warmth of the Sun, and the Rain, ^utting away all the Roots that run
upwards: The Trees ^^at you remove may be marked which way they stood ^t the
first: As Virgil expresses.

And in the Bark they set a Sign,
To know which way the Tree did grow;
Which part did to the South incline,
And where the Northern blasts did blow.
Also you must consider well the nature of the Soil, the you remove not out of
a dry Ground, into moist, and fr^^ a barren Hill, to a moist Plain, and rather
fat, than ^therwise; The young Plants being thus removed, must (...) the second
or third Year be pruned, leaving still about ^hr^^ or four Branches untouched,
so shall they grow the better^ Thus must you usually do every Year. The old
Tree (...) move with the Tops cut off, and the Roots unperishe^ which must be
helped with often Dunging and Watering^ Apple Trees that Blossom and bear no
Fruit, or if it bea^ they suddenly fall away, you shall remedy it by slitting
(...) the Root, and thrusting in of a Stone or wooden Wedge also if you water
your Trees with Urine that is old, the helps them very much both for
Fruitfulness and pleasan^ness of the Fruit; if the Tree decay by reason of the
gre^^ heat of the Sun, you must raise the Earth about it, a^ water the Roots
every Night, setting up some defense against the Sun. To cause their Fruit to
be quickly Rip^ you must wet the little Roots with Vinegar and Urine the is
old, covering them again with Earth, and often diggin^ about them. The Urine of
Men, if it be kept three or fo^^ Months, does wonderfully much good to the
Plants, and (...) you use it about Vines, or Apple Trees, it does not on^^
bring you great increase, but also gives an excellent Savor, both to the
Fruit and Vine: You may also use the M^ther of Oil, such as is without Salt, to
the same purpose which both must speedily be used in Winter. As Frosts, an^
Mists also do great harm to Trees, so you must arm you^ self with a Remedy
against them; you must lay up roun^ about your Orchard, little Faggots made of
Stalks o^ rotten Boughs, or Straw, which, when that the Frosts an^ Mists arise,
may be kindled, the Smoke whereof avoidet^ the Danger. You must stave also dry
Dung amongst you^ Vines, which when the Frost is great, you may set on Fire^
the Smoke whereof disperseth the Frost. When you^ Trees are sick, pour on the
Roots the Lees of Wine, mingled with Water, and you may, if you please, so^
Lupines round about them; the Water also wherein Lupenes have been sod, and
poured round about, which is ^very good for Apple Trees; If your Trees are
troubled with Caterpillars or Worms, there are diverse Remedies; the ^uice of
Wormwood destroys the Caterpillars; the Seeds or Grain that are steeped in
the juice of Sengreen, or Housleek, are also excellent Receipts against the
Worms: Also Ashes mingled with the Mother of Oil, or the Stale of (...) Ox,
mingled with the third part of Vinegar; moreover, (...) Trees that are smoaked
with Brimstone, or Lime, are safe from hurtful Vermin: Galbanum likewise burnt
upon the Coals, drives them away; the Blades also of Garlic, the Heads being
off, so burnt (as the smoke may pass through the Orchard) does destroy the
Caterpillars; some Soot with the Seeds, and sprinkle them with water.

CHAP. VII.
Rules and approved Directions for Grafting after the best and most thriving
Method.

AS for Grafting, it is accounted the nicest piece of Skill belonging to an
Arborist or Gardener; but by good Instruction and Practice becomes easy, and
is done with much success: The thing signifies the reforming the Fruit of one
Tree with that of another, by an artificial transposing or transplanting of a
Twig or Scion, a Bud or Leaf, commonly called a Graft, taken from one Tree of
the same, or some other kind, and placed or put to, or into another Tree, in
one time or manner; and of these there are many kinds, but the chief in use,
and most certain, are Grafting, Incising, Packing on, Grafting in the
Scutcheon, or Inoculating.

As for Grafting, when you undertake it, you mu^^ have a fine, thin, strong and
sharp Saw, made and arme^ for that purpose, to saw the Plant off even without
splitting or jagging the Bark; it may be done a foot abov^ the Ground, or more,
as the Plant is capable of yieldin^ a sufficiency of Sap, and then smoothed
with a ver^ sharp Knife, let it be done where there is no knot, for that is
best; then stay the stock very steady with yo^ foot and leg, cleave it gently
in the middle, with a fi^^ sharp cleaver, by forcing it down with the stroke o^
a Mallet, then open it with a Wedge of Wood, Bone o^ Iron, about six Inches,
then having your Graft cut a^ the great end, in a tapering flatness, the Bark
left on, (...) the two thin sides of it, thrust it gently, and let the Bar^ of
the Graft, touch the Bark of the Stock, and come even with it, to the outward
side, then take out you^ Wedge gently, and suffer the stock to close and
compre^^ the Graft; and having a fine mixture of Clay and Hors^ Dung, mould
them like a Past, into the form of an Egg then divide it in equal Parts, and
with both hands press i^ equally on the wound of the Graft and Stock, closing
i^ firm together, that it may keep them warm, as also keep out the Air and Wet,
till they can unite, and the Bark spread to cover the Wound; and thus, on a
pretty large stock, you may place three or four Grafts of various Fruits;
though it is proper they be of one kind, Apples with Apples, Pears with Pears,
and the like o^ others.

CHAP. VIII.
Times proper for Grafting; how to choose the best Grafts; the way of keeping
and ordering them.

THE best time for grafting and gathering of Grafts, are proper to be known;

As to the first, of the best time for grafting, from the ^ne of removing your
stock, is the next Spring, for at hinders a second repulse of the Sap, and a
second ^ound in the stock; and if your stock be of a sufficient ^gness, it may
take a Graft as thick as your Thumb, ^at of larger Grafts I approve not, for
they seldom stand, (...) reason they require more Sap than the stock (before
^^ey are well united) can afford them. The best time (...) the year I account,
if the Weather be open, is the latter ^^d of February, March, and the beginning
of April, ^^d about the change of the Moon, when only the Knots ^^d Buds are
seen, without any considerable appearance ^f the Blossoms, or Leaves; Cherries,
Apricocks, Pears, ^uinces, and Plums, may be grafted sooner than the ^^ter
Flowers.

The Grafts are proper to be gathered in the middle of ^ebruary, the Weather
being open, or no hard Frost on ^^em: You may do this some time before you
graft, or (...) the same day, for at this time of year they will keep ^esh a
considerable while, if laid with the greater ends (...) good Mould. Grafts
from elder Trees must be taken other than these of the younger, for they sooner
break ^^d Bud.

Take not, when you make choice, of the proudest ^rigs, unless your Stocks be
answerable to their ^trengths and Growths; nor out of a much warmer and ^cher
Soil than that your Stock grows in, lest the Sap ^ot agreeing, or springing up
fast enough, the cold Weather pine them: if they be long, cut off a little of
the top of it, for that else withering, for want of du^^ Nourishment at first,
may injure the lower part, an^ hinder it from sprouting out; take not any from
poo^ unthriving Trees, nor from the Underlings that seem t^^ dwindle in their
Growth, even on their own Trees th^^ produced them, but midling ones that
prosper, but no^ too fast.

If the Clay and Dung about your Graft, be cleft (...) dry weather, close it
again with some that is mois^ lest the Emmets get in and spoil your Graft; take
it no^ for a certain sign, that the Graft has well taken, if (...) quickly put
forth in the Spring, for that may procee^ from the Sap it brought with it, more
than from a^ Nourishment of the Stock; nor can it always be determi^ed till
after the succeeding Spring, whether it will ta^^ well or not; but when you
find it has, you may di^ burden it of the Clay, that the Sun may come to
Nourish it in all parts the better.

CHAP. IX.
Other ways relating to Grafting, as Incising Packing on, Inoculating, Grafting
in Scutcheon, etc.

ANother way relating to this Mystery, is incising or cutting the Bark of the
Bole, Rhind, or Branch, at some bending, or Knee, Shoulder-wise, with two
gashes only with a sharp Knife to the Wood; then take sharp ended Wedges to the
bigness of your Graft, fla^ on the one side, agreeing with the Tree, and round
o^ the other side, and with that, being thrust in, raise the Bark, then put in
the Graft just fashioned like the Wedge, close it hard with your Hand, and bind
about it Clay, and Horse Dung.

For great stocks, you may cleave them cross, and put ^n a Graft at each corner
with little straining them, and close them up with Clay, and Dung, as others;
and though ^hey are pretty large, the stock having sap enough to support them,
some, or all of them will cut, and growing up faster than on small stocks, will
much sooner bear Fruit: And this I have seen tried on stocks of a good growth,
that have borne, had Fruit, and in a few Years the Grafts have shot up, and
produces excellent Fruit.

Packing on, is when you cut sloap-wise, a Twig of the same Magnitude with your
Graft, either in, or besides the Knot, two Inches long, and make your Graft
just agree with the scion, and gashy our Graft, and it, just in the midst of
the Wound, length-ways, about a straws breadth deep, and thrust the one into
the other, Wound to Wound, so that sap may come to sap, and Bark to Bark, so
bind them close with soft strings, and mix Clay and Dung, and cover them over,
and this way many times, thrives wonderfully; and this may be done on Branches
of Tree, the latter end of Grafting-time, when the sap is risen with good
success.

The way of Inoculating is with an Eye or Bud, taken with a pretty large piece
of Bark to it, from a thriving Tree, and placed immediately on another Tree,
where just the same quantity has been taken off, that it may close with the
bare place of the Tree, supplying the Bark that was taken thence, and being
bound on with Clay and Dung, strengthened with a little Moss, is in great
likelihood quickly to flourish: This by some, is called Imbuding.

Grafting in Scutcheon is somewhat like unto the former, only differing in
this, that you must take an Eye, or Bud, with Leafs ( Note, That an Eye is for
a scion, and a Bud for Flowers, and Fruit) and place them on another Tree in a
Plain, like the Letter H, out with a sharp Knife, and the Bark raise with a
Wedge, and then the Eye and Bud must be put in, and so bound up: These I have
known to have grown well, but it is somewhat a tedious way, and the plainer way
of Grafting soonest answers Expectation.

As for the young Grafts, you must be careful to Fenc^ them about, for the
least rudness, or rough handling spoils your Labor, or much impares what you
ha^^ done; and this may be done with setting of Roses Gooseberries, or such
prickly Trees about them, but no^ so as to over-shade them, and hinder their
growth, a^^ be careful that no Cattle break into your Ground: nay Dogs and
Cats, where they are grafted low to the Ground may by running over them, break
off the Graft, and s^ cross you in your Industry: And now from General, (...)
proceed to particular Trees, etc.

CHAP. X.
Of the Apple Tree, how Grafted and Ordered, the Advantages accruing thereby,
etc.

THE Apple is commonly grafted upon the Crab-tree Stocks, or upon the wild
Apple-stock, being first planted, and the year after cut off within a foot to
the Earth, or more. If your Apple Trees are pestered with Worms, scrape them
with a brazen Scraper, and they will never come again, provided that the place
whence you scraped them, be rubbed over with Bullocks Dung: The Urine and Dung
of Goats is very good for this purpose, afterward the Lees of old Wine may be
poured upon the Roots of the Trees. The Tree that is sick, or prospers not,
is helped with Asses Dung, and watering it six days. Apple Trees must be often
watered at the setting of the Sun, till the Spring be come, when planted in dry
Ground. If you set your Apple Trees too thick, they will never grow well, nor
thrive kindly. The Apple declares its ripeness by the blackness of the
Kirnels. The Winter Stores are gathered after the fourteenth of September, or
thereabouts, according to their Kinds, and not before the Moon be seventeen
Days old, in fair Weather, and in the Afternoon: Those that fall from the Trees
must be laid by themselves; it is better to pull them, then shake them, least
they be bruised in their falling. The best way to keep them is in fair Lofts,
Vaults, or cold places, with Windows opening toward the North, that ^hey may
receive that Air; the South Wind; must be ^hut out; they must be laid thin upon
Straw, Chaff, or Mats. You must lay every sort by themselves, lest sundry sorts
lying together, they should the sooner rot. They are also kept from rotting, if
they are laid in Bar^y, or Wheat. Some, to avoid the hurt of the Frost, ^se to
cover them with wet Linen Clothes, which being frozen, the Fruit that lay
under them is preserved. Of Apples, besides other Uses, you may with Mills for
^he purpose, make a curious Drink, called Cider, and (...) small Drink besides,
with Water, and the refuse of the Apples drained; a good Drink to quench and
cool the Thirst. A kind of Vinegar also may be made of Crabs, and sower Apples,
called Verjuice, which mashed, and ^ying in a heap together three or four Days,
afterward put into a Pipe, or Tun, wherewith mingle Spring water, or Rain
water, and so suffer them to stand close covered thirty Days, and after taking
out what Vinegar the Moisture affords, by drawing off, and let it settle.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Pear Tree, how Grafted, Ordered an^ Improved, etc.

THE Pear challenges the next Place, and is on^ of the chiefest Beauties of
the Orchard. The Apple Tree, spreads in broad Branches; but the Pear tree
rises in hight, and delights in a rich and moi^^ Ground: it does grow of the
Kernel, and of the Scion, but it is a great while before it does come un^^ any
Perfection; and when it is grown, it degenerate^ from them its old good Nature;
and therefore it is be^ter to take the wild Plants and set them in your Groun^
in November, and when that they are well rooted, yo^ may graft upon them. It is
said, that in some Countries, it is so prospers with often digging, and much
Moisture, that it never loses its Flower: You shall d^ it a great deal of
Good, if every other Year you bestow some Dung upon it. Ox Dung is thought to
mak^ great and massy Pears; some put too a little Ashes t^ make their taste the
pleasanter. They are not onl^ planted of the Roots, but also of the very little
Twig^ being plucked, will grow. If you will set young Plants let them be three
Years old, or at least two Years old before you set them. Some again take the
fairest Branche^ they find upon the Tree, and set them, as has been directed.
The time of Grafting the Pear, is March an^ April. Pliny says, That you may
graft it when the Blossom is on it, which I myself have have tried, and foun^
true. It is grafted upon the Quince, the Pumgrane^ the Almond, the Apple and
the Mulbery-tree: If yo^ graft it on the Mulbery-tree; your Pear shall be red
and if you would have the Fruit pleasant, and the Tre^ fruitful, you must bore
a Hole through the Stock clos^ by the Ground, and driving in an Oaken, or a
Beeche^ Pin, cover it up with Earth; if the Tree prosper not wash the Roots,
and water them with the Lees of old Wine, fifteen Days, so shall it bare the
better, and plea^anter Fruit. It shall never be hurt with Worms, if when you
plant it, you anoint it with the Gaul of an Ox: ^f the Tree (whose Roots have
been cut) seem not to ^rosper, Paludius his Remedy is to pierce the Root through,
and to drive in a Pin, made either of Oak, or Plum-tree. ^f your Pears are
stony, or choke Pears, dig up the Earth from the Roots, cleanse them of Stones,
and fifth in good ^ew Mould again into the place: Let your Pear Trees ^and
thirty Foot asunder, or little less; your Apple-^rees (as I have said) further.
You may make use of ^everal ways to keep your Pears, some dip the Stalks in
^oyling Pitch, and do afterward hang them up: others keep them in new boiled
Wine, or else in a close Vessel; others in Sand; and some again, covered with
Wheat, ^r Chaff; some are of Opinion, that there is no kind Fruit but may be
preserved in Honey; of Pears there is Drink, and Sauce made, the Drink is
Perry, made as Cider, of a most delicious Taste, the Juice being pressed ^ut
with the Press, etc. In other Countries to have a pretty Dish made of Pears,
for their Religious Fasts, called Castimoniale.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Quince-Tree, how Ordered, Grafted, Improved, etc.

NEXT in order, after Apples and Pears, comes the Quince; they are planted
after the same manner that Pears and Apples are: Some affirm that the sets that
have been set in March, or in February, have taken such Root, as that they have
born Fruit the Year after. They grow well in cold and moist Countries, in plain
and silly Grounds, in hot and dry Countries you must set them in October. Many
set them with the tops a^ the set, but neither of them both is very good; and
b^ing set of Scions they soon degenerate. They are be^ter grafted in the Stock
than in the Bark; and that (...) February or March, they receive into their
Stocks, t^ Grafts (in a sort) of all manner of Trees; the Pomgi^net, the
Seruise, all the kinds of Apples, and make t^ Fruit the better. The Quince Tree
must be set in the order, that in the shaking of the Wind they drop not o^ upon
another. When it is young or newly plant^ it is helped with Dung, or better
with Ashes; the must be watered as often as the Season is very dry, a^ dug
about continually; in hot Countries, in Octob^ or November; in cold Countries,
in February, or Marc^ for if you do not often dig about them, they will eith^
be barren, or bear naughty Fruit; they must be prun^ cut, and rid of all
Superfluities. If the Tree be si^ and do not prosper well, the root must be
watered w^ the Mother of Oil, mingled with the like quantity of W^ter, or
unslack'd Lime mingled with Chalk; or Rosi^ or Tar must be poured upon the
Roots; You must gath^ them in a fair Day, being sound and unspotted, and ve^
ripe, and in the Wane of the Moon. They are best ke^ coffened betwixt two
hollow Tiles, well closed on eve^ side with Clay: Some lay them only in dry
Places, when no wind comes; others heap them in Chaff and Whea^ some in Wine,
which makes the Wine more pleasan^ lay them not near any other Fruit, because,
with (...) Air, they will corrupt them. There is also made a ki^ of Wine of
Quinces, (being beaten and pressed) and little Honey with Oil put into it;
there is also made (...) them a precious Conserve, and Marmalade, red a^ white,
being congealed with long Seething, and boyl^ with Sugar, Wine, and Spices.

CHAP. XIII.
^f the Medler and Service-tree, how Ordered, Grafted, Improved, etc.

THE Medler is accounted to be of the Number of Apple Trees, and Pear Trees: It
is Planted in the ^e Manner as the Quince is: It delights in hot Pla^, but
well watered, it will do well enough: It is ^anted of the Scion, in March or
November, in a well ^nged Ground, and mellow, so that both the Ends be ^bbed
over with Dung. It is also set of a Stone, but ^en it is very long before it
comes to any Thing: It excellently well Grafted in the white Thorn, the Pear,
the Apple. The Medlers that you mean to keep, you ^ust gather before they are
Ripe; and being suffered to ^ow so upon the Tree, they last a great part of the
^inter: They are preserved in sodden Wine, and Vi^gar, and Water. Of the Wood
of the wild Medler, (...) use to make Spokes for Wheels of Carts, and the ^wigs
of them serve for Carters Whips. Next to the ^edler, for Neighborhood sake, I
must speak of the ^rvice, it is a high Tree, with a round Berry, fashioned ^e
an Egg; this Fruit grows in Clusters, as the Grape ^th: The wild is better than
the Garden Fruit to Graft (...). It delights in cold Places, and if you Plant
it in (...) Ground, it will wax Barren. It has no Prickles as ^e Medler has,
it grows of the Stone, the Set, the ^ot, or the Scion, and prospers in a
cold wet Soil: ^s Planted in February and in March in cold Countries, ^d in hot
in October and November. It is Grafted either its own Stalk, or on the Quince,
or Haw-thorn, either the Stock or the Bark.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Pomegranate-tree, how it must Ordered, Grafted, and Improved.

AMongst the strange Fruit, there is none of them co^parable to the
Pomegranate: The tree is not Hi^ the Leaf Narrow, and of a very pleasant Green,
the Flo^er Purple, long like a Coffin; the Apple that is comp^ed with a thicker
Rind, is full of Grains within (...) Pomegranate is sweet and sower. This Tree
only, the Fig and the Vine, the Body being cloven, dies n^ the Branches are
full of Prickles as the Gorst is: It low both a hot Ground, and a warm Air, and
likes not ^tery Places. In some hot Countries it grows wild in^ Bushes: It
is planted in the Springtime, the Roots be^ watered with Hogs-dung and Stale.
It is Grafted up^ its own Stock, and also upon other Trees; and likew^ upon the
Scion that grows from the Roots of the Tree. And though it may be planted sundry
Ways, yet best Way is a Cubit in length, smoothed with your Kn^ at both Ends,
and slope-wise in the Ground, with h^ its Ends well smothered with Hogs-dung
and Stale. (...) much delights in the Myrtle, insomuch as the Ro^ will meet,
and entangle together with delight. T^ Fruit will grow, without Kernels, if
Grafted in the V^ the Peth being taken out, and the Set covered w^ Earth, and
(when it has taken) let it in the Spring pruned. You shall have them keep a
long while, if t^ be first dipped in scalding Water, and then taken (...)
quickly, laid in dry Sand, or else in some Heap^ Wheat in the Shadow, till they
be wrinkled; or els^ covered with Chaff, as that they touch not the one or^
other.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Citron, or Limon-tree; how Planted and Improved.

THE Outlandish Citron is here very carefully planted: This Tree does always
bear Fruit, some falling, ^ome ripe, and some springing: Nature showing in them
(...) wonderful Fertillity. There are several Kinds of them from whence they
have several Names: I shall only name ^wo Sorts of them; those that are long
fashioned like an ^gg, if they be yellow, are called Citrons; if they be ^reen,
Limons, the Leaf is like the Bay-leaf, saving that ^here grows Prickles amongst
them: The Fruit of them (...) yellow, wrinkled without, sweet in Smell, and
sower (...) Taste; the Kernels like the Kernels of a Pear. The ^ree is planted
four manner of Ways; of the Kernel, of ^e Scion, of the Branch, and of the
Stock: If you will ^t the Kernel, you must dig the Earth two Foot every ^ay,
and mingle it with Ashes: You must make short ^eds, that they may be watered
with Gutters on every side. (...) these Beds you must open the Earth with your
Hand, a ^ands breadth, and set three Kernels together, with the ^op downwards;
and being covered, water them every ^ay; and when they spring, set them
diligently in good ^ellow Furrows, and water them every 4 or 5 Day: And ^hen
they begin to grow, remove them again in the Spring^me, to a gentle and moist
Ground, for it delights much (...) wet: If you set the Branch, you must not
set it above a ^oot and a half in the Ground, lest it rot. He that does ^tend
to cherish this Tree, let him be sure to defend it ^om the North, and set it
toward the South, and in the ^n; in the Winter it Frails and Baskets. This
Tree de^ghteth to be continually dug about. They are grafted (...) hot
Places in April, in cold Countries in May, not un^er the Bark, but cleaving to
the Stock, near the Root: ^hey may be grafted both on the Pear and Mulberry;
But when they are Grafted they must be fenced, eith^ with a Weather-basket, or
some earthen Vessel. S^ as you mean to keep, and must be gathered in the Nig^^
the Moon being down, and gathered with Branches (...) all, as they hang. When
the Fruit burdeneth the T^ you must pull them off, and leave but few on it,
whi^ will be the pleasanter and the kinder Fruit. If wh^ they are Young and
Little, they are put into Earth Vessels, or Glass, they will grow according to
the P^^portion thereof: So that you may have them fashion^ either like a Man or
Beast, according to your Fancy, (...) you must so order your Moulds that the
Air may co^ to them. They are highly esteemed of by great Perse^

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Mulberry-tree, how Ordered, Plant^ Grafted, and Improved.

THE Mulberry of all other Trees, is accounted (...) surest bearer, because it
never blossometh til^ cold Weather be past: So that whenever you see (...)
Mulberry begin to spring, you may be sure the cold W^ther is at an end: Yet is
Ripe with the first, and budd^ out its Leafs: They dye the Hands (as Pliny
says) w^ the juice of the Ripe Berry, and wash it off with the gr^ Berry: It
changes his Color thrice, (as Ovid allude^ his Tragical History of Pyramus
and Thisbe) first Wh^ then Red, and lastly Black: It loves hot Places and
G^velly, and delights in Digging and Dunging, but not W^tering: It Is Root must
be opened about October, and (...) Lees of Wine poured upon 'em: It is set of
the Stones, (...) then it often grows to the Wild: The best planting is (...)
Scion, and the Tops a Foot and a half long, smooth^ both Ends, and rubbed over
with Dung. The Place wh^ you set your Sets, cover with Ashes mingled with Ea^
but cover it not above four Fingers thick, I wo^ ^^ve you to set it in March,
and to remove it in October (...) November. It is Grafted in the Beech, or the
White ^oplar, either by Grafting in the Stocks, or Inoculation; ^d so shall the
Berries be White It is Grafted also in ^g and Elm, which in old Time they would
not suffer for ^ar of Corrupting. Of the Mulberry is made a very noble ^edicine
for the Stomach, and for the Gout; they will ^ngest endure kept in Glasses; the
Leafs do serve to feed ^lk-worms withal, whereof some make a very great gain.

The Cornel is a ruddy colored Fruit, like a Cherry. ^his Tree is thought
never to exceed twelve Cubits in ^eight; the Body is sound and thick like Horn;
the ^eaf is like an Almond-leaf, but fatter; the Flower and ^e Fruit is like
the Olive, with many Berries hanging upon a Stalk, first white, and after red;
the Juice of the ^pe Berries is of a bloody Color. It loves both high ^round
and Valleys, and prospers both in moist Ground ^d dry: It grows both of the
slip, and of the Seed. ^ou must be careful that you Plant it not near to your
Bees.

The Bay is a most grateful Tree, which chiefly gar^sheth the House, and uses
to stand at the Entrance. ^to makes two Kinds thereof, the Delphick and the
^press; the Delphick equally colored and greener, with ^eat Berries, in Color
betwixt green and red, where^th the Conquerors at Delphos were used to be
Crown^. The Cypress-Bay has a shorter Leaf, and a darker ^een, gathered (as it
were) round about the Edges, which some (as Pliny says) suppose to be a wild
Kind: (...) grows always green, and bears Berries; he shoot, (...) out his
Branches from the Side, and therefore wax^ soon old and rotten: It does not
very well always ^th cold Ground, being hot of Nature: It is planted di^rs
Ways. The Berries being dried with the North Wind, ^e gathered and laid abroad
very thin, lest they cluster ^gether; afterward being wet with Urine they are
set (...) Furrows a handful deep, and very near together: In ^arch they are
also planted of the slip, you must set ^em not passing nine Foot asunder: But
so they grow out of Kind. Some think that they may be Grafted (...) another, as
also upon the Seruise and Ash. The B^ries are to be gathered about the
beginning of Decembe^ and to be set in the beginning of March.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Orchard Hazle-nut and Philbert-trees Their Improvement.

NUt-trees are commonly planted of the Nut, as (...) other Shell-Fruits are. Of
all Nuts the Almo^ is esteemed to be the worthiest; they are set in Februa^ and
prosper in a clear and hot Ground, in a fat and mo^ Ground they will grow
Barren; they chiefly set such (...) are Crooked, and the young Plants: They are
set bo^ of the Slips, of the Root, and of the Kernel. The N^ that you intend to
set, must be laid a Day before in s^ Dung: Others steep them in Water sod with
Hone^ letting them lie therein but only one Night, lest (...) sharpness of the
Honey spoil the Plant. The Tops a^ the sharp Ends you must set downward, for
from the^ comes the Root; the Edge stands toward the Nort^ You must set three
of them in a Triangle, a Hand^ one from the other; they must be watered every
(...) Days, till they grow to be great; it is also planted w^ the Branches,
taken from the midst of the Tree. T^ Philbert is Grafted not near the Top of
the Stock, (...) about the midst, upon the Bows that grow out. T^ Tree does
soon bear Fruit, and flowereth before (...) others, in January or February.
Virgil accounts it for Prognosticator of the Plenty of Corn: When thick the
Nut-tree Flowers, amidst the Wood
Of Trees, that all the Branches bend withal;
And that they prosper well, and come to good,
That Year be sure of Corn shall Plenty fall.
^he bitter ones (which are the Wholesomer) are made ^weet, if round about the
Tree, four Fingers from the ^oot, you make a little Trench, by which he shall
sweat ^ut its Bitterness: or else, if you open the Roots, and our therein
either Urine, or Hogs Dung; But no Tree ^oweth sooner out of Kind, and
therefore you must of^n remove it, or else you must Graft when it is great.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Wall-nut-tree, and common Nut-tree, how to Order them.

WAll-nuts are to be set in the Ground the Seam downward, about the beginning
of March; Some ^ink that they will grow as the Philbert does, either (...) the
Slip, or the Root: It grows well, and likes (...) cold and dry Place better
than a hot; the Nut that you ^ean to set, will grow the better, if you suffer
it to lie our or five Days before in the Urine of a Boy, and will also prosper
the better if it be often removed: those Nuts (as it is thought) prosper best,
that are let ^ll by the Crows, and other Birds. If you pierce the ^ree through
with an Augur^, and fill up the Place again ^ith a Pin of Elm, the Tree shall
lose his knotty hard^ess; neither will he lose his Fruit, if you hang by,
either Mallet, or a piece of Scarlet, from a Dunghill. Wall-nut-trees are
properly planted round about on ^he outside of an Orchard, because their
Shadows are ^reat, and unwholesome, besides the mischief they do ^ith their
dropping. They suck a great deal of good ^uice from the Ground: For they are
mighty high and ^all Trees of growth, so as some of them are two ^r three
Fathom about; they take up a great deal of ^oom with their standing, and
beguile the other Trees ^f their Substance; besides there are certain Trees
that ^hey agree not well withal, and therefore they are set on the outside of
an Orchard, as Standards to defe^ their fellows from tempestuous Weather.

Amongst Nuts is also to be accounted the comm^ Hazelnuts, a Kind whereof is
the Philbert; they a^ Planted after the manner of the Garden Hazelnut; the
delight in clay and waterish Grounds, and upon the highest Ground, being very
able to abide the Cold.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Chesnut-tree, and Pine tree.

AMongst the Nuts also the Chestnut challenges (...) Place, though he be rather
to be reckoned among^ Maites, from whence he is called the Nut or Mast (...)
Jupiter. This Tree delights to grow on Uplands, i^ cold Countries: It hates
Waters, and desires a cle^ and a good Mould: It misliketh not a moist grave^
Ground, and prospers in a Shadowy or Northerly Ban^ it hates a stiff and red
clay Ground: It is Planted bo^^ of the Nut, than of the Set; otherwise the
safer w^^ were the Set, whch in 2 Years bears Fruit. It i^ Planted when the
Sun is in the Aequinoctial, both of the Scion, the Set, the Branch, and Root,
as the Olive i^ The Chestnut that you mean for to Sow, must be ver^ fair and
ripe; the newer they are, the better they grow^ you must set them with the
sharp end upwards, and (...) Foot asunder. The Furrow must be a shaftman deep
This Tree being felled after 5 Years, will prosper lik^ the Willow: And being
cut out in Stays, it will last ti^ the next fe^ling. The Chestnut may be Grafted
on the Walnut, the Beech, and the Oak: It has been obse^ved, that where they
grow two and two together, they prosper the better.

The Pine is planted not much unlike to the Almon^ the Kernels of the
Keit-clocks being set as the Almon^ (...); they are gathered in July, before
the cunicular Winds, and before the Nuts, the Husks being broken, ^ll out. The
best Time of Sowing them, Paladin reckons ^o be October and November. This Tree
is thought to ^e a Nourisher of all that is sown under it.

CHAP. XX.
How to Order and Improve Cherry-trees.

THE Cherry-tree is easy to be planted; if the Stones be but cast abroad, they
will grow with ^reat increase: Such is their forwardness in growing, that the
Stays or Supporters of Vines, that are made of ^herry-tree, are commonly seen
to grow to be Trees. They are grafted upon the Plumb-tree, upon his own ^tock,
upon the Palm Tree, and on the Abricot, but ^est upon the wild Cherry; it
joyeth in being Grafted, and bearing better Fruit. If you Graft them upon the
^ine, your Tree shall bear in the Spring; the Time of Grafting is either when
there is no Gum upon them, ^r when the Gum has left running. Remove the wild
^lant either in October or November, and the first of Ja^uary or February, when
it has taken Root, it may be Grafted upon. You may Graft it on the Stock; but
often it prospers better being Grafted betwixt the Bark and the Wood. It
delights to be set in deep ^renches to have Room enough, and to be often
dug about. It loves to have the withered Boughs conti^ually cut away: It
grows best in cold Places, and ^o hates Dung, that if it be laid about them,
they grow ^o be wild: It is also planted of the Slips; and some ^ay it will
bear its Fruits without Stones, if in the set^ing of the Set you turned the
upper End downward. There are sundry Kinds of Cherries; some that are redde^
^han the rest; others as black as a Cole. Pliny says, That ^n the Banks of
Rhine, there grows a Cherry, of Color, betwixt black, red and green, like
Juniper Berries, wh^ they are almost ripe: For the several invented Names (...)
them, as Duke, Heart, etc. for more brevity, I shall pa^^ them by at this time,
and say something of them herea^ter. The small Cherries are esteemed, that grow
up^ a Bush with short Stalks, round Fruit, and very re^ soft and full of
Liquor. They will bear very early (...) you lay Lime about them: It is good to
gather them often, that those which you leave may grow the greate^ There are
also found a kind of Cherries growing wi^^ in the Woods, and Hedge-rows, (and
may be well Plan^ed in Gardens, and much improved) with little Berrie^ some
red, some altogether black.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Plumb-trees, and how to Order them.

PLumb-trees are Planted from the Middle of W^ter, to the Ides of February; but
if you set t^^ Stones soon after the Fall of the Leaf, let it be done (...)
November, in a good and mellow Ground, two Handf^ deep; they may be also set in
February, but then the must be steeped in Lie three Days, that they may t^
sooner spring; they are also Planted from the young S^ that grow from the Body
of the Tree, either in Januar^ or the beginning of February, the Roots being
well c^vered with Dung; they prosper best in a rich and mo^^ Ground, and in a
cold Country, they are Grafted t^wards the End of March, and are better in a
clov^ Stock than the Bark, or else in January, before the Gum begin to drop
out; it is Grafted upon his ow^ Stock, the Peach and the Almond. There are
s^veral Sorts of Plumbs, whereof the Damsen is not the least esteemed, joying
in a dry Ground, and in a h^^ Country; it is Grafted as the other Plumbs are.
Ther^ are diverse colored Plumbs, white, black, purple, an^ red, Wheat-plumbs,
and Horse-plumbs; the Finger-plumbs are most commended, bearing near the Length
of a Man's Finger, and blue in Color, but later. The Damsens may be dried in
the Sun upon Lattises, Leads, or in an Oven; some do dip them before, either in
Seawater, or in Brine, and after dry them.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Peach-tree, and its Ordering, etc. Also of the Apricot-tree.

OF Peach-trees there are four Kinds; but the chiefest are the Duraces, and the
Apricots: In November, in hot Countries, and in others in January, the Stones
are to be set two Foot asunder in well dressed Grounds, that when the young
Trees are sprung up, they may be removed; but in the setting you must set the
sharp end downwards, and let them stand two or three Fingers in the Ground:
Wheresoever they grow, they rejoice in watery Grounds, which Ground if you
want, look that you water them well, so shall you have great Store of Fruit.
Some would have them set in hot Countries, and sandy Ground, whereby they say
that their Fruit will longer endure; the better will also the Fruit be, if as
soon as you have eaten them, you set the Stone, with some part of the Fruit
cleaving to it: It is Grafted either on himself, Almond, or the Plumb-tree. The
Apples of Armenia, or Abricot, do far excel the Peach; used as a great dainty
amongst the Nobility and Gentry, and much desired of the Sick: They are best
Grafted in the Plumb, as the Peach in the Almond-tree: The fairest Grafts that
grow next to the body of the Tree, are to be chosen and grafted in Jan. or Feb.
in cold Countries, and in November, in hot; for if you take those that grow in
the Top, they will either not grow, or if they grow, not long endure. You may
inoculate or imbud them in April or May, the Stock being cut out aloft and many
young Buds set in; neither must you suffe^ them to stand very far from the
other, that they may the better defend themselves from the heat of the Sun. The
Frenchmen and our Gardeners also, do Graft the Abricot, taking a Graft, (not
full a Finger long) o^ the Bud that is well shot out, with a little of the Rin^
cut off, and slitting the Rind of a Plum-tree crosswise, they set them in,
binding them strongly about with Hemp or Tow. Some do hold they will be red if
they be either Grafted in the Plumb-tree, or have Roses se^ underneath them;
they will be figured, or written in* if seven Days after that you have set the
Stone, when i^ begins to open, you take out the Kernel, and with Vermillion, or
any other Color, you may Counterfei^ what you will; after the Stone is closed
up about it, and covered with Clay, or Hogs-dung, you set it in the Ground
Again, you shall have them with Stones, if you pierce the Tree through, and fill
it up with a Pin of Willow, o^ Cornet-tree, the Pith being had out; but these
Things (...) will not certify as Truth, but leave them to Experiment, as not
having tried them; The Roots of the Tree mus^ be cut and dressed in the Fall of
the Leaf, and dunged with its own Leaves; you should also at this Time prune
them, and rid them of all rotten and dead Boughs. I^ the Tree prosper not, pour
upon the Roots the Lees o^ old Wine mingled with Water. Against the Heat of the
Sun, heap up the Earth about them, water them in the Evening, and shadow them
as well as you may. Against the Frosts, lay on Dung enough, or the Lees of Wine
mingled with Water; or Water wherein Beans have been sodden: if it be hurt with
Worms, or such Ver^ mine, pour on it the Urine of Oxen mixed with a third part
of Vinegar.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Date-tree, and how it may be Propagated.

THE Date-tree, it grows in a mild gravelly Ground, and delights in a
watery Soil; and though it de^res to have Water all the Year long, yet in a dry
Year (...) bears the better; therefore some think that Dung is ^urtful unto it.
About the River Nilus, and in the East ^arts, it grows Plenteously, where
they use to make ^oth Wine and Bread of it: This Tree in Europe (for ^he most
part) is Barren, though for Novelty sake it has ^een Planted of many, as an
Adorment to an Or^hard. The Stones of Dates are to be Planted in Tren^hes of a
Cubit in Depth and Breadth, the Trench filled ^p with any Manner of Dung,
except Goats Dung; then (...) the midst of the Heap set your Stones so as the
sharper ^art stand upward; others would have it stand toward ^he East: And
after, when first they have sprinkled ^hereon a little Salt, they cover them
with Earth, well ^ingled with Dung; and every Day while it Springs, ^hey
water it; some remove it after a Year's growth, ^ho' some let it grow till it
be great. Moreover, because (...) delights in Salt Ground, the Roots must be
dress^d every Year, and Salt thrown upon them; and so will (...) quickly grow
to be a great Tree. The Sets are not ^resently to be put into the Ground, but
first to set in ^arthern Pots; and when they have taken Root, to be ^emoved
Date-trees have such a Delight one in the other, that they bend themselves to
touch together; and if they ^row alone, they wax Barren. They are planted (as
Pliny says) of the Branches, two Cubits long, growing from the Top of the
Tree; also of the slips and slivers. The same Author affirms, that about
Babylon, the very ^eaf (if it be set) grows.

Of the Almond-Tree.
THE Almond-tree will grow and flourish well in En^land, if planted in warm
Soil, and exposed to t^ Sun. It is properly grafted on the Philbert; and wh^
once it gets a Head, it grows a-pace: In Time, with go^ Diligence, in dunging
the Root of it with Swines dun^ and Water, bears considerably. It Flowers
early, whi^ is of a reddish Color; and if for no other than this, (...) much
graces an Orchard; but it has been known to be much Fruit, some bitter, some
sweet, according to t^ Nature of the Tree or Graft.

Of the Barberry-tree.
THE Barberry-tree challenges a Place in an Orchar^ amongst others, by Reason
of the usefulness of (...) Fruit, on sundry Occasions. There are several Sorts
(...) these Trees, though but one only common, above which that to be preferred,
that bears its Berries without Stone there is likewise another Sort,
differing from the common Kind, bearing its Berries twice as big, being t^ most
excellent of all others, for preserving, and ma^ing Marmalade. These are best
planted on ris^ Banks, where too much Moisture may not afflict (...) Root.

Of the Gooseberry and Currant-trees.
OF these that grow in Orchards, though under Trees (...) Shrubs may well be
accounted the Gooseberr^ and currant-trees, being Fruits that make excelle^
Wine, comparable to many others.

Of Gooseberries there are many Sorts and Colors; the white Holland or Dutch
Gooseberry is of these the faires^ and the best Bearer of all others; the
Berries are whi^ and transparent, large, smooth and round. There is a So^ ^f
green Gooseberries, well tasted, and deserving Commendation. These Trees
propagate with little Cost or ^abour, and from the beginning of May to the
middle of June, their Berries are very useful for Tarts, preserving, making
Sauces, to be eaten raw, for Concoction, and cre^ting of a good Digestion; also
to make Wine, as I have said, by clean pressing out of the Juice, clarifying
it, and ^ottling it up, with a little Loaf Sugar to feed on, and ^ike out the
Tartness: A good Spirit may be distilled from them when ripe, if bruised, and
mixed with Water, coming very near Brandy. There are a red Sort a very
plentiful Bearer.

As for the Currants there are the white, red and black. These Trees are
propagated with little Charge, growing almost on any Ground, and these with the
foregoing, may ^he planted in Intervals of Orchards: As the red they are
accounted the best for Preserving, and being used in Confections; moreover,
they produce a cool Wine, being ordered as Gooseberries, more pleasant to the
Taste than any French Wine, and held much wholesomer: This, as the Gooseberry,
may be set of slips, with little Roots, on rising Ground, where the Sun can
come at them, to enlarge and ripen the Fruit; The black are mostly to be used
in Physical Matters.

Of the Rasberry-tree.
RAsberries claim a place in this Book, for though it be but a Shrub, it affords
a delicious Fruit, useful on sundry Occasions: It delights in mellow Clay, or
loving Ground, mingled with other good Earth, to be set on little rising Hills,
or Banks, in the Out-Borders of the Orchard, by Ditch-sides, but not in too
moist Places; for overmuch Wet rots the Root.

Of the Fig Tree.
THE Fig Tree grows upright of itself in Orchards, and bears good Fruit; as the
great Blue Fig, which usually comes to Ripeness, and is of a delicious Taste*
other Sorts there are, but being brought out of hot Countries, and planted
here, the cold Weather coming on before their Fruit can well ripen, they mostly
cast it so that it comes to nothing. The Fig may be well Grafted on the
Mulberry, and then it bears the pleasanter Fruit and Prospers best; and when
the Fruit appears we^^ grown, Pluck off many of the shading Leafs, that the
Heat of the Sun coming to it, it may better ripen, and eat the kinder.

Of the Cornelian Cherry-tree, and Orange-tree.
COrnelian Cherries much Grace an Orchard, they may be set of the Stones, and
will grow up to Plants and Ingrafted on their own Stocks, they bear a pleasan^
Fruit, and may be kept for Tarts and other Uses, the greater part of the Year,
as being much Harder and Firmer than others, but not much planted, but in
choice Orchards, and more for Pleasure than for Profit. These are the principal
standing or upright Trees belonging to an Orchard, that grow without Support,
that I at present have accasion to Discourse of, bringing great Advantage to
the Industrious Arborist or Gardener; only I shall add to them my Observation
on some others, termed Separate and usually called Wall-fruit, or
Supported-fruit; as the Vine, and such like, who best prosper where there is a
Reflection of the Sun, to make the Heat the stronger, and more powerful to
Enliven, Impregnate and Ripen such Fruit, which in shady Places would come to
little.

The Orange Trees curiously grace an Orchard, but naturally growing in hot
Countries, are so tender that they must be planted in Pots, Wickers, or Wooden
Troughs to be removed into the Green-house in Winter; therefore when I come to
speak of that, I shall be larger on thi^ excellent Tree.

CHAP. XXIV.
Wall-fruit-trees, how best to Order them, their Virtues, etc.

THE Vine among these is accounted the Queen, proving delicious Clusters, as
are not only pleasant to ^he Taste, but reviving to the Spirits, and healthful
to the ^ody; and it has been more cherished in England, than at ^resent; many
spacious Grounds, though now turned into Grass or Cornfields, retaining yet the
Name of Vineyards; ^s that on the backside the Church of Camberwel in Surry,
and many others, from the Vines that have been former^y Planted there, though now
totally Eradicated; and no ^oubt, store of Wines, by well Planting, Manuring,
Dres^ing, and other good Management of Vines, might be ^ill produced, equally
to that brought out of France and Germony; but my purpose is now to speak of
Wall-vines.

The Vine is best propagated by Layers of a good bear^ng Vine, bent and laid
in the Earth, staked in about 4 or 5 Inches, with good Mould and Turf upon it,
and a^out half a Yard rising upright, which may be support^d by a Stick stuck
in the Ground, and it will take Root, which being cut short, and set about the
beginning of March, will grow very well; but ever observe to set them to a
Wall, Pales, or Houses side, etc. where the Morning, Noon, or Evening Sun, or
all of them may ^ave full Power; for without the Influence of the Sun this Tree
bears not to any purpose, bringing forth small Grapes, which seldom ripen;
for the Season advancing, ^he nipping Frosts come on them, and wither them
before ^hey can do it. Some Eminent Gardeners allow it may ^e Grafted on the
Cherry-tree, or Elm, of these there are many Kinds, but the best Bearer in our
Climate, is the Parsley Vine, bringing abundace of Fruit, with good Ma^agement,
to Perfection. The Fox grape is a fair and ^rge Fruit, bearing pretty well: The
Rhenish-grape, Paris Grape, and small Muscadel, are pretty well suite to our
Clime. The Current Grape is the earliest a^ sweetest, though they are but small.

Great care for the improving of the Vine must be Prune it before the Sap
rises, viz. in March, and na^ them up conveniently, with a Slip of old Bud, or
so^ Leather, that the Branches may spread conveniently t^^ the Sun, and the
warm breathing of the South and Western Wind; and lay a little Horse-dung
lightly about the Root, in the Spring, that it may soak in and fart^ the Root,
which must be set out from the Wall a pre^ distance, that it may have Room
enough to spread i^ without Opposition.

Some pluck off most of the Leaves when the Cluste^ are well knit, but this, in
my Opinion and Experienc^ rather hinders than advantages their growth, and so^
Ripening; for the cool Blasts are often abroad in Summer than the hot ones, and
they chill and hinder the product, so that it has been seen, that the Grapes
sheltered with Leaves, have been kept the warmer by their sooner Ripening. If
the Vine stands against damp Wall (...) the wetness perishes the Clusters that
touch it, or the moist heatings musty them; and if you see one in an^ Cluster
perished, take it away, lest it infect the rest.

There is, of those Grapes that come not to such (...) ripeness as Wine may be
made of them, a curious Vinegar nevertheless to be pressed from them. They are
also very good Sauce, pickled in Water, Salt, and a little Vinegar boild
together. The same way you may also pickle Barberries, Gooseberries, Quinces,
and gree^ Plumbs, that they, with a renewal of Pickle, keep the Year about.

Of the Apricot-Trees.
THE Apricot flourishes and thrives best against (...) kindly Wall, favored by
the heat of the Sun; and of these there are several Kinds, as the Musk Apricot,
the Orange, the Great Bearer, the Ordinary, some bring up ^pe Fruit sooner than
others. These Trees delight in free, rich and light Soil; but spreads itself
much in ^ranches, and therefore must be diligently pruned, that ^e Fruit may
grow the larger, there being then more ^ourishment left in the Stock to feed
them. It is much ^bject to the Canker, therefore to correct that Vice in ^^e
Mould, dig a large Pit where you intend to Plant ^our Tree, and fill it a Foot
thick; and within about a ^ot or eighteen Inches of the Surface, with Marle
Chalk, (...) white Earth; then scatter over that fine Mould, about ^our or five
Inches thick, and then Plant the Root upon it, and this will keep the Root from
running too deep, and ^ake it spread more near the Surface of the Earth, so
that not being overcharged with the too lushious Sap, it will not be subject
to the Canker, which is a Disease that ^estroys many of these Trees in their
bearing Prime, and ^his will also make it put forth fewer Branches, and more
^ruit.

There is a way to make this a Dwarf-tree, that is, so ^o keep it under, that
it shall grow not above three Foot ^o the Wall, whereby being under the Wind,
and recei^ing the reflection of the Suns heat, both from the warm^ess of the
Earth and Wall, it bears earlier than others, its Fruit ripens kinder; and this
may be done by often Pru^ing the main Branches, and Planting as before
directed; this may be Grafted on the Plumb, or its own Stock.

Of Peach-trees, Nectarins, Malacotoons, etc.
THOUGH the Peach may properly be a Standard Tree, yet it flourishes, as for
bearing Fruit, against a kindly East, South, or West Wall; as also the
Nectarins: And of these there are several Kinds; as the Aberge, Small Yellow,
Almond Violet, Bourdin, Belle-Chenurense, Elinge-Nectarine, Maudlin, Mignou,
Morella Muskviolet, Murry-Nectarine, Red Roman-Nectarine, Nutmeg, Red and
White, Man-Peach, Newington, Perisque, Rambulli^on, Syon, Oleance,
Savoy-Mala-cotton, etc. these may be Planted as the Apricot.

The Peach may be Grafted on the white Thorn Beech, or its own Stock: The Peach
and Almond joined together, and Grafted on the Plumb-tree, is hel^ to produce a
Peach with an Almond in the Stone of it (...) but of these Kinds the Nutmeg and
Newington Peach an^ excellent good in Taste, and great Bearers, especially the
first, which amends for the smallness of the Frui^ but the latter is very
large, and a gallant Fruit. They may also be well Inoculated on choice
Plumb-stocks, a^ the white Pear plumb stock, or Plants coming of Peach stones.

Of Plumb-trees.
Diverse Sorts of Plumbs, they may also be Standards thrive excellently well
against a Wall advantageously situated to the Suns warm Beams, as the Nutmeg*
the Pear-plumb, white and black, the Pearcod, the Prune, De L'Isle-vert, the
Damask Violet, Dale-plumb, the C^tharine, etc. These must be pruned as the
former, an^ in the Spring the Roots laid open, and well dug about and a little
Horse-dung laid on the Earth, when the Roots are covered again, which the Rain
soaking in will much cherish and enliven the Roots.

These Trees must be grafted or Inoculated on Plumb-stocks; the white
Pear-plumb stocks are accounted the best, and the Damsin-stocks the worst, as
being dry Stocks, so that the Graft cannot take, nor thrive upon them. Those
Stocks of Plumbs that have large Leafs and full Shoots, I account the best.

Of the Fig Tree.
THE Fig is both a Standard and a Wall-tree prospering best on the latter; and
of these there are several other Kinds as Wall fruit, than what I have named in
the Standards; and of all these the Scio, White and Purple, Dwarf Blue, Yellow
Dwarf, you must set the Roots pretty deep, and spreading, in a light fertile
Mould, and kept under from spreading too much, by often pru^ing, and nailing
close to the Wall: This Tree may be well Grafted on the Mulberry-stocks, but it
must not be planted against House Walls, where droppings of Rain fall much on
the Root, that will soon rot and destroy it.

Of the Current Tree, as Wall-Fruit.
CUrrant-trees, though they are properly Standards, may be planted against a
Wall, which will increase their Fruit in Largeness, if they are nailed up, and
well pruned when the Branches grow Luxuriant. There are yet other Mural-trees,
as the Lore-tree, the Virginia Plumb, and the Cornel-tree, that bear Fruit
kindly, and may be Planted in good-mellow Ground, setting the Roots some
distance from the Wall, that the hardness of its Foundation may not oppose the
growing of them; and in dry Seasons they must be watered early in the Morning,
or when the Earth is cool, after the Sun's being down, with thick soily Water;
and now though there may be some other Kinds of Fruits, yet not common, easy to
be had, or to bring to Perfection, I think I have given a sufficient choice of
Standard and Wall-Fruit, and enough I am sure to furnish and beautify any
Orchard, and bring it to vast Improvement, with good Management, in a short
Time; however, I shall proceed to other Matters, useful to be known, and
materially relating to the well Ordering of Orchards, etc.

CHAP. XXV.
The well Ordering and right Dressing of Fruit Trees, for their better thriving.

THE Skilful dressing and pruning Fruit Trees, is one main matter to keep 'em
from sundry ill Conveniences and disorders, they would be otherwise subject
(...) and to preserve them in a good Growth, and to br^ forth a good Fruit,
better and more seasonably; and the consists in Pruning, or cutting away the
superfluo^ Boughs, Branches, and Suckers that waste and destr^^ the Sap
unprofitable, hindering the bearing Branch^ from perfecting the Growth of the
Fruit, and seaso^ably ripening it; this must be done before Sap rise as in
January, February, or the beginning of March; a^ you must in this case,
distinguish the bearing from (...) Leaf-buds; and the bearing ones are known by
the^ being more turgid than the other, fuller and more swe^ling. In this Work
cut off all the Shoots of August, ^less the Nakedness of the Tree require you
to hold yo^ Hand; what you Prune from the rest, cut off slant^ above the Bud,
with a sharp Knife, leaving no Rags.

Those Buds in Wall-fruits that put forth between the Stem and the Wall, or
opposite to them, rub off as so^^ as they appear, sparing only the colateral
Branches.

Keep your Wall and Palisadoe-trees from too hig^ mounting hastily, so that
they may spread, and the be^ form themselves beautiful, like a Fan close to the
Groun^

Take the Water-boughs away, which are those on the Standards that are shaded,
and dropped upon, remaini^ smooth and naked without Buds; cut of the unbearin^
Branches of Wall-fruit-trees smooth and slanting. A^ for the tender Wall-fruit,
the proper Time to Prun^ them is in February, and the beginning of March.

Where Branches are entangled and thick, that the^ gall one another, or exclude
the free Entrance of the S^ and Air, thin that Place at Discretion: Trim and N^
your Wall-fruit and Espallers.

When you find any Moss on the Branches, or at the Roots of the Trees, take it
off with a Wooden or Ho^^ Scraper, and rub the Place smooth with a Woollen
Clo^^ dipped in Water, wherein Ashes have been well steeped and it will not
incumber those Places, at least for a lo^ Time, and see what Thrive best; open
the Roots a little of those that seem to drop, and put good Dung or Manure to
them, and cover it up with light Earth.

Keep your Trees from mounting too high, if you ^ould have them good Bearers;
for the nearer the Branches are to the Root, the Sap has the more Influence ^o
increase the Blossoms the stronger to knit them, and ^nlarge the Fruit: And the
moderate height of all spread^ng Standard-trees, should be something above two
Yards ^^yond a Man's reach; and if the middle Branches are ^piring more than
the other, keep them down by Cut^ing and Pruning, that the Tree may the better
spread; and so they will be smooth-rined, healthful, and long ^asting Trees,
growing low, and consequently safe from ^he injury of Winds; and by spreading
broad, yield much Fruit, not over-shadowing each other, or dropping much upon
each others Boughs; and the Bole, by reason ^f its shortness, will take much
Sap, consume little itself, and so yield a great deal to the better producing
the Fruit: For if the Tree aspire, the Sap takes its course so swiftly ^p, that
it has little Intercourse with the lower Boughs; so that they bear but little
Fruit.

If you ^op old Trees, and cut off great Arms, do it close to the Tree, and
leave no Snags; then make a Plaster of Tar, Tallow, and a little Pitch, on a
course Cloth, and clap it to the Wound, to keep off the cold and wet, till the
Bark recover the Strength: If it be Bark-peel'd, make a Searcloth of Butter,
Honey, and Wax, and lay on it, as a good Remedy to recover the Bark, by the
other Bark growing and closing up the naked Place.

To effect this, you must be provided with a handsome light Ladder, a little
sharp and well-armed Saw, (...) little sharp Hatchet, a broad-mouth Chizzle, a
Mallet, and a strong and sharp Cleaver, with a Notch (and which is most
necessary among young and little Trees) (...) great-hafted and sharp Knife,
with a convenient Stool, Pruning-hook, and a Paring Chizzle to smooth the out
Places.

CHAP. XXVI.
Soil proper for remedying Diseases in Frui^-trees, and destroying Vermin and
Insec^ that infect them, etc.

WHERE large Trees grow in an Orchard, there the Ground requires every 4 or 5
Years to be we^ Soiled; for those great Bodies draw a great deal of Mo^sture,
and consequently the best heart of the Ground And if it be not supplied the
Trees must pine, and w^ want much of their Fruit. But do not overstock the Root
with Dung; rather lay it somewhat near, and (...) Rain wash and soak it to the
Roots, especially of you^ Trees; for too much Dung breeds rankness, and much
hurts 'em, especially Apple Trees; according to the Verse.

Manure your Orchard, let it be well laid,
But let it never be too fertile made;
For as a Tree due Nourishment may want,
So too much Soil destroys the tender Plant.
As for the Diseeses and Hurts in Trees, they are many; which I shall enumerate
in their Order.

If the Trees be greatly subject to Moss, you must consider what may be the
principal cause of it, whether by the over coldness of the Ground, as in a wet
clayey Soil or the Barrenness of the Earth naturally.

If coldness, through moisture, be the true Cause, the^ consider how to lay it
dryer, by trenching the Ground (...) or if it be Clay-ground, then bring in
some warm So^ to mix with it, as, Ashes, Sand, Sheeps-dung, the Dun^ of
Dove-houses, or Poultry, and the like; and if the So^^ be too Barren, mix it
with good fat Soil, especially ne^ and at the Roots of the Trees; and Moss the
Trees we^ of what is already upon them.

2. Another hindrance of the growth of Fruit Trees, (...) their being
Bark-bound, which is known by their pinin^ ^en in fertile Ground: This happens
when there is but ^ull and slow Passage up of the Sap, and in small quan^. Upon
this, cut off some of the Superfluous Bran^es, and score the rest that are any
thing great, also the ^le of the Tree, and the Root, with a sharp Knife, ^en to
the hard Wood, and it will open as if loosened ^om Bondage, and another Rind
will grow, and fill up (...) Space to a good Wideness, according to the bulk of
(...) Tree, and still grow with it: So that it will seem rejoice for his
Deliverance, and flourish a great deal ^uer than before. This is proper to be
done in the ^ring, when the Sap is arising.

3. The Cankar, of which I have hinted before, is a very ^eat Enemy to Trees,
natural to some, accidental to others, (...) Bruises, etc. this hurts many, and
utterly spoils some. The Remedy is to cut it out, if it be upon the great ^ough
or Body of the Tree, then a mixture of Horse^ng and Clay, and cut off the small
Branches that are ^ad, or decaying, and lay the Mixture aforesaid on the ^ace
tainted, binding it on with Rushes, Flags, or soft ^^nds of Hay or Straw; then
lay Sea-Cole, or Wood-^shes, the Ashes of Fern or Nettles, or the like, to the
^oots: But if this be a natural Vice, and the Trees grow (...) Gravelly Ground;
it will not easily be remedied without mending the Soil.

4. In the Springtime Catterpillars breed, and are a ^eat pest to Fruit Trees,
by destroying the Buds and Blos^ms, especially in a dry Season, if the Frosts
come not to ^ke'em off; which if they do, they likewise commit much ^jury by
nipping the early Fruit, and rendering it abortive. To destroy these, take wet
Hay and Straw, place ^em when the Wind breaths a moderate fresh Gale, so ^at
being fired with with dry Stuff laid under them, the ^oke may go among the
Trees, for being carried under, will arise in the Boughs: Sprinkle on this,
Pitch, Ro^, and Brimstone, and the smothering will make them ^op off, and dye.

5. Earwigs are another Pest, though not so dangerous a (...) former.

To take and destroy these, lay small Kexes at the Ro^ of your Trees, sprinkled
with Water, wherein a little ^^ney has been boiled, and break them in short
Pieces, t^ many of the Hollownessess may be open, and it will dr^ them from the
Tree; and when they have licked up (...) sweet Water; they will crowd
themselves for shelter in^ the hollow Kexes; when you perceive this, you may b^
them, and so by degrees disincumber your Orchard of e^

6. Ants or Emmets much injure Fruit, especially Wa^ fruit: To destroy them
therefore, find out their (...) or chief Haunts, and opening the Top, pour
scaldi^ Water wherein Burdocks have been boiled; or if you cannot find their
Haunts, anoint about a Foot next the Ro^ with Tar or Oil of Turpentine, and
they will not atten^ to ascend the Tree, or if they do, they will be taken, a^
stick fast in the gluttenous matter. But some may h^ object, as for Wall-fruit,
they may run up the Wall, a^ escape it: This I own; but then in such a Case, it
man be prevented, by drawing a Line of the same matter (...) on the Wall, from
one end to the other.

7. Shell snails much annoy Wall-fruit: To reme^ that, take slacked Lime, and
strew along on the Ba^ and dust it on the Leaves and Branches, and where (...)
Snail touches it, he will fret and slime to Death: T^ is effectual likewise to
Snails without Shells.

8. Wasps are mischievous when the Fruit begins ripen; and therefore, if you
find any Nests of them your Orchard or Gardens, the best way is to destroy the
by pouring in hot Water wherein Hemlock as been bo^ed; or you may hang Pots
with Honey mingled with W^ter; drub also the insides of the Pots with Honey, a^
they having tasted it, repairing further to drink of t^ Water will drown
themselves in great Multitudes.

9. Birds are great destroyers of choice early Fruit, also in the Spring the
Buds; espcially the Bulfinch, T^^ mouse, and the like of those of Cherries,
Plumbs, Apric^^ etc. these may be taken by Lime-twigs placed in (...) Trees,
and then by hanging up dead ones by the He^ (...) the Trees, the other will be
scared away: Also two (...) three Rattle-mills, set up in the Orchard, turned
by (...) Wind, will affright them.

10. Winds and nipping Frosts in the Spring, together ^^th Blasts, are Enemies
to Fruit Trees: The best way (...) prevent these, is to keep smoking Fires
among the ^anding Trees, and cover the Wall-fruit with bass Mats.

CHAP. XXVII.
^f Nurseries for Stocks; and their Improvement.

TO serve yourself with a sufficient Number of Stocks to Graft on, or Inoculate
the several Fruits you in^end to Propagate and Advance, prepare a Bed of Earth
^ell dressed from Weeds, proportionable to the Stones or ^^eds you intend to
set or sow to raise Stock from: Let ^^em be covered with small crumbled light
Earth, that (...) the tender puttings forth may the better get through it, and
mix with the Earth a moderate sprinkling of Dung, (...) keep it the warmer in
Winter. As for the Stones, set them in Rows, with the sharp end downwards,
about the ^iddle, or latter End of October, the Weather being open, ^^d cover
the Beds against the Cold with Straw that has ^een the Litter of a Stable;
which in April, the Weather ^eing a little warm, remove; and in May, if they
pro^per, they will come up; then keep them clean from Weeds, and thin them by
plucking up the Underlings ^here they grow too thick, that the others may
thrive ^e better; and the third Summer you may mark out in ^eaving time what
you design to remove, and then in the ^inter following remove them to such
Places as you intend (...) Graft or Inoculate on them, or to other Beds,
larger, ^here they may have more room to grow, till such Time (...) your
Occasions require their removal to the Place where ^ou would have them fixed as
Stocks for Grafts.

As for the Seeds of Pears, Apples, and other Fruit not ^earing Stones, take
them out when they Rattle in the ^ore upon shaking the Fruit, or when the Apple
is cut; lay them not by, but instantly sow them very thin, dropping them one by
one, in little Rills or Furrows; co^^ them over with fine Mould, and use them
in all other r^spects as the former. These seed Plants may be likewis^ set with
a setting-stick, and if they are removed when they are come pretty well up, it
will be the better for their getting good Roots, else they will be apt to shoo^
one Root only downward, and not spread. Crab stocks and Apple-stocks thus
raised, furnish an Orchard bette^ than those that are taken wild: Trees grafted
on the O^^ not moile, or Cyder-stock, preserve better the Gust of the Apple
than any other, but on the Crab-stock this is of longer lasting, imparting more
Juice, of a tart Relish, and s^ by many preferred before most sort of Apples:
However the wild Stock does enliven the dull and phlegmati^ Apple, and the
Stock of the Genetmoile sweetens and improves the Pippin, etc. and abates the
tart Taste of other

The same Rules may be observed in Stocks to graft, Pears Plumbs, Cherries,
Apricots, and the like upon; and the mo^^ acid the Stock, the more Life it
gives to the Fruit (...) the Graft, as the Black-cherry, and the Cherry-tree is
the most approved Stock for the delicious Cherry.

Though the Fruit generally takes after the Graft, yet it somewhat altered by the
Stock, for the better or wor^^ according to its Kind; therefore for your
Seminary a^^ Nursery, choose a place of Ground that may be of an i^ different
Nature, not too Sterile, nor overmuch enriched with Dung, it lying warm, with
light Mould, th^^ the Stocks may the better thrive.

If you are desirous to raise Dwarfs, trell them: I^^ the Stocks whereon you
graft them for Apples, be of the Paradise Apple, of the Quince, for the Pear of
the M^rello or common English Cheeries for Cherries; and (...) they will be
more fit, if you so design them for Wa^^ Trees or Standards, being kept low, as
now the use is (...) many good Orchards.

If you would be furnished with good Quince-stoc^ for your Nursery, the
speediest way is to cut down an o^ Quince-tree in March, about 2 Inches from
the Ground, ^^d there will a young number of Suckers arise from the ^^^ot,
which being taken off, with some of the Root sliced with them, and moist Earth
about them, as much as may be, are easily planted, and in a little Time will be
^it to be grafted on for Pears, and raise a good Increase, and this way also
Plumb stocks may be raised, and you may be abundantly furnished of your own,
without be^^g beholden to others.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Some further Observations in the Transplanting of Fruit Trees; with the Errors
of some therein discovered.

I Hold it (though upon necessity or Emergency it may be done at other Seasons)
the best Time to transplant Trees, is the Autumnal Quarter, especiallly those
that ^ose their Leaves, and are naked all Winter, whether they ^re young Stocks
of new grafted Trees, or of longer ^tanding; and it is a good Time to do it,
when you perceive they have done growing in the Branch (which may ^e known) or
Ends of the Branches of the Tops; if ^hey be closed and shut up, they may be
removed without Danger, though in August, but September is a general proper Time,
and also in October.

In taking up Plants, great Care and Skill is required ^y the Remover: See the
spreading Roots be left on, ^ho' you must, according as the Root is, take of so
much (...) the Earth may come conveniently to close about the ^est, and fasten
on it every way, that taking good hold, (...) may spread the better; and in
removal you will ob^erve the younger Trees thrive better than the elder, and
^any Times on an equal Soil over take them in Growth upon a remove of one and
the same Time.

Plant not too deep, for the over-turf, is always riche^ than the next Mould;
and in very moist Ground Pl^^^ the nearer the Surface, that the Roots spreading
m^^ avoid the Spume; for planting too deep in any Ground much injures the
growth of the Tree, by reason the hea^ of the Sun cannot penetrate the Earth to
its Root, there by to enliven it, and shooting mostly downward it such in cold
damp Spume, which digests not into good Sap^ whereby the Tree is enfeebled, and
not of force to brin^ forth its Fruit in Proportion; and many Times, in the
depth the Roots meet with Chalk or Gravel, whi^ hinder their Progress.

In transplanting young Trees, as you leave not on (...) the Roots, so neither
must all the Branches, takin^ away the Tops of the Branches of Apples and
Pears, b^^ not of Plumbs, Cherries, or Walnuts. It is no smal^ Check to Plants
to be removed out of a warm Soil in a cold one, nor transplant Trees out of a
lean Groun^ into a very fat Soil; for the sudden Alteration will (...) near to
destroy them, or much hinder them from prospering; and therefore though the
Ground must necessarily b^ better, yet it must be by such Degrees as may be
agreeable with the Tree transplanted.

Many plant Fruit Trees unfit for the Country or So^ wherein they plant them,
and their Care is, to ch^^ Grafts of the first Kind, and the fairest plants to
loo^ upon, not considering by the way, that such kinds wi^^ prosper and bear
Fruit well in those Climates and place^ where they plant them: And hence it
often is, that man^ who have fair and goodly Fruit Trees, have little Fr^^ from
them.

It is an excellent Rule, to choose those kinds of Frui^ which yourself or
others find by many Years Expe^^ce, to be good bearing Trees in those parts
nearest (...) your Orchard, although the Fruit be not altogether so goo^ as some
others at greater Distance.

There is another Error in desiring the largest and fa^est plants, expecting
such Trees will soonest impro^ and yield Increase; whereas great plants, many
of them ^e, and others, unless rather by Chance than any war^anted Certainty,
live very poorly, whilst smaller plants, well removed, live generally, and
often thrive more in two or three Years, than the great ones in six or seven;
for the removing great plants is to Nature a very great Check, such as many
Times it is not able to recover.

Another Error is, that some unskilful Gardener break ^f the Buds upon the
Stocks grafted on, before the Grafts put forth, insinuating it will receive the
more Sap, when those Wounds indeed put a check to the Saps rising, and are more
properly taken away when the Graft is united to the Bark of the Stock, and has
gathered strength from the Sap, putting out Leaves and small Branches. And some
there are, that graft young plants coming of Stones or Seeds where they were
sowed or planted, without removing; which is not at all so proper for Growth.

THE Gardener's Almanac: Containing what is to be done in, or relating to
their Orchard, in the^ proper Seasons throughout the Year in each particular
Month.
Aquarus, or the Skinker. Things proper to be done in the Orchard i^ the Month
of JANUARY.
PRepare such Soil as is suitable to the Nature o^ the Earth you plant in; make
ready the Groun^ against the Spring, by Trenching, etc. Lay o^ Dung where there
is occasion, as your provide^ Stores of Horse, Neats, and Sheeps Dung, of two
Yea^ old; mingle with it, in the Lay-stall, some Loam, an^ under Pasture fine
Mould, mingle and stir them with the Dung, and skreen it well when laid on,
that it may the easier melt, and soak in by the falling Showers. As for the Fig
tree, the Dung of Pigeons or Poultry is very nourishing when the first Heat is
passed. Let your Horse^^ng, e're laid on, be exceeding rotten, lest it infect
the Ground with Knot-grass, which is much offensive.

Apricots and Peaches require little, but rather a natural or improved fat
mellow Soil.

Dig Borders, and uncover Tree-roots where you see occasion, as where
Ablequation is required; transplant Fruit Trees, set Quicksets for good
Fencing, plant Vines; and make a beginning to prune old Trees, and the Branches
of yound Orchard-fruit that are pretty well grown, and that toward the
decrease of the Moon; but such as are young and tender disbranch not till the
sap begins to stir, that the Wound with the Scars that the Frosts imprint, may
be the easier cured; cut away all the Shoots of August, especially from
Wall-fruit, and observe in cutting the Fruit-buds from the Leaf-buds, and the
former may be known by their being more fuller and swelling, and them you must
preserve as much as may be, cut slanting upwards, that no Rags nor Splits be
left, and in taking off a whole Limb or Branch, take it close to the Stem, that
the Bark may the sooner close over it; rub off the Buds that put forth on
Wall-fruit Trees between the Stem and the Wall, or opposite. Keep the Palisado
and Wall-trees from too much aspiring, that they may spread the better, and be
of a regular beautiful Form, like the spreading of a Fan, and bear the better
by being kept the closer to the Ground. Take off Water-boughs from Standards,
and the unbearing Branches of Wall-fruit, but do not prune such as are very
tender till the next Month: where thick or entangled Branches appear, that may
any ways gaul or fret, or keep out the Air and Sun, make them thinner by taking
off some, as the Tree will bear it.

Begin to trim and nail your Espaliers and Wall trees; rub off the Moss from
Trees, the Weather being open or moist; prepare your Scions for grafting whilst
the Buds or Supports are not yet come; and toward the end of this Month, the
Weather being open, graft Cherrier, Pears, or Plumbs.

Remove Stocks, proceeding from Kernels, to advantageous Places, either in your
Nursery, or where you intend they shall stand to be grafted, taking off the
part of the Tops and Roots; sharpen and prepare your Tools for the Work of the
succeeding Months.

Fruits in their full Virtue, and still continuing. Pears. The Winter Norwich,
very good to bake; the Great Surrei^, the Winter Musk, the Winter Bon
Chr^flein, and Winter-bergomot, Wall-fruit, etc.

Apples. The Winter Queening, Harvey-apple, Pom^water, Marrigold, Kentish
pippin, Golden-pippin, Russe^-pippin, French-pippin, John-apple, Pome-roy,
Golden drucet, Reniting, Winter-pearmain, Loons-pearmain, a^^ some others that
are with good keeping, well secure^ from the Violence of the Frost, and exclude
all Rotting as the Redstreak, the Puffin, the Wilding, the Gilliflower apple,
etc.

Pisces. FEBRUARY.
IN this Month prune Vines, and other Fruit Trees bind, nail, plash and dress,
especially Wall-Fruit, suc^ as are tender, for now the greatest Danger of the
Fros^ hurting them, is in a manner over; and finish this Wor^ before the
Bearers and Buds swell; however in Nect^rines, and other choice Fruit, it may
be omitted till the next Month, especially if the Weather be very cold Bind the
colateral Branches, to put the Wall-trees in (...) good shape, but strain them
not too roughly, or unn^turally, for that hinders the Sap in its free Motion;
an^ in this, and well pruning, lies one Masterpiece of a Ga^dener, as to these
Particulars.

The Grafts of former Years Grafting, may be now r^moved; lay and cut
Quick-set, trim up your Espaliers, and the Hedges of your Palisadoes; and
hitherto you may set the Vines, and diverse Sorts of Shrubs.

Kernels, or Stones of Fruit, are proper now to be set, or sowed. This is a
proper Month for the Circumposition, by Baskets, or Tubs of Earth; and such
Branches as you would leave to take Root, may be now laid in the Earth.

Moss your Fruit Trees, and apply Remedies for Can^ers, as cutting them out,
and laying on a Plaster of ^idgeons dung, Tar, and sweet Butter.

Drain your Orchard, and rid it of the Wet that lies sapping at the Roots of
the Trees; either Proceeding from Rain, melted Snow, or Springs Cast good Earth
^out the Roots of the Trees; cover those that were ^id bare; prune off the Webs
of Caterpillars hanging on the Twigs, or Branches. After Rain, pick up Worms
and Sug-snails, and destroy them, by putting them into hot Water, or Lime.
About the middle, till the latter End of this Month, it may be very proper to
graft in the Cleft; and this necessary Work may be held on till the End of
March, especially Pears, Plumbs, Apples, Cherries, and it is best done in the
New and Old Moon.

Fruits in their full Virtue, and still continuing.
Pears. The Winter Poppering, the Winter Bon-chrestein, the Little Dagobert,
the Warden.

Apples. The Reniting, the Lo^ns Pearmain, the Ken^ish Kirton, the Holland
Pippin, the Winter Queening, the Harvy-apple, the Golden Doucet, the Pome Roy,
the Russet-pippin.

Aries, or the Ram. MARCH.
YOU may yet dung your Orchard, and plant Trees that remain yet unset, tho it
had been better done in the last Month, unless in moist cold Places, that are
very backward.

This whole Month you may Graft, first with Pea^^ in the beginning, and so
conclude it with Apples, unless^ it be in an extraordinary forward Spring,
wherein the Trees put very early out, both Leafs and Blossoms.

Nectarines and Peach-trees may successfully be planted* but forbear to take
off the Top of the Root, as of other Trees is proper, by Reason it will
endanger their taking Root at all, or at least hinder their Growth, and
Thriving. Cut off the Tops of your budded Stocks, an^ prune Grafts of the last
Year. Uncover your Seed, o^ Kernel-beds, or if the Weather be cold, or much we^
refrain it till April. Stir the new planted Ground, an^ well lay and order it.

Cover Tree-roots that have continued bare since Autumn, and cut your
Quick-sets, trim your Fruit in the Fruit-lofts, but open not the Windows, lest
too great (...) Confluence of Air putrify, and cause them to rot.

Fruits still Lasting, and in their Virtue.
Pears. The Double Blossom Pear, the Bon Chrestien.

Apples. The Winter Pearmain, the Golden Doucet, (...) Loons Pearmain, the
Pippin, the Reineting.

Taurus, or the Bull. APRIL.
KEEP your Orchard free from Weeds; water Tree^ where they are upon a dry
Ground; but ever d^ this at a distance, that the Water may soak leisurely (...)
the Roots. Hang well betimes such Borders as yo^ Wall-fruit stands in, and
refresh the Ground with Con^post; set no Flowers there, that they may not
hinde^ their stirring the Ground; keep Weeds clear, as als^ Worms and Snails,
only the Outverges you may ado^^ with a Border of Pinks, or any pleasant Thing,
that ^ows low, and will not shadow the Heat of the Sun ^om the Root of the
Tree, and you may sprinkle the ^st with Salleting; but when they begin to run
to Seed, (...) aspire, Pluck them up Roots and all, or as soon as ^hey are fit
for young and tender Salleting. Graft by ^pproach, Oranges, Lemmons,
Pomegranades, etc.

Fruits still Lasting, and in full Virtue.
Pear^ The Oak-pear, the Bon-Chrestien, the Double Blossom, the Rowling-pear.

Apples. The Deux-ans, Pippins, Flat Leinet, Westbury, Apple, Gilliflower.

Gemini, or the Twins. MAY.
THIS Month, as to Matters in the Affairs of Orcharding in a manner gives the
Arborists rest, only be careful to keep under the Weeds, spread and bind down
the Branches and Arbours; and clip such Trees as require it, for a Pleasantness
and Shape.

Bring the Orange Trees out of the Conservatory, at such Times as you see the
Mulberry-tree put sorth, and open its Leafs, let the Weather be what it will,
for that is an Infallible Rule for the proper Season, to Transplant and remove
them, but do it with Care, drawing the Tree out with competent Mould sticking
to it, when you have well loosed it from the sides of the case, and so with
better ease place it in another, filled with Earth, taking up the first half
split, just under the Turf of the richest Pasture Ground, in a place that has
been well fothered, and take rotten Cow Dung one part, and mix with this, or at
least very mellow Soil, well skreened or sifted; and if this proves too stiff,
sift a little Loam in it, or a little Lime, with the small rotten Sticks of
Willows; then cut the two extravagant or thick Roots, a little (...) the
Bottom, and set the Plant but shallow; rather (...) some of the Root be seen,
than it be too deep: If yo^ cut off any Branch make a Sear-cloth of Rosin,
Turpe^tine, Beeswax and Tallow, and place it upon the Woun^ till it is healed.

As for the Cases they must have such vent at the Bo^tom, that the wet may
moderately pass out, and not sta^ in any abundance, to corrupt or rot the
Fib^^^ of the Roots. Water this kind of Trees, with Water where^ Sheep and
Neats Dung has been digested in the Sun, t^^ or three Days, and that moderately
at first, and so m^^ by degrees: Keep the Earth loose about them for t^^ first
Fortnight, after they are brought out of your Co^servatory, or Green-house, and
kept them the while i^ the shade, and then you may expose them freely to the
Sun, but not when it is too scorching, by lying too lo^^ on them, but where
sometimes the intermission of shad^ of Trees may refresh them with coolness.

Give this Month your other housed Plants a little fres^ Earth to the old,
stirring that up lightly with a For^ not injuring the Roots; enlarge the Cases
as the Tree^ grow bigger, from 16 Inches to near a Yard Diameter.

Brush and cleanse off the Dust, when you take the^ out of your Houses; and
such as you Transplant not, part off above an Inch of the Surface, and lay new
Earth, (...) rather Compost of Meats dung, and the ouze of the Bottom of the
Tanners Pits, both being old; so that the we may wash down the strength of it
to the Bottom of the Root; nor need you trim the Roots of any Verdures, unless
much matted, or entangled; but it will be proper (...) change their Cases once
in three or four Years.

As for Fruits in Season, Prime, or still Lasting, they are.

Pears. The Winter Born-chrestine, the Great Kareville, the Black Pear of
Worcester, the Double Blossom Pears the Surrein.

Apples. The Forward Codling, the Gilliflower-appl^ (...) Marigold, the
Russeting, the Maligar, the Westbury ^^ples, the John Apple, Pippins. The May
Cherry, and ^^rawberries.

Cancer, or the Crab. JUNE.
ABout the fourteenth Day of this Month you may begin to Inoculate Pears,
Apples, Apricots, Peaches, Plumbs, Cherries, etc. Cleanse the Vines of
luxuriant Branches and Tenderness; crop them rather than cut 'em, and stop the
second joint, directly before the Fruit, and some under Branches that are
fruitless; particularly Vines that are young planted, when they but begin to
bear, and so forward, binding the rest up to the Props or Stays.

Water Trees lately planted, and cover the Roots (if you can get it) with Fern,
almost rotten, about a Foot of the Stem, having first eradicated all Weeds that
grow about them.

Place near the Stem a Tub of impregnated Water, ^ap about it a reasonable
length of Woollen-cloth, or Flannel; let one end of it hang in the Water, so
that thereupon the moisture ascending, the Bark will draw it in, and much cool
it, in this, and the two following scorching Months, thereby preventing the
Fruit falling off untimely, by reason of excessive heat that wastes the
moisture; and this way will recover the Verdure of a Tree that is fainting and
languishing for want of moisture, by reason of great droughts, or scorching of
the Leafs and smaller Boughs, by the Sun's hot Beams; but do not continue the
Water so long that it may sob the Bark, lest it, by over-watering, injure the
Tree.

If Trees that used often to be removed, or carried to and fro from your
Conservatory, be hurt or languish, you may this Month give them a Milk-diet,
viz. delute it with a part of Water, discreetly applied, as you find amendment;
or by Planting them in a hot Bed, letti^ them down into a Pit in the Earth, two
or three For deeper than they are high, and so covering them with Glass-Frame;
which refreshing, often enlivens, and r^stores them, according as the young
Tree is either wanting in warmth or Nourishment.

Fruits in Season and Prime.
Cherries. Black, White, and Red, Flanders Hea^^ Duke, Early, Flanders,
Lukeware, Spanish, Black, C^mon Cherry, Naples, Cherries, etc. Strawberries,
R^berries, Currants.

Pears. Green Royal, St. Lawrence-pears, the Dagdale^ the first Ripe of Pears,
the Madera.

Apples. The Pippin, the John Apple, the Red, eno^^ the Robillard.

Leo, or the Lion. JULY.
WAtering young Trees not long Planted, as also La^ers, and the like; Re-prune
Peaches and Apr^cots, save many of the likely young Shoots, to be laid i^ the
Ground, that they may further increase; for no^ usually the old Berries perish,
and are succeeded by ne^ ones; cut them close and even; well pruning yo^
Wall-fruit of the Leafs that are superfluous, hinderi^^ the Suns warmth from
the Fruit, but bare not the Fr^ too much, lest it prove injurious, especially
to Vines.

When the Fruit requires filling, or is forming, mak^ Holes, about a Foot and
half from your Wall-fruit, without Wounding the Roots, and Pour in Water; you
man let the setting sticks you make them with, stand in the^ a little loose, so
that water may come to the Roots le^surely; or this may be done with
semicircle Trenche^ at a like distance.

Toward the latter End of this Month, visit the Vines ^in, and stop the
Luxuriant Branches, or Shoots at the ^econd Joint above the Fruit, if you have
not finished it before; but let there be some Umbrage in your exposing (...) to
the Sun, that there may not be too much of the heat: Hang Bottles of cool Water
near your red Roman Necta^^ines, and other lushious Fruit, to destroy the Wasps
that come to eat and spoil them, and also Flies: Set the Hoofs (...) Neats Feet
to take Earwigs in, which are equally mis^evous; and at Noon shake them into
Water to de^^roy them. Destroy Ants to preserve your Orange Trees when
flowered, by pouring scalding Water, or rather Urine, on their Hills: Pull off
the Snails that you will find ^^der the Leaves above the Fruit; but not the
Fruit that (...) bitten, for then they will fall to biting afresh. Have ^n Eye
upon Weeds, pull them up where they sprout; begin to hang them as soon as they
peep out of the Ground; and by this means you will rid more in a few Hours,
than in many when they are grown up.

Lay Laurels, Mirtles, and other delicate Greens: Wa^er choice Shrubs, and when
ever you shift them, trim the Roots, and give them good store of Compost: Clip
Box after gentle Showers of Rain, and in Watering it well thereupon, the Scent
will not be Offensive to any thing that grows near it. Graft by approach,
Inarch and ^^oculate Oranges, Jesemines, and curious Shrubs, taking off the
Surface of the Earth, about the latter End of this Month, put cooling fresh
Earth to them, that they ^ay the better weather the hot Season.

In the dryest Season strew Potashes, or sprinkle Brine, which improve Grafts,
and destroy Worms. Wa^er your Green-walks with Water, wherein Tobacco Stalks
have been boiled, and it will kill Worms, and other Insects that infest them.

Fruits in Season, Prime, or yet remaining Good.

Cherries. The Egriot, Brigzsaux, Great Bearer, Morella, Morocco-cherry, and
Carnations.

Peaches. The Violet Muscat, Nutmeg Peach, Isabella, Newington, Persian, and
Rombovillet.

Plumbs. Lady Elizabeth, Primordial, Damsens, Myrbolans, Blue and Red, and
Amber Violet, Violet or Che^^plumb, the Kings Plumb, Deny Damask, Pear-plumb,
^namon-plumb, Spanish Morocco-plumb, Tawny, and Abr^cot-plumb.

Apples. The Marget-apple, Deaux-ans, Winter Rus^ting, Pippins, Andrew-apple,
Janeting, Cinamon-app^ Red and White.

Pears. The Green-chesil, Pearl-pear, the Primat, Ru^pear, Summer-pears.

Gooseberries, Currants, Rasberries, Strawberries, ^lonsa.

Virgo, or the Virgin-Sign. AUGUST.
BEgin not early to Inoculate; gather Buds of the Year, and do it before you
remove the Stock^ Cut away the superfluous Branches, and such Shoots (...) are
found of these second Spring, but do not disrobe (...) Fruit of too many
Leaves, whereby they may be (...) too open to the scorching of the Sun: Nail up
such you leave on to cover the Wall's defects; still take aw^^ the superfluous
Branches from the Vines, but not so mi^ as to expose the Grapes too much to the
Sun's heat, (...) they lose their Plumpness, and ripen unkindly. Pluck (...)
Suckers.

Release and unbind the Buds you have Inoculated, (...) they have taken; prune
and stop them; make Cyd^ and Summer Perry.

Now is the exact Season for the Orange-tree's B^ding, therefore at the
commencement of this Month I^culate upon Seed-stocks of 4 Springs; and to have
the better Buds, cut off the Top of some aged Orange-tre^ which is of a growing
kind, and so get good Shoots.

About Bartholomew-tide lay your choice Greens; as ^^mmons, Oranges, Mirtles,
Jesamin, Philareus, Arbutus, ^eanders, and excellent Shrubs, as the
Pomegranates* ^^d such as will not endure the Nipping of the Frosts; ^aking the
Branches and Shoots of the Spring, stake them ^own with little Hook-stakes, in
very Fertile Earth, well ^iled with Soil that is consumed; Water them during
(...) hot Weather, on all convenient Times; and when (...) Month returns again,
they will be fit to remove: ^ansplant them into suitable Earth, and place them
in ^e shade, so that they may be kept moderately moist, ^ut not too wet, for
fear of Rotting the Fibers of the ^oots, and at the End of three Weeks, find
out an Airier place to set them in, till the End of fifteen Days.

Fruits in Season, Prime, and yet remaining Sound.
Apples. Sheeps-snout, Kirham-apple, May-flower, Seam^ng-apple, Cushion-apple;
Ladies Longing, Spicing-apple, John-apple, Pippin.

Pears. The Slipper-pear, Burgomot, Red Catharine, So^ereign, Windsor, Orange,
the Prussia-pear, King, Catharine, the Deny-pear, Sugar-pear, Summer-poppings,
the Lording-pear, etc.

Nectarines. The Cluster-nectarine, the Yellow-nectarine, the Murcy-nectarine,
the Tawny Red-roman, the Little Green-nectarine, etc.

Abricots and Peaches. The Savoy Mala-cottoon, the Peach des Pot, the
Roman-peach, Quince-peach, Man-peach, Burdeaux-peach, Crown-peach, Rambovillet,
Musk-peach, Grand Carnation, Portugal-peach, Lover-peach.

Plumbs. The White Date, Imperial-blew, Black Pear-plumb, Yellow Pear-plumb,
Late Pear-plumb, Great Anthony, Turkey-plumb, White Nutmeg, Jane-plumb.

Some other Fruits of this Month, viz. Filberts, Cornelians, Cluster-grapes,
and Muscadine, Currants, Figs, Melons, etc.

Libra, or the Balance. SEPTEMBER.
THIS is a proper Month to Gather the ripe W^ter-fruit; as Plumbs, Apples,
Pears, etc. for if the hang longer, the Winds being boisterous, will shake the^
off, and spoil them for keeping, by their Fall; obse^ to gather them always in
dry Weather; and if the Sea^ afford it, when the Sun has sucked up the Dews and
^^sture from the Fruit and Leaves.

Let at liberty the Bud you have Inoculated, espe^^ally if you perceive them
pinch, for in that case it m^^ be done sooner. Lay on your Winter Store of Du^
spread it finely and thinly, that the Rain may soak it i^ to fertilize the
Ground. Prune Pine and Fir-trees, b^tween the ninth and twelfth of this Month,
if it w^ neglected in March, and this will prove the more prosp^rous Season.
About Michaelmas, House choice Green and the tenderest Plants, in a convenient
Conservator^ a Lemmons, Oranges, Barba, Jovis, Ammonium, Dates, etc ordering
them with refreshing Mould, stirring up (...) rest, and so filling up the
Cases, that they may keep (...) Roots warm, as consumed and rich Soil to wash
in, an^ nourish the Fibers; keep the Windows open, till the Cold admonish you
to shut them.

Set such Plants as agree not to be Housed into the Earth, placing their Pots
and Cases lower than the Surface of the Bed, and to expose them as much as may
be to the South, that the Sun may a little refresh them i^ the Winter, and the
cold Northern Winds skreened off; cloth them with dry and fresh Moss, and then
cove^ them with Glasses, but in open Weather, under the favor of the Sun's
warm Beams, or falling of gentle Showers, give them Air to revive and
exhilerate them, and keep them from the Annoyance of any Creature tha^ may come
to break, bruise, or otherwise spoil them.

Fruits in Season, Prime, and still remaining sound.

Grapes. The Muscadine Grape, the little Blue-Grape, ^^e Verjuice-Grape,
excellent for Pickling.

Peaches. The Malacoton, the Liver-Peach, etc.

Pears. The Messieur Jane, Beze d' Hery, Hambden's ^agomont, Black Worcester,
the Rolling Pear, the Green (...) Orange, the Summer bon Christien, Frith-Pear,
Hedge^^r, Lewis-Pear, Brunswick Pear, Winter Poppering, Bi^^'s Pear, Bing's
Bear, Diego, Emperor's- Pear, Cluster-^^^ Balsam-Pear, Enelyn, Norwich-Pear,
Arundel-Pear, ^^en fielding.

Apples. The William, the Belle bonne, the Summer ^ermain, the Red Greening
Ribed, Violet Apple, Bloody ^^in, Narvy-Apple, Pear-Apple, Lording-Apple,
Quince-^^ple, and several others of less worth and note.

Scorpio, or the Scorpion. OCTOBER.
NOW is the proper Time for Trenching Ground in order to the well laying it for
Orchards, that (...) Winter may Mellow it. Plant your dry Trees, viz.
^ruit-Trees of all Sorts, Wall-Trees, Standard, or ^hrubs, such as lose their
Leaves, but let those for the ^all be not above two Years Grafting, smooth, and
ve^^ sound. Ablequation is now in Season; as for old un^riving Trees, bear
their Roots; and of those that ^ver hastily blow, stir well the Ground you have
newly ^lanted: Continue in the increase of the Moon to ga^her Winter-Fruit that
remains, always observing to ga^^er when they are dry, and beware of Pinching
or Brui^ng them with your Fingers, lest they Taint and Rot; ^ly them in fresh
Wheat Straw in your Loft, and cover them warm.

Plash and make up your Quickset Fences; after the se^ond Year remove Grafts,
unless such as are intended for Dwarf-trees, which may well be let alone till
the th^^ Year.

Sow Hard and Stony, and hard Kernel Seeds, as th^^ of the Pear-plumb,
Heart-cherries, Black-cherries, M^rello's, the Stones of Almonds, Apple, Pear,
Crab, Nu^ etc. Cleanse by Sweeping, your Walks and Allies of t^^ Autumnal
Leaves, lest Rotting, they Breed Insects to any your Ground. Cut away the Hedgy
Grass, spre^ Mole-hills and scrape the Moss from off your Fruit-tree^

Fruit in Season, Prime, or still remaining sound.

Pears. The Lambert-Pear, Russel-pear, Green But^ Pear, Cow-Pear, Saffron-pear,
Russet-pear, Petworth-pe^^ Violet-pear, or Winter Windsor-Pear, Thorne-pear,
Clo^ pear, with some of last Months-pears.

Apples. Pear-apple, Pearmain, Parsly-apple, Bell^ bonne, Honey-meal,
Apis-lording, William-costard, etc.

Bullies, and many of the last Months Plumbs, Pi^ Grapes, Arbutus, etc.

Sagitarius, or the Shooter. NOVEMBER.
NOW get your Compost in readiness in your Orcha^^ to secure the Roots of
tender plants from the Co^^ continue planting and setting Trees; observe in
Transpla^ting, how your Tree stood before, and place it to the same Quarter,
and about the same Depth, fixing it w^^ against the Violence of the Wind,
especially West an^ South: set wet, and sow dry, plant young Trees, either Wall
or Standards, provide in Nurseries stocks to gra^ on the ensuing Year, and get
new stocks in a readin^ for all sorts of Fruits, for standards, Crab-stocks,
and^ for Dwarf-trees, the stock of Paradise, or sweet-app^^ Kernels, which may
be obtained from suckers and Layers, Dwarfs on the Portugal Quince suckers,
Pears o^ (...) Kernel-stock of Pears or Suckers, Standard-cherries the
Black-cherry-stone-stock, Dwarfs for Palisadoes or ^^s, etc. on the Black-heart
or Morello-stock, or the (...) early Bitter Cherry-stock: Inoculate peaches on
(...) plumb-stock, or their own. In budding on the Al^^d, it is proper to do it
on a stock that has not been ^oved; and it is proper it should keep its
Situation. ^ft Nectarines on pear-plumb, or peach-stocks plumbs their stocks,
and of those kinds the black and white (...) plumb-stocks are to be preferred,
and those grow^ from Damsen-stones, or such as may be advantagiously ^hered
from the Suckers: And about the Middle of (...) Month shut up your choice
Trees, and enclose tender ^^ts, that so you may not be oppressed with the vio^^
cold of the Winter to overpower their heat and de^^ them, and if they become
very dry, and it be not ^^ezing Weather, refresh them moderately with Water,
^rein Cow or Sheeps-dung is dissolved, but give them ^^t too much, nor make it
over-rich with Dung, for both ^ese are injurious, especially to Orange Trees:
As for the ^oes, they require no watering in the Winter, but only freshing
abroad in Fair-day, how dry so ever their (...) or Cases may appear to be. To
know if your housed ^ees want Water, is by the Leaves shrinking or shrivel^^
up, especially those underneath; and the Paleness or (...) Leaves show they
have had too much, which lies sap^ng at the Root, and endangers destroying them.

This Month you may plant Forest-trees for the gra^^g your Walks or Avenues;
Sow stony Seeds, sweep ^^d cleanse your Walks and Alleys of Leaves, etc. and
^nsplant Trees that are durable against cold, taking up (...) much of the Earth
they grow in with the Root as you (...), and immediately set them in a soft
Earth that may ^^ntinue moist till the Rain descends to settle it.

Fruit in Season, Prime, and still remaining sound:

Pears. The Dead-mans-pear, Bergomont, Lord-pear, ^essire Jean, Burnt-cat,
Wardon, Lady-pear, Sugar-pear, ^^e-pear, Dove-pear, Winter-bergomont, Bell-pear.

Apples. Pear Apple, Belle-Bon, the William, the Su^mer Pearmain, the
Lord-Apple, the Winter Chestnut, the Short Start, the Russet Pippin, the Puffin,
the Cole App^ the Pippin, the Pomwater, the Golding, the John Apple. Services,
Bullis, Medlars, Arbutus, Wall-nuts, Small-nuts and the like.

Capricorn, or the Goat. DECEMBER.
THIS Month properly Vines may be Planted; pru^ and fasten Wall-Fruit; thin the
over-spreadin^ Branches of Standard, though you may spare them till ^^bruary;
prepare good Stocks for Grafting; sow Poma^ of the Cyder-pressings to raise
Nurseries; you may (...) any Sorts of Stones or Kernels; refresh your Autu^
Fruit, lest it Taint; Seed your weak Stocks, open the Windows of your
Fruit-lofts in a fair Day.

This whole Month you may continue to Trench the Ground, and dung it, preparing
thereby for Borders (...) set Palisado'd or Wall-Fruit Trees.

In this Month (or you may defer it till January) (...) off or prune well the
Vine-shoots to the Root, only s^^ two or three of the best Shoots, with three
or four Ey^ of young Wood: Set up Traps to destroy Vermin, th^^ they destroy
not your Nursery Seed, or the Roots (...) your tender Plants.

Keep close the Doors and Windows of your Conse^vatory so matted, that the
Piercing Air cannot enter (...) injure your choice Greens; and if the Weather
be ^^tream, you must have a Stove or Charcoal Fire in it, i^ the manner as
shall be directed hereafter; but not frequently use it any more than Necessity
requires.

Take Bay Berries that are dropping ripe and set them cover warm the Pipes and
Cocks of your Fountains, if yo^ ^e any in your Grounds, with much soiled
Horse-lit-lest they are flawed and cracked by the Violence of (...), Frost, and
put you to much Charge for want of ^nely care to prevent it.

Fruit in Season, Prime, and still remaining sound.

Pears. The Spindle pear, the Squib-pear, the Stople^^ar, white and red, the
French-warden, the Dionery, the (...) Virgin, Gascoin, Bargamont, the
Deadmans-pear, the ^rlet-pear, the Rolling pear.

Apples. The Russeting, Leather-coat, Winter Red, Cats^^ad, Chesnut-apple,
Great-belly, Pippin, Pearmain, etc.

^^e best and safest way to gather Summer and Winter Fruit of keeping; and how
to order them for that purpose.
^F you design to keep Cherries for sundry uses, especially in preserving,
great Care must be taken in Ga^^ing of them.

To do this, it is most proper to have a Ladder with Bearer or Crutch of light
Timber, that it may stand it were of itself, without pressing on the Boughs to
danger their breaking, or the bruising of the Fruit, ^^ich may conveniently be
removed to all Parts; Ga^^^ by the Stalk, without squeezing the Cherry with
(...) part of your Hand, and put them gently into your ^^erry-pot or Basket,
hanging by a Hook on some con^ient Bough well within your reach, taking care to
^^eak no Stalk but what the ripe Fruit hangs on; lay ^^em gently in, and pour
them gently into your Re^er below with as much ease as you can.

This kind of Fruit is best carried in broad Baskets like ^ves, with a smooth
yielding Bottom; if you carry them Water, let not the Sieves be full, lest
setting one upon ^her you bruise and spoil them; but if it in Carts or
Horseback, well line the Bottom or Sides of the Sie^ with Ferr, or such other
cold Vegitables, to keep the from bruising, and likewise to prevent their
sweating.

To gather and order other Stone-fruit.
WHEN you are to gather Nectarines, Aprico^ Peaches, Damsens, Pear-plumbs,
Bullis, and (...) like, of several Kinds, and they seem not to be ripe once, on
one Tree, stay not for all of them at once, (...) cull out those that are, and
wait for, the Ripening of (...) rest, unless you perceive they have received
their Substance, and the Trees can properly yield them more; then in a fair Day
when the Sun sucketh up Dew, set up your Ladder as before, and gather the with
a tender Hand without Squeezing or Bruisin^ place in your Basket, or broad
Pannier, Nettles, and them in gently, and so let them stand covered on Top with
Nettles also, and this Weed will be a gr^^ Means to hasten the Ripening of
those that are not attained to it.

The best Way to gather Pears.
IN doing this, observe two Things.

1. If you gather them for your own spending, and w^ have them keep, gather
them as soon as they change, (...) are, as some call it, half ripe, and no
more; letting rest that are come to this Perfection hang till they ch^^
otherwise; and then gather them; and so they will r^ the more kindly, and not
by many degrees, be subject to so soon as you let them be full ripe on the Tree.

2. If you design to transport them far, either by W^ or Land, then pluck a
Pear, cut it in the Middle, and at the Core you find a large hollow space, then
gather rest, and pack them gently in such Baskets or Hamper^ you design to
carry or transport them in, laying d^ VVheat-straw to secure them from
Bruising; for if they gathered too soon, this kind of Fruit will shrink and
^ther; or being too ripe, unless very hard Pears, they (...) (...) subject to
rot sooner than ordinary: Lay them in your ^oft on VVheat-straw.

To gather and order Apples in the best manner.
TO know when your Summer Apples are hasting to a Ripeness, observe the Birds
pecking at them, and with a shake many will fall; or if of those you gather,
^^e Kernels rattle in them, these are Signs of Ripeness.

Gather these in a fair Sun-shiny Day, and use them in ^l Things as a Pear, for
they will not be lasting in keep^^g, yet that they may be fair, and remain a
long while, ^^ye a Care of Bruising them in Gathering.

Winter Apples are for a long Duration; gather them ^a fair Sun-shiny or dry
Day, when all the Moisture (...) off from them and the Leaves, for the least
wet will ^bject them to heat, sweat, and rot, when laid in Heaps (...) your
Fruit-lost; when you have set up your Ladder, (...) pressing on the Tree, draw
those Boughs gently to you that are somewhat out of your Reach with a hooked
Stick; gather them with a gentle Hand, rather by the Stalks than griping, and
put them leisurely into your Basket, hanging on a Ladder, or on a convenient
Bough ^y a Hook; and when you empty, do it not roughly, ^est Bruises, or their
own Stalks pricking them, cause them to rot: Gather them clean from Leaves or
Brunts, because the one mingled with them, heats, and subjects the Fruit to
rot; and the other hurts the Tree, and ^^nders it much from Breeding the next
Year, as being the Buds that would produce new Fruit. As for the Fallings that
are shaken down by the Wind, or other Accidents, if upon soft Grass, they may
be sorted by themselves, and laid up; but if much bruised, immedi^tely make
Cider of them, for they will not keep.

Pack your Apples in Wheat or Rye-straw, in Maunds ^r Baskets, lined with the
same, and so you may fit them for ^emoving at any time, or preserve them from
the Injuries, of the Frost, and make them keep sound a long time. Gather them
without the Stalk, because with it they will soonest corrupt and rot at that
Place, laying sweet Straw between every Layer of Apples, and between the
several sorts of them, if more than one in a Basket or Maund.

To gather and secure Quinces from rotting, etc.
GAther these in a dry Day, when the moisture is of the Trees and Fruit; Pluck
them gently from the Stalks, and keep them in clean Wheat-straw, laid o^ packed
as thin as may be: Separate them a good distanc^ from other Fruit, because
their Scent is offensive to it (...) You may pack them in dry Casks, but so as
Air m^ come at them, for it is a great Preserver of them: A^ dampness makes
them mouldly, and rot: When you pac^ them, lay Layings of Straw between them,
and such (...) lie loose in your Fruit-lofts turn them often.

To gather and keep Medlers and Services.
THE Medler must be plucked gently before it b^ ripe, for it will soon grow
ripe of itself when (...) the Tree: Lay them on Heaps in your Fruit-loft on
(...) Straw, often turning and shifting them. Let them (...) lie too thick one
on another; and if you pack them (...) it be in the Sieves or dry Casks, laying
small Shavings (...) dry Straw between them; then cover them with a Wo^len
Cloth, and lay a Board on them to press them do^ with Weights; so being brought
unto a Ferment, th^^ will ripen kindly; and take those away that ripen first^
and place them by themselves; for if they be suffered (...) lie with the hard
ones till they are ripe, they will gro^ Moldy; and so do till they are all
ripe.

As for Services, you need no more than gather the^ before they are ripe,
Stalks and all, tie them up in litt^ Bunches, and hang them on Lines in an
Airy, yet war^ Place, they will kindly ripen.

Of the Fruit-loft, stowing and managing Fruit for keepin^
IF you are to carry Fruit far by Land or by Water, do (...) not in hard frosty
Weather, nor in the extreme heat (...) the Summer, nor in the Month of March
when the Winds are sharp and high.

Winter-fruit must neither lie too close nor too open, too hot nor too cold,
free from all offensive Smells, for the Fruit will be apt to attract them, and
taint.

A low Room and Cellar that is clean and sweet, either paved or boarded, but
not too close, I hold best to lay or shift your Winter-fruit into at Christmas
if it be open Weather, and so let them continue till March.

Then a Room that is celled over-head, and from the Ground, will do very well
from March till May; and ^^om thence till Michaelmas a Cellar is very proper;
^eep them in all Places from moist or sweating Walls, and from Dust or any
other Thing that is offensive.

There are some Sorts of Fruits that rarely can be kept beyond Allhollandtide,
and these must be laid by themselves, then those that will last till Christmas
by themselves, and those that last till Shrovetide by themselves, and
Pearmains, Pippins, John Apples and Winter-Russet^^gs, that will last all the
Year, by themselves; pick out the speckled or rotten ones, lest they corrupt
the rest: You need not turn the most lasting Apples till a Week before
Christmas, unless you have mixed them with others of a riper Kind, or that the
Fallings be amongst them, or much of the first Straw left amongst them. The
next proper Time to turn them is Shrovetide, and then once a Month till
Whitsuntide, and always in turn^ng lay your Heaps lower and lower, and the
Straw very Thin, but handle them at no Time in any great Frost, except they be
in a close warm Cellar. All Fruit, at every Thaw, are consequently moist, and
must not for some Time be touched, unless such as you take for present Use;
forbear them likewise during great Rains, but at these Times it may be proper
to set open your Doors and Windows, to let in the free Air, at Nine in the
Fore^oon in Winter, and at Six in Summer, but not at all in March.

To make Curious, Pleasant, Wholesome Liquors, and Wines of diverse English
Fruits, growing in Orchards and Gardens.
To make Cider.
TAKE the Apples you best fancy, or the best your Orchard yields, proper to
this use, viz. Golden Pippins, Pippins, Redstreak, or Pearmain^ when they are
indifferent ripe, which you may try by shaking of the Tree, and their easy
Falling thereupon (...) and if you have no Mill to grind them, beat with (...)
wooden Beater, very weighty, in a wooden Tub o^ Trough, well fixed and bedded
in the Earth to preven^ any Hollowness at the Bottom, till they become very
small; put in a little Sugar, or new Wort, to make them beat the easier; and
when they are mashed sufficiently, put them into a Hair-bag, filling it about
thre^ quarters full; put it into a Press of equal Wideness, we^^ fixed, and
upon it a strong Plank, then bring down the skreen or spindle upon it, directly
in the middle, wit^ an Iron Crow, and press it by turning gradually, till the
Apples are squeezed dry, having your Receiver to tak^ the Liquor as it runs
through a Fosset fixed in the Press.

This done, strain it through a course Linen cloth in^^ a Cask; put to each
Gallon an Ounce of Loaf-Suga^ and bung it up close for twenty four Hours, in
which time^ it will ferment, and be ready to work at that time (...) mix a
little fine Flower and Honey together, as big as (...) Pullets Egg; set the
Cask on a stand, where you intend it shall continue, and put it in, and then
let it work (...) which done and well settled; draw it from the Lees, and dry
it up, or for want of Bottles, into another Cask, ^sed with Water wherein a
little sweet Margorum has ^een boiled, and it will prove excellent Cider.

You may make a smaller sort, or a good cooling sort (...) Drink, by steeping
the Pressings in Water two or ^^ree Days, often stirring them, and then
pressing them (...) before.

You may make a good sort of Cider of Codlings, in (...) same manner, but let
them not be over ripe when (...) gather them; Wind-falls (presently used) will
do (...) ^ell as the best.

Pery; the best way to make it.
TAke Pears that are hasting toward ripening, but (...) have not attained to
it: of such sorts as best pleases (...) as Windsor Pears, white and red
Catharines, O^e-pears, or such as are pleasant tasted; take off the ^alks, cut
them in four Parts, and pour scalding hot ^ater to them, wherein some sliced
Pears have been ^oiled; let them steep 24 Hours, then draw the Water (...) and
preserve it.

This done, beat the Pears, as you did the Apples, and ^ess them in your Press,
in like manner strain the Li^or you receive, and put it into a Cask, and into
the (...) hang a Bag of mashed Rasins of the Sun, and a lit^ heaten Mace, for
five or six Days; and when the (...) has frothed and purged, by putting a
little warm (...) Ale-yest on the Top of it, let it settle, and draw it (...)
in Bottles, for this sort of Liquor keeps much better (...) than in any Cask;
and so when ripe, which will be (...) five or six Weeks, it will prove an
exceeding pleasant ^^d wholesome Liquor.

Mix the Pressings with the Water you drew off, and ^ey will make another good
sort of Pery, though weaker; (...) not so well to keep long.

To make Wine of Grapes.
WHEN Ripening-time comes, take away the m^ shading Leaves of the Vines, and
let the Sun h^^ full power on the Clusters for two or three Days; the^ in a dry
Day pick off those-Grapes that are the ripes^ letting the rest hang on the
Stalks to ripen kindly; a^terwards bruise and press them in a Fat or Press, man
for that purpose, in a fine Canvas-bag, but not so viol^^ hard to break the
Stones if you can avoid it, for the will give the Wine a bad Taste; then strain
it well, (...) let it settle on the Lees in such a Cask as you may dr^ it off
without disturbing the Bottom or Settling^ then season a Cask well, and dry it
with a lighted R^ that has been dipped in Brimstone, fastened to the (...) of
the Stick, and held in the Cask: Then air it well abro^ and put the Wine into
it, and stop it up close 44 Ho^ then give it a venting or purging Hole with a
Giml^ and after a Day or two stop that, and let it continue (...) the Cask or
Bottle, and it will prove as good in t^ Months or ten Weeks as any French Wine.

To make Wine of Cherries.
TAKE away the Stalks and Stones of your Cherri^ and bruise them with a round
wooden Ladle or yo^ Hands very clean washed, and when they have stood ab^ 25
Hours, and fermented, make a Rag of two clean N^kins or other fine. Linen, and
holding it over a great earthen Crock, or a wooden Vessel, pour the pulp an^
juice into it, and hang the Rag over the Vessel, that (...) much as will may
voluntarily drain; pour that out, a^ then press out the rest and strain it,
then let stand (...) while, and scum off what Froth arises; after that, po^ it
off by Inclination, and put it up into your Cask swe^^ and well seasoned,
adding a quarter of a Pound of L^^^ Sugar to a Pottle or two Quarts, and it
will deepen the Color; and when it has fermented, settled, and gro^ (...),
draw it off into Bottles, tying them over with Lea^er when corked, to keep the
Corks tight, and the ^^ngth from flying out, and in 10 or 12 Days it will (...)
excellent cooling Wine, but the longer the better.

To make good Wine of Currants.
DIck the Currants, when they are full and ripe, clean from the Stalks, put
them into an Earthen Vessel, ^d pour on them hot Water, a Quart to a Gallon of
^^rrants, bruise them well together, and let them stand (...) ferment; then
after covering close above 12 Hours, ^ain them as the Cherries; put the Liquor
up into a Cask, (...) it to a little new Ale-yest, two or three Spoonfuls; ^d
in other Things, in all respects as the Cherry wine; ^d when it has purged and
settled bottled it up.

To make excellent Goseberry-wine.
TAke the ripest Gooseberries, deprive them of the Stalk and Blossom, and pour
to a Gallon a Quart of hot Water wherein a sliced Quince has been boiled and
some of the Gooseberries; cover them 24 Hours in a very close Vessel, then
bruise them with the Water, and press our the liquid part by degrees, so that
the Stones may not be ^oken; then to a Gallon put a Pound of Loaf-Sugar, ^^d
when there is a good Settlement in an earthern Jar (...) other Vessel close
stopped, draw it off into Bottles, and (...) will keep good all the Summer and
Winter.

To make Rasberry Wine.
TAke the Rasberries clear from the Stalk, to a Gallon put a Bottle of
White Wind, and let them infuse in an earthen Vessel 2 or 3 Days close covered;
then bruise the Berries in the Wine, and through a fine Linen Bag strain, and
gently by degrees squeeze out the liquid part; let it gently simper over a very
moderate Fire, or place a Stein in which it is, on hot Wood-ashes or Embers,
scum off the Froth, or what else arises, strain it again, and with a quarter of
a Pound of Loaf-sugar to a Gallon, let it settle; then in half a Pint of
White Wind boil about an Ounce of well scented Cinnamon, and two or three Blades
of Mace, an put the Wine strained from the Spices unto it, and Bottle it up,
and so it will prove an excellent Drink and Cordial.

To make Mulberry Wine.
TAKE Mulberries just growing to be ripe, that is, when they are changing from
red to black, to a Gallon put a Quart of Rhenish Wine, let them infuse in a
close Vessel 44 Hours, and then in all respects use them as the Rasberries; and
it will be a great Cooler on no^ Weather, and a Cordial in hot Diseases. If the
Liquid be too thick, or incline to roping at any Time, ^ver when you drink it,
you may add more Wine, us best suits your Palate, and so you will find it
answer you Cost and Labor.

To make Wine of Services.
THIS, though not usual, is very pleasant and Cordial; and to make it, Take the
Services from the Stalks, when they begin to be soft, bruise them with your
Hands that you may not break the Stones, infuse them in warm Sherry, a Gallon
of them in 2 Quarts, and as much clear Small-beer, then strain, and press out
the liquid Part, fine it, and put Powder of white Sugar Candy, a quarter of a
Pound to a Gallon, and bottle it up for use.

Thus having gone through whatever I conceive material to be practiced for
Advantage and Improvement in as Orchard, etc. I shall proceed to the like in
the Delicacies of Gardening, as to what relates to Profit and Pleasure; which
will be my succeeding Task in such a degree, that nothing in Print has hitherto
come near it by many degrees.

OF GARDENING; And First of the KITCHEN-GARDEN.
That is necessary to be done and observed therein, for Setting, Sowing,
Rearing, and Bringing to Perfection Seeds, Herbs, Plants, Roots, etc.

CHAP. I.
Of the Soil, Site, and Form of a Plat of Ground, suitable to be Improved for a
Kitchen Ground.

THE main Thing in this, as in the former, is to find out a fitting Plat of
Ground; and if it be not Fertile of itself, so to cultivate and manure it, as
it may answer your Expectations, and in this especially, at first there must be
a great care taken, or you may bestow much Labor and Cost to little perpose.

The Soil of an Orchard and Garden may be said only to differ in this, that the
Soil of the latter must be somewhat dryer than the former, because Herbs and
Flower being mostly more tender than Trees, cannot well endure too much
moisture or drought in such excessi^^ Measures as Trees will do; and therefore
choosing a moderate dry Soil, if drought come, it is easier remedie^ than to
take away wetness that infests the Ground from Springs, or the Lowness of its
lying, whereby it receive^ and keeps long the Rainwater.

The Soil of your Garden must be plain and well levelled at every Square, to be
cast into the fittest Form; a^^ the reason is, the Garden-product want such
Helps (...) should stay the Water, which an Orchard has, and the Roots of
Herbs being mellow or loose, is soon either washed away, or lose their Vigor
by too much washi^^ and moisture.

Again, if a Garden soil be not clear of Weeds, especially of Knot-grass, it
will never produce any Thing kindly; and as the Richness or Barrenness of the
Soil appears to produce, so manure less or more, at first digging it up a full
Spit or something more, and trenching in the Dung; so that upon the Falling of
Showers it may so^^ indifferently alike to fertilize the whole Mass, or such
Plats as your particular Materials require: And to keep down the Weeds, sow
Ashes mingled with a little slack'd Lime, which will also destroy Worms and
other Insects that infest Walks, Alleys, Borders, devouring the Seed in the
Earth, or the tender Roots or Leaves of Plants when sprung up. This must be
done in October or November, that all Things may be well prepared against the
Spring, having your Tools and Instruments always in a Readiness, that no
Occasion may be omitted to facilitate the Work in its proper Season.

As for the Site of your Garden, it may be the same with that of your Orchard,
seeing they both tend to one main end, of Profit and Pleasure; however, the
leveller it lies, the more commodiously it produces. It must not be much
exposed to bleak Winds, for there are many tender Herbs, Flowers, and Plants,
necessary to be sowed, set, (...) planted, which will not live if that be
admitted, and (...) will well prosper; and therefore the Garden-plat ^^st be
well Fenced and Secured from the North, and ^^rth east Winds, especially with
high Walls or good ^icksets, well lined and thickened with Shrubs at the ^^tom,
not only to keep out the Cold, but Cats, Dogs, ^^res, Conies, and other Things
that greatly annoy Gar^^ns, especially in their first Propagating, by Breaking
(...) Spoiling the tender Plants of Flowers; as likewise do ^^ultry, which must
not be permitted to enter.

Let your Garden-plat be designed; as near as you can, (...) good wholesome
Air, not near any Fenny or Marshy ^^ces, or any other whence Damps, Fogs, or
Stenches ^ay arise, or Blasting Infectious Airs, to blite or Poison ^he Plants,
Herbs, or Flowers.

As for the Form of the whole Plat of Ground, the ^^are is accounted most
Commodious; next that the (...), the Oct-angular; but here I can see no general
^^le, because every Ground cannot be accordingly pro^^rtioned, and therefore it
must be done as the conveni^^ty will admit; but as for special Forms; in the
lesser ^^^dens, they are divided into many, and particularly s^^ares; and of
the Knots, and other Fancies, there are (...) many Devices as the Gardener's
Invention will admit (...); for which the Skilful are to be commended in
bringing with them. Boards nailed to the Stakes driven well in the Ground into
various curious Figures, or to do it in naturally by setting of Box, Aysop,
Privet, Marjorum, Lavender, Draff, Rosemary, or the like, in various Circiling,
Intwining, or Mazy Forms, so that Herbs, Flowers, and curious greens may grow
in their proper order exceeding delightful to the Eye These may be made of
green Turf planted with double Dazies or Violets, made up with Brick, Tile,
Trotter-bones, or the like; but they are best raised with Boards: And indeed in
Knots they are great Varieties, as the Diamond-Squares, or Ground-plat; for
Knots, the Cinquefoil, or many Mazy Branches like the Leaves of Cinquefoil; the
Cross-bow, or Four bendings from the outsides of the Square, like the Heads or
Bending of Cross-bows, with a Diamond and a Square at the midst of it, and
other Flourishes to fill up the Vacancies of the Angels and Bends: The
Interwoven, or Knot^ flourished Diamond; the Oval, the Maze, or Labyrinth's and
many more, which in Words cannot be well expressed, but rather require Figures,
being far more obviou^ to the Eye than to the Ear, and of which I shall have
more occasion to speak of when I come to Treat of Choice Flowers, etc. and
therefore at present I sha^^ proceed to other Matters.

Further Directions for the well ordering this kind of Garden in many material
Particulars: in its Sight, and Furnishing it with Herbs, Plants, etc.
AS for the Quantity of a Plat of Ground to make a Suitable Garden, there can
be no particular Rules given, but every one may take such a Proportion of
Ground as convenience will admit: But let me caution all, not to undertake more
than can be well looked after with Hands enough for the well Management of
Things in their proper Seasons; for a small Plat of Ground well ordered, turns
to greater Advantage than a large one neglected, or that upon sundry Occasions
cannot be so well compassed in due time; for if the Weeds get the Mastery for
want of Hands to rid them, it will not be easy to root them out: Also watering
a large Garden in droughty Weather, requires much Time and Pains; and therefore
my Opinion is, That one of a moderate Quantity of good Ground is to be
preferred, and may produce a sufficiency of Herbs and Roots for use, and a
supply for the Market. But to come nearer to the intended Purpose.

Herbs are of two Sorts, one for Scent and pleasant Prospect; the other for
Food; and therefore it is proper they be sowed or planted separate, and not too
much mingled together, to hinder each others Growth by the ^ers over Topping
and shadowing the lesser; and before the Garden for Flowers and curious Herbs,
^t to be separated from the Kitchen-Garden, by some ^inction, (though one Plat of
Ground may contain them (...)) because your Garden-flowers will not only suffer
grace, but he annoyed, if among them you sow Oni^ Lettice, Carrots, Parsnips,
and the like, which ^wn in their due Season, must moreover leave Rough^ and
Deformity on the Earth, and if not set at a con^ent distance, take up the Roots
of the Flowers (...) them, and make a Confusion and Disorder, where ^^er and
Comeliness should be: Besides, the Times of ^^ng and ordering them are various,
and the Ground (...) much stirred for the Planting the one, injures the (...)
other; Cabbages, Colliflowers, Colworts, and the ^t, making great shadows to
keep out the Sunbeams: ^sparagus, and the like, run its Root much spreading,
which drawing up, brings away with it those lesser ^ants and Flowers it has
undermined or entangled: And ^o many other Things in their fading Time are to
be ^^n, and others planted in their steads. And in the ^itchen-Garden you need
not be at the trouble to raise (...). Beds so high as in the Summer-Garden, yet
it is re^^site you leave Alleys to go between, for the Advantage ^f Weeding,
and gathering what is necessary in due Sea^^n, without treading on or any ways
Bruising what re^^ins, for these Kind of Herbs and Roots will go deeper (...)
the Ground, as requiring more wet than the other, (...) will better endure it:
Yet here you must observe to place your Herbs of the biggest Growth by
themselves, ^^at all may have a proportion of the Sun's Heat, and the ^^eeness
of the Air, to make them thrive, and come kindly on for use, setting the
biggest in the out Parts of ^quares, or Borders, and the lowest in the middle.

The several Growths of Herbs and Plants distinguished, (...) know the better
how to place them.
THOUGH Garden Herbs, Flowers, etc. are various a^^ very numerous, it in some
Measure they may (...) divided into two Sorts: and briefly thus:

Of the Tallest Growth, are
Angelica, Fennel, Tansie, Holly-Hocks, Elecampa^ Loveage, Succory, Lillies,
French Poppy, Endine, Fre^ Mallows, Clary, and such like.

Of the Middle Growth, are
Alexander, Cardus benedictus, Langdibief, Occu^ Christi, Aniseeds, Coriander,
Featherfew, Wall-flowers Gilliflowers, Bugloss, Parsley, Marigolds, Beets,
B^^rage, Lavender, Camfry, and the like.

Of the Smaller Growth, are,
Tansie, Hearts-ease, Marjorum, Savory, Leeks, Chive^ Chibals, Liquorice,
Strawberries, Hysop; Peniroyal, Scu^vy-grass, Time, Wood Sorrel, and many
others, too ^dious here to enumerate, and therefore I have given the^ as a
Taste, and many others will follow in their d^^ Place.

In the most Sunny places of your Garden place the te^derest Plants, or such as
you would have forward; observing to keep them as warm as their Nature require^
either with Soil or Covering; when sharp Winds are abroad, the Weather is
Nipping, or that Blites or Bla^ are expected.

^^ry sorts of useful Herbs, their Increase, well Ordering, and Preserving, etc.
^T will not be convenient that I give Instructions for the (...) well Ordering
and Renewing Herbs, etc. proper for (...) Kitchen-Garden. And of these in Order.

Angelica is renewed, with the Seed which it bears in ^^ty the second Year, and
then fades. You may re^^e the Roots the first Year: And then in this man^ you
may use Alexanders.

Aniseeds make their Growth the first Year, and bear ^ch Seed, by which they
must be renewed the next; (...) also Coriander.

Borrage and Bugloss are wholesome Pot Herbs, and ^^^y Cordial Herbs otherwise
used: They are also re^ewed by Seed.

Camomile will easily grow, being set of divided Roots (...) Banks not too
moist; and the more it is pressed, the ^uer it will thrive.

Chibals, or Chives, part in the Root like Lillies, and ^^st be renewed by
transplanting the smaller Roots every ^d or fourth Year.

Clary is produced of the Seed, and Seeds every second Year.

Coast-root parted may be set in March, and then it will ^ar the second Year.

Elecampane and Lovage are long lasting; they Seed ^early, and in transplanting
you may divide the Roots.

Endive, Succory, and Fennel, divide the Roots and you ^ay remove them before
they put forth their shanks.

Featherfew increases by shedding its Seed, without ^owing.

Hysop may be set by slips or young Roots, and is long ^asting, growing
indifferently in most Grounds.

Leeks seed the second Year unremoved, yet, unless ^ou then remove them, they
die.

Lavender Spike is proper to be removed every Seven (...) Eight Years: Slips
twined of these, as also Hysop and Sage, take Root, if set warm, at Michaelmas.
White Lavender must be sooner removed or transplanted.

Lettice Seeds the first Year, and dies; yet you may transplant them for
Winter-Lettice, and prevent their runni^ to Seed.

Mallows, French or Jagged, Seed the First or Seco^^ Year. Sow them in March.

Marigolds are usually produced of Seeds, and you m^^ transplant them when two
Inches grown.

Occulus Christi Seeds and dies the first Year.

Parsley is sown of Seed the first Year, and Seeds the Secon^

Penyroyal or Pudding-Grass lasts long, spreading d^^ new Roots, which may be
divided into Multitudes, and removed, and is an excellent Pot-herb.

Rosemary may be improved by Seed, or set in Slips immediately after
Lammas-tide, in a moist good Earth.

Rule or Herb of Grace, is an excellent Preserver (...) Health, as also Gardus;
this will grow of Slips.

Saffron is proper for this Garden, as being a great C^dial at need. Remove the
Roots every three Years: (...) Flowers at Michaelmas, when the Chives of
Saffron m^ be gathered.

Sage may be kept from Seeding, by cutting the aspiring Tops; then it will
spread, increase in Leaves and Sprouting

Savory Seeds the first Year and dies.

Sweet Sicily, is either to be sown of Seeds, or the dividing of Roots; and
transplanting, it lasts long.

Thyme may be increased either of Slips, Roots or Seeds (...) and if you let it
not run to Seed, which you may prevent by Topping, it will last three or four
Years at least.

Sweet Marjorum is produced best by Seeds, but not lasting; feeding and dying
the first Year mostly.

Charvil is improved of Seed, and will continue some time.

Tansy, or Garden-mint, are easily propagated by Seeds, or divided Roots, and
will flourish and continue a long time. And though there are others I might set
down, let th^^ suffice as a sufficient Store for this kind of Garden.

Rule in general for ordering Herbs, etc.
^N setting Herbs, ever observe to leave the Tops no more than a Handful above
the Ground, and the ^^s a Foot under the Earth.

^wine the Roots of the Herbs you set, unless too brit^ Observe always to sow
dry, and set moist.

^et Slips without Shanks at any time except very hot ^^ther, as about
Midsummer, and in hard Frosts: And ^^ent such from Seeding as you would have
continue (...) for that weakens and decays the Root by drawing Heat from it.

^^ther Herbs when the Sap is full in the Top of them. ^^ce Pensroyal,
Camomile, Dasies, etc. on Banks.

Artichoaks, Cabbages, Parsnips, Carrots, Saffron, ^^roots, Onions,
Colliflowers, Colwort, Savoys, etc. ^^uire whole Plats of Ground for their
better thriving; (...) set at Distance, they may be interlined with other
^^ings of low Growth. Gather all your Seeds ripe and (...), and lay not Heaps
of Dung to the Roots of Herbs, the Over-rankness burn them up.

^et Herbs and Plants distant according to the greatness smallness of them.

Such Herbs as you intend to gather for drying to keep (...) ^se all the
Winter, do it about Lammas-tide; dry ^em in the Shade, that the Sun draw not
out their Vir^, but in a clear Air, and brezy Wind, that no Musti^ may taint
them; then on Lines hang the Bundles ^^y thin cross a Room where usually there
is a Fire ^^de in the Winter.

Thus far having directed you in what is most material (...) the Furnishing and
Ordering the Kitchen-Garden, as Herbs, etc. I shall now show you what is proper
to be (...) relating to Roots and other Things, not, or but very ^^ly, touched
on.

Of Roots proper for the Kitchen-Garden, their well Ord^^ing and Improvement.
ROOTS are one of the main Things to be con^dered in a Kitchen-Garden; and the
chief of the for Sweetness and good Nourishment is the

Parsnip. This is proper to be sown in the Spring, rich and well stirred mellow
Soil that is deep dug, so the their Roots, with little Interruption, may
descend, a^ grow in compass: And when you perceive they (...) grown to some
bigness, tread down the Tops, that Roots may grow the larger. In the Winter
Seas^ when you take them out of the Ground, beware of ^ting them: Take off the
Mould clean; and if you (...) to keep them, you may put them in Sand, which
(...) preserve them a long time; the fairest you may let (...) to Seed to
supply another Crop, Trenching and Mell^ing the Ground in which you sow them,
to keep the as much as may be from wet.

The Skirt-Root is a very sweet Root, much nourishi^^ and provocative: It is
well raised in a light and (...) Mould, which may be done of Slips planted in
Ro^ or Ranges in the Springtime, about half a Foot distanc^ In Winter, when
you take up the Roots it will not (...) amiss that you lay the Tops in the
Earth till the Spri^ for your further increase.

Radishes are easily produced of Seed, yet require good black mellow Mould,
that they may grow la^ and deep, and such Grounds as no Soakings or Spewin^ of
Water are in, to rot or spoil them.

Potatoes, in good fat Garden-Mould thrive a main, an^ if the Roots be
accidentally cut with a Spade, or other wise, each part of it will grow, and
recovering the Wound, turn a perfect Root. And so little Care the require, when
once well taken in the Ground, that the can hardly be got out.

Jerusalem-Artichoakes are somewhat of the Nature (...) ^^toes, but more soft
and flashy when boiled, and will (...) as Potatoes in any good Mould, and
continue with renewing for many Years; and to propagate these, them with a
Stick, they growing end upward.

^^aions are necessary for Sallets or (shread with Pot^s) Broth, Sauces, or
diverse other Uses. They best ^ive in a fat warm Soil, and are proper to be sown
in ^rch, or the beginning of April; for if sown sooner, (...) must be covered
at first to keep them from the ^lls of extreme Cold; and where they grow very
thick, (...) must be drawn whilst Young, for the use of the ^hen, or be
transplanted; and when they are grown (...) reasonable bigness, you may tread
down the Spin^ or Stalks, that the Root may yet grow bigger. (...) prosper well
when sown with Bay Salt, and are to be drawn the latter end of August in a dry
Season; (...) being rubbed clean, tied in Bunches, and hung up in moderate dry
Out-House, or laid thin in Straw, that being well dried they may be made up in
Bundles, or ^es, or disposed of by Measure, as the Custom for (...) is; some of
the largest you may let stand for Seed, ^gain a fresh supply the next Season.

Garlic is a very useful Root in many cases, but most ^ysical. In any rich
Ground it prospers with a little ^re regard than Sowing or Setting taken of it.
It pro^es in a little time a wonderful increase, and despises ^e Injury of
Weather above all Roots: And if the Tops (...) kept down, the Roots will grow
much the larger.

Turnips, though usually grown in the Field, yet pro^er best in a good Garden
Soil, being propagated from ^e Seed; and when they come up, which may be ear^r
or later, as you sow them, they must be Howed, (...) kept pretty thin, the
better to propagate. Sow a ^e slacked Lime with the seeds, to keep the Insects
^n destroying them on the Ground, or to prevent Worm-eaten Roots; or if the
Caterpillar, Slug, or Snail, ^ake the new sprung Plant, do the like upon them,
and (...) few showers will bring them up apace. When you ^raw them, leave the
largest for seed.

Beans, Pease, Artichoaks, Asparagus, Cabbages, C^^flowers, Savoys, Lettice,
etc. to order and improve^
BEans are proper to the Kitchen-Garden: Set the in distant Rows in the utmost
Parts of it wit^ setting Stick. They thrive best in a rich stiff Land, (...)
are to be put in, to make them forward and large, ab^ 5 or 6 Inches in the
Ground, between St. Andrew's-D^ and Christmas, observing to do it at the Wane
of (...) Moon, especially in an open Winter; but if the (...) comes hard after
your Beans are spired, it will go ne^ destroy them, or stint their Growth when
come up; (...) therefore if you apprehend this Danger, you may de^ your setting
till Candlemas. Set them at an equal ^stance one from another by a Line, that
they may (...) room to grow up without encumbering each other, (...) the Air
pass more freely between them; as also the S^ warm Beams to mature them. Range
them for a be^ convenience of the Sun, from South or North; and betw^ the
Ranges, for the better improvement of the Grou^ you may sow Carrots, Lettice,
Beats, or the like.

To make Beans grow well, if you sow them in (...) Spring, steep them in Water
wherein Cow Dung and (...) Dregs of Oil have been well mixed: When they first
(...) hoe the Earth, or refresh the tender Stalks, and cut the Weeds that
incumber them, when they have podd^ cut off the Tops, which will make an
excellent Dish b^ed and buttered; besides, the Pods and Beans will (...) the
larger, having the more Juice to nourish them from the Root: Stripe not off
those that are first Ripe, (...) that wounds the Stalks, and hinders the Growth
of oth^ Pods, but rather cut them off with a Knife.

Garden Pease, for forwardness, largeness, and swe^ness, above those of the
Field, are in great Esteem; a^^ of these there are several Sorts that may be
sown or s^ some for Earliness, others for Largeness and Pleasa^ness of Taste,
others for their Lateness, when the us^ (...) is out of Season. The Hotspur's
become the soonest (...) of all others from their Time of sowing: To these
^ceed the large white Pease; after them the large ^e Hastings: and after them
the large Rounceval: ^en later than these comes those called, from their
^eetness, Sugar-Pease, which in their Pods are much ^wered by the Birds, and
therefore must, as much as (...) be kept from them.

As for the Ground these best thrive in, if you would ^e them large it must be
a rich Mould; but they will ^e more tender and sweet in a warm ordinary Soil.

As for those you design early, sow them the latter end September, or beginning
of October, that so before the ^st takes them they may get good Sprouting, and
some ^d; and if the Slugs or white Snales come upon them, ^ter Lime on the
Rills, and it will both destroy them keep the Roots warm from the Frost.

(...) you would have a latter Crop of Pease, sow them ^le before
Midsummer-tide, after a Shower is fallen, or ^e Earth be moist with the
Descending of the Dews: Lay ^m deeper than the former in your Rills, that the
Sun ^ay not too much make away the Moisture of the Earth from them: When they
come up, draw the Earth to ^em with a Hoe, and keep the Alleys free from Weeds;
^d so do twice or thrice, till they have got a Head, and ^vercome the Weeds;
and thus they will come to Perfe^ion, and be fit for the Table in September. As
for Roun^vals, you may set them with a Stick as you do Beans; ^d if you would
have them grow high, crop off the ^ops, which will make an excellent boiled
Sallet; and set the Bushes or Sticks in the Rows or Intervails, that their
^ines may take hold on, and the easier raise the weight ^f the Hawn from the
Ground, that the Sun may ripen ^e Pods the better, and bring the Pease to a
larger and ^er Perfection than otherwise, lying on the Ground, ^y would be.
French, or Kidneys-Beans, are very neces^^ry for furnishing out the
Kitchen-Garden with whole^ome Food in the proper Season. These are to be set in
a mellow Ground; set them with Setting-sticks, as oth^ Beans, and when they
spring up, set Wands with S^ or Branches to twist about, that they may rise and
spre^ more to the Sun for ripening the Pods; if when the^ grow up in Summer,
the Weather be very dry, wa^ them, or the Stalks will pine for want of
Moisture, a^ not produce the desired Effect. The Snails are great a^noyers of
these Beans, and therefore whilst they are ^der they must be looked well after,
and cleared of 'em.

Artichoakes are greatly in esteem for their good Tas^ pleasant Nourishment,
and their lasting a long Season, (...) there is difficulty required in raising
and bringing 'em to b^ a full Largeness; but briefly take the following
Direction

Prepare the Ground very well you intend to raise the Plants in, mix it very
deep with good mellow Du^ trench it well, and raise a little, laying it pretty
light^ then for Plants take the slips that grow by the sides (...) the Roots of
the old Stubs, which plant about the begi^ning of April, or sooner if the great
Frosts are over: A^ you must take care to Water them till they are firmly
Rooted, when kindly Rains fall, and the Season be ver^ dry; plant them about
four Foot asunder, if in a Ri^ Ground, that they may spread, and their Heads be
the larger: But if you expect not large ones, by reason the Soil will not
produce them, you may plant them nearer.

To preserve the Root for sending up new Shouls, when the Fruit is cut, leave
the Stalks about 4 Inches from the Ground, raise the Earth lightly about them
to kee^ them warm in the Winter, and afterward, covering the^ with Litter,
Straw, or long Dung, yet not too close, to moldy, or rot them; and when the
Winter is past, uncover them by little and little, at three different times
with about four Days Interval between, lest the Air coming too suddenly to
them, injure them, being as yet tender*

This done, dress, dig about them, and trim them ver^ well, taking of the small
slips to transplant, not leavin^ above three of the strongest and most likely
thriving to the Foot of each Root for Bearers, and supply the Roots a^ deep as
conveniently as you can, with good fat Mould.

Every fifth Year it is proper to renew the whole Plan^on, because too long
standing in one Place impove^es the Earth, that it produces but small Choaks;
yet (...) good deep mellow Ground you may permit them to ^ntinue, if you see
fit, till eight Years or longer.

Asparagus makes another dainty Dish, and is highly ^ecessary to be planted in
the Kitchen Garden. This is ^ised of Seed, requiring a good fat Soil, and two
Years ^owth may be transplanted into Beds.

These Beds must be well prepared with Dung, first ^ging about two Foot deep,
and four Foot wide, made ^el at the Bottom; and so with some of the Mould (...)
goodrotten Dung, and fill them up, considering it ^ill sink; then at about two
Foot distance put in the ^ants; and in such a Bed you may plant three or four
^ows, and in Time they will extend themselves through^t the whole Bed.

Let them take good Root before you cut them, that the ^oots may grow as strong
and large and not be stunted (...) stubbed with unseasonable cutting; the small
ones you ^ay leave, that the Roots may grow bigger, permitting ^ose that spring
up at the end of the Season, to run up (...) Seed, which will turn to good
Advantage.

At the beginning of the Winter, when you have cut up the ^alks, cover the Beds
4 or 5 Fingers thick with good ^ould mixed with good new House-dung, which will
^eserve the Roots from the Frost, and about the middle ^f March, if the hard
Frosts are over, uncover the Beds, ^d spread good fresh Mould over them about
two Fin^ers thick, or somewhat more, and lay the Dung in the ^lleys, or some
place near them, that it may rot, and be (...) a Readiness to renew them when
Occasion requires it.

If you take the Asparagus Root about the beginning of ^anuary, and plant them
in a hot Bed, with good De^ces from the Frost, the Weather being open, and the
^n any thing warm, you may have Asparagus at Candle^s; when yon cut the
Asparagus, remove a little of the Earth from about the Bottom, and cut as near
the Roo^ as you can; but beware you do not cut or wound thos^ that are peeping
up, or not yet appearing above the Earth

Colliflowers take a due Place in this Garden; and o^ these you may either sow
the Seeds in August, and carefully preserve them from the Injuries of Winter,
or yo^ may raise them on your Leaf Beds in the Spring, and remove the young
Plants, when they have differe^ large Leaves, into good Ground prepared for the
Pu^pose: But the approved way is to dig small Pits, a^ fill them with good
light Mould, and therein plant y^ Colliflowers, which you must take care to
water, espe^ally in dry Seasons.

Cabbages are another great Advantage, and these ar^ of several Colors and
Forms; though in this Place I sha^ take Notice of the ordinary Country Cabbage
only, an^ of others elsewhere.

Sow the Seed at any convenient Time between Midsummer and Michaelmas, so that
growing up whilst the Weather is warm, it may gain strength to defend itse^
against the violence of the Winter, which is howeve^ many times too sharp for
them; or you may raise the^ on hot Beds in the Spring; Transplant them in April
(...) to well stirred and good rich Mould; and to have the^ large, it must be
warm and light Soil, and they m^ daily be watered till they have taken good
Root, the ordinary Ground well dug and manured will pr^duce Store. The Seed
you reserve must be of the be^ Cabbages, placed during the Winter, low in the
Ground to preserve them from the sharp Winds and Frosts, co^ them with earthen
Pots and warm Soil over the Po^ and when the Spring comes plant them forth.

Savoys are a kind of Cabbages, though not coming to t^ Firmness and Magnitude of
the other, yet are swee^ and earlier than the common Cabbage; and this may
planted and raised as the other; also may, the small D^ Cabbage, and the long
loose Cabbage of a Musky Sc^ are the sweetest of all others.

Pumpions or Pumkins, are very useful in many cases, ^d to raise them, plant
the Seed first in good Mould in warm Place, and when they are fairly risen,
transplant ^m into a Dung-bed made to that End, and now and ^en water them with
Water wherein Pigeons Dung (...) been steeped, and then about Blossoming-time;
take ^y all the By-shoots, leaving one or two main Vines (...) Runners, and
beware not to hurt the Heads of them, (...) this small Weed, as I may term it,
will produce ^it of a prodigious Bigness.

^ettice cannot be omitted in this Garden, as being an ^llent cooling Sallad
raw or boiled, and is easily rai^ of the Seed growing in any tolerable good
Ground. (...) you have a Desire to have them white, or as the ^h term it to
blanch them, then when they are head^ and begin to Cabbage, bind them about in
a fair Day ^en the Dew is off them with Straws, or raw Hemp, ^er the Plants
with small earthen Pots, and lay some (...) on them, and so they will become
white.

Beats are of singular use, being a very wholesome Pot^b, they must be sowed;
and then transplanted into a (...) Soil, they are usually sown in the Spring,
and the ^ots left in the Ground, will produce fresh Leaves any Years.

(...) Beds; how to prepare and fit them for such Things as require to be set
in them.
WHere the Ground in Garden-plats is naturally cold, Art must be used to
callify or heat it, lest in set^g or sowing many Plants or Seeds you lose your
Labor ^arges, and what is more vexatious, your Expectation. ^f the Land be of
a light and warm Nature of itself, ^re is required no more than common
House-dung or ^w-dung to be mixed with the Mould in Trenching and ^ging, and
that will sufficiently enrich it.

But where Mould inclines to a cold Clay, or a Ground ^'s stubborn or stiff,
mingle some light Sand with it, or at least some light and very fertile Mould,
and make (...) Laystall of Dung with this Compost in some convenien^ Place, let
it lie and rot, the better to mingle it, a whol^ Winter, and in the Spring it
will prove good warm M^nure to cherish and enliven the Roots of your Plants a^
make warm Beds by mixing it with a good Quantity (...) tho Natural Soil, and
the best of this kind is Sheeps dung^ that of Pigeons or Poultry.

When you have made a Bed manured with this Du^ well mixed with the Soil to the
depth of a Spades gra^ or more, rake it over as even as may be with an Iron ra^
and the Mould and Dung being made fine, you may so^ your Seeds thereon, as
Mellons, Cucumbers, Onions, Lee^ or the like, but the two former, separate from
the latt^ then take them in as even distance os you can, for of the first two a
few Seeds are sufficient, then put fine f^ Mould in a very wide Sieve, and
riddle it over the See^ about an Inch or more, and the Product willl answer.

If you must choose a Plat of Ground, necessity so ^ing, there being no other to
be had, where the ble^ Winds power to beat upon it, notwithstanding all the ca^
of Fencing, etc. Then lay your Ground up in Ridges (...) Foot or two in height,
somewhat upright on the back (...) North-side, and more sloping or shelving to
the Sout^ward, and it may be laid about three or four Foot bro^ on that side
you sow, especially tender Seeds, and o^ Bank lying behind another, the Ground
that rises will ke^ off the bleak and nipping Winds, so that they will in (...)
great measure fly over the tender Plants new sprouting (...) or when they are
somewhat grown, and the Sun will h^ more force upon them to make them grow up
and ripe^ and this will do well where the Ground is over moist, (...) that
Things affecting Moisture may be set low, and Thi^ of a drier bearance higher.

In February, or earlier, you may make a hot Bed (...) Cucumbers, Mellons,
Radishes, Colliflowers, etc. in (...) warmest Place of your Ground, desended
from Winds (...) much may, by Pails, Walls, or Reed-fences, about six (...)
seven Foot high, of such a distance or capacity as the ^ccasion requires; then
you must raise your Bed about two or three Foot high, and about three or four
over, of new ^ogs dung, or at least, not above six, eight or ten Days old,
reading it very hard down on the Top; and the better (...) keep up the sides,
if there be occasion, place Boards, ^y fine rich Mould about three or four
Inches thick, and when the extreme ferment or heat of the Beds is over, which
you may perceive at the end of five or six Days, by ^rusting in your Find, then
set out or sow your Seeds (...) the Magnitude or Nature of them requires.

This done, erect some little forked Sticks four or five ^ches above the Bed
that may support the Frame of ^icks which must be laid over, and then covered
with ^raw, defend the Plants or Seeds from the Wet or Cold, only in a warm Day
you may open your Covering (...) Hour before, and after Noon, and when they
shoot still earth them up to keep the lower part warm, and when they are pretty
well grown, and the Season enables them to bear the Weather, you may transplant
them.

Watering; the proper Time; and what Plants, Herbs, etc. most require it; and
in what Seasons.
WAtering is one Thing exceeding necessary, and some Plants require it much
more than others, or especially in dry Seasons they would be burnt up, they
must be mended with Water on their first Removal, at whatsoever Season it be,
and therefore not to be neglected, though early in the Spring, yet be cautious
in Watering the Leafs of the young and tender Plants, rather confine it to the
Earth about the Root, lest the Heat mildew and injure them.

When the Plants or Seeds are more hardy, yet you find the Nights very cold,
water in the Forenoon, but when the Nights are warm, and the Weather Warm, let
it be done in the Evening after Sunset, you may m^ your Water with a little
fine Mould, to take away the Harshness of it; if it be Spring Water, or be
drawn from some cold Pit or Well, let it stand in the Sun in Tubs (...) heat
and air well, but Pond or River-water is more so^ and natural to Plants or
Herbs; and the better to atte^ it, and render it more acceptable, you may
infuse in it He^ dung, Pigeons, or Sheeps dung, and it will better even your
Plants. For Plants that are, or are to be la^ Cabbages, Colliflowers,
Artichoaks, etc. you may (...) the Ground sink a little like the Indenting of
an Oyst^ shell, that the Winter may the more direct press to (...) Root, yet
Excess of Watering is dangerous, for o^ abundance will be apt to wash the
Vigitive fertile S^ out of the Ground about the Root of the Plant, and i^
poverish it.

And you had better water seldom, and do it thoroughly well, than often, and do
it scanty, for if the Wa^ comes not to the Bottom of the Root, that the Fibr^
may suck Moisture, it little avails.

If the Season or Ground be very dry, when you s^ Seeds, sow them somewhat
deeper, but water them (...) till they have been in the Ground several Days,
and (...) is well settled about them.

When you transplant, water the Plant in Setting, (...) not superabundantly,
lest it chill the Root or Ground to^ much.

Observe that the Water run not into Puddles, but (...) well and equally
distributed with a Watering-pot, (...) other Vessel that has a Sievy Nose, and
by that Me^ it will be sprinkled softly, not for sorcing upon the Earth, but
delating and gradually sinking into it to r^fresh the Plants, etc.

The several Sorts of Strawberries, the Manner of Setti^ Transplanting, and
Improving them.
STrawberries are very material to be produced, f^ the furnishing out of
Banquets, and many oth^ Things, and of these there are diverse Sorts worthy of a
^ardener's Care.

The great sort thrive excellent well in new broken ^eds, or in such Places as
they have not before grown, ^specially on the Sides of mellow Banks, where the
Force ^f the Sun is convenient to nourish them.

As for the ordinary red ones, you may furnish your^elf with store of their
Roots in new fallen Copsis, or in ^nding Woods, where Vacancies or Avenues lie
open to ^e Sun.

The ordinary red and white Strawberries may be ei^er planted in Beds, or the
Sides of Banks, as your ^arden gives most convenience, and will hold there for
(...) long Time, but the large ones must be kept stringed and removed every two
or three Years, and they require not so much the Sunbeams as the other; they
de^ight much in a sandy soil, and the best Plants are such as come of the
strings, if well planted and ordered.

There are a sort of green Strawberries, though not of common use, and but in few
Places to be found, and ^hey lie on the Ground under the slender and tall
Leaves, ^ery green in Color, and sweet in Taste.

There is yet another sort, a very excellent scarlet Co^our, such as they call
New England, and there abound (...) great Plenty; but here they will grow well,
as has ^een proved in diverse curious Gardens, delighting in a mellow fat soil
somewhat sandy.

To preserve these several sorts over the Winter, that ^ay come earlier and
prove better, cover them from ^he Frosts with a little Straw, Peashawm, or such
like ^elter; and if you would have Strawberries in Autumn (...) away the first
Blossoms, and being hindered blowing (...) the Spring, they will blow anew much
later, and bear ^n the latter Season.

To make Strawberries very large; when they have (...) one bearing, cut them to
the Ground, keep their spires ^own, strew Cow Dung, or Pidgeon-dung on them,
and wa^er them after it.

THE Gardener's Almanac: OR, Things proper to be done i^ the Kitchen-Garden,
in the several Months of the Year.
Aquarius, or the Skinker. JANUARY,
What is required to be done in the KitchenGarden this Month.

THIS Month prepare Dung for your Garden; an^ the Dung of Pigeons or Poultry
is excellent (...) Asparagus and Strawberries, etc. when it has passed the
first Heat.

Dress your sweet-herb. Beds rather every second Yea^ with new Mould, then Dung
or over-strong or rank Soi^dig Borders, set Beans and Pease; sow if you think
co^venient, for early Colliflowers; sow Lettice, Radishe^ Charvil, and other
more curious Salleting; and if y^^ see it convenient, raise your hot Beds.

Set up Traps for Vermin among bulkous Roots, that will now be in Danger.

Pisces, or the Fishes. FEBRUARY,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this month.

THIS Month sow Beans, Pease, Rouncevals, Marigolds, Corn, Salleting, Radishes,
Parsnips, Anniseeds, Garlic, Onions, Carrots: Plant forth your Cabbages, also
Potatoes, which may be set in some Corner in the worst of your Ground; sow
Parsley, Spinach, and hardy Potherbs that will endure the Weather. Still plant
Colliflowers, to have them early; make a beginning of your hot Beds for choice
Plants, as Cucumbers, Mellons, to be sowed in the Full of the Moon, but rely
not altogether on them. Sow Asparagus, etc.

Things of the last Month are yet in Season; and indeed most Winter Roots and
Plants continue the Winter-months, except spoiled by excessive Rains, melting
of Snow-water, or violent Extremity of Frosts, which however rarely fall out in
all Gardens, and may be prevented.

Aries, or the Ram. MARCH,
Things necessary to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this Month.

THIS Month dung and trench well your Ground where it is required; and it is
the most proper and chiefest season for raising hot Beds for Gourds, Mellons,
Cucumbers, etc. which about the sixth, eighth, or tenth Day, will be in a good
liking to receive the Seeds: prick them forth at a distance according to a true
Method.

If you design them later, ten or twelve Days after the first begin again, and
proceed to the like a third Time, ever remembering to keep your hot Beds, as
much as may be from showers, the Dropping of Trees, or Eaves of Houses; for if
the Heat be too violent, you may easily cool them, but not ad^ Heat when once
spent, without new making up again

Slip and set Lavender, Sage, Thyme, Rosemary, and other lasting Herbs, Shrubs,
etc.

Sow in the beginnning of this Month, Endive, Leeks, Radish, Succory, Peets,
Chard Beet, Parsnips, Skerrers, the latter in fresh Earth, that is rich and
mellow; when pretty moist, place but one Root in a Hole, keeping a Foot
distance between them.

You may now sow Sorrel, Parsley, Bugloss, Charvil, Borage, Sallery, Small-age,
Alexander, etc. and several of these will continue many Years without renewing,
and most of them may be blanched by earthing up, and laying on Litter over them.

Sow like Onions, Garlic, Orach, Purslain, Turnips, (to have early) Monthly,
Pease, etc. Transplant Beer-Ghard, sowed in August, and the Chards will be very
large.

Sow Cresses, Fennel, Marjorum, Carrots, Cabbages, Basil, etc. But whatever of
these sorts you plant or sow, be not very hasty in Watering them, nor too much,
by reason it will close and harden the Ground; therefore in Watering, do it not
with too great a stream, but rather labor to imitate the Fall of moderate
showers.

About the middle of this Month dress up and string the Strawberry-beds,
uncover Asparagus, loosning and spreading the Mould about them, the better to
give them ease in penetrating: And now you may transplant their Roots to
furnish new Beds.

Stake and bind up your weakest Herbs and Plants against the Violence of Winds
that usually happen in this Month. Sow Lapins, and such seeds as the spring
requires to bring forward, and keep all Weeds down as low as may be; see to the
Repairing the Banks or Borders in Alleys or Walks, and secure your seeds newly
sown, from Birds or Insects.

Taurus, or the Bull. APRIL,
Things necessary to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this Month.

THis Month, about the beginning, sow sweet Marjorum, Hysop, Thyme, Scurvy
Grass, Basil, Winter-savory, and indeed all tender seeds that are desirous of
hot Beds. All sweet Herbs require to be stirred up and new molded, that they
may then well take fresh Root.

Sow Purslane, Colliflowers, Lettice, Radish, and the like: You may sow Carrots
and Radish together in one Bed, but so, that one may be drawn before the other
is much advanced; also Lettice, Purslane, Parsnip, and Carrots on the Ground,
where the Plat is small; then you must consider to take each in its proper
Season, so that one may not incumber the other; though it would be more
advantageous to change the Ground for Parsnips and Carrots now and then.

Plant Artichoak slips, sow Turnips to have them early, and set French-beans.

As yet you may slip Lavender, Sage, Penniroyal, Rosemary, etc. and the more
you clip them, the better they will thrive, and continue the longer without
Transplanting, especially Sage so served in Spring and Autumn.

To have very good Salleting all the Year, plant Purslane, Lettice, Radish,
etc. in Summer, on very rich Ground, and in Winter and Spring in hot Beds well
covered; and as soon as their Leaves open to the breadth of your Thumb-nail,
draw them up by the Roots, and so continue sowing them Monthly.

About the middle of the Month you may make a Beginning to plant forth Mellons,
also Cucumbers; and this you may continue to the end of the Month. After a warm
spring or summer showers look for Snails and Worms, and, as well as may be,
clear your Garden of them. Set Lupins, carpet Walks, and ply Weeding, and
speedily take way, hoe, or pull up, lest the Weeds, etc. take Root again and
prove injurious to the Ground; for by the Cleanness of a Garden from Weeds and
all such like destructive Encumbrances, not only the Industry and Proficiency
of the Gardener is proved even to such as make but Visits but also great
Commodities arise thereby; for a Garden once well cleared in the Spring, saves
much Labor in Summer.

Gemini, or the Twins. MAY,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this month.

THis Month sow Marjorum, Thyme and other hot and Aromatick-herbs, and such as
are the most tender: Sow Purslane, Lettice, to have them large-sized and
cabbaged, painted Beans, etc.

Now take care of your Mellons; and toward the end of this Month give over to
cover them any longer on Ridges with Mattrasses or straw, etc. continue
Weeding, and suffer not any to remain and run to seed, that by the scattering
of it the Garden may be the more incumbered to your Prejudice and Labor, that
might have been saved at once.

You may also now sift fine cooling Mould about the Boots of your hot Plants
and Herbs, which will greatly refresh them, but so that it may not be strewed
on the Leaves to hinder their growth by soiling them when showers fall, or in
your Watering.

As for Watering, as I have said, do it at the Root, some distance, that it may
leisurely soak in round about to the Fibers, etc.

Cancer, or the Crab. JUNE,
Things to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this Month.

SOw Charvil, Radish, Lettice, and the like, and oth^ Things for young and
tender Salleting. Gath^ such sweet-herbs as you intend to dry and keep for you
several uses, which may be done for the whole Year by laying them not too thin,
but upon moderate heaps which you may move and turn till they are tolerable
dry, but not Brittle; and this is to be done with as much Expedition as may be;
and for their keeping the natural Color, it will be well done in the shade;
however a little of the Sun is proper, to prevent their being musty. Now
Mellons and Strawberries are in season, and some other cooling Things, Nature
prudently providing such for the refreshing Mankind, and the^ kindly
preservation of Health in hot Season, while the hotter come seasonably in the
colder Months.

Leo, or the Lion. JULY,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this Month.

THE beginning of this Month sow Lettice, Radish, etc. for young and tender
Salleting; also latter Pease, that they may be ripe in October. Let Herbs
designed ^r it run to Seed, and carefully save it for a new sup^ly.

Long-sided Cabbages planted in May may now be re^oved, and cut away all rotten
and putrified Leaves from them, and be yet diligent in the Weeding and
Cleansing part of your Garden, hoeing up the Weeds so ^on as they begin to
appear above Ground; and by this means a great riddance may be made in a ltitle
Time, ^an in a longer when they grow up Root-deep, and ^rove more cumbersome to
the Ground: Destroy Worms and other Insects, by sprinkling hot Ashes in the
places ^hey most frequent, and it will utterly destroy such as ^re touched by
it when a little Rain descends on it: It (...) also a great Enemy to the Weeds,
though Grass is im^roved by it, and it proves an excellent Manure for that
purpose; but lay not on too much in hot Weather, un^ess much Rain falls to
dissolve it and moistens the Earth; by which means it may leisurely soak in and
disperse itself.

Virgo, or the Virgin-Sign. AUGUST,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen Garden this month.

THIS Month sow Radishes, particularly the black ones, to prevent going to
Seed, pale tender Cabbages, Colliflowers, for Winter Plants, Lettice, Carrots,
Corm, Sallet, Marigold, Spinach, Turnips, Onions, Parsnips, Angela, curled
Endive, Scurvy Grass, etc.

To prevent Plants running up too hastily to Seed, draw the Root a little out
of the Ground, lay them slaunting, and cover them again with fresh Mould, and
by that means it will be prevented.

To secure Colliflowers to bear good Heads that are a^ to overspread, or upon
Flowers before their Heads c^ be quite perfected, take them out of the Ground
an^ bury them in some cold place, as a Cellar, and bo^ Root and stalk to the
very Head, and so without being exposed to the very Sun, they will harden and
bear fir^ Heads.

Now take up your Onions that are well grown, as als^ Garlic, transplant the
Lettice you design shall contin^ for the Winter.

Gather seeds and clip such Herbs as you design shoo^ continue well in the
Winter before the Full of the Moon*

And toward the latter end of this Month sow Pu^slane, Chard-beet, Charvil,
and such like Herbs for use taking the Mould finely over them, and laying the
Ground smooth and even, yet so well covered that the Birds cannot see them to
destroy them; and if Shower^ fall and wash them out of the Ground, cover them
again in the same manner.

Libra, or the Balance. SEPTEMBER,
Things proper to be done in the KitchenGarden this month.

SOw Skirrets, Lettice, Spinach, Radishes, Parsnips etc. Cabbages,
Colliflowers, Onions, Anniseeds Scurvey-grass, etc.

It is now proper to transplant Asparagus-roots an^ Artichoaks.

Sow Herbs for Winter-store, as also Roots get Strawberry plants out of the
Copices, or Woods, and plan^ them in your Garden about a Foot asunder.

Toward the end of the Month, earth up the Sallad-^hs, and Winter-plants, set
forth such Cabbage and Colliflower-plants as were sowed in August, prepare
Com^ost to be used in trenching and preparing, and lay your Ground well for the
approaching Winter, where it is disencumbered, as the occasion requires it, and
if the cold season hastily advances, get warm covering for ^our tender Herbs,
either to preserve them well all the Winter, or till such Time as you shall
have occasion to ^pend them.

Scorpio, or the Scorpion. OCTOBER,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this month.

THis Month, that it may lie for Winter-mellowing, trench the Ground.

Sow Genova-Lettice, which will with a little care continue for good Sallading,
all the Winter with Glass-bells and straw over them in the hard Frost or Cold,
but touch them not presently after a Thaw, lest you break or crack the Glasses.

This Month you may sow Radishes, clear the Alley of all Leafs that have
fallen, lest they corrupt and produce, or at least shelter Vermin to annoy your
Plants and seeds, and foul your Garden with their Excrements. Prepare covering
for tender Herbs and Plants, and be diligent in rectifying what is amiss in
every part that your Garden may not only be pleasant and delightful to the Eye,
but profitable in increase, by being disencumbered of offensive Things.

Sagitarius, or the Archer NOVEMBER,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this month.

THIS Month Trench, fit to prepare your Garden Ground for Artichoaks, carry
Compost out of yo^ Mellon-ground, or mingle it by often turning with go^ Earth,
so lay it in Ridges prepared for your Business o^ the Spring.

Always note to sow moderate dry, and plant moist but what you sow cover not
too thick with Earth, and there are many seeds you cannot sow too shallow, so
tha^ they are covered sufficiently to preserve them from the Birds destroying
them.

Set and sow early Beans and Pease, which you may continue till Shrovetide.

Cut off the Tops of Asparagus, cover the Roots with Dung, or make Beds that
they may be prepared for the spring planting.

Take up Patatoes a sufficiency for the Winter-spending, and if they have been
of any continuance, though you search narrowly, a sufficiency will escape to
repair the Stock.

Lay up your Winter-store of Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, Cabbages, etc. as also
seeds.

Capricorn, or the Goat. DECEMBER,
Things proper to be done in the Kitchen-Garden this month.

SOW for early Beans and Pease if a prospect of violent Frosts are not in view.

This Month is proper to Trench your Garden ground, ^d dung it well, set Traps
to destroy Vermin, and lay table-litter over such Herbs or Plants, as can least
en^re the Cold; and what things are requisite to cover them now, for either the
Frosts are begun, or very near approaching, no Winter passing without more or
less force of them, which leave their marks and scars on most Herbs and Plants,
making them drop and languish for want of refreshing Heat to comfort them.

How to know particular Flowers that will alter for the best.
EXperience tell us that those Flowers which differ in Number of Leafs, in
colors and shape, their seeds will produce Flowers much different from the
ordinary Flowers, though but a Year or two before produced all of one Flower;
nay, a particular Flower among many others of one Plant will bring more double
ones than 20 others that are not quallified in the same Nature.

As for Example, the Stock-gilliflower that have five leaves or more, or six,
or seven, the seeds of such a particular Flower will produce more double ones
than those Plants that bring forth but four Leafs, quantity for quanty of Seed,
and in this it is shown more than in others; for there being in the middle of
it no thrum as in many others, it will bring forth a fine double Flower, which
when it has attained to, then it is to come to the bounds of Nature, for it
never bears Seed more, but by endeavoring blows itself to death.

The same Rule may be observed by the curious Florist in several other Flowers
that are free from any thrum in the middle, as Auriculas, Zeal flowers,
Primroses, Campions, and the like.

When in such Flowers you find one Leaf more tha^ their usual Number, then
conclude Nature has prepared for alteration; these Flowers will likewise bear
se^ when double, as the Gilliflower, African, etc. and i^ sowing the seed of
these double seeds, they will bring yo^ more and better Flowers a hundred to
one than the single ones; and in pursuing, the seeds of such will be
accommodated with sundry Varieties, but chiefly tinge^ with the color of the
Mother Plant, and some of these will proceed as it were beyond the limits of
Nature, and then they will have pods in the middle, or break, and never more be
capable of seeding.

July-flowers have likewise their signal, which will and which will not bear
seed. Those that will do it, i^ the Weather or other accidents hinder not, have
their Horns placed in the middle of the Flowers; it is also t^ be observed in
the marking of Flowers that the seeds o^ those that are striped will bring more
striped ones, an^ some of different colors and stripes, their seeds being
alike.

Choice Deirections for sowing of seed and setting, etc.
IN sowing of Flower-seed great care must be taken, o^ at least in setting
where you intend your Flowers shall thrive.

Observe then that the Ground bear the best proportion that may be to the
places, or the particular Mineral vei^ or qualit, of the places where, in other
Parts, such plan^ were wont to grow; take care therefore not to set Mountainous
plants in moist and low Grounds.

As for Bog-plants, when they are transplanted into a Garden, let it be in a
natural or arificial Bog, or near some Water, by which there is great
improvement of all ^orts of Flags, and particularly Calamus Aromaticus, or ^e
spice scented Reed.

You may make an Artificial Bog by digging a Hole ^n any stiff Clay, or there
may be Clay brought if the ^round afford it not, to bind the Hole or pit, in
the ^loor or Bottom, and so thick on the sides, that the ^et cannot soak through,
and fill this with Water, then put (...) Earth of the Nature of that where they
grew, but ^omewhat richer, and tempering it with the Water, make your Bog to a
proportionable moisture of that from whence they were taken, and planting them
therein, they ^hrive and flourish more than in their Native soil.

Things convenient to be considered in the Manner of Laying, etc.
CUT the Things you intend to lay in its proper season, after the Manner as is
usual in cutting July-flowers, and laying them, unless in some Plants that take
any way like the Vine, and it is so much the more convenient in Roses, and many
Wood-layers, that with an Awl you pierce the stock at the Place laid, as it is
done by circumposition, viz. the Mould to be born up to the Bough, which is to
be taken off, and then before the sap rises in February, or the beginning of
March, it is most properly to be done.

During the Time of drought, frequently water your Layers, that is, every Day,
or they will not come to take Regular Roots, but rather a Knob or Button full
of fresh sap upon the Tongue of the Cut in the Branch so laid down; yet these
Branches cut off, by their well watering in the Summer have grown pretty well
in their Transplantation.

The seasons most proper for this Business, are in the beginning of the spring,
or the declining of the great summer-heat, for in those seasons they more
freely enjoy moisture proper for the producing Roots, and are respited from
excessive heat and cold.

Artificial Sets, how to make them.
TO do this, bare the Roots of Plants of woody substance, and make a cut in the
like manner of that which is made in layings from the plants; and into the
cleft put a stone or little plug of Wood to keep it open, that gaping, the part
cut may turn upwards; then with light Mould cover the Root three Inches, and
the lift so lifted up will sprout into Branches, being nourished by the Root of
the old Tree; and when the Branches are grown, cut off this plant with its
Roots, and it will go and thrive of itself very well; and if possibly you can
leave an eye on the lip of the Root, which after Incision you lift up, and the
Branches will the more speedily issue out of the Root so cut, which Method is
properly called the starting a Root.

To make off sets of Bulbous-roots, with your Nail cut it lightly on the bottom
in the crown of your Root, whence spring the Fibers, and as a healer to the
wound, sprinkle some dry dust upon it, and so many wounds as you make,
Ferrarius affirms, in so many Off-sets will the Genital virtue dispose itself,
but this has not been frequently Experimented.

To change the Color of Flowers when in Bloss m, etc.
BUrn Brimstone under Roses, and it will turn the lips, and the greatest part
of the fouldings, while the the smoke of Tobacco will make it a red Rose turn
bluish or purple. Vitriol sprinkled or streaked on any Flower that is purple,
will turn it to deep scarlet, but this will not long continue, for the Leafs of
the growing Flower the next Day will wither.

^er Flowers, you must secure from great Frosts and ^^is; likewise the
Carnations, or such Seeds as run the ^ard of being washed out of the Ground, or
by ex^m Frosts chilled or over-frozen; and in this case, ^ere the snow lies too
heavy on them, strike it off and ^er them, lest they burst and are spoiled;
except on ^t Beds, and then there is no danger of them.

About the end of the Month put Mould about the ^ots of the Arunculas that have
been uncovered by ^ost, and where your choicest are set in Pots, fill up ^e
Chinks with warm Mould, and so you need not House ^m, because they will endure
the Weather.

Flowers blowing and continuing.
PRaecoce Tulips; Winter Aconite; some sorts of Anemonies; black Helebore;
Winter Cyclamen; Orien^ Jacinthis; Brumal; Hyacinth; Levantian; Narcis^;
Laurustians; Primroses; Mazareno.

However, Note, That these Fruits and Flowers are more ^ow or hasty according
to the Heat or Coldness of the ^il, as qualified by Accident or Nature,
Situation, etc. ^d that all monthly Flowers are to be understood to continue
from their first appearing to their decay.

Pisces, or the Fishes. FEBRUARY,
things proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this month.

AS the Weather is seasonable, air your housed Carnations, particularly in
moderate showers, or warm Days, and set them in again at Nights if nipping W^
or Frosts threaten them, and so you may do by o^ Flowers that are not very
tender: as in this Month, ^cept extreme Cold prevent it, diverse will be, as I
(...) term it, in prime.

Flowers blowing or continuing.
SIngle Anemonies, Winter Aconite, Hyacynthus, S^latus, some double Anemonies,
Tulips, Prae^ Persian Iris, Lucoium Bulbosum, Deus Caninus, b^ Helebore,
Vertrall Crocus, single Hepatica, Vernal^clamen, red and white, early
Daffodillies, the gi^ white Arnithogals, Muzereno, the large leafed yel^
Violets, and some others.

Aries, or the Ram. MARCH,
Things proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this Month.

THis Month place stakes, and bind up your we^ Flowers, to prevent the violent
Winds injur^ them.

Sow Pinks, Plant-box, and the like; sow Carnatio^ and Sweet-Williams, from the
middle to the End of (...) Month; Alternus, most Perenial Greens, Phillerea, a^
the like; or these may be done later in the Month, ^wards the End, as the
Season happens warmer or cold^

Sow in Pots or Cases with fine mellow Earth, A^cula-seeds, let the Earth be a
little loamy, and p^ what you sowed in September in the Shade, sprinkling ^le
Water on them. Plant latter Anemony-roots suc^sively in Parts of the Countries
that are warm. Trans^nt Ranunculus and Fiberous Roots about the middle (...)
the Month, as Primroses, Turbose, Cammomile, Au^ulas, Gentianela, Matri^aria,
Helebore, and other ^mmer-flowers. This is also a proper Time to set Le^oium,
and toward the end of the Month slip Wall-^owers, or Keris, Cannolu^lus,
Lupius, Ordinary or ^nish Jessamine.

About the middle or latter End or this Month sow ^ter-flowers on hot Beds,
especially such as are the ^ural growth of hot Countries, for the require much
^t till the natural Earth be warm enough to supply ^m by the heat of the Sun,
perfecting their Seed, and ^inging them to a proportionable Stature; and when
(...) Amaranthus is grown pretty high, remove it into ^other Bed, and so you
may order African and sensitive ^ants, particularly these ever keep under
Glasses.

About the concluding of this Month, set in the shade ^unculas Plants or
Seedlings, such as being choice you ^ave reserved in Pots. Carnation-seedlings
may be trans^lanted; also give Earth to the Layers that is fresh and ^oper for
them, placing them about a Week in the shade, ^en cut off all the infected or
drooping Leafs, and the choice ones may now have their Cover removed.

The parting Frost and cold Winds are now prejudi^ial to your choice Tulips,
and therefore cover them ^ith Mats, or other convenient shelter, and take the
^e Care of the most esteemed Anemonies, Chema-Iris, ^ricula's, early Cyclamen,
Brunal Jacinths, etc.

Sow Balsamum-mas, Balsamine Doctils, Indian Pha^ollo, Lentiscus, Datura,
Pom^m-Amoris, Flos Africa^, Cana Indicum, Casicum Indicum, Flos Passionis,
^aranthus, and the like These require hot Beds till ^armer Season, yet
Nostratum Indicum, Volabulis, ^frican Marigolds, etc. may tollerably well
subsist on cold ^eds, though not so forward. Your shown Cuprus tops, re^ire to be
wrapped about with Wisps of Straw, Hay, or the like, if the easterly Winds
continue sharp, and co^ with Peashawm, or dry straw, your Evergreens tha^
Seedlings, such as Pines, Bays, Phillyria, Fir, Cyp^ till two or three Years be
gone over them in the N^ry, and are large enough to transplant, lest the she
Winds dry them up and spoil them.

This you may do any Time in the Winter where ^tremity requires it, but in fair
and warm Weather, or ^termissions from Cold you may uncover them, the s^ Winds
more harming than the Frost or snow.

About the end of the Month, with a moderate c^ on of the continuing sharp
Winds, or fall of the F^ you may uncover your choicer Plants; but in s^ Winds
neither sow nor transplant, lest by their drying and withering, they frustrate
your Expectation.

In the Full of the Moon sow stock Gilliflower se^ that they may produce double
Flowers; and though s^ think they can make this doubling by Art, by using (...)
succation, Magnomism or Medicines, yet they will (...) themselves mistaken; or
especially it is with gr^ Certainty done by removing, transplanting, enric^ the
Mold, strewing and hardening the Ground, an^ for Variation and Change, taking
from the Root the (...) Nourishment.

Now let Lentiscus, Oranges, Lemmons, Dates, Ammums, Aloes, and the like, less
enduring Plants a^ Trees in the Portico.

Flowers blowing or continuing.
ARbor Indae; Praecoce Tulips; Rubus Adorat^ Crown Imperial; Spring Cyclamen;
Anemoni^ Winter Aconite; black and white Helebore; Cro^ Bellis; single and
double Hepticae; Chema-iris; Le^coion Eritillaria; Violets; Prim-roses;
Puberosus-i^ Hyrmodictils; Persian-iris; Dutch Mezereon; D^ yellow Violets. The
great white Ornithogalum; D^ Caninus; Chelidonium; the double Flowered small
S^nish Trumpits; or Jaquills; Hyacinth; Zeboin; B^mal; Oriental Jaquills; Great
Chalciom; and such li^ Attendants on the Spring.

Taurus, or the Bull. APRIL,
^ngs necessary to be done in the Flower-Garden this Month.

(...) the beginning of this Month sow Digitalis, double (...) Marigolds,
Definum, Cyanus; of the various Sorts, ^en Pansy, Tufts, Macipula, Holiocks,
Scorpoides, Medica, ^eous, Belvider, Collumbines, which every four or five ^s
renew to prevent Loss and Decay.

^ow continue new and fresh Hot-beds to accommo^ such Plants, as without them
will want their perfecti^ till the Earth has contracted a sufficient Warmth to
(...) in them Abroad; and those Fibrous Roots as the last ^th were not
transplanted, now transplant them, as ^roses; Violets; Heptica; Matricaria,
etc. and the ^ing Auriculas set in the shade.

^ow Carnations, Pinks, etc. cleanse and trim up the ^oots from dead and rotten
Leafs; sow sweet Willi^ after Rain, that they may Flower the following Year;
(...) Lucorum in the Full of the Moon, and set Lupins.

^rt the Off-sets from the Indian Tuberoses, but beware (...) break not their
Phangs, and these Off-sets in due ^e will produce Flowers; set them in Pots of
Natural ^h, not such as is forced with a Layer of rich Earth, ^neath to succor
the Fibers, but not touch the Bul^ Roots; set the Pots in Hot-Beds, and water
not the (...) till they begin to spring, and set them under a ^h-wall, and in
dry Weather water them much, and ^gust they will produce curious Flowers.

In this manner order the Garnsey-lilly, or Narcissus o^ Japan; Sea-sand
mingled with the Mould, wonderful prosper them, especially near the Surface,
and order the Protuberant: Fangs of the Yuca in like manner as the T^beroses.

About the middle of the Month you may expose or s^ out your Flos Cordinalis,
slip and set Marums Ranun^las; water Anemonies and such Plants as are in Cases
(...) Pots, as the Dryness of the Season requires it.

Prune or orderly regulate Anemonies, Gilliflowers, C^nations, or the like,
where they stand too thick, or (...) subject to mat together, and so being
thinned they (...) produce the fairer Flowers.

Protect your Ranunculas; Pennash; Tulips; Auri^las; Anemonies; from storms of
violent Rain, Hail, (...) the too scarching Beams of the Sun, by covering the^
with Mats supported with Hoops, or bent Wands, Cr^^^ewise.

Bring forth your choice and tender Shrubs in a fai^ Day, but the Orange Trees
may be continued housed (...) the next Month, and when you water them, let it
be do^ with Rain or Pond-water lukewarm, but not too much at a time.

Flowers blowing or continuing.
RAnunculas of Tripoly; white Violets; Anemonies Auricula Ursi; Caprisolum;
Crown Imperial^ Caprisolum Gentianella; Deus Caninus; Bell-flower^ Tritillaria;
Double Hepticas; Starry Jacinth; Florenceiris; Double Dasies; white and tufted
Double Narciss^ Chamae-Iris; Cowslips; Primroses; Pulsatilla; Ladies smock;
Tulips; Medias; Radix; Cava Geranium, Peritaria; Lurea; Caltha; Palustries;
Persian Lillies; La^rea; Caltha; Palustries; Persian Lillies; Lucoicum,
P^onies; Muscaria Reversed; Double Jonquills; Persia^ Jessamine; Acanthus; and
some others.

Gemini or the Twins. MAY,
^^ings proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this month.

^Hade your Carnations and Gilliflowers about this Season when the Sun has
passed the Meridian, and at the Full Moon plant in Beds your
Stock-gilliflowers, tran^nt forth Aramanthus, and water Ranunculus, so Anmum,
or set it, gather such Anemony-seeds as you (...) to be ripe, and preserve it
for a new supply, keep it (...) dry to preserve it from moulding or mustying;
cut stalks of those Bulbous Flowers that you find dry.

About the latter End of this Month take such Tulips as ^r-stalks are dried,
covering the Roots you find bare, prevent their being scorched by the heat of
the Sun, or ^hed up with sudden Showers, and if any of these Roots (...) take
up be Cankered, the best remedy is speedily to ^ry them in fresh Mould.

Flowers blowing or continuing, etc.
RAnuncula's of all Kinds; the latter set Anemonies; Anapodophylon; Chema-iris;
Blattaria; Cirisus; ^ranthes; Heleborine; Cyclamen; Augustisoi; Cyanus; ^ellow
Lillies; Aspodel; Froxinella; Cullumbines; Bu^ns-iris; Digitalis; Grranum;
Horminum Caiticum; Gla^us; Double Cotyleden; Caltha Plaustris; Tulips of va^s
sorts and Colors, Jacca Lychnis, Double Bellis, ^hite and red Millefolium
Luteum, Phalangium, Orcliis, ^panish Pinks, Lillium Convallium, Rosa, common
Guilder, Cinnamon and Centifol, etc. Cherrybay; Oleaster; T^chellium Hisperis;
Cowslips; Anterrhinum Sedums; S^ringa's; Veronica, single and double; Musk
Violets; Valerian; stock Gilliflowers; Ladies-slipper; Chalcedom, Star-flowers;
Ordinary Crowfoot; Red Martagom Campanellas; white and blue Bugloss; Homer's;
Maly Persian Lillies; Bee-flower; Purple; Thalictrum; Pansis Lucoium; Bulbosum
Secotinum; Sysimbrium, singl^ and double; Sambucus Peonies; Sea Narcissus; and
some others.

Cancer, or the Crab. JUNE,
Things to be done in the Flower-Garden this Month.

THis Month gather such ripe Flower-seeds as are valuable, and proper to be
saved, as Narcissus, A^runculas, Oriental Jacinth, etc. preserving them dry a
shade your Carnations from the Afternoon's Sun; transplant Autumnal Cyclamen,
you design to change for a place more advantageous; take up Iris Chalcedon. Now
you may make a beginning to lay Gilliflowers, also take up the best Sort of
Ranunculas and Anemonies, after moderate showers of Rain, the stalks dry and
withered, and the roots in a good Temper.

Take up the Bulbs of Tulips, cover those presently that lie naked on the Beds,
or transplant them to a cooler soil; water dry or parched Beds, as also the
pots of Japan Narcissus; prevent some Scabious from running to seed, which now
may be done by removing them, and so the following Year they will produce very
good Flowers.

Take up the Roots of such Flowers and plants as will endure not to be out of
the Ground, and immediately ^plant them in fresh soil, as Oriental Jacinth;
Cy^men; Frittilania; Iris-crown; Imperial; Deus Cani^; Muscaris; Bulbous
Jacinths, etc.

Flowers blowing or continuing, etc.
DOuble Poppies; Phalangium; Allobrogicum; Amazanthus; Asphodell; Hedisarum;
Giadiolus; Cla^antis Panonica; Blataria Millafolium; yellow and ^ite Martagon;
Red and white Gentian; Helebore Ni^lla; Astrea Atticus; Bulbous-iris;
Hedisarum; early ^rk-heel; Genistia of Spain; Pinks Orinthgalum; Mount ^lies
white and red; with some others.

Leo, or the Lion. JULY,
^ings proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this Month.

^^ip stocks the beginning of this Month, with other Lignous plants and
flowers; lay Carnations and Gil^owers, not suffering to remain above two or
three spin^s for the Flowers. Take away the superfluous Buds, ^port those that
remain with stays against the Wind; ^stroy Earwigs, and other Insects that
annoy them.

Layers, in a good light loamy Earth, will take Root six Weeks; set as many of
them as may conveniently one pot, to save room; in Winter let not too much ^et
come at them; if it prove too wet, lay the pots ^e-ways, and shade those that
blow from the Heat of ^e Sun in the Afternoons.

Take up early Cyclamen, Bulbs and Tulips, which you may immediately plant, or
if Convenience permi^ not, you may do it any time; within a Month after trim
them and cut off the Fibers, spreading in an early Place very dry, but do not
separate the off-sets of Tulips, and the like, till the principal Bulbs be
fully dry.

Gather seeded Tulips, and permit the seeds to continue in the Pods, also the
seed of early Cyclamen, and immediately sow it pots or cases.

Remove Crocus that are seedlings of the last Septem^ber, giving them wide
Intervails till they come to Pe^fection.

Take up some sorts of Aurunculas, Persian-iris, Cr^cus, Crown Imperial,
Frettillaria and Colchicums, pla^ the Iris, and the two last as soon as you
have taken the^ up, if you have convenience, else in August or September, may
do tollerably well; or you may defer their taking up till then, and replant
Colchicums, remove Deu^ Canius, etc.

Sift your Beds from the Off-sets of Tulips, toward the latter end of this
Month; also for Bulbous-roots Ranunculas, Anemonies, and the like, which will
prepar^ them for setting or plunging, such Things as are in you^ Pots, and
require to be set in the naked Earth till the next Season; some sort of
Anemonies may now be sowe^ in Ground that is temperately moist; cut away the
withered stalks that incumber the roots of your Flowers covering the bared
Roots with fresh Earth. To destro^ Worms and other Insects, strew Pot ashes on
your Grass plat, and Carpet-walks; and to the same end water you^ Gravel-walks
with Water wherein Tobacco-stalks have been boiled.

Flowers blowing this Month or continuing.
ASpodes Amaranthus, Phalangium Delphium, Veronic^ Odoriferous, and Purple
Sultan, Connalnusus, Volabilis Thlapse Criticum, Geranius, Triste, Fraxenela,
Hedisaurum Corn-flower, Alkengi, Double and White Jacca, Scorpion Grass,
Monthly Rose, Jacinths, and some others.

Virgo, or the Virgin-Sign. AUGUST,
Things proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this month.

THis Month take up Bulbous, Iris, sow the Seeds of them, as also of
Collumbines, Candy-Tufts, ^ark-heels, Holyocks, Iron-coloured Fox Gloves, and
other Plants that have strength to endure the approach^ng season.

Plant some Anemony-roots for Winter flowers; take ^o the last Years seedlings,
transplant them for Bearers, also Autumnal Crocus, Deus Caninus, and
Colchini^m's.

Sow-Oriental Jacinths, Narcissus, and replant such ^oots as will not well
abide out of the Earth, as Higa^nths, Deus Caninus, Lillies, Martagon,
Fretarilla, etc. (...) As yet you may slip Gilliflowers, and take up
Bulbous-^oots: As your Alaternus seed grows black and ripe, ^ather it daily,
spread it to swear, and put it up dry ^or use; water Balsamin-faem; and other
seeds that you and ripe, may now be gathered, especially from Shrubs.

About the middle of this Month, divide the large old Roots of Auricula's, and
transplant them in a light moist Earth, Loamy or Sandy, yet fertile, and in the
shade; you may now likewise sow the seed of them, also Anemony-seed toward the
latter end of this Month. That of Ra^^nculas, etc. place them in light Mould in
Cases mode^ately covered with Earth, frequently refresh them, and ^tep them in
the shade. Likewise Hepatica, Iris, Fraxe^ella, Jacinths, Cyclamen, Primroses,
Tulips, Martagon, Pretillaria, and the like; though some of these from the Seed,
Flower not in four or five Years, as the Tulip, unless set so shallow that it
cannot sink deep into the Ground; however take care not to disturb their Beds,
weed them well, and shade them till the great Heats are past, lest too much
Dryness spoil the seed; but as for Primroses and Hepatica there need not be so
much care taken of them.

Flowers blowing this Month or lasting, etc.
ANagasis; Nigella; Luchnis; yellow Millefolium; Lucoion; monthly Rose; Thalpsi
Creticum; Cyclamen; Vernum; yellow Mountain; Hearts ease; Colchicum; Autumnal
Hyacinth; Starworth; Holiocks; Elicclerioson; Eringium planum; French
Marigolds; Dasies; Pansies; Lark-heels; Catchbly; Lobells; and some other.

Libra, or the Balance. SEPTEMBER,
Things proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this month.

THis Month plant a few of the various sorts of Anemonies, to be the earlier,
in naturally rich or improved Earth, particularly the Latifol, do it when the
first Rains are over.

And now very properly you may sow Auricula-seeds, placing the Cases in the Sun
till April following. You may also plant some Tulips, Colchicum, Daffodils,
etc. Likewise Fiberous plants, such as Primroses, Violets, Matricaria,
Capillaries, Commomile, Helebore, Heptica, and the like; also transplant
Cyclamen and Chalcedon.

If you think fit, you may now sow Phillerea, Alaternus or you may do it, in
the Spring. Likewise Tulips, ^tagons, Delphinium, Nigella, Poppey, Candy Tufts,
own Imperial, and all Annuals that are not impaired the Frost in General.

So the seeds of Primroses, and transplant seedlings ^gitalis; and early this
Month plant Lychnis-slips; ^d your Tuberoses from the wet in this Season, and
serve the Roots out of the Rots in Sand, or wrapped in paper, place them in dry
Boxes near the Chimney.

Fasten Autumnal-flowers and plants to sticks, that may ^ure them from breaking
in violent Winds.

Take off Gilliflowers Layers with Earth, and place ^em in shaded Borders or
pots: You may now raise ^ocus of seeds, and such Flowers or plants as will not
^osper if housed, set in pots in the Ground three or (...) Inches lower than
the surface of Beds you plunge ^m in, expose them as much as may be to the
South; ^ath them with Glass-bells; but in warm showers, or ^en the Sun shines
pretty warm, you may uncover ^em, and give them Air, and so you may preserve
the ^ost precious Flowers, as Cistus, Marum-syriacum, ^os-cardinals, Geranium,
Nocteolens, Seedlings, Arbu^, Accacia Aegyptica, Anemonies, Ranuncula's, etc.
and (...) order them till April. Guard you Marum-syriacum with Furzes or
Bushes, from the Cats, for if they come (...) it, they will eat and destroy it.

Flowers blowing this Month or continuing, etc.
ANagalis of Portugal, Armaranthus, Clamatis, Autumnal Cyclamen, Lynaria,
Cretica, Limonium, Indian ^illies, Narcissus, Chrysanthemum,
Stock-gilliflowers, ^n flowers, Spinosum, Indicum, Persian, Autumnal,
^arcissus, Pomum Aurium, Amoris Nasturtium, Indi^n Gentianella, Anual, Tuberas,
Indian Jacinths, yel^w Millefolium, Virginian Phalangium, and some others.

Scorpio, or the Scorpion. OCTOBER,
Things proper to be done in the Flowe^Garden this month.

THis Month House Turbofe, Narcissus, and keep (...) dry till April; sow seeds
as in September; as ye^ plant Anemonies, particularly the Tenuifolio's in fres^
sandy-Earth, likewise set Ranuncula's taken from under the Turff, but let the
Bottom of the Bed be rich Mould so that the Fibers of the Root may reach it,
but not the main Roots, which only cover with Natural Earth about two Inches
deep, and preserve them from the Frost with straw or Mats, but in the warm
Times of the Da^ give them the free Air. Now plant Vernal Crocus, and
Ranunculas of Tripoly, remove Holiocks about this Time you may plant choice
Tulips, and they will be sufficiently forward, as also secured from Dangers:
mix Natural Earth, somewhat impoverished, white fine sand, and plant them in
it, though at the Bottom, within the^ the reach of the Fibers, you must place
rich Earth.

Now beware your Carnations be not injured by the Wet, therefore in Excess of
Rain, cover them, so that the Air may however come at them, or lay them on the
sides, and with fresh Mould trim them up; you may now without Danger bury all
sorts of Fulbous Roots, as likewise Iris.

Sow Phillirea and Al^ternus seeds, mow Carpet Walks, beat and roll them, as
also Cammomile-beds, and make an end of your last Weeding, cleanse your Walks
and Alleys from fallen Leafs, which corrupting will produce Vermin.

Flowers blowing or continuing this Month, etc.
LYmonium, Lychnis, Amaranthus, three colored Asser Articus, Heliotrops,
Tuberos, Jacinths, Mar^el of Peru, Autumnal Narcissus, Gilliflowers, Virgin
^halangium, Pomum Amoris, and Aethiop-Garanium ^riste, Aleppo Narcissus,
Pansies, Spherical Narcissus, ^yclamen, Saffron, Claments, and some others.

Sagitarius, or the Archer NOVEMBER,
Things proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this month.

COver the Ranuncula's that are coming up, prepare rich Earth made so with
about half Dung, sift on (...) some sandy light Mould and Earth gotten out of
hol^w or doated Willow-trees, put it in Cases or Pots in ^he Sun, and sow in it
Auricula-seeds.

If the Weather be open and seasonable, plant the fair^st Sort of Tulips in
Earth not over rich, and let them ^e under shelter about the middle of the
Month; House your tender Plants and Flowers, also set the choicest Carnation
under a Pent-house, or some such like shelter under a South Wall, and in sharp;
Weather put a covering over them, but not so close as to exclude the Bene^ of
the Air; and for shelter of your Seedlings and choice ^lants, prepare
Matresses, Pots, Cases, and Boxes, plant Fibrous Roots, also Althea-futax,
Roses, Cytisus, Cyringas, ^eonies, and the like; cleanse and sweet the Walks,
etc.

Flowers blowing this Month or continuing, etc.
MEadow Saffron, Anomies, Bellis, Stock Gilliflowers, Pancies, Clamatis, double
Violets, some kind of Carnations, Anterrhinum, Veronica, Musk-roses, and some
others.

Capricorn, or the Goat. DECEMBER,
Things proper to be done in the Flower-Garden this month.

PReserve your Carnations, Ranunculas and Anemonie^ from excessive Rains, House
all tender plants; see^ out and destroy Insects and Vermin that annoy your
Gardens, prepare warm Litter to lay over such choice Things as are to continue
abroad; if the Frost comes carry store of Dung, lay it in a readiness in some
convenient place to rot against the Spring that it may be the fitter for your
use, and order other Things as has been directed in January.

How blowing this Month or continuing.
IRis Clusi, some Anemonies, common and Persian Winter Cyclamen, black
Hellebore, Antirrhinum, Drops or Snow-flowers, single Primroses,
Stock-gilliflowers, and some others.

And thus, Reader, have I given you an exact Account of what is most material
to be done in the several Months,

Flowers, Shrubs, and choice Plants, enduring several degrees of Cold, how they
are to be preserved.
THe degrees of Cold any choice Flower or plant will bear without danger or
destruction, is requisite for a Gardener to know, that so he may order them by
a timely care to prevent loss, or being reputed no Proficient in his
Employment; and these are commonly divided in three degrees,

Flowers and Plants not dying but by extreme Cold.
^Ingle, Violets, Serapentaria, Trifolium, white and double Narcissus of
Constantinople, Agnus, Castus, ^lva Arb resceris, Persian Jesamine, Mulay,
Altha, ^tax, Orithmum Marinum, Orinthoglon Arabian, Fe^l Aethiop, Veronica,
Teuchriummas Tythymal, Myr^le, Jacca, Sarsaparilla, Abrotonum, Male and Fe^le;
Adiantum Verum, Aronitae Verum, Bellis Hyspa^ Rosemary, Lavender, Cherry
Laurels, Balbous-Iris, ^isu, Ma^antha, red Lunatus, Cene raria Pomgranets,
^iettial, Jacinths, double white Lychnis, double Matri^ria, Pancration, Spinous
Poppy Marcoe, Sysynelchi^, Cuccrum, Matthioli, the Eryngium plain, and Ita^
blue, Mountain Pritillaria, Spanish Genista, white ^wered Olives.

And those, unless in violent or excessive Colds, may (...) last set in the
Consorvatory, or Green-House; or you ^y protect them Abroad in Pots, Cases, or
Boxes, and ^raesses, or thinner covering.

Flowers and Plants enduring the second Degree of Cold.
SUmmer-purple, Cyclamen, Amimum, Plinii, Citton, Digitalis Hyspan, Aspilanthus
Creticus, Ja^obaea Marina, Suza-Iris, Oleanders, Alexandrian Law^l, Oranges,
Lentiscus Myrtles, Lanentine, Tufted Narcissus, choicest Cornations and
Gilliflowers, Narcissus of ^pan, red Cytisus, Vernal, Cyclamen, Canna, Indica,
double and single Asiatick Ranuncula's, Hedyfarium Cly^eatum, Virginia
Jesamine, Thymis Capitatus Verbe^nodi, Fles Cretica, Geranium-trifle, Chem-Laea
Al^hestris, Carbo; and some few others of the choicest ^rt; and therefore when
the Frosts approach so that ^hey seem to set in, they must be hastened into the
^servatory, etc.

Flowers and Plants the least of all enduring Cold.
ARabian Ornithogalon, Tuberose Narcissus, Acaci^ Aegyptiaca, Helichryson,
Balsamum, Amaranthus, three colors, American Aloes, Aspalathus of Oret,
Chaelaea Tricoccos, Indian Norcissus, Summer sweet Ma^jorum, Pistaicos,
Dactyls, the great Indian Fig, Lyla^ with the white Flower, Coultea Odorata,
Cistus Rag^saeus: with the white Flower, Cretica, Lavendula Multifol. clus.
Syrax Arbor, Nastrutium Indicum. The two Marums of Syria; Capsicum Indicum,
Pomu^ Aethop. Aureum, Spinosum Phaseol, and some few others that are very
choice and tender, and therefore a Gardener who undertakes to order them, must
have a special care he suffers not the Nipping Prosts or Cold Winds to surprise
late abroad, lest they dye, and his Labors and Expectation have thereby an
equal Frustration.

These of all other tender Flowers or Plants, must first be removed into the
Conservatory or Green-House, and carefully tended and ordered according to the
Directions that will follow in the close of this Rook, relating to the well
ordering and regulating a Green-House or Conservatory; and if you have not
opportunity or convenience to remove them so early as necessity requires, then
cover them as they stand for a Time with Matresses, or thinner covering,
according as the Season is Colder or Hotter, or the cold Dews fall, which after
Bartholomew-tide fall very cold in the Night, and not great Enemies to choice
Plants and Flowers, bringing mostly with them Nipping Morning Frosts, as they
are called Mildews, and other Misfortunes, so that a little neglect does a
great deal of Mischief, which much Time, Cost, and Labor, cannot renew or
recover.

Therefore again, I say be careful in this, and gain Advantage and Credit.

(...) further Description of Flowers, as to their Shapes and Colors.
Dorethea.
THIS is an esteemed Flower, of a deep brown Purple whipped very curiously
about the edges, dap^d with Red and Purple, a curious white bottom, and ^is
Purple.

Bacchus Bole.
This Flower is not Tall, yet a very full, large and ^ad Leafed Flower, being
of a sad light Purple and a ^per White, divided equally, having the three
utmost ^fs edged with a Crimson color, Bluish bottom, and ^k Purple and Tamis.

Memorables.
This Flower is of a pale tanned Leather color, bright ^llow and sad Purple,
and is for its variety compared ^th many now in good esteem.

Royal Shuttle-maker.
This Flower has sharp-pointed Leafs, turning a little ^iously marked with a
bright Carnation, pale yellow ^d deep Scarlet, the bottom Tamis black, and is
well im^oved by off-sets coming out above the lower-most Leaf.

Dianea.
This Flower is properly raised from Seeds of the Di^a, differing from it in
that it has white Leafs edged ^d whipped about, and feathered in the middle
with a ^eep brown Purple, and Tamis dark Blue.

Puvion of Rome.
This Flower has its Leafs very green and large in the ^lks, raising high, and
dividing into several Branches striped, or at least each Leaf of the Flower
listed about with Yellow, the rest deep Scarlet.

Paeonie.
This Flower, though common, is a great Grace and Ornament to the Flower-Garden,
it is Male and Female, the first of these are single; and known by the
constantly coming of the Leafs whole and undivided; the Roots are roun^ and
long, and the Flower of a Purplish Red; and of the Male there is but one Kind,
but of the Females many, some bearing double, others single Flowers, resembling
in Sha^ the common red Rose; and these being usually I nee^ not Elaborate to
describe their Kinds being mostly used for adorning Windows in
House-Flower-Pots.

The Bee-Flower.
This grows nor above six Inches high, having three or four narrow Leafs,
bearing on the Stalk 3 or 4 Flowers, one above the other; and where there
happens to be 4 Leafs, three of them are usually small and sharp pointed, of a
Blush color, turning up toward the Top of the Stalk; the fourth is round, in
color like a Be that is sucking a Flower, which has deceived many at first
sight, who have supposed it to be really so. This has 2 Roots joined together,
and round, and when the Flower fades, usually one of them perishes, and the
other remains sound for furthea increase.

The Bladder Nut.
This grows low if neglected to be pruned up and kept from the Suckers; the
Bark is whitish, and the Leafs like Elder-flowers, white and sweet, hanging
many on a Stalk, after them greenish Bladders, each containing one Nut, sending
up many Suckers, by which it greatly increases.

Rubented.
This is the great pale Red or Peach-bloom-coloured-Flower-de-luce, being
Bulbous-rooted, and is more in ^eem than the many other Irises, so called from
their ^veral Colors, resembling them in the Rain bow, and adorned with small
yellow Spots in each of the three ^ing Leafs.

The Spanish Yellow-Iris.
This Flower is of a curious Golden color in all Parts (...) the blowing
Leafs; there is yet another of this Kind ^th a pale yellow Flower, with a deep
yellow Spot, and (...) these there are indeed many diversities, some paler, ^me
higger, some lesser, and others of a deeper yellow ^olour, one with white
falling Leafs, except a yellow Spot, which is usual to all Bulbous Iris, or
Flower-de-luces. ^lso the Spanish party colored Flower-de-luce, whose ^eafs
are white, that fall, but the Arched ones of a Silver ^our, and the Top-leafs
of a bluish Purple, another ^y-coloured, arched with yellow-falling Leafs, etc.

Hungarian Rose.
This Rose differs from the usual common red, one in (...) Green-shoots, its
Flower being of a pailer red, ha^ng faint Spots spread over the Leafs of the
whole dou^e Flower.

The Double Velvet Rose.
This Rose has its shoots of a saddish red green color, ^ttle thorney, the
Leafs being of a sadder green than the common red Rose; the Flowers are
consistent of two or three rows of Leafs, of a dark red Velvet-colour, having
some distinction of lighter red in Velvet-colour, having many Flowers.

The Marble Rose.
This resembles the former in growth, but is larger and more folded, being of a
light red, Marbled with a lighter blush grey-deline, and gives a curious scent.

The Virgin Rose.
Is in the Leafs greener than the last, being smoo^ and without any Thorn, the
Flower not very thick (...) standing, but spreading the Leafs, and standing
forward^ from each other; the Leafs, that are of a pale Red, (...) blush
color, are streaked on the Faces, the backsides b^ing of a whitish color,
blowing usually fair, and are (...) a very fragrant Scent.

The Evergreen Rose.
This is so called because the Leafs fade not in Winte^ but remain Green, and
continue till new ones come (...) the Spring; the Flowers are clustered four or
five together at each end of the Branches, which consist but (...) five Lea's
single, of a curious white color having (...) Musky Scent.

The Moley of Hungary.
This Flower is of two Sorts, the first has three or fou^ long broad Leafs,
which grow up with the Stalk a Foo^ high, one above the other; and are on the
Top beset wit^ some reddish Bulbs, of a pase Purple; the Root small an^ fit for
increase; the second is in resemblance of the first only the Stalk bears
smaller Leafs, and a greater cluster o^ dark green Bulbs, the Flowers alike,
etc.

Spiderwort.
Those of Savoy and Italy, of these Kinds are the chiefest in esteem, they are
very secure Plants against Weather, and prosper in almost any Soil, especially
where it is moist, bearing a Star-like Flower, white and something inclining to
blushing.

This is called the Queens Gilliflower, and by some the close Sciences; there
are two Sorts of them, both single, one of a pale Blast, the other white,
producing but four Leafs.

The double White Gilliflower.
This is accounted the nobler, having many Branches on Stalk, and many Flowers
on a Branch, standing close to^ether in a long Spike, the Flowers being of a
curious ^hite color, thick and double, and give their choicest ^ent in the
Evening on the declining of the Sun.

Double Poppies.
These are not to be omitted, though they give no fragrant ^ent, since their
Beauties are an Ornament to the Flower-^arden; they are of various Colors,
though of one Kind; ^ome red, other purple, some white, others scarlet, and ^me
again, white-blush, others party color; one Leaf ^alf scarlet, and half white,
some striped with the same ^olour, but those chiefly esteemed are of Gold
yellow, ^ouble flowering, and produce much Seed.

Bastard Britany.
This grows about two Foot high, bearing a reddish ^lower, having many brownish
woody Stalks; and on ^e lower part of it are winged Leafs seven, nine, or ^even
together, resembling those of a young Ash, though ^mewhat larger, longer, and
purpled about the edges, ^eing of a sad green color.

Male Cistus.
This has not its growth above a Yard high, small and shrubby, composed of many
brittle slender woody Bran^hes, bearing Flowers of a fine reddish purple, like
single ^oses, each having five small round Leafs, many yellow Threads in the
middle that soon fall away, etc.

Virgin Silk.
This with one or more round Stalks rises near 4 Foot ^igh, set wiih two long
broad Veins, at several Joints green and round pointed, and on the Top of the
Stalks, out of the skinny Hose, a great tuft of Flowers issue, sometimes thirty
or forty hanging down on long Foo^ stalks, each containing five small hollow
Leafs of a Pu^ple color, which fading, are succeeded by long croo^ed Cods,
standing upwards, which produce flat bro^ Seed.

Indian Scarlet Jesamine.
This comes up from a large spreading Root with o^ two or more flexible
Branches, which must be suppor^ed when they put forth their Tendrills, by
fastening (...) any woody Substance, and there will come forth (...) winged
Leafs, much like them of Roses, and at the e^^ of the Branches come forth the
Flowers, many in Number, long like a Fox-glove, and at the end opening in fine
fair broad Leafs, with a style and small threadin^ in the middle, of the color
of Saffron; some of the^ Plants have on the inside the Flower, small and r^
Leafs, others veined with small yellow lines, the Groun^ being a deep Scarlet.

The Rose Bay Tree.
This is of two Sorts, one bringing red, the other white Flowers, not otherways
differing, its Stem growing to the bigness of an Inch and half compass,
dividin^ into three Branches at each Joint; bearing long, hard thick, and dark
Leafs at the end of the Branches; the Flower issues of a white in the one, and
deep blush i^ the other; containing four long narrow Leafs, yet roun^ pointed,
falling away without Seed.

Candy Tufts.
These are small Plants, whitish green Leafs, their Stalks set with narrow long
notches, and at the Top i^ produced many small single Flowers, placed close
together, some white, and others with purple Spots in the middle; others all of
a purple color; they are produced of Seeds, the Roots Yearly perishing.

Flower Gentle of many Colors.
This produces a Flower of a lighter color, of Purple-^^arlet, and
Gold-colour; Lemmon, Orange, some Straw-^olour, and crimson; they have a thick
stalk, with ma^y large green Leafs, of many Branches, etc.

The Shrub Spicara.
This Flower rises a Yard or something more in height, ^ith diverse wooden
Stalks set with long green Leafs, ^cked on the edges; and the top of the Stalk
produces ^any Flowers of a pale Peach-bloom color, close toge^er in a long
spike, lessening by degrees, like Pyra^ids; the wooden Root despises the
Winter's rage, and ^ay be propagated by Layers.

The Cloth of Silver colored Crow-foot.
This produces lesser Flowers than some others of its and, having its Leafs
pointed, six, seven, or eight in ^umber, of a pale yellowish Blush-colour,
striped on ^e inside, but more on the outside with Crimson, the ^ot Grumous.

The double yellow Crow-foot.
This is called the Ranuncula of Asia, having its Leafs ^reading and dividing
like a Carrot; from the Root, ^e many small stalks, each producing a shining
yellow ^all double Flower.

The Ranuncula of Aleppo.
This Flower is of a curious Orange-colour'd tawney, and and very double
striped with Yellow.

Carolus.
This Flower is curiously marked and striped with ^ades of Murry-purple, through
the several Leafs of it, ^^e at bottom, and Purple Tamis, making a very cu^ous
show.

The Indian Fig.
This springs Leafs one out of another, from one Lea^ put half into the Earth:
Which taking Root, puts ou^ others, being a Finger thick, flat and round
pointed, an^ of color a pale green; showing at first brown prickle^ at the
upper end, and at the tops of the Leafs the Flowers break forth, set with two
Rows of pale yellow Leafs having a yellow thrum tipped with red in the middle
(...) after the Flower fades, the head they stood on, in the middle, grows
large, in the form of a Fig, but in these Countries comes not to perfection; it
is a tender Plan^ and must be set in Pots, so that it may be Housed in the
Winter, lest the Frost rot and destroy it.

White Hellebore.
This makes its first appearance with a round larg^ head, of a green whitish
color, and afterward opens i^ many fine green Leafs, signally pleated in
every parttaking a compass about each other at the bottom, from whence a Stalk
rises about a Yard high, small Leafs extending to the middle of it, which
dividing into man^ Branches bears a considerable Number of Star-like Flowers,
small, and so a yellowish green color.

The double Purple Virgins-Power.
This has many woody Branches, covered with a thi^ brown out bark, and green
underneath, winding about what it takes hold on; the Leafs are at the Joints,
consisting of three parts of it, notched on one side, and some on both; the
Flowers appear from the Joints on lon^ Footstalk, standing like Crosses, of a
sullen dark Red the outward Leafs broad, and in the inward folded lik^ a
Button, so that the outward ones fall off before the inward ones spread
themselves, this is proper to be supported against a Wall, and such of the
small Branches a^ in the Winter, prune off in the end of March.

Marum, or Herb Mastick.
This raises about a Foot high with hard stiff stalks, and the many Branches,
into which it divides it self, are ^r with fine green small Leafs, two at a
Joint, at the ^p of the Branches it sends forth small white Flowers, ^d among
the Tusts downy Threads; all the Plant, as ^ell as Flowers, being of a curious
Scent, and may be ^proved by Slips set in April.

The Autumn Mountain Crocus.
This is of a pale blue Color, it stands on short Foot-^lks, appearing but
little above ground, but soon grows ^ttle higher, and is prized, because it
comes when over Flowers are going out, being of a curious softness.

The Silver cupped Spanish Moley.
This appears with two or three long Rush like Leafs, ^ling when the Stalk is
at its height, that aspiring a ^rd or more, bearing a considerable Head of
Flowers ^t soon open, grow on long Foot stalks, and spread ^ch, the Flowers
being of the Color of Silver, with ^es down them on both sides, the Leafs
fashioned small ^d hollow in the manner of an Encrease-well, with lit^ Trouble.

The great yellow Frutilary.
This has a stalk about two Foot high, the Flower is ^g, small, and of a pale
Yellow, and is well in compo^ of a Garden among May-flowers, whose Number is
(...) numerous as various.

As for these last, Reader, I have given you most of ^em in the English Names;
as for the Months Flowers ^ow in, I have set them down particularly, as you
will ^d in this Book, in the Months adapted to the Flower-^arden; so that
nothing may be omitted to satisfy the ^ader in his Curiosity.

THE Gardener's Almanac: For what is necessary to be done in the Green-House
and Conservatory, in Preserving and wel^ Ordering choice Shrubs, Plants,
Flowers, etc. with the Time of Housing, etc.
GReens, as well as Flowers, are to be considered and care taken of them,
because they are n^ only pleasant to the Site of the Garden, but serve for many
profitable Uses, besides Adornment and Fragrancy Therefore,

In MARCH, What things are proper to be done.
PLant Box in Parterres, sow Bay-seeds, Fir-seeds, Phillyrea, Alaternus, and
most Perennial Greens; and after the Equinox a few Days, prune and Pine
Fir^rees; sow toward the End of the Month Myrtle-berries ^eeped a while in
warm Water.

Wrap with Straw-wisps the Tops of shorn Cyprus; ^over with Straw, or Pease
hawm, your exposed Ever^reens, as also Bays, Cyprus, Phillyrea, Pine, Fir, etc.
that are Seedlings, till they have continued in the Nursery about three Years,
and are capable of being transplanted, lest the sharp Winds too much dry and
injure them; and uncover them not till the latter End of the Month, or the tail
of the Frost be pretty well over; especially the Ever-greens, lest the Wind and
Sun conspire to wither and destroy them; and this you may do a bleak Winds, or
sharp Frosts all the Winter.

At the latter End of this Month you may set your Orange trees, Myrtles,
Lemmon-trees, Ammammus, Dates, ^entisci, Olenders, Aloes, and such like Plants,
that are ^ender and impatient of Cold, in the Portico of your Conservatory: And
if the Weather be mild and warm, the sharp Frosts and Winds being over, you may
open the Windows and Doors, but do it gradually, and not altogether, and trust
not the leaving them open a Nights, ^nless the Season be very well settled; and
some hardy Ever-greens may be transplanted, if the Season be warm and
temperate. It is also a proper Time to raise stocks to bud Lemmons and Oranges
on; and to do it set the seeds early in the Month, in Pots, half a Dozen of the
seeds of Sevil Oranges may be placed in a Pot filled with Earth, viz.

That Earth which is taken the first half spit under the Turf, in rich
Pasture-ground, where Cattle have much been fothered, and mix of rotten Cow
dung one part with it, and if then it happen to be too stiff, sift moderately a
little Lime and rotten Wood, or sticks of Willows; and for binding, if occasion
requires it, add a little loamy Earth, and plunge the Pots into Hot-beds which
may be renewed in May, and so ever the Winte^ the shoots will be near a Foot,
and in three Years fit t^ inocculate, which at the end of this Month you may
also bud, by placing two Buds opposite one to the other not above an Inch from
the Earth.

In APRIL, What Things are proper to be done.
THis Month sow Phyllerea, Pine-kernels, Fir-seeds Alternus, and the most Sorts
of Perennial-greens Take your tender and choice Shrubs of the Conservator and
air them in a fair Day, and about the middle of the Month, if the Weather be
fair and temperate, else le^ them remain till May; and when you see Occasion to
water them, about four Gallons of warm Water, will serve to do about Trees, but
let it be Rain or Pond Water, which will most nourish them.

You may also graft your tender Shrubs, and the like by approach, as
Jessamines, Pomgranades, Oranges* Lemmons, and the like.

Toward the end of the Month will be a proper Season to remove and transplant
Oleanders, Myrtles, Spanish Jessamine, young Orange-plants, Pomgranades, etc.
first suffering them to sprout, placing them about a Fortnigh^ in the shade;
refresh and time them, and also Spanish Jessamine, within an Inch or two of the
Stock, when it begins to put out or shoot. If the cold Winds are passed,
^owards the end of the Month, after gentle showers, etc. Clip Barba-jovis, Box,
Cyprus, Myrtle, Phillyrea, Alternus; and to prevent Box smelling after it is
clipped, water it immediately, and the scent will vanish.

In MAY, What things are proper to be done.
BRing forth your Orange Trees, remove and transplant them. See the particular
Manner of it in what relates to Orchard-management of Fruit Trees.

Give such housed Shrubs and Plants as you think ^ot convenient to bring yet
Abroad, fresh Earth at the sur^ice, a handful deep or somewhat more, loosening
the ^est of the Earth with a forked stick, without bruising ^r wounding the
Roots.

Brush and cleanse the Leafs of your Plants from dust (...) some other ill
conveniences they have gathered in the Green-house; and if you neither remove
nor transplant them, take off the surface of the old Earth, and finely ^ift on
some rotten old Cow Dung.

From the several sorts of Greens, except Orange's and Lemmons, you need not,
in taking up, to transplant them, or trim the Roots much, unless they are very
^uch entangled or matted; and if they increase in growth ^d stature, remove
them into large Pots or Cases, and ^ut lesser into those you remove them out
of, and this ^eed not be done above once in two or three Years.

In JUNE, What things are proper to be done.
NOw Inoculate Roses, Jessamine, and some other choice Shrubs; set Slips of
Myrtle in Cold mois^ Ground, and they will the better take Root. Likewise by
slips you may multiply Cytisus Innatus in Ground that is moderately moist, but
let them not exceeds handful in length, and be of the same spring; and use this
Month neither Seeds nor Layers of them; Water now such Things as require it;
trim up your Knots, and put every Thing in order that by defect, aecident or
luxuriance have entangled, or put themselves out o^ decency, or regular form,
and proceed to the place the spreading shoots, or tender slips of this Years
growth in your Verdent Bowers or Arbours.

In JULY, What things are proper to be done.
YOu may this Month continue to slip Myrtle, Laurels, and other useful Greens.
Water Shrubs newly planted, as also Layers of Granads, Myrtle, Orange Trees,
Amomum; which Shrub must be frequently Watered, and cannot well be done too
much, requiring likewise very much Compost to support it, as do also the
Granads and Myrtles; so that take care when you tri^ their Roots, or change
their Earth, that you give the^ the fattest and most natural Soil.

Inarch, graft by Approach, and inoculate Oranges, Jesamine, and other curious
Shrubs: Take up Autumnal Cyclamen, gather the early Seeds of it, and sow it in
Pots.

About the latter end of this Month, lay new Earth on the Surface of the Cases
wherein your Orange Trees are planted, and cool them as much as you can, and
plunge your Pots in cool Earth to avoid the excessive heat of the Sun.

In AUGUST, What Things are proper to be done, etc.
THE beginning of this Month is the proper season for Success in Budding of
Orange Trees: Therefore Inoculate seedling Stocks, of about three or four Years
growth; and to have good Buds for this purpose, take off the head of an old
Orange-Tree that is of a good kind, which will furnish you with the best by
making large Shoots.

About the 24th of this Month is a proper and very safe Season to remove and
lay your Perennial Greens, Lemmons, Oranges, Myrtles, Oleanpers, Phllyreat,
Pomgranates, Monthly Roses, Arbutus, Jesamines, and other choice Shrubs, and
such as will endure the Frost; peg the Shoot and Branch of the last Spring in
very fertile Earth, water them as you see occasion, during the Summer; and when
this Time comes again the next Year, you may transplant or remove them into fit
Earth, set in the shade with moderate Moisture, but not too much, lest it rot
the young Fibers; and then at three Weeks end place them in a more Airy
Station, but not till fifteen Days after; you ought not to venture them in the
Sun, especially (...) hot.

In SEPTEMBER, Things proper to be done, etc.
PLANT Irish-chalchidon, and Cyclamen, continue to sow Phillyria and Alternus,
and Anuals that are not impaired by the Frost.

Priune Pines and Firr-Trees somewhat after the Equinoctial, if it was not done
in March; for I prefer that Month as a proper Season.

About Michaelmas, later or sooner, as the Weather proves reasonable fair,
without Fogs or great Mists, is a proper Time to retire your tender Greens,
etc. observing at the same Time that they be dry on the Leafs, etc. as Lemmons,
Oranges, Indian, and Spanish Jessamine, Dates, Ledon Clusi, Aloes, Sedums,
Oleanders, Babha-Jovis, Citysus, Lunatus, Amomum, Plin, Choemeleatricocces; put
them into your Conservatory, with fresh Mould stirred amongst that which is on
the Top of their Cases and Boxes; then add rich and well consumed Soil, for
their better nourishment during the Winter, but you need not shut the Doors and
Windows of the House, till the cold is much more increased, and by its
sharpness gives you warning to do it: As for Myrtles they may be left Abroad
till the latter end of October.

In OCTOBER, Things proper to be done, etc.
IN this Month you may sow Cyprus, if the Frost be not rise, but do not much
clip your Shrubs of any kind; sow Alternus and Philligra-seeds, and look after
your Green-House to place all Things in good Order, and clear them of dead or
decaying Leafs, or any other Annoyances; and remove such Things as are yet
Abroad, according to their Degrees bearing Cold, into shelter; and put Dung to
the Roots of such as are yet left Abroad, but not too much, nor too hot, lest
it injure them to too much Heat, so that they will be the less abler.

In NOVEMBER. Things proper to be done, etc.
THIS Month cover your young exposed Ever-Greens with Straw or Hawm, if the
Winds be very sharp, lest they be dried up and spoiled; and quite enclose your
tender Plants, Peranual-greens, and choice Shrubs, if the Frost come on in your
Conservatory, excluding particularly the cold Winds; and if they there appear
very dry, and not freezing, you may water them with Water qualified with Cow or
Sheeps dung, some what warmed.

Plant Roses, Althea-frutex, Citysus, and sow stony Seeds.

You may now Plantt Forest trees for Walks, to make a curious green Shade in
their proper Seasons, either in Walks or Avenues, and cover your tender Greens
in the Nursery, with Mattresses and warm Straw.

In DECEMBER, Things proper to be done, etc.
IN this Month little can be expected to be done as to Gardening, and therefore
may be termed to the careful Gardener a Month of rest, wherein he ought to take
care of himself in providing wholesome, nourishing Diet, warm Clothes and good
Fires; yet let him look after such Things as yet require his Care, especially
in the Green-House or Conservatory, which now will prove an easy Task, the
main being to keep the Windows and Doors well closed, and lined with Mats or
other Conveniences, to prevent the piercing Air entering through the Crevices;
for now the Orange Trees are most likely to be in danger, and therefore if the
Weather be extreme, assist them with the kindly Heat of Fire, but not too much,
for that does more Harm than Cold.

Set dropping iipe Barberries, and Pine-kernels in a good mellow Mould, and see
what else is requisite; and so I conclude the Year with my Wishes, that the
honest Gardener's Undertakings may be always successful and prosperous.

The GREEN-HOUSE AND CONSERVATORY
For the Preservation of Plants, Shrubs, Choice Flowers, etc. from Winds,
Frost, or cold Airs that would otherwise Chill and Destroy them.
GREENS that last all the Year are for the most part not to be kept without
great Care, sometimes abroad, and sometimes in the Conservatory; and since few
Books give any satisfactory Account of, to accommodate the English Gardener: I
conceived it highly necessary to place such Rules and Directions, on that
Occasions at the latter End of this Work, as cannot choose but make it more
acceptable to the Ingenious, than any that have gone before it.

That a Green House or Conservatory to preserve choice Greens and Flowers from
the nipping Winds or chilling Frosts, I cannot conceive any that deal this Way
are Ignorant, though some are for having it in one Fashion, and others in
another; and indeed I shall not undertake to contradict Fancy in this Matter,
yet there remains something to be said that many are ignorant of, and being
^nown and put in practice, may highly conduce to their Advantage.

Consider then that free breathing Air is that which continues the life and
grotwh of Plants, as well as Animals, and where they are stifled and kept in
too close, though with Heat and subterranean Fires, as Stows, etc. in the cold
Weather, as many use for want of free Air to breath, they express a Languor by
the Parching of the Brims of the Leafs; and sometimes a Decay and Dryness of
the whole Leaf, which could they have moderate Heat and Air to pass in and out
moderately for their Refreshment, would be remedied, and this can be done no
better than by Earthen Pipes conveniently placed, some in a Stow set on the
Outside of the House conducting Heat, and others conveniently placed to let
out the stagnated or sulphurous Air that sickens the Plants, and let in that
which is fresh and pure to revive and refresh them, that they may continue and
flourish, at least keep their lively Verdure; and 'this is far better than Pans
of Charcole, or Stows within, that corrupt and stifle the Air; and such a Stow
may be erected with a Chimney or Funnel, a Fire hearth, and an Ash-hole at a
moderate Price, and the Expense of much less Fuel than the others; the Pipes
to let in Heat need not exceed three, and one or two of them as Occasion
requires, may sometimes be stopped, or less or more Heat is requisite, the
Season being very sharp or relenting, and so may you order those of the like
Number, to let in and out the Air.

In this House you must have your Door and Windows to the South; and the Door
that is placed in the side of it requires a Porch, with another Door matted, to
keep the Crevices, and shutting close, so that going in or our, one Door may be
shut upon you before the other is opened, that the cold Air may be kept out,
that otherwise would rush in with much Violence.

As for the Windows they must have Wooden-Shutters, as well as Sashes of Glass
well framed in, that when the Cold is extreme they may be totally shut up; and
when there is relentings or Sun-shiny Days, the Wooden-Shutters my in the
Daytime by degrees be opened to let in the Sun and Air more freely, but not
the Glass ones be drawn up, unless it proves very warm and Sun-shiny, and then
not too suddenly but with Caution and Discretion, that the Plants may take it
kindly; and not find too sudden an alteration in the change of the Air, which
may prove very prejudicial.

So range your Pots and Cases wherein your choice Plants and Flowers stand, and
each may receive a Benefit of Air, and warmth according to its Degree, but not
so near as to interfere or entangle with one another, for then they will keep
in the contaminated, thick or gross Air, and there will be no free breathing
amongst them; as in this Case there ought to preserve a Vivacity of Liveliness
in them.

The Greens require a little watering in the Conservatory, or Green-House, and
many of them none; as Aloes, and the like; because it makes them sickly and
fading, the Air being sufficient to moisten them, especially in the cold
season; and when by the curling and withering of the Leafs you find a necessity
to do it, warm the Water, and mix it a little with Pigeons or Poultry's-Dung;
pour it on moderately some distance from the Roots, that it may leisurely soak
to them, and not in abundance.

Take off such Leaves as wither or grow dry, and stir the Stalk or Bole of the
Plant gently, that the Root may be a little loose to have the freer breathing
of Air; open the Mould a little on the top, and sprinkle a fresh Mould on the
surface, and over that a small scattering of warm Dung; and if any Weeds or
Grass grow up, take them away, smoothing over the place again, keeping such a
distance between your Rows of your Pots or Cases placed on Forms, or Stools,
Tables, or the like, that you may easily pass between them to do any Office
that is required for the Commodity or Advantage.

Spread at the bottom of your Green-House, Wood-Ashes finely sifted, and over
them lay dried Rushes, and they will suck up the Damps apt to arise out of the
Earth, and add a considerable warmth to the place.

Let the Ceiling be low to reflect the Heat that proceeds from the Stow, and
hang it about with Linsey-wooles-y Baye, or some such course Stuffs which will
take off the Cold that is subject to penetrate the Walls, and ^vent their
Mustiness, often occasioned by sweating ^ter Frosts, or some relentings of
Frosts, foggy Wea^her, or immoderate Rains, when the Air is thick and gross;
and likewise add a considerable warmth for the preservation of such Things as
are the most tender: In matters not at which end of your House you erect your
Stow, whether East or West, so it be in a convenient place. It may be made of
Stone or Brick, to be erected foursquare, of the ordinary size of a single
plain Furnace, like that of a Chemist, used sn his Laboratory, usual there for
common Operation, consisting of an Ashhole and Fire-hearth, which may take up
about 2 Foot from out to out: Yet so it must stand that the Grate or
Fire-hearth may be about a Yard above the Floor, or Area of the Green-House,
that thereby the Heat coming through the Pipes conveniently placed, may be the
more leveller, and evener dispersed to the middle, bottom, and top of the
House, that every part may participate as much as is convenient of it; and in
this good ordering; even in the Cold of Winter, you will perceive many of your
Greens to shoot out and flourish, some Blossom, and some produce Fruit, many
Flowers blow to admiration; as if, by this reviving Heat and good Management,
an Artificial Spring or Summer was produced, which will much redound to the
Credit and Profit of a Gardener, especially such as manage these Affairs for
the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, who are curious in them, and take
pleasure to see what they cannot reasonably expect at such a Season.

Thus, Reader, I hope I have fulfilled my Undertaking, in omitting nothing that
might materially conduce to the well ordering of an Orchard or Garden, pleasant
and profitable to the Owners, in all their Particulars and Niceties; so that an
indifferent understanding Man may reach and comprehend the Instructions laid
down, which being put in practice as the Seasons are specified cannot but
render a Gardener acceptable.

FINIS.

