IVS REGIVM: Or, the Just, and Solid FOUNDATIONS OF MONARCHY In General, and
more especially of the MONARCHY of SCOTLAND: Maintained against Buchannan,
Naphthali, Dolman, Milton, etc.

BY Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, His Majesty's Advocat.

1 Samuel 10.26, 27. 26. And there went with Saul a band of men, whose hearts God
had touched.

27. But the Children of Belial said, how shall this man save us? and they
despised him, and brought him no presents, but he held his peace.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1684.

The Design.
BVchannans Book De Iure Regni being lately Translated, and many Copies
dispersed. His Majesty's Advocat, in Duty to the King, and Compassion to the
People, who are thus like to be poisoned, has Written this Answer, which was
necessary, notwithstanding of the Learned Answers made by Barclay and
Blackwood, since beside that theirs are in Latin, and so not useful to the
people, it is conceived they understood not fully our Law, nor was our Law so
clear then as now. Many Arguments have been invented since their time by
Dolman, Milton, Nephthaly, etc. And Experience has opened our Eyes much since
their time. Blackwoods Arguments are Calculated for the Romish Church, and
Barclay has mistaken essential Points. Theirs run upon History and Philology.
This upon our Law, the Laws of Nations, Reason and Convenience. And I am
afraid, it will be said that there are too many new thoughts in mine.

ERRATA.
Page 90. For Pliny Read Tacitus.

TO THE UNIVERSITIE OF OXFORD.
THe King my Master, and His Royal Brother, being by their natural goodness
inclined to Pardon all Crimes, except Flattery; and by their Modesty to think
all that Flattery, which can be justly said of them. I could not in prudence
Dedicat this Book to Them, since the first Part of it, concerns the Right of
the Monarchy: and the second the Right of the Successor. And therefore (since
to Support a Crown, is the next Honor to the Bearing it) this Dedication was
due to you, who have both in the last Rebellion, and this Factious Age,
maintained the Royal Interest, so learn'dly, and generously. Your late
Decisions against the Fanatics, have almost made my Reasonings useless; for
your Authority will weigh as much as any private man's Arguments. And what should
have more credit amongst men, than an illustrious Company of Learned and pious
Divines, deciding for their Duty, and Conscience against their Interest and
Vanity. Men who wish for no Crown save in Heaven; and desire no power save over
their own Lusts and Passions. To the Episcopal Church, God has fulfilled that
promise, of making Kings their Nursing Fathers, The true Heirs and best
Scholars of the Primitive Church, happier than it, in this* that they can
practice its virtues, without its necessities, and need not Poverty to make
them humble, nor Armies to make them Loyal. And who in it are so happy as you,
who can be submissive, without being Slaves, Firm, without being Opiniatre.
Zealous, without being Cruel, and Pious, without being Bigot. To whom I cannot
wish greater blessings, than that your Fame may grow as great as your Loyalty;
That your University may continue prosperous, till an other grow more Learned;
and that all honest men, may be as ready to serve you, as

Your sincere Welwisher, and humble Servant, Geo. Mackenzie.

THE Just Right OF MONARCHY In General, but more especially of the KINGS of
SCOTLAND, asserted against Buchannan and others.
LVCIFER might in Reason have contented himself with that share of Knowledge,
Glory, and Power, which was bestowed upon him, by his Almighty, and Bountiful
Sovereign. And Adam should have rested satisfied, with the Glory of having been
made after the Image of God, and with the being his Lieutenant in this lower
World. But there are such strong Charms in Ambition, and Vanity, that the one
resolved to hazard all that he possessed, as being second, rather than not try
if he could be the first, and the other, desiring to improve his present share,
forefeited those Excellencies which he enjoyed. How jealous then should frail
and fallen man be, in debates with those, whom the Almighty has appointed to be
his Vicegerents amongst them; and to whom he has said, Ye are Gods. And how
hard is it for us to Conquer that Vice, which the one could not resist, though
he was all Light, and the other though he was all Innocence?

What Nations under Heaven were so happy as we, under the Reign of King
Charles the First? Secure against all Invasion from abroad, by the situation of
our Country; and from all Oppression at home, by its Laws, and the gracious
Concessions of our excellent Monarchs: But more especially in that Age, by the
innat Virtues of that King, who was severe to none, but to himself; and whose
Prerogatives, no Laws could bound so much as His own Goodness did. And yet
weary with the burden of our own prosperity, we lusted after new improvements
of Liberty and Property: And after we had emptied our own Veins, and Purses, in
fighting for these; all we gained, was to be Slaves, and Beggars. And having
killed for Religion a King, who had more of it, than all who fought against
him; we split our own Church into a thousand pieces, and from its murdered
Body, did arise those Sectarians, like so many Worms, and Insects. But yet God
Almighty desiring to try us once more, and make us for ever inexcusable, did
not only deliver us from that Slavery that we had drawn upon our selves; but
because we were all Crimes, he gave us a King who was all Clemency, and who
deserves to have been Elected, if he had not been born our King: And yet after
that he had also condescended to all our new Extravagancies, and that by His
Conduct, all Sciences flourish, and Trade is so increased, that Riches are
become a Plague. We are now troubled with Jealousies, because we can be
troubled with nothing else: And murmuring against the gentlest and best of
Kings, we are tormented daily with Apparitions, Visions, Plots, Pamphlets and
Libels. But under whom can we expect to be free from Arbitrary Government, when
we were, and are afraid of it under King Charles the First, and King Charles
the Second? And what King, or Government, can be secure from those, who
Conspire the death of this most merciful Prince, and of this so ancient, and so
well molded Government?

Amongst the other wicked Instruments in these Rebellions, I must confess that
our Contrymen Buchannan (one of the chief Ornaments, and Reproaches of his
native Country) the Authors of Lex Rex, Naphtali, and Ius Populi Vindicatum,
have been Ringleaders, who have endeavored extremely to poison this Nation by
persuading the People:

1. That our Monarchs derive their Rights from them.

2. That therefore since they derive their Right from the People, they are
accountable to them for for their Administration, and consequently they may be
suspended or deposed by them.

3. That the People may Reform without them, and may rise in Arms against them,
if the Monarch hinder them to Reform.

4. That the People or their Representatives may seclude the Lineal Successor,
and raise to the Throne any of the Royal Family who does best deserve the Royal
Dignity.

These being all matters of Right, the plain and easy way which I resolve to
take for refuting them, so as the learned and unlearned may be equally
convinced, shall be first, by giving a true account of what is our present
positive Law. 2. By demonstrating that as our present positive Law is
inconsistent with these Principles, so these our positive Laws are excellently
well founded upon the very nature of Monarchy, and that those Principles are
inconsistent with all Monarchy: And the third Class of my Arguments shall be
from the Principles of common Reason, Equity and Government, abstracting both
from the positiveness of our Law, and the nature of our Monarchy: And in the
last place I shall answer the Arguments of those Authors.

As to the first, I conceive that a Treatise De Iure Regni apud Scotos, should
have cleared to us what was the power of Monarchs by Law, and particularly what
was the positive Law of Scotland as to this point; for if these points be clear
by our positive Law, there is no further place for debate, since it is
absolutely necessary for Mankind, especially in matters of Government, that
they at last acquiesce in something that is fixed and certain, and therefore it
is very well observed by Lawyers and Statesmen, that before Laws be made, men
ought to reason; but after they are made, they ought to obey: which makes me
admire how Buchannan and the other Authors that I have named, should have
adventured upon a Debate in Law, not being themselves Lawyers; and should have
written Books upon that Subject, without citing one Law, Civil, or Municipal,
pro or con: Nor is their Veracity more to be esteemed than their Learning; for
it is undeniable that Buchannan wrote this Book De Iure Regni, to persuade
Scotland to raise his Patron, though a Bastard to the Crown: and the Authors of
Lex Rex, Ius Populi Vindicatum, and others, were known to have written those
Libels from picque against the Government, because they justly suffered under
it.

I know that to this it may be answered, That these Statutes are but late, and
were not extant in Buchanans time, and consequently Buchanan cannot be
Redargu'd by them.

2. That these Statutes have been obtained from Parliaments, by the too great
influence of their Monarchs, and the too great Pusillanimity of Parliaments,
who could not resign the Rights and Privileges of the People, since they have
no Warrant from them for that effect.

To the first of which, I answer, that my Task is not to form an Accusation
against Buchanan, but against his Principles, and to demonstrat, that these
Principles are not our Law, but are inconsistent with it, and it is ridiculous
to think, that any such Laws should have been made, before these Treasonable
Principles were once hatched and maintained, for Errors must appear before they
be condemned: and by the same Argument it may be as well urged, that Arius,
Nestorius, etc. were not Heretics; because those Acts of General Councils,
which condemned their Heresies, were not extant, when they first defended those
opinions; and that our King had not the power of making Peace and War, till the
Year 1661:

But, 2 dly, For clearing this Point, it is fit to know that our Parliaments
never give Prerogatives to our Kings, but only declare what have been their
Prerogatives, and particularly in these Statutes that I shall Cite, the
Parliament does not Confer any New Right upon the King, but only acknowledge
what was Originally his Right and Prerogative from the beginning, and therefore
the Parliament being the only Judges who could decide whether Buchannans
Principles were solid, and what was Ius Regni apud Scctor. These Statutes
having decided those points contraverted by him, there can be hereafter no
place for Debate, and particularly as to Buchannan, his Book De jure Regni apud
Scotos, it is expressly condemned as Slanderous, and containing several
offensive Matters by the 134 Act, Parl. 8. Ia. 6. in Anno 1584. which was the
first Parliament that ever sat after his Book was printed.

To the 2 d, I answer, that it being controverted what is the Kings Power,
there can be no stronger Decision of that Controversy in Favors of the King
than the acknowledgment of all Parties Interested, and it is strange and
unsufferable to hear such as appeal to Parliaments, cry out against their
Power, their Justice, and Decisions; and why should we oppress our Kings, and
raise Civil Wars, whereby we endanger so much our selves to procure powers to
Parliaments, if Parliaments be such ridiculous things as we cannot trust when
they are empowered by us? and if there be any force in this answer of
Buchannans, there can be none in any of our Laws, for that strikes at the Root
of all our Laws, and as I have produced a Tract of reiterated Laws for many
Years, so where were there ever such free unlimited Parliaments in any Nation
as these whose Laws I have Cited? 2 dly, Whatever might be said, if a positive
Contract betwixt the King and People were produced, clearing what were the just
Limits of the Monarchy, and bounding it by clear Articles mutually agreed upon,
yet it is very absurd and extravagant to think that when the Debate is, what is
the King of Scotlands just Power and Right, and from whom he Derives it, that
the Laws and repeated Acknowledgements of the whole Representatives of the
People assembled in the Supreme Court of the Nation, having no open force upon
it, but enacted at several times, in many several Parliaments, under the
gentlest, peaceablest, and wisest Kings that ever they had, should not be
better believed than the Testimonies of three or four biased and disobliged
Pedants, who understood neither our Laws nor Statutes, and who can bring no
clear fundamental Law; nor produce no Contract nor Paction restricting the
King, or bounding his Government. 3 dly, That which adds a great deal of
Authority to this Debate, and these Statutes is, that as this is clear by our
positive Law, so it is necessarly inferred from the nature of our Monarchy, and
is very advantageous for the Subjects of this Kingdom, which I shall clear in
the second and third Arguments that I shall bring against these Treasonable
Principles, nor can they be seconded by any solid Reason, as I shall make
appear in answering the Arguments of those Authors.

I know that Nephthaly, the Author of Ius populi, and our late Fanatical
Pamphlets allege that our Parliaments since 1661 are null and unlawful,
because many who have Right to sit as Members, or to Elect Members were
secluded by the Declaration or Test: But my answer is, First, That these were
excluded by Acts of Parliament, which were past in Parliaments prior to their
exclusion, and so they were excluded by Law, and no man can be said to be
illegally excluded from his Seat in Parliament, who is excluded by a clear
Statute. 2 dly, If this were not a good answer, then the Papists might pretend
that they are unjustly excluded, because they will not take the Oath of
Supremacy, and because they are Papists; and how can the Fanatics pretend to
make this objection, since they by the same way excluded the Kings Loyal
Subjects in the Year 1647. and 1649. etc. Or how would these Authors have
railed at any Malignant for using this Argument against them, which they use
now most impudently against us with far less justice, for their Parliaments
were unjust upon other Heads, as being inconsistent with the fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom, and so their acts of exclusion were null in themselves. 3 dly.
All the Statutes made since 1661. are necessary consequences of former Laws,
and so are rather renewed than new Laws. 4 ly. If this were allowed there could
be no end of controversy, for all who are excluded would still allege that
they were unjustly excluded, and consequently there could be no submission to
Authority, and so no Society nor Peace.

The last answer that our Dissenters make when they are driven from all their
other grounds is, that they, though the lesser, are yet the sounder part of the
Nation; but this shift does not only overturn Monarchy, but establishes
Anarchy, and though they were once settled in their beloved Commonwealth, this
would be sufficient to overturn it also, for every little number of Dissenters,
nay, and even the meanest Dissenter himself might pretend to be this sounder
part of the Commonwealth; but God Almighty foreseeing that pride or ignorance
would suggest to frail Mankind this principle, so inconsistent with all that
Order and Government, whereby he was to preserve the World, he did therefore in
his great Wisdom convince men by the Light of their own Reason, that in matters
of common concern, which were to be determined by Debate, the greater number
should determine the lesser; and such as drive beyond this Principle, shall
never find any certain Point at which they may rest: and by the same Reason,
the Law has pronunc'd it safer to rest in what is decided, though it be unjust,
than to cast loose the authority of Decisions, upon which the peace and quiet
of the Commonwealth does depend, who would be so humble and just, as to confess
that his Adversary has the juster side? Or who would obey if this were allowed?
And what Idea of Government or Society could a man form to himself, allowing
once this principle.

It is also very observable, that those who pretend to be the sounder part, and
deny obedience upon that account, are still the most insolent and irregular of
all the Society, the greatest admirers of themselves, and the greatest enemies
to peace, and so the unfitest to be Judges of what is the sounder part, though
they were not themselves parties: But what pretense is there for that Plea in
this case, where the foundations of our Monarchy, have been unanimously
acknowledged by many different Parliaments, in many different Ages, chosen at
first from the Dictats of Reason, and confirmed after we had in many
Rebellions, found how dangerous all those popular pretenses are, and in which
we agree with the Statsmen, Lawers and Divines of all the well Governed Nations
under Heaven, who are born under an hereditary Monarchy, as it is confessed we
are.

To return then to the first of those Points, I lay down as my first position,
that our Monarchs derive not their Right from the People, but are absolute
Monarchs, deriving their Royal Authority immediately from God Almighty; and this
I shall endeavor to prove, first from our positive Law.

By the 2. Act Par. 1. Chapter 2 d. in which it is declared, That His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, have for ever, by virtue of that Royol Power which they
hold from God Almighty over this Kingdom, the sole choice and appointment of
Officers of State, Counselors and Judges.

But because this Act did only assert that our Kings did hold their Royal Power
from God, but did not exclude the people from being sharers in bestowing this
Donative, therefore by the 5 th Act of that same Parliament, they acknowledge
the Obligation lying on them in Conscience, Honor and Gratitude, to own and
assert the Royal Prerogatives of the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, which the
Kings Majesty holds from God Almighty alone; and therefore they acknowledge
that the Kings Majesty only, by virtue of His Royal Prerogative, can make Peace
and War, and Treaties with foreign Princes.

Because this last Statute did only assert that the King did hold His Imperial
Crown from God alone, but did not decide from whom our Kings did only derive
their Power; therefore by the 2 d^ Act Par. 3 d Chapter 2 d. It is declared that
the Estates of Parliament considering that the Kings of this Realm, Deriving
their Power from God Almighty alone, they do succeed Lineally thereto, etc.
Which Statutes do in this agree with our old Law; for in the first Chapter of
Reg. Magist. verse. 3. These Words are, That both in Peace and War, our Glorious
King may so Govern this Kingdom committed to Him by God Almighty, in which He
has no Superior but God Almighty alone, which Books are acknowledged to be our
Law, and are called the Kings Laws by the 54 th Act Par. 3 d Iam. 1. and the
115. Act Par. 14. Iam. 3.

These our Laws both Ancient and Modern, can neither be thought to be extorted
by force, nor enacted by flattery, since in this we follow the Scripture, the
Primitive Church and their Councils, the Civil Law and its Commentators, and
the wisest Heathens, both Philosophers and Poets. As to the Scripture, God
tells us, That by him Kings Reign, and that he has anointed them Kings, and
that the King is the Minister of God. David tells us, That God will give
strength to his King, and deliverance to his King, and to his Anointed. Daniel
says to Nebuchadnezar, The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom. And to
Cyrus, God gave to Nebuchadnezar thy Father a Kingdom, and for the Majesty that
he gave him, all Nations trembled.

As to the Fathers, Augustine de Civit. Dei, l. 5. c. 21. Let us not attribute
unto any other, the power of giving Kingdoms and Empyrs, but to the true God.
Basil in Psalm. 32. The Lord sets up Kings and removes them. Tertul: apol:
contra gentes, Let Kings know, that from God only they have their Empire, and
in whose power only they are. And Ireneus having proved this point fully, ends
thus, l. 5. c. 24. By whose Command they are born men, by his likewise they are
ordained Kings. This is also acknowledged by the Councils of Toledo 6. c. 14 of
Paris 6. c. 5. vid Council aquis gran. 3. c. 1.

Amongst our late Divines, Marca the famous Archbishop of Paris, Concord:
sacerd: and imperij, l. 2. c. 2. n: 2. asserts, That the Royal Power is not
only bestowed by God, but that it is immediately bestowed by God upon Kings: and
Refutes Bellarm. ^de laico c. 6. maintaining, That the Jesuits Doctrine in
this, lessens Authority, and raises Factions, and contradicts both the Design
and Word of God. Duvalius de suprem. potest. Romans Pontif. p. 1. q. 2. Asserts
that Kings derive their Rights by the Laws of God and Nature, non ab ipsa
Republica and hominibus; and in all this the Fanatics and Republicans agree
with the Jesuits against Monarchy.

In the Civil Law this is expressly asserted, Cod. de vet. Cod. enucleand. Deo
auctore nostrum gubernante imperium quod nobis a coelesti majestate traditum
est, Nov. 6. in init. Nov. 133. in proem. in Nov. 80.85, 86. Justinian
acknowledges his Obligation to care for his People, because he received the
Charge of them from God; and certainly Subjects are happier, if their Kings
acknowledge this, as a duty to God, than if they only think it a Charge
conferred on them by their People, and that they are therefore answerable to
them.

That the Doctors and Commentators are of this opinion, is too clear to need
Citations, vid. Arnis. cap. de Essentia Majest: Granswinkel. de jur. Maj. cap.
1. and 2.

As to the Heathens, Hesiod. in Theog. verse 96. says (...) Kings are from
God. Homer says their Honor is from God (...) -- Iliad. 1. verse 197.
Themistcus asserts, that the Regal Power came from God, Orat. 5. with whom
agrees Dion. Chrisostom Orat. 1. diotog. apud Stob. sermon. etc. Plat. in polit.
etc. But above all, Aristotle in polit. (...). And Plutarch. Ages and Cleom.
(...).

If to these Statutes and Citations it be answered, that God Almighty may
indeed be the principal and chief Author of Monarchy, and that Monarchs may
derive their Power from him, as from the Supreme Being, that directs all more
immediate Causes, and yet the People may be the immediate Electors of Monarchs,
and so Kings may derive immediately from them their Power; and thus these
Statutes are not inconsistent with the principle laid down by Buchanan and
others, whereby they assert, that Kings in general, and particularly the Kings
of Scotland, derive their Power immediately from the People.

To this my answers are, that first, if we consider the propriety of the
Words, there can be nothing more inconsistent, than that Kings should derive
their Power from God Almighty alone, and yet that they should derive it from
the People, for the Word Alone, is of all other words the most exclusive. 2
dly, The design of the Parliament in that acknowledgement was to condemn, after
a long Rebellion, the unhappie Principles which had kindled it; and amongst
which, one of the chief was, that our Kings derived their Power from the
People, and therefore they might qualify, or resume what they at first gave,
or might oppose all Streaches in the Power they had given, and might even
punish, or depose the King when he transgressed, none of which Principles could
have been sufficiently condemned, by acknowledging that, though God was the
chief Author, yet the People were the immediate Electors. 3 dly, There needed no
Act of Parliament be made for acknowledging God to be the chief Author, and
first Fountain of every Power, for that was never contraverted amongst
Christians. 4 thly, That foolish gloss cannot at all consist with the
Inferences deduced from that Principle in the former Statutes: for in the 2.
Act, Par. 1. Char. 2. It is inferred from His Majesty's holding His Royal Power
from God alone, that therefore he has the sole choice of his own Officers of
State, Privy Counselors, and Judges; And in the 5. Act, it is inferred from
the same Principle, that because he derives his Power from God alone, that
therefore it is Treason to rise in Arms without his Consent, upon any pretext
whatsoever: And in the 2. Act, Par. 3. Char. 2. It is concluded, that because
our Kings derive their Power from God Almighty alone, therefore it is Treason
in the People to interrupt, or divert their Succession, upon any Difference in
Religion, or other pretext whatsoever; whereas all this had been false, and
inept Reasoning, if the design of the Parliament had not been to acknowledge
that our Kings derived not their Power from the People, for though they derived
their Power from God, as the supreme Being only, and not as the immediate
bestower, and if the People were the immediate bestowers of that Power, then the
People might still have pretended, that they who gave the Power, might have
risen in their own Defense, when they saw the same abused, and might have
diverted the Succession, when it descended upon a person who was an enemy to
their Interest: but how false this gloss is, will appear more fully from the
following Arguments, and it is absolutely inconsistent with St. Augustins
opinion, formerly cited, wherein he forbids to attribute the giving of Kingdoms
to any other but to God.

My second Argument for proving that Kings derive their Power from God alone,
and not from the People, shall be from the principles of Reason. For First, The
Almighties design being to manifest his Glory, in Creating a World, so vast and
regular as this is, and his goodness in Governing it, and that Men might live
peaceably in it, having both Reason and Time to Serve him, it was consequential
that he should have reserved to himself the immediate dependence of the supreme
Power, to preclude the extravagant and restless multitude, from those frequent
Revolutions which they would make, and Desolations which they would occasion,
if they thought that the supreme Power depended on them, and that they were not
bound to obey them for Conscience sake; so that those expressions in Scripture
were very useful in this to curb our Insolences, and to fix our restlesnesse;
and it seems that Kings are in Scripture, said to be gods, to the end it might
be clear that they were not made by Men^ 2 dly, God Almighty being King of
Kings, it was just, that as inferior Magistrates derived their Power from the
King, so Kings should derive their Power from God, who is their King; and this
seems to be clear from that analogy, which runs in a Dependence, and Chain
through the whole Creation. 3 dly, As this is most suitable to the principles
of Reason, so it is most consonant the analogy of Law, by which it is declared,
that no Man is master of his own Life, or Limbs, nemo est Dominus membrorum
suorum; and therefore, as no Man can lawfully take away his own Life, so
neither can he transfer the power of disposing upon it to any other Man, and
consequently this Power is not derived to Kings and Princes by private Men, but
is bestowed upon them by God Almighty, who is the sole Arbiter of Life and
Death, and who can only take it away, because he gave it: And if it be
objected, that this last branch of the Argument, seems either to prove nothing,
or else to prove that there can be no Elective Monarchies. To this it is
answered, that even in Elective Monarchies, the Nomination proceeds only from
the People, but the Royal Power from God, as we see in inferior Magistracies,
such as Burrows Royal, etc. the People Elect, and so the Nomination is from
them, but the power of Governing proceeds from the King, and not from the
Electors, and therefore as the People who Elected the Magistrates in these
Towns, cannot Depose them by their own Authority, so neither can the People
Depose their King, but the punishment of him belongs to God Almighty. I
confess, that if the People Choose a King with express Condition, that they
may punish him as the Lacedemonian Kings were punishable by those Magistrates,
called the Ephori, the Kings are in that case accountable to the People, but
then they are not Monarchs, having supreme Power as our Kings have, and who are
therefore declared to hold their Power immediately from God, and not to be at
all punishable by the People.

The 4 th Argument that I shall use, for proving that our Kings derive not
their power from the People, shall be from the natural Origin of Monarchy, and
of ours in particular, which I conceive to be that Right of Paternal Power
which is stated in them; for understanding whereof, it is fit to know, that God
at first created only one Man, that so his Children might be subject to him, as
all Children yet are to their Parents: and therefore the Jesuitical and
Fanatical Principles, that every man is born Free, and at Liberty to choose
what form of Government he pleases, was ever, and is most false, for every man
is born a Subject to his own Parents, who, if they were not likewise subject to
a Superior Power, might judge and punish them Capitally, lead them out to War,
and do all other things that a King could do, as we see the Patriarchs did in
their own Families. And as long as it is known who is the Root of the Family,
or who represents it, there is no place for Election, and people Elect only
when the memory of this is lost, and such as overcome the Heads of Families in
Batle, succeed to them in their Paternal Right.

If it be answered, that the Father may by nature pretend to a power over his
Children, or it may be an Elder Brother over his Cadets, yet there is no tie in
nature subjecting Collaterals, as Uncles, and their descendents to those
descended from the Eldest Family. To this I reply, that 1. This power over all
the Family was justly given by nature, to shun divisions, for else every little
Family should have erected it self in a distinct Government, and the weakest
had still been a Prey. 2. We see that Abraham did lead out to War, and in every
thing Act as King, not only over his own Children, but all the Family, and
whole Nations, are called the Children of Israel, the Children of Edom, etc. 3.
That must be concluded to be established by natural instinct, which all men in
all Ages and Places allow and follow; but so it is, that all Nations in all
Places, and Times have ever allowed the Eldest Son of the Eldest Family to
govern all descended from the Stock, without new Elections; and the Author of
the late famous Moral Essays have admired this as one of the wisest Maxims
that we have from Natural Instinct; for if the wisest, or strongest were to be
choos'd, there had still been many Rivals and so much Faction and Discord, but
it is still certain who is the Eldest Son, and this precludes all Debate, and
prevents all Dissension: For applying this to our Case, it is fit to know, that
if we believe not our Historians, then none else can prove that the People of
Scotland did at first Elect a King, that being contrary to the
acknowledgements of our own Statutes; and all Buchannans Arguments, for
restricting Kings, being founded upon the authority of our Historians, who, (as
he says,) assert that K. Fergus was first Elected King by the People, if he be
not able to prove that our Kings owe their Crowns to the Election of the
People, without any inherent or previous Right, all his Arguments evanish to
nothing, but on the other hand, if we consider exactly our Historians, we will
find that our Kings Reign over us by this Paternal Power; and though I am not
very fond of Fabulous Antiquities, yet if Tradition, or Histories can be
believed in any thing, they should at least be believed against Buchannan, and
those who make use of them, to restrict the power of our Kings, and by our
Histories it is clear, that Gathelus having led some Forces into Egypt, he
after several Victories, settled in Portugal, called from him Portus Gatheli,
from which an Collonie of that Race transported it self into Ireland, and
another into Scotland; nor should this be accounted a Fable, since Cornelius
Tacitus, in the Life of Agricola, makes the Scots to be of Spanish, and the
Picts to be of German Extraction.

The Scottish Collonies finding themselves oppressed by the Britains, and Picts,
they sent over into Ireland to Ferquhard, and he sent them a considerable
Supply, under the Command of Fergus his Son, who having secured them against
their Enemies, all the Heads of the Tribes acknowledged him for their King, and
swore that they should never admit of any other Form of Government then
Monarchy; and that they should never obey any except Him and his Posterity,
which if they brake, they wished that all the Plagues and Miseries that had
formerly fallen on their Predecessors, might again fall upon their Posterity,
as the punishment of that Perjury. All which Religious Vows and Promises,
Sealed by those dreadful Oaths voluntarly given, were graven on Marble Tables,
and Consigned for preservation into the custody of their Priests: and these are
Boethius own words, Fol. 10. From which I observe, 1. That as our Laws assert,
that our Kings derive their Power from God, and not from the People, so we
ought not to believe the contrary upon the Faith of our Historians, except they
were very clear, and unanimous in contradicting our Laws, whereas it appears to
me, that our Laws agree with our History, for Gathelus was not at all Elected
by the People, but was himself the Son of a King, and did Conquer by his own
Subjects, and Servants, and all those who are descended from his Collonies,
were by Law obliged to obey the Eldest Son, and Representative of that Royal
Family. And Ferquhard is acknowledged to have been his only Successor, nor did
ever any of the Scottish Tribes pretend to the Supremacy, and our Histories
bear, that none of our Tribes would yield to another; and the Fatal Marble
Chair that came from Spain, remaining with these who went to Ireland, does
evince that the Birthright remained with them; and therefore when Fergus the
Son of Ferquhard came over, he brought over with him the Marble Chair, which
was the mark of Empire. And Boethius immediately upon his arrival calls him King,
and Fordon the most Ancient of our Historians, lib. 1. cap. 36. calls him,
Fergusius Filius Ferardi aut Ferquhardi ex antiquarum Regium prosapia genitus,
qui ambitione Regnandi stimulatus magnam sibi Iuvenum copiam assimulavit and
Albionem continuo progressus est and ibidem super eos Regem primum se
constituit, that is to say, he made himself the first King* therefore K. James.
Basil. Doron, page 201. asserts, that K. Fergus made himself King and Lord as
well of the whole Lands, as of the whole Inhabitants. 2. We read nothing at all
of the consent of the People, but of the Heads of the Tribes, who had no
Commission from the People, each of them having by his Birthright a Power to
Command his own Tribe, and consequently, the Royal Power was not derived to
Fergus from the People, but had it is Original from this Birthright that was
both in them, and Fergus, and he succeeded in the Right of those Chiefs to
Command their respective Families; and Boethius brings in King Fergus, lib. 1.
number. 5. Speaking of himself, as a pious Parent, as one who owes to them what a
Parent owes to his Children: sunt pij Parents in Liberos propensi, and debemus
vobis quod proli genitores. And the consent given by the Chief of the Clanns,
and the People did not give, but declare the former Right, as our consent now
does in Acts concerning the Prerogative, and as the Vote of the Inquest does in
the Service of Heirs; and thus at the Coronation of our Kings, it is still said
by our Historians, that such a man was declared King, communi suffragio and
acclamatione. 3. This consent being only given in the Army cannot be said to
have been universally by the People, nor do we read that the People did
Commissionat the Army, or that the Army consulted the People; and in general
it cannot be instanced, that the People did in any Nation universally consent
to Election, nor is it possible all the People can meet. And in Pole, which is
the only Elective Monarchy we know, the Freeholders only consent, and yet
every private Man and Woman have as great interest, according to these pretended
Laws of Nature, as they have: and potior est conditio negantis. Nor do we find
that the Commons, and mean People have any interest in the Elections, of our
Magistrates, or Parliament Men; so that Popular freedom by Birth, and the
interest of the People, in Popular Elections are but mere Cheats invented to
engage the Rabble, in an aversion to the established Government, when factious
and insolent Spirits, who cannot submit themselves to Government, design to
cheat the Multitude by fair Pretenses, and to bribe them by Flattery.

If it be pretended, that it is not certain, whether King Fergus was eldest So^
to Ferquhard, nor is it probable, that if he had been such, he would have
preferred an uncertain Conquest in Scotland, to his secure Succession in
Ireland. To this it is answered, that all our Histories bear, that King
Ferquhard sent his Son Fergus, and when a Son is spoken of indefinitly, in such
Cases, he is actually understood to be the Eldest. 2. He brought with him the
Marble Chair, the mark of Empire, which would not have been allowed to a Cadet.
3. It is said, that having settled the affairs of Scotland, he returned into
Ireland to settle the differences there about the choosing of a new King, which
does import that he should have been King,, if he had not preferred Scotland to
Ireland, and the reason of this preference was, because Ireland was then
divided amongst many Kings, and his Predecessors had but a very small share of
it at that time, and Scotland being a part of a greater Isle, he probably found
in this greater Isle, a higher flight for his Hopes, and more latitude for his
Ambition.

But albeit the Kings of Scotland had been originally and at first elected by
the People, yet it does not at all follow necessarly as Buchannan, Dolman, and
our other Republicans pretend, that therefore they may reject them at their
pleasure, or which is all one, when they imagine that the Kings Elected by them
serve not the ends for which they were designed, and that for these Reasons. 1.
It cannot be denied, but that the People may consent to an Election of a
Monarch without Limitatons; for from the Principles of Nature, we may learn,
that whatever is in ones power may be by them transferred upon another; and
therefore, if the People be indew'd with a power of governing themselves, they
may certainly transfer this Power upon another; and we see that all Christians,
and even our Republicans allow, that men may sell themselves to be Slaves, a
custom not only mentioned but approved by God himself, so far does consent
reach beyond what is necessary for maintaining this Point. 2. If this could not
be, then there could be no such thing as absolute Monarchies, which is against
the received Opinion of all Nations, and against the Doctrine of all Authors,
who, though they debate that this, or that Monarchy, in a particular Country
is not Absolute, yet it was never contraverted by any man alive, but that the
People might consent, and in many places have consented to absolute Monarchies;
and by the famous Lex Regia, amongst the Romans, Populus ei and in eum omne
Imperium suum, and Potestatem transtulit, instit. de jur. not. gent. and civ.
6. Mentioned likewise by that Famous Lawyer Vlpian, l. 1. ff. de constitut.
Princ.

3. We see this consequence to be very false in many other cases, and therefore
it cannot be necessary here, for we find that a man chooses a Wife, yet it is
not in his power to put her away; Cardinals choose the Pope, and Chapters the
Bishop, and yet they cannot depose them; the Common Council choose Magistrates,
and yet they cannot lay them aside.

4. This Reasoning is condemned as most fallacious, by most learned, and
dis-interested Lawyers, and therefore it cannot be infallible, as is pretended:
vide Arnisaeum cap. 3. number. 2. Haenon. dis. Pol. 9. number. 44. Panorm. ad cap. 4.
de Cler. non residend. Zasius ad l. non ambigitur number. 3 ff. de legibus, Nor
have any Lawyers differed from this common opinion of mankind, except some very
few, who have differed from a Principle of Pique, rather than of Judgment.

The next thing that I am to prove in this my first Proposition, is, that Our
King is an Absolute Monarch, and has the Supreme Power within this his
Kingdom, and this I shall endeavor to prove, First, From our positive Law, 2.
By several Reasons deduced from our Fundamental Laws and Customs. 3. From the
very nature of Monarchy it self, and the Opinion of Lawyers who write upon that
Subject, and who define Absolute Monarchy to be a Power that is not limited or
restricted by coactive Law, Arnisaeus, de essentia Majest. cap. 3. number. 4.

By the 25. Act Parl. 15. Ia. 6. The Parliament does acknowledge, that it
cannot be denied, but his Majesty is a free Prince, of a Sovereign Power,
having as great Liberties, and Prerogatives, by the Laws of this Realm, and
Priziledge of his Crown, and Diadem, as any other King, Prince, or Potentat
whatseever. And by the 2. Act Parl. 18. Ia. 6. The Parliament consenting to his
Majesty's restoring of Bishops, declare and acknowledge the absoluteness of
our Monarchy, in these words. The remeed whereof properly belongs to his
Majesty, whom the whole Estates, of their bound n duty, with most hearty and
faithful affection, humbly and truly acknowledge to be a sovereign Monarch,
absolute Prince, Judge and Governor, over all Persons, Estates and Causes,
both Spiritual and Temporal, within his said Realm.

And by the first Act of that same Parliament. The Estates and whole Body of
this present Parliament, acknowledge all with one voluntar, humble, faithful,
united heart, mind, and consent his Majesty's sovereign Authority, Princely
Power, Royal Prerogative, and privilege of his Crown, over all Persons,
Estates, and Causes whatsoever, within his said Kingdom.

And because no Acts were ever made, giving Prerogatives, nor even declaring
Prerogatives to have been due, until some special controversy did require the
same, so that Possession, and not positive Law, was the true measure of the
Prerogative; therefore the Parliament does in that same Act approve, and
perpetually confirm all the Royal Prerogatives, as absolutely, amply, and
freely in all respects, and considerations, as ever his Majesty, or any of his
Royal Predecessors possessed, used, and exercised the same; and they promise
that his Majesty's Imperial Power, which God has so enlarged, shall never be in
any sort impar'd, prejudged, or diminished, but rather reverenced, and
augmented as far as possibly they can.

In the preface to our Books of Law, called Regiam Majestatem, it is
acknowledged that the King has no Superior, except the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, who Governs all. Foreign Lawyers also, such as Lansius de Lege Regiae,
number. 49. and others do number the King of Scotland amongst the absolute
Monarchs.

My second Argument for proving our King to be an absolute Monarch, shall be
from my former position, wherein I hope I have proved sufficiently, that our
Kings derive not their Right from the People; for if the King derive not his
Power from the People, the Monarchy can never be limited by them, and
consequently it must be an absolute Monarchy; for there could be nothing more
unjust, more unnatural, and more insolent, then that the People should pretend
a Right to limit and restrict that Power which they never gave; and the only
reason why Buchannan, and his Accomplices, do assert our Monarchy to be a
qualified and limited Monarchy, being that the People, when they first Elected
our Kings, did qualify and restrict their Government. This position being
false as appears by the absolute Oath, and original Constitution above set
down, which is lessened, or qualified by no condition whatsoever, therefore the
conclusion drawn from it must be false likewise.

The third Argument shall be deduced from the Nature of Monarchy, and in order
thereto, I lay down as an uncontroverted principle, that every thing must be
constructed to be perfect in its own Nature, and no mixture is presumed to be
in any thing; but he who alleges, that the thing controverted is added against
Nature, must prove the same; and therefore since Monarchy is that Government
whereby a King is Supreme, the Monarch must be presumed, neither to be obliged
to Govern by the advice of the Nobility, (for that were to confound Monarchy
with Aristocracie) nor by the advice of the People (for that were to confound
it with Democracie;) and consequently if Buchannan, and others design to prove,
that our Kings are obliged to Govern, by the advice either of the Nobility, or
People, or are subject to be Chastised by them, they must prove, that our
Kings, at their first Creation, were Elected upon these Conditions, the very
Essence and Being of Monarchy, consisting in its having a Supreme, and
absolute Power. Arnisaeus c. 30. Vasquez l. 1. Contrav. c. 47. Budaeus in l.
princeps. Zas. ibid. ff. de legibus, pone enim, says Arnisaeus, populum in
Regem habere aequalem potestatem neutrum pro summo venditari posse. When we
hear of a Monarch, the first notion we have is, that he is subject to none; for
to be a Subject and a Monarch, are inconsistent; but if we hear that his
Nobility, or People, or both may Depose, or punish him, we necessarly conclude
by the Light of Nature, that they, and not He, are the supreme Governors. Thus
we see, that in allowing our King to be an absolute Monarch, we have only
allowed him to be a Monarch, and to have what naturally belongs to him, and
that by as necessary a consequence; for as every Man is presumed to be
reasonable, because reason is the Essence of Man, so is a King presumed to be
absolute, except these limitations whereby the Monarchy is restricted, could be
proved by an express Contract.

4 thly, How is it imaginable, but that if our Predecessors had Elected our
Kings upon any such Conditions, but they would have been very careful to have
limited the Monarchy, and this Contract had with these conditions been
recorded, whereas on the contrary we find, that albeit great care was taken to
record the Oath of Allegiance made to the King, and to grave the same upon
Marble Tables, consigned unto the custody of their Priests, as sacred Oracles;
yet none of all our Historians make the least mention of any limitations in
these Oaths, or by any other Contract; and to this day our Oaths of Supremacy,
and Allegiance, are clogged and lessened by no limitations.

If it be answered, that these limitations do arise from the nature of the
thing it self, there being nothing more unreasonable, and contrary to the
nature of Government, then that a Monarch, who was designed to be a Protector
to his People, should be allowed to destroy them. To this it is answered, that
Monarchy by its nature is absolute, as has been proved, and consequently these
pretended limitations are against the nature of Monarchy, and so arise not* ex
natura rei, nor can there any thing be more extravagant, than to assert that,
that which is contrare to the nature of Monarchy, should arise from its nature,
and it might be with greater reason pretended, that because the great design of
men in Marriage, is to get a Helper, that therefore they may repudiat their
Wives, when they find them unsupportable, and that the putting them away in
such cases, is consistent enough with the nature of their Oath, though simple,
and absolute; this cause of Divorce arising from the nature of Marriage it
self: This is after Vows to make Inquiry, and what Vow, or Oath could be
useful, if the giver were to be Judge how far he were tied, and if his
convenience were the measure of his Obligation. But since I shall hereafter
fully prove, that these limitations are as dangerous to the Subjects, as to the
Prince, and that ten thousand times more Murders, and other Insolences have
been committed in Civil Wars, upon the false pretense of Liberty, than ever was
committed by the worst of Kings; it must necessarily follow, that those
limitations ought not to be admitted after an absolute Oath, for eviting
inconveniences, which at the balance appear to be of no weight.

5. It cannot be denied, but our Kings have ever had the power of Peace and
War, the calling and disolving of Parliments, and a negative Voice in them, the
remitting of Crimes, and nomination of Judges; and therefore it must be
presumed, that since the Law has not limited them in those things, it has
limited them in nothing; for by involving us in War, they may expose our
Fortunes, our Wives and Children to the greatest of dangers; and it had been
great folly to limit them in any thing, after those great Prerogatives were
allowed: And though our Histories do bear, That Peace and War were ordinarily
determined by the advice, and consent of the Nobility, yet that does no more
infer a necessity not to do otherwise, than the ordinary style of all our
Proclamations, bearing to be with advice of our Privy Council, infers a
necessity upon the King to do nothing without their advice; and how could the
consent of the Nobility have been necessary in the former Ages, since all their
Right flowed from the King Himself, and that neither they then, nor the
Parliament now, had, or have a Power equal with the King, much less above Him,
as shall be fully proved in the first Conclusion, that I am to draw from this
Doctrine; only to what I have said, I must here add, that it being proposed to
our Predecessors, at the swearing the Oath of Allegiance to King Fergus,
whether they would be governed by a King, who should have absolute Power, or by
the Nobility, or by a Multitude? it was answered, that lest they should have
many Kings in place of one, they abhorred to bestow the the Absolute Power
either upon the Nobility, or upon the Multitude.

6. I cannot but exceedingly commend our Predecessors, for making this
reasonable choice of an absolute Monarchy, for a Monarch that is subject to the
impetuous caprices of the Multitude when giddie, or to the incorrigible
Factiousness of Nobility when interested, is in effect no Government at all;
and though a mixed Monarchy may seem a plausible thing to Metaphisical Spirits
and Schoolmen, yet to such as understand Government, and the World, it cannot
but appear impracticable; for if the People understand that it is in their
Power to check their Monarch, the desire of command is so bewitching a thing,
that probably they will be at it upon all occasions; and so when the King
commands one thing, the Nobility will command another, and it may be the People
a third. And as it implies a contradiction, that the same Persons should both
command and obey: so where find we those sober and mortified men, who will
obey, when they may command. Let us consider what dreadful extravagancies, and
cruelties appeared at Rome, betwixt the Tribunes of the People, and the Senate,
one of six Kings had a Son, who ravished a Woman, and thereupon the Kings were
expelled, but every year almost produced a Civil War, wherein vast numbers of
free Romans were murdered, and in the contest betwixt Sylla and Marius, 90.
Senators, 15. Consuls, 2600. Gentlemen, and 100000. others were murdered, and
after the whole Commonwealth was exhausted in the Wars betwixt Caesar and
Pompey; and in the immediate succeeding War betwixt Augustus, Anthony, and
Lepidus, wherein every man lost either a Brother, a Father, or a Son, Rome
returned again to its Monarchy, and was never so happy, as under Augustus. The
People of Naples complaining lately of their Taxes, put themselves under the
Command of Reforming Massaniello, by whose extravagancies they suffered more in
one Month, than they had done under the Spainsh cruelty in an hundred years.
But our late Reformation in Britain seems to have been permitted by God, to
let us see that mixed Governments having power to Reform Kings, are more
insufferable than Tirrany; for by it we saw that the multitude consists of
Knaves and Fools, and both these are the worst of Governors, that the best of
Kings will be thought wicked, when Subjects are his Judges, who resolve not to
obey, and that it is impossible to know what is right, when every man is Judge
of what is wrong. The impracticableness likewise of this popular Supremacy,
will yet more convincingly appear, if we consider that the People are to be
Judges, because of their natural freedom, for then all men should have equal
right to be Reformers, and these can never meet nor consult together: And if it
be answered, that the People may send their Representatives, my Reply is, that
the greatest half of the Nation are neither Freeholders nor Burgesses; and yet
those only are called the Representatives of the people; and what absurd Tricks
and Cheats are used in choosing even those Representatives, and it may be the
resolution prevails by the Vote of the greatest Fool or Knave in the Meeting;
and if any one man remove by sickness or accident, at the passing of a Vote; or
if any of the multitude be bryb'd or have prejudice, though on a most unjust
account, that which would have been the interest of the Nation, turns to be
against it, so infallible a Judge is the multitude. And I have seen in popular
Elections, hundreds cry for a thing, and thereafter ask what was the matter.

7 ly, If the the Proceres Regni, or Nobility are to be the check upon our
Kings, and to be trusted with this coercive power of calling them to an
account, as Buchannan pretends; then I desire to know who invested them with
this power, for it was never pretended that it is naturally inherent in them:
And if the people invested them, I desire to know by what Act the people
transferred this power upon them, for they have no Law, nor original
Constitution for this, as our Kings have for their Right; and passing over the
dangers may arise from their having this power, because of the Factiousness,
Poverty, Picques, Humors, or Ignorance that may be incident to them, it seems
to me strange, why we the people should trust such to be our Checks over the
King, who are His own Creatures, owing their Honors to Him, and expecting
daily from Him Employments and Estates? and if they and the people differ, who
is to be Judges of those Controversies? Nor can the Nobility and Commons
assembled in Parliament have this coercive power, for the Reasons which I shall
hereafter offer; and therefore none has it, but the King is Supreme in himself,
and accountable to none, save God Almighty alone. But more of this will be
found in the Sequel of this Discourse, upon other occasions.

8 ly, Whatever proves Monarchy to be an excellent Government, does by the same
Reason prove absolute Monarchy to be the best Government; for if Monarchy be to
be commended, because it prevents Divisions, then a limited Monarchy, which
allows the people a share, is not to be commended, because it occasions them;
if Monarchy be commended, because there is more expedition, secrecy, and other
excellent Qualities to be found in it, then absolute Monarchy is to be
commended above a limited one; because a limited Monarch must impart his
secrets to the people, and must delay the noblest designs until malicious and
factious Spirits be either gained or overcome: And the same anallogy of Reason
will hold in reflecting upon all other advantages of Monarchy, the Examination
whereof I dare trust to every man's own breast.

9 ly, It was fit for the People that their Kings should be above Law, because
the severity of Law will not comply with that useful, tho illegal Justice which
is requisite in special cases, for since summum jus is summa injuria, and since
impossible est sola innocentia vivere, we may well conclude, that absolute
Monarchy is necessary to protect the guilty innocent by Remissions, to break
Laws justly, in a Court of Chancery, and to crook them uprightly in our Courts
by an officium nobile. For strict and rigid Law is a greater Tyrant, than
absolute Monarchy.

I know that some pretend that the 25. Act 15. Par. Ia. 6. declaring the King
to be an absolute Prince, is only to be interpreted in opposition to the Popes
Authority, he being so far absolute, only as not to be Subject to the Pope, who
pretended then a Jurisdiction over all Kings. But the answers to this are
clear; First, This Statute is made to declare the Kings of Scotland to have
Right by their Inherent Prerogative, to their exacting Customs for all
Merchandice, because they are absolute Monarchs, which Argument had been
ridiculous, if this absoluteness had only been in opposition to the Pope, nor
is there any mention of the Pope in all this Statute; and what interest has
the Pope in our Customs. 2 dly, When the Kings power is by our Statutes raised
above the Pope, it is done by declaring him Supreme, and not by declaring him
absolute. 3 dly, All Lawyers, and Statesmen divide Monarchies in absolute and
limited Monarchies, and the word Absolute, is still taken in opposition to
limited, as is clear by Arnisaeus, Bodin, etc. And whereas it is pretended that
these words in this Statute, acknowledging the King to be absolute, are only
expressed transiently and enunciatively, but are not Decisive and Statutory. It
is answered, that our Parliaments never give our Kings Prerogatives, but only
acknowledge what our Kings have by an Inherent and Independent Right; and these
words in this Statute, are of all others in our Laws, expressed with most of
Energy, for they are ushered with, It cannot be denied, but His Majesty has as
great Liberties and Prerogatives, as any Monarch whatsoever: and this
acknowledgment is made the Foundation of His Right to exact Customs. And in
true Reasoning, nothing is made the proposition of an Argument, but that which
is most uncontrovertable.

I foresee that our Fanatics and Republicans, will be ready to mis-represent
absolute Monarchy, as Tyrany: But a Tyrant is he, who has no Right to Govern;
and so he may be opposed, as the common Enemy of all the Society. And it is
ridiculous to pretend with Hobs, That we are obliged to obey whoever is once in
possession; for that were to invite men to Torment us, and to justify Crimes
by success. Nor can it be from this deduced, that since it is lawful to oppose
any who are in Possession, that it is therefore lawful to oppose our Monarchy:
because they have (as Algernon Sidney pretends^) Usurped over us, a power
inconsistent with our natural Liberty. And owe their Right to that
Prescription, which the greatest Tyrants may maintain by force, and to that
consent which they may procure by Violence, or Flattery. For to this I answer,
That our Monarchs have their power established by Birthright, by Consent, by
Prescription, and by Law; which are all the ways whereby any Right can be
legally Established. But it is a gross mistake in Buchannan, and others, to
conclude a lawful King punishable as a Tyrant, because he becomes vicious: For
though God may punish him as such, yet his People cannot; that were to raise
the Servant above the Master, and to occasion a thousand Disorders to redress
one. and when King James acknowledges, that a good King thinks Himself made for
his People, and not His People for Him. That is only said with reference to the
Kings, duty to God, but not with Relation to the Peoples Duty to their King.
And when Trajan delivering the Sword to the Proconsul, said Pro me, si mereor,
in me. Grotius observes justly, That this was spoke as a Philosopher, and not
to subject himself to the others jurisdiction. And so Buchannan did most
traitorously advise the Printing this on our Coin. Nor does this Title of
absolute Monarch, empower him to dispose upon our Estates. For it is fit to
know, that Government is the Kings, and Property is the Subjects Birthright.
Monarchy is a Government, and so can include no more, than what is necessary
for Government. And though the Turk or Mogul, arrogat to themselves, the total
Property of their Subjects, in this they are Tyrants, and not Kings. And when
our Statute abovementioned, says, That our Kings have as much power as they,
this is only to be understood of what Right they have by the Nature of
Monarchy, Rex nomen est jurisdictionis non dominij, say the Lawyers: For the
Law having said, that all things were the Emperors, l: been a Zenone.. Sed
scimus C. de Quadr: Praescript. The Emperor asked the famous Lawyer Bulgarus in
what sense all was his, who is mightily praised for having answered, Omnia Rex
possidet imperio singuli dominio, Accurs: in praem. ff. in Verb: Sanctioni, For
what is once ours cannot be taken away without our consent: And therefore by
the 5. Act, 1. Par. Chapter 2. It is declared lawful for the King to make Garrisons,
His Majesty entertaining them on His own expense. And by the Act 3. Par. 3. Ch:
2. It is declared that the people shall not be subject to free Quarter, etc.
And yet right reason teaches us, that all the Land of Scotland having been
once the Kings (for the Law says, that the King is Safitus ratione Coronae, in
all the Lands of Scotland) His Majesty is therefore presumed Proprietar of all,
and every thing belongs to him, if some other cannot instruct a right which is
the sense of that Law, Nemo terram nisi authoritate Regia possideto: And of
King Malcolm Canmor's Law, that Rex distribuit totam Terram Scotiae hominibus
suis. And it therefore clearly follows, that the King has Dominium directum, a
right of Superiority, as all Superiors have, and that the people on whom he has
bestowed these Lands, are obliged to concur in the expense with him, for the
defense of it. For as if he had retained the Property, he would have been able
with the Fruits and Rents to have defended it. So it is not agreeable to sense
or reason that they to whom he has granted it, should not be obliged to defend
it, especially seeing all the Rights made by the King, are in Law presumed mere
Donations; For it cannot be denied but that all Lands were originally granted
by the King, and so must have originally belonged to himself: for no person can
give what is not his own; and our Law acknowledges, that all Lands belong to
the King, except where the present Heretor can instruct a Right flowing from
our King, and that he is the Fountain of Property, as well as of Justice. 2. In
Law, all who are engaged in a Society, as to any thing that is the subject of
the Society, should contribute to its preservation; and therefore the King
having the Dominium directum, and the Vassal Dominium ut i will* it follows, that
the Vassals of the Kingdom should contribute toward its preservation, and the
King may expect justly an equal Contribution toward the defraying the
necessary expense, and thence it was, that by our old Law, all Heretors were
obliged to furnish some unum Militem, unum Sagittarium, or Equitem: Some a
Bow-man, some a Soldier, some a Horseman: But thereafter the King having
changed these Holdings, because all betwixt 60. and 16. were obliged to come to
the Field with 40. days Provision, which was all that was then necessary; it
follows, that now that way of making War being altered, the Subjects should
contribute toward the way that is necessary for defending the Kingdom. 3. The
King by His Forces protects our Persons, and by His Navies protects our
Commerce, by His Ambassadors manages all our public Affairs, and by His
Officers, and Judges, administrates Justice to us: And so it is just that all
this should be done on our expenses, and that we should defray the public
expenses of the Government, and so much the rather, because by a special
Statute with us, it is declared that the King may impose what He pleases on all
that is Imported, or may discharge us to export any thing without which we
could not live; and what ever he gets from us, he distributes amongst us,
without applying one shilling of it to his own private use.

The King, or whoever has the management of the Government, have in the opinion
of Lawyers, Dominium eminens, a Paramount and transcendent Right over even
private Estates, in case of necessity, when the common Interest cannot be
otherwise maintained; and this Grotius, though no violent friend of Monarchy,
does assert ve. ry positively and clearly; and it cannot be denied that a King
may take any man's Lands, and build a Garrison upon it, paying for it; and that
in case of a Siege, the King may order whole Suburbs to be burnt down for the
security of the Town: And whence is this power, save from that Paramount and
Supereminent Right that the King has over all private Estates, for the good of
the whole So. ciety and Kingdom? Nor can it be denied* that the King may in
time of War Quarter freely; and it is in his power to declare War, when, or
where he pleases: Nor do the former Statutes oppose this, for they exclude not
necessity that has no Law, and is it self that Law which gave David right to
eat the Shewbread, and the Christian Emperors right to sell the Goods of the
Church for maintaining their Armies, with consent of the Primitive Fathers; and
this is so necessarily inherent in all administration, that the very Master of
a Ship has power to throw over the Goods of Passengers and Merchants in a
storm, for the preservation of the Ship: And they are not enemies to the King,
but to themselves, who would deny the King this power.

The third Class of Arguments that I am to use against these principles, shall
be from Reason, and Experience in Fortification and Corroboration of our
positive Law, and the nature of our Monarchy; for since humane Reason it self
is liable to so many Errors; and since men when they differ, are so wedded to
their own Sentiments, that few are so wise as to see their own mistakes, or so
ingenuous as to confess them, when they see them: Therefore prudence and
necessity has obliged men to end all Debates by making Laws: and it is very
great vanity and Insolence in any private men, to balance their own private
Sense against the public Laws; that is to say, the Authoritative Sentiments,
and the legal Sense of the Nation.

If we were then to Establish a new Monarchy, were it not prudent and
reasonable, for us to consider what were the first Motives which induced our
Predecessors to a Monarchy, and Boethius and Lesly both tell us, that least
they might be distracted by obeying too many, it was therefore fit to submit to
one, if then this Reason was of force at first to make us submit to a Monarchy,
it should still prevail with us to obey that Monarchy, and not gape idly
after every new Model, Ne multos Reges sibi viderentur creare summam rerum aut
optimatibus, aut ipsi multitudini permittere aspernabantur, says Boethius,
fol: 6. Here the advantages of being Governed by Aristocracie, or Democracie,
were expressly considered and rejected; so that we have our Predecessors choice,
founded on their way of Reasoning, added to the Authority of our Law; and
after, we their Successors, had seen the mischiefs arising from the pretenses
of Liberty and Property, with all the advantages that seeming Devotion could
add to these. Our Representatives, after two thousand years experience, and
after a fresh Idaea of a long civil War, wherein these Arguments and Reasons
adduced by Buchannan, were fortified and seconded by thousands of Debates: They
did by many passionate Confessions, and positive Laws acknowledge, that the
present Constitution of our Monarchy. is most excellent, Act 1. Par: 1. ch: 2
d. That inevitable prejudices and miseries do accompany the invading the Royal
Prerogative. Act 4. That all the troubles and miseries they had suffered, had
sprung from these Invasions. Act 11. That all the bondage they had groaned
under, was occasioned by these Distractions. Act 2. Par. Sess: 2. Chapter 2. So
that we have here also a Series of Parliaments, attesting the reasonableness of
the Constitution of our Monarchy, and His Majesty's Prerogatives.

2. We must not conclude any thing unreasonable, or unfit, because there are
some inconveniences in it; for all humane Constitutions have their own
defects. But I dare say, the principles of my Adversaries have more than mine;
for commonwealths are not only subject to err, because they have their
passions as well as King; but they are subject to more passions: for 1. These
who Govern in Commonwealths and Aristocrasies, have Rivals whom they fear,
and against whom, upon that account, they bear Revenge, which Kings want. 2,
They are not so much concerned in these, they Govern as Kings; the one
considering the Common Interest, as a Tennent does Lands, of which he takes his
present advantage, though he should destroy it; the other caring for it as a
Proprietar does for his own Ground; the one Jading it, as a Man does a hired
Horse; the other using it as a Man does his own. 3. The people are ordinarily
Governed by these who are the worst of men; for these ordinarily can flatter and
cheat most, and can best use the Hypocrites Vizorn: Whereas the best Men
ordinarily are abstemious, modest, and love a private Life, and were there ever
such Villains as Governed us in the last Age? And in this too, can we deny but
our pretenders to Liberty and Property, are the Cheats of the Nation? Who, to
be in Employment, hate such as are in it, or are such as are discontented for
being put out of it, or are Bankrupts, who resolve to make up their broken
Fortunes by it. 4. Even good Men when they are raised to Govern, grow Insolent,
of which Princes are not capable, for they are still the same. 5. Kings and
Princes know they will be Charged with what they do; but the multitude knows,
that the public in general, and not any one Man will be blamed: and so every
private Man thinks himself secure, whilst he shifts it over on another; or else
lessens it, by dividing it amongst many. 6. They are very subject to Factions,
most Men scorning to obey their fellow Subjects; and when they are in Factions,
who knows whom to obey; and those Factions will again subdivide in new ones,
and so in infinitum; and when either prevails, they spare none, because their
opposits are Enemies: But Kings pity even Rebels, remembering that they are
their own. And I dare say, that more were Murdered and Ruined in one year, of
the last Reforming Age, than suffered by the great Turk, the Mogul, and the
King of France in twenty years. And more severity was exercised in one year by
these Reformers, than by all this Race of our Kings; these 600. years. 7. If it
be said, that Kings have ill Ministers, so have Commonwealths and we observed
in Scotland, that after we had taken from our King the Prerogative of choosing
Judges and Counselors, our Parliament did the next year, choose the greatest
Block-heads, and Idiots in all the Nation, whom the Ringleaders advanced, to
the end they might Govern all themselves; to which Cheat, Kings cannot be
liable, it being their Interest to have able Ministers* And whereas Kings have
no Interest to prefer one to another: yet in popular Governments, every one
endeavors to prefer his own Relations. 8. In difficult Cases, haste and
expedition requires, that one should be trusted: and even the Romans behoved in
great dangers, to employ a Dictator, who was accountable to no man for any
thing he did. 9. There can be no Secrecy in popular Governments, as in
Monarchy, and what many must know, all may. 10. Enemies may always get some in
popular Governments to side with them, and upon specious pretexts, to retard
all good Designs; and when popular men are Debating for shadows, the occasion
slips away irrecoverably. 11. Either Commonwealths employ no extraordinary
persons, being ever jealous: or if any man become such by great Actions, or
long Experience, he is presently ruined. And it is observable in this Age, that
the great Zobieskie durst never undertake any great thing since he became King
of Pole. And if we consider the severity of Venice against their Nobles, and
their Executing Men, without citing or hearing them, and that upon mere
jealousies. We must confess, that there is less Liberty there, than under the
worst of Monarchies; nor was ever any people so miserable as Rome, during their
Republic, having been ruined in every age with civil Wars, and having had no
great man, who died not miserably, after many false and popular Accusations,
and did not de Wit find little of that Justice which he magnified in
Republics.

But whatever may be said against the inconveniences arising from the
passions, humors, and insolences of the Populace in Commonwealths, yet much
more may be said against the allowing that Prerogative to them under a
Monarchy, for that were to Distract for ever the Government betwixt two
contradictory Supreme Powers, and make the People miserable in not knowing whom
to obey when they differ, and to make Government, which should defend against a
Civil War, become the cause of it; for how can it be in reason expected, but
that if the People know they can control the King, ambitious, and discontented
Ring-lerders, or ignorant and bigote Multitudes will be always endeavoring to
use this their Prerogative, since it seems always glorious, and often times
advantageous to oppose Kings, whereas on the other hand Kings cannot but be
always jealous of, and fear popular Invasions, and both these Powers shall
like Neighboring Princes, be always endeavoring to gain advantages upon one
another, and in these Contests shall be spent all the time and pains that
should be bestowed in resisting the Common Enemy, which cannot but very much
lessen the Love which Princes ought to have for their People, and the Respect
which People ought to have for their Prince, and how can it be imagined, but
that in this case the People shall always groan under greater misfortunes then
these which they felt betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol, the King and Queen?
Pretended Factions in the Minority of K. James 6. and the Houses of Lancaster
and York, because the one can never end, being inherent in the nature of the
Government, whereas the other are but accidental and temporary, All which
cannot but appear very probable, as well as dreadful to those who consider the
late Rebellion, wherein the People pretending that the King had violated their
Liberties, they murdered and pillaged all such as were not of their Opinion,
and after they had ruined their Prince, the People divided and fought one
against another, the greater part pretending they ought to be obeyed, because
of their numbers, and the lesser pretending that they were the sounder part,
and had the better Cause, and it is impossible in such a case to find a Judge
of Controversies. Which is another unanswerable Argument against the Peoples
Supremacy, by which all they can gain is an endless Liberty of ruining one
another without hope of Redress. Nor can Parliaments remedy this, for we have
seen opposite Parliaments Sitting at the same time Forfeiting one another,
whilst the astonished Multitude stood at a Gaze, not knowing whom to obey, and
praying that God would Re-establish our lawful Monarchy, with which, when it
was Miraculously Restored, they were so overjoyed as men are when they are
freed from the Galleys, in which they had been Treated as Slaves.

And whereas these Republicans pretend that the King is but a Phisician, this
shows that they design to have no King, for any man may lawfully change his
Phisician, and Buchannans laying so much weight on this Argument makes me
suspect much his honesty, for no man can have so mean an opinion of his Sense.
And his comparing the Monarch to a Tutor is very extravagant, for no man is
sworn to have such a man's Heirs for Tutors, but though he were a Tutor, no man
can remove his Tutor at pleasure, as they say the People may remove their King.
Nor is a Tutor to be laid aside but by an Action before a Superior Judge,
wherein he is to be proved to have Malversed, and therefore since there is no
Superior Judge except God, and that the People are not his Superiors, it
clearly follows that the People cannot lay aside their King.

A Tutor has not an inherent Right of Property as a King has to the Government
of the Nation, and to the Imperial Crown thereof, only I join so far with
Buchannan in these Rhetorical expressions, that I really think the Multitude is
always so mad that they need a King to be their Physician, and of so weak a
Judgment like Mi. nors, that they need him for a Tutor, and without his
assistance and protection every hypocritical Bigot, and ambitious Usurper would
cheat them at his pleasure, and make them not only a Prey, but a Tool in their
own Slavery.

Nor is there any force in that Argument, the King was made for the People, and
not the People for the King; and therefore the People are Nobler than the King,
and ought to be preferred to Him. For to this it is answered, that 1. The
question here is not, who is more preferable, but who is the Superior? And
though one good Christian be preferable to a thousand, who are not so, yet
their Interest in the Commonwealth is not preferable; the wiser part is still
preferable to the greater part: and yet the greater will overruled the wiser. A
Shepherd is ordained for the Flock; and yet it cannot be concluded, that a
Flock of Brutes is to be preferred to any Reasonable Creature. 2. The Kings
Interest and the Peoples are inseparable in the Construction of Law, which
presumes, that what the King does, He does for the People, and there is none
above the King, that can Judge Him, if He does otherwise. 3. Whether the Kings
Power be derived from God, or from the People? Yet if it be derived from God,
it is preferable, because of Gods Ordinance: Or if from the People, it is
preferable, because they, by Electing Him King, have consented that it should
be so, and they having Trusted Him with the public Interest, the public
Interest is still preferable. I know that Buchannan and others, value
themselves much upon the Instance of the Bruce and Baliol, in which the people
did Declare, that they preferred the Bruce, because the Baliol had enslaved the
Kingdom to the English. And it is generally urged, that all Lawyers are clear,
that if a King Alienat His Kingdom, His people may Disclaim Him. But my answers
are, That if a King will Alienat His Kingdom, the Subjects are free in that
case, not by their power to reassume their first Liberty; but because the King
will not continue King, and they are free by His Deed, but not by their own
Right. 2. Even in that case, Lawyers do irritat and annul the Deed; but
dissolve not the Contraveeners Right. And as to that particular Instance, it is
well known that King Robert the First, or the Bruce, as we call him, was
desirous that the Parliament should threaten to choose another, if He submitted
His Interest to the Popes Decision, who pretended then to be the Supreme Judge,
over all Kings. And John Major, as many other Popish Writers were still enemies
to the Supremacy of Kings upon that account. But though the Bruce, to please
the people, should have shunned to quarrel what they did in such a Juncture;
yet that could not wrong the Monarchy, nor His Successors, as shall be proved.

Having thus cleared, that the Kings power is not derived from the people, even
though they had Elected Him, and that He is an absolute King, both by our Laws,
and the Nature of our Monarchy; and that all this is most consistent with right
Reason. I come now to draw some Conclusions from these Principles.

The first Conclusion shall be, that our Parliaments are not co-ordinat with
our Kings, in the Legislative Power; but that the Legislative and
Architectonick Power of making Laws (as Lawyers term it) does Solly reside in
the King, the Estates of Parliament only consenting, which will further appear
by these Reasons, 1. It cannot be denied but we had Kings long ere we had
Parliaments (we never having had any Parliaments till King Kenneth the 3 ds.
time, according to the Computation of the severest Re-publicans themselves; for
till then we Read only of the Proceres Regni, or the Nobility, or Chiefs of
Clanes, and Heads of Families, who assembled upon all occasions, to give the
King advice) and therefore our Parliaments cannot pretend that they were
designed as a Coordinate power with the King, whilst he did what was right;
much less to be his Judge, when he did what was wrong. 2. That our Kings made
Laws of old without any consent, and that these were acquiesced in by the
people, is clear, not only from our Histories, which do tell us, that such
Kings made such Laws, without speaking any thing of either Nobility, People or
Parliament, but even from our old Books of Statutes, wherein there is no
mention made of the consent, of either the Nobility or Parliament: The Laws at
that time beginning simply, The Kings Statutes, as in all the Statutes of King
William, King Alexander 2 d. and in the Statutes of King Malcolm Canmore: King
David the first, and King David the 2 d. where there is not so much as mention
made of the Nobility, or the Parliament, in the very beginning of the Statutes,
and that at other times the Nobility were only called, and that only the
Nobility did sit, is very clear from the Inscriptions of these Parliaments,
such as in the Parl. K. Alexander 2 d. which bears, to have been made with the
common consent of the Nobility, cum communi consensu Comitum suorum, without
speaking of any other State. Nor do I find a word of Burgesses, till the
Parliament of K. Robert the 3 d. in 1400. and even according to this late
Constitution, it is undeniable that the Parliament have not even an equal power
with the King, much less a power above him. 3. How can that Judicature have a
Co-ordinat power with the King, when no man can sit in it but by a privilege
from the King: but so it is, that all that are Members of Parliament, sit there
by a special privilege from the King, and there is nothing considered to
capacitate them to sit, but the Force and Energie of that Privilege, without
respect, either to what Land they possess, or what number of People they
represent. And thus the Nobility and Bishops, sit there, by virtue of the Kings
Creation; and the King may Creat a hundredth Noblemen that morning that the
Parliament is to sit, though none of all the hundredth, have not one foot of
Land in Scotland; and though the Barons must have some Land, else they cannot
Represent any Shire; yet though a Gentleman had 5000. pounds Sterling a year,
he could not sit there, except he be the Kings immediate Vassal, and holds his
Lands of His Majesty in capite: So that he sits not by virtue of his Land, but
as Capacitated by the King. And though these who Represent the Burrows Royal
are Commissionated by the people of their Burghs; yet the people who sent them,
are not considered in that Commission, but the power only which the King gives
them to send: For though a Town had a hundredth thousand Inhabitants, and
another only twenty Inhabitants: yet these 100000 could not be Re-presented in
Parliament, except the King had Erected their Town in a Burgh Royal, From which
I evince two things, 1. That the Parliament is the Kings Council, in which he
may call any He pleases, and not as the peoples Representatives only, since
there are great multitudes in the Nation, Represented by none there: For tho
they Represent their Constituents in Parliament, yet the power of sending
Representatives, is derived from the King Originally, and flows not from any
proper Right inherent in those whose Representatives they are. 2. That
Judicature cannot have a Co-ordinat power with the King, which He needs not
Call except He pleases, and which He can Dissolve when He pleases: and in
which, when they are Met, He has a Negative Voice, which can stop all their
Proposals, and Designs; For, if they were Co-ordinat with the King, then par in
parem non habet imperium, and it is against common Sense to think that these
two can be equal, when the power of the one flows from the other; By which is
likewise clear that the great principle laid down by Buchannan, viz. That the
King is Singulis Major, universis Minor, greater than any one, but less than
the collective Body of the Parliament taken together, is absolutely false;
because he has a Negative Voice over that collective Body, and as they cannot
Meet without him, so he can Dissolve them when he pleases, and I confess it
seems to me unintelligible how they can be greater than the King, by virtue of
a power which they Derive from the King. 4. The Parliament is called by the
Kings Council, as is clear from the Inscriptions of all our old Parliaments.
Thus the Statutes of Alexander the 2. begin, Alexander By the Grace of God King
of Scots did by the Common Council of his Earls Decree, etc. The Statutes of K.
Robert bear to be by the Common Council of his Prelates, etc. The first Statute
of King Robert 2. Bears that none who is Elected to be of the Kings Council
shall bring another to it who is not Elected. The 8, and 13. Parliaments of K.
Ia. 1. And the 2, 3, 4, and 7. of K. Ia. 2. Bear for Inscriptions, The
Parliament or general Council of such Kings. And the 1. Act of that 8.
Parliament K. Ia. 1. Bears Quo Die Dominus Rex deliberatione and consensu
totius Concilij, etc. And it is against Sense to think that any man's Counsel
can have Authority over him, for as we say Counsel is no Command. 5. The
Parliament was but the Kings Baron Court, as is very clear to any man who will
read the old Registers of Parliament, in which he will see that the Parliament
was Fenced, and the Suits were called, and Absents Unlawed as in other Baron
Courts, whereof many public Records are extant, and I shall only set down that
of the 8. Parliament Ia. 1. The words of which Inscription are, In Parliamento
octavo, vel Concilio generali Illustrissimi Principis, Iacobi Dei gratia Regis
Scotiaetento apud Perth and inchoato tificato and approbato, tanquam
sufficienter and debite praemunito, per tres Regni Status, duodecimo die mensis
Julij Anno Domini millesimo, quadringentesimo vicesimo, octavo, cum
continuatione dierum and temporum, summoni^is and vocatis debito modo and more
solito, Episcopis, Abbatibus, prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus and omnibus
libere tenentibus, qui tenent in capite, de dicto Domino nostro Rege and de
quolibet burgo regni, certis burgensibus, comparentibus omnibus illis, qui
debuerunt, voluerunt and potuerunt interesse, quibusdam vero absentibus, quorum
quidam fuerunt legitime excusati, aliis per contumaciam se absentantibus,
quorum nomina patent in rotulis sectarum, quorum quilibet adjudicatus fuit in
amerciamento december librarum ob ejus contumaciam. And that the King was Judge
what Barons should come to the Parliament, is most clear by the 75. Act Par.
14. Ia. 2. whereby it is declared, no Freeholder under the sum of 20. pounds,
shall come except he be specially called by the King, either by his Officer, or
by Writ, and tho afterward the King allowed two Barons of every Shire to be
sent to Represent all the Barons for saving Expenses, yet even after that
Concession it is declared by the 78. Act Par. 6. Ia. 4. That no Freeholder be
compelled to come, but gif our Sovereign Lord Writ specially for them.

It being thus clear that the Parliament is the Kings Baron Court, it seems a
wonder to me how it could have entered into the heart of any sober man to think
that any man's Baron Court, but much less the Kings Baron Court, should have
power and jurisdiction over him, and that it should be lawful to them, as
Buchannan and these other Authors assert, to punish him or lay him aside, all
which assertions are equally impious and illegal.

6. When the King resolves to lessen any way his own Power, this is not done by
the Authority of the three Estates, as certainly it would be, if they had the
power to lessen his Authority, but the King does the same from his own proper
Motive, as when the King binds up his own Hands from granting Remissions in
cases of forethought Felony, Ia. 4. Par. 6. Act 63. And when an Act was to be
made, discharging the Lords of the Session to admit of private Writings from the
King to stop the procedure of Justice, this is not Enacted by the three Estates
but only by the King, and is founded upon the Kings own Promise, Act 92. Par.
6. Ia. 6. And in all Acts of Parliament the King only Statutes as Legislator,
and the Parliament only Advise and Consent, which shows that they are not
Co-ordinat with the King, as is asserted by Buchannan and others, much less
above him. And the Acts of Parliament in the late Rebellion having run thus,
Our Sovereign Lord, and the three Estates contrare to the Tenor of all the Laws
that ever were made in Scotland. The Parliament returning to their duty,
ordained that Style to be altered, and to bear as formerly, Our Sovereign Lord,
with Advice and Consent, etc.

But lastly, what advantage can the people have by placing their security in
the Parliament, since they are so liable to Passions, Errors, and
Extravagancies, as well as Kings are, and have, if Buchannan be believed,
betrayed the interest of the Kingdom, since K. Kenneth the seconds time, now
above 700. years; and they are ordinarily led by some pragmatical Ringleaders,
who have not that interest to preserve the Kingdom that Kings have: and since
the King may make so many Noblemen and Burghs Royal at pleasure, by whose
Votes he may still prevail. What security can we have by giving them a power
above the King, or how can they have it?

From all which it may clearly appear that we have had Kings long ere we had
Parliaments, and that the Parliaments derive their power from the King; and
that at first our King only called the Heads of Families, and his own Officers,
as his Council, with whom he consulted, without any necessity to call any
others than he pleased, there being no Law, Article, nor Capitulation obliging
him from the beginning thereto: And our Kings were so far from having
Parliaments associated with them in their Empire, that there is no mention at
all of them, or of any condition relating to them in the first Institution of
our Kings above-related; nor were there any Parliaments in being at that time.
But after the Feudal Law came to be in vigor, then our Kings looking upon the
whole Kingdom as their own in property; King Malcolme Canmore did distribute
all the Land of Scotland amongst his Subjects, as his Liedge-men, which is
clear by the first Chapter of his Laws; and according to the Feudal Law, all
the Vassals of our Kings compeared in their Head-Court, and therein consulted
what was fit for the Kingdom; but thereafter the way of making War, requiring
Money and Property belonging to the Subject, as Government did to the King, it
was necessary to have their consent for raising Money: And from this did arise
the inserting the advice and consent of the three Estates in our Acts of
Parliament.

From this also it is very clear that their opinion is very unsolid and ill
founded, who think that Kings can do nothing without a special Act of
Parliament, even in matters of Government. As for instance, that, he cannot
restrain the license of the Press, or require his Subjects to take a Bond for
securing the Peace; for these and the like being things which relate immediately
to Government, the King has as much right to regulate these, as we have to
regulate and dispose upon our Property, Government being the King's Property.
2. Though the Monarchy had been derived from the People, yet how soon our Kings
got the Monarchy, they got every thing that was necessary for the Explication
and Administration of it, which as it is common sense and reason, so it is
founded upon that most wise and just Maxim in Law, Quando aliquid conceditur,
omnia concessa videntur, sine quibus concessum explicari nequit. 3. I desire to
know where there is yet a Law giving the King a Negative voice, a power of
erecting Incorporations, or a power to grant Remissions, for Crimes, or
Protections for Civil Debts, and yet the people is far more concerned in these;
and the King's having power to do these, and a thousand other things, does
rather oblige and warrant me to lay down a general rule, that the Kings of
Scotland can do every thing that relates to Government, and is necessary for
the administration thereof, though there be no special Law or Act of Parliament
for it, if the same be not contrary to the Law of God, Nature, or Nations.

The second Conclusion that we draw from these former principles, is, that
Princes cannot be punished by their own Subjects, as Buchannan and our
Republicans do assert, which is most clear by the former Laws, wherein it is
declared, that the King is a Sovereign and Absolute Prince, and deriving his
power from God Almighty. That it is Treason to endeavor to depose, or suspend
the King. Wherein our Law is founded on the nature of Monarchy; for if He be
Supreme, He cannot be judged, for no man is judged but by his Superior, and
that which is Supreme can have no Superior: and on the Principles of the Law of
Nature and Nations, because says the Law, no man can be both the person who
Judges, and the person Judged; and it is still the King who Judges, since all
other Judges do represent him, and derive their power from him, Ipse se prator
cogere non potest, quia triplici officio fungi nequit suspectum dicentis, and
coac^^, and cogentis L. Ille a^quo ff. ad Trebell. It is a principle in all
Law, that Jurisdiction and all other Mandats cease with the power that granted
it, and therefore as they acknowledge that a King cannot be cited till he have
forfeited His just Right, so how soon he has forfeited it, all the power of the
ordinary Judges in the Nation falls, and becomes extinct, and no other Judge
can Judge Him, because no other Judge can sit by virtue of any other Authority,
till it be known that he has forfeited his, and that cannot be till the event
of the Process; and if the People be Judges, yet they cannot assume the
Government till the King has forfeited it: And why also should they be Judges,
who have neither knowledge nor moderation, who are acted by humor, and delight
in insolence? And how shall they meet? Or who shall call them? Nor can the
Parliament judge them, because they derive their right from the King, as shall
be proved: And though they were equal, yet no equal can judge another, par in
parem non habet Imperium, nemo sibi Imperare potest. No man can command
himself, l. si de re sua, ff. derecept. ^rbitr. Nemo sibi legem imponere
potest, l. quid autem ff. de donat. inter virum and uxorem, and therefore the
Civil Law, which is ours by Adoption, does positively assert, that Princeps
legibus solutus est, the King is liable to no Law, l. princeps, ff. de legibus:
For though He be liable to the Directive Force of the Law, that is to say, He
ought to be Governed by it as His Director: Yet He is not liable to the
Co-ercive Force of the Law, as all Lawyers that are indifferent do assert,
H^rmenopol* l. 1. tit. 1. Sect. 48. (...), The King is not Subject to the Law,
because offending against them, he is not punished, vid: Granswinkell. cap. 6.
Arnis. cap. 4. Francisc. a victoria Relect. 3. number 4. Ziegler. de jur. Majes.
cap. 1. number. 12. with whom the Fathers also agree, Ambros. in Apol. David cap.
4. Liberi sunt Reges a vin^ulis delictorum neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur
legibus, tuti Imperij potestate Isiodorus 3. sent. cap. 31. populi peccantes
Iudicem me^^u^t, Reges autem solo. Dei timore, metuque g^hennae coercentur: And
in this Sense, they take these words, Psalm. 51. -- Against thee, thee only have
I sinned; and I was glad to find in Bishop Vshers Power of Prin^es, amongst
many other Citations, that the Rabbis, and particularly Rabbi Jeremiah own^d
that no Creature may Judge the King, but the Holy and Blessed God alone, in
which also Heathens agree with Jews and Christians, Ecphantas the Pithagorean
makes it the Privilege of God, and then of the King, to be Judged by none,
Stobeus Sermon. 46. and Dion in Marco Aurelio tells us, that it is certain,
that free Monarchs cannot be Judged, save by God alone, and if it were
otherwise, we should see them very unsecure, for the ambition and avarice of
insolent Subjects should never or seldom miss to form their Process, and why
should Parties be Judges? But to demonstrate the Justice Kings and Princes are
to expect from the Populace and Mobile, let us remember their Material Justice,
in the usage of our Savior, when they cried, Crucify him, Crucify him; their
Sentence against King CHARLES the Martyr, when they were at the hight of their
pretensions to Piety, and public Spiritedness; their usage of de Wit, the
Idolizer of them, and their Commonwealth: and if we want a true Idea of their
Form of Process, we will find it in their usage of the Archbishop of St.
Andrews and others, no L^bel, no Citation, no Defenses, no Sentences, no time
to prepare to die: and yet all this are the Dictates of pure and devout public
Spiritedness. Buchannans Bloody Arguments for this position are, that Tyrants
have been Murdered with applause, and Princes would become licentious, if they
were not Restrained, by the just fear of being called to an account: That the
Roman and Venetian Magistrates have been punished by the people, and that the
ordinary Judges of the place have Judged them: and that some of our Kings, as
well as these of other Nations, have been punished as Tyrants.

To which I answer shortly, that Inconveniences must not prevail with us to
break our Oaths, and overturn our Laws, for nothing has so great
inconveniencie in it, as this has, these being but partial, and this is a total
Inconveniency. And the English Lawyers agree, that a mischief is better than an
inconvenience, and this should have been considered, before we swore to
Monarchy: and if the people were Electors, as they never were; yet they should
have reserved this power, or else they cannot now challenge it. But though our
Law were not clear, as it is most uncontroverted upon this point: Yet right
Reason should persuade us to have reserved no such power: For as Kings may
err, so may the Judges who are to Try them: and it is more probable their
Tryers will, because they may be acted by Revenge, Ambition, or Popularity; and
there is nothing so liable to err as the populace.

The Romans and Venetians might have punished their Magistrates, because these
Magistrates were not Vested with a Supreme power; nor were they Sovereigns as
our Monarchs are. And those Judges who Tried them, derived not their power from
those Magistrates who Tried them, as our Judges do; for the same consent, and
compact by which they were made the Chief, the others were made also
Magistrates, which cannot be said of absolute Monarchs, who derive not their
power from the people as these do, and the Instances of Kings who have been
Murdered, are Crimes in them, who did commit them, and so should not be Rules
to us. And generally the best of Kings have been worst used. But who can escape
by innocence, when King CHARLES the Martyr fell by Malice: Such also as cry up
the Murderers of Tyrants* who had no just Right, never meant to allow the
Arraignment of lawful Monarchs, who, when they err, have God only for their
Judge; and if they fear not Him, and eternal Punishment, they will not probably
fear mortal Men, and their own Subjects whom they can many ways escape. 2.
There is no Creature so unreasonable, but he will use his own with discretion,
though there be no Law obliging him to it, nor Punishment to be inflict'd, if
he do otherwise: who burns his own House, or drowns his Lands, though he may
do it? For the Law considers, that a King is either mad, and if so, he will
respect no Law, and should not be punished, at least he will not stand in awe
for fear of it, or else he is of a sound Judgment, and then he needs no Law;
and therefore, Why should we apprehend that a King will destroy His own
Kingdom. 3. A King is also obliged by His Fame, to do things worthy of His high
Trust, and things able to abide that conspicuous hight to which he is exposed.
4. Though His people ought not to Rebel, yet no thinking man can be sure that
they will not. And therefore even the greatest Tyrants fear such accidents,
though they know they are not bound by these Laws, that tie Subjects. And if
all these fail, yet we must reverence Gods Dispensations, and expect a redress
of these unusual Emergents from his Divine Goodness, for whose sake we suffer
them; Rather then expose all to ruin, by endeavoring a revenge, that may be
so unjust, in the preparative, and dangerous in the event.

The 3. Conclusion which I shall draw from the former principles, shall be,
that as it is not lawful for Subjects to punish their Kings, so neither is it
to rise in Arms against them upon what pretext soever, no not to defend their
Liberty nor Religion. Which Conclusion also I shall endeavor to Establish on
sure foundations of Positive Law. Reason, Experience, and Scripture. As to our
Positive Law, it is clear, for by the 3. Act Par. 1. Ia. 1. It is declared
Rebellion to rise in Arms against the Kings Person: And by the 14. Act 6. Par.
K. Ia. 2. It is Treason to Rebel against the Kings Person or Authority: By the
25. Act Par. 6. Ia. 2. It is Treason to rise in fear of War against the Kings
Person or his Majesty, or to lay hands upon his Person violently, whatever age
they be of, or to help or supply these who commit Treason. By the 131 Act 8,
Par. Ia. 6. All the Subjects are discharged to Convocat for holding of Councils
or other Assemblies without his Majesty's express Warrant; and by the 12. Act
10. Par. K. Ia. 6. The entering into Leagues or Bonds without his Majesty's
special Command is declared to be Sedition. All which Acts are prior to
Buchannans time, and consequently he was very inexcuseable in advancing this
Rebellious Principle. And these Laws having excepted no case, exclude all cases
and pretexts of rising in Arms against the lawful Monarch; but our unhappy
Contrymen having by a long and open Rebellion opposed the most devout, and
most just of all Kings upon the false pretexts of Liberty, and Religion, the
Parliament of this Kingdom, from a full Conviction of the Villainies of these
times, and to prevent such dangerous Cheats for the future, they did by the 5.
Act, Par. 1. Char. 2. Declare it to be Treason for any number of his Majesty's
Subjects to rise in Arms upon any pretext whatsoever, and to show that all such
Glosses as were used by Buchannan were absurd, and did not evacuat the first
Laws, though general, the Parliament did by the 4. Act of that 1. Parliament
declare that any Explanation or Gloss, that during the late Troubles has been
put upon these Acts, as that they are not to be extended against any Leagues,
Councils, Conventions, Assemblies, or Meetings, made, holden, or kep't by the
Subjects, for Preservation of the Kings Majesty, the Religion, Laws, and
Liberties of the Kingdom, or for the public Good either of Kirk or Kingdom,
are false and Disloyal, and contrare to the true and genuine meaning of these
Acts. Which Statute is a clear decision against Buchannan, finding that the
Statutes that were prior to his time, and all other such general Statutes made
in favors of the King, did formerly strike against his Principles and
Distinctions. As also to preclude all avenues to Rebellion by teaching,
defending, or encouraging others to Rebel upon these pretexts, as the former
Act declared, that actual rising in Arms was Rebellion. So by the 2. Act Sess.
2. Par. 2. Charles 2. It is declared Treason for any Subject to maintain these
positions, viz. That it is lawful for Subjects upon pretense of Reformation, or
any other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Leagues, or Covenants, or to take
up Arms against the King, or any Commissionated by him.

2. All the Arguments formerly adduc'd against the power of the Subject to
punish his Person, do fully prove likewise that they have no power to rise in
Arms against him. For either the collective Body of the Subjects are Superior
to him, and if so, they may not only rise up in Arms against him, but they may
punish him; but if the King be Superior to them, as has been formerly proved,
then it cannot be lawful for Subjects to rise up in Arms against him, no more
than it is to punish his Person. Nor can I see how all such as declare for a
Defensive War, are not to be concluded guilty of designing to Murder the King,
for if the King come in Person to defend his own Right, as certainly he will,
and must; can it be thought they will shoot at none, least they kill him? and
if they shoot, how can they secure his Sacred Person? and if they kill him in
the Field, are they less guilty of his Murder, than these Russians who lately
designed it? Or does it lessen the guilt that these designed to kill him alone
privately? whereas our moderate men will in face of the Sun, and with displayed
Banners against God and him, kill with him all such, as being persuaded that
they are obliged before God to assist him, expose their lives for their duty.

3. That dangerous, though specious Principle of defensive Arms, is
inconsistent with that order of Nature which God has established, and which is
absolutely necessar amongst all other humane Relations; and by the same
Analogy, by which we allow Subjects to rise against their Prince, we may much
more allow Children to rise against their Parents, Servants, against their
Masters, Soldiers against their Officers, and the Rabble against their
Magistrates: for the King does eminently comprehend all these relations in his
Sovereignty, as inferior Branches of that Paramount, and Monarchical power.
And what a glorious state should mankind be left in, if Anarchy were thus
Established, and every man should be invested with power to be his own Judge?
Or dares any reasonable man assert, that this is fit to be allowed in the
present condition of Mankind, for since the generality of men can scarce be
contained in their Duty by the severest Laws that can be made, what can be
expected from them, when they are loosed from all Law, and are encouraged to
transgress against it?

If the multitude could prove that they were infallible, and that no oppression
could be expected from them, some thing might be said, why we might balance
them with authority. But since both Reason and doleful experience, teach us,
that generally the multitude consists of Knaves and Fools, who alter not to the
better by Conspiring together, nor become juster, for being led by such
ambitious, and discontented Spirits, as ordinarily lead on Rebellions. It is
safer to obey those of the two fallible Governors, whom God has set over us,
and whom the Law ties us to obey, and to whom also we are bound by the Oath of
Allegiance; especially, seeing thus we may probably expect, that they will be
more careful of us, as being their own, than mere Strangers, who use us only
for their own Ends. And at the worst in the King, we can have but an ill
Master, whereas in allowing Subjects to usurp, we may fight to get our selves
hundreds of Tyrants, and these two fighting against one another, so that we
shall not even know which of these Devils to obey.

The Arguments that can be adduc'd to justify this Principle of Defensive
Arms, are almost answered in the former Article, viz. That there is a mutual
Obligation betwixt King and people, so that when He breaks the one, they are
free from the other, and that all Government is Established for the advantage of
the People, and thus these few Arguments peculiar to this Point, remain now
only to be here solved. 1. That self-defence is by the Law of Nature allowed to
all, and even to Brutes* why then should men who may lose more, who deserve
better, and can use self-defense more innocently be debarred from it? 2. We see
in Scripture, that the people deserted and opposed their Kings for Religion. 3.
This has been allowed with us in the instance of King James the third, against
whom his Subjects rose in Rebellion, for Mis-governing and oppressing His
people, and this opposition, was first justified by God, in the success he gave
to their Arms, and thereafter by a special and express Act in the ensuing
Parliament, which stands yet unrepeal'd.

To which I shortly answer, that as to the first of self-defense in Brutes, we
must still remember, that God having designed Government to bridle the
Extravagancies of restless Mankind, he has appointed Magistrates to be his
Vicegerents and Representatives, and has entrusted them with his power, and so
opposition to them is unlawful, because it is not lawful against him; and
because if it were allowed, all would pretend to it, and so there should be no
Order, nor Government. And that this may be the better observed, God has
endowed man with Principles fitted for these ends of Order and Society, amongst
which, one is, That the public Safety of the whole is to be preferred to the
Safety of any one man, or of any number of private men, who are not to be
considered as the public, because that is the public Interest, which is the
Representative of the Nation, and that this Principle may be the better obeyed,
he has commanded men to suffer injuries, rather than occasion Disorders, and
has promised to reward Patience and Submission for his sake, with eternal Life,
a Nobler Prize, than we here can contend for.

This being then Premised, It is answered, that though Brutes may defend
themselves, because Order and the common good of Societies are not there
concerned; yet there is no reason to extend this to Men, whose self-defense
against Authority occasions more mischief, than it can bring advantage: and if
this Argument hold, it would prove, that every man who is unjustly Condemned,
or at least thinks so, may kill the King, or His Judge; Servants might bind
their Masters, and the people of any private Town might pull down their Judge
from the Bench, when they thought he oppressed them. And as these must submit,
because they expect Reparation from a higher Tribunal. So God has promised
Reparation to those who suffer for his sake; and the greatness and sureness of
this Reward, makes this no uncomfortable Doctrine, and this Submission is as
necessary, and rather more, for men's preservation, than Resistance; and is a
kind of self-defence, since opposition to Authority would bring a certain
ruin, and confusion, in which more would perish, than opposition by private
self defense would preserve. Upon which Christian Principles also, Ames. a
Protestant and Calvinist Divine has resolved that, In bonis temporalibus
tenetur quisque personam publicam si^i ipsi praeferre, bonum enim totius pluris
faciendum est quam bonum alicujus partis Cas: conscient: l. 5. cap. 7. These
14. and Lex Rex confesses, p. 335. That a private man should rather suffer the
King to kill him, than that he should kill the King, because he is not to
prefer the Life of a private man, to the Life of a public man.

And whereas it may be pretended, that though this opposition should not be
trusted to any private man, yet Parliaments and the Collective Body should, and
may be trusted with it. But to this I have answered formerly, that all
Convocations without Authority from the King, and all rising against him are
indefinitely declared unlawful, and justly, for whoever wants Authority, is but
in a private capacity, none having a public capacity, save the Magistrates.
And if they be allowed to rise, because their quarrel is just, it must be as
just to allow a lesser number, if they have the same Justice in their pretexts,
and we have frequently seen, that the same persons who magnified the multitude
for their numbers, did shortly thereafter divide from them, pretending that
they were the Sanior pars, or juster Party.

4. This position is against the very Nature, not only of Monarchy, but of all
Governmments; For who will obey when they may resist? And who can be Judges
whether the pretenses upon which Arms are taken, be lawful, or not? And
therefore since it is unlawful for Subjects to take up even Defensive Arms,
until it be found that the King against whom these defensive Arms are taken up
be a Tyrant, and an Oppressor: It clearly follows, that these Subjects must
first have a power to judge and find that the King has erred, which is to
declare the People to be Judges of their King; and we may be soon convinced
that this Principle is against the Nature of all Government, if we consider
that if it were lawful for Subjects with us to rise against the King, it should
be lawful for these in a Commonwealth, or Aristocracy, to rise against their
Governors, since these may err as well as Kings do; and if this were allowed,
all Nations should always have one Rebellion rising out of the Ashes of
another, for only they who prevailed should be satisfied, and all the rest
would certainly conclude that they might more justly oppose these Usurpers, one
or more, then the first did oppose their lawful Prince; and thus Government
which is designed for the security of the State, should run in a Circle fixed
upon no certain Basis, and determined by no sure Measures.

5. This Principle is dangerous for the Subjects, as well as for the King and
other Governors; for if Kings be persuaded that Subjects think this opposition
lawful, then they will be still jealous of them, and will be necessitated on
all occasions to secure against such oppositions, and so this Doctrine tends
more to make our King a Tyrant, than to make us free. And if the difference
betwixt King and People, should draw both to Arms, where can we find a Judge,
to whom both Parties will submit? So that to allow this power in the People to
debate, is to allow a difference that can never end; and so what innocent man
shall be able to know whom he may securely follow? And the best issue that
could be expected from these debates, would be, that the one half of the Nation
should ruin the other: So comfortable and just is this rebellious Doctrine.

6. If we consult either our own experience, or History, we will find that
these pretexts of Liberty, and Religion, have always been used by those who
loved neither, and that they have been ordinarily used against the best of
Kings, and so prove to be mere Cheats upon their parts who use them, and
absolute Villainies, if we consider against whom they are used; and it cannot be
otherwise, for the worst of men are always readiest to take Arms, and the
best of Kings are most inclined to suffer insolence to grow up by degrees to
Rebellion: And as few or none ever took up Arms against their King, in whom
even the dullest did not see other motives than a love to liberty and Religion,
so when they who did take up Arms upon these pretexts, did succeed in their
attempts, they became themselves greater grievances to the people, than these
lawful Powers against whom they pretended to protect them: and when others rose
against them upon the same pretexts, they did in the severest manner declare
that to be Rebellion in others, which they contended to be lawful in themselves.

7. So dangerous is this Principle, that it has been alway^s used as a Tool to
promote contrary designs, and to serve the worst of men in all the opposite
sides. And thus we see that the Bigot Papists have by it overturned Thrones,
and disinherited and murdered Kings. In which the most impious of their Doctors
have been admired and followed by the rigid Phanaticks, who did notwithstanding
teach, that all Papists were to be extirpated, and unquiet Spirits in the
established Republics of Rome, Venice, and Florence, have by this Principle
endeavored to overturn and disquiet as much their own Commonwealths, as our
Republicans have impiously endeavored to destroy Just Monarchy, thereby to
settle an usurping Commonwealth.

8. The only pretext that can justify the rising up in Arms, being, that it is
lawful to all Creatures to defend themselves; the pretext must be dangerous,
since its limits are uncertain: For how can Defensive Arms be distinguished
from Offensive Arms? Or, whoever begun at the one, who did not proceed to the
other? Or, what Subject did ever think himself secure after he had drawn his
Sword against his King, without endeavoring to cut off by it that King against
whom he had drawn it? The hope of Absolute Power is too sweet, and the fear of
punishment too great, to be bounded, and marched by the best of Men: And how
can we expect this moderation from these who at first wanted patience to bear
the lawful Yoke of Government, but because examples convince as much as reason,
let us remember how when this Nation was very happy in the Year, 1638. under
the Government of a most Pious and Just Prince, born in our own Kingdom, we
raised an Army, and with it Invaded His Kingdom of England, upon the pretext
that He was governed by wicked Counselors, and designed to introduce Popery;
and this was justified as a Defensive War, by a long tract of General
Assemblies, and Parliaments: and if this be a Defensive War that is
justifiable, what King can be secure? Or, wherein shall we seek security
against Civil Wars? Or what can be more ridiculous than to pretend the invading
Kingdoms, Murdering such as are Commissionated by the King, after that
Invasion, entering into Leagues and Covenants against him, both at home and
abroad, the robbing him of his Navies and Militia, and denying him the power to
choose his own Counselors and Judges, are merely Defensive; but God Almighty,
to teach us how dangerous these Defensive Arms are, and how impossible it is to
regulat Lawless violence, how gentle and easy soever the first beginnings are,
suffered our War, which was so much justified for being merely Defensive, to
end in the absolute overthrow of the Monarchy, and the taking away the life of
the best of Kings; and it is very remarkable, that such as have begun with the
Doctrine of giving only Passive Obedience in all things, as in refusing to pay
just Taxes, to concur in securing Rebels, etc. have from that stepped up to
Defensive Arms, and from that to the Power of Reforming by the Sword, and from
that to the Power of Dethroning and Murdering Kings by Parliaments, and
Judicatures, and from that to the Murdering and Assassinating all who differed
from them, without any other pretext or formality whatsoever, so hard a thing
it is to stop when we begin once to fall from our duty: and so easy a thing it
is to persuade such as have allowed themselves in the first degrees of guilt,
to proceed to the highest extravagancies of Villainy.

Oh! What a blindness there is in Error? And how palpably does God desert them,
who desert their duty; suffering them after they have done what they should
have abhorred, to proceed to do what they first abhorred really? To these I
must recommend the History of Hazael, who, when the Prophet foretold him, 2
King. 8.12, 13. That he should slay their young men with the sword, dash their
children, and rip up their women with child, answered him, Am I a dog, that I
should do such things; and yet he really did what he had so execrated.

The moderation likewayes of these modest pretenders to Self-defence, and
Defensive Arms, will appear, by the bloody Doctrine of their great Rabbis,
Buchannan not only allows but invites Subjects to Murder their King. And Lex
Rex, Page 313. tells us, that it is a sin against Gods Command to be Passively
subject to an unjust Sentence, and that it is an Act of Grace and Virtue to
resist the Magistrate violently, when he does him wrong: and after that horrid
Civil War was ended, the Author of Naphtali does justify it, page 16, and 17.
in these words, Combinations for assistance in violent opposition of the
Magistrates, when the ends of Government are perverted (which must be referred
to the discretion of them who minds Insurrection) are necessary by the Law of
Nature, of Charity, and in order to Gods Glory, and for violation of this duty
of delivering the oppressed from Magistrates, Judgment comes upon People. From
which he proceeds, Page 18, and 19. to assert that, Not only the power of
self-defence, but vindicative, and reforming power is in any part of the
People, against the whole, and against all Magistrates, and if they use it not,
Judgment comes on (supposing their capacity probable to bear them forth) and
they shall be punished for their connivance, and not acting in way of
vindication of Crimes, and reforming abuses.

Before I enter upon these Arguments, which the Scripture furnishes us with
against these rebellious Principles; I must crave leave to say, that Defensive
Arms seem to me very clearly inconsistent with that Mortification, Submission,
and Patience, which is recommended by our Blessed Savior, in all the strain of
the New Testament; and how will these people give their Coat to a Stranger, or
hold up their other Cheek to him, when they will rise even in Rebellion against
their Native Prince. 2. As the taking up of Arms is inconsistent with the
temper required in a Christian; so it seems a very unsuitable mean for
effectuating the end, for which it is designed, since Religion being a
Conviction of what we owe to God, how can that be commanded, which should be
persuaded? And how can Arms become Arguments? Or how can External Force
influence immaterial Substances, such as are the Souls of Men. And we may as
well think to awake a man's Conscience by Drums, or to persuade his Judgment by
Muskets; and therefore the Apostle speaks only of Spiritual Arms, in this our
Spiritual Warfare, The Sword of the Spirit, and the helmet of salvation, etc.
But good God, how could the extravagancy of forcing the Magistrate by Arms, in
Defense of Religion, enter into Men's Heads? when it is unlawful even for the
Magistrate himself, to force Religion by Arms. And as Subjects should not be by
the King forced to Religion; so if they use Force against the King, the pretext
of Religion, tho specious, should not defend them. And therefore when the sons
of Zebedee desired fire from heaven, upon these who opposed even our Savior,
he told them, that they knew not what spirit they were of.

3. It seems very derogatory to the power of Almighty God, that He should need
humane assistance, and it is a lessening of the great esteem that we ought to
have for the energy, force and reasonableness of the Christian Religion, that
it needs to be forced upon men by Arms, as if it were not able to force its own
way. This Mahomet needed for his Cheats, but our blessed Savior needs not for
his Divine Precepts, and therefore when Peter offered to fight for him, our
Savior checked him, commanding him to put up his Sword, and to persuade him
the more effectually, he assures him, that all these who take the Sword, shall
perish by it, and that his Kingdom was not of this World, and so he needed no
such worldly help, but if he pleased to call for legions of Angels, his
Omnipotent Father would send them, and sure Angels are fitter and abler
Instruments to carry on such a work of Reformation, than Rebellious Regiments
of Horse and Dragoons. Which Divine Argument serves also to refute the
Atheistical Doctrine of Buchannan, and Owen, who would persuade us, that our
Savior did only recommend to his Disciples to flee from one City to another,
when they were persecuted, Because they then wanted power to resist. For tho
they did want, yet our Savior could have, by legions of Angels, defeated all
the Powers upon Earth: And Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians,
insists on their patient suffering under Persecution, tho their number were
sufficient to have resisted.

4. Our blessed Savior foreseeing that Man's Corruption would in spite of
Christianity, prompt him to resist; he therefore did command by the Apostle
Paul, Romans 13. v. 1, and 2. Let every Soul be Subject to the higher Power for
there is no power but of God; the powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. In which Text, it is very
remarkable that the Apostle urges this Christian duty of submission, as being a
mark of man's immediate dependence upon God, and as that, which when contemned
brings eternal damnation. And whereas it is pretended that this Text commands
only submission to Magistrates, whilst they Act Piously, and Virtuously, because
only in so far they are Gods Vicegerents, but discharges not resistance to
their impious commands. It is answered that the Text has no such limitation,
and we must have so much respect to the Scripture, as to think that if God
Almighty had designed to allow such an opposition, he would have warranted it,
in as clear Terms, as he commanded the submission, and the reason why this
submission is commanded, is not because the power is rightly used, but because
the power is ordained of God. And we see that St. Paul himself did think that
the power should be reverenced, even when abused: for when the high Priest was
Injuring him, he acknowledged that he was obliged not to speak evil of the
Rulers of his People, Acts 23.2. And if this place of Scripture, and the
submission therein commanded, were so to be limited, we behoved likewise so to
limit the 5. Commandment, and not to honor our Parents, except when they are
Pious, nor to obey them, if they vex or trouble us; and St. Paul having written
this Epistle to those, who were then living under that monstrous Emperor
Caius, did clearly design, that the Christian Religion was to be admired for
commanding Subjects, not only to obey good Princes, but even submitting
peaceably to Tyrants. And suitable to this Doctrine are these Texts, Heb. chapter
12. v, 9. We had Fathers of our flesh, who corrected, and chastened us, after
their own pleasure, and we gave them reverence; and lest we might think that
Text rather a Narration than a Command, it is told us Peter 2. v. 18. Servants
be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward, for this is thanks-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God do endure grief And v. 20. If when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take
it patiently, this is acceptable to God, for even hereunto were ye called.

Our blessed Saviors practice, did likewise agree most admirably with his
Precepts and Doctrine formerly insisted on, for though no man ever was, or can
be so much injured as his blessed self, nor could ever any defensive Arms have
been so just, as in his quarrel, yet he would not suffer a Sword to be drawn in
it, and to discourage all Christians from using Arms, he told these who were
offering to defend even himself with Arms, that whosoever should draw the
Sword, should perish by it, and it seems that God Almighty permitted Peter to
draw his Sword at that time merely, that we might upon that occasion be for
ever deterred from defensive Arms, by this our Saviors Divine example and
reasoning.

The last Argument I shall adduce, shall be from that most Christian Topic
used by St. Paul, Romans 3.8. We should not do ill that good may come of it.

And therefore since disobedience to Magistrates, but much more to Rebel against
them, is discharged both by the Laws of God and Men: This disobedience and
opposition, cannot be justified by pretending that it is designed for Reforming
the Nation. And if it be answered, that this opposition is not in it self ill,
because the design justifies it. It is to this replied, that if this answer be
sufficient, then the former excellent Rule is of no use: For when a Servant
steals his Masters Money to give to the Poor; or a Son cuts his Fathers Throat,
ecause he is vicious; or when Iacques Clement Stabed Henry the 3. and Ravilleck
Henry the 4. they might have alleged the same in their own defense. Nor know
we a surer proof that any thing is impious, or unlawful, then when the Laws of
our Nation have discharged it as a great Crime, they being against and contrare
to no positive Law of God; but rather suitable to the same; and owned as such
by Christian Synods and Divines: and there being no necessity to enforce this
going out of the Road. All which holds in this case, nor can it be imagined,
how Reforming by Arms, can be thought necessary, since God both can without a
Miracle, Turn the hearts of Kings, in whose hands they are, as Rivers of
Waters. And can send devout Men to influence Kingdoms. And should not we rather
suffer patiently as the Primitive Christians did, that his Divine Majesty may
be by our patience prevailed upon, to Reform us now, as he did of old our
Predecessors from Paganism; by our own Kings, in a Regular way than upon every
notion of Bigot and Factious Ringleaders overturn all Government, and order,
Rent all Unity, and involve our native Country in Blood and Confusion. And
whilst we are fighting for the Throne of Religion, lose the true efficacy of
Piety, and Devotion, for what use can there be of Patience, Humility, Faith,
and Hope. If we will presently repair our selves, submit to no Magistracy that
differs from us, and believe that Religion cannot subsist except by us.

The Fathers also of the Primitive Church have inculcated so much this Doctrine
every where, both by their Doctrine and Practice, and both these are so fully
known, that I shall remit this point to these Learned Men who have fully
handled it. Only I must remember that excellent passage of St. Ambrose, who
being commanded to deliver up his Church to the Arians, says, Volens nunquam
deferam, coactus repugnare non novi; dolere potero, flere potero, gem^re
potero; adversus arma milites Gothos, Lachrymae me^, mea arma sunt, talia enim
sunt munimenta sacerdotis; aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere. Which Prayers
and Tears are likewise called the only Arms of the Church by the great Nazianz:
in his first Oration against Julian, and by St. Bernard in his 221. Epistle.
But more of this is to be found, Tom. 2. Council. Galliae page 533. Where it is
fully proved that all Subjects ought humbly and faithfully to obey the Regal
Power, as being ordained by none but God, with whom the wise Heathens agree,
for Marcellus (Tacit. lib. 4. hist.) prayed for good Princes, but obeyed bad
ones; and Plinij in his Panegirick to Trojan, confesses that the gods had
bestowed on the Emperor the sole disposal of all things leaving nothing to
Subjects, save the honor of obedience* But because these of that persuasion
will believe better Calvin than the Fathers, I have taken pains to consider in
him these few passages, cap. 20. lib 4. Institut.. 27. Assumptum in Regiam
Maj^statem violare nefas est nunquam nobis seditiosae istae cogitationes in
mentem veniant tractandum, esse pro meritis Regem,. 29. Personam sustinent
voluntale Domini, cui inviolabile in Majestatem ipso impressit, and
insculpsit,. 31. Privatis hominibus nullum aliud quam parendi, and patiendi
datum est mandatum. And all this Chapter does so learnedly and judicially
impugn this Doctrine, that it is a wonder why Calvinists should differ from
Calvin.

The Examples adduced by our Republicans, of the revolt of Libra, 2 Chronicles.
1.21. And from Jeroboam, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers,
and of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, because of Rehoboam his oppression, 1
King. 12. prove not all the lawfulness of the Subjects defection from their
Kings, because these defections are only narrated, but not allow^d in
Scripture, and are recorded rather as instances of Gods vengeance upon the
wickedness of these Princes, than as examples justified in these Revolters, and
to be followed by such as read the Sacred History: In which, when Examples are
proposed by the Spirit of God for our imitation, they are still honored with
the Divine approbation. And I hope my Readers will still remember, that I
design not by this Treatise to encourage Princes to wickedness by Impunity, but
only to discourage Subjects from daring to be the punishers.

The great esteem which the great Bishop Usher has justly, even among
Republicans, and Phanaticks, for Learning and Devotion, has prevailed with me,
to set down two Objections used by him, with his pious Answers thereto. The
first is, Suppose (say they) the King, or Civil Magistrate should command us to
Worship the Devil, would you wish us here to lay down our Heads upon the Block,
and not to repel the violence of such a Miscreant, to the outmost of our power:
And if not, what would become of Gods Church, and his Religion. To which the
Holy Man Answers, That even when the Worship of the Devil was commanded by the
cruel Edicts of persecuting Emperors, the Christians never took up Arms
against them, but used fervent Prayers, as their only refuge: And St. Peter
animats them to this patient suffering, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. Beloved, think it not
strange concerning the fiery trial, but rejoice in as much as ye are partakers
of Christ's sufferings. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief,
or as an evil-doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters. By which last
words, if I durst add to so great an Author as B. Usher, the Apostle seems
expressly to me to have obviated the dreadful Doctrine of rising in Arms upon
the pretext of Religion, and the killing such as differ from them; which if the
Christians did allow, they behooved to pass for Murderers, and to discharge
them to meddle in matters of Government upon this pretext; because then they
behooved to suffer justly, as busy bodies. And here B. Usher does most
appositly cite St. Augustine, in Psalm. 149. The World raged, the Lion lifted
himself up against the Lamb, but the Lamb was full stronger than the Lion: The
Lion was overcome by showing cruelty, the Lamb did overcome by suffering. And
St. Jerome, Epist. 62. By shedding of blood, and by suffering, rather then
doing injuries, was the Church of Christ at first founded, it grew by
Persecutions, and was crowned by Martyrdoms.

The second Objection is, If men's hands be thus tied, no man's estate can be
secure; nay, the whole frame of the Commonwealth would be in danger to be
subverted, and utterly ruined. To which he answers, that the ground of this
Objection is exceeding faulty, and inconsistent with the Rules of Humanity, and
Divinity; of Humanity, because this would empower private persons to Judge, and
so should confound all Order, and invite all men to oppose Authority, and make
Subjects Accusers, Judges, and Executioners too; and that in their own Cause,
against their own Sovereign, and against Divinity, because it is contrary to
the Scriptures, and Fathers, who command Submission, Humility, and Patience.
Rex est si nocentem punit, cede justitiae, si innocentem, cede fortunae, Seneca
de Iura. lib. 2. cap. 30. If the King punish thee, when thou art guilty, submit
to Justice: If when thou art innocent, submit to Fortune. And if a Heathen
could be induced by his virtue to submit to blind Fortune, how much more ought
a Christian to be prevailed upon by Devotion to submit to the All-seeing
Providence of the most wise God, who makes all things to work jointly for good
to them that love him. And as St. Augustine piously advises, Princes are to be
suffered by their People, that in the exercise of their patience, temporal
things may be born, and external hoped for.

The instance of King James the Third being punished by his Subjects, is so far
from being an Argument able to justify Subjects rising in Arms against their
King, that this part of our History should for ever convince all honest men of
the dangers that attend Defensive Arms: For this excellent Prince was so far
from being one of these Tyrants, against whom Defensive Arms are only confessed
to be just, that few Princes were more meek and careful of his Subjects. But
because he employed such as himself had raised, finding that the Nobility had
too often been insolent Servants to their Prince, and severe Taskmasters to
the People; the Nobility thinking more upon this imaginary neglect, than their
own duty, did from Combinations proceed to Arms, and rejecting all conditions
of peace, they were at last cursed with a Victory, in which this Gentle Prince
was murdered, whilst he sought to save his Sacred life in a deserted Miln. By
which we may see that these Defensive Arms so much hallowed in our late
Debates, are but the Militia of Pride, Vanity, and Ambition, and that if they
be allowed, the best of Princes will ever fall by them.

And as to the Act 14. Par. 4. Ia. 4. Whereby it is pretended that the
opposing, and even the killing K. Ia. the 3. in Battle is justified, and which
Act was never repelled. It is answered, First, That this Statute was made by
the same Rebels who had opposed their lawful Prince, and so was rather a
continuing of their Rebellion, than a justification of it. 2. That abominable
Statute proceeds on the Precept of K. Ia. the 3. calling in the English, and
designing to enslave the Kingdom to Forraigners, which was not proved as it
ought to have been, though the pretext had been legal, as it was neither legal
nor true in the least circumstance, and the Noblemen and Barons are Condemned,
without being Cited or heard; though the Act be not a Statute but a Verdict, so
unjust are all Rebels, who are forced to maintain one Crime by another. 3. In
the new Collection of our Statutes made by K Ken. and Authorized in many
subsequent Parliaments. The Dreadful and Treasonable Act is not insert, which
was the best way to Rescind it, because it was, though a reproach to the Nation
to have any formal Law made to Rescind the Statute, which behooved to preserve
its memory in annulling its Authority. 4. Many Statutes since that time are
made, declaring the rising in Arms against the King and his Authority, upon any
pretext whatsoever to be Treason; and expressly Rescinding all Acts and Statutes
to the contrary, as Rebellious and Treasonable, and there needed no more
Positive Statutes to Rescind that Rebellious and Treasonable Combination rather
than Law.

As to the 44. Act 6. Par. Ia. 2. From which its urged, that because that Act
declares it Treason to Assault Castles, and Places where the Kings Person shall
happen to be, without the Consent of the three Estates: And that it is
therefore lawful to Assault the same with the Consent of the three Estates, and
consequently to rise in Arms with the Consent of the three Estates is no
Treason. It is answered, that it being but too ordinary in the Minority of our
Kings to have great Factions amongst the Nobility (which shows also the danger
of placeing the Supreme Power in the Proceres Regni) one of the Factions
ordinarily either having made the young King Prisoner, or using to Assault the
Castle where he was really preserved. It was therefore most wisely declared by
this Statute, That to lay hands upon the Kings Person violently, what age the
Ring be of, young or auld* or to Assailzy Castles, or Places where the Kings
person shall happen to be, without the Consent of the three Estates, shall be
punished as Treason. That is to say, that so great respect was to be had to his
sacred Person, that no violence was to be offered to the Place where he was,
until the same was allowed by the three Estates. But in all the former Laws,
as well as those made in our age, it is still declared Treason to Rebel against
the Kings Person, or to refuse to assist him without adding, except the same be
done by the three Estates, which shows that there is nothing designed in this
Act in favors of their Authority; and that this King was Minor the time of
this Act; and that he had great Troubles in his Youth, is very clear from the
short characters given of our Kings, by Skeen, in the end of our Acts of
Parliament.

It will (I hope) easily appear by the balance of these Arguments, that at
least the Municipal Laws of our Nation, which punish defensive Arms as Treason,
should be obeyed by our Contrymen, since, as I have often inculcated the Laws
of any Nation should still be obeyed, except where they are inconsistent with
the Word of God, and the most that the most violent Republicans alive can say
upon this Subject, is, that the case may be debated by probable Arguments, and
that neither of the Positions want their inconveniences, so that in this, as
in all other Debates, the Law of each Nation is the best Judge to decide such
Controversies, and therefore such as maintain these Principles, after so many
positive and reiterated Laws, are obliged for preserving the Peace of humane
Society, and the Order which God has established, to remove from places where
they cannot obey, for they will always find some place where the Government
will please them, and better they be disquieted, than the Government of the
whole World should be disturbed, but if they will stay, and oppose the
Government, it must be excused, to Execute those who would destroy it.

Having thus glanced only at Answers to these Objections, because I think the
Objections rather shining than strong, I shall sum up this Debate with these
Reflections, First, Buchannan, and our Republican Authors, Debate all these
Grounds, as if we were yet to Form the Government, under which we were to live,
whereas we live under, and are sworn to a Monarchy, fixed by Law and Consent,
time out of mind, and the Levellers may as well urge that no Nobleman should be
Dignified, nor no Gentleman Enriched above, a man of good sense; and Tennents
may argue that it is not reasonable, that they bearing Gods Image as well as
the Master, should toil to feed their Lusts* thus Reason may be distorted, and
we call that Reason and Providence, which pleases us best.

2. Most of their Citations and Authorities, are the Sentiments of these
Greeks, and Romans, who lived under Commonwealths, and so magnified their
Country in opposition to Usurpers, whereas our King is the Father of our
Country, and whatever they said of their Country, we should say of him, and
therefore these Citations concerns us no more than the Law of England binds
Scotsmen, they praise their own Children and Servants, for their Faithfulness
and Obedience to them, and yet they rail at us for being Faithful to our great
Master, and chief Parent under God.

3. Most of the Authors cited and admired by them, are Heathens, particularly
Stoics, who equaled themselves not only to Kings, but to their own Gods, and
against whose selfishness and pride, all Christians have justly exclaimed, and
so they are not competent Judges, nor sure Guides to Christians, in the
exercise of those purely Christian Virtues of Humility, Submission,
Self-denial, Patience, Faith, and Relyance upon God.

4. They balance not all the Conveniences and Inconveniences of either
Government, but magnify the one and conceal the other; and thus it is true
that Kings may be Tyrants, but so may, and usually are the Leaders of the
Rabble: Cromwell was such, and Shaftsbury had been such, he was such in his
Nature, and had been such in his Government; and the Distractions of a Civil
War, which ordinarily attend Competitions amongst Republicans, Destroy more than
the Lusts of any one Tyrrant can do, which made Lucan conclude, after a sad
review of the continued Civil Wars, betwixt Scilla and Marcus, Caesar and
Pompeij, without considering what followed under the Trium viri.

Faelices Arabes, Medique Eoaque tellus,
Qui sub perpetuis tenuerunt Regna Tyrannii.
5. These who debate against Magistracy, gratify their own Vanity and
Insolence; but such devout men as Ambrose, Augustine, Usher and others, Debate
against the Dictats of Interest, as well as Passion; which two, nothing save
Grace can overcome, and there can be no surer mark of Conviction than to recide
against these.

Lastly, even Buchannan repented this horrid Doctrine, Cambden, 10. year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in 1567.

But forasmuch as Buchannan being transported with partial affection, and with
Murrays bounty, wrote in such sort that his said Books have been condemned of
falsehood, by the Estates of the Realm of Scotland, to whose Credit more is to
be Atributed, and he himself sighing and sorrowing, sundry times blamed himself
(as I have heard) before the King, to whom he was Schoolmaster, for that he
had employed so virulent a Pen against that well deserving Queen, and upon his
Deathbed wished that he might live so long, till by recalling the truth, he
might even with his Blood, wipe away these Aspertions, which he had by his bad
Tongue falsely laid upon her, but that (as he said) it would now be in vain;
when he might seem to dote for Age, etc.

Idem, Anno 1582.

And not content with all this (speaking of their surprising the King) they
Compelled the King against his Will, to approve of this intercepting of him by
his Letters to the Queen of England, and to Decree an Assembly of the Estates,
Summoned by them to be just, yet could they not enduce Buchannan to approve of
this their Fact, either by writting, or persuasion by Message, who now
sorrowfully lamented, that he had already undertaken the Cause of Factious
people against their Princes, and soon after Died, etc.

THAT THE Lawful Successor Cannot be DEBARRED From Succeeding to the CROWN:
Maintained against Dolman, Buchannan, and others.

BY Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE His Majesty's Advocat.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1684.

King James In His Advice to Prince Henry.
Page 173. IF God give you not Succession, Defraud never the nearest by Right,
whatsoever conceit ye have of the Person; for Kingdoms are ever at Gods
Disposition, and in that Case we are but Liferenters, it lying no more in the
Kings, than in the Peoples Hands to Dispossess the Righteous Heir. Page 209.
Ibid. FOr at the very moment of the Expyring of the King Reigning, the nearest
and Lawful Heir enters in his place; and so to refuse him, or intrude
another, is not to hold out the Successor from coming in, but to expel and put
out their Righteous King: and I trust at this time whole France acknowledges
the Rebellion of the Leaguers, who upon pretense of Heresy by force of Arms,
held so long out, to the great Desolation of their whole Country, their Native
and Righteous King from possessing his own Crown and natural Kingdom. ERRATA.
Page 5. delet at his Majority. Page 33. for Richard 3d. Read 2d.

The Right of the Succession Defended.
THe fourth Conclusion to be cleared was, that neither the People, nor
Parliaments of this Kingdom, could seclude the lineall Successor, or could
raise to the throne any other of the same Royal line.

For clearing whereof, I shall according to my former method, first clear what
is our positive Law in this case; Secondly I shall show that this our Law is
founded upon excellent reason, and lastly, I shall answer the objections.

As to the first. It is by the second Act of our last Parliament acknowledged,
That the Kings of this realm deriving their Royal power from God Almighty
alone, do lineally succeed thereto, according to the known degrees of proximitie
in blood, which cannot be interrupted, suspended or diverted by any Act or
Statut whatsoever, and that none can attempt to alter or divert the said
Succession, without involving the subjects of this Kingdom in Perjury and
Rebellion, and without exposing them to all the fatal and dreadful consequences
of a civil war, DO THEREFORE from a hearty and sincere sense of their duty
Recognize, acknowledge and declare that the right to the Imperial Crown of this
realm, is by the inherent right and the nature of Monarchy, as well as by the
fundamental and unalterable laws of this realm, transmitted and devolved by a
lineal Succession, according to the proximity of blood. And that upon the death
of the King or Queen, who actually reigns, the Subjects of this Kingdom are
bound by Law, duty and alledgance to obey the nixt immediate and Lawful Heir
either male or female, upon whom the right and administration of the Government
is immediately devolved. And that no difference in Religion, nor no Law nor Act
of Parliament made, or to be made, can alter or divert the right of Succession
and lineal descent of the Crown to the nearest and Lawful Heirs, according to
the degrees foresaids: nor can stop or hinder them in the full, free and
actual administration of the Government according to the Laws of the Kingdom.
LIKE AS OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with advice and consent of the said Estates of
Parliament, Do declare it is high treason in any of the Subjects of this
Kingdom, by writing, speaking, or any other manner of way to endeavor the
alteration, suspension or diversion of the said right of Succession, or the
debarring the next Lawful Successor from the immediate, actual, full and free
administration of the Government, conform to the Laws of the Kingdom. And that
all such attempts or designs shall infer against them the pain of treason.

This being not only ane Act of Parliament, declaring all such as shall
endeavor to alter the Succession, to be punishable, as Traitors; but
containing in it a Decision of this Point by the Parliament, as the Supreme
Judges of the nation, and ane acknowledgement by them, as the representatives
of the people, and nation. There can be no place for questioning a point, which
they have placed beyond all contraversie: especially seeing it past so
unanimously that there was not only no vote given but even no argument propon'd
against it. And the only doubt moved about it was, whither any Act of
Parliament, or acknowledgement, was necessary, in a point which was in it self
so uncontraverted. And which all who were not desperate fanatics, did conclude
to be so in this nation, even after they had heard all the arguments that were
used, and the Pamphlets that were written against it, in our Neighbor-kingdom.

But because so much noise has been made about this question, and that blind
bigotry leads some, and humorous faction draws others out of the common road.
I conceive it will be fit to remember my reader of these following reasons,
which will I hope clear that as this is our present positive Law, so it is
established upon the fundamental constitution of our Government, upon our old
Laws, upon the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and particularly of the
Civil Law.

As to the fundamental constitution of our Government, I did formerly remark,
that our Historians tell us, that the Scots did swear alledgeance to FERGUS,
who was the first of our Kings, and to his Heirs. And that they should never
obey any other, but his Royal Race. Which Oath does in Law, and reason, bind
them to obey the lineal Successor, according to the proximity of Blood. For ane
indefinite obligation to obey the blood Royal, must be interpreted according to
the proximity in Blood, except the swearers had reserved to themselves a power
to choose any of the Royal Family, whom they pleased, which is so true, that
in Law, ane obligation granted to any man, does in the construction of Law
accresce to his Heirs, though they be not expressed. Qui sibi providet, and
haeredibus providet. And Boethius tells us that after King FERGUS'S death, the
Scots finding their new Kingdom infested with wars, under the powerful
influence of Picts, Romans, and Britans, they refused notwithstanding to
prefer the next of the Royal Race, who was of perfect age, and a man of great
merit, to the Son of King FERGUS, though ane infant; which certainly in reason
they would have done, if they had not been tied to the lineal Successor. But
lest the Kingdom should be prejudged during the minority, they enacted, that
for the future, the next of the Blood Royal should always in the minority of
our Kings administrat as Kings, till the true Heir were of perfect age. But
this does not prove, as Buchannan pretends, that the people had power to
advance to the Throne, any of the Royal Race: whom they judged most fit, for
common sense may tell us, that was not to choose a King, but a Viceroy, or a
Regent. For, though to give him the more authority, and so to enable him the
more to curb factions, and oppose enemies, he was called King, yet he was but
Rex fidei Commissarius, being obliged to restore it to the true Heir at his
majority: and so Governed only in his Vice, and consequently was only his
Viceroy.

But because the Uncles, and next Heirs being once admitted to this fidei
Commissarie tittle, were unwilling to restore the Crown to their Nephews, and
sometimes murdered them: and oftetimes raised factions against them. Therefore
the People abhorring these impieties, and weary of the distractions, and
divisions, which they occasioned, begged from King KENNETH the second, that
these following Laws might be made.

1. That upon the Kings death the next Heir of whatsoever age should succeed.

2. The Grandchild either by Son or Daughter should be preferred.

3. That till the King arrived at 14 years of age, some Wiseman should be
choos'd to Govern, after which, the King should enter to the free
administration, and according to this constitution, some fit Person has still
been choos'd Regent in the Kings minority, without respect to the proximity of
Blood, and our Kings have been oftentimes Crowned in the Cradle.

In conformity also to these principles, all the acknowledgements made to our
Kings, run still in favors of the King, and his Heirs. As in the first Act
Parl. 18. JAMES VI. and the II, III, IV. Acts Parl. 1. CHARLES II. And by our
Oath of Alledgeance, we are bound to bear faithful and true alledgeance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Lawful Successors; which word LAWFUL, is insert, to cut
off the pretexts of such as should not succeed by Law, and the insolent
arbitrarieness of such, as being but subjects themselves, think they may choose
their King. viz. Act 1. Parl. 21. JAMES 6.

That this right of Succession according to the proximity of blood, is founded
on the Law of God, is clear by Number. Chap. 27. v. 9. and 10. If a man has no
Son or Daughter, his inheritance shall descend upon his Brother, by Number. 36.
Where, God himself decides in favors of the Daughters of Zelophehad, telling
us, it was a just thing, they should have the inheritance of their father. And
ordaines, that if there were no Daughters, the estate should go to the
Brothers. Saint Paul likewayes concluds Romans 8. If Sons, then Heirs, looking
upon that, as a necessary consequence; which if it do not necessarly hold, or
can be any way disappointed, all his divine reasoning in that Chapter falls to
nothing. And thus Ahaziah 2 Chronicles. 22. v. 1. was made King (though the
youngest) in his Fathers stead; because says the text,,,the Arabians had slain
all the eldest: which clearly shows that by the Law of God, he could not have
succeeded, if the eldest had been alive. We hear likewayes in Scripture,,,God
often telling, By me Kings reign. And when he gives a Kingdom to any as to
Abraham, David, etc. He gives it to them and their posterity.

That this right of Succession flows from the Law of nature, is clear;
because, that is accounted to flow from the Law of nature, which every man
finds grafted in his own heart, and which is obeyed without any other Law, and
for which men neither seek nor can give another distinct reason; all which hold
in this case: for who doubts when he hears of ane hereditary Monarchy, but
that, the next in blood must Succeed; and for which we need no positive Law,
nor does any man enquire for a further reason, being satisfied therein by the
principles of his own heart. And from this ground it is, that though a remoter
Kinsman did possess as Heir, he could by no length of time prescribe a valide
right; since no man, as Lawyers conclude, can prescribe a right against the Law
of nature: and that this principle is founded thereupon is confessed l: cum ratio
naturalis ff. de bonis damnat: cum ratio naturalis, quasi lex quaedam tacita,
liberis parentum haereditatem adjecerit, veluti ad debitam successionem eos
vocando: propter quod suorum haeredum nomen eis indultum est; adeo ut ne a
parentibus quidem, ab ea successione amoveri possint. Et. emancipati Institut:
de haered: quae ab intest. Praetor naturalem aequitatem sequutus, iis etiam
bonorum possessionem contra 12 tabularum leges, and contra jus civil
permittit. Which text shows likewayes, that this right of nature was stronger
than the Laws of the 12 Tables, though these were the most ancient and chief
Statutes of Rome. Which principle is very clear likewayes from the Parable,
Math. 21. Where the Husbandmen who can be presumed to understand nothing but
the Law of nature, are brought in saying, this is the Heir, let us kill him and
seize on his inheritance. Nor does this hold only in the Succession of Children
or the direct line, but in the collateral Succession of Brothers and others L.
hac part ff. unde cognati. Hac part proconsul Naturali aequitate motus,
omnibus cognatis permittit bonorum possessionem quos sanguinis ratio Vocat ad
haereditatem. Vid. l. 1. ff. de grad. and l. 1.. hoc autem ff. de bonor.
possess. And these who are now Brothers to the present King, have been Sons to
the former: and therefore whatever has been said for Sons, is also verified in
Brothers. As for instance, though his Royal Highness be only Brother to King
CHARLES the II., yet he is Son to King CHARLES I. and therefore, as Saint Paul
says, if a Son, then ane Heir, except he be secluded by the existence and
Succession of ane elder Brother.

That this gradual Succession is founded on the Law of nations, is as clear by
the Laws of the 12 Tables, and the Praetorian Law of Rome. And if we consider
the Monarchy either old or new, we will find, that wherever the Monarchy was
not elective, the degrees of succession were there exactly observed. And
Bodinus de Republ. lib. 6 Cap. 5. asserts, that, Ordo non tantum naturae and
divinae sed etiam omnium ubique gentium hoc postulat. From all which, Pope
Innocent in c. grand. de supplend. neglig. praelati concludes, In regnis
haereditariis caveri non potest ne filius aut frater succedat. And since it is
expressly determined, that the right of blood can be taken away by no positive
Law or Statute L. Iura Sanguinis ff. de Reg. jur. and L. 4. ff. de suis
legitim. and that the power of making a Testament, can be taken away by no Law
L. ita legatum ff. de conditionibus. I cannot see how the right of Succession
can be taken away by a Statute: for that is the same with the right of Blood,
and is more strongly founded upon the Law of nature, than the power of making
Testaments.

Since then this right is founded upon the Law of God, of nature and of
nations, it does clearly follow, that no Parliament can alter the same by their
municipal Statutes, as our Act of Parliament has justly observed.

For clearing whereof, it is fit to consider, that in all powers and
jurisdictions which are subordinat to one another, the Inferior should obey,
but not alter the power to which it is subordinat; and what it does contrary
thereto, is null and void. And thus, if the judges of England should publish
edicts contrare to Acts of Parliament, or if a Justice of Peace should ranverse
a decree of the judges of West-minster, these their endeavors would be void
and ineffectual. But so it is, that by the same principle, but in ane infinitely
more transcendent way, all Kings and Parliaments are subordinat to the Laws of
God, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of Nations: And therefore no Act of
Parliament can be binding, to overturn what these have established.

This, as to the Law of God, is clear, not only from the general dictats of
Religion, but 28 Hen. 8. cap. 7. the Parliament uses these words, For no man
can dispense with Gods Laws; which we also affirm and think. And as to the
Laws of nature, they must be acknowledged to be immutable, from the principles
of reason. And the Law it self confesses that naturalia quaedam jura quae apud
omnes gentes peraeque observantur, divina quadam providentia constituta semper
firma, atque immutabilia permanent sed naturalia Institut. de Iur. Natural.
and. singulorum de rer. divis: And when the Law declares, that a Supreme Prince
is free from the obligation of Laws, Solutus legibus, which is the highest
power that a Parliament can pretend to, or arrive at; Yet Lawyers still
acknowledge that this does not exeem these Supreme powers from being liable to
the Laws of God, nature and nations, Accurs: in l. Princeps ff. de Leg.
Clementina pasturalis de rejudicata Bart. in l. ut vim de justitia and jure
Voet. de Statutis Sect. 5. Cap. 1. nor can the Law of nations be overturned by
private Statutes, or any Supreme power. And thus all Statuts to the prejudice
of Ambassadors, who are secured by the Law of nations, are confessed by all to
be null, and the highest power whatsoever cannot take off the necessity of
denuncing watr before a war can be Lawful. And Lawyers observe very well,
that these who would oppose the common dictats of mankind, should be looked
upon as enemies to all mankind.

My second argument shall be, that the King and Parliament can have no more
power in Parliament than any absolute Monarch has in his own Kingdom: for, they
are when joined, but in place of the Supreme power, sitting in judgment; and
therefore they cannot in Law do what any other Supreme and absolute Monarch
cannot do. For all the power of Parliaments consists only in their consent, but
we must not think, that our Parliaments have ane unlimited power de jure, so,
as that they may forfeit or kill without a cause or decerne against the
Subjects without citing or hearing them; or, that they can alienat any part of
de Kingdom; or Subject the wholl Kingdom to France or any other Foreign
Prince: all which deeds would be null in themselves, and would not hinder the
party injured from a due redress. For if our Parliaments had such power, we
would be the greatest slaves, and live under the most arbitrary Government
imaginable. But so it is, that no Monarch whosoever can take from any man what
is due to him, by the Law of God, nature, and nations. For being himself
inferior to these he cannot overturne their statuts. Thus a Prince cannot even
ex plenitudine potestatis legitimat a Bastard in prejudice of former children
though they have only but a hope of Succession l. 4. and sequen de natal.
restituend. and for the same reason, it is declared in the same Law, that he
cannot restore a freed man ( restituere libertum natalibus) in prejudice of
his Patron, who was to succeed, though that succession was but by a municipal
Law. For clearing which question, It is fit to know that the solid lawyers who
treat jus publicum, as ARNISAEUS and others, do distinguish betwixt such
Kingdoms, as were at first conferred by the People, and wherein the Kings
succeed by contract, and in these, the Laws made by King and People can
exclude, or bind the Successor. And yet even here, they confess, that this
proceeds not, because the Predecessor can bind the Successor, but because the
People renew the paction with the succeeding King. But where the Successor is
to succeed ex jure regni, in hereditary Monarchies, there they assert
positively that the Predecessor cannot prejudge the Successors right of
Succession. Which they prove by two arguments. First, that the Predecessor has
no more power, nor right, than the Successor: for the same right, that the
present King has to the possession, the next in Blood has to the Succession.
And all our Laws run in favors of the King, and his Heirs, and no man can tie
his equal, or give him the Law, par in parem non habet dominium. The second is,
that it were unjust and unequitable that the Predecessor should rob his
Successor nulla ergo (says Arnisaeus Cap. 7. Number. 5.) clausula Successori jus
auferri potest, modo succedat ille ex jure regni. And Hottoman: lib. 2. de
Regno Galliae asserts, that in France which is a very absolute Monarchy, Ea
quae jure Regio primogenito competunt, ne Testamento quidem patris adimi
possunt. And thus when the King of France designed to break the Salique Law of
Succession, as in the Reign of CHARLES the V. It was found impracticable by
the three Estates, and when Pyrrhus was to prefer his youngest Son to the
Crown, the Epirots following the Law of Nations, and their own, refused him,
Paus. lib. 1. In the year 1649. Also Amurat the grand Seignior, having left the
Turkish Empire to Han the Tartarian, passing by his Brother Ibrahim, the wholl
Officers of that State, did unanimously Cancel that Testament, and restore
Ibrahim, the true Heir tho a silly fool.

Which shows the opinion not only of Lawyers but of whole nations and
Parliaments; Tho vander Graaff, an Hollander confesses, that it is not Lawful
to choose any of his Sons to succeed him, in which, the general quiet of the
Kingdom is much concerned. And therefore, tho the next Heir were wiser, braver,
and more generally beloved; Yet the more immediate must be received, as choos'd
by God, whither good or bad, and as honored with his Character. And if Kings
could have inverted their Succession, and choos'd their own Successor Saint
Lewis had preferred his own third Son to Lewis his eldest, and Alfonsus King of
Leon in Spain, had preferred his Daughters to Ferdinand his eldest Son. And
Edward the VI. of England had preferred, and did actually prefer the Lady
Iean Gray to his Sisters Mary, and Elizabeth. And if Successions especially of
such great importance, had not been fixed by immutable Laws of God, and nature,
the various and unconstant inclinations of the present Governors, especially
when shaken by the importunity of Step-mothers and Mothers, or clouded by the
jealousy of flatterers, or favorites, had made the Nations whom they Governed,
very unhappy: and therefore, God did very justly, and wisely setle this
Succession, that both King and People might know, that it is by him that Kings
Reign, and Kingdoms are secured in Peace against faction* and it were strange,
that this should not hold in Kings, since even amongst subjects the Honor and
Nobility that is bestowed upon a Man and his Heirs, does so necessarly descend
upon those Heirs, that the Father, or Predicessor cannot seclude the next
Successor, or derogat from his right, either by renuncing, resigning, following
base or mean Trades, or any other: For say those Lawyers, since he derives
this right from his old Progenitors, and owes it not to his Father, his Fathers
deed should not prejudge him therein. Fab. Cod. 9. Tit. 28. Def. 1. Warnee;
Consil. 20. Number. 7. And as yet the Estates of Parliament in both Nations have
no legislative power, otherwise than by assenting to what the King does; so
that if the King cannot himself make a Successor, neither can they by
consenting: and all that their consent could imply would only be that, they and
their Successors should not oppose his nomination, because of their consent.
But that can never amount to a power of transferring the Monarchy from one
branch to another, which would require, that the Transferrers, or bestowers had
the Supreme power Originally in themselves, nemo enim plus juris in alium
transfer potest quam ipse in se habet. And if the States of Parliament had
this power* Originally in themselves to bestow, why might they not reserve it
to themselves? And so perpetuate the Government in their own hands: And this
moved judge Ienkins in his treatise concerning the liberty and freedom of the
subject, page 25. To say, that no King can be Named, or in any time made in
this Kingdom, by the People. A Parliament never made a King, for there were
Kings before there were Parliaments, and Parliaments are summoned by the Kings
writtes.

Fourthly, A King cannot in Law alienat his Crown, as is undeniable in the
opinion of all Lawyers, and if he do, that deed is void and null, nor could he
in Law consent to an Act of Parliament declaring that he should be the last
King. And if such consents and Acts had been sufficient to bind Successors,
many silly Kings in several parts of Europe had long since been prevailed upon,
to alter their Monarchy from Haereditarie to Elective; or to turn it in a
Commonwealth; and therefore by the same reason, they cannot consent to exclude
the true Successor: For if they may exclude one they may exclude all.

5. In all Societies and Governments, but especially where there is any
association of powers, as in our Parliaments, there are certain fundamentals,
which like the Noble parts in the Body are absolutely necessar for its
preservation; for without these, there would be no Balance, or certainty. And
thus with us, if the King and each of the Estates of Parliament had not
distinct and known limits (set by the gracious concessions of our Monarchs)
each of them would be ready to invade one another Privileges. And thus I
conceive that if the Parliament should consent to alienate the half of the
Kingdom, or to subject the whole to a Stranger, as in King John's case in
England, and the Baliols in Scotland, it has been found by the respective
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, that, that Statute would not oblidge the
Successor. Or if the House of commons in England, or the Burrowes of Scotland
should consent to any Act excluding their Estate and respresentatives from the
Parliament, doubtless that Statute excluding them would not prejudge their
Successors; because that Act was contrare to one of the fundamental Laws of the
Nation. And the late Acts of Parliaments excluding Bishops, were reprobated by
the ensuing Parliaments, as such; and therefore by the same rule, any Statute
made excluding the legal Successor, would be null and void, as contrare to one
of the great Fundamental Rights of the Nation. And what can be called more a
Fundamental Right than the Succession of our Monarchy? Since our Monarchy in
this Isle, has ever been acknowledged to be hereditary. And that this
acknowledgment is the great Basis whereupon most of all the positions of our
Law run, and are established: such as, that the King never dies, since the very
moment in which the last King dies, the next Successor in Blood is Legally
King, and that without any express recognizance from the People, and all that
oppose him are Rebels, His Commissions are valide, He may call Parliaments,
dispose the Lands pertaining to the Crown, all men are liable to do him homage;
and hold their Rights of him and his Heirs. And generally this principle runs
through all the veins of our Law. It is that, which gives life and Authority to
our Statutes, but receives none from them; which are the undeniable marks and
Characters of a Fundamental Right in all Nations. But that this right of lineal
Succession is one of the Fundamental, and unalterable Laws of the Kingdom of
Scotland, is clear, by the Commission granted by the Parliament for the union
in Anno 1604. In which these words are, his Majesty vouchsafeing, to assure
them of his sincere disposition and clear meaning, no way by the foresaid Union
to prejudge or hurt the Fundamental Laws, ancient Privileges, Offices and
Liberties of this Kingdom; whereby not only the Princely Authority of his most
Royal descent has been these many ages maintained, but also his Peoples
securities of their Lands and Livings, Rights, Liberties, Offices and dignities
preserved: Whilks if they should be innovated, such confusion should ensue; as
it could no more be a free Monarchy.

6. There would many great inconveniences arise, both to King and People, by
the Parliaments having this power: For weak Kings might by their own
simplicity, and Gentle Kings by the rebellion of their Subjects be induced to
consent to such Acts, in which their Subjects would be tempted to cheat in the
one case, and rebel in the other. Many Kings likewise might be wrought upon,
by the importunity of their Wives, or Concubins, or by the misrepresentations
of Favorites, to disinherit the true Successor; and he likewise to prevent this
arbitrarienesse, would be obliged to enter in a faction for his own support,
from his very infancy. This would likewise animate all of the Blood Royal, to
compete for the Throne, and in order thereto, they would be easily induced to
make factions in the Parliament, and to hate one another; whereas the true
Successor would be ingadg'd to hate them all, and to endeavor the ruin of
such as he thought more popular than himself. Nor would the people be in better
case, since they behooved to expect upon all these accounts, constant civil
wars and animosities, and by being unsure whom to follow, might be in great
hazard by following him who had no Right. And their rights bearing to hold of
the King and his Heirs, it would be dubious to the vassals, who should be their
superior, as well, as who should be their King. It is also in reason to be
expected, that Scotland will ever own the legal descent: and thus we should
under different Kings of the same Race, be involved in new and constant civil
wars; France shall have a constant door opened, by allyances with Scotland, to
disquiet the peace of the whole Isle; and England shab loose all the endeavors
it used to unite this Isle within it self. Another great absurdity and
inconveniency which would follow upon the exclusion of the lineal Successor
would be, that if he had a Son, that Son behoov'd certainly to succeed; and
therefore after the next Lawful Heir were brought from abroad to Reign, he
behooved to return upon the Birth of this Son; and if he dyed he would be again
called home, and would be sent back by the Birth of another Son: which would
occasion such affronts, uncertainties, divisions, factions, temptations, that I
am sure, no good nor wise man could admit of such a project.

I find also, that as the debarring the Righteous Heir, is in reason, the
fruitful seed of all civil war and misery, (for who can Imagine that the
Righteous Heir will depart from his Right, or that wise men will endanger their
lives and fortunes in opposition to it?) so experience has demonstrated, how
dangerous, and bloody this injustice has proved. Let us remember amongst many
Domestic examples, the miseries that ensued upon the exclusion of Mordredus
the Son of Lothus; the destruction of the Picts for having secluded Alpinus the
Righteous Heir; the wars during the reign of William the Conqueror; these
betwixt King Stevin and Henry the II, betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York;
betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol; the murder of Arthur Duke of Britanny, true
Heir of the Crown of England, with many other foreign Histories, which tell
us of the dreadful michiefs arising from Pelops preferring his youngest Son to
the Kingdom of Micene; from Aedipus commanding that Polinices his youngest Son
should reign alternatly with the eldest; from Parisatis the Queen of Persia's
preferring her youngest Son Cyrus, to her eldest Artaxerxes, from Aristodemus
admitting his two Sons Proclus, and Euristhenes to an Equal share in the
Lacedemonian Throne. The like observations are to be made in the Succession of
Ptolemaeus Lagus and Ptolemaeus Phisco, In the Sons of Severus, in the
Succession of Sinesandus who killed his Brother Suintilla Righteours Heir of
Spain, And that of Francis and Fortia Duke of Millan with thousands of others:
In all which, either the usurpers or the Kingdom that obeyed them, perished
utterly. To prevent which differences and mischiefs, the Hungarians would not
admit Almus the younger Brother, in exclusion of the elder Colomanus, though
a silly deformed creature, albeit Almus was preferred by Ladislaus (the Kings
elder Brother) to both. Nor would France acquiesce in St. Lewis his preferring
CHARLES his 3 Son, to Lewis the eldest. And the English refused to obey Lady
Iean Gray, in prejudice of Queen Marie, though a Papist and persecuter. Tali
and constanti veneratione nos Angli legitimos Reges prosequimur etc. says an
English Historian.

7. If Parliaments had such powers as this, then our Monarchy would not be
hereditary, but elective; the very essence of ane hereditary Monarchy
consisting in the right of Succession, according to the contingency of blood.
Whereas if the Parliament can prefer the next, save one, they may prefer
the last of all the line: for the next save one, is no more next than the last
is next. And the same reason by which they can choose a Successor (which can
only be that they have a power above him) should likewayes in my opinion
justify their deposing of Kings. And since the Successor has as good Right to
succeed, as the present King has to Govern (for that Right of blood which makes
him first, makes the other next, and all these Statuts which acknowledge the
present Kings Prerogatives, acknowledge that they belong to him and his Heirs.)
It follows clearly, that if the Parliament can preclude the one, they may
exclude the other. And we saw even in the last age, that such reasons as are
now urged to incapacitat the children of our last Monarch, from the hope of
Succession. viz. Popery, and arbitrary Government, did embolden men to
Dethrone, and Murder the Father himself who was actual King.

8. That such Acts of Parliament, altering the Succession are ineffectual, and
null, Is clear from this, that though such an Act of Parliament were made, it
could not debar the true Successor: because by the Laws of all Nations, and
particularly of these Kingdoms, the Right of Succession purges all defects, and
removes all impediments, which can prejudge him who is to Succeed. And as Craig
one of our learned lawyers has very well expressed it, Tanta est Regii
sanguinis praerogativa, and dignitas, ut vitium non admittat, nec se
contaminari patiatur. And thus though he who were to succeed, had committed
murder, or were declared a traitor formerly to the Crown for open Rebellion
against the King, and Kingdom; yet he needed not be restored by Act of
Parliament upon his coming to the Crown: But his very Right of blood would
purge all these imperfections. Of which there are two reasons given by Lawyers,
one is, that no man can be a Rebel against himself, nor can the King have a
Superior. And consequently, there can be none whom he can offend. And it were
absurd that he who can restore all other men, should need to be restored
himself. The second reason is, because the punishment of crimes, such as
confiscations, etc. Are to be inflicted by the Kings Authority, or to fall to
the Kings Thesaury; and it were most absurd, that a man should exact from
himself a punishment. Likeas, upon this account it is, that though in the Canon
Law, Bastards cannot be promov'd to sacred orders without dispensation, nor can
alibi nati, that is to say, people born out of England be admitted to succeed
in England, by express Act of Parliament there; Yet Agapaetus, Theodorus,
Gelasius and many others, have been admitted to be Popes without any formal
dispensation, their election clearing that imperfection. And the Statute of
alibi nati, has been often found not to extend to the Royal line.

That the Succession to the Crown purges all defects, is clear, by many
instances, both at home and abroad. The instances at home are, in England Henry
the VI. Being disabled and attainted of high treason by Act of Parliament, it
was found by the Judges, notwithstanding that from the moment he assumed the
Crown, he had Right to succeed without being restored. And the like was
resolved by the Judges in the case of Henry the VII, As Bacon observes in his
History of Henry the VII. fol. 13. And in the case of Queen Elizabeth, who was
declared Bastard by Act of Parliament, as is clear by Cambden anno 2.
Elizabeth. And though in Scotland there be no express instances of this,
because though some Rebellious Ringleaders in Scotland, have often in a private
capacity been very injurious to their King; Yet their Parliaments have been
ever very tender of attainting the blood Royal, or presumptive Heirs. But
Alexander Duke of Albanie, and his Succession being declared traitors, by his
Brother King James the IV. his Son John was notwithstanding called home from
France upon his Uncles death, and declared Tutor and Governor, without any
remission, or being restored: that employment being found to be due to him by
the right of blood: therefore he had been much more declared the true Successor
of the Crown if his Cousin King James the V. had died.

These being sufficient to establish our design, I shall mention only some
foreign stories.

CHARLES the VII. of France who though banished by Sentence of the Parliament
of Paris, did thereafter succeed to the Crown. And though Lewis the XII. was
forfeited for taking up arms against CHARLES the VIII. Yet he succeeded to him
without restitution. And Lewis the II. his Son being declared a Rebel, whom his
Father desiring to disinherit, and to substitut in his place Charles Duke of
Normandy, that Son had succeeded if he had not been hindered by the Nobility,
who plainly told him it was impossible to exclude his Sone from the Succession.

My next task shall be to satisfy the arguments brought for mantaining this
opinion, whereof the first is.

That God himself has authorized the inverting the Right of Succession, by the
examples of Esau, Solomon, and others.

To which I answer, that these instances which are warranted by express
commands from God, are no more to be drawn into example, than the robbing of
the Egyptians earrings. And it is needing an express command, and the
expressing of that command, does evince, that otherwise Jacob, nor Solomon
could not have succeeded against the privilege of Birthright and possession.

The next objection, is that it is naturally implied in all Monarchies, that
the people shall obey whilst the Prince Governs justly, As in the paction
betwixt David, and the people 2 Samuel 5. Which is most suitable to the
principles of justice, and Government: Since relations cannot stand by one
side; so that when the King leaves off to be King, and becomes a Tyrant, the
people may consult their own security in laying him aside, as Tutors may be
removed when they are suspect. And that this is most just when Kings are
Idolaters since God is rather to be obeyed then men.

To all which it is answered, that God who loves order, and knows the
extravagant levity, and insolence of men, especially when baited by hope of
prey, or promotion, did wisely think fit to ordain under the pain of eternal
damnation, that all men should be subject to Superior powers for conscience
sake. 1 Pet. 2.13. and that whoever resists the power, resists God, Romans 13.2.
reserving the punishment of Kings to himself, as being only their Superior.
And thus David, Asa, and others, committed crimes, but were not deposed, nor
debarred by the people. Nor were even the Idolatrous Kings such as Achab,
Manasse, etc. judged by their subjects, nor did the Prophets exhort the people
to rise against them, though they were opposing Gods express, and immediate
will, And overturning the uncontraverted fundamentals of Religion. Nor did the
Fathers of the primitive Church, excite the Christians to oppose the Heathen,
and Idolatrous Princes, under which they lived: and Paul commands them to pray
for these Heathen Emperors. Nor was the Emperor Basilicus deposed for
abrogating the Council of Chalcedon, as is pretended by some Republicans, but
was turned out by the just Successor Zeno, whom he had formerly dethroned. Nor
were Zeno or Anastasius degraded for their errors in Religion, or their vices
by the ancient Christians: but were oppressed by private faction. And sure they
must think God unable to redress himself, who without warrant, and against his
express warrant, will usurp so high a power. And we in this rebellious
principle, own the greatest extravagancy with which We can charge the Pope and
Jesuits, and disowne not only our own Confession of faith which Article 1.
Chap. 22. acknowledges, that infidelity, or difference in Religion does not
make void the Magistrates just* or legal authority, nor free the People from
their due obedience to him, but contradict the best Protestant divines, as
Musculus, Melancthon and others vid. libell. de vitand. superstit. Anno 1150.
and Consil. Biden. Dec. 1. Consil. 10. and Decad. 10. Consil. 5. nor can the
subterfuge used by Buchanan, and others satisfy, whereby they contend that the
former Texts of Scripture prove only that the Office, but not the Persons of
Kings are Sacred: so that Parliaments or People may lay aside the Persons,
though not the Office, seeing the Sacred Text secures oftener the Person, than
the Office as I have formerly more fully prov'de. And if this principle
prevailed as to the differences in the Theory of Religion, it would in the next
step be urged as to the practice of Religion; and we would change our Kings,
because we thought them not pious, as well as Protestant. And did not our
Sectarians refine so far, as to think dominion founded on grace? and this
opinion seems to my self more solid than the other, for certainly an impious
Protestant, is a worse Governor, and less Gods Vicegerent, and image, than a
devout Papist. And amongst Protestants, every Sect will reject a King, because
he is not of their opinion. And thus our Covenanters, by the Act of the
West-kirk Anno 1650. declared, they would disown our present Monarch, if he did
not own the Covenant. And though a King were Protestant, yet still this pretext
that he designed to introduce Popery, would raise his People against him, if
differences in Religion could Lawfully Arm subjects against their King, or did
empower them to debar his Successor. And when this cheat prevailed against
devout King Charles the I, the Martyr of that Orthodox Faith to which he was
said to be enemy, what a madness is it to allow this fatal error, which was
able to ruin us in the last age, and went so near to destroy us in this? This
is indeed, to allow that arbitrariness against our Kings, which we would not
allow in them to us.

The second Objection is, that in England the Parliament has frequently
devolved the Crown and Government upon such as were not otherwise to have
succeeded, as in the instances of Edward the II. and Richard the III, the first
of whom was most unjustly deposed, for making use of Gavestoun, and the
Spencers; which shows how extravagant the People ar in their humors, rather
than how just their power is: for besides, that we do not read, that these
Counselors were unsufferable, there is no good Christian that can say, that a
King can be deposed for using ill Counselors. And as to Richard the III. his
case is so fully examined, and all the Articles brought both against him, and
Edward the II. so fully answered by the learned Arnisaeus a Protestant Lawyer,
(and who had no other interest in that debate than a love to Truth and Law) in
that treatise, Quod nulla ex causa subditis fas sit contra legitimum principem
arma sumere, that we Protestants should be ashamed to bring again to the field
such instances, upon which Arnisaeus, in answer to the 14. Article against
Richard the II, viz. that he refused to allow the Laws made in Parliament,
does very well remark, that this was in effect to consent to their being King,
and to transfer upon them the Royal power, and this will be the event of all
such undertakings.

The instances of Henry the IV. and Henry the VII., are of no more weight than
the other two, since these were likewayes only Kings de facto, till King Henry
the VII. by his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to King
Edward the IV., did by her transmit a just title to his Successor: and
therefore it was not strange, that either of these should allow the Parliament
to interpose, when they behooved to owe to them the possession of the Throne.
But yet Henry the VII. himself (as the Lord Bacon relates in his History)
shunned to have the Parliament declare his title to be just, being content with
these ambiguous words, viz. that the inheritance of the Crown should rest,
remain and abide in the King, etc. And upon this account it was, that the same
King caused make a Law, that such as should serve the King for the time, being
in his wars, could not be attainted or impeached in their persons or Estates.

As to Henry the VIII. his procuring an Act, whereby the Parliament declares
that in case he had no issue by the Lady Iean Seymour, he might dispose of the
Crown to whatsoever person he should in his own discretion think fit.

It is answered, that by a former Statute in the 25 year of his Reign, he by
Act of Parliament setles the Crown upon the Heirs male of his own body, and for
lack of such issue, to Lady Elizabeth, and for lack of such issue also, to the
next Heirs of the King, who should for ever succeed according to the right of
Succession of the Crown of England; which shows that the Succession to the
Crown of England is established by the Law of Nature, and the Fundamental Laws
of England, upon the Heirs of Blood, according to the proximity of degrees; so
that though that King did afterward prevail with the Parliament to declare
this Elizabeth a Bastard, as he did also his Daughter Mary, by another Act, and
resolve to setle the Crown, upon Henry Fitz Roy, Duke of Richmond, yet these
Acts teach us how dangerous it is to leave Parliaments to the impression of
Kings in the case of naming a Successor, as it is to expose Kings to the
arbitrariness of Parliaments. But such care had God of his own Laws, that Mary
succeeded notwithstanding She was Papist, and Elizabeth succeeded her, though
she was declared Bastard; the Rights of Blood prevailing over the formalities
of divorce, and the dispensations of Popes: as the strength of Nature does
often prevail over poisons. And God removed the Duke of Richmond by death, to
prevent the unjust competition, and so little notice was taken of this; and the
subsequent Act Anno 1535, that the Heirs of Blood succeeded without repealing
of that Act, as ane Act in it self invalide from the beginning: for only such
Acts are past by, without being repealed. And Blackwood page 45. observes very
well, that so conscious were the Makers of these Acts, of the illegality
thereof, and of their being contrary to the immutable Laws of God, Nature and
Nations, that none durst produce that Kings Testament wherein he did nominat a
Successor, conform to the power granted by these Acts, that how soon they were
freed by his death from the violent oppressions that had forced them to alter a
Successor three several times, and at last to swear implicitly to whomever he
should nominat, (a preparative which this age would not well bear though they
cite it) they proclaimed first Queen Mary their Queen though a Papist, and
thereafter Queen Elizabeth, whom themselves had formerly declared a Bastard.
And as in all these Acts there is nothing declaring the Parliaments to have
power to name a Successor, but only giving a power to the King, for preventing
mischiefs, that might arise upon the dubiousness of the Succession, to nominat
a Successor; two of the legal Successors having been declared Bastards upon
some niceties, not of nature, but of the Popes Bulls for divorcing their
Mothers: so, this instance can only prove, that the King may nominat a
Successor, and that the Parliament may consent, not to quarrel it, (which is
all that they do) but does not at all prove, that where the Right of Nature is
clear, the Parliament may invert the same. And strangers who considered more
the dictats of Law than of Passion, did in that age conclude, that no Statute
could be valide when made contrare to the fundamental Law of the Kingdom,
Arnisaeus Cap. 7. Number. 11. Henricus VIII. Angliae Rex Eduardum filium primo,
deinde Mariam, denique Elizabetham suos haeredes fecerat, verum non aliter ea
omnia valent quam si cum jure Regni conveniant, Vid. Curt. Tract. Feud. Par. 4.
Number. 129.

There seems greater difficulty to arise from the 13 Elizabeth c. 2. by which
it is enacted, that if any person shall affirm, that the Parliament of
England has not full power to bind and Govern the Crown in point of Succession
and descent, that such a person, during the Queens life, shall be guilty of
high treason.

But to this Act it is answered, that this Act does not debar the next legal
and natural Successor. And these words, That the Parliament has power to bind
and Govern the Succession, must be, as all other general expressions in
Statutes, interpreted and restricted by other uncontraverted Laws; and so the
sense must be, that the Parliament are Judge where there are differences
betwixt Competitors in nice and contravertable points which cannot be otherwise
decided: and both this and the former Acts made in Henry the VI. time, are not
general Laws but temporary Acts and personal Privileges; and so cannot
overturn the known current of Law. Quod vero contra rationem juris receptum
est, non est producendum ad consequentias. And in all these instances it is
remarkable, that the restriction was made upon the desire of the Sovereign,
and not of the Subject. And if we look upon this Act as made to secure against
Mary Queen of Scotland, and to let her know, that it was to no purpose for her
to design any thing against the Right, or Person of Queen Elizabeth, as being
declared a Bastard, by Act of Parliament in England; since her other right as
next undoubted Heir by Blood to the Crown, might be altered, or Governed: we
must acknowledge it to be only one of these Statutes, which the Law says, are
made ad terrorem and ex terrore only. Nor was there ever use made of it by
Queen Elizabeth, nor her Parliaments; so fully were they convinced, that this
pretended power was so unjust, as that it could not be justified by an Act of
Parliament, being contrair to the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and of
the Fundamental Laws of both Kingdoms. But this Law being made to exclude Queen
Mary, and the Scottish line, as is clear by that clause, wherein it is declared
that every Person or Persons of what degree or Nation soever they be, shall
during the Queens life declare or publish, that they have Right to the Crown of
England during the Queens life, shall be disinabled to enjoy the Crown in
Succession, inheritance, or otherwise, after the Queens death; It therefore
follows, that it was never valide: For if it had, King James might have
thereby been excluded by that person who should have succeeded next to the
Scottish race. For it is undeniable, that Queen Marie did, during Queen
Elizabeth's life, pretend* Right to the Crown, upon the account that Queen
Elizabeth was declared Bastard. And therefore the calling in of King James
after this Act, and the acknowledging his title, does clearly evince, that the
Parliament of England knew, that they had no power to make any such Act. The
words of which acknowledgement of King James's Right, I have thought fit to set
down, as it is in the statute it self, 1. Ia. Cap. 1. That the Crown of England
did descend upon King James by inherent Birthright, as being lineally, justly,
and Lawfully next, and sole Heir of the Blood Royal. And to this recognition
they do submit themselves, and posterities for ever, until the last drop of
their Blood be spilt. And further does beseech his Majesty to accept of the
same recognition, as the first Fruits of their Loyalty, and Faith to his
Majesty, and to his Royal progeny, and posterity for ever.

It may be also objected, that by the 8, Act. Parl. 1. Ia. 6. It is provided in
Scotland, that all Kings and Princes that shall happen to reign and bear Rule
over that Kingdom, shall at the time of their Coronation, make their faithful
promise by Oath in presence of eternal God, that they shall mantaine the true
Religion of Jesus Christ, the preaching of the Holy Word, and due and Right
Administration of the Sacraments now received and preached within this Kingdom;
from which two conclusions may be inferred, 1. That by that Act the Successor
to the Crown may be restricted. 2. That the Successor to the Crown must be a
Protestant, that being the Religion which was Professed and established the
time of this Act.

To which it is answered, that this Act relates only to the Crowning of the
King, and not to the Succession. Nor is a coronation absolutely necessar,
Coronatio enim magis est ad ostentationem, quam ad necessitatem. Nec ideo Rex
est quia coronatur, sed coronatur quia Rex est. Oldard: consil. 90. number. 7.
Balbus lib. de coronat. page 40. Nor do we read that any Kings were Crowned in
Scripture except Ioas. And Clovis King of France was the first, who was Crowned
in Europe. Nor are any Kings of Spain Crowned till this day. Neither is ane
Coronation Oath requisite; Sisenandus being the first who in the 4. Tolletan
Council gave such an Oath amongst the Christians, as Trajan was the first
amongst the heathen Emperors. And we having had no Coronation Oath till the
Reign of King Gregory, which was in Anno 879, he having found the Kingdom
free from all Restrictions, could not have limited his Successor, or at least
could not have debarred him by an Oath. Nullam enim poterat legem dictare
posteris, cum par in parem non habeat imperium, as our Blackwood observes. page
13. (2.) There is no clause irritant in this Act debarring the Successor, or
declaring the Succession null in case his Successor gave not this Oath. 3. The
Lawful Successor though he were of a different Religion from his People (as
God forbid he should be) may easily swear, that he shall mantaine the Laws
presently standing. And any Parliament may legally secure the Successor from
overturning their Religion or Laws, though they cannot debar him. And though
the Successor did not swear to mantaine the Laws, Yet are they in little danger
by his Succession; since all Acts of Parliament stand in force, till they be
repealed by subsequent Parliaments* And the King cannot repeal an Act without
the consent of Parliament. But to put this beyond all debate, the 2. Act of
this current Parliament is opponed, whereby it is declared, that the Right and
administration of the Government is immediately devolved upon the nixt Lawful
Heir after the death of the King or Queen, and that no difference in Religion,
nor no Law nor Act of Parliament can stop or hinder them in the free and actual
administration; which is an abrogation of the foresaid Act concerning the
Coronation as to this point* for how can the administration be devolved
immediately upon the Successor, if he cannot administrat till he be Crowned, and
have sworn this Oath.

The next objection is, that since the King and Parl. may by Act of Parl. alter
the Successions of private families though transmitted by the Right of blood,
why may they not alter the Succession in the Royal family?

To which it is answered, that the reason of the difference lies in this, that
the Heirs of the Crown owe not their Succession to Parliaments: for they
succeed by the Laws of God, nature, and the Fundamental Laws of the nation;
whereas private Families are Subject to Parliaments, and inferior to them, and
owe their private Rights to a municipal Law, and so may and ought in point of
Right to be regulated by them. And yet I am very clear, that a Parliament
cannot arbitrarly debarr the eldest Son of a private Family, and devolve the
Succession upon the younger: and if they did so, their Acts would be null. But
if this argument were good, we might as well conclude by it, that no person
born out of England, or attainted of treason could succeed to the Crown;
Because he could not succeed to a private Estate. All which and many more
instances do clearly demonstrat that the Successor to the Crown cannot be
debarred, not the Succession to the Crown diverted by Act of Parliament.

The last objection is, that Robert the III. King of Scotland, was by ane Act
of Parliament preferred to David and Walter, who were (as he pretends) were
truly the eldest lawful Sons of Robert the 2 d. because Euphan Daughter to the
Earl of Ross was first lawful Wife to King Robert the 2 d, and she bore him
David Earl of Strathern, and Walter Earl of Athol, Alexander Earl of Buchan,
and Euphan who was married to James Earl of Dowglass, after whose deceass he
married Elizabeth Muir, Daughter to Sir Adam Muir; not so much (as Buchanan
observes) from any design to marry a second Wife, as from the great love he
carried to Elizabeth Muir, whom because of her extraordinary Beauty he had
loved very passionatly in his youth, and before he married the Earl of Rosses
Daughter, and from the love which he bore to the Sons whom Elizabeth had born
before that first Marriage, who were John Earl of Carrick (who thereafter
succeeded to the Crown by the Title of Robert the 3 d,) and Robert Earl of Fife
and Monteith, he prevailed with the Parliament to prefer John eldest Son by
Elizabeth Muir, to the two Sons which he had by the Earl of Rosses Daughter,
who was (as they pretend) his first lawful Wife.

In which though I might debate many nice points of Law relating to this
Subject, yet I choose only to insist on these few convincing Answers.

1. That in a Case of so great moment Historians should be little credited,
except they could have produced very infallible Documents; and as in general
one Historian may make all who succeed him err, so in this Case Boethius (who
was the first) lived and wrote 200 years after the Marriage of King Robert the 2
d, and wrote his History at Aberdeen, very remote from the Registers and Records
by which he should have instructed himself; nor did he know the importance of
this point, having touched it only transiently, though it has been design'dly
pressed by Buchanan, to evince that the Parliaments of Scotland might prefer
any of the Royal Line they pleased; and it is indeed probable that King Robert
the 2 d. did for some time make no great noise of his first Marriage with
Elizabeth Muir, least the meaness of the Match should have weakened his
Interest upon his first coming to the Crown, he being himself the first of the
Race of the Stewarts, and having so strong Competitors as the Earl of Dowglass,
who claimed Right to the Crown in the Right of the Baliol and the Cummings, as
Boethius himself observes.

2. King Robert the 3 d. having succeeded as the eldest lawful Son, and having
been received as such by that Parliament, and his Posterity by all succeeding
Parliaments, the Possession of the King and the Acquiescence of the People is
the most infallible proof that can be adduc'd for proving that Robert was the
eldest lawful Son, nor have most Kings in Europe, or the Heads of most private
Families any other proof of their being the eldest and lawful Sons, save that
they succeeded and were acknowledged as such.

3. To balance the authority of these Historians, I shall produce the
Testimony of the Learned Sir Lewis Stewart, one of the most famous Lawyers we
ever had, and who ought much more to be believed than Buchanan, not only
because he was more disinterested, but because he founds upon Acts of
Parliament and old Charters which he himself had seen in the Registers, in
which Elizabeth Muir is acknowledged to have been the first Wife. Buchananus
lib. 9. in vitam Roberti 2. affirmat Euphaniam Comitis Rossenssis filiam primam
Regis Roberti 2. uxorem fuisse and ea mortua, Regem superinduxisse Elizabetham
Moram ex qua prius Liberos ternos mares suscepisset, and eam uxorem duxisse,
ejusque liberos regno destinasse, ut postea eorum natu maximus suc^essit quod
quam falsum sit, apparet ex archivis in carcere Edinburgensi reconditis, ubi
exstant separata acta duorum Parliamentorum, subscripta manibus
Ecclesiasticorum praesulum, nobilium, baronum, and aliorum statuum Parliamenti,
and eorum sigillis roborata, quibus Elizabetha Mora agnoscitur prima uxor, and
Euphania Rosse secunda, and liberis ex Elizabetha Mora tanquam justis
haeredibus Regni, successive regnum d^cernitur, and post eos liberis Euphaniae
Rosse nec non ibidem cartae extant plurimae, factae per Davidem secundum, eorum
patruum magnum ex diversis terris, Ioanni filio primogenito, nepotis ejus
Roberti, dum Euphania Rosse viverit nec non Davidi filio natu maximo Euphaniae
Rosse quem solum filium indigitat Roberti nepotis, quod non fecisset si
Elizabetha Mora non prius fuisset nupta Roberto ejus nepoti, nam primogenitus
nunquam attribuitur notho imo ego plures quam viginti cartas in archivis
inveni, ubi etiam eas reliqui, ex quibus sole clarius elucessit, Elizabetham
Moram primam fuisse uxorem, and Euphaniam Rosse secundam, nam extra
contraversiam, liberi Elizabethae Morae etate grandiores erant liberis
Euphaniae Rosse: which Paper I did get from the Lord Pitmeden, who has himself
written some learned Observations upon this point.

4. I have my self seen an Act of Parliament (found out by the industry of Sir
George Mackenzie of Tarbet, now Lord Register) having the entire Seals of the
Members of Parliament appended thereto, by which the Parliament do swear
Allegiance to Robert the 2 d. the first King of the Race of the Stewarts; and
after him Roberto Comiti de Carrict, filio suo natu maximo (his eldest Son) in
Anno 1371, which was the first year of his Reign; and if the pretended defect
be true, it was a very palpable, and a very undeniable one, and could not but
have been unanswerably known to the whole Nation. And how can we imagine, that
the whole Parliament would have unanimously drawn upon themselves so dreadful a
Perjury, by excluding the lawful Heir, against their National Oath in the Reign
of K* Kenneth the 3 d, whereby they swore to own always the immediate Heir, or
that they would have entailed upon themselves a Civil War, by preferring even a
questionable Heir, after the Miseries which they had lately then felt, in the
competition betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol. Amongst which Seals, the Seal of
James Earl of Dowglass is one, and how ridiculous is it to think, that he would
sit and declare a Bastard preferable to the Brother of his own Lady, and to his
own Lady who would have succeeded if her Brothers had died without Succession:
Which Act of Parliament does also clearly prove, that Buchanan did not at all
understand matters of Fact in this part of the History, for he asserts, that
after the death of Euphan Ross, the King married Elizabeth Muir, and did by Act
of Parliament obtain the Crown to be settled upon Robert the 3 d, Son to the
said Elizabeth Muir, upon whom he also bestowed the Title of Carrick; all which
is most false, for this Act of Parliament is dated in Anno 1371, and King
Robert the 2 d. succeeded to the Crown that year, nor did Euphan Ross die till
the 3 d. year after he succeeded to the Crown, and so not till the Year 1374,
and yet in Anno 1371 this Act is past, designing him Heir to the Crown, and
Earl of Carrick, and consequently he was so designed before the death of Euphan
Ross.

5. I have seen a Charter granted by King Robert the 2 d, when he was only
Steward of Scotland, granted in anno 1165, and so long before he was King. In
which Charter likewise, John, thereafter King, by the name of Robert the 3 d,
is a conjunct Disponer with him, under the express designation of the eldest
Son and Heir. Robertus Senescallus Scotiae, Comes de Strathern, and Ioannes
Senescallus primogenitus and haeres ipsius Dominus Baroniae de Kyle, etc. which
Charter confirms to the Abbacy of Pasley several Lands disponed to them, by
Reginaldus More, Father to Sir William More of Abercorn. And I find that David
Duke of Rothsay, was always in the Charters granted by his Father King Robert
the first, called Primogenitus, and he was no Bastard, nor can this designation
be given to a Bastard, as is clear by Covaruvias de Matrim. part. 2. cap. 8..
2. number 4. But how can it be imagined that the Monks of Pasley would have taken
a Right from a person as Heir to the Crown, who was not: for this would have
inferred Treason against them, beside the annulling their Right, or who could
understand better the lawfulness of a Marriage, than a body of Churchmen,
living in the time, and very near to the Residence of the married Persons, and
in whose Conventual-Church the said King Robert and Elizabeth Muir ly buried
together.

Item, I have seen in the Registers another Charter granted by King Robert the
2. in the first year of his Reign, with the consent of John Earl of Carrick,
primogenitus and haeres, Allano de Lavidia terrarum de Whitslet; And an other
granted by the said King, 1. June, anno primo regni, confirming to Paulo Mctire
a Charter granted by the Earl of Ross, Father to Euphan, wherein the said John
primogenitus and haeres, is a Witness: And to show that the said Euphan Ross
was then living when he was so designed Heir, there is a Charter to her by the
King upon the very same day of the Lands of Lochleaven. As also, there is a
Charter granted by King Robert the 2 d, the first year of his Reign, to
Alexander his Son, and another to John Kennedy of the Barrony of Dalrymple, in
both which the said John Earl of Carrick is called primogenitus, and is Witness
with the Earl of Dowglass; so that he has been designed eldest Son and Heir,
openly, uncontravertedly, and in all Papers, and with the consent of the second
Wife and her Relations.

6. In the Parliament 1372, the said John Earl of Carrick is designed to be
Lieutenant of the Kingdom, and all the Estates of Parliament swear to own him
in his Government, and which Statute is printed amongst the Satutes of King
Robert the 2 d, Father to the said John, and which must be during the Marriage
with Euphan Ross, for she lived three years after her Husband was King, and he
succeeded to the Crown anno 1371: And this also confutes Buchanan, who asserts,
that he was created Earl of Carrick after the death of Euphan Ross, and it is
against all sense and reason to think that he could have been acknowledged
during her life, if he had not been the true Apparent Heir of the Crown and a
lawful Son.

7. Walter (who they pretend should have succeeded to the Crown,) having killed
his Nephew King James the first, Son to King Robert the 3 d; He was not only
not owned after the death of the said King James, as certainly he had been if
his Title had been good, and his Right so recent and demonstrable, having so
many great and powerful Relations, that his Father was induced upon their
account to marry his Mother; but yet the said Walter was by all the Parliament
unanimously condemned as a Traitor, for having conspired the death of his
lawful Prince. Nor does Boethius justify Walter's Title in the least, but on
the contrary, magnifies the Parliament for their just Sentence. As did likewise
Aeneas Silvius the Popes learned Legate, who exhorted the Parliament to condemn
him.

8. How is it imaginable, that King Robert who had so lately, and after a
strong competition come to the Crown, would have adventured to make his Title
yet more disputable, by preferring a Bastard to the true Heir, who had so many
Friends by his Mother, and who being an Infant had never disobliged him.

9. If we will consider the opinion of the Civilians, whom we and almost all
Nations follow in the Cases of Succession, we will find, that the said King
Robert the 3 d was the eldest and lawful Son of King Robert the 2 d. filius
legitimus, and non legitimatus. For, 1. They conclude, that a Son is proved to
be a lawful Son by the Assertion of the Father, Alciat tract praesumpt. Reg. 2*
praesumpt. 2. number. 6. and certainly the Father is the best Judge in such Cases;
but so it is we have the Father owning the said Robert the 3 d. to be his
eldest Son and Heir, both in Charters and Acts of Parliamnets, which are the
most solemn of all Deeds. 2. Quando pater instituit aliquem tanquam filium
suum, which holds in this Case, where the Father institutes and leaves him
Heir, and the Parliament swears Allegiance to him as the Heir, Mascard. de
prob. vol, 2. conclus. 799. And in dubious Cases, the Father's naming such a
man as a Son, presumes him to be a lawful Son, nominatio parentis inducit
filiationem in dubio, l. ex facto. si quis Rogatus ff. ad trebell. 3. Even
Fame, and the common opinion of the People, do in favors of these that are in
Possession, and in ancient Cases, prove and filiationem, and legitimationem,
Mascard. conclus. 792. but much more, where the Fame and common Opinion is
adminiculated by other Arguments, fulgos consil. 128. Panorm. in cap.
transmiss. qui filii sunt ligittimi. 4. When Writs are produced, calling a man
a Son, the Law concludes him to be a lawful Son. Mascard. vol. 2. conclus. 800.
number 15. all which can be easily subsum'd in our Case. In which Robert the 3 d.
is named not only Son, but Heir, and Allegiance sworn to him, even in the
lifetime of the second Wife and her Relations sitting in Parliament, and all
this acquiesc'd in for many hundreds of years, and the Competitors punished as
Traitors by the unanimous consent of all the Parliament.

I know that Buchanan does most bitterly inveigh against those Laws made by
King Kenneth the 3 d, as Laws whereby the ancient Right of Succession was
innovated, and whereby the Government was settled upon Children who were
neither able to consult with the People, nor to defend them, and whereby those
had the Government of the Nation conferred upon them who were not capable to
govern themselves.

To which my answer is, That in this Buchanan's Malice contradicts his History,
for his own History tells us, that the Scots swore Allegiance to Fergus and his
Posterity; and consequently Fergus's Son ought by Law to have succeeded, and
not his Brother, for his Brother was none of his Posterity, and therefore those
Laws made by K. Kenneth did but renew the old Law, and the innovation
introduced in favors of the Uncles, was a subversion of the fundamental Law to
which they had sworn. 2. That the old Law was not abrogated, but was in Being
by virtue of the first Oath, appears very clear by Buchanan himself, who
confesses, that upon the death of Durstus, a wicked Prince, it was debated
whether his Son should not succeed juxta sacramentum Fergusio prestitum
veteremque esse morem servandum, which acknowledges that the Succession was
even in these days established by Law, by Oath, and by Custom; and after the
death of Fergus the 2 d, his Son Eugenius (though a Minor) was crowned, and his
Uncle Graemus allowed to be his Tutor. And Buchanan also brings in Bishop
Kennedy, lib. 12. praising this Law as made by Kenneth, a most wise and
glorious Prince, with advice of all his Estates of Parliament; and which rather
confirms (as he says) the old Law than introduces a new one, so far did
Buchanan's rage against Queen Mary prevail with him, to praise and rail at the
same individual Law; and it is observable, that it is very dangerous to recede
once from fundamental Laws, for Buchanan makes not only the Succession
Elective, but he makes no difference betwixt lawful Children and Bastards, and
excludes not only Minors during the Uncles life, but Women for ever. 3. In all
Nations where the Monarchy is Hereditary, Minors succeed, and so this
innovation of causing the next Male succeed for all his Life, was contrary to
the nature of the Monarchy and to the Customs of all Nations, and God in
Scripture gives us many instances of it: Ioas succeeded when he was seven years
of Age, Josiah when he was eight, Manasseh in twelve, and Azariah in sixteen;
and yet in those days, God is said to have chosen the King, for it is said in
Deuteronomy. Thou shall set over thee, the King whom I have chosen, and consequently
the choice of Minors cannot be ill, since God Almighty used to make such a
choice. I know that Eccles. 10.16. says, Woe unto the land when thy King is a
child, but the Critics interpret this of a King that is childish, puer
intellectu and moribus, or because Factions arise by the opposition to his
Regents, and this inconveniency did more necessarily attend the allowing a
Regent King during Life, for both the Subjects and the true Heir raised
Factions in that Case, whereas the Subjects only are factious in the other, and
yet even they are no more factious for that short time, than they are always in
Commonwealths. 4. The reason why the Minor King was to have one to supply his
Nonage ceasing with his Majority, it was unreasonable that the Remedy should
have lasted beyond the Disease, and the worst effect that could have been
occasioned by the Infant King's Minority was, that the Kingdom should have been
during that time governed by joint advice of Parliament, Councils, and Officers
of State, which in Buchanan's opinion in other places of his History and Book
De Jure Regni, is so excellent a Model, that he decrys Monarchy as much
inferior to it. 5. It was most inconvenient to accustom any private Family to
live in the quality of a King. 6. It could not but occasion many Murders, and
much Faction, for the true Heir could not live peaceably under this Eclipse and
Exclusion, nor could the Uncle live without making a Party to secure his
pleasant Usurpation. 7. As these Divisions and Factions were the natural and
necessary Effects that were to be expected from this irregular Succession, so
it is very observable, that from King Fergus to King Kenneth the 3 d, we had
79. Kings, amongst whom, almost the half were the most impious, tyranical, or
lazy Kings that ever we had, according to Buchanan's character of them; so
happy and wise a thing is this (so much magnified) Election of a Successor by
the People and their Representatives, to supply the defects of the lawful Heir,
whereas from King Kenneth the 3 d, to King CHARLES the 2 d. inclusive, we have
had 31. Kings, 26. of whom have succeeded by a due lineal Right, and have
proved virtuous Princes, greater by their Merit than their Birth, as if God had
designed to let us see, that though most of them succeeded whilst they were
very young, yet that he can choose a fitter Successor than Parliaments can do;
whereas the other 5. Kings who came to the Crown against that Law of Kenneth
the 3 d* viz. Constantine the bald, Grimus, Mackbeath, Donal Bain, and Duncan
the 2 d, were all persons who deserved very ill to be preferred to the true
Heir, and who, as they came to the Crown against Law, so governed without it:
And it is very strange, that the Fanatics, who think that every throw of the
Dice is influenced by a special Providence, will not allow, that God does by a
special Providence take care who shall be his Representative, who shall be the
Pastor of his Flock, and nursing Father of his Church; let us therefore trust
his Care more than our own, and hope to obtain more from him by Christian
Submission, Humility and Obedience than we can by Caballing, Rebelling, and
Sacrilegious-Murdering, or Excluding the true Successor.

FINIS.
What follows is immediately to be subjony'd to the Testimony of Calvin, Page 90.
I Know that to this it may be answered, That the same Calvin does qualify his
own words, which I have cited with this following Caution. Si qui sunt (says
he) populares Magistratus, ad moderandam Regum libidinem constituti (quales
olim erant qui Lacedemoniis regibus oppositi erant ephori; and qua etiam forte
potestate (ut nunc res habent) fuguntur in singulis regnis, tres ordines; quum
primarios conventus peragunt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae, pro
officio intercedere non veto; ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and humili
plebeculae insultantibus conniveant, eorum dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non
carere affirmam; quia populi libertatem, cujus se tutores Dei ordinatione
positos norunt, fraudulenter produnt.

To which my reply is, That these words must be so constructed, as that they
may not be incosistent with his former clear and Orthodox Doctrine, of not
resisting Supreme Powers, the former being his positive Doctrine, and this but
a supervenient Caution, and they do very well consist; for though Calvin be
very clear, that Kings cannot be resisted, yet he thinks that this is only to
be mean'd of those Kings who have no Superiors to check them by Law, as the
Kings of the Lacedaemonians had, who by the fundamental Constitution of their
Monarchy, might have been called to an account by the Ephori, and so in effect
were only Titular Kings: Or of such Monarchs as had only a coordinate Power
with the States of their own Kingdom; and even in these Cases, he does not
positively assert, that these Monarchs may be resisted, but does only doubt
whether if there be any such Superior or coordinate Magistrate representing
the People, they may not restrain the Rage and Licentiousness of their Kings:
But that Caution does not at all concern the Ius Regni apud Scotos, because
this cannot be said of the Kings of Great Britain, since the States of
Parliament are only called by the King, and derive their Authority from him,
and the Legislative Power is solely in the King, the States of Parliament being
only Consenters, he and not they can only make Peace and War, and grant
Remissions, and against him and not them Treason only is committed, and the Law
Books of both Nations do affirm, that the King is Supreme, and consequently
even according to Calvin's Doctrine, neither his People, nor any of their
Representatives, can justly oppose, and much less punish him.

I know that Grotius is by the Republicans, and the Fanatics, oft-times cited
to defend this their Doctrine, of opposing Princes; but though his Testimony
might be justly rejected, as being himself born under a Commonwealth, yet he is
most impudently cited, for he lib. 1. cap. 4. does positively lay down as a
general and undoubted Rule, that Summum imperium tenentibus, resisti non
potest, Those who have the Supreme Power cannot lawfully be resisted; whilch
Rule he founds upon the Principles of Reason, the Authority of Scripture, and
the Practice of the Primitive Church; and though he limits the same thereafter
by some exceptions, yet it will easily appear, that these exceptions extend not
at all to our Case.

For the first relates only to such Kings, as have received their Power with
express condition, that they may be tried by other Magistrates.

The second to such as have voluntarily resigned their Empire, as Charles the 5
th. did; and so the one may be opposed, because they were only Titular Kings:
and the other, because they left off to be Kings, and consequently we are
concerned in neither of these Cases.

The third limitation is only in the Case where he who was truly a King, has
alienated his Kingdom to Strangers; In which Case, Grotius does contend, that
Subjects may refuse to obey, because he cease to be their King. But as this
is not our Case, so even in that Case Grotius is very clear, that if this
alienation be made by an Hereditary Monarch, the alienation is null, as being
done in prejudice of the lawful Successor, but he does not at all assert that
the Monarch may be thereupon deposed by his People.

The fourth relates only to such Kings, as from a hatred to their Country,
design its Destruction and utter Ruin; but as he confesses himself, Id vix
accidere potest in Rege mentis compote; and consequently can take only place in
a mad Man, in which Case all Laws allow the Kingdom to be ruled by Governors,
and Administrators in the King's Name, if the Madness be Natural, and a total
depravation of Sense. But if by Madness be mean'd a moral Madness, and design
to ruin the Kingdom and the Subjects, as was, and is most impiously pretended
against King CHARLES the first, and King CHARLES the 2 d, the best and most
reasonable of Kings; then Opposition in such Cases is not at all warranted by
Grotius, who speaks only of a Physical and Natural Madness; for else, every
thing that displeases the People should be called Madness; and so the
exception should not limit but overturn the general rule, and should arm all
Subjects to rebel against their Princes, and make them the Sovereign Judges in
all Cases. Which is inconsistent with Grotius's own Doctrine, and is
excellently refuted by his own Reasons.

The fifth relates only to Kings, who by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom
are tied to such and such Conditions, so as that if they fall in them, they may
be opposed.

The sixth relates only to Kingdoms where the Power is equally divided betwixt
the King and the Senate.

The seventh is incase the King was at first invested by the People, with
express reservation to them to resist in such and such Cases, and so is almost
the same with the fifth, and all these three differ little from the first. And
with Grotius good leave, they err also in this, that they are not properly
exceptions from his own rule, for the rule being only, that Supreme Powers
cannot be resisted, these Powers are not Supreme, and they needed not be
cautioned by an exception, since they did not fall under the rule. But neither
of these Cases extend to us, since our King is by the Acts of Parliament
fomerly cited, declared to be Supreme over all Persons and in all Causes, nor
made our Predecessors any such express reservations at the first erection of
the Monarchy, and consequently by Grotius own positive Doctrine cannot be
resisted. And so far is Grotius an enemy to such Fanatical Resistance, upon the
pretense of Liberty and Religion, that number. 6. he calls the Authors of these
Opinions, Time Servers only. And Gronovius a violent Republican and Fanatic,
taxes him extremely for it, in his Observations upon that fourth Chapter, whose
Arguments adduc'd against Grotius I shall answer amongst the other Objections.

Gronovius's first Argument why it should be lawful to resist the Supreme
Magistrate in defense of Religion, is, because if it be not lawful for Subjects
to Arm themselves for Religion against their Prince, it should not be lawful
for their Prince by the same rule to defend himself against Turks and Infidels,
who would endeavor to force him to comply with their Impieties. But to this it
is answered, That Resistance to Superiors is expressly discharged by the Laws
of God and Nature, as said is, but this cannot be extended to Cases where there
is no Subjection nor Allegiance; and it may be as well argued, that because one
private man may beat another who offers to strike him, that therefore a Child
may beat his Parent, or a Servant his Master, or that because I may violently
resist a private man who offers to take away my Goods unjustly, that therefore
I may oppose the Sentence of the Magistrate, because I forsooth do not think the
same just.

His second shift is, That our Savior commanded only absolute submission
without resistance in the Infancy of the Church when he himself was miraculosly
to assist his own Servants, but this Submission was to end with the Miracles,
to which it related. As to which, my answer is, 1. That all the Commands in
Scripture may be so eluded, nor is there any Duty more frequently and fully
inculcated than this is, and that too in the same Chapters amongst other
Duties, which are to last for ever, such as submission to Parents, and Masters,
and this is founded upon plain reason and convenience, and not upon Miracles.
2. This was received and acknowledged by the Pagans, as has been fully proved,
though it cannot be pretended that they relied upon any such miraculous
assistance. 3. It cannot be denied but the Fathers of the Primitive Church did
recommend and justify themselves in their Apologies to the Heathen Emperors
for bearing patiently, when they were able not only to have resisted, but to
have overthrown their Persecuters, as is clear by the Citations out of
Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Augustine, and others, to be seen in Grotius,
De Iure Belli, lib. 1. cap. 4. number. 7. And it had been great impudence as well
as sin in them, to have boasted of a recent matter of Fact, which was not true;
nor could there be a greater injury done to the Primitive Christians, as
Grotius observes, than to ascribe that to their Weakness, which they considered
as an effect of Duty; and why should the Heathen Emperors have suffered those
to multiply, who obeyed only because Disobedience was not safe, for they might
have certainly concluded, that by the same Principle that they obeyed only
because they were weak, they would disobey how soon they were able. 4. If the
first Christians in general had obeyed only because they were not able to
resist, then any private Christian had resisted when he was able, or would have
fled or concealed himself, whereas it it acknowledged in the other Answer
pressed by Gronovius himself, that they sought for Martyrdom, and so these two
Answers are inconsistent; and the Thebean Legion, and others, did submit
themselves voluntarly to Martyrdom with their Arms in their hands, and when
they were able to have overthrown the Emperor. And lastly, If this Doctrine
were allowed, no Society could subsist, for when Dissenters grew strong, the
lawful Magistrate behooved to perish; whereas Jesus Christ did contrive the
Christian Religion; so as that all Governors should reasonably wish their
Subjects to be Christians; and so as no Christian should attempt to overthrow
the order and establishment of Civil Government, and that they should not be
drawn away from the practice of Christian Devotion by the carnal desires of
being great and strong in the World, nor have any hopes in the Arm of Flesh to
the lessening of their immediate dependence upon him.

His third shift is, That his Doctrine of Submission and of dying for the
Christian Religion without making Resistance, was only the Practice, but not
the Command of the Primitive Church, and proceeded from their immoderat
affectation of the Crown of Martyrdom, as Milntoun also pretends. But since the
express Command of Scripture is founded upon such clear Reason, and since (as
Grotius well observes) the Practice of the Primitive Christians, who lived so
near the Age wherein these Scriptures were penned, is the best Interpreter of
the Scripture, it is horrid Impiety to make those blessed Martyrs pass for vain
Hypocrites, and distracted Self-murderers; and it becomes us with holy
reverence to imitate those whom the Christian Church has ever admired.

The fourth shift is, That the Protestant Churches have been reformed by such
Insurrections as these, contrary to the Royal Authority. But this is fully
answered by the learned Henry More in his Divine Dialogues, and by Du Moulin in
his Philanax Anglicus; where likewise are to be found the many Testimonies of
Protestant Churches, and Protestant Divines, condemning positively the taking
up of Arms against the Sovereign Power, even for the defense of Religion; and
the very Presbyterian Confession of Faith at Westminster, is so positive as to
this point, that the Presbyterians themselves can never answer it. The sum of
which answer is, That the King of Spain coming by Marriage in place of the Duke
of Burgundy, the said King of Spain could pretend to no more power than they
had, nor could the House of Burgundy pretend to any more power by marrying the
Heirs of the Counts of the several Provinces, than these Counts had over their
Provinces; and therefore since none of these were Sovereigns over their
Provinces, the Provinces might have resisted the King of Spain when he
oppressed them; and consequently that Resistance cannot defend such as resist
Supreme Powers upon pretense of Religion, Grotius de Antiq. Reipub. Ba^av. cap.
7.

The opposition made by the Protestants in France, was not occasioned by
Religion, but upon a Quarrel betwixt the Princes of the Blood and the House of
Guise in the Minority of Francis the 2 d, and is defended most excellently by
King James himself, not to have been Rebellion, in his Defense of the Right of
Kings, page 14.

The Opposition made by the Princes of Germany to the Emperor, was founded upon
the inherent Right in the Princes, by the golden Charter of the Empire. And
Luther himself declared, that Magistratui non erat resistendum, and has written
a Book to that purpose; nor would he engage in the Confederacy for Defensive
Arms at Smalcald, until the Lawyers declared that that Resistance was lawful by
the Laws of the Empire, Vide Slydan Hist. lib. 8. anno 1531.

The War that arose in Switzerland, was not occasioned by Religion; for the
Reformation was once established with the conconsent of the Magistrate. And the
Eruption that was made by other Cantons upon the Reformed Cantons eleven years
after that Establishment, Vide Slydan, anno 1522. Nor was it Calvin who
banished the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, for he fled eight Months before upon
the detecting of a Conspiracy, by which that Bishop was to deliver over the
Liberties of that City to the Duke of Savoy, and for which his Secretary was
hanged, Vide Turretin* Annal. Reformationis, anno 1529. And albeit those who
Reformed in Scotland, in the Reign of Queen Mary, pretended Authority from the
King, yet they were certainly Rebels, and are condemned by Rivet, a famous
Protestant Divine, who also inveighs bitterly against this Principle, Castiga
Not. in Epist. ad Balsac. cap. 13. number. 14. sub finem.

From all which, I observe, First, That all the Protestant Divines by making
Apollogies for such of their Profession as have risen in Arms against Supreme
Powers, must be thereby concluded to be ashamed of the Principle. 2. Immediately
upon the quieting those Rebellions, all the Protetestant Churches have in their
Confessions of Faith, declared their abhorrence of that Principle; which being
the product of Conviction and Experience, joined with Duty, must be the most
judicious and sincere Testimony of all others. 3. All these Rebellions have
been occasioned by a mistake in point of Law, and not in point of Religion; for
the Divines, as I have related, have been abused by the Lawyers: And therefore,
since in the Isle of Britain, the Laws of both Kingdoms have declared the
Rising in Arms against the King, to be Treason, albeit for the defense of
Religion; it necessarily follows, that this must be unlawful in point of
Conscience in this Kingdom. 4. Though good things may be occasioned by a
Rebellion, yet that does not justify a Rebellion; for though Jeroboam was
allowed by God to rise against Rehoboam, yet God Almighty himself calls his
revolt Rebellion, 1 Kings 12.19. and 2 Chronicles. 10.19. and it is observable, that
after this Revolt, there was but one good King amongst all the rebellious Kings
of Israel; whereas amongst the Kings of Judah, who were lawful Kings, there was
but one or two who were any ways impious; so far does God bless a lawful
Succession.

Some also use as a shift against this Orthodox Doctrine, that the reason why
the Primitive Christians did not oppose their Emperors in the defense of the
Christian Religion, was, because they had not been secured at that time in the
Exercise of their Religion by the Laws of the Empire; and therefore the
practice of those Christians can be no Argument why we may not now rise to
defend the Orthodox Religion* since it is now established by Law. But this
Objection is fully answered by that great great Antiquary Samuel Petit.
Diatriba de Iur. Principum edictis Ecclesiae quaesito, where he clearly proves,
that they were actually secured by the Edicts of the Emperors in the days of
the Emperor Tiberius, and downward, and yet they would not rise in Arms though
they were persecuted under these same Emperors, because the Word of God and the
Christian Religion did command Obedience under Persecution, and discharged
Resistance and taking up of Arms.

Add to Page 73.
I have also seen in Fordon's History, lib. 14. page 73. a Charter granted by
King David to the Bishops, with the consent of Robert his Nephew, and his Sons
giving power to the Bishops to dispone in Testament upon their own Movables,
which before that time did by a corrupt custom fall to the King, in which
Charter, the Witnesses are, Robertus Senescallus Comes de Strathern, Nepos
noster Ioannes Senescallus Comes de Carrict, filius suus primogenitus and
haeres, Thomas Comes de Mar, Georgius de Dunbar, Comes de March, and Gulielmus
Comes de Dowglass; so that here is not only the attestation of the Father
before he was King, naming John Earl of Carrick, thereafter King Robert the 2
d. his eldest Son and Heir, but the attestation of the Grand-Uncle King David,
who could be no ways biased in the Affair; and here he is ranked before the
three eldest Earls in the Nation, who were then the three first Subjects
therein; and it is against all Sense, to think that the whole Bishops would
have sought the consent of the said John as Apparent Heir of the Crown, if he
had not been Apparent Heir. I find also, that Fordon calls him when he is
crowned King, Primogenitus Roberti secundi; nor was there the least opposition
made to his Coronation, nor to the Coronation of Annabella Drummond his Queen
(a Daughter of the House of Stob hall, now Pearth,) though both the Sons of the
second Marriage were then alive. I find also, that Boethius himself
acknowledges, that the Earl of Marches Son George, being pursued for having
married clandestinly one of the Daughters of Elizabeth Muir, his defense was,
that he married her when she was the Daughter of a private Subject, and before
King Robert was King, whereas if she had been only a Bastard-Daughter, it could
have been no Crime to have married her.


