JVS REGIVM: Or, The Just and Solid FOUNDATIONS OF Monarchy In General; And
more especially OF THE MONARCHY of SCOTLAND: Maintained against Buchannan,
Naphtali, Dolman, Milton, etc.

By Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, His Majesty's Advocate in Scotland.

1 Samuel x. 26, 27. And there went with Saul a band of men, whose hearts God had
touched.

But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they despised
him, and brought him no Presents, but he held his peace.

London, Printed for R. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1684.

TO THE University OF OXFORD.
THE King my Master, and His Royal Brother, being by their Natural Goodness
inclined to pardon all Crimes, except Flattery; and by their Modesty to think
all that Flattery, which can be justly said of them. I could not in Prudence
dedicate this Book to Them, since the First Part of it, concerns The Right of
the Monarchy: And the second, The Right of the Successor. And therefore (since
to support a Crown, is the next Honor to the bearing it) this Dedication was
due to you, who have both in the last Rebellion, and this Factious Age,
maintained the Royal Interest so learnedly and generously. Your late Decisions
against the Fanatics, have almost made my Reasonings useless; for your
Authority will weigh as much as any private Man's Arguments. And what should
have more Credit amongst Men, than an illustrious Company of learned and pious
Divines, deciding for their Duty and Conscience, against their Interest and
Vanity. Men who wish for no Crown, save in Heaven; and desire no Power, save
over their own Lusts and Passions. To the Episcopal Church God has fulfilled
that promise, of making Kings their Nursing Fathers, the true Heirs and best
Scholars of the Primitive Church, happier than it in this: that they do
practice its Virtues, without its Necessities; and need not Poverty to make
them Humble, nor Armies to make them Loyal. And who in it are so happy as you,
who can be Submissive, without being Slaves; Firm, without being Opinionated;
Zealous, without being Cruel; and Pious, without being Bigot. To whom I cannot
wish greater Blessings, than that your Fame may grow as great as your Loyalty:
That your University may continue prosperous, till another grow more Learned;
and that all honest Men may be as ready to serve you, as,

Your Sincere Well-wisher, and Humble Servant, Geo. Mackenzie.

TO THE Reader.
BUchannan's Book, De Jure Regni, being lately Translated, and many Copies
dispersed, His Majesty's Advocate, in Duty to the King, and Compassion to the
People, who are thus like to be poisoned, has written this Answer; which was
necessary, notwithstanding of the learned Answers made by Barclay and
Blackwood, since beside that theirs are in Latin, and so not useful to the
People, it is conceived they understood not fully our Law, nor was our Law so
clear then as now. Many Arguments have been invented since their time by
Dolman, Milton, Nephthali, etc. and Experience has opened our Eyes much since
their time. Blackwood's Arguments are calculated for the Romish Church, and
Barclay has mistaken essential Points: Theirs run upon History and Philology,
this upon our Law, the Laws of Nations, Reason and Convenience; and, I am
afraid, it will be said that there are too many new thoughts in mine.

THE Just Right OF MONARCHY In general, but more especially of the KINGS of
SCOTLAND, asserted against Buchannan and others.
LVCIFER might in Reason have contented himself with that share of Knowledge,
Glory and Power, which was bestowed upon him, by his Almighty, and Bountiful
Sovereign. And Adam should have rested satisfied, with the Glory of having been
made after the Image of God, and with being his Lieutenant in this lower World.
But there are such strong Charms in Ambition, and Vanity, that the one resolved
to hazard all that he possessed, as being second, rather than not try if he
could be the first, and the other, desiring to improve his present share,
forfeited those excellencies which he enjoyed. How jealous then should frail
and fallen man be, in debates with those, whom the Almighty has appointed to be
his Vicegerents amongst them; and to whom he has said, Ye are Gods. And how
hard is it for us to conquer that Vice, which the one could not resist, though
he was all Light, and the other though he was all Innocence?

What Nations under Heaven were so happy as we, under the Reign of King Charles
the First? Secure against all Invasion from abroad, by the situation of our
Country; and from all Oppression at home, by its Laws, and the gracious
Concessions of our excellent Monarchs: But more especially in that Age, by the
innate Virtues of that King, who was severe to none but to himself; and whose
Prerogatives, no Laws could bound so much as His own Goodness did. And yet
weary with the burden of our own prosperity, we lusted after new improvements
of Liberty and Property: And after we had emptied our own Veins, and Purses, in
fighting for these, all we gained, was to be Slaves, and Beggars. And having
killed for Religion a King, who had more of it, than all who fought against
him, we split our own Church into a thousand pieces, and from its murdered
Body, did arise those Sectarians, like so many Worms, and Insects. But yet God
Almighty desiring to try us once more, and make us for ever inexcusable, did
not only deliver us from that Slavery that we had drawn upon our selves, but
because we were all Crimes, he gave us a King who was all Clemency, and who
deserves to have been Elected, if he had not been born our King: And yet after
that he had also condescended to all our new Extravagancies, and that by His
Conduct, all Sciences flourish, and Trade is so increased, that Riches are
become a Plague. We are now troubled with Jealousies, because we can be
troubled with nothing else: And murmuring against the gentlest and best of
Kings, we are tormented daily with Apparitions, Visions, Plots, Pamphlets and
Libels. But under whom can we expect to be free from Arbitrary Government, when
we were, and are afraid of it under King Charles the First, and King Charles
the Second? And what King, or Government, can be secure from those, who
Conspire the death of this most merciful Prince, and of this so ancient, and so
well molded Government?

Amongst the other wicked Instruments in these Rebellions, I must confess that
our Countrymen Buchannan (one of the chief Ornaments, and Reproaches of his
native Country) the Authors of Lex Rex, Naphtali, and Jus Populi Vindicatum,
have been Ringleaders, who have endeavored extremely to poison this Nation by
persuading the People:

1. That our Monarchs derive their Rights from them.

2. That therefore since they derive their Right from the People, they are
accountable to them for their administration, and consequently they may be
suspended or deposed by them.

3. That the People may Reform without them, and may rise in Arms against them,
if the Monarch hinder them to Reform.

4. That the People or their Representatives may Exclude the Lineal Successor,
and raise to the Throne any of the Royal Family who does best deserve the Royal
Dignity.

These being all matters of Right, the plain and easy way which I resolve to
take for refuting them, so as the learned and unlearned may be equally
convinced, shall be first, by giving a true account of what is our present
positive Law. 2. By demonstrating that as our present positive Law is
inconsistent with those Principles, so these our positive Laws are excellently
well founded upon the very nature of Monarchy, and that those Principles are
inconsistent with all Monarchy: And the third Class of my Arguments shall be
from the Principles of common Reason, Equity and Government, abstracting both
from the positiveness of our Law, and the nature of our Monarchy: And in the
last place I shall answer the Arguments of those Authors.

As to the first, I conceive that a Treatise, De Jure Regni apud Scotos, should
have cleared to us what was the power of Monarchs by Law, and particularly,
what was the positive Law of Scotland as to this point; for if these points be
clear by our positive Law, there is no further place for debate, since it is
absolutely necessary for Mankind, especially in matters of Government, that
they at last acquiesce in something that is fixed and certain, and therefore it
is very well observed by Lawyers and Statesmen, that before Laws be made, men
ought to reason; but after they are made, they ought to obey: which makes me
admire how Buchannan and the other Authors that I have named, should have
adventured upon a debate in Law, not being themselves Lawyers; and should have
written Books upon that Subject, without citing one Law, Civil, or Municipal,
pro or con: Nor is their Veracity more to be esteemed than their Learning; for
it is undeniable that Buchannan wrote this Book, De Jure Regni, to persuade
Scotland to raise his Patron, though a Bastard to the Crown: and the Authors of
Lex Rex, Jus Populi Vindicatum, and others, were known to have written those
Libels from picque against the Government, because they justly suffered under
it.

I know that to this it may be answered, That these Statutes are but late, and
were not extant in Buchannan's time, and consequently Buchannan cannot be
refuted by them.

2. That these Statutes have been obtained from Parliaments, by the too great
influence of their Monarchs, and the too great Pusillanimity of Parliaments,
who could not resign the Rights and Privileges of the People, since they have
no Warrant from them for that effect.

To the first of which, I answer, that my Task is not to form an Accusation
against Buchannan, but against his Principles, and to demonstrate, that these
Principles are not our Law, but are inconsistent with it, and it is ridiculous
to think, that any such Laws should have been made, before those Treasonable
Principles were once hatched and maintained, for Errors must appear before they
be condemned: and by the same Argument it may be as well urged, that Arius,
Nestorius, etc. were not Heretics, because those Acts of General Councils,
which condemned their Heresies, were not extant, when they first defended those
opinions; and that our King had not the power of making Peace and War, till the
Year 1661.

But, 2dly, For clearing this Point, it is fit to know that our Parliaments
never give Prerogatives to our Kings, but only declare what have been their
Prerogatives, and particularly in these Statutes that I shall Cite, the
Parliament does not Confer any New Right upon the King, but only acknowledge
what was Originally his Right and Prerogative from the beginning, and therefore
the Parliament being the only Judges who could decide whether Buchannans
Principles were solid, and what was Jus Regni apud Scotos. These Statutes
having decided those points controverted by him, there can be hereafter no
place for Debate, and particularly as to Buchannan, his Book De jure Regni apud
Scotos, it is expressly condemned as Slanderous, and containing several
offensive Matters by the 134 Act, Parl. 8. Ja. 6. in Anno 1584. which was the
first Parliament that ever sat after his Book was printed.

To the 2 d, I answer, that it being controverted what is the Kings Power,
there can be no stronger Decision of that Controversy in Favors of the King,
than the acknowledgment of all Parties Interested, and it is strange and
unsufferable to hear such as appeal to Parliaments, cry out against their
Power, their Justice, and Decisions; and why should we oppress our Kings, and
raise Civil Wars, whereby we endanger so much our selves to procure powers to
Parliaments, if Parliaments be such ridiculous things as we cannot trust when
they are empowered by us? and if there be any force in this answer of
Buchannans, there can be none in any of our Laws, for that strikes at the Root
of all our Laws, and as I have produced a Tract of reiterated Laws for many
Years, so where were there ever such free unlimited Parliaments in any Nation
as these, whose Laws I have Cited? 2dly, Whatever might be said, if a positive
Contract betwixt the King and People were produced, clearing what were the just
Limits of the Monarchy, and bounding it by clear Articles mutually agreed upon,
yet it is very absurd and extravagant to think, that when the Debate is, what
is the King of Scotlands just Power and Right, and from whom he Derives it,
that the Laws and repeated Acknowledgements of the whole Representatives of the
People assembled in the Supreme Court of the Nation, having no open force upon
it, but enacted at several times, in many several Parliaments, under the
gentlest, peaceablest, and wisest Kings that ever they had, should not be
better believed than the Testimonies of three or four biased and disobliged
Pedants, who understood neither our Laws nor Statutes, and who can bring no
clear fundamental Law, nor produce no Contract nor Paction restricting the
King, or bounding his Government. 3dly, That which adds a great deal of
Authority to this Debate, and these Statutes is, that as this is clear by our
positive Law, so it is necessarily inferred from the nature of our Monarchy,
and is very advantageous for the Subjects of this Kingdom, which I shall clear
in the second and third Arguments that I shall bring against those Treasonable
Principles, nor can they be seconded, by any solid Reason, as I shall make
appear in answering the Arguments of those Authors.

I know that Nephthaly, the Author of Jus Populi, and our late Fanatical
Pamphlets, allege that our Parliaments since 1661. are null and unlawful,
because many who have right to Sit as Members, or to Elect Members, were
excluded by the Declaration or Test: but my answer is, First, That these were
excluded by Acts of Parliament, which were past in Parliaments prior to their
exclusion, and so they were excluded by Law, and no man can be said to be
illegally excluded from his Seat in Parliament, who is excluded by a clear
Statute. 2dly, If this were not a good answer, then the Papists might pretend
that they are unjustly excluded, because they will not take the Oath of
Supremacy, and because they are Papists; and how can the Fanatics pretend to
make this objection, since they by the same way excluded the Kings Loyal
Subjects in the Year 1647. and 1649. etc. Or how would these Authors have
railed at any Malignant for using this Argument against them, which they use
now most impudently against us with far less justice, for their Parliaments
were unjust upon other Heads, as being inconsistent with the fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom, and so their Acts of exclusion were null in themselves. 3dly.
All the Statutes made since 1661, are necessary consequences of former Laws,
and so are rather renewed than new Laws. 4ly. If their reasons were allowed
there could be no end of controversy, for all who are excluded would still
allege that they were unjustly excluded, and consequently there could be no
submission to Authority, and so no Society nor Peace.

The last answer that our Dissenters make when they are driven from all their
other grounds, is, that they, though the lesser, are yet the sounder part of
the Nation; but this shift does not only overturn Monarchy, but establishes
Anarchy, and though they were once settled in their beloved Commonwealth, this
would be sufficient to overturn it also, for every little number of Dissenters,
nay, and even the meanest Dissenter himself; might pretend to be this sounder
part of the Commonwealth, but God Almighty foreseeing that pride or ignorance
would suggest to frail Mankind this principle, so inconsistent with all that
Order and Government, whereby he was to preserve the World, did therefore in
his great Wisdom convince men by the light of their own Reason, that in matters
of common concern, which were to be determined by Debate, the greater number
should determine the lesser; and such as drive beyond this Principle, shall
never find any certain Point at which they may rest: and by the same Reason,
the Law has pronounced it safer to rest in what is decided, though it be
unjust, than to cast loose the Authority of Decisions, upon which the Peace and
quiet of the Commonwealth does depend, who would be so humble and just, as to
confess that his Adversary has the juster side? Or who would obey if this were
allowed? And what Idea of Government or Society could a man form to himself,
allowing once this principle.

It is also very observable, that those who pretend to be the sounder part, and
deny obedience upon that account, are still the most insolent and irregular of
all the Society, the greatest admirers of themselves, and the greatest enemies
to peace, and so the unfittest to be Judges of what is the sounder part, though
they were not themselves Parties. But what pretense is there for that Plea in
this case, where the foundations of our Monarchy have been unanimously
acknowledged by many different Parliaments, in many different Ages, chosen at
first from the Dictates of Reason, and confirmed, after we had in many
Rebellions, found how dangerous all those popular pretenses are, and in which
we agree with the Statesman, Lawyers and Divines of all the Well-governed
Nations under Heaven, who are born under an hereditary Monarchy, as it is
confessed we are.

To return then to the first of those Points, I lay down as my first Position,
that our Monarchs derive not their Right from the People, but are absolute
Monarchs, deriving their Royal Authority immediately from God Almighty; and
this I shall endeavor to prove, first from our positive Law.

By the 2. Act Par. 1. Chapter 2 d. in which it is declared, that His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, have for ever, by virtue of that Royal Power which they
hold from God Almighty over this Kingdom, the sole choice and appointment of
Officers of State, Counselors and Judges.

But because this Act did only assert that our Kings did hold their Royal Power
from God, but did not exclude the people from being sharers in bestowing this
Donative, therefore by the 5th. Act of that same Parliament, they acknowledge
the Obligation lying on them in Conscience, Honor and Gratitude, to own and
assert the Royal Prerogatives of the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, which the
Kings Majesty holds from God Almighty alone; and therefore they acknowledge
that the Kings Majesty only, by virtue of His Royal Prerogative, can make Peace
and War, and Treaties with foreign Princes.

Because this last Statute did only assert that the King did hold His Imperial
Crown from God alone, but did not decide from whom our Kings did only derive
their Power; therefore by the 2 d. Act Par. 3 d. Chapter 2 d. It is declared that
the Estates of Parliament considering that the Kings of this Realm, Deriving
their Power from God Almighty alone, they do succeed Lineally thereto, etc.
Which Statutes do in this agree with our old Law; for in the first Chapter of
Reg. Magist. verse. 3. these Words are, That both in Peace and War, our Glorious
King may so Govern this Kingdom committed to Him by God Almighty, in which He
has no Superior but God Almighty alone, which Books are acknowledged to be our
Law, and are called the Kings Laws by the 54th. Act Par. 3 d. Jam. 1. and the
115. Act Par. 14. Jam. 3.

These our Laws both Ancient and Modern, can neither be thought to be extorted
by force, nor enacted by flattery, since in this we follow the Scripture, the
Primitive Church and their Councils, the Civil Law and its Commentators, and
the wisest Heathens, both Philosophers and Poets. As to the Scripture, God
tells us, That by him Kings Reign, and that he has anointed them Kings, and
that the King is the Minister of God. David tells us, That God will give
strength to his King, and deliverance to his King, and to his Anointed. Daniel
says to Nebuchadnezar, The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom. And to
Cyrus, God gave to Nebuchadnezar thy Father a Kingdom, and for the Majesty that
he gave him, all Nations trembled.

As to the Fathers, Augustine de Civit. Dei, l. 5. c. 21. Let us not attribute
unto any other, the Power of giving Kingdoms and Empires, but to the true God.
Basil in Psalm. 32. The Lord sets up Kings and removes them. Tertul. Apol:
contra gentes, Let Kings know, that from God only they have their Empire, and
in whose power only they are. And Irenaeus having Proved this point fully, ends
thus, l. 5. c. 24. By whose Command they are born men, by his likewise they are
ordained Kings. This is also acknowledged by the Councils of Toledo 6. c. 14.
of Paris 6. c. 5. vid. Council aquis gran. 3. c. 1.

Amongst late Divines, Marca the famous Archbishop of Paris, Concord. sacerd.
and imperii, l. 2. c. 2. n. 2. asserts, That the Royal Power is not only
bestowed by God, but that it is immediately bestowed by God upon Kings: and
Refutes Bellarm. de laico, c. 6. maintaining, That the Jesuits Doctrine in
this, lessens Authority, and raises Factions, and contradicts both the Design
and Word, of God. Duvalius de suprem, potest. Romans Pontif. p. 1. q. 2. Asserts
that Kings derive their Rights by the Laws of God and Nature, non ab ipsa
Republica and hominibus; and in all this the Fanatics and Republicans agree
with the Jesuits against Monarchy.

In the Civil Law this is expressly asserted, Cod. de vet. Cod. enucleand. Deo
anctore nostrum gubernante imperium quod nobis a coelesti majestate traditam
est, Nov. 6. in init. Nov. 133. in proem. in Nov. 80. 85, 86. Justinian
acknowledges his Obligation to care for his People, because he received the
Charge of them from God, and certainly Subjects are happier, if their Kings
acknowledge this, as a duty to God, than if they only think it a Charge
conferred on them by their People, and that they are therefore answerable to
them.

That the Doctors and Commentators are of this opinion, is too clear to need
Citations, vid. Arnis. cap. de Essentia Majest. Granswinkel. de jur. Maj cap.
1. and 2.

As to the Heathens, Hesiod. in Theog. ver. 96. says (...) Kings are from God.
Homer says their Honor is from God, (...) -- Iliad. 1. verse 197. Themistous
asserts, that the Regal Power came from God, Orat. 5. whith whom agrees Dion.
Chrysostom Orat. 1. diotog. apud Stob. sermon. etc. Plat. de legibus. etc. But
above all, Aristotle in polit. (...). And Plutarch. Agis and Cleom. (...).

If to these Statutes and Citations it be answered, That God Almighty may
indeed be the principal and chief Author of Monarchy, and that Monarchs may
derive their Power from him, as from the Supreme Being, that directs all more
immediate Causes, and yet the People may be the immediate Electors of Monarchs,
and so Kings may derive immediately from them their Power; and thus these
Statutes are not inconsistent with the principle laid down by Buchannan and
others, whereby they assert, That Kings in general, and particularly the Kings
of Scotland, derive their Power immediately from the People.

To this my answers are, that first, If we consider the propriety of the Words,
there can be nothing more inconsistent, then that Kings should derive their
Power from God Almighty alone, and yet that they should derive it from the
People, for the Word Alone, is of all other words the most exclusive. 2dly, The
design of the Parliament in that acknowledgement was to condemn, after a long
Rebellion, the unhappy Principles which had kindled it; and amongst which, one
of the chief was, that our Kings derived their Power from the People, and
therefore they might qualify, or resume what they at first gave, or might
oppose all Streaches in the Power they had given, and might even punish, or
depose the King when he transgressed, none of which Principles could have been
sufficiently condemned, by acknowledging that, though God was the chief Author,
yet the People were the immediate Electors. 3dly, There needed no Act of
Parliament be made for acknowledging God to be the chief Author, and first
Fountain of every Power, for that was never controverted amongst Christians.
4thly, That foolish gloss cannot at all consist with the Inferences deduced
from that Principle in the former Statutes: for in the 2. Act, Par. 1. Char. 2.
It is inferred from His Majesty's holding His Royal Power from God alone, that
therefore he has the sole choice of his own Officers of State, Privy
Counselors and Judges; And in the 5th. Act, it is inferred from the same
Principle, that because he derives his Power from God alone, that therefore it
is Treason to rise in Arms without his Consent, upon any pretext whatsoever:
and in the 2 d. Act, Par. 3. Char. 2. It is concluded, that because our Kings
derive their Power from God Almighty alone, therefore it is Treason in the
People to interrupt, or divert their Succession, upon any Difference in
Religion, or other pretext whatsoever; whereas all this had been false, and
improper Reasoning, if the design of the Parliament had not been to acknowledge
that our Kings derived not their Power from the People for though they derived
their Power from, God, as the supreme Being only, and not as the immediate
bestower, and if the People were the immediate bestowers of that Power, then the
People might still have pretended, that they who gave the Power, might have
risen in their own Defense when they saw the same abused, and might have
diverted the Succession, when it descended upon a person who was an enemy to
their Interest: but how false this gloss is, will appear more fully from the
following Arguments; and it is absolutely inconsistent with St. Augustins
opinion, formerly cited, wherein he forbids to attribute the giving of Kingdoms
to any other but to God.

My second Argument for proving that Kings derive their Power from God alone,
and not from the People, shall be from the principles of Reason. For First, The
Almighties design being to manifest his Glory, in Creating a World, so vast and
regular as this is, and his goodness in Governing it, and that Men might live
peaceably in it, having both Reason and Time to Serve him, it was consequential
that he should have reserved to himself the immediate dependence of the supreme
Power, to shut out the extravagant and restless multitude, from those frequent
Revolutions which they would make, and Desolations which they would occasion,
if they thought that the Supreme Power depended on them, and that they were not
bound to obey them for Conscience sake; so that those expressions in Scripture
were very useful in this to curb our Insolences, and to fix our restlesness;
and it seems that Kings are in Scripture, said to be gods, to the end it might
be clear that they were not made by Men. 2dly, God Almighty being King of
Kings, it was just, that as inferior Magistrates derived their Power from the
King, so Kings should derive their Power from God, who is their King; and this
seems to be clear from that analogy, which runs in a Dependence, and Chain
through the whole Creation. 3dly, as this is most suitable to the principles of
Reason, so it is most consonant the analogy of Law, by which t*is declared,
that no Man is master of his own Life or Limbs, nemo est Dominus membrorum
suorum; and therefore, as no Man can lawfully take away his own Life, so
neither can he transfer the power of disposing of it to any other Man; and
consequently this Power is not derived to Kings and Princes by private Men, but
is bestowed upon them by God Almighty; who is the sole Arbiter of Life and
Death, and who can only take it a away, because he gave it: And if it be
objected, that this last branch of the Argument, seems either to prove nothing,
or else to prove that there can be no Elective Monarchies. To this it is
answered, that even in Elective Monarchies, the Nomination proceeds only from
the People, but the Royal Power from God, as we see in inferior Magistracies,
such as Burrows Royal, etc. the People Elect, and so the Nomination is from
them, but the power of Governing proceeds from the King, and not from the
Electors, and therefore as the People who Elected the Magistrates in these
Towns, cannot Depose them by their own Authority; so neither can the People
Depose their King, but the punishment of him belongs to God Almighty. I
confess, that if the People Choose a King with express Condition, that they may
punish him as the Lacedaemonian Kings were punishable by those Magistrates,
called the Ephori, the Kings are in that case accountable to the People, but
then they are not Monarchs, having supreme Power as our Kings have, and who are
therefore declared to hold their Power immediately from God, and not to be at
all punishable by the People.

The 4th Argument that I shall use, for proving that our Kings derive not their
power from the People, shall be from the natural Origin of Monarchy, and of
ours in particular, which I conceive to be that Right of Paternal Power which
is stated in them; for understanding whereof, it is fit to know, that God at
first created only one Man, that so his Children might be Subject to him, as
all Children yet are to their Parents: and therefore the Jesuitical and
Fanatical Principles, that every man is born Free, and at Liberty to choose
what form of Government he pleases, was ever, and is most false, for every man
is born a Subject to his own Parents, who, if they were not likewise subject to
a Superior Power, might judge and punish them Capitally, lead them out to War,
and do all other things that a King could do, as we see the Patriarchs did in
their own Families. And as long as it is known who is the Root of the Family,
or who represents it, there is no place for Election, and people Elect only
when the memory of this is lost, and such as overcome the Heads of Families in
Battle, succeed to them in their Paternal Right

If it be answered, that the Father may by nature pretend to a power over his
Children, or it may be an Elder Brother over his younger, yet there is no tie
in nature subjecting Collaterals, as Uncles, and their descendents to those
descended from the Eldest Family. To this I reply, that 1. This power over all
the Family was justly given by nature, to shun divisions, for else every little
Family should have erected it self in a distinct Government, and the weakest
had still been a Prey. 2. We see that Abraham did lead out to War, and in every
thing act as King, not only over his own Children, but all the Family, and
whole Nations, are called the Children of Israel, the Children of Edom, etc. 3.
That must be concluded to be established by natural instinct, which all men in
all Ages and Places allow and follow; but so it is, that all Nations in all
Places, and Times have ever allowed the Eldest Son of the Eldest Family to
govern all descended from the Stock, without new Elections; and the Author of
the late famous Moral Essays has admired this as one of the wisest Maxims
that we have from Natural Instinct; for if the wisest, or strongest were to be
chosen, there had still been many Rivals, and so much Faction and Discord; but
it is still certain who is the Eldest Son, and this shuts out all Debate, and
prevents all Dissension: For applying this to our Case, it is fit to know, that
if we believe not our Historians, then none else can prove that the People of
Scotland did at first Elect a King that being contrary to the acknowledgements
of our own Statutes and all Buchannans Arguments, for restraining Kings, being
founded upon the authority of our Historians, who (as he says,) assert that K.
Fergus was first Elected King by the People: if he be not able to prove that
our Kings owe their Crowns to the Election of the People, without any inherent
or previous Right, all his Arguments vanish to nothing: but on the other hand,
if we consider exactly our Historians, we shall find that our Kings Reign over
us by this Paternal Power; and though I am not very fond of Fabulous
Antiquities, yet if Tradition, or Histories can be believed in any thing, they
should at least be believed against Buchannan, and those who make use of them,
to restrain the power of our Kings: and by our Histories it is clear, that
Gathelus having led some Forces into Egypt, he after several Victories, settled
in Portugal, called from him Portus Gatheli, from which a Colony of that Race
transported it self into Ireland, and another into Scotland; nor should this be
accounted a Fable, since Cornelius Tacitus, in the Life of Agricola, makes the
Scots to be of Spanish, and the Picts to be of German Extraction.

The Scottish Golonies finding themselves oppressed by the Britains, and Picts,
they sent over into Ireland to Ferquhard, and he sent them a considerable
Supply, under the Command of Fergus his Son, who having secured them against
their Enemies, all the Heads of the Tribes acknowledged him for their King, and
swore that they should never admit of any other Form of Government then
Monarchy; and that they should never obey any except Him and his Posterity,
which if they brake, they wished that all the Plagues and Miseries that had
formerly fallen on their Predecessors, might again fall upon their Posterity,
as the punishment of that Perjury. All which Religious Vows and Promises sealed
by those dreadful Oaths voluntarly given, were graven on Marble Tables, and
Consigned for preservation into the custody of their Priests: and these are
Boethius own words, Fol. 10. From which I observe, 1. That as our Laws assert,
that our Kings derive their Power from God, and not from the People, so we
ought not to believe the contrary upon the Faith of our Historians, except they
were very clear, and unanimous in contradicting our Laws, whereas it appears to
me, that our Laws agree with our History, for Gathelus was not at all Elected
by the People, but was himself the Son of a King, and did conquer by his own
Subjects, and Servants, and all those who are descended from his Collonies,
were by Law obliged to obey the Eldest Son, and Representative of that Royal
Family. And Ferquhard is acknowledged to have been his only Successor, nor did
ever any of the Scottish Tribes pretend to the Supremacy, and our Histories
bear, that none of our Tribes would yield to another; and the Fatal Marble
Chair that came from Spain, remaining with those who went to Ireland, does
evince that the Birthright remained with them; and therefore when Fergus the
Son of Ferquhard came over, he brought over with him the Marble Chair, which
was the mark of Empire. And Boethius immediately upon his arrival calls him
King, and Fordon the most ancient of our Historians, lib. 1. cap. 36. calls
him, Fergusius Filius Ferardi aut Ferquhardi ex antiquorum Regum prosapia
genitus, qui ambitione Regnandi stimulatus magnam sibi Juvenum copiam
assimulavit and Albionem continuo progressus est and ibidem super eos Regem
primum se constituit, that is to say, he made himself the first King; therefore
K. James. Basil. Doron. page 201. asserts, that K. Fergus made himself King and
Lord as well of the whole Lands, as of the whole Inhabitants. 2. We read
nothing at all of the consent of the People, but of the Heads of the Tribes,
who had no Commission from the People, each of them having by his Birthright a
Power to Command his own Tribe, and consequently, the Royal Power was not
derived to Fergus from the People, but had it is Original from this Birthright
that was both in them, and Fergus, and he succeeded in the Right of those
Chiefs to Command their respective Families; and Boethius brings in King Fergus,
lib. 1. number. 5. Speaking of himself, as a pious Parent, as one who owes to them
what a Parent owes to his Children: sunt pij Parents in Liberos propensi, and
debemus vobis quod proli genitores. And the consent given by the Chief of the
Clanns, and the People did not give, but declare the former Right, as our
consent now does in Acts concerning the Prerogative, and as the Vote of the
Inquest does in the Service of Heirs; and thus at the Coronation of our Kings,
it is still said by our Historians, that such a man was declared King, communi
suffragio and acclamatione. 3. This consent being only given in the Army cannot
be said to have been universally by the People, nor do we read that the People
did Comissionate the Army, or that the Army consulted the People; and in
general it cannot be instanced, that the People did in any Nation universally
consent to Election, nor is it possible all the People can meet. And in Poland
which is the only Elective Monarchy we know, the Freeholders only consent, and
yet every private Man and Woman have as great interest, according to these
pretended Laws of Nature, as they have: and potior est conditio negantis. Nor
do we find that the Commons, and mean People have any interest in the Elections
of our Magistrates, or Parliament Men; so that Popular freedom by Birth, and
the interest of the People in Popular Elections are but mere Cheats invented to
engage the Rabble, in an aversion to the established Government, when factious
and insolent Spirits, who cannot submit themselves to Government, design to
cheat the Multitude by fair Pretenses, and to bride them by Flattery.

If it be pretended, that it is not certain, whether King Fergus was eldest Son
to Ferquhard, nor is it probable, that if he had been such, he would have
preferred an uncertain Conquest in Scotland, to his secure Succession in
Ireland. To this it is answered, that all our Histories bear, that King
Ferquhard sent his Son Fergus, and when a Son is spoken of indefinitly, in such
Cases, he is actually understood to be the Eldest. 2. He brought with him the
Marble Chair, the mark of Empire, which would not have been allowed to a
younger Brother. 3. It is said, that having settled the affairs of Scotland, he
returned into Ireland to settle the differences there about the choosing of a
new King, which does import that he should have been King if he had not
preferred Scotland to Ireland; and the reason of this preference was because
Ireland was then divided amongst many Kings, and his Predecessors had but a
very small share of it at that time, and Scotland being a part of a greater
Isle, be probably found in this greater Isle, a higher flight for his Hopes and
more latitude for his Ambition.

But albeit the Kings of Scotland had been originally and at first Elected by
the People, yet it does not at all follow necessarly as Buchannan, Dolman, and
our other Republicans pretend, that therefore they may reject them at their
pleasure, or which is all one, when they imagine that the Kings Elected by them
serve not the ends for which they were designed, and that for these Reasons. 1.
It cannot be denied, but that the People may consent to an Election of a
Monarch without Limitations; for from the Principles of Nature, we may learn,
that whatever is in ones power may be by them transferred upon another; and
therefore, if the People be invested with a power of governing themselves, they
may cartainly transfer this Power upon another and we see that all Christians,
and even our Republicans allow, that men may sell themselves to be Slaves, a
custom not only mentioned but approved by God himself, so far does consent
reach beyond what is necessary for maintaining this Point. 2. If this could not
be, then there could be no such thing as absolute Monarchies, which is against
the received Opinion of all Nations, and against the Doctrine of all Authors,
who, though they debate that this, or that Monarchy, in a particular Country
is not Absolute, yet it was never controverted by any man alive, but that the
People might consent, and in many places have consented to absolute Monarchies;
and by the famous Lex Regia, amongst the Romans, Populus ei and in eum omne
Imperium suum, and Potestatem transtulit, instit. de jur. not. gent. and civ..
6. Mentioned likewise by that Famous Lawyer Vlpian, l. 1. ff. de constitut.
Princ.

3. We see this consequence to be very false in many other cases, and therefore
it cannot be necessary here, for we find that a man chooses a Wife, yet it is
not in his power to put her away; Cardinals choose the Pope, and Chapters the
Bishop, and yet they cannot depose them; the Common Council choose Magistrates,
and yet they cannot lay them aside.

4. This Reasoning is condemned as most fallacious, by most learned, and
disinterested Lawyers, and therefore it cannot be infallible, as is pretended:
vide Arnisaeum cap. 3. number. 2. Haenon. dis. Pol. 9. number. 44. Panorm. ad cap. 4.
de Cler. non residend. Zasius ad l. non ambigitur number. 3. ff. de legibus. Nor
have any Lawyers differed from this common opinion of mankind, except some very
few, who have differed from a Principle of Pique, rather than of Judgment.

The next thing that I am to prove in this my first Proposition, is, That Our
King is an absolute Monarch, and has the Supreme Power within this his Kingdom
and this I shall endeavor to prove, First, From our positive Law. 2. By
several Reasons deduced from our Fundamental Laws and Customs. 3. From the very
nature of Monarchy it self, and the Opinion of Lawyers who write upon that
Subject, and who define Absolute Monarchy to be a Power that is not limited or
restrained by coactive Law. Arnisaeus, de essentia Majest. cap. 3. number. 4.

By the 25. Act Parl. 15. Ja. 6. The Parliament does acknowledge, That it
cannot be denied, but his Majesty is a free Prince, of a Sovereign Power;
having as great Liberties and Prerogatives, by the Laws of this Realm, and
Privilege of his Crown, and Diadem, as any other King, Prince, or Potentate
whatsoever. And by the 2. Act. Parl. 18. Ja. 6. The Parliament consenting to
his Majesty's restoring of Bishops, declare and acknowledge the absoluteness of
our Monarchy, in these words: The remedy whereof properly belongs to his
Majesty, whom the whole Estates, of their bounden duty, with most hearty and
faithful affection, humbly and truly acknowledge to be a Sovereign Monarch,
absolute Prince, Judge and Governor, over all Persons, Estates and Causes,
both Spiritual and Temporal, within his said Realm.

And by the first Act of that same Parliament: The Estates and whole Body of
this present Parliament, acknowledge all with one voluntary, humble, faithful,
united heart, mind, and consent, his Majesty's sovereign Authority, Princely
Power, Royal Prerogative, and Privilege of his Crown, over all Persons,
Estates, and Causes whatsoever, within his said Kingdom.

And because no Acts were ever made, giving Prerogatives, nor even declaring
Prerogatives to have been due, until some special controversy did require the
same, so that Possession, and not positive Law, was the true measure of the
Prerogative; therefore the Parliament does in that same Act approve, and
perpetually confirm all the Royal Prerogatives, as absolutely, amply and freely
in all respects, and considerations, as ever his Majesty, or any of his Royal
Predecessors possessed, used, and exercised the same; and they promise that his
Majesty's Imperial Power, which God has so enlarged, shall never be in any sort
impaired, prejudged, or diminished, but rather reverenced, and augmented as far
as possibly they can.

In the Preface to our Books of Law, called Regiam Majestatem, it is
acknowledged that the King has no Superior, except the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, who governs all. Foreign Lawyers also, such as Lansius de Lege Regia,
number. 49. and others, do number the King of Scotland amongst the Absolute
Monarchs.

My second Argument for proving our King to be an absolute Monarch, shall be
from my former position, wherein I hope I have proved sufficiently, that our
Kings derive not their Right from the People; for if the King derive not his
Power from the People, the Monarchy can never be limited by them, and
consequently it must be an absolute Monarchy; for, there could be nothing more
unjust, more unnatural, and more insolent, then that the People should pretend
a Right to limit and restrain that Power which they never gave; and the only
reason why Buchannan, and his Accomplices, do assert our Monarchy to be a
qualified and limited Monarchy, being th^^ the People, when they first Elected
our Kings, did qualify and restrain their Government. This position being
false, as appears by the absolute Oath, and original Constitution above set
down, which is lessened, or qualified by no condition whatsoever, therefore the
conclusion drawn from it must be false likewise.

The third Argument shall be deduced from the Nature of Monarchy, and in order
thereto, I lay down as an uncontroverted principle, that every thing must be
constructed to be perfect in its own Nature, and no mixture is presumed to be
in any thing; but he who alleges, that the thing controverted is added against
Nature, must prove the same; and therefore since Monarchy is that Government
whereby a King is Supreme, the Monarch must be presumed, neither to be obliged
to Govern by the advice of the Nobility, (for that were to confound Monarchy
with Aristocracie) nor by the advice of the People (for that were to confound
it with Democracie;) and consequently if Buchannan, and others design to prove,
that our Kings are obliged to Govern, by the advice either of the Nobility, or
People, or are subject to be Chastised by them, they must prove, that our
Kings, at their first Creation, were Elected upon these Conditions, the very
Essence and Being of Monarchy, consisting in its having a Supreme and absolute
Power. Arnisaeus c. 30. Vasquez l. 1. Controv. c. 47. Budaeus in l. princeps.
Zas. ibid. ff. de legibus, pone enim says Arnisaeus, populum in Regem habere
aequalem potestatem neutrum pro summo venditari posse. When we hear of a
Monarch, the first notion we have is, that he is a Subject to none; for to be a
Subject and a Monarch, are inconsistent; but if we hear that his Nobility, or
People, or both, may Depose, or punish him, we necessarily conclude by the
Light of Nature, that They, and not He, are the supreme Governors. Thus we
see, that in allowing our King to be an absolute Monarch, we have only allowed
him to be a Monarch, and to have what naturally belongs to him, and that by as
necessary a consequence; for as every Man is presumed to be reasonable, because
reason is the Essence of Man, so is a King presumed to be absolute, except
these limitations whereby the Monarchy is restrained, could be proved by an
express Contract.

4thly, How is it imaginable, but that if our Predecessors had Elected our
Kings upon any such Conditions, but they would have been very careful to have
limited the Monarchy, and this Contract had with these conditions been
recorded; whereas on the contrary we find, that albeit great care was taken to
record the Oath of Allegiance made to the King, and to grave the same upon
Marble Tables, consigned unto the custody of their Priests, as sacred Oracles;
yet none of all our Historians make the least mention of any limitations in
these Oaths, or by any other Contract; and to this day our Oaths of Supremacy,
and Allegiance, are clogged and lessened by no limitations.

If it be answered, that these limitations do arise from the nature of the
thing it self, there being nothing more unreasonable, and contrary to the
nature of Government, than that a Monarch, who was designed to be a Protector
to his People, should be allowed to destroy them. To this it is answered, That
Monarchy by its nature is absolute, as has been proved, and consequently these
pretended limitations are against the nature of Monarchy and so arise not, ex
natura rei, nor can there any thing be more extravagant, than to assert that,
that which is contrary to the nature of Monarchy, should arise from its nature,
and it might be with greater reason pretended, that because the great design of
men in Marriage, is to get a Helper, that therefore they may repudiate their
Wives, when they find them unsupportable, and that the putting them away in
such cases, is consistent enough with the nature of their Oath, though simple,
and absolute; this cause of Divorce arising from the nature of Marriage it
self: This is after Vows to make Inquiry, and what Vow or Oath could be useful,
if the giver were to be Judge how far he were tied, and if his convenience were
the measure of his Obligation. But since I shall hereafter fully prove, that
these limitations are as dangerous to the Subjects, as to the Prince, and that
ten thousand times more Murders, and other Insolences have been committed in
Civil Wars, upon the false pretense of Liberty, than ever was committed by the
worst of Kings; it must necessarily follow, that those limitations ought not to
be admitted after an absolute Oath, for shunning inconveniences, which at the
balance appear, to be no weight.

5. It cannot be denied, but our Kings have ever had the Power of Peace and
War, the calling and dissolving of Parliaments, and a negative Voice in them,
the remitting of Crimes, and nomination of Judges; and therefore it must be
presumed, that since the Law has not limited them in those things, it has
limited them in nothing; for by involving us in War, they may expose our
Fortunes, our Wives and Children to the greatest of dangers; and it had been
great folly to limit them in any thing, after those great Prerogatives were
allowed: And though our Histories do bear, That Peace and War were ordinarily
determined by the advice, and consent of the Nobility, yet that does no more
infer a necessity not to do otherwise, than the ordinary style of all our
Proclamations, bearing to be with advice of our Privy Council, infers a
necessity upon the King to do nothing without their advice; and how could the
consent of the Nobility have been necessary in the former Ages, since all their
Right flowed from the King Himself, and that neither they then, nor the
Parliament now, had, or have a Power equal with the King, much less above Him,
as shall be fully proved in the first Conclusion, that I am to draw from this
Doctrine; only to what I have said, I must here add, that it being proposed to
our Predecessors, at the swearing the Oath of Allegiance to King Fergus,
Whether they would be governed by a King, who should have absolute Power, or by
the Nobility, or by a Multitude? it was answered, That lest they should have
many Kings in place of one, they abhorred to bestow the Absolute Power either
upon the Nobility, or upon the Multitude.

6. I cannot but exceedingly commend our Predecessors, for making this
reasonable choice of an absolute Monarchy; for a Monarch that is subject to the
impetuous caprices of the Multitude when giddy, or to the incorrigible
Factiousness of Nobility when interested, is in effect no Government at all;
and though a mixed Monarchy may seem a plausible thing to Metaphysical Spirits
and Schoolmen, yet to such as understand Government, and the World, it cannot
but appear impracticable; for if the People understand that it is in their
Power to check their Monarch, the desire of command is so bewitching a thing,
that probably they will be at it upon all occasions, and so when the King
commands one thing, the Nobility will command another, and it may be the People
a third. And as it implies a contradiction, that the same Persons should both
command and obey: so where find we those sober and mortified men, who will
obey, when they may command? Let us consider what dreadful extravagancies, and
cruelties appeared at Rome, betwixt the Tribunes of the People, and the Senate:
one of six Kings had a Son, who ravished a Woman, and thereupon the Kings were
expelled, but every year almost produced a Civil War, wherein vast numbers of
free Romans were murdered; and in the contest betwixt Sylla and Marius, 90
Senators, 15 Consuls, 2600 Gentlemen, and 100000 others were murdered, and
after the whole Commonwealth was exhausted in the Wars betwixt Caesar and
Pompey; and in the immediate succeeding War betwixt Augustus, Anthony, and
Lepidus, wherein every man lost either a Brother, a Father, or a Son, Rome
returned again to its Monarchy, and was never so happy, as under Augustus. The
People of Naples complaining lately of their Taxes, put themselves under the
Command of Reforming Massaniello, by whose extravagancies they suffered more in
one Month, than they had done under the Spanish cruelty in an hundred years.
But our late Reformation in Britain seems to have been permitted by God, to let
us see that mixed Governments having power to Reform Kings, are more
insufferable than Tyranny; for by it we saw that the multitude consists of
Knaves and Fools, and both these are the worst of Governors; that the best of
Kings will be thought wicked, when Subjects are his Judges, who resolve not to
obey, and that it is impossible to know what is right, when every man is Judge
of what is wrong. The impracticableness likewise of this popular Supremacy,
will yet more convincingly appear, if we consider that the People are to be
Judges, because of their natural freedom, for then all men should have equal
right to be Reformers, and these can never meet nor consult together: And if it
be answered, that the People may send their Representatives, my Reply is, that
the greatest half of the Nation are neither Freeholders nor Burgesses, and yet
those only are called the Representatives of the people; and what absurd Tricks
and Cheats are used in choosing even those Representatives, and it may be the
resolution prevails by the Vote of the greatest Fool or Knave in the Meeting;
and if any one man remove by sickness or accident, at the passing of a Vote; or
if any of the multitude be bribed, or have prejudice, though on a most unjust
account, that which would have been the interest of the Nation, turns to be
against it, so infallible a Judge is the multitude. And I have seen in popular
Elections, hundreds cry for a thing, and thereafter ask what was the matter.

7ly, If the Proceres Regni, or Nobility are to be the check upon our Kings,
and to be trusted with this coercive power of calling them to an account, as
Buchannan pretends; then I desire to know who invested them with this power,
for it was never pretended that it is naturally inherent in them: And if the
people invested them, I desire to know by what Act the people transferred this
power upon them, for they have no Law, nor original Constitution for this, as
our Kings have for their Right; and passing over the dangers may arise from
their having this power, because of the Factiousness, Poverty, Picques, Humors,
or Ignorance that may be incident to them; it seems to me strange, why we the
people should trust such to be our Checks over the King, who are His own
Creatures, owing their Honors to Him, and expecting daily from Him Employments
and Estates? and if they and the people differ, who is to be Judges of those
Controversies? Nor can the Nobility and Commons assembled in Parliament have
this coercive power, for the Reasons which I shall hereafter offer; and
therefore none has it, but the King is Supreme in himself, and accountable to
none, save God Almighty alone. But more of this will be found in the Sequel of
this Discourse, upon other occasions.

8ly, Whatever proves Monarchy to be an excellent Government, does by the same
Reason prove absolute Monarchy, to be the best Government; for if Monarchy, be
to be commended, because it prevents Divisions, then a limited Monarchy, which
allows the People a share, is not to be commended, because it occasions them;
if Monarchy be commended, because there is more expedition, secrecy, and other
excellent Qualities to be found in it, then absolute Monarchy is to be
commended above a limited one; because a limited Monarch must impart his
secrets to the people, and must delay the noblest designs, until malicious and
factious Spirits be either gained or overcome: And the same analogy of Reason
will hold in reflecting upon all other advantages of Monarchy, the Examination
whereof I dare trust to every man's own breast.

9ly, It was fit for the People that their Kings should be above Law, because
the severity of Law will not comply with that useful, tho illegal Justice which
is requisite in special cases, for since summum jus is summa injura, and since
impossible est sola innocentia vivere, we may well conclude, that absolute
Monarchy is necessary to protect the guilty innocent by Remissions, to break
Laws justly, in a Court of Chancery, and to crook them uprightly in our Courts
by an officium nobile. For strict and rigid Law is a greater Tyrant, than
absolute Monarchy.

I know that some pretend that the 25. Act 15. Par. Ja. 6. declaring the King
to be an absolute Prince, is only to be interpreted in opposition to the Popes
Authority, he being so far absolute, only as not to be Subject to the Pope, who
pretended then a Jurisdiction over all Kings. But the answers to this are
clear; First, This Statute is made to declare the Kings of Scotland to have
Right by their Inherent Prerogative, to their exacting Customs for all
Merchandise, because they are absolute Monarchs, which Argument had been
ridiculous, if this absoluteness had only been in opposition to the Pope, nor
is there any mention of the Pope in all this Statute; and what interest has
the Pope in our Customs. 2dly, When the Kings power is by our Statutes raised
above the Pope, it is done by declaring him Supreme, and not by declaring him
absolute. 3dly, All Lawyers, and Statesmen, divide Monarchies in absolute and
limited Monarchies, and the word Absolute, is still taken in opposition to
limited, as is clear by Arnisaeus, Bo^in, etc. And whereas it is pretended that
these words in this Statute, acknowledging the King to be absolute, are only
expressed transiently and enunciatively, but are not Decisive and Statutory. It
is answered, that our Parliaments never give our Kings Prerogatives, but only
acknowledge what our Kings have by an Inherent and Independent Right; and these
words in this Statute, are of all others in our Laws, expressed with most of
Energy, for they are ushered with, It cannot be denied, but His Majesty has as
great Liberties and Prerogatives, as any Monarch whatsoever: and this
acknowledgement is made the Foundation of His Right to exact Customs. And in
true Reasoning, nothing is made the Proposition of an Argument, but that which
is most uncontrovertable.

I foresee that our Fanatics and Republicans, will be ready to misrepresent
absolute Monarchy, as Tyranny: But a Tyrant is he, who has no Right to Govern;
and so he may be opposed, as the common Enemy of all the Society. And it is
ridiculous to pretend with Hobs, That we are obliged to obey whoever is once in
possession; for that were to invite men to torment us, and to justify Crimes
by success. Nor can it be from this deduced, that since it is lawful to oppose
any who are in Possession, that it is therefore lawful to oppose our Monarchy:
because they have (as Algernon Sidney pretends) Usurped over us, a power
inconsistent with our natural Liberty. And owe their Right to that
Prescription, which the greatest Tyrants may maintain by force, and to that
consent which they may procure by Violence, or Flattery. For to this I answer,
That our Monarchs have their power established by Birthright, by Consent, by
Prescription, and by Law; which are all the ways whereby any Right can be
legally Established. But it is a gross mistake in Buchannan, and others, to
conclude a lawful King punishable as a Tyrant, because he becomes vicious: For
though God may punish him as such, yet his People cannot; that were to raise
the Servant above the Master, and to occasion a thousand Disorders to redress
one; and when King James acknowledges, that a good King thinks Himself made for
his People, and not His People for Him. That is only said with reference to the
King's duty to God, but not with Relation to the Peoples Duty to their King.
And when Trajan delivering the Sword to the Proconsul, said, Pro me, si recte
impero, si male, contra me. Grotius observes justly, That this was spoke as a
Philosopher, and not to subject himself to the others Jurisdiction. And so
Buchannan did most traitorously advise the Printing this on our Coin. Nor does
this Title of absolute Monarch, empower him to dispose of our Estates. For it
is fit to know, that Government is the Kings, and Property is the Subjects
Birthright. Monarchy is a Government, and so can include no more, than what is
necessary for Government. And though the Turk or Mogol, arrogate to themselves,
the total Property of their Subjects, in this they are Tyrants, and not Kings.
And when our Statute abovementioned, says, That our Kings have as much power as
they, this is only to be understood of what Right they have by the Nature of
Monarchy, Rex nomen est jurisdictionis non dominii, say the Lawyers: For the
Law having said, that all things were the Emperors, l. been a Zenone.. Sed
scimus C. de Quadr. Praescript. The Emperor asked the famous Lawyer Bulgarus,
in what sense all was his, who is mightily praised for having answered, Omnia
Rex possidet imperio singuli dominio, Accurs. in praem. ff. in Verb. Sanctioni:
For what is once ours, cannot be taken away without our consent: And therefore
by the 5. Act, 1. Par. Chapter 2. It is declared lawful for the King to make
Garrisons, His Majesty entertaining them on His own expense. And by the Act 3.
Pav. 3. Chapter 2. It is declared that the people shall not be subject to free
Quarter, etc. And yet right reason teaches us, that all the Land of Scotland
having been once the Kings (for the Law says, that the King is Susitus ratione
Coronae, in all the Lands of Scotland) His Majesty is therefore presumed
Proprietor of all, and every thing belongs to him, if some other cannot
instruct a right, which is the sense of that Law, Nemo terram nisi authoritate
Regia possideto: And of King Malcolm Canmor's Law, that Rex distribuit totam
Terram Scotiae hominibus suis. And it therefore clearly follows, that the King
has Dominium directum, a right of Superiority, as all Superiors have, and that
the people on whom he has bestowed those Lands, are obliged to concur in the
expense with him, for the defense of it. For as if he had retained the
Property, he would have been able with the Fruits and Rents to have defended
it. So it is not agreeable to sense or reason that they to whom he has granted
it should not be obliged to defend it, especially seeing all the Rights made by
the King, are in Law presum*d mere Donations; For it cannot be denied but that
all Lands were originally granted by the King, and so must have originally
belonged to himself: for no person can give what is not his own; and our Law
acknowledges, that all Lands belong to the King, except where the present
Heretor can instruct a Right flowing from our King, and that he is the Fountain
of Property, as well as of Justice. 2. In Law, all who are engaged in a
Society, as to any thing that is the Subject of the Society, should contribute
to its preservation; and therefore the King having the Dominium directum, and
the Vassal Dominium utile, it follows, that the Vassals of the Kingdom should
contribute toward its preservation, and the King may expect justly an equal
Contribution toward the defraying the necessary expense, and thence it was,
that by our old Law all Heretors were obliged to furnish some unum Militem,
unum Sagittarium, or Equitem: Some a Bow-man, some a Soldier, some a
Horseman: But afterward the King having changed those Tenures, or because all
betwixt 60. and 16. were obliged to come to the Field with 40. days Provision,
which was all that was then necessary; it follows, that now that way of making
War being altered, the Subjects should contribute toward the way that is
necessary for defending the Kingdom. 3. The King by His Forces protects our
Persons, and by his Navies protects our Commerce; by His Ambassadors manages
all our public Affairs, and by His Officers, and Judges, administrates Justice
to us: And so it is just that all this should be done at our expenses, and that
we should defray the public expenses of the Government, and so much the
rather, because by a special Statute with us, it is declared that the King may
impose what He pleases on all that is imported, or may forbid us to export any
thing without which we could not live; and what ever he gets from us, he
distributes amongst us, without applying one shilling of it to his own private
use.

The King, or whoever has the management of the Government, have in the opinion
of Lawyers, Dominium eminens, a Paramount and Transcendent Right over even
private Estates, in case of necessity, when the common Interest cannot be
otherwise maintained; and this Grotius, though no violent friend to Monarchy,
does assert very positively and clearly, l. 1. c. 1. 6. and l. 3. c. 19. number.
7. and it cannot be denied but that a King may take any man's Lands, and build a
Garrison upon it, paying for it; and that in case of a Siege, the King may order
whole Suburbs to be burnt down for the security of the Town: And whence is this
power, save from that Paramount and Supereminent Right that the King has over
all private Estates, for the good of the whole Society and Kingdom? Nor can it
be denied, but that the King may in time of War, Quarter freely; and it is in
his power to declare War, when, or where he pleases: Nor do the former Statutes
contradict this, for they exclude not Necessity that has no Law, and is it self
that Law which gave David right to eat the Shewbread, and the Christian
Emperors, right to sell the Goods of the Church for maintaining their Armies,
with consent of the Primitive Fathers; and this is so necessarily inherent in
all administration, that the very Master of a Ship has power to throw overboard
the Goods of Passengers and Merchants in a storm, for the preservation of the
Ship: And they are not enemies to the King only, but to themselves, who would
deny the King this power.

The third Classis of Arguments that I am to use against these Principles,
shall be from Reason, and Experience to fortify and corroborate our positive
Law, and the nature of our Monarchy; for since humane Reason it self is liable
to so many Errors; and since men when they differ, are so wedded to their own
Sentiments, that few are so wise as to see their own mistakes, or so ingenuous
as to confess them, when they see them: Therefore Prudence and Necessity have
obliged men to end all Debates by making Laws: and it is very great vanity and
insolence in any private men, to justify their own private Sense against the
public Laws; that is to say, the Authoritative Sentiments, and the legal Sense
of the Nation.

If we were then to Establish a new Monarchy, were it not prudent and
reasonable, for us to consider what were the first Motives which induced our
Predecessors to a Monarchy; and Boethius and Lesly both tell us, That lest they
might be distracted by obeying too many, it was therefore fit to submit to one;
if then this Reason was of force at first to make us submit to a Monarchy, it
should still prevail with us to obey that Monarchy, and not gape idely after
every new Model: Ne multos Reges sibi viderentur creare, summam rerum aut
optimatibus, aut ipsi multitudini permittere aspernabantur, says Boethius,
fol. 6 Here the advantages of being governed by Aristocracie, or Democracie,
were expressly considered and rejected; so that we have our Predecessors choice,
founded on their way of Reasoning, added to the Authority of our Law; and after
we their Successors, had seen the mischiefs arising from the pretenses of
Liberty and Property, with all the advantages that seeming Devotion could add
to these. Our Representatives, after two thousand years experience, and after a
fresh Idaea of a long Civil War, wherein the Arguments and Reasons produced by
Buchannan, were fortified and seconded by thousands of Debates: They did by
many passionate Confessions, and positive Laws acknowledge, That the present
Constitution of our Monarchy, is most excellent, Act 1 Par. 1. Char. 2. That
inevitable prejudices and miseries do accompany the invading the Royal
Prerogative, Act 4. That all the troubles and miseries they had suffered, had
sprung from these Invasions, Act 11. That all the bondage they had groaned
under, was occasioned by these Distractions, Act 2. Par. Sess. 2. Chapter 2. So
that we have here also a Series of Parliaments, attesting the reasonableness of
the Constitution of our Monarchy, and His Majesty's Prerogatives.

2. We must not conclude any thing unreasonable, or unfit, because there are
some inconveniences in it; for all humane Constitutions have their own
defects. But I dare say, the Principles of my Adversaries have more than mine;
for Commonwealths are not only subject to err, because they have their passions
as well as Kings, but they are subject to more passions: for,

1. They who Govern in Commonwealths and Aristocracies, have Rivals whom they
fear, and against whom, upon that account, they bear Revenge, which Kings want.

2. They are not so much concerned in those they Govern as Kings; the one
considering the common Interest, as a Tenant does Lands of which he takes his
present advantage, though he should destroy it; the other caring for it, as a
Proprietor does for his own Ground; the one Jading it, as a Man does a hired
Horse; the other using it as a Man does his own.

3. The People are ordinarily Governed by those who are the worst of men; for
these ordinarily can flatter and cheat most, and can best use the Hypocrites
Vizor: Whereas the best Men ordinarily are abstemious, modest, and love a
private Life, and were there ever such Villains as those Rebels who Governed
us in the last Age? And can we deny but our pretenders to Liberty and Property
in this Age are the Cheats of the Nation? Who, to be in Employment, hate such
as are in it, or are such as are discontented for being put out of it, or are
Bankrupts, who resolve to make up their broken Fortunes by it.

4. Even good Men when they are raised to Govern, grow Insolent, of which
Princes are not capable, for they are still the same, and their Passions do not
rise because their fortunes do not.

5. Kings and Princes know they will be Charged with what they do; but the
multitude knows, that the Public in general, and not any one Man will be
blamed: and so every private Man thinks himself secure, whilst he shifts it
over on another; or else lessens it, by dividing it amongst many.

6. The multitude are very subject to Factions, most Men scorning to obey their
fellow Subjects; and when they are in Factions, who knows whom to obey; and
those Factions will again subdivide in new ones, and so in infinitum; and when
either prevails, they spare none, because their Opposites are Enemies: But
Kings pity even Rebels, remembering that they are their own. And I dare say,
that more were Murdered and Ruined in one year, of the last Reforming Age,
than suffered by the great Turk, the Mogol, and the King of France in twenty
years. And more severity was exercised in one year by those Reformers, than by
all this Race of our Kings these 600 years.

7. If it be said, That Kings have ill Ministers, so have Commonwealths; and
we observed in Scotland, that after we had taken from our King the Prerogative
of choosing Judges and Counselors, our Parliament did the next year, choose the
greatest Block-heads, and Idiots in all the Nation, whom the Ringleaders
advanced, to the end they might Govern all themselves; to which Cheat, Kings
cannot be liable, it being their Interest to have able Ministers. And whereas
Kings have no Interest to prefer one to another: yet in Popular Governments,
every one endeavoures to prefer his own Relations.

8. In difficult Cases, haste and expedition requires, that one should be
trusted: and even the Romans behoved in great dangers, to employ a Dictator,
who was accountable to no man for any thing he did.

9. There can be no Secrecy in Popular Governments, as in Monarchy, and what
many must know, all may.

10. Enemies may always get some in popular Governments to side with them, and
upon specious pretexts, to retard all good Designs; and when popular men are
Debating for shadows, the occasion slips away irrecoverably.

11. Either Commonwealths employ no extraordinary persons, being ever jealous:
or if any man become such by great Actions, or long Experience, he is presently
ruined. If we consider the severity of Venice against their Nobles, and their
executing Men without citing or hearing them, and that upon mere jealousies, we
must confess with a wise Spaniard, who has collected the arbitrary courses
practiced and allowed in that State, that there is less liberty there, than
under the worst of Monarchies; nor was ever any people so miserable as Rome,
during their Republic, having been ruined in every age with Civil Wars, and
having had no great man, who died not miserably, after many false and popular
Accusations; nor find we amongst the many Grecian Heroes in Cornelius Nepos,
that two escaped the peoples fury: and did not De Wit find little of that
Justice which he magnified in Republics?

But whatever may be said against the inconveniences arising from the passions,
humors, and insolences of the Populace in Commonwealths, yet much more may be
said against the allowing that Prerogative to them under a Monarchy; for that
were to distract for ever the Government betwixt two contradictory Supreme
Powers, and make the People miserable in not knowing whom to obey when they
differ, and to make Government, which should defend them a against a Civil War,
become the cause of it; for how can it be in reason expected, but (if the
People know they can control the King, that ambitious, and discontented
Ringleaders, or ignorant and bigoted Multitudes, will be always endeavoring
to use this their Prerogative, since it seems always glorious, and oft-times
advantageous to oppose Kings; whereas on the other hand Kings cannot but be
always jealous of, and fear popular Invasions, and both these Powers, shall
like Neighboring Princes, be always endeavoring to gain advantages upon one
another, and in these Contests shall be spent all the time and pains that
should be bestowed in resisting the Common Enemy, which cannot but very much
lessen the Love which Princes ought to have for their People, and the Respect
which People ought to have for their Prince; and how can it be imagined, but
that in this case the People shall always groan under greater misfortunes than
those which we felt betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol, and those which our
Neighbors felt in the Contest between the Houses of Lancaster and York. All
which cannot but appear very probable, as well as dreadful to those who
consider the late Rebellion, wherein the People pretending that the King had
violated their Liberties, they murdered and pillaged all such as were not of
their Opinion, and after they had ^uin'd their Prince, the People divided and
fought one against another, the greater part pretending they ought to be
obeyed, because of their numbers, and the lesser pretending that they were the
sounder part, and had the better Cause, and it is impossible in such a case to
find a Judge of Controversies. Which is another unanswerable Argument against
the Peoples Supremacy, by which all they can gain is an endless Liberty of
ruining one another without hope of Redress. Nor can Parliaments remedy this,
for we have seen opposite Parliaments sitting at the same time forfeiting one
another, whilst the astonished multitude stood at a Gaze, not knowing whom to
obey, and praying that God would Re-establish our lawful Monarchy, with which,
when it was Miraculously Restored, they were so overjoyed as men are when they
are freed from the Galleys, in which they had been treated as Slaves.

And whereas these Republicans pretend that the King is but a Physician, this
shows that they design to have no King, for any man may lawfully change his
Physician, and Buchannan's laying so much weight on this Argument, makes me
suspect much his honesty, for no man can have so mean an opinion of his Sense.
And his comparing the Monarch to a Tutor, is very extravagant; for no man is
sworn to have such a man's Heirs for Tutors: the one is chosen by God, the other
by the Patient; the one has a right by Law that is unalterable, the others
employment, is merely precarious. But though he were a Tutor, no man can remove
his Tutor at pleasure, as they say the People may remove their King. Nor is a
Tutor to be laid aside, but by an Action before a Superior Judge, wherein he is
to be proved to have Malversed; and therefore since there is no Superior Judge
except God, and that the People are not his Superiors, it clearly follows that
the People cannot lay aside their King: Only I join so far with Buchannan in
those Rhetorical expressions, that I really think the Multitude is always so
mad, that they need a King to be their Physician, and of so weak a Judgment
like Minors, that they need him for a Tutor, and without his assistance and
protection every hypocritical Bigot, and ambitious Usurper would cheat them at
his pleasure, and make them not only a prey, but but a Tool in their own Slavery

Nor is their any force in that Argument, The King was made for the People, and
not the People for the King; and therefore the People are nobler than the King,
and ought to be preferred to Him. For to this it is answered, that,

1. The Question here is not, who is more preferable, but who is the Superior?
And though one good Christian be preferable to a thousand, who are not so, yet
his Interest in the Commonwealth is not preferable; the wiser part is still
preferable to the greater part: and yet the greater will overruled the wiser. A
Shepherd is ordained for the Flock; and yet it cannot be concluded, that a
Flock of Brutes is to be preferred to any reasonable Creature.

2. The Kings Interest and the Peoples are inseparable in the Construction of
Law, which presumes, That what the King does He does for the People, and there
is none above the King, that can Judge Him, if He does otherwise.

3. Whether the Kings Power be derived from God, or from the People? yet if it
be derived from God, it is preferable, because of Gods Ordinance: Or if from
the People, it is preferable, because they, by Electing Him King, have
consented that it should be so; and they having Trusted Him with the public
Interest, the public Interest is still preferable. I know that Buchannan and
others, value themselves much upon the Instance of the Bruce and Baliol, in
which the people did Declare, That they preferred the Bruce, because the Baliol
had enslaved the Kingdom to the English. And it is generally urged, That all
Lawyers are clear, that if a King alienate His Kingdom, His people may disclaim
Him. But my answers are, That if a King will alienate His Kingdom, the Subjects
are free in that case (if at all) not by their power to reassume their first
Liberty; but because the King will not continue King, and they are free by his
Deed, but not by their own Right. 2. Even in that case, Lawyers do irritate and
annul the Deed; but dissolve not the Contraveeners Right. And as to that
particular Instance, it is well known, that King Robert the First, or the
Bruce, as we call him, was desirous that the Parliament should threaten to
choose another; if He submitted his Interest to the Popes Decision, who
pretended then to be the Supreme Judge, over all Kings. But though the Bruce,
to please the people, should have shunned to quarrel with what they did in such
a Juncture; yet that could not wrong the Monarchy, nor His Successors, as shall
be proved.

Having thus cleared, that the Kings power is not derived from the people, even
though they had Elected Him, and that He is an absolute King, both by our Laws,
and the Nature of our Monarchy; and that all this is most consistent with right
Reason, I come now to draw some Conclusions from these Principles.

The first Conclusion shall be, That our Parliaments are not coordinate with
our Kings, in the Legislative Power; but that the Legislative and
Architectonick Power of making Laws (as Lawyers term it) does solely reside in
the King, the Estates of Parliament only consenting, which will further appear
by these Reasons.

1. It cannot be denied, but we had Kings long ere we had Parliaments (we never
having had any Parliaments till King Kenneth the Thirds Time, Anno Dom. 988.
according to the Computation of the severest Re-publicans themselves; for till
then, we read only of the Proceres Regni, or the Nobility, or Chiefs of Clanes,
and Heads of Families, who assembled upon all occasions, to give the King
advice) and therefore our Parliaments cannot pretend that they were designed as
a Coordinate power with the King, while he did what was right; much less to be
his Judge, when he did what was wrong.

2. That our Kings made Laws of old without any consent, and that these were
submitted to by the people, is clear, not only from our Histories, which do
tell us, that such Kings made such Laws, without speaking any thing of either
Nobility, People or Parliament, but even from our old Books of Statutes,
wherein there is no mention made of the consent of either the Nobility or
Parliament: The Laws at that time beginning simply, The Kings Statutes, as in
all the Statutes of King William, King Alexander the Second, and in the
Statutes of King Malcolm Canmore: King David the First, and King David the
Second, where there is not so much as mention made of the Nobility, or the
Parliament, in the very beginning of the Statutes, and that at other times the
Nobility were only called, and that only the Nobility did sit, is very clear
from the Inscriptions of those Parliaments, such as in the Parliament of King
Alexander the Second, which bears, to have been made with the common consent of
the Nobility, cum communi consensu Comitum suorum, without speaking of any
other State. Nor do I find a word of Burgesses, till the Parliament of King
Robert the Third, in 1400. and even according to this late Constitution, it is
undeniable that the Parliament have not even an equal power with the King, much
less a power above him.

3. How can that Judicature have a Coordinate power with the King, when no man
can sit in it but by a privilege from the King? but so it is, that all that
are Members of Parliament, sit there by a special privilege from the King, and
there is nothing considered to capacitate them to sit, but the Force and Energy
of that Privilege, without respect, either to what Land they possess, or what
number of People they represent. And thus the Nobility and Bishops, sit there,
by virtue of the Kings Creation; and the King may Create a hundred Noblemen
that morning that the Parliament is to sit, though none of all the hundred have
one foot of Land in Scotland; and though the Knights Barons must have some
Land, else they cannot Represent any Shire; yet though a Gentleman had 5000.
pounds Sterling a year, he could not sit there, except he be the Kings
immediate Vassal, and hold his Lands of His Majesty in capite: So that he sits
not by virtue of his Land, but as Capacitated by the King. And though those who
Represent the Burrows Royal are Commissionated by the people of their Burghs;
yet the people who send them, are not considered in that Commission, but the
Power only which the King gives them to send: For though a Town had a hundred
thousand Inhabitants, and another only twenty Inhabitants: yet these hundred
thousand could not be Represented in Parliament, except the King had erected
their Town into a Burgh Royal, From which I evince two things. 1. That the
Parliament is the Kings Council, in which he may call any He pleases, and not
as the peoples Representatives only, since there are great multitudes in the
Nation, Represented by none there: For though they Represent their Constituents
in Parliament, yet the power of sending Representatives, is derived from the
King Originally, and flows not from any proper Right inherent in those whose
Representatives they are. 2. That Judicature cannot have a Coordinate power
with the King, which he needs not call unless He pleases; and which he can
dissolve when He pleases: and in which, when they are assembled, He has a
Negative Voice, by which He can stop all their Proposals and Designs; For, if
they were Coordinate with the King, then par in parem non habet imperium; and
it is against common Sense to think that these two can be equal, since the
Power of the one flows from the other: By which is likewise clear, that the
great principle laid down by Buchannan, viz. That the King is Singulis Major,
Vniversis Minor, greater than any one, but less than the collective Body of the
Parliament taken together, is absolutely false; because he has a Negative Voice
over that collective Body, and as they cannot Meet without him, so he can
dissolve them when he pleases, and I confess it seems to me unintelligible how
they can be greater than the King, by virtue of a power which they derive from
the King.

4. The Parliament is called the Kings Council, as is clear from the
Inscriptions of all our old Parliaments.

Thus the Statutes of Alexander the Second begin, Alexander, By the Grace of
God, King of Scots, did by the Common Council of his Earls Decree, etc.

The Statutes of King Robert the First, bear, to be by the Common Council of
his Prelates, etc.

The first Statute of King Robert the Second, bears, that none who is elected
to be of the Kings Council, shall bring another to it who is not elected.

The 8. and 13. Parliaments of King James the First, and the 2. 3, 4. and 7. of
King James the Second, bear for inscriptions, The Parliament or general Council
of such Kings. And the first Act of that 8. Parliament of King James the first,
Bears, Quo Die Dominus Rex deliberatione and consensu totius Concilii, etc. And
it is against Sense, to think that any man's Counsel can have Authority over
him, for, as we say, Counsel is no Command.

5. The Parliament was but the Kings Baron Court, as is very clear to any man
who will read the old Registers of Parliament, in which he will see that the
Parliament was assembled, and the Suits were called, and Absents Outlawed as in
other Baron Courts, whereof many public Records are extant, and I shall only
set down that of the 8. Parliament Ja. 1. The words of which Inscription are,
In the eighth Parliament, or General Council of the Illustrious Prince James,
by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, holden at Perth, and begun, ratified and
approved by the three States of the Kingdom, as sufficiently and rightly
summoned, the twelfth day of July, in the year of our Lord, one thousand four
hundred and twenty eight, continued from Time to Time; the Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and all Freeholders, which hold in Chief of our said
Lord the King, and certain Burgesses of every Burrow of the Kingdom being
summoned and called in due and wonted manner; all those assembling that ought,
would and might be concerned; but some were absent, some of which were lawfully
excused, others absenting themselves through Obstinacy, whose Names appear in
the Rolls of the Suits, were every one of them amerc'd ten pounds for his
Contumacy. And that the King was Judge what Barons should come to the
Parliament, is most clear by the 75. Act Par. 14. Ja. 2. whereby it is
declared, No Freeholder under the sum of twenty pounds shall come, except he
be specially called by the King, either by his Officer, or by Writ; and though
afterward the King allowed two Barons of every Shire, to be sent to represent
all the Barons for saving Expenses, yet even after that Concession, it is
declared by the 78. Act Par. 6. Ja. 4. That no Freeholder be compelled to come,
except our Sovereign Lord writ specially for them.

It being thus clear, that the Parliament is the Kings Baron Court, it seems a
wonder to me how it could have entered into the heart of any sober man to think
that any man's Baron Court, and much less the Kings Baron Court, should have
power and jurisdiction over him, and that it should be lawful to them, as
Buchannan and these other Authors assert to punish him, or lay him aside, all
which Assertions are equally impious and illegal.

6. When the King resolves to lessen any way his own Power, this is not done by
the Authority of the three Estates, as certainly it would be, if they had the
power to lessen his Authority, but the King does the same from his own proper
Motive, as when the King binds up his own Hands form granting Remissions in
cases of forethought Felony, Ja. 4. Par. 6. Act 63. And when an Act was to be
made, forbiding the Lords of the Session to admit of private Writings from the
King to stop the procedure of Justice, this is not Enacted by the three
Estates, but only by the King, and is founded upon the Kings own promise, Act
92. Par. 6. Ja. 6. And in all Acts of Parliament the King only Statutes as
Legislator, and the Parliament only Advise and Consent, which shows that they
are not Coordinate with the King, as is asserted by Buchannan and others, much
less above him. And the Acts of Parliament in the late Rebellion having run
thus, Our Sovereign Lord, and the three Estates; contrary to the Tenor of all
the Laws that ever were made in Scotland. The Parliament returning to their
duty, ordained that Style to be altered, and to bear as formerly, Our Sovereign
Lord, with Advice and Consent, etc.

But lastly, what advantage can the people have by placing their security in
the Parliament, since they are so liable to Passions, Errors, and
Extravagancies, as well as Kings are, and have, if Buchannan be believed,
betrayed the interest of the Kingdom, since King Kenneth the Seconds time, now
above 700. years; and they are ordinarily led by some pragmatical Ringleaders,
who have not that kindness or interest to preserve the Kingdom that Kings have:
and since the King may make so many Noblemen and Burghs Royal at pleasure, by
whose Votes he may still prevail, what security can we have by giving them a
power above the King, or how can they have it?

From all which it may clearly appear, that we have had Kings long ere we had
Parliaments, and that the Parliaments derive their power from the King; and
that at first our King only called the Heads of Families, and his own Officers,
as his Council, with whom he consulted, without any necessity to call any
others than he pleased, there being no Law, Article, nor Capitulation obliging
him from the beginning thereunto: And our Kings were so far from having
Parliaments associated with them in their Empire, that there is no mention at
all of them, or of any condition relating to them in the first Institution of
our Kings above related; nor were there any Parliaments in being at that time.
But after the Feudal Law came to be in vigor, then our Kings looking upon the
whole Kingdom as their own in property, King Malcolme Canmore did distribute
all the Land of Scotland amongst his Subjects, as his Liege-men, which is clear
by the first Chapter of his Laws; and according to the Feudal Law, all the
Vassals of our Kings compeared in their Head-Court, and therein consulted what
was fit for the Kingdom; but thereafter the way of making War, requiring Money,
and Property belonging to the Subject, as Government did to the King, it was
necessary to have their consent for raising Money: And from this did arise the
inserting the advice and consent of the three Estates in our Acts of Parliament.

From this also it is very clear that their opinion is very unsolid and ill
founded, who think that Kings can do nothing without a special Act of
Parliament, even in matters of Government. As for instance, that he cannot
restrain the License of the Press, or require his Subjects to take an
Engagement for securing the Peace; for these and the like being things which
relate immediately to Government, the King has as much right to regulate these,
as we have to regulate and dispose of our Property, Government being the Kings
Property.

2. Though the Monarchy had been derived from the People, yet as soon as our
Kings got the Monarchy, they got ever thing that was necessary for the
Aministration of it, which as it is common sense and reason, so it is founded
upon that most wise and just Maxim in Law, Quando aliquid conceditur, omnia
Concessa videntur, sine quibus concessum explicari nequit.

3. I desire to know where there is yet a Law giving the King a Negative voice,
a power of Erecting Incorporations, or a power to grant Remissions for Crimes,
or Protections for Civil Debts, and yet the people is far more concerned in
these; and the King's having power to do these, and a thousand other things,
does rather oblige and warrant me to lay down a general Rule, that the Kings of
Scotland can do every thing that relates to Government, and is necessary for
the administration thereof, though there be no special Law or Act of Parliament
for it, if the same be not contrary to the Law of God, Nature or Nations.

The second Conclusion that we draw from these former Principles, is that
Princes cannot be punished by their own Subjects, as Buchannan and our
Republicans do assert, which is most clear by the former Laws, wherein it is
declared, That the King is a Sovereign and absolute Prince, and deriving his
power from God Almighty, that it is Treason to endeavor to depose, or suspend
the King. Wherein our Law is founded on the nature of Monarchy; for if he be
Supreme, He cannot be judged; for no man is judged but by his Superior, and
that which is Supreme can have no Superior: and on the Principles of the Law of
Nature and Nations, because says the Law, No man can be both the Person who
Judges, and the Person Judged; and it is still the King who Judges, since all
other Judges do represent him, and derive their power from him, Ipse se praetor
cogere non potest, quia triplici officio fungi nequit suspectum dicentis, and
coacti, and cogentis L. Ille a quo ff. ad Trebell. It is a prnciple in all Law,
that Jurisdiction and all other Mandats cease with the power that granted it,
and therefore as they acknowledge that a King cannot be cited till he have
forfeited His just Right, so as soon as he has forfeited it, all the power of
the ordinary Judges in the Nation falls, and becomes extinct, and no other
Judge can Judge Him, because no other Judge can sit by virtue of any other
Authority, till it be known that he has forfeited his, and that cannot be till
the event of the Process; and if the People be Judges, yet they cannot assume
the Government till the King has forfeited it: And why also should they be
Judges, who have neither knowledge nor moderation, who are acted by humor, and
delight in insolence? and how shall they meet? Or who shall call them? Nor can
the Parliament Judge them, because they derive their Right from the King, as
shall be proved: And though they were equal, yet no equal can Judge another,
par in parem non habet Imperium, nemo sibi Imperare potest. No man can command
himself, l. si de re sua ff. de recept. Arbitr. Nemo sibi legem imponere.
potest. l. quid autem ff. de denat. inter. virum and uxorem, and therefore the
Civil Law which is ours by Adoption, does positively assert, That Princeps
legibus solutus est, the King is liable to no Law, l. princeps, ff. de legibus:
For though He be liable to the Directive Force of the Law, that is to say, He
ought to be Governed by it as his Director: Yet He is not liable to the
Coercive Force of the Law, as all Lawyers that are indifferent do assert,
Harmenpol. l. 1. tit. 1. Sect. 48. (...). The King is not Subject to the Law,
because offending against it, he is not punished, vid. Granswinkell. cap. 6.
Arnis. cap. Francisc. a victoria Relect. 3. number. 4. Ziegler. de jur. Majes.
cap. 1. number. 12. with whom the Fathers also agree, Ambros. in Apol. David cap.
4. Liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum, neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur
legibus, tuti Imperii potestate Isiodorus 3. sent. cap 31. populi peccantes
Judicem metuunt, Reges autem solo Dei timore; metuque gehennae coercentur: and
in this Sense, they take these words, Psalm. 51. -- Against thee, thee only have
I sinned; and I was glad to find in Bishop Vshers Power of Princes, amongst
many other Citations, That the Rabbis, and particularly Rabbi Jeremiah owned,
that no Creature may Judge the King, but the Holy and Blessed God alone, in
which also Heathens agree with Jews and Christians, E^phantas the Pythagorean
makes it the Privilege of God, and then of the King, to be Judged by none,
Stobeus Sermon 46. and Dion in Marco Aurelio tells us, That it is certain, free
Monarchs cannot be Judged, save by God alone, and if it were otherwise, we
should see them very unsecure, for the ambition and avarice of insolent
Subjects should never or seldom miss to form their Process, and why should
Parties be Judges? But to demonstrate the Justice which Kings and Princes are
to expect from the Populace and Mobile, let us remember their Material Justice,
in the usage of our Savior, when they cried, Crucify him, Crucify him; their
Sentence against King CHARLES the Martyr, when they were at the height of their
pretensions to Piety, and a public Spirit; their usage of De Wit, the
Idolizer of them, and their Commonwealth: and if we want a true Idea of their
Form of Process, we will find it in their usage of the Archbishop of St.
Andrews and others, no Enditement, no Citation, no Defenses, no Sentences, no
time to prepare to die: and yet all this are the Dictates of pure and devout
public Spirits. Buchannan's Bloody Arguments for this position are, That
Tyrants have been Murdered with Applause, and Princes would become licentious,
if they were not Restrained, by the just fear of being called to an account:
That the Roman and Venetian Magistrates have been punished by the people, and
that the ordinary Judges of the place have Judged them: and that some of our
Kings, as well as those of other Nations, have been punished as Tyrants.

To which I answer shortly, that Inconveniences must not prevail with us to
break our Oaths, and overturn our Laws, for nothing has so great inconveniency
in it as this has, these being but partial and this a total Inconveniency. And
the English Lawyers agree, that a mischief is better than an Inconveniency, and
this should have been considered, before we swore to Monarchy: and if the
People were Electors, as, they never were; yet they should have reserved this
Power, or else they cannot now challenge it. But though our Law were not clear,
at it is most uncontroverted upon this point: Yet right Reason should persuade
us to have reserved no such Power: For as Kings may err, so may the Judges who
are to Try them: and it is more probable their Tryers will, because they may be
acted by Revenge, Ambition, or Popularity; and there is nothing so liable to
err as the Populace.

The Romans and Venetians might have punished their Magistrates, because these
Magistrates were not Vested with a Supreme Power; nor were they Sovereigns as
our Monarchs are. And those Judges who Tried them, derived not their Power from
those Magistrates whom they Tried, as our Judges do; for the same consent, and
compact by which they were made the Chief, the others were made also
Magistrates, which cannot be said of Absolute Monarchs, who derive not their
Power from the People as these do, and the Instances of Kings who have been
Murdered, are Crimes in them, who did commit them, and so should not be Rules
to us and many of the best of Kings have been worst used. But who can escape by
innocence when King CHARLES the Martyr fell by Malice? Such also as cry up the
Murderers of Tyrants, who had no just Right, never meant to allow the
Arraignment of lawful Monarchs, who, when they err, have God only for their
Judge; and if they fear not Him, and eternal Punishment, they will not probably
fear mortal Men, and their own Subjects whom they can many ways escape.

2. There is no Creature so unreasonable, but he will use his own with
discretion, though there be no Law obliging him to it, nor Punishment to be
inflicted, if he do otherways: who burns his own House, or drowns his Lands,
though he may do it? For the Law considers, that a King is either mad, and if
so, he will respect no Law, and should not be punished, at least he will not
stand in awe for fear of it, or else he is of a sound Judgment, and then he
needs no Law; and therefore, Why should we apprehend that a King will destroy
His own Kingdom?

3. A King is also obliged by His Fame, to do things worthy of His high Trust,
and things able to abide that conspicuous light to which he is exposed.

4. Though his People ought not to rebel, yet no thinking man can be sure that
they will not. And therefore even the greatest Tyrants fear such Accidents,
though they know they are not bound by those Laws, that tie Subjects. And if
all these fail, yet we must reverence God's Dispensations, and expect a redress
of these unusual Emergencies from his Divine Goodness, for whose sake we suffer
them; rather then expose all to ruin, by endeavoring a revenge, that may be
so unjust, in the preparative, and dangerous in the event.

Doleman does here urge, that although the People have conferred upon the King,
the Power and Jurisdiction which naturally resided in them, yet they have not
so delegated that Power, as to divest themselves of all Jurisdiction
privatively, so that they still retain a cumulative Jurisdiction, by which, in
case of necessity, they may judge the King, and all other Delinquents. To which
my Answers are. 1. It is fully proved, that the King derives not his Power from
the People, and so they connot retain that Power which they never had. 2. A
Cumulative Jurisdiction, is only granted to those who cannot divest themselves
of the Power they give, because Supreme Power is essential to their Character,
and therefore, though a King retain a Cumulative jurisdiction, when he
delegates his Power to a Subject, it cannot at all be inferred, that therefore
the People retains the same, when they transfer, all their Power upon the King;
for the one designs to make a King, who is to be Supreme; and the other designs
to gratify a Person, who is to remain still a Subject. Populus jus omne in
Caesarem transfert, and qui totum dicit nihil excipit. The People may be a
People without a Cumulative Power, or without being Supreme, but a King cannot;
and I admire, why Doleman, who compares always the King to the Husband, and the
Commonwealth to the Wife; the King to the Head, and the Commonwealth to the
Body, can think, that it is Lawful for the People to judge and punish their
King, since it is not lawful for the Wife to judge her Husband, or for the Body
to cut off the Head.

The 3. Conclusion which I shall draw from the former Principles, shall be,
That as it is not lawful for Subjects to punish their Kings, so neither is it
to rise in Arms against them, upon what pretext soever, no not to defend their
Liberty nor Religion. Which Conclusion also I shall endeavor to Establish on
sure foundations of Positive Law. Reason, Experience, and Scripture. As to our
Positive Law, it is clear, for by the 3. Act Par. 1. Ja. 1. It is declared
Rebellion to rise in Arms against the Kings Person: And by the 14. Act 6. Par.
King Ja. 2. It is Treason to Rebel against the Kings Person or Authority: By
the 25. Act Par. 6. Ja. 2. It is Treason to rise in fear of War against the
Kings Person or his Majesty, or to lay hands upon his Person violently,
whatever age they be of, or to help or supply those who commit Treason. By the
131. Act 8. Par. Ja. 6. All the Subjects are forbid to Convocate for holding of
Councils or other Assemblies without his Majesty's express Warrant; and by the
12. Act 10. Par. King Ja. 6. The entering into Leagues or Bonds without his
Majesty's special Command is declared to be Sedition. Most of which Acts are
prior to Buchannans time, and consequently he was very inexcusable in advancing
this Rebellious Principle. And these Laws having excepted no case, exclude all
cases and pretexts of rising in Arms against the Lawful Monarch; but our
unhappy Countrymen having by a long and open Rebellion, opposed the most
devout, and most just of all Kings, upon the false pretense of Liberty, and
Religion, the Parliament of this Kingdom, from a full Conviction of the
Villainies of those times, and to prevent such dangerous Cheats for the future,
they did by the 5. Act, Par. 1. Char. 2. declare it to be Treason for any
number of his Majesty's Subjects to rise in Arms upon any pretense whatsoever,
and to show that all such Glosses as were used by Buchannan were absurd, and
did not make void the first Laws, though general, the Parliament did by the 4.
Act of that 1. Parliament declare that any Explanation or Gloss, that during
the late Troubles has been put upon these Acts, as that they are not to be
extended against any Leagues, Councils, Conventions, Assemblies, or Meetings,
made, holden, or kept by the Subjects, for Preservation of the Kings Majesty,
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, or for the public Good
either of Church or Kingdom, are false and Disloyal, and contrary to the true
and genuine meaning of these Acts. Which Statute is a clear decision against
Buchannan, finding that the Statutes that were prior to his time, and all other
such general Statutes made in favors of the King, did formerly strike against
his Principles and Distinctions. As also to preclude all avenues to Rebellion
by teaching, defending, or encouraging others to Rebel upon these pretexts, as
the former Act declared, that actual rising in Arms was Rebellion. So by the 2.
Act Sess. 2. Par. 2. Charles 2. It is declared Treason for any Subject to
maintain these Positions, viz. That it is Lawful for Subjects upon Pretense of
Reformation or any other Pretense whatsoever to enter into Leagues, or
Covenants, or to take up Arms against the King, or any Commissionated by him.

2. All the Arguments formerly produced against the power of the Subject to
punish His Person, do fully prove likewise that they have no power to rise in
Arms against him. For either the collective Body of the Subjects are superior
to him, and if so, they may not only rise up in Arms against him, but they may
punish him; but if the King be superior to them, as has been formerly proved,
then it cannot be lawful for Subjects to rise up in Arms against him, no more
than it is to punish his Person. Nor can I see how all such as declare for a
Defensive War, are not to be concluded guilty of designing to murder the King;
for if the King come in Person to defend His own Right, as certainly he will,
and must; Can it be thought they will shoot at none, lest they kill him? and if
they shoot, how can they secure His Sacred Person? and if they kill him in the
Field, are they less guilty of his murder, than those Ruffians who lately
designed it? Or does it lessen the Guilt that these designed to kill him alone
privately? whereas our moderate men will in face of the Sun, and with displayed
Banners against God and him, kill with him all such, as being persuaded that
they are obliged before God to assist him, expose their lives for their Duty.

3. That dangerous, though specious Principle of defensive Arms, is
inconsistent with that order of Nature which God has established, and which is
absolutely necessary amongst all other humane Relations; and by the same
Analogy, by which we allow Subjects to rise against their Prince, we may much
more allow Children to rise against their Parents, Servants against their
Masters, Soldiers against their Officers, and the Rabble against their
Magistrates: for the King does eminently comprehend all these relations in his
Sovereignty, as inferior Branches of that Paramount, Monarchial power. And
what a glorious state should Mankind be left in, if Anarchy were thus
Established, and every man should be invested with power to be his own Judge?
Or dares any reasonable man assert, that this is fit to be allowed in the
present condition of Mankind; for since the generality of men can scarce be
contained in their Duty by the severest Laws that can be made, what can be
expected from them, when they are loosed from all Law, and are encouraged to
transgress against it?

If the Multitude could prove that they were Infallible, and that no Oppression
could be expected from them, something might be said, why we might balance
them with Authority. But since both Reason and doleful Experience, teach us,
that generally the Multitude consists of Knaves and Fools, who alter not to the
better by Conspiring together, nor become juster, for being led by such
ambitious, and discontented Spirits, as ordinarily lead on Rebellions, it is
safer to obey those of the two fallible Governors, whom God has set over us,
and whom the Law ties us to obey, and to whom also we are bound by the Oath of
Allegiance; especially seeing thus we may probably expect, that they will be
more careful of us, as being their own, than mere Strangers, who use us only
for their own Ends. And at the worst in the King, we can have but an ill
Master; whereas in allowing Subjects to usurp, we may fight to get our selves
hundreds of Tyrants, and these too fighting one against another, so that we
shall not even know which of these Divils to obey.

4. This Position is against the very Nature, not only of Monarchy, but of all
Governments; For who will obey when they may resist? And who can be Judges
whether the pretenses upon which Arms are taken, be lawful, or not? And
therefore since it is unlawful for Subjects to take up even Defensive Arms,
until it be found that the King against whom these Defensive Arms are taken up,
be a Tyrant, and an Oppressor: It clearly follows, that these Subjects must
first have a Power to judge, and find that the King has erred, which is to
declare the People to be Judges of their King; and we may be soon convinced
that this Principle is against the Nature of all Government, if we consider
that if it were lawful for Subjects with us to rise against the King, it should
be lawful for those in a Commonwealth, or Aristocracie, to rise against their
Governors, since these may err as well as Kings do; and if this were allowed,
all Nations should always have one Rebellion rising out of the Ashes of
another, for only they who prevailed should be satisfied, and all the rest
would certainly conclude that they might more justly oppose these Usurpers, one
or more, then the first did their lawful Prince; and thus Government which is
designed for the security of the State, should run in a Circle fixed upon no
certain Bafis, and determined by no sure Measures.

5. This Principle is dangerous for the Subjects, as well as for the King and
other Governors; for if Kings be persuaded that Subjects think this Opposition
lawful, then they will be still jealous of them, and will be necessitated on
all occasions to secure against such Oppositions, and so this Doctrine tends
more to make our King a Tyrant, than to make us free. And if the difference
betwixt King and People, should draw both to Arms, where can we find a Judge,
to whom both Parties will submit? So that to allow this power in the People to
debate, is to allow a difference that can never end; and in that case, what
innocent man shall be able to know whom he may securely follow? And the best
Issue that could be expected from these debates, would be, that the one half of
the Nation should ruin the other: So comfortable and just is this Rebellious
Doctrine.

6. If we consult either our own Experience, or History, we will find that
these Pretenses of Liberty, and Religion, have always been used by those who
loved neither, and that they have been ordinarily used against the best of
Kings, and so prove to be mere Cheats upon their parts who use them, and
absolute Villainies, if we consider against whom they are used; and it cannot
be otherways, for the worst of men are always readiest to take Arms, and the
best of Kings are most inclined to suffer insolence to grow up by degrees to
Rebellion: And as few or none ever took up Arms against their King, in whom
even the dullest did not see other motives than a love to Liberty and Religion,
so when they who did take up Arms upon these pretenses, did succeed in their
attempts, they became themselves greater grievances to the people, than those
lawful Powers against whom they pretended to protect them: And when others rose
against them upon the same pretense, they did in the severest manner declare
that to be Rebellion in others, which they contended to be lawful in themselves.

7. So dangerous is this Principle, that it has been always used as a Tool to
promote contrary designs, and to serve the worst of men in all the opposite
sides. And thus we see that the Bigot Papists have by it overturned Thrones,
disinherited and murdered Kings. In which the most impious of their Doctors
have been admired and followed by the rigid Phanaticks, who did notwithstanding
teach, that all Papists were to be extirpated, and unquiet Spirits in the
established Republics of Rome, Venice, and Florence, have by this Principle
endeavored to overturn and disquiet as much their own Commonwealths, as our
Republicans have impiously endeavored to destroy Just Monarchy, thereby to
settle an usurping Commonwealth.

8. The only pretext that can justify the rising up in Arms, being, that it is
lawful to all Creatures to defend themselves; the pretense must be dangerous,
since its limits are uncertain: For how can Defensive Arms be distinguished
from Offensive Arms? Or whoever begun at the one, who did not proceed to the
other? Or, what Subject did ever think himself secure after he had drawn his
Sword against his King, without endeavoring to cut off by it that King against
whom he had drawn it? the hope of Absolute Power is too sweet, and the fear of
punishment too great, to be bounded, and matched by the best of Men: And how
could we expect this moderation from those who at first wanted patience to bear
the lawful Yoke of Government, but because examples convince as much as reason,
let us remember how when this Nation was very happy in the Year, 1638. under
the Government of a most Pious and Just Prince, born in our own Kingdom, we
raised an Army, and with it Invaded His Kingdom of England upon the pretense
that He was Governed by wicked Counselors, and designed to introduce Popery;
and this was justified as a Defensive War, by a long tract of General
Assemblies, and Parliaments: and if this be a Defensive War that is
justifiable, what King can be secure? Or, wherein shall we seek security
against Civil Wars? Or what can be more ridiculous than to pretend the invading
Kingdoms, murdering such as are Commissionated by the King, after that
Invasion, entering into Leagues and Covenants against him, both at home and
abroad, the robbing him of his Navies and Militia, and denying him the power to
choose his own Counselors and Judges, are merely Defensive: but God Almighty,
to teach us how dangerous these Defensive Arms are, and how impossible it is to
regulate Lawless violence, how gentle and easy soever the first beginnings
are, suffered our War, which was so much justified for being merely Defensive,
to end in the absolute overthrow of the Monarchy, and the taking away the life
of the best of Kings; and it is very remarkable, that such as have begun with
the Doctrine of giving only Passive Obedience in all things, as in refusing to
pay just Taxes, to concur in securing Rebels, etc. have from that stepped up to
defensive Arms, and from that to the power of Reforming by the Sword, and from
that to the power of Dethroning and Murdering Kings by Parliaments, and
Judicatures, and from that to the Murdering and Assassinating all who differed
from them, without any other pretense or formality whatsoever, so hard a thing
it is to stop when we begin once to fall from our Duty: And so easy a thing it
is to persuade such as have allowed themselves the first degrees of guilt, to
proceed to the highest extravagancies of Villainy.

Oh! What a blindness there is in Error? And how palpably does God desert them,
who desert their Duty; suffering them after they have done what they should
have abhorred, to proceed to do what they first abhorred really? To these I
must recommend the History of Hazael, who, when the Prophet foretold him, 2
King. 8. 12, 13. That he should slay their young men with the sword, dash their
Children, and rip up their Women with child, answered him, am I a dog, that I
should do such things? and yet he really did what he had so excerated.

The moderation likewise of these modest pretenders to Self-defence, and
Defensive Arms, will appear, by the bloody Doctrine of their great Rabbis.
Buchannan not only allows but invites Subjects to murder their King. And Lex
Rex, Page 313. tells us, That it is a sin against Gods Command to be Passively
Subject to an unjust Sentence, and that it is an Act of Grace and Virtue to
resist the Magistrate violently, when he does him wrong: and after that horrid
Civil War was ended, the Author of Nahptali does justify it, page 16, and 17,
in these words, Combinations for assistance in violent opposition of the
Magistrates, when the ends of Government are preverted (which must be referred
to the discretion of them who mind Insurrection) are necessary by the Law of
Nature, of Charity, and in order to Gods Glory, and for violation of this Duty
of delivering the oppressed from Magistrates, Judgment comes upon People. From
which he proceeds, Page 18, and 19. do assert that, not only the power of
self-defence, but vindicative, and reforming power is in any part of the
People, against the whole, and against all Magistrates, and if they use it not,
Judgment comes on (supposing their capacity probable to bear them forth) and
they shall be punished for their connivance, and not acting in way of
vindication of Crimes, and reforming Abuses.

Before I enter upon those Arguments, which the Scripture furnishes us with,
against these Rebellious Principles; I must crave leave to say,

1. That Defensive Arms seem to me very clearly inconsistent with that
Mortification, Submission, and Patience, which is recommended by our Blessed
Savior, in all the strain of the new Testament; and how will these People give
their Coat to a Stranger, or hold up their other Cheek to him, when they will
rise even in Rebellion against their Native Prince.

2. As the taking up of Arms is inconsistent with the temper required in a
Christian; so it seems a very unsuitable mean for effectuating the end, for
which it is designed, since Religion being a Conviction of what we owe to God,
how can that be commanded, which should be persuaded? and how can Arms become
Arguments? Or how can External Force influence immaterial Substances, such as
are the Souls of Men. And we may as well think to awake a man's Conscience by
Drums, or to persuade his Judgment by Muskets; and therefore the Apostle
speaks only of spiritual Arms in this our Warfare, The Sword of the Spirit, and
the Helmet of Salvation, etc. But, good God, how could the extravagancy of
forcing the Magistrate by Arms, in Defense of Religion, enter into Men's heads?
When it is unlawful even for the Magistrate himself, to force Religion by Arms.
And as Subjects should not be by the King forced to Religion; so if they use
Force against the King, the pretext of Religion, tho specious, should not
defend them. And therefore when the sons of Zebedee desired fire from Heaven,
upon those who opposed even our Savior he told them, that they knew not what
Spirit they were of.

3. It seems very derogatory to the power of Almighty God, that he should need
humane assistance, and it is a lessening of the great esteem that we ought to
have for the energy, force and reasonableness of the Christian Religion, that
it needs to be forced upon men by Arms, as if it were not able to force its own
way. This Mahomet needed for his Cheats, but our Blessed Savior needs not for
his Divine Precepts, and therefore when Peter offered to fight for him, our
Savior checked him, commanding him to put up his Sword, and to persuade him the
more effectually, assures him, That all they who take the Sword, shall perish
by it, and that his Kingdom was not of this World, and so he needed no such
worldly help, but if he pleased to call for Legions of Angels, his Omnipotent
Father would send them, and sure Angels are fitter and abler Instruments to
carry on such a work of Reformation, than Rebellious Regiments of Horse and
Dragoons.

4. Our blessed Savior foreseeing that Man's Corruption would in spite of
Christianity, prompt him to resist; he therefore did command by the Apostle
Paul, Romans 13. v. 1. and 2. Let every Soul be Subject to the higher Power, for
there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. In which Text, it is very
remarkable, that the Apostle urges this Christian duty of submission, as being
a mark of man's immediate dependence upon God, and as that, which when
contemned, brings eternal damnation. And whereas it is pretended that this Text
commands only submission to Magistrates, whilst they Act Piously, and
Virtuously, because only in so far they are Gods Vicegerents, but forbids not
resistance to their impious commands. It is answered, that the Text has no such
limitation, and we must have so much respect to the Scripture, as to think that
if God Almighty had designed to allow such an opposition, he would have
warranted it, in as clear Terms, as he commanded the submission; and the reason
why this submission is commanded, is not because the Power is rightly used, but
because the Power is ordained of God. And we see that St. Paul himself did
think that the power should be reverenced, even when abused: for when the High
Priest was Injuring him, he acknowledged that he was obliged not to speak evil
of the Rulers of his People, Acts 23. 2. And if this place of Scripture, and
the submission therein commanded, were so to be limited, we behoved likewise so
to limit the fifth Commandment, and not to honor our Parents, except when they
are Pious, nor to obey them, if they vex or trouble us; and St. Paul having
written this Epistle to those, who were then living under that monstrous
Emperor Caius, did clearly design, that the Christian Religion was to be
admired for commanding Subjects, not only to obey good Princes, but even
submitting peaceably to Tyrants. And suitable to this Doctrine are these Texts,
Heb. chapter 12. v. 9. We had Fathers of our flesh, who corrected, and chastened
us, after their own pleasure, and we gave them reverence; and lest we might
think that Text rather a Narration, than a Command, it is told us Peter 2. v.
18. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward, for this is thanks-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God do endure grief. And v. 20. If when ye do well, and
suffer for it, ye take it patiently this is acceptable to God, for even
hereunto were ye called.

Our blessed Savior's practice, did likewise agree most admirably with his
Precepts and Doctrine formerly insisted on, for though no man ever was, or can
be so much injured as his blessed self, nor could ever any defensive Arms have
been so just, as in his quarrel, yet he would not suffer a Sword to be drawn in
it, and to discourage all Christians from using Arms, he told those who were
offering to defend even himself with Arms, that whosoever should draw the
Sword, should perish by it; and it seems that God Almighty permitted Peter, to
draw his Sword at that time merely, that we might upon that occasion be for
ever detered from Defensive Arms, by this our Savior's Divine example and
reasoning.

The last Argument I shall produce, shall be from that most Christian Topic
used by St. Paul, Romans 3. 8. We should not do ill that good may come of it.

And therefore since disobedience to Magistrates, but much more to Rebel
against them, is forbid by the Laws both of God and Men: This disobedience and
opposition, cannot be justifi*d by pretending that it is designed for Reforming
the Nation. And if it be answered, That this opposition, is not in it self ill,
because the design justifies it. It is to this replied, That if this answer be
sufficient, then the former excellent Rule is of no use; for when a Servant
steals his Masters Money to give to the Poor; or a Son cuts his Fathers Throat,
because he is vicious; or when Jacques Clement Stabbed Henry the 3. and
Ravillack Henry the 4. of France, they might have alleged the same in their
own defense. Nor know we surer proof that any thing is impious, or unlawful,
then when the Laws of our Nation have forbid it as a great Crime, they being
against and contrary to no positive Law of God; but rather suitable to the
same; and owned as such by Christian Synods and Divines: there being no
necessity to enforce this going out of the Road. All which holds in this case,
nor can it be imagined how Reforming by Arms, can be thought necessary, since
God both can without a Miracle, Turn the hearts of Kings, in whose hands they
are, as Rivers of Waters. And can send devout Men to influence Kingdoms. And
should not we rather suffer Patiently as the Primitive Christians did, that his
Divine Majesty may be by our Patience prevailed upon, to Reform us now, as he
did of old our Predecessors from Paganism; by our own Kings, in a Regular way,
than upon every Notion of Bigot and Factious Ringleaders overturn all
Government, and Order, rent all Unity, and involve our Native Country in Blood
and Confusion. And whilst we are fighting for the terms of Religion, lose the
true efficacy of Piety, and Devotion: for what use can there be of Patience,
Humility, Faith and Hope; if we will presently repair our selves, submit to no
Magistracy that differs from us, and believe that Religion cannot subsist
except by us?

The Fathers also of the Primitive Church have inculcated so much this Doctrine
every where, both by their Doctrine and Practice, and both these are so fully
known, that I shall remit this point to those Learned Men who have fully
handled it. Only I must remember that excellent passage of St. Ambrose, who
being commanded to deliver up his Church to the Arians, says, Volens nunquam
deseram, coactus repugnare non novi; dolere potero, flere potero, gemere
potero; adversus arma, milites Gothos, Lachrymae meae, mea arma sunt, talia
enim sunt munimenta sacerdotis; aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere. Which
Prayers and Tears are likewise called the only Arms of the Church by the great
Nazianzen in his first Oration against Julian, and by St. Bernard in his 221.
Epistle. But more of this is to be found, Tom. 2. Council. Galliae page 533.
Where it is fully proved, that all Subjects ought humbly and faithfully to obey
the Regal Power, as being ordained by none but God with whom the wise Heathens
agree; for Marcellus Eprius (Tacit. lib. 4. hist.) prayed for good Princes, but
obeyed bad ones; and Terentius in the same Author An. lib. 6.. 3. confesses,
That the Gods had bestowed on the Emperor the sole disposal of all things,
leaving nothing to Subjects, save the honor of obedience. But because these of
that persuasion rather will believe Calvin than the Fathers, I have taken pains
to consider in him these few passages, cap. 20 lib. 4. Institut.. 27. Assumptum
in Regiam Majestatem violare nefas est, nunquam nobis seditiosae istae
cogitationes in mentem veniant tractandum esse pro meritis Regem,. 29. Personam
sustinent voluntate Domini, cui inviolabilem Majestatem ipse impressit, and
insculpsit,. 31. Privatis hominibus nullum aliud quam parendi, and patiendi
datum est mandatum. And all this Chapter does so Learnedly and judicially
impugn this Doctrine, that it is a wonder why Calvinists should differ from
Calvin.

I know that to this it may be answered, That the same Calvin does qualify his
own words, which I have cited, with this following Caution, Si qui sunt (says
he) populares Magistratus, ad moderandam Regum libidinem constituti (quales
olim erant qui Lacedemoniis regibus oppositi erant Ephori; and qua etiam forte
potestate (ut nunc res habent) funguntur in singulis regnis tres ordines; quum
primarios conventus peragunt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae, pro offico
intercedere non veto; ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and humili
plebeculae insultantibus conniveant, eorum dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non
carere affirmem; quia populi libertatem, cujus se tutores Dei ordinatione
positos norunt, fraudulenter produnt.

To which my reply is, That these words must be so constructed, as that they
may not be inconsistent with his former clear and Orthodox Doctrine, of not
resisting Supreme Powers, the former being his positive Doctrine, and this but
a supervenient Caution, and they do very well consist; for though Calvin be
very clear, that Kings cannot be resisted, yet he thinks that this is only to
be meant of those Kings who have no Superiors to check them by Law, as the
Kings of the Lacedaemonians had, who by the fundamental Constitution of their
Monarchy, might have been called to an account by the Ephori, and so in effect
were only Titular Kings: Or of such Monarchs as had only a coordinate Power
with the States of their own Kingdom; and even in these Cases, he does not
positively assert, that these Monarchs may be resisted, but does only doubt
whether if there be any such Superior or coordinate Magistrate representing
the People, they may not restrain the Rage and Licentiousness of their Kings:
But that Caution does not at all concern the Jus Regni apud Scotos, because
this cannot be said of the Kings of Great Britain, since the States of
Parliament are only called by the King, and derive their Authority from him,
and the Legislative Power is solely in the King, the States of Parliament being
only Consenters, he, not they, can only make Peace and War, and grant
Remissions, and against him and not them Treason only is committed, and the Law
Books of both Nations do affirm, that the King is Supreme, and consequently
even according to Calvin's Doctrine, neither his People, nor any of their
Representatives, can justly oppose, and much less punish him.

I know that Grotius is by the Republicans, and the Fanatics, oft-times cited
to defend this their Doctrine, of opposing Princes; but though his Testimony
might be justly rejected, as being himself born under a Commonwealth, yet he is
most impudently cited, for he lib. 1. cap. 4. does positively lay down as a
general and undoubted Rule, That Summum imperium tenentibus, resisti non
potest, Those who have the Supreme Power cannot lawfully be resisted; which
Rule he founds upon the Principles of Reason, the Authority of Scripture, and
the Practice of the Primitive Church; and though he limits the same thereafter
by some exceptions, yet it will easily appear, that these exceptions extend not
at all to our Case.

For the first relates only to such Kings, as have received their Power with
express condition, that they may be tried by other Magistrates.

The second to such as have voluntarily resigned their Empire, as Charles the
5th. did; and so the one may be opposed, because they were only Titular Kings:
and the other, because they left off to be Kings, and consequently we are
concerned in neither of these Cases.

The third limitation is only in the Case where he who was truly a King, has
alienated his Kingdom to Strangers; In which Case, Grotius does contend, That
Subjects may refuse to obey, because he cease to be their King. But as this
is not our Case, so even in that Case Grotius is very clear, that if this
alienation be made by an Hereditary Monarch, the alienation is null, as being
done in prejudice of the lawful Successor, but he does not at all assert that
the Monarch may be thereupon deposed by his People.

The fourth relates only to such Kings, as from a hatred to their Country,
design its Destruction and utter Ruin; but as he confesses himself, Id vix
accidere potest in Rege mentis compote; and consequently can take only place in
a mad Man, in which Case all Laws allow the Kingdom to be ruled by Governors,
and Administrators in the King's Name, if the madness be Natural, and a Total
depravation of Sense. But if by Madness be meant a moral Madness, and design to
ruin the Kingdom and the Subjects, as was, and is most impiously pretended
against King CHARLES the first, and King CHARLES the 2 d, the best and most
reasonable of Kings; then Opposition in such Cases is not at all warranted by
Grotius, who speaks only of a Physical and Natural Madness; for else every
thing that displeases the people should be called Madness; and so the
exception should not limit but overturn the general rule, and should Arm all
Subjects to rebel against their Princes, and make them the Sovereign Judges in
all Cases. Which is inconsistent with Grotius's own Doctrine, and is
excellently refuted by his own Reasons.

The fifth relates only to Kings, who by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom
are tied to such and such Conditions, so as that if they fail in them, they may
be opposed.

The sixth relates only to Kingdoms where the Power is equally divided betwixt
the King and the Senate.

The seventh is in case the King was at first invested by the People, with
express reservation to them to resist in such and such Cases, and so is almost
the same with the fifth, and all these three differ little from the first. And
with Grotius's good leave, they err also in this, that they are not properly
exceptions from his own rule, for the rule being only, that Supreme Powers
cannot be resisted, these Powers are not Supreme, and they needed not be
cautioned by an exception, since they did not fall under the rule. But neither
of these Cases extend to us, since our King is by the Acts of Parliament
formerly cited, declared to be Supreme over all Persons and in all Causes, nor
made our Predecessors any such express reservations at the first erection of
the Monarchy, and consequently by Grotius own positive Doctrine cannot be
resisted. And so far is Grotius an enemy to such Fanatical Resistance, upon the
Pretense of Liberty and Religion, that number. 6. he calls the Authors of those
Opinions, Time-Servers only. And Gronovius a violent Republican and Fanatic,
taxes him extremely for it, in his Observations upon that fourth Chapter, whose
Arguments produced against Grotius I shall answer amongst the other Objections.

Gronovius's first Argument why it should be lawful to resist the Supreme
Magistrate in defense of Religion, is, because if it be not Lawful for Subjects
to Arm themselves for Religion against their Prince, it should not be lawful
for their Prince by the same rule to defend himself against Turks and Infidels,
who would endeavor to force him to comply with their Impieties. But to this it
is answered, That Resistance to Superiors is expressly forbid by the Laws of God
and Nature, as is said, but this cannot be extended to Cases where there is no
Subjection nor Allegiance; and it may be as well argued, that because one
private man may beat another who offers to strike him, that therefore a Child
may beat his Parent, or a Servant his Master, or that because I may violently
resist a private man who offers to take away my Goods unjustly, that therefore
I may oppose the Sentence of the Magistrate, because I forsooth do not think
the same just.

His second shift is, That our Savior commanded only absolute submission
without resistance in the Infancy of the Church when he himself was
miraculously to asist his own Servants, but this Submission was to end with the
Miracles, to which it related. As to which, my answer is,

1. That all Commands in Scripture may be so eluded, nor is there any Duty more
frequently and fully inculcated than this is, and that too in the same Chapters
amongst other Duties, which are to last for ever, such as Submission to
Parents, and Masters, and this is founded upon plain reason and convenience,
and not upon Miracles.

2. This was received and acknowledged by the Pagans, as has been fully proved,
though it cannot be pretended that they relied upon any such miraculous
assistance.

3. It cannot be denied but the Fathers of the Primitive Church did recommend
and justify themselves in their Apologies to the Heathen Emperors for bearing
patiently, when they were able not only to have resisted but to have overthrown
their Persecuters, as is clear by the Citations out of Tertullian, Cyprian,
Lactantius, Augustine, and others, to be seen in Grotius, De Jure Belli, lib.
1. cap. 4. number. 7. And it had been great impudence as well as sin in them to
have boasted of a recent matter of Fact, which was not true: nor could there be
a greater injury done to the Primitive Christians, as Grotius observes, than to
ascribe that to their Weakness, which they considered as an effect of Duty; and
why should the Heathen Emperors have suffered those to multiply, who obeyed
only because Disobedience was not safe, for they might have certainly
concluded, that by the same Principle that they obeyed only because they were
weak, they would disobey as soon as they were able.

4. If the first Christians in general had obeyed only because they were not
able to resist, then any private Christian had resisted when he was able, or
would have fled or concealed himself, whereas it is acknowledged in the other
answers pressed by Gronovius himself, that they sought for Martyrdom, and so
these two answers are inconsistent; and the Theban Legion, and others, did
submit themselves voluntarily to Martyrdom with their Arms in their hands, and
when they were able to have overthrown the Emperor.

And lastly, If this Doctrine were allowed, no Society could subsist, for when
Dissenters grew strong, the lawful Magistrate behooved to perish; whereas Jesus
Christ did contrive the Christian Religion; so as that all Governors should
reasonably wish their Subjects to be Christians; and so as no Christian should
attempt to overthrow the order and establishment of Civil Government, and that
they should not be drawn away from practice of Christian Devotion by the carnal
desires of being Great and Strong in the World, nor have any hopes in the Arm
of Flesh to the lessening of their immediate dependence upon him.

His third shift is, That his Doctrine of Submission and of dying for the
Christian Religion without making Resistance, was only the Practice, but not
the Command of the Primitive Church, and proceeded from their immoderate
affectation of the Crown of Martyrdom, as Milton also pretends. But since the
express Command of Scripture is founded upon such clear Reason, and since (as
Grotius well observes) the Practice of the Primitive Christians, who lived so
near the Age wherein these Scriptures were penned, is the best Interpreter of
the Scripture, it is horrid Impiety to make those blessed Martyrs pass for vain
Hypocrites, and distracted Self-murderers, and it becomes us with holy
reverence to imitate those whom the Christian Church has ever admired.

The fourth shift is, that the Protestant Churches have been reformed by such
Insurrections as these, contrary to the Royal Authority. But this is fully
answered by the learned Henry More in his Divine Dialogues, and by Du Moulin in
his Philanax Anglicus; where likewise are to be found the many Testimonies of
Protestant Churches, and Protestant Divines, condemning positively the taking
up of Arms against the Sovereign Power, even for the defense of Religion; and
the very Presbyterian Confession of Faith at Westminster, is so positive as to
this point, that the Presbyterians themselves can never answer it. The sum of
which answer is, That the King of Spain coming by Marriage in place of the Duke
of Burgundy, the said King of Spain could pretend to no more Power than they
had, nor could the House of Burgundy pretend to any more Power by marrying the
Heirs of the Counts of the several Provinces, than those Counts had over their
Provinces; and therefore since none of these were Sovereigns over their
Provinces, the Provinces might have resisted the King of Spain when he
oppressed them; and consequently that Resistance cannot defend such as resist
Supreme Powers upon pretense of Religion, Grotius de Antiq. Reipub. Batav. cap.
7.

The opposition made by the Protestants in France, was not occasioned by
Religion, but upon a Quarrel betwixt the Princes of the Blood and the House of
Guise in the Minority of Francis the 2 d, and is defended most excellently by
King James himself, not to have been Rebellion, in his Defense of the Right of
Kings, page 14.

The Opposition made by the Princes of Germany to the Emperor, was founded
upon the inherent Right in the Princes, by the Golden Charter of the Empire.
And Luther himself declared, that Magistratui non erat resistendum, and has
written a Book to that purpose; nor would he engage in the Confederacy for
Defensive Arms at Smalcald, until the Lawyers declared that that Resistance was
lawful by the Laws of the Empire, Vide Slydan Hist. lib. 8. anno 1531.

The War that arose in Switzerland, was not occasioned by Religion; for the
Reformation was once established with the consent of the Magistrate. And the
Eruption that was made by other Cantons upon the Reformed Cantons eleven years
after that Establishment, Vide Slydan, anno 1522. Nor was it Calvin who
banished the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, for he fled eight Months before upon
the detecting of a Conspiracy, by which that Bishop was to deliver over the
Liberties of that City to the Duke of Savoy, and for which his Secretary was
hanged, Vide Turretin. Annal. Reformationis, anno 1529 And albeit those who
Reformed in Scotland, in the Reign of Queen Mary, pretended Authority from the
King, yet they were certainly Rebels, and are condemned by Rivet, a famous
Protestant Divine, who also inveighs bitterly against this Principle, Castiga
Not. in Epist. ad Bal. fac. cap. 13. number 14 sub finem.

From all which, I observe, First, That all the Protestant Divines by making
Apologies for such of their Profession as have risen in Arms against Supreme
Powers, must be thereby concluded to be ashamed of the Principle.

Secondly immediately upon the quieting those Rebellions, all the Protestant
Churches have in their Confessions of Faith, declared their abhorrence of that
Principle; which being the product of Conviction and Experience, joined with
Duty, must be the most judicious and sincere Testimony of all others.

Thirdly, All those Rebellions have been occasioned by a mistake in Point of
Law, and not in point of Religion; for the Divines, as I have related, have
been abused by the Lawyers: and therefore, since in the Isle of Britain, the
Laws of both Kingdoms have declared the Rising in Arms against the King to be
Treason, although for the defense of Religion; it necessarily follows, that
this must be unlawful in point of Conscience in this Kingdom.

Fourthly, Though good things may be occasioned by a Rebellion, yet that does
not justify a Rebellion; for though Jeroboam was allowed by God to rise
against Rehoboam, yet God Almighty himself calls his revolt Rebellion, 1 Kings
12 19. and 2 Chronicles. 10. 19. and it is observable, that after this Revolt, there
was but one good King amongst all the Rebellious Kings of Israel; whereas
amongst the Kings of Judah, who were lawful Kings, there was but one or two who
were any ways impious; so far does God bless a lawful Succession.

Some also use as a shift against this Orthodox Doctrine, that the reason why
the Primitive Christians did not oppose their Emperors in the defense of the
Christian Religion, was, because they had not been secured at that time in the
Exercise of their Religion by the Laws of the Empire; and therefore the
practice of those Christians can be no Argument why we may not now rise to
defend the Orthodox Religion, since it is now established by Law. But this
Objection is fully answered by that great Antiquary Samuel Petit. Diatriba de
Jur. Principium edictis Ecclesiae quaesito, where he clearly proves, that they
were actually secured by the Edicts of the Emperors in the days of the Emperor
Tiberius, and downward, and yet they would not rise in Arms though they were
persecuted under those same Emperors, because the Word of God and the Christian
Religion did command Obedience under Persecution, and did forbid Resistance and
taking up of Arms.

The Arguments that can be produced to justify this Principle of Defensive
Arms, are almost answered in the former Article, viz. That there is a mutual
Obligation betwixt King and People, so that when He breaks the one, they are
free from the other, and that all Government is Established for the advantage of
the People, and thus these few Arguments peculiar to this Point, remain now
only to be here resolved.

1. That Self-defence is by the Law of Nature allowed to all, and even to
Brutes, why then should men who may lose more, who deserve better, and can use
self-defence more innocently, be debarred from it?

2, We see in Scripture, that the People deserted and opposed their Kings for
Religion.

3. This has been allowed with us in the instance of King James the third,
against whom his Subjects rose in Rebellion, for misgoverning and oppressing
His People, and this opposition, was first justified by God, in the success he
gave to their Arms, and thereafter by a special and express Act in the ensuing
Parliament, which stands yet unrepeal'd.

To which I shortly answer, That as to the first of Self-defence in Brutes, we
must still remember, that God hvaing designed Government to bridle the
Extravagancies ofrestless Mankind, he has appointed Magistrates to be his
Vicegerents and Representatives, and has entrusted them with his Power, and so
opposition to them is unlawful, because it is not lawful against him; and
because if it were allowed, all would pretend to it, and so there should be no
Order, nor Government. And that this may be the better observed, God has
endowed man with Principles fitted for these ends of Order and Society, amongst
which, one is, That the public Safety of the whole is to be preferred to the
Safety of any one man, or of any number of private men, who are not to be
considered as the public, because that is the public Interest, which is the
Representative of the Nation, and that this Principle may be the better obeyed,
he has commanded men to suffer injuries, rather than occasion Disorders, and
has promised to reward Patience and Submission for his sake, with eternal Life,
a Nobler Prize, than we here can contend for.

This being then Premised, it is answered, that though Brutes may defend
themselves, because Order and the common good of Societies are not there
concerned; yet there is no reason to extend this to Men, whose Self-defence
against Authority occasions more mischief, than it can bring advantage: And if
this Argument hold, it would prove, that every man who is unjustly Condemned,
or at least thinks so, may kill the King, or His Judge; Servants might bind
their Masters, and the People of any private Town might pull down their Judge
from the Bench, when they thought he oppressed them. And as these must submit,
because they expect Reparation from a higher Tribunal: So God has promised
Reparation to those who suffer for his sake; and the greatness and sureness of
this Reward, makes this no uncomfortable Doctrine, and this Submission is as
necessary, and rather more, for men's preservation, than Resistance; and is a
kind of Self-defence, since opposition to Authority would bring a certain
ruin, and confusion, in which more, would perish, than opposition by private
Self-defence would preserve. Upon which Christian Principles also, Ames. a
Protestant and Calvinist Divine has resolved, In bonis temporalibus tenetur
quisque personam publicam sibi ipsi praeferre, bonum enim totius pluris
faciendum est quam bonum alicujus partis Cas. conscient. l. 5. cap. 7. These.
14. and Lex Rex confesses, p. 335. That a private man should rather suffer the
King to kill him, than that he should kill the King, because he is not to
prefer the Life of a private man, to the Life of a public man.

And whereas it may be pretended, That though this opposition should not be
trusted to any private man, yet Parliaments and the Collective Body should, and
may be trusted with it. But to this I have answered formerly, That all
Convocations without Authority from the King, and all rising against him are
indefinitely declared unlawful, and justly; for whoever wants Authority, is but
in a private capacity, none having a public capacity, save the Magistrates.
And if they be allowed to rise, because their quarrel is just, it must be as
just to allow a lesser number, if they have the same Justice in their pretense,
and we have frequently seen, that the same Persons who magnified the multitude
for their numbers, did shortly thereafter divide from them, pretending that
they were the Sanior pars, or juster Party.

The Examples produced by our Republicans of the revolt of Libna, 2 Chronicles. 1.
21. And of Jeroboam, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers, and
of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, because of Rehoboam his oppression, 1 King.
12. prove not at all the lawfulness of the Subjects defection from their Kings,
because these defections are only Related, but not allowed in Scripture, and
are recorded rather as instances of God's vengeance upon the wickedness of
these Princes, than as examples justified in these Revolters, and to be
followed by such as read the Sacred History: In which, when Examples are
proposed by the Spirit of God for our imitation, they are still honored with
the Divine approbation. And I hope my Readers will still remember, that I
design not by this Treatise to encourage Princes to wickedness by Impunity, but
only to discourage Subjects from daring to be the punishers.

The great esteem which the great Bishop Usher has justly, even among
Republicans and Fanatics, for Learning and Devotion, has prevailed with me, to
set down two Objections used by him, with his pious Answers hereto.

The first is, Suppose (say they) the King, or Civil Magistrate should command
us to Worship the Devil, would you wish us here to lay down our Heads upon the
Block, and not to repel the violence of such a Miscreant, to the utmost of our
Power: and if not, What would be come of Gods Church, and his Religion? To
which the Holy Man answers, That even when the Worship of the Devil was
commanded by the cruel Edicts of persecuting Emperors, the Christians never
took up Arms against them, but used fervent Prayers, as their only refuge: And
St. Peter animates them to this patient suffering 1. Pet. 4. 12. 13. Beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, but rejoice, in as much as ye
are partakers of Christ's sufferings. But let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or a Thief, or as an Evil-doer, or as a Busy body in other men's matters. By
which last words, if I durst add to so great an Author as Bishop Usher, the
Apostle seems expressly to me to have obviated the dreadful Doctrine of rising
in Arms upon the pretense of Religion, and the killing such as differ from
them; which if the Christians did allow, they ought to pass for Murderers, and
to forbid them to meddle in matters of Government upon this pretense; because
then they ought to suffer justly, as busy bodies. And here Bishop Usher does
most appositely cite St. Augustine, in Psalm. 149. The World raged, the Lion
lifted himself up against the Lamb, but the Lamb was full stronger than the
Lion: The Lion was overcome by showing cruelty, the Lamb did overcome by
suffering. And St. Jerome, Epist. 62. By shedding of Blood, and by suffering,
rather then doing injuries, was the Church of Christ at first founded; it grew
by Persecutions, and was Crowned by Martyrdoms.

The second objection is, If men's hands be thus tied, no man's Estate can be
secure; nay the whole frame of the Commonwealth would be in danger to be
subverted, and utterly ruined. To which he answers, That the ground of this
objection is exceeding faulty, and inconsistent with the Rules of Humanity, and
Divinity; of Humanity, because this would empower private Persons to Judge, and
so should confound all Order, and invite all men to oppose Authority, and make
Subjects Accusers, Judges, and Executioners too; and that in their own Cause,
against their own Sovereign, and against Divinity, because it is contrary to
the Scriptures, and Fathers, who command Submission, Humility, and Patience,
Rex est, si nocentem punit, cede justitiae, si innocentem, cede fortunae,
Seneca de Jura. lib. 2. cap. 30. If the King punish thee, when thou art guilty,
submit to Justice: If when thou art innocent, submit to Fortune. And if a
Heathen could be induced by his virtue to submit to blind Fortune, how much
more ought a Christian to be prevailed upon by Devotion to submit to the
All-seeing Providence of the most wise God, who makes all things to work
jointly for good to them that love him? And as St. Augustine piously advises,
Princes are to be suffered by their People, that in the exercise of their
patience, temporal things may be born, and Eternal hoped for.

The instance of King James the Third being punished by his Subjects, is so far
from being an Argument able to justify Subjects rising in Arms against their
King, that this part of our History should for ever convince all honest men of
the dangers that attend Defensive Arms: For this Prince was so far from being
one of those Tyrants, against whom Defensive Arms are only confessed to be just,
That few Princes were more meek and careful of his Subjects. But because he
employed such as himself had raised, finding that the Nobility had too often
been insolent Servants to their Prince, and severe Taskmasters to the People;
the Nobility thinking more upon this imaginary neglect, than their own duty,
did from combinatitions, proceed to Arms, and rejecting all conditions of
peace, they were at last cursed with a Victory, in which this gentle Prince was
murdered, whilst he sought to save his Sacred life in a deserted Mill. By
which we may see, that these Defensive Arms so much hallowed in our late
Debates, are but the Militia of Pride, Vanity and Ambition; and that if they be
allowed, the best of Princes will ever fall by them.

And as to the Act 14. Par. 4. Ja. 4. Whereby it is pretended that the
opposing, and even the killing K. Ja. the 3. in Battle is justified, and which
Act was never Repealed: It is answered,

First, That this Statute was made by the same Rebels who had opposed their
lawful Prince, and so was rather a continuing of their Rebellion, than a
justification of it.

Secondly, That abominable Statute proceeds on the pretense of K. James the 3d.
calling in the English, and designing to enslave the Kingdom to Foreigners,
which was not proved as is ought to have been, though the pretext had been
legal, as it was neither legal nor true in the least circumstance, and the
Noblemen and Barons are Condemned, without being cited or heard; though the Act
be not a Statute but a Verdict, so unjust are all Rebels, who are forced to
maintain one Crime by another.

Thirdly, In the new Collection of our Statutes made by Skeen, and Authorized
in many subsequent Parliaments, that abominable and Treasonable Act is not
inserted, which was the best way to rescind it, because it was thought a
reproach to the Nation to have any formal Law made to rescind the Statute,
which would have preserved its memory in anulling its Authority.

Fourthly, Many Statutes since that time are made, declaring the rising in Arms
against the King and his Authority, upon any pretense whatsoeve to be Treason;
and expressly rescinding all Acts and Statutes to the contrary, as Rebellious
and Treasonable, and there needed no more Positive Statutes to rescind that
Rebellious and Treasonable Combination rather than Law.

As to the 44. Act 6. Par. Ja. 2. From which its urged, that because that Act
declares it Treason to assault Castles, and Places where the Kings Person shall
happen to be, without the Consent of the three Estates: And that it is
therefore lawful to assault the same with the Consent of the three Estates, and
consequently to rise in Arms with the Consent of the three Estates, is no
Treason. It is answered, that it being but too ordinary in the Minority of our
Kings to have great Factions amongst the Nobility (which shows also the danger
of placing the Supreme Power in the Proceres Regni) one of the Factions
ordinarily either having made the young King Prisoner, or using to assault the
Castle where he was really preserved: It was therefore most wisely declared by
this Statute, That to lay hands upon the Kings Person violently, what Age the
King be of, young or old, or to Assail Castles or Places where the Kings Person
shall happen to be, without the Consent of the three Estates, shall be punished
as Treason. That is to say, that so great respect was to be had to his sacred
Person, that no violence was to be offered to the Place where he was, until the
same was allowed by the three Estates. But in all the former Laws, as well as
those made in our Age, it is still declared Treason to rebel against the Kings
Person, or to refuse to assist him without adding, except the same be done by
the three Estates, which shows that there is nothing designed in this Act in
favor of their Authority, and that this King was Minor the time of this Act;
and that he had great Troubles in his Youth, is very clear from the short
characters given of our Kings, by Skeen, in the end of our Acts of Parliament.

It will (I hope) easily appear by the balance of these Arguments, that at
least the Municipal Laws of our Nation, which punish Defensive Arms as Treason,
should be obeyed by our Contrymen, since, as I have often inculcated, the Laws
of any Nation should still be obeyed, except where they are inconsistent with
the Word of God; and the most that the most violent Republicans alive can say
upon this Subject, is, that the case may be debated by probable Arguments, and
that neither of the Positions want their inconveniences, so that in this, as
in all other Debates, the Law of each Nation is the best Judge to decide such
Controversies, and therefore such as maintain these Principles, after so many
positive and reiterated Laws, are obliged for preserving the Peace of humane
Society, and the Order which God has established, to remove from places where
they cannot obey, for they will always find some place where the Government
will please them, and better they be disquieted, than the Government of the
whole World should be disturbed: But if they will stay, and oppose the
Government, it must be excused, to execute those who would destroy it.

Having thus glanced only at Answers to these Objections, because I think the
Objections rather plausible than strong, I shall sum up this Debate with these
Reflections.

First, Buchannan, and our Republican Authors, debate all these Grounds, as if
we were yet to form the Government, under which we were to live, whereas we live
under, and are sworn to a Monarchy, fixed by Law and Consent, time out of mind,
and the Levellers may as well urge that no Nobleman should be dignified, nor no
Gentleman enriched above a man of good sense; and Tenants may argue that it is
not reasonable, that they bearing God's Image as well as the Master, should
toil to feed their Lusts: Thus Reason may be distorted, and we call that
Treason and Providence, which pleases us best.

Secondly, Most of their Citations and Authorities, are the Sentiments of those
Greeks and Romans who lived under Commonwealths, and so magnified their
Country in opposition to Usurpers; whereas our King is the Father of our
Country, and whatever they said of their Country, we should say of him, and
therefore these Citations concern us no more than the Law of England binds
Scotchmen; they praise their own Children and Servants, for their Faithfulness
and Obedience to them, and yet they rail at us for being faithful to our great
Master and chief Parent under God.

Thirdly, Most of the Authors cited and admired by them, are Heathens,
particularly Stoics, who equaled themselves not only to Kings, but to their
own Gods, and against whose selfishness and pride, all Christians have justly
exclaimed, and so they are not competent Judges, nor sure Guides to Christians,
in the exercise of those purely Christian Virtues of Humility, Submission,
Self-denial, Patience, Faith, and Reliance upon God.

Fourthly, They balance not all the conveniences and inconveniences of either
Government, but magnify the one, and conceal the other; and thus it is true
that Kings may be Tyrants, but so may, and usually are the Leaders of the
Rabble: Cromwell was such, and Shaftsbury had been such; he was such in his
Nature, and had been such in his Government; and the Distractions of a Civil
War, which ordinarily attend Competitions amongst Republicans, destroy more
than the Lusts of any one Tyrant can do, which made Lucan, tho a Republican,
and of the Pompeyan Party, conclude, after a sad review of the continued Civil
Wars betwixt Sylla and Marius, Caesar and Pompey, without considering what
followed under the Trium viri.

Faelices Arabes, Medique Eoaque tellus,
Qui sub perpetuis tenuerunt Regna Tyrannis.
Fifthly, Those who debate against Magistracy, gratify their own Vanity and
Insolence; but such devout men as Ambrose, Augustine, Usher, and others, debate
against the dictates of Interest, as well as Passion; which two, nothing save
Grace can overcome, and there can be no surer mark of Conviction than to decide
against these.

Lastly, Even Buchannan repented his horrid Doctrine, Cambden, 10. year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in 1567.

But forasmuch as Buchannan being transported with partial affection, and with
Murrays bounty, wrote in such sort, that his said Books have been condemned of
falsehood by the Estates of the Realm of Scotland, to whose Credit more is to be
attributed; and he himself sighing and sorrowing, sundry times blamed himself
(as I have heard) before the King, to whom he was Schoolmaster, for that he
had employed so virulent a Pen against that well deserving Queen, and upon his
Deathbed wished that he might live so long, till by recalling the truth, he
might even with his Blood, wipe away those Aspersions, which he had by his bad
Tongue falsely laid upon her, but that (as he said) it would now be in vain,
when he might seem to dote for Age, etc.

Idem, Anno 1582.

And not content with all this (speaking of their surprising the King) they
compelled the King against his Will, to approve of this intercepting of his
Letters to the Queen of England, and to decree an Assembly of the Estates,
summoned by them to be just, yet could they not induce Buchannan to approve of
this their Fact, either by writing, or persuasion by Message, who now
sorrowfully lamented, that he had already undertaken the Cause of Factious
people against their Princes, and soon after Died, etc.

THAT THE LAWFVL SVCCESSOR CANNOT BE DEBARRED FROM Succeeding TO THE CROWN:
Maintained against DOLMAN, BUCHANNAN, And OTHERS.

BY Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, His Majesty's Advocate in Scotland.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

King James In His Advice to Prince Henry.
Page 173. IF God give you not Succession, Defraud never the Nearest by Right,
whatsoever Conceit ye have of the Person; for Kingdoms are ever at God's
disposition, and in that Case we are but Liferenters, it lying no more in the
Kings, than in the Peoples hands, to dispossess the Righteous Heir.

Page 209. Ibid. FOR at the very moment of the Expiring of the King Reigning,
the Nearest and Lawful Heir enters in his place; and so to refuse him, or
intrude another, is not to hold out the Successor from coming in, but to expel
and put out their Righteous King: And I trust at this time whole FRANCE
acknowledges the Rebellion of the Leaguers, who, upon pretense of Heresy, by
Force of Arms, held so long out, to the great Desolation of their whole
Country, their Native and Righteous King from possessing his own Crown and
natural Kingdom.

THE RIGHT OF THE Succession DEFENDED.
THE Fourth Conclusion to be cleared, was, That neither the People, nor
Parliaments of this Kingdom, could exclude the Lineal Successor, or could raise
to the Throne any other of the same Royal Line.

For clearing whereof, I shall, according to my former method, First, clear
what is our positive Law in this Case; Secondly, I shall show that this our Law
is founded upon excellent Reason: And lastly, I shall answer the Objections.

As to the first. It is by the second Act of our last Parliament acknowledged,
That the Kings of this Realm, deriving their Royal Power from God Almighty
alone, do Lineally succeed thereto, according to the known degrees of Proximity
in Blood, which cannot be interrupted, suspended or diverted by any Act or
Statute whatsoever, and that none can attempt to alter or divert the said
Succession, without involving the Subjects of this Kingdom in Perjury and
Rebellion, and without exposing them to all the fatal and dreadful consequences
of a Civil War, DO THEREFORE from a hearty and sincere sense of their duty
recognize, acknowledge and declare that the right to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, is by the inherent right and the Nature of Monarchy, as well as by the
fundamental and unalterable Laws of this Realm, transmitted and devolved by a
lineal Succession, according to the Proximity of Blood. And that upon the death
of the King or Queen, who actually reigns, the Subjects of this Kingdom are
bound by Law, duty and allegiance, to obey the next immediate and Lawful Heir
either Male or Female, upon whom the right and administration of the Government
is immediately devolved. And that no difference in Religion, nor no Law nor Act
of Parliament made, or to be made, can alter or divert the right of Succession
and lineal descent of the Crown to the nearest and Lawful Heirs, according to
the degrees aforesaid: nor can stop or hinder them in the full, free and actual
administration of the Government according to the Laws of the Kingdom. LIKE AS
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with advice and consent of the said Estates of Parliament,
do declare it is High Treason in any of the Subjects of this Kingdom, by
writing, speaking, or any other manner of way to endeavor the alteration,
suspension or diversion of the said right of Succession, or the debarring the
next Lawful Successor from the immediate, actual, full and free administration
of the Goment conform to the Laws of the Kingdom. And that all such attempts or
designs shall infer against them the pain of Treason.

This being not only an Act of Parliament, declaring all such as shall
endeavor to alter the Succession, to be punishable, as Traitors; but
containing in it a Decision of this Point by the Parliament, as the Supreme
Judges of the Nation, and an acknowledgment by them, as the representatives of
the people, and Nation. There can be no place for questioning a point, which
they have placed beyond all controversy, especially seeing it past so
unanimously that there was not only no vote given but even no argument proved
against it. And the only doubt moved about it was, whether any Act of
Parliament, or acknowledgment, was necessary, in a point which was in it self
so uncontroverted. And which all who were not desperate Fanatics, did conclude
to be so in this Nation, even after they had heard all the arguments that were
used, and the Pamphlets that were written against it, in our Neighbor-kingdom.

But because so much noise has been made about this question, and that blind
bigotry leads some, and humorous faction draws others out of the common road. I
conceive it will be fit to remember my Reader of these following Reasons, which
will I hope clear that; as this is our present positive Law, so it is
established upon the fundamental constitution of our Government, upon our old
Laws, upon the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and particularly of the
Civil Law.

As to the fundamental constitution of our Government, I did formerly remark,
that our Historians tell us, that the Scots did swear Allegiance to FERGUS, who
was the first of our Kings, and to his Heirs. And that they would never obey
any other, but his Royal Race. Which Oath does in Law, and Reason, bind them to
obey the Lineal Successor, according to the proximity of Blood. For an
indefinite obligation to obey the Blood Royal, must be interpreted according to
the proximity in Blood, except the swearers had reserved to themselves a power
to choose any of the Royal Family, whom they pleased, which is so true, that in
Law an obligation granted to any man, does in the construction of Law accrue to
his Heirs, though they be not expressed. Qui sibi providet, and haeredibus
providet. And Boethius tells us that after King FERGUS'S death, the Scots
finding their new Kingdom infested with Wars, under the powerful influence of
Picts, and Britains, they refused notwithstanding to prefer the next of the
Royal Race, who was of perfect age, and a Man of great Merit, to the Son of
King FERGUS, though an infant; which certainly in reason they would have done,
if they had not been tied to the lineal Successor. But least the Kingdom should
be prejudged during the minority, they enacted, that for the future, the next
of the Blood Royal should always in the minority of our Kings administer as
Kings, till the true Heir were of perfect age. But this does not prove, as
Buchannan pretends, that the people had power to advance to the Throne, any of
the Royal Race: whom they judged most fit, for common sense may tell us, that
was not to choose a King but a Viceroy, or a Regent. For, though to give him
the more authority, and so to enable him the more to curb factions, and oppose
enemies, he was called King, yet he he was but Rex fidei Commissarius, being
obliged to restore it to the true Heir, chosen rather to serve than Reign, and
so Governed only for a time, and consequently was only his Viceroy.

But because the Uncles, and next Heirs being once admitted to this fidei
Commissarie title, were unwilling to restore the Crown to their Nephews, and
sometimes murdered them: and oft-times raised Factions against them. Therefore
the People abhorring those impieties, and weary of the distractions, and
divisions, which they occasioned, begged from King KENNETH the 3 d, that these
following Laws might be made.

1. That upon the Kings death, the next Heir of whatsoever Age should succeed.

2. The Grandchild either by Son or Daughter, should be preferred.

3. That till the King arrived at 14 years of age, some Wiseman should be
chosen to Govern, after which, the King should enter to the free
Administration, and according to this constitution, some fit Person has still
been chosen Regent in the Kings Minority, without respect to the Proximity of
Blood, and our Kings have been oft-times Crowned in the Cradle.

In conformity also to these Principles, all the acknowledgments made to our
Kings, run still in favor of the King, and his Heirs. As in the first Act
Parl. 18 JAMES VI. and the II, III, IV. Acts Parl. 1. CHARLES II. And by our
Oath of Allegiance, we are bound to bear faithful and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Lawful Successors; which word LAWFUL, is insert, to cut
off the pretenses of such as should not succeed by Law, and the insolent
arbitrariness of such, as being but Subjects themselves, think they may choose
their King, viz. Act 1. Parl. 21. JAMES the VI.

That this right of Succession, according to the Proximity of Blood, is founded
on the Law of God, is clear by Number. Chap. 27. v. 9. and 10. If a man has no
Son or Daughter, his Inheritance shall descend upon his Brother, by Number. 36.
Where God himself decides in favor of the Daughters of Zel^phehad, telling us,
it was just thing, they should have the inheritance of their Father. And
ordains, that if there were no Daughters, the Estate should go to the Brothers.
St. Paul likewise concludes, Romans 8. If Sons, then Heirs; looking upon that, as
a necessary Consequence; which if it do not necessarily hold, or can be any way
disappointed, all his divine reasoning in that Chapter falls to nothing. And
thus Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 22. v. 1. was made King (though the youngest) in his
Fathers stead; because, says the Text, The Arabians had slain all the eldest:
which clearly shows, That by the Law of God, he could not have succeeded, if
the eldest had been alive. We hear likewise in Scripture, God often telling, By
me Kings reign. And when he gives a Kingdom to any, as to Abraham, David, etc.
he gives it to them and their Posterity.

That this Right of Succession flows from the Law of Nature, is clear; because,
that is accounted to flow from the Law of Nature, which every man finds grafted
in his own heart, and which is obeyed without any other Law, and for which men
neither seek nor can give another distinct Reason; all which holds in this
Case: for who doubts when he hears of an Hereditary Monarchy, but that the Next
in Blood must succeed; and for which we need no positive Law, nor does any man
enquire for a further Reason, being satisfied therein by the Principles of his
own heart. And from this ground it is, that though a remoter Kinsman did
possess as Heir, he could by no length of time prescribe a valid Right; since
no man, as Lawyers conclude, can prescribe a Right against the Law of Nature;
and that this Principle is founded thereupon, is confessed, l. cum ratio
naturalis ff. de bonis damnat: cum ratio naturalis, quasi lex quaedam tacita,
liberis parentum haereditatem adjecerit, veluti ad debitam successionem eos
vocando: propter quod suorum haeredum nomen eis indultum est; adeo ut ne a
parentibus quidem, ab ea successione amoveri possint. Et. emancipati Institut.
de haered. quae ab intest. Praet^r naturalem aequitatem sequutus, iis etiam
bonorum possessionem contra 12 tabularum leges, and contra jus civil permittit.

Which Text shows likewise, That this Right of Nature was stronger than the
Laws of the Twelve Tables, though these were the most ancient and chief
Statutes of Rome: which Principle is very clear likewise from the Parable,
Matthew. 21. where the Husbandmen, who can be presumed to understand nothing but
the Law of Nature, are brought in, saying, This is the Heir, let us kill him,
and seize on his inheritance.

Nor does this hold only in the Succession of Children, or the Direct Line, but
in the collateral Succession of Brothers, and others. L. hac part ff. unde
cognati. Hac part proconsul Naturali aequitate motus, omnibus cognatis
permittit bonorum possessionem quos sanguinis ratio Vocat ad haereditatem. Vid.
l. 1. ff. de grad. and l. 1.. hoc autem ff. de bonor. possess.

And these who are now Brothers to the present King, have been Sons to the
former; and therefore whatever has been said for Sons, is also verified in
Brothers: As for instance, though his Royal Highness be only Brother to King
CHARLES II. yet He is Son to King CHARLES I. and therefore, as St. Paul says,
If a Son, then an Heir; except he be secluded by the Existence and Succession
of an elder Brother.

That this gradual Succession is founded on the Law of Nations, is as clear by
the Laws of the Twelve Tables, and the Praetorian Law of Rome. And if we
consider the Monarchy either old or new, we will find, That where ever the
Monarchy was not Elective, the degrees of Succession were there exactly
observed. And Bodinus de Republ. lib. 6. cap. 5. asserts, that, Ordo non tantum
naturae and divinae sed etiam omnium ubique gentium hoc postulat. From all
which, Pope Innocent in c. grand. de supplend. neglig. praelati, concludes, In
regnis haereditariis caveri non potest ne filius aut frater succedat.

And since it is expressly determined, That the Right of Blood can be taken away
by no positive Law or Statute, L. Jura Sanguinis ff. de Reg. jur. and L. 4. ff.
de suis legitim. And that the power of making a Testament, can be taken away by
no Law, L. ita legatum ff. de conditionibus: I cannot see how the Right of
Succession can be taken away by a Statute; for that is the same with the Right
of Blood, and is more strongly founded upon the Law of Nature, than the power
of making Testaments.

Since then this Right is founded upon the Law of God, of Nature, and of
Nations, it does clearly follow, That no Parliament can alter the same by their
municipal Statutes, as our Act of Parliament has justly observed.

For clearing whereof, it is fit to consider, That in all Powers and
Jurisdictions which are subordinate to one another, the Inferior should obey,
but not alter the Power to which it is subordinate; and what it does contrary
thereto, is null and void. And thus, If the Judges of England should publish
Edicts contrary to Acts of Parliament; or if a Justice of Peace should reverse
a Decree of the Judges of Westminster, these their endeavors would be void and
ineffectual. But so it is, that by the same Principle, but in an infinitely
more transcendent way, all Kings and Parliaments are subordinate to the Laws of
God, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of Nations; and therefore no Act of
Parliament can be binding, to overturn what these have established.

This, as to the Law of God, is clear, not only from the general Dictates of
Religion, but, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 7. the Parliament uses these words: For no man
can dispense with God's Laws, which we also affirm and think. And as to the
Laws of Nature, they must be acknowledged to be immutable, from the principles
of Reason: And the Law it self confesses, that Naturalia quaedam jura quae apud
omnes gentes peraeque observantur, divina quadam providentia constituta semper
firma, atque immutabilia permanent. sed naturalia Institut. de Jur. Natural.
and. singulorum de rer. divis.

And when the Law declares, That a Supreme Prince is free from the obligation
of Laws, Solutus legibus, which is the highest power that a Parliament can
pretend to, or arrive at; yet Lawyers still acknowledge, That this does not
exclude these Supreme Powers from being liable to the Laws of God, Nature, and
Nations: Accurs. in l. Princeps ff. de Leg. Clementina pasturalis de re
judicata Bart. in l. ut vim de justitia and jure Voet. de Statutis. Sect. 5.
Cap. 1. Nor can the Law of Nations be overturned by private Statutes, or any
Supreme Power. And thus all Statutes to the prejudice of Ambassadors, who are
secured by the Law of Nations, are confessed by all to be Null, and the highest
Power whatsoever cannot take off the necessity of denouncing a War, before a
War can be lawful: And Lawyers observe very well, That those who would oppose
the common Dictates of Mankind, should be looked upon as Enemies to all Mankind.

My second Argument shall be, That the King and Parliament can have no more
power in Parliament, than any absolute Monarch has in his own Kingdom: For,
they are, when joined, but in place of the Supreme Power, sitting in judgment;
and therefore they cannot in Law do what any other supreme and absolute Monarch
cannot do, for all the Power of Parliaments consists only in their Cons^nt; but
we must not think, that our Parliaments have an unlimited Power de jure, so, as
that they may forfeit or kill without a cause, or pass Sentence against the
Subjects without citing or hearing them; or, that they can alienate any part of
the Kingdom; or, subject the whole Kingdom to France, or any other Foreign
Prince; all which deeds would be null in themselves, and would not hinder the
Party injured from a due redress. For if our Parliaments had such Power, we
should be the greatest Slaves, and live under the most arbitrary Government
imaginable. But so it is, That no Monarch whosoever can take from any man what
is due to him, by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations: For being himself
inferior to these, he cannot overturn their Statutes. Thus a Prince cannot even
ex plenitudine potestatis, legitimate a Bastard in prejudice of former
Children, though they have only but a hope of Succession, l 4. and sequen. de
natal. restituend. And for the same Reason it is declared in the same Law, that
he cannot restore a freed man (restituere libertum natalibus) in prejudice of
his Patron, who was to succeed, though that Succession was but by a municipal
Law. For clearing which Question, it is fit to know that the Eminent Lawyers
who treat Jus Publicum, as Arnisaeus and others, do distinguish betwixt such
Kingdoms as were at first conferred by the People, and wherein the Kings
succeed by contract, and in these, the Laws made by King and People can
exclude, or bind the Successor. And yet even here they confess, that this
proceeds not, because the Predecessor can bind the Successor, but because the
People renew the Paction with the succeeding King. But where the Successor is
to succeed ex Jure Regni, in hereditary Monarchies, there they assert
positively, that the Predecessor cannot prejudge the Successor's Right of
Succession; which they prove by two Arguments.

First, That the Predecessor has no more Power, nor Right, than the Successor:
for the same Right that the present King has to the Possession, the next in
Blood has to the Succession; and all our Laws run in favor of the King, and
his Heirs, and no man can try his Equal, or give him the Law, Par in parem non
habet dominium.

The second is, That it were unjust and unequitable, that the Predecessor
should rob his Successor, Nulla ergo (says Arnisaeus Cap. 7. Number. 5.) clausula
Successori jus auferri potest, modo succedat ille ex jure regni. And Hottoman
lib. 2. de Regno Galliae asserts, that in France, which is a very absolute
Monarchy, Ea quae jure Regio primogenito competunt, ne Testamento quidem patris
adimi possunt.

And thus when the King of France designed to break the Salique Law of
Succession, as in the Reign of Charles V. it was found impracticable by the
Three Estates: And when Pyrrhus was to prefer his youngest Son to the Crown,
the Epirots following the Law of Nations, and their own, refused him, Paus.
lib. 1. In the year 1649, also Amurat the Grand Seignior having left the
Turkish Empire to Han the Tartarian, passing by his Brother Ibrahim, the whole
Officers of that State, did unanimously cancel that Testament, and restore
Ibrahim, the true Heir, though a silly Fool: Which shows the Opinion not only
of Lawyers, but of whole Nations and Parliaments: Thus Vander Graaff, an
Hollander, confesses, That it is not lawful to choose any of his Sons to succeed
him, in which, the general quiet of the Kingdom is much concerned; and
therefore, though the next Heir were wiser, braver, and more generally beloved,
yet the more immediate must be received, as chosen by God, whether good or bad,
and as honored with his Character.

And if Kings could have inverted their Succession, and chosen their own
Successor, Saint Lewis had preferred his own third Son to Lewis his eldest: And
Alfonsus King of Leon in Spain, had preferred his Daughters to Ferdinand his
eldest Son: And Edward VI. of England had preferred, and did actually prefer
the Lady Jane Gray to his Sisters Mary, and Elizabeth.

And if Successions, especially of such great importance, had not been fixed by
immutable Laws of God and Nature, the various and unconstant inclinations of
the present Governors, especially when shaken by the importunity of Stepmothers
and Mothers, or clouded by the jealousy of Flatterers, or Favorites, had made
the Nations whom they governed, very unhappy: and therefore, God did very
justly and wisely settle this Succession, that both King and People might know,
That it is by him that Kings Reign, and Kingdoms are secured in Peace against
Faction: And it were strange, that this should not hold in Kings, since even
amongst Subjects, the Honor and Nobility that is bestowed upon a Man and his
Heirs, does so necessarily descend upon those Heirs, that the Father, or
Predecessor, cannot exclude the next Successor, or derogate from his Right,
either by renouncing, resigning, following base or mean Trades, or any other:
For, say those Lawyers, since he derives this Right from his old Progenitors,
and owes it not to his Father, his Fathers deed should not prejudge him
therein, Fab. Cod. 9. Tit. 28. Def. 1. Warnee. Consil. 20. Number. 7.

And as yet the Estates of Parliament in both Nations have no Legislative
Power, otherwise than by assenting to what the King does; so that if the King
cannot himself make a Successor, neither can they by consenting; and all that
their consent could imply, would only be, that they and their Successors should
not oppose his Nomination, because of their consent. But that can never amount
to a power of transferring the Monarchy from one branch to another, which would
require, that the Transferrers, or Bestowers, had the Supreme Power originally
in themselves: Nemo enim plus juris in alium transfer potest quam ipse in se
habet.

And if the States of Parliament had this power originally in themselves to
bestow, why might they not reserve it to themselves, and so perpetuate the
Government in their own hands? And this moved Judge Jenkins, in his Treatise
concerning the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, page 25. to say, that no
King can be named, or in any time made in this Kingdom, by the People. A
Parliament never made a King, for there were Kings before there were
Parliaments, and Parliaments are summoned by the King's Writs.

Fourthly, A King cannot in Law alienate his Crown, as is undeniable in the
Opinion of all Lawyers; and if he do, that deed is void and null: nor could he
in Law consent to an Act of Parliament, declaring that he should be the last
King: And if such Consents and Acts had been sufficient to bind Successors,
many silly Kings in several parts of Europe had long since been prevailed upon,
to alter their Monarchy from Hereditary to Elective, or to turn it into a
Commonwealth; and therefore by the same Reason, they cannot consent to exclude
the true Successor: For if they may exclude one, they may exclude all.

Fifthly, In all Societies and Governments, but especially where there is any
association of Powers, as in our Parliaments, there are certain Fundamentals,
which, like the noble parts in the Body, are absolutely necessary for its
preservation; for, without these, there would be no Balance or Certainty. And
thus with us, If the King and each of the Estates of Parliament had not
distinct and known limits, (set by the gracious Concessions of our Monarchs)
each of them would be ready to invade one another's Privileges. And thus, I
conceive that if the Parliament should consent to alienate half of the Kingdom,
or to subject the whole to a Stranger, as in King John's Case in England, and
the Baliols in Scotland; it has been found by the respective Parliaments of
both Kingdoms, that, that Statute would not oblige the Successor. Or, if the
House of Commons in England, or the Boroughs of Scotland, should consent to any
Act excluding their Estate and Representatives from the Parliament, doubtless
that Statute excluding them, would not prejudge their Successors, because that
Act were contrary to one of the Fundamental Laws of the Nation. And the late
Acts of Parliaments excluding Bishops, were reprobated by the ensuing
Parliaments, as such; and therefore by the same Rule, any Statute made
excluding the Legal Successor, would be null and void, as contrary to one of
the great Fundamental Rights of the Nation. And what can be called more a
Fundamental Right, than the Succession of our Monarchy? Since our Monarchy, in
this Isle, has ever been acknowledged to be Hereditary.

And that this Acknowledgment is the great Basis whereupon most of all the
Positions of our Law run, and are established; such as, That the King never
dies: since the very moment in which the last King dies, the next Successor in
Blood is Legally King, and that without any express Recognizance from the
People; and all that oppose Him are Rebels, His Commissions are valid; He may
call Parliaments, dispose of the Lands belonging to the Crown; all men are
liable to do him Homage, and hold their Rights of Him and His Heirs. And
generally this Principle runs through all the veins of our Law; it is that,
which gives life and authority to our Statutes, but receives none from them,
which are the undeniable Marks and Characters of a Fundamental Right in all
Nations: But that this Right of Lineal Succession is one of the Fundamental,
and Unalterable Laws of the Kingdom of Scotland, is clear, by the Commission
granted by the Parliament for the Union, in Anno 1604. in which these words are:

His Majesty vouchsafing, to assure them or His sincere disposition and clear
meaning, no way by the foresaid Union to prejudge of hurt the fundamental Laws,
ancient Privileges, Offices and Liberties of this Kingdom; whereby not only
the Princely Authority of His most Royal Descent has been these many Ages
maintained, but also His Peoples Securities of their Lands and Livings, Rights,
Liberty, Offices and Dignities preserved: Which if they should be innovated,
such Confusion would ensue, as it could no more be free Monarchy.

Sixthly, There would many great Inconveniences arise, both to King and
People, by the Parliaments having this Power: For weak Kings might, by their
own simplicity, and gentle Kings, by the Rebellion of their Subjects, be
induced to consent to such Acts, in which their Subjects would be tempted to
cheat in the one Case, and rebel in the other. Many Kings, likewise, might be
wrought upon, by the importunity of their Wives, or Concubines, or by the
misrepresentations of Favorites, to disinherit the true Successor; and He,
likewise, to prevent this Arbitrariness, would be obliged to enter in a Faction
for His own Support, from His very Infancy.

This would likewise animate all of the Blood Royal to strive for the Throne,
and in order thereunto, they would be easily induced to make Factions in the
Parliament, and to hate one another; whereas the true Successor would be
engaged to hate them all, and to endeavor the Ruin of such as he thought more
Popular than himself; and every new Successor would use new Ministers,
Officers, Methods, and Designs; whereas the apparent Heir uses those whom his
Predecessor preferred.

Nor would the People be in better Case, since they ought to expect upon all
these accounts, constant Civil Wars and Animosities, and by being unsure whom
to follow, might be in great hazard by following him who had no Right. And
their Rights bearing to hold of the King and his Heirs, it would be dubious to
the Vassals, who should be their Superior, as well as who should be their King.
It is also in reason to be expected, that Scotland will ever own the Legal
Descent: And thus we should under different Kings of the same Race, be involved
in new and constant Civil Wars; France shall have a constant door opened by
Alliances with Scotland, to disquiet the Peace of the whole Isle; and England
shall lose all the endeavors it used, to unite this Isle within it self.

Another great Absurdity and Inconveniency which would follow upon the
exclusion of the lineal Successor would be, that if he had a Son, that Son
ought certainly to succeed; and therefore after the next Lawful Heir were
brought from abroad to Reign, he ought to return upon the Birth of this Son;
and if he dyed he would be again called home, and would be sent back by the
Birth of another Son: which would occasion such affronts, uncertainties,
divisions, factions, temptations, that I am sure, no good nor wise man could
admit of such a project.

I find also, that as the debarring the Right Heir, is in reason, the fruitful
seed of all Civil War and misery, (for who can imagine that the Right Heir will
depart from his Right, or that wise men will endanger their lives and fortunes
in opposition to it?) so experience has demonstrated, how dangerous, and bloody
this injustice has proved. Let us remember amongst many Domestic examples, the
miseries that ensued upon the exclusion of Mordredus the Son of Lothus; the
destruction of the Picts for having secluded Alpinus the Right Heir; the Wars
during the Reign of William the Conqueror; those betwixt King Stephen and Henry
the II, betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York; betwixt the Bruce and the
Baliol; the murder of Arthur Duke of Britanny, true Heir of the Crown of
England, with many other foreign Histories, which tell us of the dreadful
mischiefs arising from Pelops preferring his youngest Son to the Kingdom of
Micene; from Aedipus commanding that Polinices his youngest Son should reign
alternately with the eldest; from Parisatis the Queen of Persia's preferring
her youngest Son Cyrus, to her eldest Artaxerxes; from Aristodemus admitting
his two Sons, Proclus and Euristhenes to an equal share in the Lacedaemonian
Throne. The like observations are to be made in the Succession of Ptolemaeus
Lagus, and Ptolemaeus Phisco, In the Sons of Severus, in the Succession of of
Sinesandus who killed his Brother Suintilla, Righteous Heir of Spain, and that
of Francis and Fortia, Duke of Millan, with thousands of others: In all which,
either the Usurpers, or the Kingdom that obeyed them, perished utterly.

To prevent which differences and mischiefs, the Hungarians would not admit
Almus the younger Brother, in exclusion of the elder Colomanus, though a silly
deformed Creature, albeit Almus was preferred by Ladislaus (the Kings eldest
Brother) to both.

Nor would France acquiesce in St. Lewis's preferring CHARLES's third Son, to
Lewis the Eldest. And the English refused to obey Lady Jean Gray, in prejudice
of Queen Mary, though a Papist and persecuter. Tali and constanti veneratione
nos Angli legi timos Reges prosequimur, etc. says an English Historian.

Seventhly, If Parliaments had such Powers as this, then our Monarchy would not
be hereditary, but elective; the very essence of an hereditary Monarchy
consisting in the right of Succession, according to the contingency of blood.
Whereas if the Parliament can prefer the next, save one, they may prefer the
last of all the Live, for the next save one, is no more next than the last is
next. And the same reason by which they can choose a Successor (which can only
be that they have a Power above him) should likewise in my opinion justify
their deposing of Kings. And since the Successor has as good right to succeed,
as the present King has to Govern (for that Right of blood which makes him
first, makes the other next, and all these Statutes which acknowledge the
present Kings Prerogatives, acknowledge that they belong to him and his Heirs)
it follows clearly, that if the Parliament can preclude the one, they may
exclude the other. And we saw even in the last age, that such reasons as are
now urged to incapacitate the Children of our last Monarch, from the hope of
Succession, viz. Popery and arbitrary Government, did embolden men to Dethrone,
and Murder the Father himself who was actual King.

Eighthly, That such Acts of Parliament, altering the Succession, are
ineffectual, and null, is clear from this, that though such an Act of
Parliament were made, it could not debar the true Successor: because by the
Laws of all Nations, and particularly of these Kingdoms, the right of
Succession purges all defects, and removes all impediments, which can prejudge
him who is to Succeed. And as Craig, one of our learned Lawyers has very well
expressed it, tanta est Regii sanguinis praerogativa, and dignitas, ut vitium
non admittat, nec se contaminarep atiatur. And thus though he who were to
succeed, had committed Murder, or were declared a Traitor formerly to the
Crown for open Rebellion against the King, and Kingdom; yet he needed not be
restored by Act of Parliament upon his coming to the Crown: But his very Right
of blood would purge all these imperfections. Of which there are reasons given
by Lawyers: one is, that no man can be a Rebel against himself, nor can the
King have a Superior. And consequently, there can be none whom he can offend.
And it were absurd that he who can restore all other men, should need to be
restored himself. The second reason is, because the punishment of crimes, such
as confiscations, etc. are to be inflicted by the Kings Authority, or to fall
to the Kings Thesaury; and it were most absurd, that a man should exact from
himself a punishment. Like as, upon this account it is, that though in the
Canon Law, Bastards cannot be promoted to sacred orders without dispensation,
nor can alibi nati, that is to say, People born out of England, be admitted to
succeed in England, by express Act of Parliament there; Yet Agapaetus,
Theodorus, Gelasius, and many others, have been admitted to be Popes without
any formal dispensation, their election clearing that imperfection. And the
Statute of alibi nati, has been often found not to extend to the Royal Line.

That the Succession to the Crown purges all defects, is clear, by many
instances, both at home and abroad. The instances at home are, in England Henry
the VI. Being disabled and attainted of High Treason by Act of Parliament, it
was found by the Judges, notwithstanding that from the moment he assumed the
Crown, he had Right to succeed without being restored. And the like was
resolved by the Judges in the case of Henry the VII, as Bacon observes in his
History of Henry the VII. Fol. 13. And in the case of Queen Elizabeth, who was
declared Bastard by Act of Parliament, as is clear by Cambden, anno 2,
Elizabeth. And though in Scotland there be no express instances of this,
because though some Rebellious Ringleaders in Scotland, have often in a
private capacity been very injurious to their King; Yet their Parliaments have
been ever very tender of attainting the Blood Royal, or presumptive Heirs. But
Alexander Duke of Albany, and his Succession being declared Traitors, by his
Brother King James the IV, his Son John was notwithstanding called home from
France upon his Uncles death, and declared Tutor and Governor, without any
remission, or being restored: That Employment being found to be due to him by
the right of Blood: Therefore he had been much more declared the true Successor
of the Crown if his Cousin King James the V. had died.

These being sufficient to establish our design, I shall mention only some
foreign stories.

CHARLES the VII. of France, who though banished by Sentence of the Parliament
of Paris, did afterward succeed to the Crown. And though Lewis the XII, was
forfeited for taking up Arms against CHARLES the VIII, yet he succeeded to him
without restitution. And Lewis the II. his Son being declared a Rebel, whom his
Father desiring to disinherit, and to substitute in his place Charles Duke of
Normandy, that Son had succeeded if he had not been hindered by the Nobility,
who plainly told him it was impossible to exclude his Son from the Succession.

My next task shall be to satisfy the arguments brought for maintaining this
opinion, whereof the first is:

That God himself has authorized the inverting the Right of Succession, by the
examples of Esau, Solomon, and others.

To which I answer, that these instances which are warranted by express
commands from God, are no more to be drawn into example, than the robbing of
the Egyptians Earrings. And it is needing an express command, and the
expressing of that command, does evince, that otherwise Jacob, nor Solomon
could not have succeeded against the privilege of Birthright and Possession.
David was a Prophet, and a Man according to God's own Heart, and so it is
presumable, that he knew the Will of God, and God did wonderfully and
remarkably declare Solomon to be preferable to all his Brethren.

The next Objection is, That it is naturally implied in all Monarchies, That
the People shall obey whilst the Prince governs justly, as in the paction
betwixt David, and the People, 2 Samuel 5. which is most suitable to the
Principles of Justice and Government, since Relations cannot stand by one side;
so that when the King leaves off to be King, and becomes a Tyrant, the People
may consult their own security in laying him aside, as Tutors may be removed
when they are suspected; and that this is most just, when Kings are Idolaters,
since God is rather to be obeyed, than men.

To all which it is answered, That God, who loves Order, and knows the
extravagant Levity and Insolence of men, especially when baited by hope of
Prey, or Promotion, did wisely think fit to ordain under the pain of Eternal
Damnation, that all men should be subject to Superior Powers for Conscience
sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. And that whoever resists the Power, resists God, Romans 13.
2. reserving the punishment of Kings to himself, as being only their Superior.
And thus David, Asa, and others, committed Crimes, but were not deposed, nor
debarred by the People.

Nor were even the idolatrous Kings, such as Achab, Manasse, etc. judged by
their Subjects.

Nor did the Prophets exhort the People to rise against them, though they were
opposing God's express and immediate Will, and overturning the uncontroverted
Fundamentals of Religion.

Nor did the Fathers of the Primitive Church excite the Christians to oppose
the Heathen and Idolatrous Princes under which they lived, and Paul commands
them to pray for these Heathen Emperors.

Nor was the Emperor Basilicus deposed for abrogating the Council of Chalcedon,
as is pretended by some Republicans, but was turned out by the just Successor
Zeno, whom he had formerly dethroned.

Nor were Zeno or Anastasius degraded for their errors in Religion, or their
vices by the ancient Christians, but were oppressed by private faction. And sure
they must think God unable to redress himself, who without warrant, and against
his express warrant, will usurp so high a power. And we in this rebellious
principle, own the greatest extravagancy with which We can charge the Pope and
Jesuits, and disown not only our own Confession of faith, which Article 1.
Chap. 22. acknowledges, That infidelity, or difference in Religion does not
make void the Magistrates just or legal authority, nor free the People from
their due obedience to him, but contradict the best Protestant Divines, as
Musculus, Melancthon, and others; vid. libell. de vitand. superstit. Anno 1150.
and Consil. Biden. Dec. 1. Consil. 10. and Decad. 10. Consil. 5. nor can the
subterfuge used by Buchannan, and others, satisfy, whereby they contend that
the former Texts of Scripture prove only that the Office, but not the Persons
of Kings are Sacred: so that Parliaments or People may lay aside the Persons,
though not the Office, seeing the Sacred Text secures oftener the Person, than
the Office, as I have formerly more fully proved. And if this principle
prevailed as to the differences in the Theory of Religion, it would in the next
step be urged as to the practice of Religion; and we would change our Kings,
because we thought them not pious, as well as Protestant. And did not our
Sectarians refine so far as to think dominion founded on grace? and this
opinion seems to me more solid than the other, for certainly an impious
Protestant, is a worse Governor, and less Gods Vicegerent, and Image, than a
devout Papist. And amongst Protestants, every Sect will reject a King, because
he is not of their opinion. And thus our Covenanters, by the Act of the
West-kirk, Anno 1650. declared, they would disown our present Monarch, if he
did not own the Covenant. And though a King were a Protestant, yet still this
pretense that he designed to introduce Popery, would raise his People against
him, if differences in Religion could lawfully arm Subjects against their King,
or did empower them to debar his Successor. And when this cheat prevailed
against devout K. Charles I. the Martyr, of that Orthodox Faith to which he was
said to be Enemy, what a madness is it to allow this fatal Error, which was
able to ruin us in the last Age, and went so near to destroy us in this? This
is indeed, to allow that Arbitrariness against our Kings, which we would not
allow in them to us.

The second Objection is, that in England the Parliament has frequently
devolved the Crown and Government upon such as were not otherwise to have
succeeded, as in the instances of Edward the II. and Richard the II, the first
of whom was most unjustly deposed, for making use of Gavestoun, and the
Spencers; which shows how extravagant the People are in their humors, rather
than how just their Power is: For besides that we do not read, that these
Counselors were unsufferable, there is no good Christian that can say, that a
King can be deposed for using ill Counselors. And as to Richard the II. his
case is so fully examined, and all the Articles brought both against him, and
Edward the II, so fully answered by the learned Arnisaeus a Protestant Lawyer,
(and who had no other interest in that debate than a love to Truth and Law) in
that Treatise. Quod nulla ex causa subditis fas sit contra legitimum principem
arma sumere, That we Protestants should be ashamed to bring again to the field
such instances, upon which Arnisaeus, in answer to the Fourteenth Article
against Richard the II, viz. that herefus'd to allow the Laws made in
Parliament, does very well remark, that this was in effect to consent to their
being King, and to transfer upon them the Royal Power, and this will be the
event of all such undertakings.

The Instances of Henry IV. and Henry VII. are of no more weight than the other
two, since these were likewise only Kings de facto, till King Henry VII. by his
Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward IV. did by her
transmit a just Title to his Successor; and therefore it was not strange, that
either of these should allow the Parliament to interpose, when they owed to
them the possession of the Throne. But yet Henry VII. himself (as the Lord
Bacon relates in his History) shunned to have the Parliament declare his Title
to be just, being content with these ambiguous words, viz. That the inheritance
of the Crown should rest, remain and abide in the King, etc. And upon this
account it was, that the same King caused a Law to be made, that such as should
serve the King for the time, being in his Wars, could not be attainted or
impeached in their Persons or Estates.

As to Henry VIII. his procuring an Act, whereby the Parliament declares, That
in case he had no Issue by the Lady Jean Seymour, he might dispose of the Crown
to whatsoever person he should in his own discretion think fit.

It is answered, That by a former Statute in the 25th year of his Reign, he, by
Act of Parliament, settles the Crown upon the Heirs-male of his own Body, and
for lack of such Issue to Lady Elizabeth, and for lack of such Issue also, to
the next Heirs of the King, who should for ever succeed according to the Right
of Succession of the Crown of England; which shows, that the Succession to the
Crown of England is established by the Law of Nature, and the Fundamental Laws
of England, upon the Heirs of Blood, according to the Proximity of Degrees; so
that though that King did afterward prevail with the Parliament to declare
this Elizabeth a Bastard, as he did also his daughter Mary by another Act, and
resolve to settle the Crown upon Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond: Yet these
Acts teach us how dangerous it is to leave Parliaments to the impression of
Kings in the case of naming a Successor, as it is to expose Kings to the
Arbitrariness of Parliaments. But such care had God of his own Laws, that Mary
succeeded, notwithstanding she was Papist, and Elizabeth succeeded her, though
she was declared Bastard; the Rights of Blood prevailing over the Formalities
of Divorce, and the Dispensations of Popes, as the strength of Nature does
often prevail over Poisons. And God removed the Duke of Richmond by death, to
prevent the unjust Competition, and so little notice was taken of this, and the
subsequent Act Anno 1535. that the Heirs of Blood succeeded without repealing
of that Act, as an Act in it self invalid from the beginning: for only such
Acts are past by, without being repealed.

And Blackwood, page 45. observes very well, that so conscious were the Makers
of these Acts, of the illegality thereof, and of their being contrary to the
immutable Laws of God, Nature and Nations, that none durst produce that King's
Testament wherein he did nominate a Successor, conformable to the power granted
by those Acts, that as soon as they were freed by his death from the violent
Oppressions that had forced them to alter a Successor three several times, and
at last to swear implicitly to whomsoever he should nominate, (a Preparative
which this Age would not well bear, though they cite it) they proclaimed first
Queen Mary their Queen, though a Papist, and thereafter Queen Elizabeth, whom
themselves had formerly declared a Bastard.

And as in all these Acts there is nothing declaring the Parliaments to have
power to name a Successor, but only giving a power to the King, for preventing
mischiefs, that might arise upon the dubiousness of the Succession, to nominate
a Successor, two of the legal Successors having been declared Bastards upon
some Niceties, not of Nature, but of the Pope's Bulls for divorcing: So, this
Instance can only prove, that the King may nominate a Successor, and that the
Parliament may consent, not to quarrel at it, (which is all that they do) but
does not at all prove, that where the Right of Nature is clear, the Parliament
may invert the same. And Strangers who considered more the dictates of Law than
of Passion, did in that Age conclude, That no Statute could be valid when made
contrary to the fundamental Law of the Kingdom: Arnisaeus cap. 7. number. 11.
Henricus VIII. Angliae Rex Eduardum filium primo, deinde Mariam, denique
Elizabetham suos haeredes fecerat, verum non aliter ea omnia valent quam si cum
jure Regni conveniant. Vid. Curt. Tract. Feud. Par. 4. Number. 129.

There seems greater difficulty to arise from 13 Eliz. c. 2. by which it is
enacted, that if any person shall affirm, that the Parliament of England has
not full power to bind and govern the Crown in point of Succession and descent,
that such a person, during the Queens life, shall be guilty of High Treason.

But to this Act it is answered, that this Act does not debar the next legal
and natural Successor; and these words, That the Parliament has power to bind
and Govern the Succession, must be, as all other general expressions in
Statutes, interpreted and restricted by other uncontroverted Laws; and so the
sense must be, that the Parliament is judge where there are differences betwixt
Competitors in nice and controvertable Points which cannot be otherwise
decided: and both this and the former Acts made in Henry the VI. time, are not
general Laws, but temporary Acts, and personal Privileges, and so cannot
overturn the known current of Law, Quod vero contra rationem juris receptum
est, non est producendum ad consequentias. And in all these instances it is
remarkable, that the restriction was made upon the desire of the Sovereign, and
not of the Subject. And if we look upon this Act as made to secure them against
Mary Queen of Scotland, and to let her know, that it was to no purpose for her
to design any thing against the Right or Person of Queen Elizabeth, as being
declared a Bastard, by Act of Parliament in England; since her other Right as
next undoubted Heir by Blood to the Crown, might be altered, or Governed: we
must acknowledge it to be only one of these Statutes, which the Law says, are
made ad terrorem and ex terrore only. Nor was there ever use made of it by
Queen Elizabeth, nor her Parliaments; so fully were they convinced, that this
pretended power was so unjust, as that it could not be justified by an Act of
Parliament, being contrary to the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and of
the Fundamental Laws of both Kingdoms. But this Law being made to exclude Queen
Mary, and the Scottish line, as is clear by that clause, wherein it is declared
that every Person or Persons of what degree or Nation soever they be, shall
during the Queens life declare or publish, that they have Right to the Crown of
England during the Queens life, shall be disinabled to enjoy the Crown in
Succession, inheritance, or otherwise, after the Queens death; It therefore
follows, that it was never valid: For if it had, King James might have thereby
been excluded by that person who should have succeeded next to the Scottish
Race. For it is undeniable, that Queen Mary did, during Q. Elizabeth's Life,
pretend Right to the Crown, upon the account that Queen Elizabeth was declared
Bastard. And therefore the calling in of King James after this Act, and the
acknowledging his Title, does clearly evince, That the Parliament of England
knew, that they had no power to make any such Act: The words of which
acknowledgment of King James's Right, I have thought fit to set down as it is
in the Statute it self, 1 Jac. Cap. 1.

That the Crown of England did descend upon King James by inherent Birthright,
as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal.
And to this Recognition they do submit themselves and Posterities for ever,
until the last drop of their Blood be spilt. And further does beseech His
Majesty to accept of the same Recognition, as the first Fruits of their Loyalty
and Faith to His Majesty, and to His Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever.

It may be also objected, That by the 8 Act. Parl. 1. Ja. 6. it is provided in
Scotland, that all Kings and Princes that shall happen to Reign and bear Rule
over that Kingdom, shall, at the time of their Coronation, make their faithful
promise by Oath, in presence of the eternal God, that they shall maintain the
true Religion of Jesus Christ, the preaching of the Holy Word, and due and
right Administration of the Sacraments now received and preached within this
Kingdom; from which, two Conclusions may be inferred:

1. That by that Act the Successor to the Crown may be restricted.

2. That the Successor to the Crown must be a Protestant, that being the
Religion which was professed and established the time of this Act.

To which it is answered, That this Act relates only to the Crowning of the
King, and not to the Succession. Nor is a Coronation absolutely necessary:
Coronatio enim magis est ad ostentationem, quam ad necessitatem. Nec ideo Rex
est quia coronatur, sed coronatur quia Rex est. Oldrad. consil. 90. number. 7.
Balbus lib. de coronat. page 40.

Nor do we read that any Kings were Crowned in Scripture except Joas: And
Clovis King of France was the first who was Crowned in Europe.

Nor are any Kings of Spain Crowned till this day; Sisenandus was the first who
in the fourth Tolletan Council gave such an Oath amongst the Christians, as
Trajan was the first amongst the Heathen Emperors. And we having had no
Coronation Oath till the Reign of King Gregory, which was in Anno 879. he
having found the Kingdom free from all Restrictions, could not have limited his
Successor, or at least could not have debarred him by an Oath: Nullam enim
poterat legem dictare posteris, cum par in parem non habeat imperium, as our
Blackwood observes, page 13.

(2.) There is no Clause irritant in this Act debarring the Successor, or
declaring the Succession Null, in case his Successor gave not this Oath.

(3.) The Lawful Successor, though he were of a different Religion from his
People, (as God forbid he should be) may easily swear, That he will maintain
the Laws now standing. And any Parliament may legally secure the Successor from
overturning their Religion or Laws, though they cannot debar him. And though
the Successor did not swear to maintain the Laws, yet are they in little danger
by his Succession; since all Acts of Parliament stand in force, till they be
repealed by subsequent Parliaments, and the King cannot repeal an Act without
the consent of Parliament. But to put this beyond all debate, the 2d Act of
this current Parliament is opposed, whereby it is declared, That the Right and
Administration of the Government is immediately devolved upon the next lawful
Heir after the death of the King or Queen; and that no difference in Religion,
nor no Law nor Act of Parliament can stop or hinder them in the free and actual
Administration: Which is an abrogation of the foresaid Act concerning the
Coronation as to this Point; for how can the administration be devolved
immediately upon the Successor, if he cannot administer till he be Crowned, and
have sworn this Oath?

And therefore King James urges very well, That sure immediately upon the death
of the last King, the Successor acquires a Right; they who debar the Successor,
do not exclude a Successor from entering, but debar a righteous King. And by
Act 2. Parl. 1. Sess. 2. Chapter 2. It is declared Treason to suspend the King from
the Style, Honor, or Kingly Name. And whereas Dolman urges, That at all
Coronations the People are asked, If they will have such a King? It is
answered, That this is no necessary Solemnity, and is done rather to give the
People occasion to show their affection, than their power; even as a Gentleman
in England is appointed to offer Due^ to any who would controvert the King's
Right who is to be Crowned, notwithstanding of which offer, he who would
controvert the Title, would certainly commit Treason. Nor can it be denied from
our History, but that many of our Kings have reigned long before they were
Crowned, and that those who rebelled against them before their Coronation, were
as legally Traitors as those who rebelled after it.

All Kings number the years of their Reign from their Predecessors death, and
not from their Coronation. They grant new Commissions and Judicatures (who
should understand Law best of all others) decide in their Name, and by their
Authority, before they be Crowned: So that I cannot but smile at Dolman's
Conceit, who says, That a King before his Coronation is betrothed, but not a
King espoused to the Commonwealth till his Coronation, and consequently may,
till then, be rejected.

But this is a mere Whimsie and Scholastic Conceit, for sure he acts as King;
and since they who oppose him commit Treason, it is certain that he cannot be
rejected, and the solid Right of Blood, and not airy Formalities, make Kings:
Nor can I understand how Election and Birth can be joined, to complete the
excellency of Hereditary Monarchy, as Doleman teaches; for make it our Elective
upon the unfitness of the Successor, and all Successors shall be called unfit
and unable to govern, when a Faction resolves to set up a Rival, though he be
really yet more unfit than the true Heir is.

The next Objection is, That since the King and Parliament may by Act of
Parliament alter the Successions of private Families, though transmitted by the
Right of Blood, why may they not alter the Succession in the Royal Family?

To which it is answered, that the reason of the difference lies in this, that
the Heirs of the Crown owe not their Succession to Parliaments: for they
succeed by the Laws of God, Nature, and the Fundamental Laws of the Nation;
whereas private Families are subject to Parliaments, and inferior to them, and
owe their private Rights to a municipal Law, and so may and ought in point of
Right to be regulated by them. And yet I am very clear, that a Parliament
cannot arbitrarily debar the eldest Son of a private Family, and devolve the
Succession upon the younger: and if they did so, their Acts would be null. But
if this argument were good, we might as well conclude by it, that no person
born out of England, or attainted of Treason could succeed to the Crown;
because he could not succeed to a private Estate. All which and many more
instances do clearly demonstrate that the Successor to the Crown cannot be
debarred, nor the Succession to the Crown diverted by Act of Parliament.

The last objection is, that Robert the III. King of Scotland, was by an Act of
Parliament preferred to David and Walter, who (as he pretends) were truly the
eldest lawful Sons of Robert the 2 d. because Euphan Daughter to the Earl of
Ross was first lawful Wife to King Robert the 2 d, and she bore him David Earl
of Strathern, and Walter Earl of Athol, Alexander Earl of Buchan, and Euphan
who was married to James Earl of Dowglass, after whose decease he married
Elizabeth Muir, Daughter to Sir Adam Muir; not so much (as Buchannan observes)
from any design to marry a second Wife, as from the great love he carried to
Elizabeth Muir, whom because of her extraordinary Beauty he had loved very
passionately in his youth, and before he married the Earl of Rosses Daughter,
and from the love which he bore to the Sons whom Elizabeth had born before that
first Marriage, who were John Earl of Carrick (who thereafter succeeded to the
Crown by the Title of Robert the 3 d,) and Robert Earl of Fife and Monteith, he
prevailed with the Parliament to prefer John eldest Son by Elizabeth Muir, to
the two Sons which he had by the Earl of Rosses Daughter, who was (as they
pretend) his first lawful Wife.

In which though I might debate many nice points of Law relating to this
Subject, yet I choose only to insist on these few convincing answers.

1. That in a Case of so great moment Historians should be little credited,
except they could have produced very infallible Documents; and as in general
one Historian may make all who succeed him err, so in this Case Boethius (who
was the first) lived and wrote 200 years after the Marriage of King Robert the
2 d, and wrote his History at Aberdeen, very remote from the Registers and
Records by which he should have instructed himself; nor did he know the
importance of this point, having touched it only transiently, though it has
been design'dly pressed by Buchannan, to evince that the Parliaments of
Scotland might prefer any of the Royal Line they pleased; and it is indeed
probable that King Robert the 2 d. did for some time make no great noise of his
first Marriage with Elizabeth Muir, least the meanness of the Match should have
weakened his Interest upon his first coming to the Crown, he being himself the
first of the Race of the Stuarts, and having so strong Competitors as the Earl
of Dowglass, who claimed Right to the Crown in the Right of the Baliol and the
Cummings, as Boethius himself observes.

2. King Robert the 3 d. having succeeded as the eldest lawful Son, and having
been received as such by that Parliament, and his Posterity by all succeeding
Parliaments, the Possession of the King and the Acquiesence of the People is
the most infallible proof that can be adduc'd for proving that Robert was the
eldest lawful Son, nor have most Kings in Europe, or the Heads of most private
Families any other proof of their being the eldest and Lawful Sons, save that
they succeeded and were acknowledged as such.

3. To balance the Authority of these Historians, I shall produce the
Testimony of the Learned Sir Lewis Stewart, one of the most famous Lawyers we
ever had, and who ought much more to be believed than Buchannan, not only
because he was more disinterested, but because he found upon Acts of Parliament
and old Charters which he himself had seen in the Registers, in which Elizabeth
Muir is acknowledged to have been the first Wife. Buchananus lib. 9. in vita
Roberti 2. affirmat Euphaniam Comitis Rossenssis filiam primam Regis Roberti 2.
uxorem fuisse and ea mortua, Regem superinduxisse Elizabetham Moram ex qua
prius Liberos ternos mares suscepisset, et eam uxorem duxisse, ejusque liberos
regno destinasse, ut postea ^orum natu maximus successit quod quam f^lsum sit,
apparet ex archivis in carcere Edinburgensi reconditis, ubi exstant separata
acta duorum Parliamentorum, subscripta manibus Ecclesiasticorum praefalum,
nobilium, baronum, and aliorum statuum Parliamenti, and eorum sigillis
roborata, quibus Elizabetha Mora agnoscitur prima uxor, and Euphania Rosse
secunda, and liberis ex Elizabetha Mora tanquam justis haeredibus Regni,
successive regnum decernitur, and post eos liberis Euphaniae Rosse nec non
ibidem cartae extant plurimae, factae per Davidem secundum, eorum patruum
magnum ex diversis terris, Joanni filio primogenito, nepotis ejus Roberti, dum
Euphania Rosse viveret nec non Davidi filio natu maximo Euphaniae Rosse quem
solum filium indigitat Roberti nepotis, quod non fecisset si Elizabetha Mora
non prius fuisset nupta Roberto ejus nepoti, nam primogenitus nunquam
attribuitur notho imo ego plures quam viginti cartas in archivis inveni, ubi
etiam eas reliqui, ex quibus sole clarius elucessit, Elizabetham Moram primam
fuisse uxorem, and Euphaniam Rosse secundam, nam extra controversiam, liberi
Elizabethae Morae aetate grandiores erant liberis Euphaniae Rosse: which Paper
I did get from the Lord Pitmeden, who has himself written some learned
Observations upon this Point.

4. I have my self seen an Act of Parliament (found out by the industry of Sir
George Mackenzie of Tarbet, now Lord Register) having the entire Seals of the
Members of Parliament appended thereto, by which the Parliament do swear
Allegiance to Robert the Second, the first King of the Race of the Stuarts; and
after him, Roberto Comiti de Carrict, filio suo natu maximo (his eldest Son) in
Anno 1371. which was the first year of his Reign; I have also found out a Copy
of an Act of Parliament amongst the Records of the late famous Lord Register
Skeen, which I think fit to insert, word for word, at the end of this Treatise,
in Latin, the substance whereof in English runs thus:

That a Parliament being called at Scoon the 4th. of April, Anno 1373. and
third year of the Reign of King Robert the Second, on purpose to secure the
Succession, and to prevent all disorders that might afterward arise in any
part of the Kingdom about Titles to the Crown; It was Enacted by the said King
Robert the Second, with the Advice and Consent of the whole Three Estates, That
the Sons then born to the King by his first and second Wives, and their Heirs,
should in order succeed to the King in manner after specified: That is to say,
that his eldest Son by the first Marriage, John Earl of Carrick, should
immediately succeed, as had been already declared in the preceding Parliament,
and after him his Heirs; And in case he died without Issue, that his Brother,
Robert Earl of Monteith, the King's second Son of that Marriage, should
succeed, and his Heirs: Which failing, that Alexander, Earl of Badenoch, the
King's third Son of that Bed, and his Heirs, should inherit the Crown; And in
case that failed, that David, Earl of Strathern, the King's fourth Son by his
second Wife, and his Heirs, should succeed; And that failing, that Walter the
King's fifth Son by the said second Wife, and his Heirs, should inherit the
Crown. And if it should happen that the said five Sons and their Issue should
fail, that then the next in Blood of the Royal Line should succeed. Which Act
all the Three Estates did for themselves and their Heirs for ever, solemnly
swear to observe, as is more at large to be seen in the Original it self.

And if the pretended Defect be true, it was a very palpable, and a very
undeniable one, and could not but have been unanswerably known to the whole
Nation. And how can we imagine, that the whole Parliament would have
unanimously drawn upon themselves so dreadful a Perjury, by excluding the
lawful Heir, against their National Oath in the Reign of King Kenneth the
third, whereby they swore to own always the immediate Heir, or that they would
have entailed upon themselves a Civil War, by preferring even a questionable
Heir, after the Miseries which they had lately then felt, in the Competition
betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol; amongst which Seals, the Seal of James Earl
of Douglas is one, and how ridiculous is it to think, that he would sit and
declare a Bastard preferable to the Brother of his own Lady, and to his own
Lady who would have succeeded, if her Brothers had died without Succession?
Which Act of Parliament does also clearly prove, that Buchanan did not at all
understand matters of Fact in this part of the History; for he asserts, that
after the death of Euphan Ross, the King married Elizabeth Muir, and did by Act
of Parliament obtain the Crown to be settled upon Robert the third, Son to the
said Elizabeth Muir, upon whom he also bestowed the Title of Carrick; all which
is most false, for this Act of Parliament is dated in Anno 1371. and King
Robert the second succeeded to the Crown that year, nor did Euphan Ross die
till the third year after he succeeded to the Crown, and so not till the year
1374. and yet in Anno 1371. this Act is past, designing him Heir to the Crown,
and Earl of Carrick, and consequently he was so designed before the death of
Euphan Ross.

5. I have seen a Charter granted by King Robert the 2 d, when he was only
Steward of Scotland, in anno 1365, and so long before he was King. In which
Charter likewise, John, thereafter King, by the name of Robert the 3 d, is a
conjunct Disponer with him, under the express designation of the eldest Son and
Heir. Robertus Senescallus Scotiae, Comes de Strathern, and Joannes Senescallus
primogenitus and haeres ipsius Dominus Baroniae de Kyle, etc. which Charter
confirms to the Abbacy of Pasley several Lands disponed to them, by Reginaldus
More, Father to Sir William More of Abercorn. And I find that David Duke of
Rothsay, was always in the Charters granted by his Father King Robert the
first, called Primogenitus, and he was no Bastard, nor can this designation be
given to a Bastard, as is clear by Covaruvias de Matrim. part. 2. cap. 8.. 2.
number 4. But how can it be imagined that the Monks of Pasley would have taken a
Right from a person as Heir to the Crown, who was not: for this would have
inferred Treason against them, beside the annulling their Right, or who could
understand better the lawfulness of a Marriage, than a body of Churchmen,
living in the time, and very near to the Residence of the married Persons, and
in whose Conventual-Church the said King Robert and Elizabeth Muir lie buried
together.

Item, I have seen in the Registers another Charter granted by King Robert the
2d. in the first year of his Reign, with the consent of John Earl of Carrick,
primogenitus and haeres, Allano de Lavidia terrarum de Whitslet; And another
granted by the said King, 1. June, anno primo regni, confirming to Paulo Metire
a Charter granted by the Earl of Ross, Father to Euphan, wherein the said John
primogenitus and haeres, is a Witness: And to show that the said Euphan Ross
was then living when he was so designed Heir, there is a Charter to her by the
King upon the very same day of the Lands of Lochleaven. As also, there is a
Charter granted by King Robert the 2 d, the first year of his Reign, to
Alexander his Son, and another to John Kennedy of the Barony of Dalrymole, in
both which the said John Earl of Carrick is called Primogenitus, and is Witness
with the Earl of Douglas; so that he has been designed eldest Son and Heir
openly, uncontrovertedly, and in all Papers, and with the consent of the second
Wife and her Relations.

6. In the Parliament 1372. the said John Earl of Carrick is designed to be
Lieutenant of the Kingdom, and all the Estates of Parliament swear to own him
in his Government, and which Statute is printed amongst the Statutes of King
Robert the second, Father to the said John, and which must be during the
Marriage with Euphan Ross, for she lived three years after her Husband was
King, and he succeeded to the Crown Anno 1371. And this also confutes Buchanan,
who asserts, that he was created Earl of Carrick after the death of Euphan
Ross, and it is against all sense and reason to think that he could have been
acknowledged during her life, if he had not been the true apparent Heir of the
Crown, and a lawful Son.

I have also seen in Fordon's History, lib. 14. page 73. a Charter granted by
King David to the Bishops, with the consent of Robert his Nephew, and his Sons
giving power to the Bishops to dispose in Testament upon their own Movables,
which before that time did by a corrupt custom fall to the King, in which
Charter, the Witnesses are, Robertus Senescallus Comes de Strathern, Nepos
noster Joannes Senescallus Comes de Carrict, filius suus primogenitus and
haeres, Thomas Comes de Mar, Georgius de Dunbar, Comes de March, and Gulielmus
Comes de Dowglass; so that here is not only the attestation of the Father
before he was King, naming John Earl of Carrick, thereafter King Robert the 2
d. his eldest Son and Heir, but the attestation of the Grand-Uncle King David,
who could be no ways biased in the Affair; and here he is ranked before the
three eldest Earls in the Nation, who were then the three first Subjects
therein; and it is against all Sense, to think that the whole Bishops would
have sought the consent of the said John as Apparent Heir of the Crown, if he
had not been Apparent Heir. I find also, that Fordon calls him when he is
crowned King, Primogenitus Roberti secundi; nor was there the least opposition
made to his Coronation, nor to the Coronation of Annabella Drummond his Queen
(a Daughter of the House of Stob-hall, now Pearth,) though both the Sons of the
second Marriage were then alive. I find also, that Boethius himself
acknowledges, that the Earl of Marches Son George, being pursued for having
married clandestinely one of the Daughters of Eliz. Muir, his defense was, that
he married her when she was the Daughter of a private Subject, and before King
Robert was King, whereas if she had been only a Bastard-Daughter, it could have
been no Crime to have married her.

7. Walter (who they pretend should have succeeded to the Crown,) having killed
his Nephew King James the first, Son to King Robert the 3 d; He was not only
not owned after the death of the said King James, as certainly he had been if
his Title had been good, and his Right so recent and demonstrable, having so
many great and powerful Relations, that his Father was induced upon their
account to marry his Mother; but yet the said Walter was by all the Parliament
unanimously condemned as a Traitor, for having conspired the death of his
lawful Prince. Nor does Boethius justify Walter's Title in the least, but on
the contrary, magnifies the Parliament for their just Sentence. As did likewise
Aeneas Silvius the Popes learned Legate, who exhorted the Parliament to condemn
him.

8. How is it imaginable, that King Robert who had so lately, and after a
strong Competition come to the Crown, would have adventured to make his Title
yet more disputable, by preferring a Bastard to the true Heir, who had so many
Friends by his Mother, and who being an Infant had never disobliged him.

9. If we will consider the opinion of the Civilians, whom we and almost all
Nations follow in the Cases of Succession, we will find, that the said King
Robert the third was the eldest and lawful Son of King Robert the second,
Filius legitimus, and non legitimatus: For,

1. They conclude, that a Son is proved to be a lawful Son by the Assertion of
the Father, Alciat tract. praesumpt. Reg. 1. praesumpt. 2. numb. 6. and
certainly the Father is the best Judge in such Cases; but so it is we have the
Father owning the said Robert the 3 d. to be his eldest Son and Heir, both in
Charters and Acts of Parliaments, which are the most solemn of all Deeds.

2. Quando pater instituit aliquem tanquam filium suum, which holds in this
Case, where the Father institutes and leaves him Heir, and the Parliament
swears Allegiance to him as the Heir, Muscard. de prob. vol. 2. conclus. 799.
And in dubious Cases, the Father's naming such a man as a Son, presumes him to
be a lawful Son, nominatio parentis indueit filiationem in dubio, l. ex facto.
si quis Rogatus ff. ad trebell.

3. Even Fame, and the common opinion of the People, do in favors of these
that are in Possession, and in ancient Cases, prove and filiationem, and
legitimationem, Mascard. conclus. 792. but much more, where the Fame and common
Opinion is supported by other Arguments, fulgos consil. 128. Panorm. in cap.
transmiss. qui filii sunt legitimi.

4. When Writs are produced, calling a man a Son, the Law concludes him to be a
lawful Son. Muscard. vol. 2. conclus. 800. number. 15. all which can be easily
subsum'd in our Case. In which Robert the 3 d. is named not only Son but Heir,
and Allegiance sworn to him, even in the lifetime of the second Wife and her
Relations sitting in Paliament, and all this acquiesc'd in for many hundreds of
years, and the Competitors punished as Traitors by the unanimous consent of all
the Parliament.

I know that Buchannan does most bitterly inveigh against those Laws made by
King Kenneth the 3 d, as Laws whereby the ancient Right of Succession was
innovated, and whereby the Government was settled upon Children who were neither
able to consult with the People, nor to defend them, and whereby those had the
Government of the Nation conferred upon them who were not capable to Govern
themselves.

To which my Answer is, That in this, Buchanan's Malice contradicts his
History; for his own History tells us, That the Scots swore Allegiance to
Fergus and his Posterity; and consequently Fergus's Son ought by Law to have
succeeded, and not his Brother; for his Brother was none of his Posterity, and
therefore those Laws made by King Kenneth, did but renew the old Law, and the
Innovation introduced in favors of the Uncles, was a subversion of the
fundamental Law to which they had sworn.

2. That the old Law was not abrogated, but was in Being by virtue of the first
Oath, appears very clear by Buchanan himself, who confesses, that upon the
death of Durstus, a wicked Prince, it was debated whether his Son should not
succeed, juxta sacramentum Fergusio praestitum veteremque esse morem servandum,
which acknowledges that the Succession was even in those days established by
Law, by Oath, and by Custom; and after the death of Fergus the second, his Son
Eugenius (though a Minor) was Crowned, and his Uncle Graemus allowed to be his
Guardian. And Buchanan also brings in Bishop Kennedy, lib. 12. praising this
Law as made by Kenneth, a most wise and glorious Prince, with advice of all his
Estates of Parliament; and which rather confirms (as he says) the old Law, than
introduces a new one: So far did Buchanan's Rage against Queen Mary prevail
with him, to praise and rail at the same individual Law; and it is observable,
that it is very dangerous to recede once from fundamental Laws, for Buchanan
makes not only the Succession Elective, but he makes no difference betwixt
lawful Children and Bastards, and excludes not only Minors during the Uncle's
life, but Women for ever.

3. In all Nations where the Monarchy is Hereditary, Minors succeed, and so
this innovation of causing the next Male succeed for all his Life, was contrary
to the Nature of the Monarchy, and to the Customs of all Nations, and God in
Scripture gives us many instances of it. Joas succeeded when he was seven years
of age; Josiah, when he was eight; Manasseh in twelve; and Azariah in sixteen:
And yet in those days, God is said to have chosen the King; for it is said in
Deuteronomy, Thou shall set over thee the King whom I have chosen; and
consequently the choice of Minors cannot be ill, since God almighty used to
make such a choice. I know that Eccles. 10. 16. says, Woe unto the Land when
thy King is a child; but the Critics interpret this of a King that is
childish, Puer intellectu and moribus: or because Factions arise by the
opposition to his Regents, and this inconveniency did more necessarily attend
the allowing a Regent King during Life, for both the Subjects and the true Heir
raised Factions in that Case, whereas the Subjects only are factious in the
other; and yet even they are no more factious for that short time, than they
are always in Commonwealths.

4. The reason why the Minor King was to have one to supply his Nonage ceasing
with his Majority, it was unreasonable that the Remedy should have lasted
beyond the Disease, and the worst effect that could have been occasioned by the
Infant King's Minority was, that the Kingdom should have been during that time
governed by joint advice of Parliament, Councils, and Officers of State, which
in Buchanan's opinion in other places of his History and Book De Jure Regni, is
so excellent a Model, that he decries Monarchy as much inferior to it.

5. It was most inconvenient to accustom any private Family to live in the
Quality of a King.

6. It could not but occasion many Murders, and much Faction; for the true Heir
could not live peaceably under this Eclipse and Exclusion, nor could the Uncle
live without making a Party to secure his pleasant Usurpation.

7. As these Divisions and Factions were the natural and necessary Effects that
were to be expected from this irregular Succession, so it is very observable,
that from King Fergus to King Kenneth the third, we had Seventy nine Kings,
amongst whom, almost the half were the most impious, tyrannical, or lazy Kings
that ever we had, according to Buchanan's Character of them; so happy and wise
a thing is this (so much magnified) Election of a Successor by the People and
their Representatives, to supply the defects of the lawful Heir; whereas from
K. Kenneth the third, to King CHARLES the Second inclusive, we have had Thirty
one Kings, Twenty six of whom have succeeded by a due lineal Right, and have
proved virtuous Princes, greater by their Merit than their Birth, as if God had
designed to let us see, that though most of them succeeded whilst they were
very young, yet that he can choose a fitter Successor than Parliaments can do;
whereas the other five Kings who came to the Crown against that Law of Kenneth
the third, viz. Constantine the Bald, Grimus, Mackbeth, Donal Bain, and Duncan
the second, were all persons who deserved very ill to be preferred to the true
Heir, and who, as they came to the Crown against Law, so governed without it.
And it is very strange, that the Fanatics, who think that every throw of the
Dice is influenced by a special Providence, will not allow that God does by a
special Providence take care who shall be his Representative, who shall be the
Pastor of his Flock, and nursing Father of his Church; let us therefore trust
his Care more than our own, and hope to obtain more from him by Christian
Submission, Humility and Obedience, than we can by Caballing, Rebelling, and
Sacrilegious Murdering, or Excluding the TRUE SUCCESSOR.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN regard there is Page 194, 195. mention made of an Act of Parliament
determining the Succession of Robert the Second's Children, and referred to
here, upon further Consideration the Author has thought fit to defer the
printing of it till another time, the Substance of it being inserted in the
said Pages.

Books Printed for, and Sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time.

Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc.

B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity.

Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large Additions.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2. Vol.

-- Account of the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn.

Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion.

Herodoti Historia. Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life.

Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir. Treas. and Usurpat.

Dalton's Office of Sheriffs with Additions.

-- Office of a Justice of Peace with Additions.

Lord Cook's Reports in English.

Edmunds on Caesar's Commentaries.

Sir John Davis's Reports.

Judge Yelverton's Reports.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and
resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawley
Esquire.

Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.

QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English.

Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism.

History of the late Wars of New England.

Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis.

Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery.

Parkeri Disputationes de Deo.

The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon, By James Paston.

Dr. Jane's Fast Sermon before the Commons. 1679.

Mr. John James' Visitation Sermon April. 9. 1671.

Mr. John Cave's Fast-Sermon on 30. of Jan. 1679.

-- Assize Sermon at Leicester July 31. 1679.

Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and
the Christian Religion.

Mr. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 1679.

-- History of the Powder Treason, with a vindication of the proceedings
relating thereunto.

Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter.

Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections.

Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Lib. Manuscript. and impress. in omni
Art and Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro
scientiae naturali promovenda donavit.

OCTAVO.
BIshop Wilkin's Natural Religion.

Dr. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy.

Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the Case
of Skinner.

-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in Case of Appeals.

-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in Case of Impositions.

-- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.

Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History, on Roots.

Spaniard's Conspiracy against the State of Venice.

Dr. Brown's Religio Medici: with Digby's Observations.

Dr. Symposon's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of
the Original of Hot Springs and other Fountains.

-- Hydrological Essays, with an Account of the Alum works at Whitby, and some
Observations about the Jaundice.

Organon Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With diverse new
Experiments of the Virtue of Tobacco and Coffee: with a Preface of Sir Hen.
Blunt.

Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts.

Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness.

Doctor Sanway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists.

Record of Urines.

The Trials of the Regicides in 1660.

Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural,
etc. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. Tho. Tennison.

Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.

Sir John Munsons Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texts.

Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the three first
Centuries.

The Country-man's Physician.

Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

-- Vindic. of the Ordinations of the Church of Engl.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Church Lands.

Markam's Perfect Horseman.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Disc. of Religious Assemblies.

-- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation.

-- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet in Answer to Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion.

The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York.

Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings.

Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans.

Lawrence's interest of Ireland in its Trade and Wealth stated.

DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic.

Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae.

Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.

An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason, written by M. Clifford Esquire

VICESIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine's Devotions.

Pharmacopaeia Colegii Londinensis reformata.

Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
Illustrated with Fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years. Folio.

Mr. Camfield's two Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation. Octavo.

Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons, never before Extant.

Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the Duty and Benefit of Submission to the Will
of God in Afflictions. Quarto.

Dr. Crawford's serious Expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland. Quarto.

A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the Difference between the
French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added, The Pope's Brief to the
Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet.

Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military Essays of the ancient Grecian,
Roman and Modern Art of War. Folio.

Mr. Tanner's Primerdia: Or, The Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described. Octavo.

A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet. Octavo.

Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the Government of the ancient Church by
Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs: more particularly concerning the
ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, and the Encroachments of
that upon other Sees, especially Constantinople. Oct.

Dr. John Lightfoot's Works in English, in two Volumes. Folio.

Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his
Ep^nomis, concerning the ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never
before Extant. Also two other Treatises written by the same Author: One of the
Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods: Now the first time
published. Folio.

A Letter from Mr. Richard Smith to Dr. Henry Hammond, concerning the Sense of
that Article in the Creed, He descended into Hell. Together with Dr. Hammond's
Answer.

Guil. Ten. R^yne Med. Do^t. Dissertat. de Arthritide, Mantyssa Schematica, and
de Acupunctura. Item Orationes tres de Chemiae ac Botaniae Antiquitate and
Dignitate. De Physiognomia and de Monstris. Cum Figuris and Authoris notis
illustratae. Octavo.

Disquisitiones Criticae de variis* per diversa loca and tempora Biblierum
editionibus quibus accedunt Castigationes Theologi cujusdem Parisiensis ad
Opusc. Is. Vossi^ de Sybillinis Oraculis and ejusdem Responsionem ad
objectiones Nupera Criticae. Quarto.

D. Spenceri Dissertationes de Ratione Rituum Judaicorum, etc. Fol. (Sub
praelo.)

FINIS.

