MEMOIRS OF Queen Mary's days.
Wherein the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and all the Inhabitants may plainly see (if God
has not suffered them to be infatuated) as in a Glass, the sad Effects which
follow a POPISH SUCCESSOR enjoying the CROWN of ENGLAND.
Humbly tendered to the Consideration of, etc.

THE first remarkable passage in Queen Mary's (Popish) Reign, was Her wicked
Dissimulation with the Men of Suffolk, to get Herself into the Throne, and
Breach of Her Faith and Word, after She had obtained it, thus:

As soon as She heard of her Brother King Edward's death, and that He had by
his Will, with the consent of his Council, Excluded Her, and Nominated the Lady
Jane to succeed (the said Queen Mary having been before Bastardized by her
Father King Henry VIII.) She, under pretense of fearing Infection, Rid 40 Miles
in one day, and removed from Norfolk to her Castle of Framingham in Suffolk,
where taking upon Her the name of Queen, pretended to all the Nobility and
Gentry of those Countries, That if they would give Her their Assistance, She
would make no Alteration in Religion; Thereupon came to Her the Earls of
Oxford, Bath, and Sussex, Lord Wentworth, John Mordent and Thomas Wharton
Barons, eldest Sons, and several Knights, and many others of Norfolk and
Suffolk, with whom She Conditioned and Agreed, That She would not attempt in
any wise the least Alteration of Religion established by her Brother King
Edward VI. She, by this trick, being thus assisted, wrote her Letter to the
Lords of the Council, wherein She claimed the Crown, and required them to
proclaim Her Queen of England and the City of London, which in a short time was
done.

As soon as She got into the Throne, her fair Promises proved false Deceits,
for She immediately (the very next day) broke her Word with them, and in a
short time those of the Diocese in Suffolk whom She thus wheedled to assist
Her, tasted the sharpest Persecution under Her Reign; for She was so far from
keeping Her Promises and Conditions made either with them, or any others in
matters of Religion, that She acted quite contrary, as appears by the Sequel of
Her sad and bloody Reign.

1. It was in the 3d of August, Anno 1553. that Queen Mary rode through London
to the Tower, and the very next day She set up Stephen Gardner, the bloody
Persecutor of the Protestants, in the Bishopric of Winchester, and a few days
after made him High Chancellor of England; this was that cruel Man that the
Duke of Norfolk came to dine with, who would not go to Dinner till Four of the
clock in the afternoon, because he would first have the news of Bishop Ridleys
and Latimers being Burnt; of whose death, by Gods heavy Judgment on him, you
may read further in our Chronologies.

2. The 5th of August, (two days after Her coming to London) She turns out the
Protestant Bishops of London and Durham, and re-established Bonner (that
blood-thirsty Miscreant) Bishop of London, and Turstall Bishop of Durham. You
see her first Act was to displace Bishops of the Church of England, and put
bloody Popish Persecutors in their room, who worried and destroyed the poor
Protestants.

3. The 15th of September after, Mr. Latimer, and Dr. Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, with others, were Arraigned and Condemned.

4. Presently after Her Coronation, which was the First of October, She
pretended to show Mercy by a General Pardon, which (says my Author) was so
interlaced with Exceptions of Matters and Persons, that very few received
benefit thereby; so even that, with all the rest, was a mere Cheat.

5. It was not only the Protestant Clergy that She dealt thus withal, but even
with the Judges too; for Sir James Hales, one of the Justices of the Common
Pleas, who had been Her Friend, and stood for Her Succession, yet he for giving
Charge at a Quarter Sessions in Kent, upon the Statutes of Henry VIII. and Edw.
VI. in derogation of the Primary of Rome, he was first Committed to the
King's Bench, then to the Counter, then to the Fleet, where he grew so troubled
in mind, that he attempted with a Penknife to kill himself, and at last did
drown himself.

6. In this Her first Year, She also caused a Synod to be assembled about
matters of Religion, who restored the Romish Religion, and the Mass commanded
to be celebrated after the Romish manner.

7. The 4th of February, in the said Year, John Rodgers, the first Martyr of
these times, was burnt at London.

8. February the 9th, John Hooper, late Bishop of Worcester, was Burnt at
Gloucester.

9. Robert Ferrer, Bishop of Man, was Burnt at Caermarthen; after him John
Bradford, with many others, was Burnt.

10. October the 16th, 1554. those two famous Men, Ridley late Bishop of
London, and Latimer late Bishop of Worcester (no less famous for their constant
Deaths, than their Religious Lives) were most inhumanely and barbarously Burnt
at Oxford, after they had first been conveyed from the Tower thither, upon
pretense to dispute with the Romanists about the Real Presence in the Sacrament.

11. The next worthy thing that this Popish Successor did, was, to set up the
Popes Supremacy amongst us; For as soon as She was married to King Philip, She
sent to Rome for Cardinal Poole to come into England, who came invested with
great Authority as the Popes Legate a latere, who made a solemn Speech to the
Parliament, exhorting them to return to the Bosom of the Church, for which End
he was come to reconcile them to the Church of Rome; and for their first work
of Reconcilement, he required them to Repeal and Abrogate all such Laws as had
been formerly made in derogation of the Catholic Religion.

Upon which Speech, the Parliament begged pardon for their former Errors, and
told the Queen, They were most ready to abrogate all Laws prejudicial to the Sea of Rome. And thereupon the Cardinal gives them Absolution in these words:
[We by the Apostolical Authority given unto Us by the Most Holy Lord Pope
Julius III. (Christ's Vicegerent on Earth) do Absolve and Deliver you, and
every of you, with the whole Realm and the Dominions thereof, from all Heresy
and Schism, and from all Judgments, Censures and Pains in that Case incurred;
and also We do restore you again to the Unity of Our Mother, The Holy Church.]

The Report hereof coming to Rome, was cause of a Solemn Procession made for
joy of the Conversion of England to the Church of Rome. And thus was all the
Kingdom of England turned Papists in one day, by having a Popish Successor.

12. March 1555. the Queen called to Her Four of Her Privy Council, and
signified unto them, That it went against Her Conscience to hold the Lands and
Possessions as well of Monasteries and Abbeys, as of other Churches; and
therefore did freely relinquish them, and leave them to be disposed as the Pope
and the said Cardinal should think fit. And shortly after in performance
hereof, John Fecknam, late Dean of Paul's, was made Abbot of Westminster, and
the Lands belonging to it.

13. Before this, Stephen Gardner, the Queens great Creature, uses malicious
practices against the Lady Elizabeth, the Queens only Sister, and next Heir to
the Crown, and endeavored very much to take away Her Life, She being a
Protestant; he laid all the Snares for Her that he could invent, and at last,
by his procurement, the Lady was kept in hard durance, and a Warrant at last
was framed under certain Counselors hands to put Her to death; and had been
done, but that Mr. Bridges, Lieutenant of the Tower, pitying Her case, went to
the Queen about it, who denied that She knew any thing of it, by which means
Her Life was preserved, this bloody Persecutor Gardner saying at the
Council Board, My Lords, we have but all this while been stripping off the
Leaves, and now and then lopped a Branoh; but till such time as we strike at
the Root of Heresy, (meaning the Lady Elizabeth) nothing can be effected to
purpose.

14. All Beneficed Men of the Clergy that were married, or would not forsake
the Protestant Religion the first Year of Her Reign, were put out of their
Livings, and Romanists put in their room.

15. On the 27th of August, in the same Year, the Service begun to be sung in
Latin in Paul's Church.

16. The same Year the Popes Authority was restored in England, and the Mass
was commanded in all Churches to be used.

17. In Her 4th Year Monasteries were begun to be Re-edified and Restored, and
had She but Reigned long enough, undoubtedly She would have had all the Abbey
Lands in England restored, had not Death put a period to all.

18. Neither was Her persecution less to the common People, and plain hearted
Countrymen, than to the Protestant Clergy; For observe and consider, that
within the compass of less than four Years, there suffered Death for the
Testimony of their Consciences in the Protestant Religion 277 Persons, without
any regard either of Degree, Age or Sex; in the heat of whose flames was
consumed Five Bishops, Twenty one Divines, Eight Gentlemen, and Eighty four
Artificers, One hundred Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers, Twenty six Wives,
Twenty Widows, Nine Virgins, Two Boys, and Two Infants, and nigh as many dyed
in Prison, through hunger, and other cruelties.

OH the bloody Cruelty of the Papists, through their Popish Religion! Shall I
call it Religion, which is more properly a Butchery? And thus you see the
effects of a Popish Successor.

This is no Romance, it was de facto, and would you have it so again? Or will
you put it in the same hazard once more? No sure, unless you are infatuated;
let Experience teach us which is the best Mistress; let the burnt Child dread
the Fire. Oh never forget the Burnings, the Scorchings, the Tortures and the
Flames that were in Queen Mary's Reign! We beg and beseech you all in your
places, use all the Care imaginable now in time to secure us our Wives and
Children, and the Protestant Religion, from the like again.

19. Though many Persecutions lasted longer, yet it is observable by Dr.
Heyling, that none since Dioclesian's time raged so terribly, Eccles. Resta^r.
but God being merciful to the poor Land and persecuted Church. Of all since the
Conquest, Her Reign was the shortest, only excepting that of Richard the
Tyrant, yet much more bloody than was his.

[She Reigned five Years and four Months, wanting two Days.]

20. She lies Buried in Westminster, without any Monument or Remembrance at
all; as in her Life She deserved none, so in Her Death Her Memory is rotten; a
just Reward for Her who was so cruel and bloody: yet one has given Her this
Inscription to remain to Posterity, viz.

Whose Name was polluted with the Blood of so many Martyrs. Unfortunate by so
many Insurrections. Made inglorious by the less of Calice (the Key of France)
in eight days, which had been 211 years in the possession of the English. Some
COROLLARIES.
IN this History we may observe seriously these Things as the sad and fatal
Consequence.

I. How Popish Successors will at first blind us with Wheedles, till they have
got the Power and Kingdom in possession; and will tell us, That not one tittle
of our Religion shall be changed, or altered; nay, and make Compacts,
Agreements and Conditions to that purpose. II. But when once set in the Throne,
let what Promises will be, they shall be so far from being performed, that
quite the contrary shall be acted, or else Thunder and Lightning will come from
the Pope, till he has done it by his Legates a latere. III. That when a Popish
Successor came to the Crown, the Popes Supremacy was immediately set up in
England, even the very first year, and we all made tributary to Rome, and
Slaves to the Pope, and would you have it so again? IV. The Popish Religion and
the Mass set up immediately all over England, and would you have it so again?
V. The Protestant Bishops put out, and Popish ones put in; and all the Clergy
that were married, or would not abjure the Protestant Religion, were turned
out; therefore you of the Clergy that mean to be sincere, and not turn Papists,
it behooves you well to consider of it. VI. And not only so, but truly further,
they must be brought to the Stake with their Wives and Children, and Burnt for
Heretics; For Popery is a merciless persuasion, and if they make never so many
Promises otherwise, yet you know it is their Opinion, That no Faith is to be
kept with Heretics; so we can never be secure, if ever such Reign. VII.
Observe further, That if a Popish Successor comes to the Crown, there will be
all the Endeavors used to take off all the next Heirs that are Protestants, as
there was to destroy the Lady Elizabeth, which ought to be of no small
consideration with us. VIII. Observe, Popish Monks and Friars were brought into
England, and great Endeavors used to restore all Monasteries and Abby-Lands,
wherein no doubt but She and good Cardinal (...) had prevailed, and they had
been all restored, had She Reigned but a little longer; therefore it does not a
little behove all you Gentlemen that have any Priories, Abbeys, or
Monastery-lands to lose, to consider well how you put your selves or your
Posterity in any such great hazard to lose your Estates; as for those that have
such Lands, of the Romish Religion, must not out of Conscience detain them, if
they will have any Absolution from their Ghostly Father; and as to those
Protestants that have such Lands, they will be reckoned Heretics, and to be
sure shall not be suffered to keep Church Lands from them. And this highly
concerns all to consider how with our Religion we give up our Liberties and
Estates, by admitting a Popish Successor; which God of his infinite mercy to
England, and in opposition to such Blood-thirsty, Heaven-daring, King-killing
Principles and Practices, be pleased to deliver us.
POSTSCRIPT.
NOW as you have plainly seen the great and manifold Inconveniences, eminent
Dangers, and most certain Ruin, to follow the admitting of a Popish Successor
in the sad Effects of Queen Mary's Reign; so we may also consider and behold
(as the bright side of the Cloud) the vast advantages of Peace, Plenty, Glory
and Happiness that accrued to this Kingdom by a Protestant Successor's enjoying
the Imperial Crown, in the long and prosperous Reign of that magnanimous,
thorough-hearted Protestant Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, who (after
having suffered five Years fiery Trials) Reigned above Forty four Years, maugre
all Her desperate and bloody Enemies; yet could they not anticipate Her Death,
nor stain Her Glorious Government, by all the black and hellish Contrivances of
Her, and our treacherous Popish Adversaries.

Many, I may say infinite, were the Advantages and Felicities that these poor
Kingdoms enjoyed by Her happy Reign; I will only hint a few general Heads now.

First then, By this Protestant Queen, a period was put to all the Bloody and
Popish Persecution against the Church of England, which all the poor
Protestants had groaned under, all the Reign of Popish Queen Mary.

Secondly, By this true Protestant Princes, and the Protestant Religion, were
established in this Nation, and Idolatrous Popery casheer'd.

Thirdly, By Her were our Ancestors Lives protected, the Church of England
defended, our Estates preserved, and our Liberties secured.

Fourthly, By Her Reign did the Kingdom enjoy Tranquillity, and flourished
wonderfully, to the great benefit of all our Forefathers.

Fifthly, And by Her Reign, this Nation became both Glorious and Formidable as
well to Her and its Enemies Abroad, as at Home, and kept the Balance of all
Europe in Her Hands, by Her winning the love of Her People, and Her continual
adhering to the Advice of Her Parliaments, by which as She had their Hearts, so
She had their Purses at Command, though She was always so kind and just to
them, as sometimes to refuse their Grants of Subsidies, and would never make
use of their Aids in money, (though offered by Her Parliament) but when there
was real occasion for Her Peoples Good and Safety.

The Conclusion of all, is the same that Moses said to the Children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 30.15, and 19 verses, Behold I have set before ye this day life and
death, good and evil. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you,
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy house may live.

FINIS.

