A MEMORIAL For His HIGHNESS the Prince of Orange, In Relation to the AFFAIRS
OF SCOTLAND: Together with The ADDRESS of the Presbyterian-Party in that
Kingdom to His HIGHNESS; AND Some OBSERVATIONS on that Address.

By two Persons of Quality.

Psalm. xcv. 10. Forty years long have I been grieved with this generation, etc.
Licensed.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall. 1689.

A MEMORIAL for His N. B. These were written some time before the Prince was
proclaimed King of England, etc.
Highness the Prince of Orange in relation to the Affairs of Scotland.
May it please Your Highness,
THE Rise of our Animosities, and the reason why they are warmer in Scotland
than in England, is, That England reformed by the Royal Authority, and
therefore the Government of their Church was suited to the Monarchy; but
Scotland Reforming by force and violence, some of our Reformers coming from
Geneva, and the Republics of Switzerland, tho otherwise good Divines, yet were
so far mistaken in their Politics as to inspire many of their Converts with an
aversion to the Monarchy, as well as to Popery; Buchanan and others wrote Books
which were thereafter condemned as Treasonable even in King James's minority.
These Puritans (as they were then called) so vexed the righteous Soul of King
James the 6th, that he was never at ease or secure till he succeeded to the
Crown of England, and then he settled Episcopacy in Scotland; as most suitable to
the Monarchy, and fitted to unite the two Kingdoms: and though it was fully
agreed to for many years, yet some factious and ambitious Noblemen being
desirous to advance themselves, though by the ruin of their Country; and some
Priest riden and blind Zealots among the Gentry, admiring the Parts and Persons
of their Enthusiastic Preachers, were instigated by them to join with the
Puritanical Party, and at length to rise in a most unjustifiable War against
their lawful Sovereign. During which, the Presbyterians entered in a Covenant,
wherein they obliged themselves by solemn Oath to extirpate Prelacy and bring
all opposers of their Covenant to condign punishment: and thereafter into a
League with England, wherein they obliged themselves to reform England after
the Model of the best reformed Churches abroad, for their own ends leaving the
Rule thus general. All these Oaths and Leagues being entered into by Subjects
without and against, yea and in despite of the Royal Authority, and the evident
design of them being to overturn the fundamental constitution of the Church and
State in the two Kingdoms, were therefore mostly justly condemned as Treason by
the Parliaments in both Nations. Notwithstanding whereof, the Covenanters in
prosecution of the black designs of these Oaths, raised first the Rabble, and
afterward strong Armies against that most pious and Protestant King Charles I.
who out of a religious desire as much as in him lay to preserve their peace and
his own, condescended to all that they desired, in a Parliament held by himself
at Scotland. But the lust of rebellious Zealots has no bounds; for the Faction
encouraged with this success, and having obtained now the Government of the
Church, they immediately after usurped that of the State, calling by their own
pretended Authority rebellious Parliaments, wherein they rescinded all the
Royal Prerogatives, murdered thousands of the Kings best subjects, and almost
quite ruined all the Ancient Families of the Nation who opposed them,
preferring and enriching chiefly mean and factious persons who headed the
Rabble, robbing more from these Loyal Families in one month, without any
pretext of Law, than has been exacted from them since the Kings Restoration
in prosecution of it; besides the many other barbarities which they committed
under pretext of Religion; as the Poyniarding hundreds of them in cold blood
after Quarter granted, and the hanging them with the Kings Commission about
their Necks. At length having robbed the King of all Power to defend himself,
they gave him perfidiously up to those who inhumanly murdered him at his own
Palace-gate, to the great reproach and scandal of the Reformation; themselves
being all the while after supported by these very Regicides, against the
Royalists, whom they called Malignants; till God restored King Charles II. and
then offers of Peace and Pardon were made to these Presbyterians, provided,
they would but disown the Covenant and their rebellious principles. But they
refusing all offers, Episcopacy was restored chiefly for the Monarchies sake:
The Faction being enraged at this, proceeded with all fire and fury to preach
up Rebellion in their Conventicles. The Parliament in the mean time justly
displeased at this insolence and contempt of Authority, and desirous to secure
the peace and the people from the Poison of rebellious and false Doctrine,
appointed all to come to Church; whereupon they broke forth in open Rebellions,
and some of their Ring leaders being taken in the guilt, and not disowning nor
promising to help these faults, were punished in order to terrify others; and
this is all the Severity complained of.

By this your Highness may see:

1. That You being come to support our Laws, You are in honor bound to support
Episcopacy, which is confirmed by twenty seven Parliaments.

2. That Episcopacy is necessary for support of the Monarchy, and that the
Scottish Presbytery is not opposed by us as an Ecclesiastical Government, but
as having incorporated into it many horrid Principles, inconsistent with humane
Society, in which the Monarchy is more concerned than we.

3. That what these who were in the Government did, was conform to Law, and
that these Laws were made for preservation of the Protestant Religion,
Monarchy, humane Society, and Self-defence. And that they value their
Church Government more than the Protestant Religion, is clear by their late
compliance with the Papists upon getting an Indulgence; Whereas the Church of
England and we hazarded all rather than comply; They magnified the dispensing
Power, and we opposed it.

4. This appears more clearly by their present Principles, whereby many, as we
are informed own, that Subjects have a right to force their King to do them
Justice, and that they are his Judges, and may dethrone him; That the Rebellion
against King Charles the First and Second, and in favor of the Duke of
Monmouth were just; and that the Monarchy being returned by Forfeiture to the
People, there remains no Prerogative with future Kings who are to have no more
power than the People will give them: and because we love the Monarchy, we are
decry'd as Slaves; whereas it had been easier for us to have connived at their
Insolences, and to become Republicans with them.

5. To evidence that they resolve not as yet to be quiet; They in place of
accommodating differences at this time, wherein all Protestants should show
what happy change they hope for from Your Highness coming to restore our
Religion and Laws, do threaten Magistrates out of their Government, and
Ministers from their Charges, forcing them to swear, after many indignities,
that they shall never return to their Employments, doing thereby all that in
them lies to disgrace Your Highnesses designs, and to persuade the Nation that
they only must give Measures, and that none can live peaceably there without
complying with all their Inclinations.

6. That their numbers are not near so great as ours, appears convincingly from
this: that twenty seven Parliaments have run unanimously against them under
four Kings, and that they have still been easily overcome in all their
Rebellions: and though now they appear numerous here, yet that proceeds from
their being all here, upon design to make themselves appear considerable, that
they may be thought necessary; and to the end, that some of them may recover
what was justly taken from them, and may get Employments by procuring the
Possessors to be incapacitated. Whereas others, trusting to the Laws, the
Interest of the Monarchy and Your Highness's just sense of things, thought no
such appearance necessary till the Convention. These Presbyterians have also
instigated some Tumults, to fright honest Men, who will not rise in Arms
without Authority, yet if there be not Forces sent down under well-principled
Officers, they will be forced again to beg leave to raise new Forces in
self-defence, without which we can neither live at home nor go to serve Your
Highness in the Convention.

7. Many of them pretending that their Presbytery is Iure divino, and that they
are bound to it by Oaths (tho declared Treason) do own that they can submit to
no Laws inconsistent with Presbytery, whereas we are ready to comply with
whatever Your Highness and a Parliament shall find convenient for the Monarchy
and the good of the Kingdom, being grieved at those Animosities in which they
delight. And to demonstrate our Innocence and our readiness to accommodate all
matters justly, we desire to be heard before Your Highness or any You shall
name.

8. We do in the next place, offer to Your Highness's Consideration, whether in
this Age, wherein Episcopacy is acknowledged to have been the best Bulwark
against Popery, the English, who so justly love and reverence Episcopacy will
unite with Scotland, if subjected to Presbytery; especially since the
Presbyterians, who generally own the Covenant* are sworn to extirpate
Episcopacy, having violently and effectually concurred in the last Age, to
throw it out of both Nations. Which Oath will certainly bind them to overthrow
Episcopacy in England more industriously, when England by the Union becomes a
part of their native Country.

We design not by this to load all of that persuasion, amongst whom we confess
many are so moderate as to deserve, that for their sake we should incline
heartily to such an Indulgence as may satisfy sober Dissenters, nor would we
have troubled your Highness with this Account, if we had not been assured that
there was an Address prepared, craving a total extinction of Episcopacy, as
contrary to the divine right of Presbytery; which if it be acknowledged, they
can be subject to no Law; and the Covenant, though illegal and irreligious,
must be the Rule: Which if yielded, no sober Man can live in security; and
though some things may now be reformed in that Address by advice from London,
yet the first draught shows their inclination: And even the extinction of
Episcopacy which will certainly be craved, they being sworn to it in their
Covenant, obliges us to offer this in defense of our Laws, and to prevent the
inconveniences and insolences which would ensue on so great an Alteration.

Lastly, We humbly entreat Your Highness to consider, that in the Church, as it
is now established by Law under Episcopacy amongst us, we have no Ceremonies at
all, no not so much as any form of Prayer, no Music but singing in the
Churches, the Doctrine and Discipline is the same both in the Church and
Conventicle; and in a word not one Ace of difference between the two, but that
in the present Church instead of their Moderators, whom themselves have
sometimes confessed may be Constant, we have Bishops whom the King is pleased
to make Lords, allowing the Presbyters a free Vote in their Elections; and even
the Bishops govern only by Presbyteries and Synods, as the World shall have a
more particular and full account of hereafter. And now after this we leave Your
Highness and the World to judge, what just ground they have for their
separation from our Churches Communion: or if the difference betwixt us and the
Presbyterians, for such they all own themselves, be indeed such as may justify
their constant clamor, present noise and tumults, their uncharitable Censures
and cruel Persecutions of their reformed Brethren; whether the difference
betwixt us be truly such as may warrant their dividing the Church, disturbing
the State, and weakening the Reformation, which Your Highness has so generously
and piously engaged to protect; and which we shall always heartily pray God to
prosper You in.

THe Reader is desired to observe first, that the Figures placed in the
Address, lead to the Annotations, on that part of it which are marked with the
same Figures. Secondly, that the public Resolutioners and Remonstrators were
two conten^ding Parties among the Scots Presbyterians, who as they found favor
from the Usurper, or had Power and Interest with the Rabble, mutually
excommunicated and persecuted one another. These were called Public
Resolutioners, who adhered to the public Resolves of the State in favors of
the King: and they called Remonstrators, who dissented from these Proceedings
of the Public, by their open Remonstrances against them.

The PRESBYTERIAN ADDRESS FROM SCOTLAND TO THE Prince of Orange.
May it please your Royal Highness,
WHen we (1) begin to think how the Lord has blessed your illustrious
Progenitors in being the happy Instruments of so much good to his Church, and
in standing in the Gap, and appearing for the People of God, his Truth and
Interest in Times of the greatest Extremity, when matters seemed desperate in
the Eyes of all who could look no higher than the Hand of second Causes, and
how the Lord crowned their resolute Endeavors with the Success of planting (2)
a beautiful Church in the United Provinces, and delivering the People of God
there from the fury of the Spanish Persecutions. And that your Royal Highness
has succeeded these Worthies of the Lord, as in their Estates and Dignities,
so in their Zeal for the Gospel of Christ, sympathy withi his (3) suffering
People, and magnaninous Resolution in appearing in such an astonishing way for
the (4) Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and for his faithful Servants, while lying
in the Mouth of the Lion, while Refuge failed, and we looked on the Right and
Left Hands (5) and no Man was found till the Lord raised up your Highness, and
put it in your Heart to lay down Life and all things of a (6) corporal Interest
at the stake, while ye did act for his Glory, and lamentably oppressed
Servants. Ah, we have not Hearts to prize that wonderful Mercy, the greatness
of past and present Sufferings, the inexpressible hazard, the irremediless (as
to the hand of Man) condition we seemed to be in, do heighten the Mercy beyond
our apprehension, so that when your Highness first appeared, we were like them
that (7) dream, and our Hearts were filled with matter of Hope and Joy, yet how
are we overwhelmed with fear, considering our (8) provocations and sinning in
the face of Judgments, and in a day of so much Wrath and Indignation, the
combination of so many potent Adversaries, the Perils from Winds and raging
Seas, the hazard to your valiant Army, but especially to your Highnesses Royal
Person, sent us to the Throne of Grace (and oh how great had our guiltiness
been, if we had lain by) to (9) wrestle for the protection of Heaven toward
your Highness's Person, Army and Navy. And now that the Lord has not despised
the Prayer of the destitute, and has made his outstretched Arm appear in the
prudent Conduct and desirable Success of such an Heroic Undertaking, and that
the Lord has (10) melted the Hearts of some in making them join with your
Highness's Forces, has bound up the Hands of (11) implacable Adversaries, and
has stopped all ways of escaping, is the doing of our God, and it is wonderful in
our Eyes. And God forbid, that ever we forget such a Mercy, or that we neglect
to stir up the People under our Charges to magnify his Name for so seasonable
and so great a Mercy, which upon several accounts may be compared with the
delivering of God's People out of Egypt, and out of Babylon, and from
Antichristian Darkness by the Reformation, begun by Zuinglius and Luther, if
now we get Grace to improve it to the (12) Honor of his Name.

Great Sir, as the Welfare and Happiness of the Kirk has mainly influenced
your Highness's great Undertaking, so we are confident, that the sad Case of
the Kirk of Scotland, occasioned by the overturning of that (13) beautiful
Government, the Presbyterian Government of the Kirk established there, and
Mother Churches in France, United Provinces, etc. will by your tender Care, and
Providence, now find a suitable Remedy: and that your Highness will commiserate
the deplorable State of a Kirk once (14) famous for its Reformation, Purity,
(15) Piety, Order and Unity. (16) And oh how refreshing was it to Christ's
afflicted ones, to find that your Highness was so nearly concerned, and so
deeply touched with our late Sufferings, as to hold forth your Sympathy in your
Highness's Gracious Declaration, containing one just Epitome of our sad Trials,
and unparalled (on such account) Sufferings, which would require a Volume for
rehearsing the several particulars, and giving a full History of the merciless
Perseiutions we were forced to lie under, since the erection of Prelacy: yea,
the Severity ran to such an height, that by the eighth Act of King James the
Seventh his Parliament, it was statute and ordained, that all Preachers in
Houses or Field Conventicles, and all present at Field-Meetings, should be
punished by (17) Death, and Confiscation of Goods. And tho by the Light of
Nature, and Law of Nations, it be the Oppresseds innocent Refuge to supplicate
the Judges or Ruler, yet with our Rulers it was accounted a Crime of the
highest Demerit. And his Majesty's Commissioner in his first Parliament, after
his Return from Exile, sent to the several Provincial Synods, then meeting at
the set time, to raise them; which accordingly they did. So soon as they did
move, as all of them were to do, toward a supplication to the Parliament for
ratifying the Government of the Kirk, established by King and (18) solemn Acts
of Parliament. And what Tongue can express the Oppression we have met with
since that day. And tho it were not pertinent in this our humble Address to
trouble your Royal Highness with an account of particulars, yet we have given
to (19) these now sent from us to your Highness, such Information concerning
those, as during the short time of our staying together, we could provide,
which they are ready to offer to your Highness, when required; neither could we
take upon us to condescend upon any method for remedy of our Grievances, but
entirely relying upon your Highness's Zeal for the Glory of God, and good of
this Kirk, do in all Humility beseech, and in the Bowels of Christ Jesus
entreat your Highness to procure the (20) Extirpation of Prelacy, and
Re-establishment of Presbyterian Government of this Kirk, and of the restoring
of the faithful Ministers of Christ to their respective Charges, from which
they were so unjustly thrust out.

It will not (21) (we hope) seem strange to your Highness's Goodness, tho some
of us being on the place about the time the King allowed to Ministers the free
Exercise of their Ministry, opened the Prison Doors, and set the Captives at
liberty, recalled the Exile, took off the Arrests, and permitted these to
return to their homes, (22) who know not where to hide their Heads, did by
their Address thankfully acknowledge the Favor of a little Respite from so
much Slavery and intolerable Sufferings, all of them being ready solemnly to
protest, that it was far from their thoughts to homologate the Liberty granted
to Papists, or the Arbitrary Dispensing Power, to speak nothing of that
absolute Power, without reservation, claimed by his Majesty, and (23) asserted
by Parliament and Council. But our confidence of your Highness's persuasion of
our Integrity in that matter, makes us forbear any farther Apology. But oh, as
the Lord has followed your pious Endeavors for the delivering of Britain and
Ireland from the Persecution they were lying under (while we could epsy no
Remedy) with wonderful Success: So he will be pleased to strengthen your
Highness (24) for going on in his Work, and will make you an happy Instrument
for delivering of other Churches groaning under Popish Persecution. Babylon the
great must fall. And that this may be the time, and your Highness the Man of
Gods Right Hand, whom he has made strong for being eminently instrumental in
such a Glorious Work, that he would more and more sanctify and (25) humble you
under his bountiful Dispensation, and would guard and preserve your Person, and
multiply his choice Blessings spiritual and temporal on your precious Princess,
your Royal Consort, shall be the continual Prayer of

Serene Highness, Your assiduous Orators at the Throne of Grace, and most
Faithful and Humble Servants.

Their Letter to the Prince: which they ordered to be sent at the same time
with the preceding Address.
SIR,
IF we might have met for moving in this great Concernment, or had known how to
transmit a Testimony of our Congratulation at your Highness's safe Arrival, we
had not been so far wanting in Duty, as to have delayed to this time. And if it
had been supposed needful to have called a fuller Meeting, we know few or none,
except such as are biased by interest, or (26) accession to our Persecution,
who would not have cordially concurred as in one Gratulation; so in this our
humble Supplication to your Royal Highness, and for evidencing our zeal for
your Highness's Happiness and Prosperity, we have appointed a solemn Day of
Thanksgiving for your Highness's great and glorious Success to be forthwith
observed in all Congregations, and that continual Prayers be poured out to God
for your Highness's Royal Consort, as in Families of private Devotion, so in
our public Meetings.

Edinburg, 8. Ian. 1689.
ANNOTATIONS.
YOu are pleased to call the Prince Royal Highness, we do not grudge him the
highest Titles; we know he deserves the greatest that are due to the most
worthy Heroes, and we hope, that in due time he shall justly enjoy these that
are proper to the most glorious Monarchs; only we cannot but think it strange,
that the Popes and Puritans should be the only Clergymen that take upon them,
without public consent, to dispose of Royal Titles. Just so in your late
Address to King James the Seventh, you are pleased to compare him to some of
the great Deliverers of God's People in the Old Testament, although in your former
Books, Sermons and Prayers, you would allow no better Titles to the best of
your own Protestant Kings, but that of Ahab, Iehu, or Jeroboam.

(1) When we begin to think, etc.] The Reader ought not to imagine, that this
Address is like their extemporary Prayers, (wherein if one may judge by their
Expressions, they never so much as begin to think.) No, this is the last Effort
of all the Remonstrator-Wit in the Nation revised and refined, and indeed the
Smoothness and Harmony of the first Paragraph is an undeniable proof of their
thoughtfulness and eloquence. However, I hope the glorious Actions of the
Prince, and those of his illustrious Ancestors shall be recorded far otherwise
than in the Panegyricks of Enthusiasts.

(2) A Beautiful Church, etc.] This Expression is remarkable; for that the
Protestant Church in the United Provinces presume not to prescribe to the
State, as your Assemblies always did; sometimes purging the Army, as you did
the King's at Dunbar, to the Ruin of it; sometimes declaring against the
public Acts of the Nation, as you did against the honorable Attempt, made by
Duke Hamilton, to relieve the King, when Prisoner at the Isle of Wight. For tho
that Army was raised and sent under his Grace for that purpose into England, by
the public Authority of the Nation, yet you were pleased to condemn it as an
irreligious Design, and the Battle it self as an unlawful Engagement;
afterward compelling the best of the Nobility to do open Penance in Sack cloth
before your Congregations, for being concerned in it. Moreover, it is worth your
notice, that the Reformed Churches in the United Provinces, which you confess
so beautyful, have their Organs, which they use in the Divine Service; they
observe other Holy days besides the Lords Day, and in all their public
Administrations have a grave Liturgy, or set Form of Prayer, wherein they
Religiously and constantly use the Lord's Prayer, Creed and Ten Commandments,
all which you disclaim as superstitious Fooleries.

(3) His suffering People, etc.] Tho you made others to suffer more, and with
far greater Bitterness and Cruelty; yet you would have your selves thought the
only People in Britain that dare suffer for Conscience sake. You forget, it
seems, how in the time of your Covenant your Scaffolds stood up for some
Months, employed in the bloody Execution of many noble and worthy persons, who
because of their previous Oaths of Allegiance, and Canonical Obedience, could
not in Conscience or Honor submit to your Covenant, the Obligations whereof you
thought sufficient to cancel all former Ties, even those of the Ten
Commandments not excepted.

(4) The Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, etc.] Id est, Presbytery, after the Scotch
Model, for that in their Language is the Kingdom of Christ, although your Ruling
Elders and you, governed with such a Rod of Iron, as seems quite opposite to
Christ's Scepter.

(5) No Man was found to help us, etc.] Did not Father Petre, with all vigor,
employ his power and interest, at the Court, to procure your Indulgence and
Toleration? If he had not applied himself to serve your Interest, he had not
obeyed the Directions of his Society for distracting the Reformation: then you
faithfully served the Whore of Babylon, in supplanting the Church, when her
Face was against a more powerful and formidable Enemy.

(6) Of a Corporal Interest, etc.] A fulsom expression indeed, but that is not
extraordinary for some Men to use, were not Honor and Reputation things of far
greater value for a Prince to venture, but you presume to measure his Highness
by your own Scantling.

(7) Like them that dream, etc.] When his Highness knows you better, he will
find that you are Dreamers indeed. 'Twere good for the People, whose Morals you
have debauched, that you dreamed less; for it cannot be denied, but that in the
multitude of your Dreams there are diverse Vanities.

(8) Our Provocations, etc.] There is certainly nothing could recommend you
more to his Highness, than most ingenuously to confess and forsake your
habituul Faults, your incurable spite against the Royal Race, your sawciness
to King James the Sixth, your binding King Charles the First a Sacrifice upon
the Altar, your open Rebellions against King Charles the Second. If you will
heartily acknowledge these Provocations, and what you have frequently done
against the Authority of King and Parliament, and by some public Deed of yours
renounce the Principles that naturally yield such Consequences, then there is
no doubt but the Prince of Orange will accept your Repentance.

(9) To wrestle, etc.] It cannot be denied indeed, but that your Prayers in the
public are Wrestlings without a Metaphor, but they are levelled most against
the Pulpit, and all the struggling is how to press out one sentence after
another, and to keep wind in the Bags for two hours together. Just so we were
told, after you were warmed with the dispensing Power, that the Queens Big
Belly was the effect of the Heat and Pregnancy of these your Wrestlings in
Prayer. But the Priests thought 'twas the Result of their Devotions at Loretto.
And as you ascribe all the courage and conduct of this wonderful action of the
Prince to the prevalency of your own Prayers; so in your Addresses to King
James, you alleged all the piety and goodness you so much magnified in the
late Indulgence, to have proceeded from the same fountain; although it be well
known that that very Indulgence was first framed at the Conclave, and sent
hither from Rome: and Secr. Coleman's Letters, still upon Record, are
sufficient to convince the world, that such an Indulgence was all along
designed as the readiest method to destroy the North. Heresy.

(10) Melted the Hearts of some, etc.] Namely, the Sons of the Church of
England, who, as you would charitably represent them, can do nothing in favors
of the Protestant Religion, but when they are forced to it by some
extraordinary Accidents, or outward Violence.

(11) Implacable Adversaries, etc.] Compare this with your late Address to King
James, when you had neither the Courage nor Fidelity to open your Mouths
against Popery, although your selves could not but be convinced, that it was
violently breaking in upon us at the Door which was opened mostly by your
Divisions. Here you also promise to stir up the People under your Charges; I
know not how they came to be under your Charge, but this the whole Nation too
well knows, that the Design of most of your Sermons and Prayers too is to stir
them up, as you have done formerly, to Tumults, Calumnies and Assassinations,
and whose name I beseech you, do you magnify in this, unless it be his who was
a Liar and Murderer from the beginning. Here also it is observable, that in the
List ye assign of the first Reformers, ye make no mention of the Learned
Calvin; sure the peaceable Father Knox would not have denied him the honor of
naming him among the Reformers, and at least have given him equal place with
either Zuinglius or Luther. But ah his Letters, his unsavory Letters, these
unadvised and unholy Letters to the Limbs of the Beasts, the Bishops of
England, our thoroughly reformed Consciences cannot away with these Letters,
wherein like a worldly Courtier, and carnal Politician he compliments and
commends these Popishly affected Bishops, and approves of the Constitution of
their Superstitious Church, as most agreeable to the Government of the State
and Monarchy of England, tho not to the Republic at Geneva. These ye think
were carnal and worldly ends, unbecoming the purity of your new Light and
Doctrine, therefore the poor old Gentleman Calvin must be no longer mentioned
among the Reformers. Another Dash of a through-paced Assembly would certainly
exclude Luther too; for you know he never took the Covenant, and therefore
could not be thoroughly reformed. And besides he seems to smell rankly of the
Scarlet Whore, in the Superstitious Forms of Prayer, Ceremonies in Worship, and
Holy Days, which he allowed and appointed to be observed in the Church where he
was concerned.

(12) Improved to the Honor of his Name, etc.] You should have added here, and
to the Persecution of far better Christians than our selves.

(13) Beautiful Government, etc.] If the Devils Sacrifices, human Blood and
Slaughter, the trampling upon the State, the Exirpation of all Liturgies, and
the everlasting Contentions of public Resolutioners and Remonstrators could
make it beautiful, it cannot be denied but that it was so in the highest degree.

(14) Once famous for, etc.] A Church without Prayers, whose Worship is
invisible, and as often vaiyed as the several Administrators appear in
different places, or are affected with different Passions; a Church without
Canons, without Uniformity, and void of Decency, in this sense your Church was
and is still famous.

(15) Purity and Piety, etc.] In this Catalogue of excellent things that made
your Church famous, not one word of Charity; indeed that is none of the
Ingredients of the Remonstrator-Constitution. He who would see that in its
proper Colors, let him strip Christianity naked of all Morality, and in lieu
of that, place these Vices which our Savior reproved in the Pharisees;
Hypocrisy, Pride, Insolence and Singularity. Then add to these a Conversation
so ordered, as to apply the Prophetical Language of the Old Testament,
frequently and impertinently to every trifling Occurrence, keeping at the same
time the greatest distance from what is recommended in Christ's Sermon on the
Mount; and by this means a Man may have some Idea of the Religion of our
Remonstrators.

(16) On how refreshing, etc.] 'Twas very comfortable indeed to you, that you
imagined his Highness the Prince had no account of the Regular Clergy, but from
these that studied to defame them, and to represent them all, without
exception, either as ignorant or wicked persons. But to your great Grief the
Prince is not precipitant, he will deliberately enquire into your former ways,
and how the Remonstrator-Learning appeared, either in Sermons, as Books against
Popery, when it so fiercely assaulted us. May be some will be so just as to
tell his Highness, that Learning was never so much your Talent, and that some
of the most famous Doctors The Learned Doctors at Aberdeen were all deposed and
expelled, for disputing against the Legality of some Subjects imposing Oaths
upon others, without the consent of lawful Authority.
our Nation had since the Reformation, Men whose Learning and Conscience were
their greatest Crimes, were not allowed a Country Church to preach in, nor so
much as the benefit of a private School to teach, when you were last upon the
Stage.

(17) Punished by death, etc.] It would be difficult for you to name one Man
put to death for being present at a Field-Conventicle, tho I could name some
that you have killed formerly for wearing the King's Livery. Two of King
Charles the Second's Lifeguard murdered at Swyn Abbie some few years ago,
being by some of that Party barbarously shot from the Windows, and killed, as
they sat at Supper in their Inn.
And it would be as impossible for you to justify your Meetings in the Field
with vast numbers of armed Men, when the Laws have declared it treasonable, and
when there is not any thing in the Worship of the Church established by Law,
that you scruple at, except the Lord's Prayer, the Doxology, and the Reading of
the Scriptures before the Minister goes into the Pulpit: neither of which we
are ashamed of; tho you ought to be for separating upon that account.

(18) Solemn Acts of Parliament, etc.] The King and Parliament having
experience of your saucy Behavior, and unheard of Cruelties for so many years
did in a full and Free Parliament re-establish the Episcopal Government about a
year after the Restoration of King Charles; and it is arrogant, as well as
unjust, for you to imagine, that his Highness the Prince will believe you, when
you asperse the Memory of his Royal Uncle King Charles, (whom all Men know to
have been merciful and wise to a Miracle) with such Cruelties as are
inconsistent with the Laws of Nature and Nations. Ye ought in Justice to have
told the Prince also how many Indulgences he emitted in your favors, and how
little you deserved them at his Hands: you should have likewise told him, that
Episcopacy never forced it self upon the State by violence, (as Presbytery did,
and still endeavous to do.) But the King, Nobility and Gentry, wearied with the
tyrannical Discipline of your Assemblies, did over and again ratify that
Apostolical Government in Parliament, and cannot therefore now be removed till
those many Laws be taken away even by them who are deeply sworn never to
endeavor the alteration of the Government in the Church or State. Which Oath
was not as your Covenant, pressed upon any without the consent of lawful
Authority, nor under any penalties, except the not being entrusted in public
Offices be accounted as such; and it were very hard not to allow the Government
the choice of such as should serve in it.

(19) These sent from us, etc.] And you are confident his Highness will believe
all they say without any farther examination, just as you would have the
ignorant Mobile believe, and receive all your Doctrines with an implict Faith.

(20) Extirpation of Prelacy, etc.] And will nothing less satisfy you, than
the total Extirpation of that Government which has now continued in all the
parts of the Christian Church for fifteen hundred years, and was first planted
with Christianity it self by the Apostles, whose Doctrines, it seems, you
relish not in these Points which are not agreeable to your Covenant. When the
Parliament is legally constituted, and the Sense of the whole Nation fully
heard, there may be some things in the Constitution of the Church Government
made more perfect, but it is strange, if it can be entirely removed, unless the
Civil Government of the Nation be again usurped by a Committee of the general
Assembly. It will be considered who they are that demand this Change? A Set of
Men who have renounced the Communion of all the Reformed Churches in Europe,
Presbyterian or Episcopal: for the Conform Clergy in Scotland are willing to
refer all Debates between them and you to foreign Presbyterians, who cannot be
supposed to have any Biass to our side. And tho your Industry and Faction (in
populous Cities on the South Side of Forth) make you appear numerous; yet any,
who thoroughly knows the Nation, knows that you are not truly one twentieth part
of it. But whatever your strength be, let me entreat you, that when ye beg for
new Revolutions, ye would forbear to abuse the sacred Name Jesus, by making it
the Prologue to Confusions in his Church; alas, it has been too too ordinary
to usher in such black Designs with that holy Name.

(21) We hope, etc.] Now comes in your Apology for your late Address, under the
Influences of the Dispensing Power, and then your zeal against Popery appeared
in a profound silence; for you told your People you preached Christ, and that
was enough, tho you did not insist on the particular Controversies against
Rome. Now and then you darted some waspish Reflections against the Church of
England, when she was otherwise employed than to take notice of your whistling
Arguments and unjustifiable spite against her, which appeared more visible
lately when it was tossed in your Divan; whether or not you should address the
Prince of Orange for abolishing Episcopacy over all Britain and Ireland; but
tho you be sworn to that in your Covenant, yet you must wait some further time
for it. It is a part of the Ceremony ye use in removing the conformed Clergy of
the West, to inquire if they have the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of
England, and if they have it, it is wrapped up in the Ministers Gown, and both
committed to the flames together, with loud shouts of Joy and Triumph. Witness
your late Outrage to Mr. Bell, Minister of Kilmarnock, and even your pretended
kindness for the Prince of Orange is known to be much cooled, since you heard
of his communicating with the Church of England: nor is it long since you
preached that the Church of England was more idolatrous than the Church of
Rome; because they received the Sacrament kneeling, where they believed no
Corporal Presence to be. Just so one of these whom you have since appointed a
Commissioner from you to the Prince, hearing that his Highness frequented the
Prayers of the Church of England, and that he had received the Sacrament from
the Hands of a Bishop, was so unadvisedly indiscreet and impertinent, as to
say, that he never expected better of a Dutch Conscience. A true Specimen of a
Remonstrator's Charity, and signal evidence, that ye value not the best
Consciences, when they will not stretch to the full length of your covenanted
Standard. I cannot here omit what one Veatch, canting in Mr. Hamilton's Meeting
House at Edinburgh lately said, his words were these; Oh Sirs, wonderful
things, and great things, Sirs, very great things have been done here by mean
Instruments: (meaning the Rabble, on whose commendation he had fully enlarged
before.) But alas, Sirs, the half of your work is not done, so long as the
Prelates and Curates are to the Fore (that is in true English so long as they
are left alive) and if the Prince of Orange will not put to his helping hand,
and lend God a lift, I will say to him as Modecai did to Hester, Hester iv. 14.
Who knows but thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this; but if thou will altogether hold thy peace, deliverance will come from another place to the
Jews, (a most pertinent Epithet for Remonstrators) but thou and thy fathers
house shall perish. Another of their Preachers about the same time, holding
forth to his Auditory, said, Oh Sirs, Sirs, but ye be an hide-bound people, a
lucken handed and fast griping people, Sirs, I could gar (that is cause) a few
Fourteens (that is Scotch Marks) drive all the Prelates and Curates out of the
Town; indeed I could easily do it, Sirs. This is a Doctrine very agreeable, I
confess, to the Covenant; but whether it be so to the Gospel of Peace or no, I
leave the World to judge.

(22 ( Who knew not where to hide their Heads, etc.] Good lack, poor Gentlemen,
no where to hide their Heads! and yet if we may believe what ye confidently
affirmed before, the Bias of the whole Nation is for Presbytery; it seems they
were a very merciless, as as well as unconscionable People, who were so much
affected to your Cause, and yet would not allow the Professors of it, when
persecuted, the least shelter, ( Mendaces oportet esse memores) but this was
your comfort, in these troubles, that many Angels were sent to support you, and
if it were not that I am resolved to avoid all personal Reflections, I could
name some, who when removed from their places for Nonconformity, had little or
nothing; and yet purchased considerable Estates under the pretended
persecution. The Severity of our Laws never appeared against Dissenters for
having different Opinions from the established Church; nor can you instance any
one that suffered either Ecclesiastic or Civil Censure, only upon that
account, but for High Treason against the State. Some indeed, according to
their demerit, suffered death, such as Cameron, one of your Preachers, who
emitted a Declaration of War against the King, declaring, that every covenanted
Brother was bound to cut off from the face of the Earth his Majesty, and all
that had, or did bear Office under him: and Hackstoun of Rathallat, and a
Weaver, Murderers of the late Archbishop of S. Andrews, as also a Fiddler, who
had murdered his own Wife, when big with Child. These were some of the Martyrs
of your new Gospel, whose Heads and Hands you have lately removed from the
public Gates at Edinburgh, and buried with all the Solemnity that the
Reforming Rabble, and your Preachers upon their Van, could possibly make.

(23) Asserted by Parliament, etc.] The absolute power seemingly implied not
asserted in some Parliaments, is not to be understood in that unlimited sense,
that your Assemblies assumed it to themselves, but as it is restrained and
interpreted by the constant tenor of our Laws, the practice of the Nation, and
the just and necessary exceptions that all such general words must be supposed
to receive from Reason and the Liberties of Mankind.

(24) For going on in his work, etc.] Let it be a through Reformation, a truly
covenanted Work, such as may bring all Malignants, the most Protestant Kings
not excepted, to condign punishment, or else you will never believe it to be
indeed the Work of the Lord.

(25) Humble you, etc.] He will be sufficiently humbled, if ever you get him
under the Yoke of Presbyterian Discipline, and you should take all care to
conceal from him the Methods you are wont to use for humbling Princes; as also
the difference betwixt your way, and that of the Presbyterian Churches abroad,
either in France, or the Netherlands.

(26) Accession to our Persecution, etc.] You mean undoubtedly the Conform
Clergy, whom, when you have not power to persecute, ye show your inclinations
to it, by calumniating and misrepresenting them. However in the present
business, whenever lawful Authority injoyns them, they will be ready to observe
a day of Thanksgiving for our Deliverance from Popery and Slavery, with more
cheerfulness and order than you can pretend to. In the mean while it is worth
the Prince's notice; how you adventure without the State to appoint public
Solemnities. It may be some will inform his Highdess how your Predecessors
appointed a Thanksgiving on that very day wherein the State had enjoined a
Fast. And to show their cross Disposition, a Fast at another time, when King
James the Sixth had appointed a Feast for the public entertainment of Foreign
Ambassadors in the City of Edinburgh.

THis is the Address which in your public Meeting of the Assembly at Edinburgh
you agreed to, and subscribed; but upon the News of the Prince's having
communicated with the English Church, you demurred a little, and the sending of
it to his Highness was delayed till ye heard from your Friends at Court, by
whose advice your Address perhaps suffered some Alterations before it was sent
thither; but these, as I am credibly informed, were not material, and therefore
deserve no notice. However, the industry you used to have some persons of
Quality at London subscribe it, was very remarkable; for, as some of these
persons themselves have told me, you would not allow them to read it, till they
should first sacredly promise to subscribe it. A Method very agreeable to that
which ye used in getting hands to the Covenant, when several young Children
were taught to write their Names of purpose to affix them to it; and
Schoolboys were brought from dreiving their Tops, to dreive on the Work of the
Lord in subscribing the Covenant. Implicit Faith, it seems, is a Doctrine as
much in vogue among Scots Presbyterians, as among Papists themselves; and the
Consistory and Conclave do not really differ so much as you would have the
World believe.

In all this that I have said, I must tell you, that I have no thoughts of
Cruelty against Distenters, I indeed pity them, as deluded. And if it were in
my power I would not persecute them, but rather, as Brethren, restore them with
the Spirit of Meekness. I allow, that so long as they are willing to contain
themselves within the just Liberties and Limits of Subjects, they have as good
a right to the Royal Protection, as any other Set of Men in the Nation; but
then they should let the World see, that they can allow other Protestants to
live too, as having the same natural Right with themselves: and that they are
capable of such an Accommodation as the Learned Protestants abroad are not
against: and that they do not abhor the Communion and Practices of other
Reformed Churches; and particularly, that they do not think themselves bound by
the Covenant, or any other Tie to persecute these of the Church of England.

Lastly, it were very just and pertinent in them to declare their resolutions
never again by their Sentences, to counteract and condemn the Decrees of the
supreme Civil Judicatures of the Nation; and to satisfy the World in this, it
will be fit for them by some public deed to disclaim and renounce that
absolute Supremacy or Papacy which the Kirk has always claimed over Kings, and
Civil Powers. Many public and known Instances might be assigned, wherein they
have challenged and usurped this power; but Hercules may be known by his Foot,
and therefore one instance that is yet fresh in the memory of many, shall serve
for all; and it is that of the unnatural as well as undutiful Behavior of the
Kirk to their lawful Sovereign King Charles the Second in the year 1650, when
like a hunted Partridge he fled from the Birds of Prey in England to them for
Sanctuary. The easiest Proposals they made to him were no less than these: 1.
To subscribe the Covenant, which they knew his Majesty did not, nor could not
like, because of the Destruction it had brought upon his Father and Kingdoms,
and of the Door it opened for continual Rebellion against himself. 2. To make
public satisfaction to the Kirk, that is open Penance before their
Congregations, for his own Sins, and these of his Fathers House, particularly
for his and his Families Godless Opposition (as they called it) to the Cause of
God, the Work of the Covenant. 3. That his Majesty should subscribe, and
publish to the World a Declaration, charging himself and his Family with the
whole guilt of all the Miseries and Blood (not excepting that of the Royal
Martyr his Father) which had been occasioned by these unhappy Civil Wars
themselves had raised, and carried on for so many years before. Upon these
Conditions they promised to make him a most glorious King indeed.

But when his Majesty modestly declined the last two, which in Honor and
Conscience he could not submit to, immediately out comes that Tundering Bull
from the General Assembly against him, THE ACT OF THE WEST KIRK; it was
commonly called so, because the Assembly was held at the West Church of
Edinburgh, where both the foresaid Declarations which they would have imposed
upon the King, and that Act of the West Kirk are still kept, and to be seen
upon Record in the public Register at that place. A true and exact Copy of
which Act, as it was faithfully transcribed from the authentic Original, I
shall here for the satisfaction of the Reader subjoyn.

West Kirk, the 13th. Day of August, 1650.
THe Commission of the General Assembly, considering, that there may be just
ground of stumbling, from the King's Majesty's refusing to subscribe, and emit
the Declaration offered unto him by the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
concerning his former Carriage and Resolutions for the future, in reference to
the Cause of God, and Enemies and Friends thereof, does therefore declare, that
this Kirk and Kingdom do not own or espouse any malignant Party, Quarrel or
Interest, but that they fight merely upon their former Grounds and Principles,
and in Defense of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdom, as they have done these
twelve years past; and therefore as they do disclaim all the Sin and Guilt of
the King, and of his House, so they will own him and his Interest no otherways
than with a subordination to God, and so far as he owns and prosecutes the
Cause of God, and disclaims his and Fathers Opposition to the Work of God, and
to the Covenant, and likewise all the Enemies thereof. And that they will with
convenient speed take into consideration the Papers sent unto them by Oliver
Cromwell, and vindicate themselves from all the Falsehoods therein contained,
especially in those things wherein the Quarrel betwixt us and that Party is
mistated. As if we owned the late Kings Proceedings, and were resolved to
prosecute and maintain his present Majesty's Interest, before, and without a
full acknowledgment of the Sins of his House, and former ways, and Satisfaction
to God's People in both Kingdoms.

Sic subscribitur A. Ker.
The Order for Printing this Act is signed by Tho. Henderson.

Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab uno
-- Disce omnes.


Many Papers to this purpose, and more odious, might be published, but my
Design is not to expose, but if possible, to reclaim those whom this
antimagistratical Party leads by an implicit Faith of the Assemblies
Infallibility in all its Oracles; nor would I have sent this abroad, if our
whole Church and Nation had not been first attacqued by them, and that not only
in their present outrages against all who are not of their Gang; but also in
most scandalous and scurrilous Libels, in one whereof they have accused the
Government in all its Proceedings since the Restoration, to have been worse
than the Inquisition; tho it was malicious, yet it was cunningly done in them
to print and publish this among Strangers; for they knew it could find no
credit at home, where the Falsehoods of it would have been as easily discovered
as the Malice of the Authors is. The public Proceedings of the Nation against
that Party, were indeed no more than self-defence, and therefore may easily, as
they will be shortly vindicated, and justified to the World, where all the
matters of Fact of that which they call Persecution, and the true Causes of it,
will be impartially discovered and laid open, which will be but little to the
credit of the Party, or their pretended Martyrs, of whom they have now promised
so glorious and full a History; and I doubt not but the impartial and
unprejudiced part of Mankind will abominate and abhor when they hear the former
and present Barbarities and bloody Cruelties, which that covenanted Party,
under pretense of Reformation, have committed, and do daily at this time
inflict, without any respect to Office, Age or Sex, upon all such as differ
from them, only in a very inconsiderable Punctilio of Government, and not in
the least point (that themselves can allege) either of Doctrine, Discipline or
Worship. And I doubt not but his Highness the Prince, by their open
Disobedience to his late Proclamation for securing the Peace, and by their
opposition to, and contempt of all former Government, will be soon convinced,
how impossible it is to make them quiet under any; and the World will be easily
satisfied by but a little inquiry into their Principles and Practices, how
inconsistent the Papacy of the Scots Presbytery is with any Form of Government,
except that of Popery, which arrogantly presumes (as they also do) to punish
and persecute all Governors in the State at their pleasure, and manage all
secular Interests in ordine ad Spiritualia.

Would to God they would but comply with this one advice of the Apostle, Study
to be quiet, and do your own Business.

FINIS.

