A MELIUS INQUIRENDUM Into the BIRTH OF THE Prince of WALES: OR An ACCOUNT of
several New Depositions And ARGUMENTS Pro and Con, and the Final Decision of
that Affair BY THE GRAND INQUEST OF EUROPE, BEING A Supplement to the
DEPOSITIONS Published by AUTHORITY in October last.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wilks in St. James's Street. 1689.

Consultation of the ORACLE, by the Great Men of England, and the Potentates of
the Earth, to know if the Prince of WALES, (Given of God) Diu dateus, be
Suppositious, or Legitimate.
AS soon as the darkness of the Night was dispersed, and the Morning had
appeared, the Gates of the Temple of the Divinity opened themselves, and one
might see all the Potentates of the Earth hastening thither: Great number of
Princes, and mighty Mouarchs, many Heraclit's, and Democrit's, the one sad, and
the other merry, for the Birth of this new Messiah; the Catholic Princes, were
in dispute with the Protestants, the latter did maintain; That the Prince of
Wales was Suppositious, and the first the contrary. It was then resolved, by
one part, as well as the other, to refer the business to the Oracle, and that
the Divine Appollo should decide a Question, whereon the Happiness of Europe
depended.

The POPE

Being the first advanced, kneeled to the Earth, and having taken in each hand,
a certain Composition, went on foot to the entrance of a little Cavern, as soon
as he found himself within, with a great deal of eagerness and haste, he spoke

To the ORACLE.

I desire to know four things before my Death.

The First is to see Constantinople purged from Execrable Mahometism, by my
good Son Leopold, Emperor of the East and West.

The Second, to see my Eldest Son, the King of France, to repent himself of all
those Affronts, that he has committed during his Reign, against the Holy See,
against the other Kings his Brethren, and against his poor people.

The Third, to see my Son Charles the Il. always poor, become sufficient
powerful, to revenge himself of his Brother-in-Law, and give to the Throne of
Spain a Successor, whether Legitimate, or Suppositious, according to the
Example of King James.

The Fourth, to learn if my Son James the Il. he well fixed on his Throne, and
if the Young Prince of Wales, shall be Legitimated by the Parliament.

As soon as the Holy Father had ended, all those Powers that had followed him,
were impatient to speak of the Queen of England's Lying-in, and of the Birth of
the Young Prince; and although the Cardinal of Furstemberg, desired it, and would
by all meant speak of his Election, he was ordered to hold his Tongue, and it
was resolved, that the Court of England should firsT be allowed to give reasons
whereby she pretends to prove, that the Prince of Wales is Legitimate; that the
Protestane Princes, who had Arguments to prove the contrary, should be heard
next: That the Question should be disputed with mildness, and moderation, and
that the Court of France, as well as the Court of England, as Allies, should be
desired to occasion no Dispute, but leave it fairly to the decession of Justice.

The KING of E -- d

Attended by Father Petres. who followed him step by step, approached the Holy
Cavern, and thus spoke to the

DIVINITY.

I give God thanks. for giving me a Son, on the 20th day of June, 1688. and
that he gave a Happy Delivery to the Queen my Wise, by the Birth of the Prince
of Wales.

His Majesty had scarce made an end of pronouncing these words, but a
Protestant Prince interrupted him saying.

We all give thanks to God, because we have discovered, that this Young Prince
is the Son of the Society of Jesuits, and that he never had any Royal Blood in
him.

These Words were no sooner delivered, but Father P^tres advanced, and having
sixed his Triangular Cap upon his head, to show his indignation, thus said to
the

ORACLE.

The Heretics do nothing but laugh at the Queens Lying in, as if the Prince of
Wales were only a supposited Infant; for my part, who was not a moment absent
from the Queen, I know better than any person, and if I do not tell truth, I
will call Mrs. Wilks as a Witness.

It was sc^rce observable that Petres had spoke so much; the Priests of the
Temple being employed in furnishing the soul of Wilks, with proper Ideas, to
make her Recollect. To the end that she might discover the Intrigue, she made
her sTege upon the skin of Sacrifices rubbed with certain Drugs which disturb
the Brain, and being present at the Holy Cavern, spoke thus.

It is easy to prove, that the Queen was really with Child if one considers
that she kept her Bed at her Lyingin for 2 or 3 days, without getting up, and
the rather for that she never went abroad, while she was big.

The ORACLE

Ordered, that she should hold her peace, if she had no better proof.

The Priestess of the Temple conducted the Queen of England, as yet weak, and
indisposed, and having given her her hand to lead her into the Sanctuary, she
thus said to the

DIVINITY.

I prove that I have been with Child of a Young Prince, because I had many
pains, for 5 or 6 Months, and I have always heard it reported, that Women with
Child are always subject to them.

Mrs. Cellier, who was near the Queen, had a mind to speak again, desired her
Majesty to add the sickness she was speaking of; that she had several times
been sensible of the Infants stirring in her Womb, and that these two proofs
were convincing.

The PRINCESS of D -- k

Being called in her turn, came near and said to the

ORACLE.

I find it very difficult to believe, that the Young Prince of Wales is
Legitimate; if it be true, what is said, that he was some hours at St. James's,
before the Queen came thither to Lie-in.

The ORACLE

Answered her.

This Proof is strong, have you any Witnesses?

The PRINCESS

Answered him,

Yes.

The R. Father SMITH, and Father ALIX JESUITS.

Conspiring together in a design to destroy the proof, which the Princess had
offered to produce.

Father SMITH

As being the Eldest, spoke first to the

DIVINITY.

I maintain, that the Queen has been with Child, and that the Prince of Wales
is Legitimate, by reason the Queen has resolved, at the present, to have a
Daughter, and after that another Daughter, and then another Young Prince, that
if it happens the first should die, his Majesty may be provided of a Successor.

Father ALIX

Took his Turn and said,

For my part, I prove that there is nothing suppositious in the Person of the
P. of Wales, and that he is the Legitimate Son of the King, because he was
informed, that the Child was Baptized on the 15 day of July, 1688. it being St.
James's day.

The Priests went out of the Holy Cavern, and returned before the Queens Ladies
of Honor, and having made them drink a Glass of the Water of the River
Hircinas, they said:

We maintain, that the Queen has been really with Child, because she was
always troubled with a kind of a Gout, which hindered her going, and always
obliged her to be carried in a Chair.

The A. B. of C -- attended by his SUFFRAGANS.

Came near to the Divinity, extremely pleased to have been acquitted in his
Trial, and that innocence had prevailed over Calumny.

The DIVINITY

Made him be informed, by one of his Priests, that he was exhorted to reveal
what he knew, or what he had learned, concerning the Queens Lying-In; that
there was no degree of power above the Gods, and that he was obliged in
Conscience to tell the things as they were, and being approached, he spoke to
the

ORACLE.

Because you conjure me, by all that is most Holy in your Temple, to discover
an Imposture, which the Society of Jesuits takes care to conceal from all
Europe; I shall tell you then in two words, That the Prince of Wales, is
suppositious, and that they put us in the Tower, at the very time the Queen was
in the Straw, to the end that the Bps. of the Kingdom might not be present.

The KING of E -- d

Hearing this Discourse, came forward hastily, and being angry with the A. B.
called him Rebel, adding, That he knew how to make him obey.

The ORACLE

Answered the King. That he had forgotten that the place where he Blasphemed,
was Holy, and that he ought to be satisfied long since, that the Gods esteem
bad Kings no more than silly Shepherds; that he ought to abate his fierceness,
and thank the Gods for giving them more good things in this World, oftentimes,
than they deserve.

The KING

Being, desirous to answer, what the A. B. had objected, said, It was true that
the Bishops were put in the Tower, before the Queen lay-In; but also, that
order was given to release them, and there was nothing to hinder their Visits;
besides, I am not willing to argue thus with my Subjects, I am a King and
expect to be obeyed, without disputing, and when I say that the Prince of
Wales* is my Legitimate Son; this ought to suffice, and they ought to believe
it.

The ORACLE

Answered to all this, That he was not well satisfied with his Majesty's
Behavior, and that he ought to have more moderation, and to bring good proofs,
because we came thither to know if the Prince of Wales, was legitimate, or
Supposititious, and not to dispute his Royal Prerogative.

The Priestess had order to advance some

MEMBERS of the next PARLIAMENT.

Who spoke thus to the

DIVINITY.

His Majesty has solicited us, by his chief Almoner, Father Peter's, to
legitimate his Son the Prince of Wales, when we shall meet in Parliament; and
all the people cry in London, that it is a Supposititious Child, that his
Father is a poor Citizen, and that his Mothers a poor Woman, which the Jesuits,
have persuaded by money, to keep this secret. The

ORACLE

Orders the Priestess to conduct in the

Earl of S -- L -- D

To see what he had to answer, to what was proposed. S -- L -- D having order
to enter, the holy Cavern, desired, before that to abjure his Religion, and to
assist at the Holy Office, in the Kings Chapel, and to give a proof of a
profound respect. After which he said,

The Prince of Wales, is so much the more Legitimate, and the supposition of
which they accuse her Majesty, is the rather a Callumny, by how much the big
Belly of the Queen has been accompanied, with many wonders, viz. As the Queen
stepped, an Angel appeared to her several times, and said to her, Have Courage
you shall bring forth a Son, and his Name shall be called WALES: The Queen
awaking, started, and saw that this Angel, was like to him, that appeared long
since to Mary the Mother of God.

The ORACLE

Asked him how he knew it to be an Angel?

S -- L -- D

Answered, that Father Peter's had told him so.

The Lawyer P -- n, one that pleaded for the Bishops,

Hearing that the Earl of Sunder land would prove the Prince of Wales to be
legitimate, by the greatest Imposture that ever was, could not forbear speaking
into the Holy Cavern, as loud as if he had pleaded in Westminster Hall, and
said openly, that it was a shame, that such a man as he, whom his majesty had
Honored with his charge of Secretary of State, should have so mean and low
thoughts, and so unworthy of a man of Honor; he ought to have known, that this
Angel, of whom he was speaking of, was one of the Queens Footmen, who had been
instructed by the Jesuits to play this part: And that the King, having
surprised him, with his Sword wounded him in his Arm.

The ORACLE

Ordered the Priests, to turn out S -- L -- D, and bring the

Lord CHANCELLOR.

Who spoke to this purpose, to the

DIVINITY.

The greatest proof that I can offer, to justify that there is no supposition
in the Birth of this Young Prince, is the coming of so many Ministers from all
the Courts of Europe to Congratulate his Majesty, and pay their homage to this
Young Prince. As to the rest, his Majesty was transacted at his Council of
Conscience, with Father Peter's, and he forbids to inquire into what passes
there: So if there be any supposition, it is a secret, that very few persons
know at Court. And the King has ordered us, to compel the people to believe
the Prince of Wales to be legitimate. And this is enough, and we ought as much
as in us lies, to adore these great mysteries, and by no means pry into them.

As soon as my Lord Chancellor had spoken, the Lawyers,

L -- s, F -- n, S -- r, T -- y, F -- b, S -- s

Were ordered, to answer what my Lord Chancellor had said; they all unanimously
said, That having gained the Cause for the Bishops, they would do their
endeavor to get that for the people also: and to maintain, by an authentic
Discourse, which they would publish concerning a supposititious Birth, that the
Prince of Wales was supposited, but they prayed the Divinity to grant them some
time, the

ORACLE

Answered them, that it was granted, and that in the mean time the Priests
should be examined of such as are to appear.

The Priests had order to introduce the

JESUITS of the College of the SAVOY.

The most ancient of them, having taken off his Triangular Cap, said,

That the greatest proof that they had (that the Prince of Wales was the lawful
Son of the King) was, that his Majesty had promised on the day of his
Coronation, that he intended to give a Successor to the Crown, and that the
King had now performed his Royal Word, in giving them this Young Prince, who
they should always acknowledge as Legitimate, since they being Roman
Catholics, it was much for the advantage of their Society. The

ORACLE

Answered, That these Reasons proved that the King had a Successor, but the
Question now, was to know, if this Successor were of the blood Royal. The
Priestess had order to cause them to go out, and to introduce the

NON CONFORMISTS, the QUAKERS and PRESBYTERIANS.

The Quakers being come in, said they had presented many Addresses to his
Majesty, for to thank him for the Liberty of Conscience he had granted them,
but that they acknowledged now by experience, that he would not keep his word,
and that he would break his word, as often as it tends to make him absolute;
that they think the Prince of Wales is suppositious, and that they will give
their proofs in Writing.

The Nonconformists say, That his Majesty is full of designs, which he has to
advance the Papists, in all charges, and that his Favors are chiefly reserved
for the Jesuits, and that at last, he will repent, for having assisted at the
making so many Innovations, and as to the Prince of Wales, it was easy to
suppose it supposititious, because it was a Month before the Queen lay in.

The Presbyterians say in their turn, That what has passed at the Birth of
this Young Prince, where Father Peter's, and Cellier, only assistants, is a
convincing proof, that there was a manifest supposition, and that one only
ought to examine the Circumstances of this Birth to make it appear.

The ORACLE

Ordered a Priest to take in Writing, all these Depositions, and omit nothing.

The Priests had order to introduce the Foreign Princes, and their Ambassadors.

The KING of FRANCE

Before the entered the Holy Cavern, according to the Example of the Emperor
Heraclitus, made his Army be purged of the Dragoons for three days, who came
from the hunting the new Converts, and having opened the Holy Evangalist, said
to the

DIVINITY.

I maintain, at the peril of my life, that the Young Prince of Wales is
Legitimate, and if I ought to transport my Armies, by my Bombs, and my
Carcasses, I would reduce the World in to Ashes, and chastife and the
Rebellious Nation, that oppose the Design of King James my Cousin.

The ORACLE

Answered him, That no one ought to enter into this Holy Caveru, to make French
Rhodomantades, that the business in hand was to prove he was legitimate, or
supposititiou.

Father La CHASE

Hearing them speak of a supposititious Child, came forward, the Priests
stopped him, pulling him by the arm, and told him, That he knew very well,
there was no safety within the Cavern, for such as came not with good
intentions so that being drawn near, he made many Bows, killed the Statue of
Trophanius, and said to the

ORACLE.

I hold the Prince of Wales is legitimate, for two strong Reasons.

The First, Because my Master is his Godfather.

And Secondly, Because my Master has sent him his Spirit, to inspire him in
the Cradle, with the love for our Society, and with a hatred to Heresy.

The ORACLE

Answered, That this would not signify any thing, and if he had no other
reason, he might retire, as soon as he could The Priests took his Cap, and
threw it out of the Cavern, and having pushed him out, gave their hands to the

DAVPHIN.

Who came from Hunting the Wolf, and having conducted him into the Cavero, made
him shut his eyes, and asked him the number, and the name of the things he came
to consult about; and after retired into a little Grotto, and having taken the
water of a Spring that is hid there, the Divinity ordered him to speak, which
he did thus.

I do not intermeddle in other men's affairs, and it little concerns me, whether
the Prince of Wales be legitimate or not; I only complain that my Father does
all for himself, but nothing for me: The Archduke Joseph is made King of
Hungary at 12 years of age; and I am but Dauphin at 15.

The ORACLE

Answered, That there was no business concerning the Archduke Joseph the
Emperor's Son: but of the Prince of Wales, Son of King James, to know if he
were legitimate, or nor.

The Priests introduced

Madam La DAPHINE

Who appeared with much respect and Veneration, having made many Sacrifices to
Appollo of Clarot, she spoke thus, to the

DIVINITY.

Praised be God, that he has given me Children, even more than I desired, I
complain of the misfortune of some poor Queens, who do whatever is possible, to
have some, and yet can have none, but are at length forced to supposite them,
and to make them pass for their own; however it be, since I am in this Holy
place, for to say what I think, the greatest proofs I can offer, are the great
public Rejoycings, and the Te Dewn Landamus sung in all Churches of France.

The ORACLE

Seeing that Madam the Dauphine, spoke with a great freedom and naturalness,
ordered the Priestess to accompany her, and made her a present of some Relics.

The Priestess re-entred immediately, followed by the Young

QUEEN of P -- L.

Who after having performed the usual Ceremonies, spoke in this manner to the

DIVINITY.

The Elector Palatine has Married me to Don Pedro, upon condition that I bring
him Legitimate Children, and by consequence a lawful Successor, and not an
Infant supposited: The truth is, he had a mind to such a fertile House as ours
is, in comparison of the House of Modena, of which the World has spoken
variously: But since I am here, to speak my thoughts concerning the Prince of
Wales, I will prove it to be a legitimate Child, because it came into the World
by the Prayers made to our Lady of Lorette.

The QUEEN of S -- N

Hearing them speak of Children, made haste to come in, and prayed the
Priestess to introduce her quickly, adding, that she had somewhat of
consequence to say, being entered, she began thus, to the

ORACLE.

All the Queens of Europe have Children, except me, notwithstanding I am Young,
and Handsome, Why cannot I have one, as well as the Queen of England?

The ORACLE

Answered her, That he did not concern himself with the getting of Children,
nor examined the causes of Barrenness, or Fertility, but only to know if the
Child of the Queen of England, was legitimate, or not.

The QUEEN of S -- N

Replied, That she knew nothing, but that it was reported legitimate.

The Priestess conducted the

Three Sisters of Father PETER'S.

At the rise of the River, and after having made them drink of two sorts of
Water, viz. that of Lethe, which blots out of the Soul all profane thoughts,
and that of Ninemosine, which has the virtue to make one remember whatever is
seen in the Holy Cavern.

The ORACLE

Asked them, and said to them, That they ought to declare all that they knew
concerning the Prince of Wales, how he came into the World, who was his Father,
and who his Mother, that there had been already taken the Depositions of many
Princes and Princestes; but that the Oracle was not yet satisfied, that there
yet remained some obscurity in all that was said; that in the mean time, they
should be shut up in a Grote, until they did reveal this Mystery.

After appeared,

A Troop of Priests, and Prophets, of Poets, of Interpreters, of Prelates, and
Sacrificers.

The Pretress came before them, and told them then, That they were informed,
that the Epicureans were banished from that holy place, and those that were in
the Fields had order to pass no farther.

The Temple of the Oracle bring near to Parnassus, one might see the Muses
composing by the sweet harmony of their Instruments and Voices, a Quire, in
which was sung the Triumph of the Prince of Wales.

After this one might see the Young Prince carried into the Temple by fourscore
Jesuits, (as yet before Jupiter Hammon was by 80 Priests) in a kind of Goudolo
of Gold, from whence hung knobs of Silver, followed by a great number of Monks
of all Orders, singing with a loud voice holy Hymns to his Glory: As soon as
the little Prince was within the Temple all the Priests and Priestesses of
Apollo encompassed him, and having examined and considered the features of his
face, said aloud (contrary to the custom of our modern Gossips) That he was not
at all like his Father. The

DIVINITY

Ordered, That such should be introduced, as had not yet appeared. The Pretress
came before

Mr. SKELETON Ambassador of his Britannick Majesty to the King of France,

And being brought to the entry of the Holy Cave, thus spoke.

I prove the Prince of Wales to be Legitimate; because the King his Father had
wrote to me, to spare no charge in making Fireworks and splendid Feastings.

The Author of the Triumph of Liberty

Being come up, answered to Mr. Skeleton, That if his Excellency had no other
proof to give, he ought to expect to see himself very speedily censured, and
condemned; and that having already proved in his Book, That King James the It.
had not been lawfully called to the Crown of England, but that he had Usurped
it, since the Laws of the Land have Excluded all Romand Catholic Princes; he
had resolved to prove to him presently, That the Prince of Wales was never of
Royal Blood; That this is a suppositition, believing the Society contrived it
to deceive Fools.

The ORACLE

Ordered, That they should cause to come in

The Author of Parliamentum Pacificum

To see what he had to answer thereto.

The Pretress conducted him to the Cavern, and made the Author of the Triumph
of Liberty retire some paces back, for fear lest a noise should arise between
these two different Spirits; the Author of Parliamentum Pacificum said thus to
the

DIVINITY.

I cannot for bear the admiring the Divine Wisdom, for giving a Child to his
Majesty in his old years; and at a time when we were near seeing a second Queen
Elizabeth to Reign; and the greatest proof that I have that this young Infant
is Legitimate, is the ill opinion his Majesty has of all the Heretics. The

ORACLE

Answered him, That he had not in the least satisfied the Question which the
Author of the Triumph had proposed, viz. That his Majesty had Usurped the Crown
of England; he ought to prove the contrary before he came to the suppositition.
The

Earl of AVAUX Ambassador of FRANCE

Took his time, and the Pretress having received some Louis which he presented
her with, he was immediately introduced, and brought the affair into a few
words. The

ORACLE

Asked him then, How that he pretended to prove the Prince of Wales to be
Legitimate; his Excellency said;

The greatest proof he had, was a Magnificent Treat, the Monsieur Albeville
gave in the Prince Maurice his Palace to all the Ministers of Foreign Courts,
where we were near 300 persons that he invited.

After Mr. D'Avaux,

Mr. St. DISDIER

Advanced, and as he knew the History to the bottom, and is knowing in all
things; he said to the

DIVINITY.

That it was not difficult to prove that the Queen of England had really been
with Child, if one consider that the Queen Mother lay-in with Louis the XIV.
after she had been barren twenty two years, which is the reason they call the
King Given of God; and at this day the Prince of Wales has the same Name,
because he certainly came into the World by the gift of Heaven.

Mr. MOREAV Envoy Extraordinary from POLAND

Entered without Ceremony, and dispatched his business with a laughing air; the
relish of a glass of certain delicate Wine he drank at the Palace of Prince
Maurice made him not want matter or words in speaking to the

DIVINITY.

For my part I shall prove the Prince of Wales is not supposititiou; because
Mr. Albeville rose from the Table several times to fill us out to drink of a
most excellent wine, and he did it with so graceful a mein, that I have reason
to say, he has not forgot his first employment, [a Buler, or Footman.]

Mr. ALBEVILLE's Steward

Slipped into the Cavern without taking notice of the Pretress; and spoke thus
to the

DIVINITY.

I am about to abjure my Religion to oblige my Master the Ambassador. The
PRETRESS

Bid him hold his Tongue, for here was nothing to do about Religion, but only
to know how the Prince of Wales was Born.

The STEWARD

Answered, That he had resolved to tell all that he knew; but that he was only
concerned in performing the Commission he had from the Ambassador the day of
the Fireworks; which was to search out some English (or other unknown persons)
to borrow for them white Perriwigs, a Gentiel Dress, fine Linen, Cravats, and
Cuffs of French Point; and to procure them Footmen to follow, as if they had
been my Lords, or other of considerable Quality, that I had order to seat them
at the Table to make a figure, and fill seven or eight places, because that
some of the States had no mind to come.

The PRETRESS

(Perceiving that this Discourse displeased Monsieur Albeville who was present,
who was concerned to do things honorably on such occasions; besides that what
the Steward said, did more make known what was done on the day of rejoicing for
the young Prince, than to prove that he was of the Blood Royal) made him retire.

As soon as the Steward had done, the Pretress introduced Monsieur D' Albeville.

The DIVINITY

Told him, That all the World was surprised to see what passed at this day, and
that it was a thing that all people spoke of, that one would make a supposited
Child for a legitimate.

Monsieur ALBEVILLE

Cried out in the Discourse, calling Heaven and Earth to Witness; saying, That
it was a pure scandal that he had caused from the day that he had notice of the
Birth of the Young Prince to make Fire works, which had surprised the 7
Provinces with their Beauty and Magnificence, where was to be seen the Young
Prince upon a Globe, in the midst of a Triumphal Arch where these Words were
written, which contain the year of his Birth.

Augusta eX IaCobo Magno proLes DIV VIVat. M. DC. LXXXVIII. Which is, That the
Son of Great JAMES Live long.

Upon this Triumphal Arch you might see St. George, who represented the King,
trampling under his feet the Dragon of Rebellion, and abolishing the Test and
Penal Laws: There one might see the good Conscience of the Jesuits, represented
by the Woman that was near the Dragon, firm, and unmoved, notwithstanding the
rigours of the Penal Laws. There was to be seen two Guardian Angels near the
person of the Prince, to deliver him from the Ambuscades of the Quakers,
Conformists, and Nonconformists, from the Presbyterians, the Arminian Bishops,
the Calvinists, Lutherans, Anabaptists, and other Seets. There the Dragon was
to be seen, devoured by its own proper Flames, while the Crown, and all other
Figures were entire, which was a Prognostic, That his Majesty should bring
about his great designs. After this, ought the Heretics to maintain that the
Young Prince is not legitimate? And that all this has been done for a
supposited Child?

The Secretary of Monsieur D' Albeville

Came forwards with all speed, and softly put his Excellency in mind to add
something of a number of incomparable flying Squibs, Fire-pots, Rackets,
Wheels, etc. which filled the air full of Stars, and Serpents, which proved
that the Prince was legitimate, because they produced the effect that was
designed.

The ORACLE

Ordered the Jesuits to enter, together with the Pricits that framed these
Fireworks.

He that composed the Inscription came first, saying,

Non si commencia been se non dal Cielo.

I have my self Composed,

Veritas and Justitia fulcimentum Throni Patris, and erunt mei: As Virtue and
Justice are the support of my Father's Throne, so also shall they be of mine. I
have moreover composed this fine device;

Religio and libertas, amplexatae sunt:

Liberty and Religion are united. Adding, That this was convincing, and that he
had not composed this for an Insant supposited.

The Almoner of the Ambassador of France

Came in his turn, and said, That he himself had Composed a short Prayer, which
begun. Ad Deum Optimum Maximum pro Rege, Principe, and Gente Britanica Procuto
brevis: To the Great God, for the King, Prince, and British Nation, a short
Prayer. After this, one ought not to question, that the Prince of Wales was not
legitimate.

A Jesuit of the S -- sh Ambassador

Pressed hard, and being come in, said, That he had distributed a General Alms
that Morning, and given to the poor several Shillings, and a Pint of Wine to
every one to drink the Health of the Young Prince, that all this might serve to
prove and disabuse the vulgar incredulity.

All the Domestics of Monsieur Albeville,

Came in their turn and said, That they had labored more than 15 days to put
things in order, and prepare a most sumptuous Feast: Adding, That there could
not remain any doubt of the Young Princes legitimacy, since the Ambassador had
been at so great expense.

All the Musicians came also, and said, That they had sung that day a very fine
Te Deum, with excellent Music, and an incomparable Symphony, composed by
Monsieur Hacquart, and that this alone was fully convincing.

The Players on the Violins came also and said, that they were carried in a
Boat during the time of the Feast, and that they had played the Follies of
Spain, the Descent of Mars, and many other fine pieces, proper to the occasion,
for to divert the Ambassadors who were in the Palace of Prince Maurice; and
that all this could not be done for a supposited Child.

Those that had discharged the Cannon which came from England on purpose for
this day, came and said* It was not reasonable to suppose so much noise made
for nothing.

Those that had pierced several Tuns of Wine came also and said, That the
Street was overflowed by six Fountains of excellent Wine, part Claret, and part
White Wind of France and Spain; and one ought to believe that this was made for
an Illegitimate Child.

An Unknown POET

Desired the Pretress to permit him to enter into the holy Cavern, to repeat
some Verses which he had composed for the Glory of the Young Prince, on the day
of his Triumph; he being come in said,

Some Protestant LORDS

Sliding in in the Crowd, desired the Divinity to give them Audience; one of
them said, That this Young Prince had let fall his Scepter while he was upon
the Globe, and that this was an ill presage. Another said, That they had given
the Hydra but 6 Heads, because it was said, they would not represent by it the
7 Provinces.

Another said, That St. George was devoured by the Monster, instead of the
Monster being devoured by St. George, and that all this proves manifestly, that
the Child was supposited.

The ORACLE

Ordered the Pretress to introduce

Monsieur the PRINCE, Madam la Princess d' O -- and Messieurs Le ESTATS,

To see what they had to answer to so many Witnesses, who had maintained the
Kings side.

The Pretress went out of the Holy Cavern, and was humbly desired, that she
would dispense with them, for a great many reasons, which was granted them.

The Pretress had order to call

Dr. B -- t.

Who being entered, said to the

DIVINITY.

Who desired her, That she would dispense with him from speaking of the Affairs
of England, for fear of saying too much: The

DIVINITY

Ordered him to tell his thoughts of the Queens lying-in, and of the Birth of
the Prince of Wales.

Dr. B -- t

Answered, That supposing the Prince of Wales was legitimate, and that the
Queen was truly his Mother, as they would maintain. It is to be presumed, that
it was extremely the interest of the King, at a time, when his people did with
difficulty obey him, to contrive, that the Queens lying-in should be made
according to the forms, by calling thither all the Peers of the Realm, as was
always practiced in the Court of England, because it is known, that the people
are naturally very difficult to persuade, they scarce believing the things they
see.

Author of the Book, whose Title is, The Mischiefs that threaten the
Protestants of England.

Seeing that every one endeavored to speak, desired the Pretress to permit him
to recite a History of Puffendorfe, which proves, marvelous well, that it is
easy to supposit a Young Prince, since we have in Histories many Examples of
it. The

ORACLE

Ordered him to recite the said History.

Poffendorfe, a Celebrated Historian, speaking of the Kings of Spain, says,
After John the II. his Son Henry the IV. the disgrace and infamy of that Crown
succeeded to the Kingdom of Casteile, for since he was esteemed impotent to
remove that conceit from the people, he made one Berrand Curva, lie with the
Queen, and for a recompense of that service, he made him Earl of Desina; this
Adultery produced a Daughter, named Jane, which Henry proclaimed Successor to
the Crown. This action is the more likely to be true, because this Queen had
sometime after a Bastard by another. But in fine, to discover this cheat, and
to exclude Jane from succeding: They united together, and carried things so
high, that they exposed upon a Theater, the Figure of Henry dressed in all his
Royal Ornaments, and after having made a Process against him, and brought an
Accusation against him, they stripped him of all his Clothes, and threw him
from top to bottom. After they proclaimed Alphonsus King, Brother of Henry. But
this Farce caused terrible Shocks, and furious Agitations in the Kingdom, which
came to bloody Battles; at last Alphonsus died, during these Troubles, in the
year 1468.

The DIVINITY

Ordered the three Sisters of Father Peter's, to be brought out of the Grote
they were shut in.

The Pretress conducted them into the Holy Cavern, being veiled.

The ORACLE

Told, That it was no longer time now to dissemble; that wanting nothing but
their Depositions, they ought seriously to reflect, and to speak to him the
plain truth, that all the World did with impatience expect the revealing this
Mystery.

She that stayed in London, said, That she had seen one Peter's her Brother, go
often into three diffirent Houses where there lived big-belly'd Women, viz. a
Baker's House, a Sword Cutlers, and a Millers, that she had followed him step
by step several times, and she had observed, that he stopped oftnest at the
Miller's, and that she had observed, that this Woman had been brought to Bed
without any body knowing what became of the Child.

APOLLO

Seeing that the Question had been long enough debated, made all the Powers be
informed, that he was about to pronounce the Divine Oracle.

After the Divine Cavern was shut of a sudden, and the Pretress had ordered,
That they ought to wash themselves in the River Hercinas; after which, to make
a Sacrifice to Trophonius, and all the Family, to Apollo, to Jupiter, to
Saturn, to Ceres, Europa Nurse to Trophonius, and not to eat during the three
days of the Sacrificing, but of the Flesh Sacrificed, and then appeared the
last time, the

DIVINITY

Accompanied with her Pretress, and there was heard throughout the Cavern many
Voices saying, The Child Supposited, the Monk reigning.

The Commissioners of the High-Court of JUSTICE

Established by the Parliament, to try Charles Stuart, came in a body from the
other World, causing a Sword of Justice, and the Mace to be carried before them.

The President BRADSHAW

Being placed in a Chair of Crimson Velvet, thus spoke to the

DIVINITY.

We have made an Unjust Process against C. Stuart, when shall we form a Just
one against James II. his Son?

The ORACLE

When the Patiance of the good English shall be weary of suffering a false
Prince of Wales to be put upon them.

CROMWELL one of the Members of the High-Court

Advanced for a moment, out of the Crowd, and said, Jesu my God! What is it
they say of James the II. all all the World cries out, and complains against
him.

ORACLE

Answers him, That King James the II. is a good Jesuit, and pretends to die a
Martyr of that Society.

DUKE of MONMOUTH.

Before he presented himself to the Divinity, the Pretr^ss made him kiss the
Statue of Apollo of Claros, and made him at the same time drink a Glas^ of
Water, called Lethe, to make him forget his shameful death, and said,

I made too much haste to Death, and I have lost by it. O would to God I were
now living! What afair occasion should I have to secure the Libarties of the
English Nation.

The ORACLE

It is long since you have been predestined by the Society, to go reign in
another World.

The Q. D -- r to the ORACLE.

Since the death of the King my Husband, I have had no satisfaction at Court,
where nothing rules out Jesuitism: And as the Society is full of fury and rage
when it atracks Heresy, I have resolved to go into Portugal, to avoid the
Storm that is rising: They have so moved the people, that one is obliged to
suffer the Supposititiousness of the Prince of Wales.

The ORACLE

The Lightnings have flashed, and the Thunder grumbled, if you love peace, and
repose, stay not until the Bolts fall.

The EMPEROR.

The same Pretresses that yet before conducted Alexander, and V^spasian, into
the Sanctuary of Hammon, came to introduce the Emperor Leopold, and having made
him a present of a Crown of Laurels, conducted him into the Holy Cavern, and
said to the

DIVINITY.

I have already filled the Universe, with the News of my Victories, extended
the Frontiers of my Empire even to Belgrade: Planted Christianity in all the
Mosques of Mahomet: Delivered the Electors of my Empire from the Ottoman fury;
snatched off the Crescent, and planted the Standard of the Roman Eagle on all
the Towers of Hungary; made Rome to Triumph, and the Cross of Jesus Christ, in
the midst of the terrors of War: my Generals being tired with so many labors,
solicit me to make peace: What ought I to do?

The ORACLE.

Leopold, Leopold, if thou will believe me, hearken no more to Loyola, make
Peace with the Crescent, (Turks) and War against the Sun. (France)

Archduke JOSEPH King of Hungary

Having heard of the Surrender of that Important place of Alba Regalis, came
on, and said, to the

DIVINITY.

The Emperor my Father, has gained on one side, and lost on the other. France
has promised not to break the Truce, and notwithstanding he every day
advances on the Rhine, on the other side, the Jesuits promise him the
Universal Monarchy, if he continues the War. I beg you to discover the mystery.

ORACLE.

The Jesuits are Traitors to the Empire, banish them the Court. The

EMPRESS

After she had ended her short Devotions at St. Stevens, where Te Deum was sung
for the Prosperity of the Imperial Arms, she came and said to the

ORACLE

The House of Aushia has triumphed over its greatest Enemies, and if the
Emperor my Husband, would believe me, we should spill no more Ottoman blood.

The ORACLE.

When the Emperor shall have shed as much French as he has of the Ottoman
Blood, he shall secure his Conquests, and have no more to fear.

The GRAND SEIGNIOR, Emperor of the Turks.

Seeing afar off the Prophetic Temple, he approached the Holy Cavern, the
entrance of which, was covered with Leaves of Laurel, which bespake the Success
of the Christian Arms, and making several Sighs, said to the

DIVINITY.

La illa alha Mahomet rasoul alha.

The Great God, and our great Prophet Mahomet, my Brother Sultan, is Dethroned,
to raise me upon his Throne, and in despite of the Rage of my Janisaries, and
of his Party, I have extinguished the Fire that burned in the heart of my
Empire: Being unskilful in the Art of War, I propose a Peace, to the Christian
Emperor, and I yield him all his Conquests, adding thereto, even Belgrade,
fearing that my Bassaw should betray me; and that the Uncircumcised Army do not
advance to Constantinople, I have ordered my Treasury to be carried into Asia,
Day and Night my Priests go to the Holy Temple of Sophia, where the Alcoran is
kept, and I send my Dervices to Meccha, and Medina, to Pray our Great Prophet,
to have pity on the true Musselmen, and to desire the State of Venice to make
Peace. The ORACLE

Notredame Cent. 3. Quat. II.

The KING of S -- n, CHARLES the Second.

Before the descended into the Divine Cavern, he was ordered, to spend a certain
number of Days in a little Chapel, which is named Good Fortune, or Good
Genius, after which being Introduced, he said to the

ORACLE.

All other Princes, reap Laurels, in the Art of War, and extend the Frontiers
of their Kingdoms; they become the Terror of their Subjects, and do a Thousand
Famous Exploits, to Eternalize their Names; for my part I am always the same,
and instead of becoming great, I diminish, I Sow in Ungrateful and Barren
Earth, which produces nothing but Brambles. The Queen my Wife, gives me no
Heir, notwithstanding, the pains I take, to get her with Child. Oh! how happy
is King J. the Second my Cousin, to have a Son? Oh! that the Queen my Wife had
been heard, by the Lady of Loretto. I desire you to tell me, what can make my
Wife to have Children?

ORACLE.

You must have at hand a good Father, such as Father Peter's.

KING of P -- d

Having received Orders, from the Pretress to make a confession of all the
Secrets of his Life, approached, and said to the

DIVINITY.

I repent, to have made so much noise of my Victories gotten over the Infidels,
and to have called the Emperor, and the Princes of the Empire, ungrateful. I
repent me, of having Amused the Czar of Muscovy, my Allies, in promising them a
great many things, I have not performed; I repent my self also, for having had
more concern, for Love of France, then for Poland; I repent my self, for having
suffered the Emperor to take Hungary, since I might have partaken with him, of
the Plunder, of the common Enemy, I repent my not taking Caminieck, the last
Compagn when its Doors were opened to me, if France had not whispered in my
Ear, stay, stay. I only Ask the Crown of Poland for my Son.

The ORACLE.

The King of France is a Fox, and if you follow his Councels, you will Live in
the Hatred of your People, and your Son shall never be King.

The GRAND VIZIER,

After having saluted the Oracle of Tyophonius, and drank a Glass of the Water
of Hircinas, descended into the Holy Cavern, and said,

La illa alha Mahomet rasoul alha.

The new Sultan my Master would honor me with the Charge of Grand Vizier, I
beseech you inform me, what shall be my Fate?

The ORACLE.

Take care of your self, for the Neck of a Grand Vizier draws to it the
Bowstring, as naturally, as Amber does a Straw.

The KING of D -- k to the ORACLE.

I am the Spy of the Northern Crowns, and when any thing remarkable happens
amongst my Neighbors, I inform the King of France of it, and the King of
England; they promise me, so long as we continue Friends, we shall keep the
Balance equal, between the Emperor and the other Princes of Europe. I Answer,
that I am content, so far, but I doubt France will always play the same play:

The ORACLE.

The King of France is often guilty of Deceits, take care of your self.

The ELECTOR of S -- y

Making his Prayers, passed by Holland, and after having saluted the Prince of
Orange, entered into the Temple, and said to the

DIVINITY.

I love the French Wine, but not the French, but I like better the Rhenish
Wine, and I am of opinion, that I ought to drink no other, although the King of
France Cries Day and Night in my Ears, my Lewisses, and my good Champagn Wine.
I beseech you tell me what side I shall take.

The ORACLE.

The Emperor's side, and that of Holland.

After all Ceremonies were ended, and the Lot was going to be cast, with much
Respect and Veneration,

The Cardinal of FURSTENBERG

Being entered in the Holy Cavern, in haste, overturned the Lots and Urns.

The Pretress being disturbed, ordered him to speak, and he said to the

ORACLE.

Was there ever a Pope seen so wilful, and stubborn, as ours now is? To have a
Red Cap, I have endeavored above Five Years, without interruption, and do so
at this Day, to become Elector, and what way have I not tried? And I am not
nearer it now than I was the first Year; if the King my Patron would have
believed me, he should have abandoned the affair of the Franchises at the
beginning, without making so much noise about it, since the advantage of being
Master of the Rhine, and by that to intercept the Communication of the Empire
with Flanders, and so in few Years promise himself the Conquest of Holland; It
had been better to have made an Exchange, of a Bull, with his Right of the
Franchises, which is only, -- without endeavoring to vex the Holy Father in
his Old Age.

The ORACLE.

For to have a Bull, and to make the Holy Father agree with his Eldest Son, it
is necessary that Marshal D'Estree quit the Barbarous Algeirs, to come and
Bombard the Holy See at Rome.

Dr. MOLINOS, the Cardinal PETRUCCI, the Cardinal CICERO DON LIVIO DUCK DE
CICERI, Nephew of the Pope, and other Quietists.

Doctor Molinos, slepping forwards, said to the

ORACLE.

Praised be God, the Holy Father has made us accounted Heretics, and he is
one himself, if it is true, that he is a Quierest, as it is reported; the
Inquisition having examined him, were about shutting him up in the Minerva, if
the Cardinal D'Estre, (who betrayed me, as Judas did our Savior) had not
prevailed with him, that he ought to dissemble, which saved him. I beseech you
to inform me, How long this Intrigue shall last.

The ORACLE.

In our Age the Power of the holy See is a Tyranny, which Sacrifices all to its
Interests.

Madam of MONTESPAN.

After much Ceremony she whispered the God in the Ear, and asked him what she
would, at last she stopped her Ears with her Hands, and went out, coming in
again, and said to the

ORACLE.

I have endured a great many difficulties since my Affairs went backwards at
Court, the Good Man loves me no more, and the Old Hag Maintenon has done me
the good office, she has so buzzed the Ears of the King with the Merit of
Mounsieur Scarron, that it has made him have a mind to turn Poet. For my part
not knowing to what Saint to pay my Vows, after having lost the Great Louis, I
am resolved to imitate La Valliere.

The ORACLE.

To learn to string Pater Nosters is a poor Life for Montespan.

Madam of MAINTENON

Took the way of the Temple accompanied by Father La Chese, who entertained her
with the new Converts of France, and the hopes he had to see England in the
same State, by the Care the Society took to provide a Successor to the Crown;
Maintenon being come near said to the

DIVINITY.

That Father La Chese had informed her, that his Penitent by many repeated
Confessions, that he always had a Passion for the Fair Sex, that neither Age,
nor the Severities of Penance, could ever reclaim him, we have a mind to Marry
together, to the end that we may lead a good Life, and that there be no more
discourse in the Royal Family of a Divorce. I beseech you tell me, if I, being
60 Years Old, may yet be able to bring forth a Brother to the Dauphin; His
Majesty says, he will keep only to me.

The ORACLE.

The Fathers of Loyola have excellent Secrets, you being a Daughter of the
Society, I would have Father Peter's inform you how the Prince of W. came into
the World.

The Marshall of ESTRES, Vice Admiral of France, To the ORACLE.

I have two great Designs to Execute, the first obliges me to destroy Algiers,
and totally to burn that Barbarous People out of their Nests, and on the Ashes
of this Rebellious Place I ought to Erect a Statue to His Majesty, like to that
which the Duke of Tuillade has put up in the place of Victory, to the end that
the Name of Great Louis may become the Terror of all Africa, as it is of all
Europe, and that the Report of his great Victories may be conveyed by the
Waters of the Mediterranean to the Ocean, and by the Ocean to the Four
Extremities of the World. And in the second place, I have Orders to go as soon
as I can to the Coast of England to make that Rebellious Nation tremble at the
Will of King James, and to oblige the House of Lords and Commons to Revoke the
Tests and Penal Laws.

The ORACLE.

These Barbarians are turbulent, and resolved to fight well. And the English
expect only a contrary Wind to prove to King J. and to Peter's his Almoner, that
the Prince of W. is Supposited.

The SWISSES to the ORACLE.

The King of France our Uncle is at length tired with engaging us to the
Germans in Wars. And we have managed the Affair so well, that he has left poor
Geneva in Peace. He is contented to see if we are afraid, but seeing the
Swisses have always a good Stomach, and Drink well, his Counsel of Conscience
have not judged it proper to Bleed them; so that he is retired from us without
bidding us farewell. We beseech you to inform us, if he will ever return again.

The ORACLE.

The King your Uncle often makes such Braggings.

GENEVA to the ORACLE.

The King of France, has at last, granted us a Truce, for some Months, because
his Affairs press him a little too hard, on the Rhine, his Pretensions on the
Palatmate, his Franchises at Rome, the Stubborness of the Holy Father, the
Election of Furstenberg, have so employed him, during the Spring, that he has
desired us, by his Resident, to excuse him, if he defers the Business to a
fitter Opportunity. Besides, That the new Converts cut him out so much Work,
that he knows not which way to turn him: In the mean time Father La Chese,
makes him believe, that before he dies, he shall enter with his Coach and
Horses into the greatest Church of Geneva, adding, That he ought to keep fair,
and expect until his Brother King J. has equipped his Fleet.

The ORACLE.

Watch and pray, for you know not the Hour when the Thief will come.

The ALGERINES to the ORACLE.

The King of France is a terrible Champion; after having purged the Heretics
out of his Kingdom, he imagines to purge the Sea of Pirates, and to make the
Coasts of Barbary a Desert: This is a great Design, and worthy of a great
Monarch; but the Algerines have already passed so many times through the Fire
of their Bombs and Carcasses, that they are become half Devils, that Hellfire
cannot burn them. If our Houses were built so as his Versai'les is, it had been
long since reduced to Ashes, and the Palace of M'ezemorto had been nothing but
a Tomb; but they are built of a certain Cement, which the Fire cannot hurt; and
the Three thousand Bombs which the Marthal of Estres discharged against us,
have done no more harm, than Bullets shot into the Air. Barbarian against
Barbarian; he that is the most barbarous shall conquer: All the French that are
in our Power shall be put in the Mouth of a Cannon; we have shot them the
Consul already, expecting to send them their King, if ever he fall into our
Hands.

The ORACLE.

You ought to keep him Prisoner.

All the ELECTORS of the EMPIRE.

We are encompassed with the Claws of the Eagle, and the Paws of the Fox: The
great Leopold on the side ingrosses Villages, Provinces, and Kingdoms. The
great Louis on the other side ravages amongst us, sometimes as a Lion, and
sometimes as a Fox, making his Bombs thunder amongst us; making a thousand fair
Promises, to one, to oblige him to sell his best places to them for their
Liberty; to others, for to truck, exchange, or engage their Sovereignty. The
great Leopold seeing all these Contrivances, advises us, under hand, to have a
care of such delusive Promises: The great Louis, on his side, whispers us by
his Spies, Take care of your selves, Leopold becomes too powerful for you; you
will shortly become Slaves of the House of Austria: We beseech thee tell us
which is our true Interest.

The ORACLE.

Your true Interest is, to join with the Emperor and the Empire, and to be of
Opinion always, That the Fox will do his Endeavor to catch the Eagle and her
Eagless.

The Archbishop of PARIS to the ORACLE.

I have hitherto done all the Good, and all the Ill, I could unto the Hugonots,
in order to get a Cardinals Cap, and I have only a Mitre: The Bishop of Camus,
that is reputed a Heretic, and is really so in his Heart as well as the
Cardinal of Furstenberg, who is a very Libertine, given up to his Pleasures,
and has got a Cap with ease: And I who daily sing Vespers, and assist at the
holy Offices, with the Piety and Zeal of greatest Prelate, is it possible that
I should have nothing to cover my Ears in my old Age?

The ORACLE.

It is true indeed, you are a great Mimmick, but the holy Father does not
reward Grimaces.

All the CANNONS of the Chapter of COLLOIGNE

Came in a Body, and after having drank a Glass of the Water of the River
Hircinas, and made a Sacrifice to the God Trophonius, they entered into the
holy Cavern, and said to the

ORACLE.

The Cardinal of Furstenberg is not worthy to wear the Electoral Bonnet, since
the holy Father is not willing he should: If we had the Power, neither should
the Prince of Bavaria, for we have received nothing from him; as to Furstenburg
we very much fear.

The ORACLE.

For fear, lest they strangle you, for the sure Charge is great, Qualitas bona,
Quantitas mala, aiunt medici, The Physicians say the Quality is good, but the
Quantity is ill.

All the Monks of FRANCE.

Were carried by the Pretress into the Chapel of good Genius, and being first
laid on the Earth, they entered the holy Cavern, after which the

DIVINITY.

Ordered them to sing some Exaudions in Music, with a loud Voice.

Omnes Sancti in C^elis, Exaudions, and Orate pro nobis, (All the Holy in
Heaven, hear us, and pray for us,) when the Quire began to repeat the Ora pro
nobis, the Pretress Ordered the most Ancient and

VENERABLEST

to speak, and they said to the

ORACLE.

At this time, we are the most Powerful part of the Government, under the
Protection of a great King, we live in Peace, Ease, fatted with the Blood of
the People, we fear neither War, nor Peace, and heaping up Riches, we become so
powerful, that we give Laws to the Princes of the Earth, and it is by us that
Kings Reign; we have secret ways to insinuate our selves, and every one of us
endeavors to play his part: We make Rich and Poor when we please; we affect to
be counted Men of Estates, and to be Wicked, when we have a mind, and under the
Cheating Mask of Virtue and Vice, we seduce the People, Hypocrisy is the
highest degree of Perfection, and the Wisest, most Pious, and Honestest,
amongst us is a great Hypocrite; we have not made Virtue consist in a severe
exercise of good Thoughts, as the Ancient Philosophers did, who not having the
true way of enjoying this World, have lived in the middle, between Good and
Evil, without coming to Extremes; in short, we have so well Sung for Six or
Seven Months, that the Queen of England has at length had a Son.

The DIVINITY.

Supposited.

Count TECKELY

Came out of this Den, imitating the Savage-Beasts, who suffer themselves to be
seen, when the Hunters and Dogs are retired out of the Field.

The PRETRESS

Surprised to see him yet alive, made many Acclamations of Joy, Crying Helas;
Helas, and immediately presented him with a Glass of the Water of the River
Hercinas, for -- and made him sit a Moment to rest himself, after which he was
conducted into the Holy Cave, and spoke thus to the

DIVINITY.

You see here the most Wretched and Unfortunate Prince that ever was,
notwithstanding, I am still living, by the Powerful Arm of the great God, who
has always preserved me from the Hatred of the Emperor my capital Enemy;
against the King of France who has betrayed me; against the Cursed Race of the
Jesuits, who have tried a Thousand ways to Sacrisice me to their Rage. Against
the Grand Seig^ior, who cares for me no more than I am serviceable to him; and
in fine, against a Thousand and a Thousand Enemies, who are contriving my
Death. You see me a Fugitive, and Robbed of a Crown, which the Archduke Joseph
wears for the Love of me. Yet notwithstanding I have not lost my Courage* and
such as you see me, I give a great deal of trouble to my Enemies.

The ORACLE.

As long as thou live thou shall be between the two Rocks, always in danger
-- the Fathers of Loyola have surrounded thee like so many hungry Wolves
seeking to devour thee.

Mounsieur le Cardinal de CAMUS.

Being conducted to the Holy Cavern, one of the Pretress gave him her hand to
help him to go down, lest he should fall; being come near, he made a Narration
of his History, in an Eloquent manner, and said to the

ORACLE.

You see here a Fisherman, like other Men; pardon I beseech you the term which
seems to be contrary to the custom, since I have all reason imaginable to
praise my self, if I have any regard to that Great and August Dignity the
Purple has raised me to; God be praised, I take a Glory to be Humble, as much
as my proper Nature will permit me. You have been informed, without doubt, that
it is my Zeal, and that I endeavor to acquit my self of the Duty, to which the
Charge of Pastor, engages me, by the pains I take to gather together the poor
Sheep strayed about the Holy Mother Church. You know that I blame extremely the
ways of Rigor and Tyranny which is exercised, and that on the Consciences of
Persons, whose greatest Guilt is, that they pray to God in the purity of their
Heart. That I have Preached, and still do so that this harsh way is wholly
opposite to the Christian Religion. That I endeavor to prove it by all the
Fathers of the Church, who never had any other way, than by Sweetness and
Humanity: In short, I have said it, allowed in the Chair, and shall eternally
say it, of the Reverend Fathers of the Society, who Vomit out every Day their
Gall and Rage against me; I leave them to their Opinions, and I have acted at
present with so much Boldness, that the Holy Father begins to approve of my
Conduct, and his Majesty on the other side Orders that I be taken for a Model
and Example. In short, you may see what I do, and what I have done hitherto.
But one thing goes extremely to my heart, and if I did dare to tell you, it is,
that I am of the Opinion of those poor People whom they Persecute so much. As
to what remains to be said, it is delicate, and I beseech you that it may be
permitted, that I may be suspected such, but that the truth be never known.

ORACLE.

Jansenist, take care of your self.

The Duke of BAVARIA.

The Prestress having conducted him into the Cavern, made him drink a Glass of
the Water of the River Hercinas, and bid him shut his Eyes, and speak to the

DIVINITY.

Since my Marriage with the Daughter of the Empire, I have always got
Victories, and gathered Laurels, and the Ottoman War has been my Apprentiship.
I have abandoned the Interest of France, in quitting a considerable Pension
which she gave me, because it blotted my Glory, I have Married my Sister to the
Dauphin of France, he has cost me nothing, and what I have lost on one side, I
have gained on the other. I have failed in being Governor of the Spanish Low
Countries, by a Grant which the King of Spain would have made me, but it gave a
Jealousy to France, and this Affair is put off to another time. I have refused
the Alliance of a Bastard, that was offered me, because it did not consist with
my Honor, besides it would have made me a Slave to a Crown, that does nothing
but for Interest. At this time they Court me more than ever, the Emperor, my
Father in Law, promises me that there shall be no more Jealousy between me
and Lorrain, and that I shall have the sole Command of all his Arms. The King
of France promises me that I shall share with him in Spain, in Flanders, in
Mallaine, in Perne, and Mexico, and in all the Goods of his Brother in Law,
after his Death; what side ought I to take?

The ORACLE.

The Empires side, in preferring thy own Glory, to that of the Emperor, and all
the Electors, to the Castles in Spain, and to the Deceitful Promises of France.

The PRETRESS.

Seeing coming the

PARTISANS of FRANCE,

Came before them by the Chapel of Good Fortune, before they entered into the
Holy Cavern.

The PRETRESS.

Ordered, The most ancient to sit in the Chair of Mnemosine, and to make a long
Discourse; having shut his Eyes, and opened his Mouth, he spoke thus to the

DIVINITY;

We are a Race Cursed by God, Bloody to the poor People, Disturbers of the
Public Quiet, and Preservers of the Royal Authority; without us, the Kings
would be Sovereigns without Power, of Power without Arms, of Riches without
Silver; we grow Fat in the midst of Plenty and Poverty, and we have the Secret
to find Money where there is none. In short, great Divinity, St. Louis, yet
before, was only a poor Saint of Wood, and we have made him at this Day a Saint
of Gold, and when you shall see the Ambassadors of the King of Siam, and of the
King of China, Wise Men come from the the East, and powerful Kings send their
Ambassadors from another World, let not this surprise you: You ought to know,
that all the Powers of the Earth are obliged to give him Marks of their
Submission, (because this serves for his Glory.) In the mean time, he seems to
have forgot from whence he came, that he has forgot his good Friends, he is
become so fierce of late Years. in relation to us, that we dare no more look
upon him. And above all, since the Reverend Fathers of the Society have put him
in the head, to chase away the Hugonots, without considering, that this does us
wrong; farther he has taken care to purge us from time to time with good
Taxes, for fear, left we growing too Rich, we should be able to make War with
him; but the Revenue begins to diminish, and lessens every day more and more by
the great number of Refuges, who have quitted, and daily do quit, the Kingdom;
who being the fat and strength of the Nation, and Rich, and the best
Pay-matters that we had, what shall we do now for Money? The

ORACLE.

Establish real to Ruin the Nobility.

The Reverend Father TACHART Jesuit and Ambassador of the King of SIAM, to the
Court of France,

Was no sooner arrived at the Sanctuary of Hammond, but all the Pretresses of
the Divinity went out to see his Dress, there was one who would have him Dance,
the Reverend Father having lifted up his Triangular Bonnet, saluted him with a
Kiss, praying him to excuse him, and to introduce him into the Holy Cavern; the
Twelve Mandarines that accompanied them were ordered to stay in the Chapel of
Good Genius, the Reverend Father Tachart being come near, said to the

ORACLE.

I am the Ambassador of a great King, and I come from the other World to make
an Alliance between Mahomet and the Christians. The Society have chosen me, an
Apostle, who ought to plant the Gospel in the Kingdom of Siam. I have persuaded
the King of Siam to send his Son to the Court of France, for to learn the Art
there of Converting Heretics, to the end that we may suddenly go to Hunt r e
new Converts through all the Indies, I have already introduced into the chief
Commands of the Kingdom the principal Members of our Society, and the King of
Siam himself is a Zealous Catholic, who has been a Zealous Idolater. The

ORACLE.

It much concerns the Society, for the execution of their great Designs, to
Transport to the Indies a Naval Army of French Dragoons.

Monsieur Le Marquess de LOUVOIS, and Monsieur de VAVBAN Ingeneer-General of
France,

Having a mind to visit the Frontier places, to see if all be in a good
condition on this side of the Rhine, in case the Emperor, and his Allies should
openly oppose the Election of the Cardinal of Furstenberg;

The PRETRESS

Seeing then appear,

Mounsieur, the Marquis of LOUVOIS

Came on first, and was conducted without loss of time, into the Chapel of
good Genius, where he saluted the Apollo of Claros, in passing, and from thence
he came into the holy Cavern, and spoke thus to the

ORACLE.

His Majesty is for War, and I for Peace, he is resoived to make his Troops
enter Cologne, and make Furstenberg Elector, in despite of the Pope and the
Empire. and for my part. I am of a contrary opinion; I represent to him the
pitiful condition that France is in at this time, its Coffers are empty, its
Trade ruined, the new Converts ready to put off the Mask at the first Signal. I
represent to him all the Electors of the Empire, and Holland, expecting War
with impatience, prudence is my Council, and as long as we fish in troubled
Waters, I shall be always for Peace, fearing to lose in one Campaign what we
have gained in six.

The ORACLE.

So long as the Ottoman War shall last, the Deceitful Promises shall do more
than Powerful Enemies.

Mounsieur de VAVBAN

Who was busy in considering the Avenue to the Holy Cave, and had already
drawn on his Tablets, all that he saw curious in the Chapel of Good Genius, he
was ordered by the Pretress to meddle no more with his Tablets, but to speak
his business, and to retire as fast as he could; having shut his Eyes, and
opened his Mouth, he spoke to the

ORACLE.

We have no rest Day nor Night, and we are in a perpetual Motion, as the Water
of a River that runs without ceasing; and we run from Province to Province,
from place to place, and from Frontier to Frontier; they may call us Fools. The
Glory of our great Monarch, to which we Sacrifice all our Pains and Travels, is
at present a great Idol we Adore, which will erect to us eternal Monuments,
which all Ages will admire; all the Monks of France, chiefly the Jesuits, say
that the Ring is Immortal, and that the Empire, as well as all the other
Potentates of Europe, will be obliged to submit to his Yoke, and to rank
themselves under his Obedience; we beseech thee inform us, what will be the
Destiny of the Great Louis.

The ORACLE.

The Great Louis has Enemies without number, who expect only the reverse of
the Medal. That he always endeavors for Peace, in making a show of declaring
War, and this is his great Policy.

The Count de RAUNTS,

Ambassador of his Having received Order from the Emperor, and Electors of the
Empire, to go immediately to the Holy Cavern, came forwards, and said to the

ORACLE,

France has endeavored, for many Years, by his Money, and his Menaces, to
make the Cardinal of Furstenberg Elector of Cologne; the Emperor has ordered
me to represent to the Illustrious and most Reverend Chapter of Cologne, that
the said Cardinal, although a German by Birth, is gained to be a Slave to the
Crown of France: That he has often times betrayed the Empire, and its Members,
that he brought the War within the Diocese, and made it a Bloody Theater, that
he dismembered Strasburgh from the Empire, and delivered the Citadel of Liege to
a powerful Stranger; that at this Day he Quarters the French Troops in the
strong places of the Diocese; that he Fortifies Bonn with the Leuis of Gold
which the King his Protector lends him, in hopes of being reimbursed by him, in
resigning Cologne to him.

The ORACLE.

The Empire is a Machine difficult to manage, and France will Conquer it all,
so long as Misunderstandings reigns amongst them.

All the MONKS, and all the PRIESTS, of the Spanish Low Countries, to the
ORACLE.

Since the Queen of England was brought to Bed, we are ordered, by the Holy
Father, and all the Clergy of Spain, to Sing Ora pro nobis, and to Pray our
Lady of Loretto, that the Queen of Spain may be with Child also. If the
Princess of Orange and her Sister the Princess of Denmark, were not Heretics,
we could at the same time Pray for them, and they should have no cause to
complain, if it happen that they remain Barren, while all the other Princes of
Europe have reason to rejoice at their Fruitfulness.

The ORACLE

In Barrenness, Father of Marvelous Effect, as well as the assistance of some
good Father:

The most Serene Republic of VENICE came forward, attended by all the
Senators; Morosini spoke, in Quality of the Doge, and said to the

DIVINITY.

We have purged one part of Greece, the Adriatic Gulf, the Morea, and some of
the Islands of the Archipelago, of infamous Mahometism, and we are about
placing the Standard of Christians in all the Churches of Constantinople. The
Ports of the Holy Sophia are open to us, the Impostor Mahomet shall shortly
have no Sanctuary, but the fearful Deserts of Arabia, the Emperor, our Allie,
solicites us to make Peace; all Italy represents to us that France makes
advantage of our Conquests. If we suffer him to pass the Alps, and if he
advance on the Rhine, what ought we to do?

The ORACLE.

All Europe enjoys Peace in the East, and wish the War were in the West. But
since you have gone so far, take Candia to assure the Conquests.

The King of SIAM to the ORACLE.

I have sent the Reverend Father Tachart, of the Society of Jesus, in Quality
of Ambassador Extraordinary, to the Court of France, there to treat of the
Means to Convert my People from Idolatry, and to break Commerce with the
Hollanders. Part of the Pagods of my Kingdoms are already Consecrated to
Christianity, and have purged them of Marmasets; and of False Gods, with which
they were filled. The Reverend Father Tachart has Counseled him to put in
their places the Statues of St. Louis, and St. Ignatius. On the other part, I
have set out a Fleet, and I have built Fortresses on the Frontiers of my
Countries, and the King of France has sent me Ingineers, and he desires me to
send my Son to him, that he may be Taught the Art of Reigning. The Jesuits
persuade me to be willing that the Dragoons come, as Missionaries, from France,
to Convert my People. I beg of you to inform me what I shall do.

The ORACLE.

A good Dragoon is a good Apostle, but has no Faith, Law, or Baptism.

The King of PERSIA to the ORACLE.

We are at the end of the World, if it be true that the Evangilest of Jesus
Christ is Preached through all the Habitable Earth. There is no other Discourse,
but of making New Converts, as if the Son of God was come. The King of Siam my
Brother has chosen rather to embrace the Cross than the Alchoran, and a great
many open the Port of the East to the Fathers of Loyola, who advance in Troops,
and assembles in the Indies like Wild Loupes. If the Prophets accomplish their
Prophesies, and my Brother the Sultan is driven out of Europe, Constantinople,
and all the Holy Places of our Prophet Mahomet's Repose, will be purged of
Mahometism, and I only shall be left in Asia; I beseech you what must I do to
continue the Circumcised, that they may spread over the whole World like an
Universal Fire. And will not they Reduce to Cinders the Mosques of the Great
God, if we do not take hold of this opportunity?

The ORACLE.

The surest Remedy that can be, is to make a great Rampart Wall from Ispaham to
the Frontiers of Persia, which may make a Tower of a Kingdom, to hinder the
Fathers of Loyola from entering.

The Canade, or New-France, to the ORACLE.

There is no finer Countries in the World for the Chasing the new Converts,
than this is, if the Fathers of Loyola will believe us, one passes whole
America, and principally into Canada, where are several great and vast
Campagnes, Mountains, and Forests, where the Land flows with Milk and Honey,
where the Taste and Delicateness is to be preferred to the best Chicken in
France. If the Great Louis was well Counseled, he would let them Sing no more
in his Kingdom, for fear that France in the end should become a frightful
Desert where none but the Society of Jesuits Inhabit.

FINIS.

