A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable THE Lord Major AND Aldermen,
etc. AT GVILD-HALL Chapel, January the 30th 1673/4.

By RICHARD MEGGOTT D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange.

HOOKER Major.
CVria Specialis tenta die Veneris, xxx. die Januarii 1673. Annoque Regni Regis
Caroli Secundi Angliae, etc. xxvi.

ORdered by this Court, that Dr. Meggott be desired to Print his Sermon this
day Preached before this Court at the Guild Hall Chapel.

Wagstaffe.

To the Right Honorable Sr. WILLIAM HOOKER Lord MAJOR of LONDON, and Court of
ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
OF all the sound Doctrines which, in the times that are come, men will not
endure, there is not any that fares harder, than that which respects Kings.
So that it is plain, you have not consulted the Palats of the People (it could
be only their Healths) in desiring this Discourse to be made public. It is a
Truth as evident, as it is severe, that so many as there are among us of
Dissenters from the Church of England, (...) many there are, who are more or
less unsound in Tenants concerning Magistracy. And then how is it possible to
speak of such a Matter faithfully (though never so tenderly) without the
offense and regret of many? The apprehension of it, usually on this day keeps
those who have most need of such Lessons farther from the places in which they
are taught, than to receive any Virtue from them. If now you have ordered this
to come to them at their homes, putting its Mouth upon their Mouths, and its
Eyes upon their Eyes, it shall be instrumental to cause the departed Spirit of
Loyalty and Obedience, Humility and Sobriety to return into any of them, I
shall account it a happiness, that by this instance of Submission I have shown
my self

Your humble Servant Rich. Meggot.

Psalms 11.3. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?


THat the Doctrine of Obedience to the Civil Magistrate might not be
misconstrued an Encroachment upon the Rights of Humane Nature, but received, as
the rest of the Precepts of Christ, for a reasonable and prudent Service; St.
Paul declares to the jealous Murmurer ( Romans 13.4.) That he is the Minister of
God to men for Good. The Institution was not for the Politic Advancement of
some to be Princes, that they might enjoy themselves in incommunicable Pomps
and Splendours; but for the Benefit and Security of every individual Subject,
that they might not vex and mischieve one another with remediless wrongs and
injuries.

It is true there are other Creatures (as Ants and Bees) live sociably
together, without any Coercive Power to command and overawe them: but no
argument can be drawn from these to our more troublesome and untoward Species.

Their Appetites are limited by their Real Needs; but ours are retched by
Emulation, Pride and Envy: from whence, if there be nothing to restrain them,
will arise Hatreds and Strifes, Fears and perpetual Violences.

With them there is no public Good that does enterfere with the private Good
of any one in particular; but with men there is a General Good of the Society,
which cannot always be promoted or maintained without the damage of several
single Members in it.

Although they make Sounds among themselves, sufficient to express a simple
instance, yet they have not the artifice of disguising words, whereby we put
false colors upon things, to the fomenting of Discontents and causless
Quarrels.

From these and such like differences it is, that though the Agreement of
inferior Animals, when they flock and herd together, being Natural, there
needs no such Ordinance as a Supreme Authority, to preserve their Peace and
Unity: yet that of Men being Artificial, it is necessarily required to make
theirs firm and lasting.

There are no Nations, People or Languages that are not convinced of it. Could
we ride Post upon the Back of the Sun, and thence look down upon all the
Inhabitants on the Surface of this Globe we live on, we might find some People
Naked without the Modesty of Clothes; some Poor without the Gayeties of Wealth;
some Rude without the Culture of Arts and Sciences: but none so Barbarous, but
that they have some to Rule and Govern them.

This is the Foundation which all Order and Equity, Quiet and Property among
Corrupted men is built upon, which if it fail, they all fall into Ruins: And
then it is easy to foresee what a Miserable and Distressed Case all Meek and
Honest, Harmless and Sober People must be in; what Preys and Sacrifices to the
Sons of Craft and Fraud, of Cruelty and Oppression.

These are conceived to be the Psalmists Melancholy Thoughts and Expostulations
with Almighty God, upon such Occasion (the Danger of his own Destruction, as
King of Israel) in the Text. As the great Gresor was wont to say, That it was
not so much his own Interest, as the Commonwealths, that he should be preserved
safe: so seems holy David to reflect upon it here, and not so much for his
own sake, as his poor Subjects, to be concerned at his present Condition. What
will become of the Flock, if they have no Shepherd to look after them? How will
the Children be wronged when the Father is gone that did provide for them?
Where will the Building be, if the Foundation be undermined that did uphold it?
If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?

While you are yet but at the door of the Text, before you enter further, I
cannot but take notice that some of the Learned Languages have rendered it very
differently from that Sense, which it carries in our Translation. The most
ancient Version out of the Hebrew, the Septuagint, has it thus; (...). They
have destroyed what thou have prepared, and what has the Righteous done? And
the other Interpreters that follow them, the Syriack, Arabic and Vulgar
(although a little varying the phrase) in substance altogether to the same
purpose. These make them part of the words of David's distrustful friends, who
persuaded him in the first Verse, to retire in this his Exigence to some
fortified place of strength, Fly as a bird to the mountains. And then it is the
Motive with which they back their Counsel. His Arms and Militia were seized on,
or otherwise become useless; his Forces and war like Preparations scattered or
else revolted, notwithstanding that Justice and Right he had on his side, and
did so much depend upon.

If we take them so, there is this sad Truth to be gathered from them, That a
good Cause may have had success. Although it be not so clear what was the
particular occasion of his penning this Psalm; whether the persecution of Saul,
when he was fain to leave his Country, and live as an Exile in the Land of the
Philistines: or the Rebellion of Absalon, when he withdrew himself from his
Metropolis at Jerusalem, for the preservation of his Person, to the hazard of
his Crown. Evident it is, by this his Pourtrature of himself in his solitude
and sufferings, his Enemies had got the better of him.

This they cry up for a plain Bath Col in their own behalf, a Determination
from above in their favor, saying, God has forsaken him. Now they conclude
that the Lord was for them, let his Laws speak never so much for the other. When
the Vapors of their Prosperity are fumed up into the heads of the prevailing
Party, it is usual for their dazeling Eyes thus to mistake the fiery Effluvia
of their own tumultuous and overheated Spirits, for some miraculous Light from
Heaven that shines on them. Am I come up without the Lord against this place?
says Rabshekah, The Lord said to me, Go up, etc.

But let them that follow Mahomet plead the Conquest of their Swords, for the
Justification of their ways; we have not so learned Christ: If so he that we
have heard him, and been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus: we know that
here all things fall alike unto all, there is one Event to the good and to the
bad, and no man can judge of love or hatred by all that is before him.

The Wise God for great and weighty ends, either The Punishment of some former
Sins, or The Exercise of some unacted Graces, or The Discountenancing some
unfitting Instruments, or The Magnifying some After-providences, often deals
with two contending Sides, as old Jacob with Ephraim and Manasseh, crosses his
hands on them; lays his right hand on them that stand at his left, and again
his left on them that stand at his right, guiding them so wittingly. The Arms
of the unbelieving Ottoman have been crescent, when all his neighbor
Christians have been in the Wane. The Harps of the Irish Protestants hung upon
the Willows, while the blood-thirsty Papists among them sung to theirs and made
Melody.
Should we judge according to such Appearances (concluding from the Providence
of God to his Approbation) what not only unrighteous but ridiculous and
contradictory Judgment must we pass upon things? making the same bread and
stone, both Fish and Scorpion? As the Barbarians on Paul when the Viper was on
his hand, then he must be a murderer; when he shook it into the fire, then
they change their minds, and say, that he is a God: so must we, blow, now hot,
now cold; pronounce now blessing, now cursing (according to the interchangeable
sways and turnings of the doubtful and trembling Scale) upon the same Cause.

But this is a point which, as for your sakes I need not, so for our
Translation sake, I must not longer insist on. This more suitable to the
Original, makes the words have another aspect: to be not an Argument of
David's Friends to him, to fly from his Adversaries, but of David himself to
God, to protect him against them. And so they are a Rhetorical Representation
of the ill Consequences that follow the want of lawful Governors and
Government. Where the Turbulency of evil and unreasonable men shall prevail to
the pulling down and rooting out of these, what is like to become of that
Kingdom and People? This is the sum of his Expostulation, If the Foundations be
destroyed, what can the Righteous do?

Considered thus, they contain,

First, and significant Denomination of them who are in lawful Authority; they
are they upon whom the welfare of the People is bottomed, the Foundations of it.

2dly, A dreadful Supposition of their Danger, from the Fury or Treachery of
the never-satisfied Sons of Belial. These Foundations may be destroyed.

Lastly, The fatal Confusion that must follow such Acts of desperate
Disobedience and Disloyalty, What can the Righteous do?

These are the Particulars the mournful Text and more horrid Tragedy of the Day
require that I should speak to.

The first in order is the Denomination, the significant Denomination, here
given to them who are in lawful Authority, they are they upon whom the welfare
of the people is bottomed, the Foundations of it.

The Etymologists will have it, that the Greeks upon this score called their
King (...), say they, (...), that they chose such a word to express him by, as
was derived from a Root which signifies a Basis, as he that supported the
Interest of the whole Community. It was no Court Complement that the People
passed upon David, but a judicious and sober Truth, when they tell him, 2 Samuel
18.3. Thou art worth ten thousand of us; as to their public Concernments there
is none can doubt but he was so.

Most of the Titles that are given by the holy Ghost in Scripture, to them that
are honored with this high employment, commence upon this Hypothesis. They are
called the shields of a Land, Psalm. 47.9. as they that defend it from being
hurt: The healers of it, Isa. 3.7. as they that cure it when it has been
wounded; The bars of it, Lam. 2.9. as they that secure it from being broken
open by foreign Invasions: The foundations of it, in the Text, as they uphold
it from tumbling down by intestine Commotions. Passages of this nature have
given countenance to an old Tradition among the Jewish Doctors, viz. that
although there were but three things enjoined their Forefathers before hand, to
do when they should possess the Land of Canaan; One, to destroy the Amalakites;
Another to build the Temple; yet the first of all was to choose them a King, as
one without whom they would scarce be in a Capacity of either of the other two.
From this their apparent Usefulness, not only Jews and Christians, who were
expressly commanded it from their God, but the whole remaining World with one
consent (and who can suppose such a General and Oecumenick Council as this
should err?) have of their own accord decreed a Hedge to be made about their
Sacred Persons, that none upon any pretense whatsoever should stretch forth
their hands against them.

It is true, apprehending that bottomless Evil of having things managed in ways
that are purely Arbitrary; and that great Influence the observed Examples of
Princes have upon them that are their Subjects, they cautiously provided
Ordinances for them, not only to govern the People by, but, in several places,
themselves also, Diodorus Siculus speaking of the Egyptian Kings, relates how
besides the Rules of their Judging, the very manner of their Eating, the times
of their Bathing, the hours of their Sleeping, the Qualifications of their
Officers and Attendants were all punctually prescribed to them. And so it was
with the Jewish* Deuteronomy. 17.16. there were Injunctions about the Religion they
were to profess, their Wives they were to marry, the number of the very Horses
they were to keep, etc. The Prophet Samuel wrote a Book about them, though now
it be lost, there is mention made of it, 1 Samuel 10.25.

But although there were Laws to guide and direct them, yet if they forgot
themselves so much as to violate and break through them, there were none by
which they might resist and punish them, their Ministers and Instruments were
ever accountable, but as to themselves it was a Maxim every where, that they
could do no wrong. The Egyptians, Herodotus has told us, as a modest
Admonition to their Successors, did sit solemnly in judgment upon their Kings,
after they were dead; before they put them into their Sepulchers, a survey was
made of their past Reigns, and accordingly there passed a Sentence of Honor or
Dishonor on them: but to do it while they lived, is so presumptuous an
Abomination, as that nothing was able to provoke them to. The later Rabbis
have asserted, that if their Kings transgressed in those particulars enjoined
them by the Law of Moses, the Sanhedrin might adjudge them to be scourged: but
this if it were true (which we may well suspect, there being so many things in
Scripture that seem against it, and nothing but their extravagant Say-soes
appearing for it) if, I say, it were true, it was rather a Voluntary Penance
than a Judicial Sentence: for they themselves confess it without infamy, it
being in his own choice, both the number of the Stripes, and the Person who
should inflict them.

For the Office sake, all places and Countries have in the highest degrees been
tender of the Officer; and in kindness to themselves, if they had none for him,
still took care of his Preservation. The Kings of the Gentiles did exercise
Lordship over them (a rough and domineering Power) yet they that exercised this
Authority were called, by them that were under it, all things considered, their
Benefactors. In so much that Plutarch in the Life of Themistocles) thinks it
well returned of Artaban, who when asked, among all the wise and eminent Laws
of the Persians, which he thought the most wholesome, answered, that which
required Honor and Obedience, Tribute and profound Submission to be paid to
them that ruled them.

How wild a Wickedness is it to act otherwise! If there were no danger of their
receiving to themselves damnation in the other World for such unjustifiable
forbidden practices; yet they do but bring upon themselves troubles and
calamities in this. What does Sampson get by pulling down the Pillars of the
House? he has his reverenge indeed upon his enemies, but (alas!) he pays
dearly for it, poor man! he braineth himself too. And what do turbulent and
unpeaceable Men get more by pulling down the Pillars of the Commonwealth they
live in? Whatever they may fancy and propound to themselves, what is the usual
end of it, but burying the Peace (and Fortunes if they have any) of themselves
and others in the Rubbish of those unforeseen, but unavoidable Confusions that
must ensue upon it! But yet notwithstanding the Experience of so many Ages has
so abundantly confirmed this, there seldom want some who would be adventuring
upon this senceless Project: and if any room, or it may be but its Furniture,
in the vast Building of the Policy, have the ill luck to be disliked by them,
are for pulling down all and rasing the very Foundations. And hence it
sometimes comes to pass that God permitting, and they succeeding, they are
destroyed: which is

The dreadful Supposition couched in the next part of the Text, the danger of
them who are in lawful Authority from the Fury and Treachery of restless Sons
of Belial. The Foundations may be destroyed.

Seeing the Foundations are of the same corruptible Materials with the
Superstructure, we cannot expect they should last always: though they are said
to be Gods, yet they must die like men: why then does so contemplative a Person
as David send forth such a Tragic Exclamation at their downfall? Did he think
that the holy Oil that anointed him King of Judah was so sovereign as to exempt
him from being a subject of Death? No, it was not the thing, but the manner of
it, he seems so startled at. It is one thing to have the Foundation fail of
it self, another to have it destroyed by others: although in common Buildings
the mischief is the same to that which stands upon it, either way all comes
tumbling down, yet in these it is quite different. In the former case, the
State still remains as it was, upheld by the surviving Heirs, who immortally
supply the place: but in this latter that only Remedy seldom or never is
admitted of, but (...), as some Greek Copies read the Text, the Legal
Succession also is cut off with them.

And yet as pernicious as this is to the People, so common has it been for
their Kings to be served so, that a violent and untimely End is Proverbially
called, Psalms 82.7. falling like one of the Princes. This has been the lot,
not only of Usurpers who had no Title, and Tyrants that abused their Office,
but even of the most excellent and deserving among the Order. In sacred Story
you find Moses, though the meekest and mildest man the World then had, yet is
mutinied against, and like to be deposed by Corah and his Accomplices. David is a
man after Gods own heart, yet fowl-mouthed Shimei bespattereth him, and
fair-tongued Absalon steals away the peoples hearts from him. Ahasuerus, a
Heathen indeed, but in the character of all Writers, a well qualified and sweet
natured one, yet Bigthan and Teresh, though no cause can be found for it, are
said to be wroth, and that they sought to lay hands on him. Should we pass into
the Roman History, it would there appear that of the forty Emperors between
Julius Caesar and Constantine, there were not ten that died in their Beds; and
of them that did, scarce one that was not endangered by more than one
Conspiracy. And thus (though not in so great proportion, where their standing
Forces being less, were more governable) has it been in the other parts of the
Earth also.

Of which a twofold account may be given, One from God, Another from men.


First, If we look upwards, as we ought in all the various Events below, as it
comes from God; he has informed the people that they ought to be sensible of
it, as an Effect of his anger and displeasure; not against their Princes that
are so used (though sometimes it may be so, they ought not to pass that Censure
on it, because it is more than they at any time can be sure of) but against
themselves over whom they reigned, for the punishment of their sins. So Solomon
tells us, Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a land (even when there may be
eminent and exemplary Piety in the King) many are the Princes thereof. If by
this [many] be meant many collectively, then it shows the sweet Original of
that we call a Commonwealth, the blessed Womb that bears it, and the Paps
that give it suck: It is not the Reformation, the Liberty, but the
Transgression of a Land, that it owes its Birth to. But if it be not meant of
many at a time (as in his days and for some while after, it does not appear
there was any such Form of Government as a Democracy in the World) but of many
successively, then it informs us, that where ever this befalls a Nation,
that the Crown stays not hereditarily fixed in one, but is ravished from
Family to Family (where there must needs be contrary Dependencies, Factions and
Projects) it is a Judgment on them. Although the newfangled Multitude may
fancy to themselves beforehand great Advantages by such alterations, yet in the
Event they still find it is but an Addition of new Distractions to their old
Grievances, or an exchanging their Rods for Scorpions: in so much that when
they see the Successor, nothing more common than (with the Peasant that would
be digging for Antigonus out of his Grave again) to confess they were better
under his Predecessor.

And by how much the Prince is the worthier, by so much the Case is still the
sadder. When Saul is slain, the Children of Judah are taught the use of the
Bow, that they might revenge his death: but when Josiah is slain, all Judah and
Jerusalem mourn in the Valley of Megiddon, they lament his death. So that if
Hiram King of Tire said of Solomon's Reign, Because the Lord has loved this
people, he has made thee King over them, we may upon the same ground affirm
upon such a King's Ruin, because the Lord is incensed against that people, he
takes away him from being King over them.

Various are the ways of God in animadverting upon the ways of men. As where
there is a natural Union, sometimes he visits the sins of Fathers upon the
Children, and sometimes again the sins of Children upon on the Fathers: So
where there is this Political Union, sometimes he visits the sins of Kings
upon their Subjects, and sometimes again the sins of Subjects upon their Kings.
Nor can one suffer without the other: for if the Head cannot say to the Foot, I
have no need of thee, much less can the Foot say to the Head, I have no need of
thee. So that as it comes from God, it is certainly a token of his
Indignation. Look downwards upon this in the

Second place, as it comes from Men, and it must be attributed to their Pride
and Ambition; the Pride and Ambition of such as covet to be in their Room. God
permits it as a chastisement for a disobedient and offending People, howbeit
these mean not so, neither do their hearts think so; but it is in their hearts
to promote and exalt themselves. Though the Dignity of Princes be great, yet
their Burdens are so heavy, that several, who have not been much mortified
neither, merely out of Prudence and Modesty have declined the meddling with it.
Saul when to be anointed King over Israel hides himself among the stuff:
Gordian, when elected Emperor, fell down upon his knees to beg them to pass
him by. Charles the Fifth grew weary of his fortunate Scepter, and upon a long
Experience deliberately resigned it. But though the Olive and the Fig Tree and
the Vine have no mind any of them to be King of the Trees, yet the Bramble is
wild for it. There are that consider not that the Head is the leanest part of
the Body, but only that it is the highest.

Not that if they were so shameless, men were ever so silly as to own this
directly, that were the way to lose the envious Rabble (Tools without which
such work as this can never be done) and be forsaken by the giddy Multitude:
No, no, they have solemn Protestations and self-denying Ordinances, specious
Declarations and fair Remonstrances for the cajoling and inveigling these. But
whatever hypocritical Colors it may be painted over with, when time has
washed them off, the End all along has made it appear this was the Old Cause
that was underneath; they kill, that they may take possession, they dethrone,
that they may reign in his stead. In so much that though there never yet was
any Rebellion or Civil War, where Religion or Liberty (according as the Genius
of the place would best bear) were not one or both pretended, yet I shall
adventure to say, that he who examineth the most judicious and impartial
Writers of Story, will be hugely put to it to produce an Instance of any one,
where personal Disgusts and selfish Designs were not the first promoters and
fomentors of it.

Now there being no place unpestered with store of these, hence it comes to
pass, that in all places, according as they have seen probability of
prospering, lawful Governors have been disturbed, and the Foundations
attempted to be destroyed. But O how deplorable is the Condition of that
People, where such things do happen! How are they tossed by the boisterous
Waves, and their Souls melted because of trouble! How do they reel to and fro
and stagger like a drunken man, and are even at their wits end! Such is the
Description here given of them that are in these State-storms, in the

Last part of the Text, where you have the fatal Confusions that follow upon
such wicked and disloyal Practices Rhetorically represented, What can the
Righteous do? If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?

It is not asked, what shall they that call themselves the Righteous do: there
are of them that pretend it is lawful for them to do this, destroy the very
Foundations: that to them pertains the Privilege and the Glory to bind their
Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron. So a place, not hard to
be understood, has been wrested by them, to their Sovereign's destruction as
well as their own: and because the Israelites had a Promise that they should so
conquer the Kings of Canaan (whose Country God had engaged to restore to them,
as those to whom, by an hereditary Right derived in a direct line from Sem, it
did belong) therefore assert that the People of God, in all ages, may serve
their own so also. But if this Title be a legal Commission for it, and a
sufficient Dispensation from all the Precepts of Obedience and Subjection, who
would ever be guilty of such course Sins as Treason and Rebellion? How cheap
and easy is it for them, when upon such projects, first to canonize
themselves? For though men of downright Integrity do ever abhor the Canting
and unmanly Superciliousness of such distinguishing and vainglorious Names,
yet men of subtle Mischief (it is easy to observe) have ever most
unbeseemingly affected them. The bitterest enemies of our blessed Lord called
themselves Pharisees, that is, they of the holy Separation. They that denied
the Resurrection, Angel and Spirit, called themselves Sadduces, that is, the
Righteous. Those Heretics, against whom St. Paul is so sharp in most of his
Epistles, called themselves Gnostics, that is, the Knowing and Enlightened.
Those plundering bloody Rake-hells among the Jews, called themselves Zealots,
that is, inspired Reformers. But they are not the Saints, that we have nothing
but their own word for, that are here enquired after.

Neither does he ask, what can the Unrighteous do? No, there is no question to
be made of them, but they will do well enough, it may be best of all then;
others Ruins shall be their Raisings, others Losses shall be their Gains. What
if the Waters are troubled? they know how to catch Fish in them. What if the
Kingdom be in a Flame? they take the advantage of warming their own hands at
it. They can sail with the Wind that blows, and with the Hedgehog be sure to
open to the Sunny side. They that can dispense with their Oaths, and comply
with Usurpers; be Instruments of the illegal Innovations, and zealous for the
statutes of Omri, may receive some wages for their unrighteousness, and ravish
to themselves Fortunes unexpected as ignominious: But for those that dare not
debauch their Consciences, nor be pertakers of other men's sins; that will
retain their Integrity, and rather than do, would suffer evil, what can these
do?

These are they that are here so pitied, as in a lamentable and woeful case,
and that in all which concerns them either as men or good men, I mean both
Their Religion and Their Property.


First, consider them in their Religious Concernments. Religion indeed,
considered in an abstracted Notion, stands upon a Foundation that cannot be
destroyed. It is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. So it depends not upon the Will
or breath of any mortal Man, how great soever. It was the same, as much
deserving to be believed, as necessary to be obeyed, yesterday, under the most
furious heathen Persecutions, as it is to day, that Kings are become its
Nursing-fathers. But though, as it is a divine Revelation, it stands upon
another bottom, and leans not at all upon the Civil Power, yet as it is a
visible Profession, so it is a most desirable and strong Support to it. As long
as this holy Vine has the benefit of such a wall to grow up by, it spreads
its orderly and thriving Branches, secure both from the Boar and Foxes: but
when this is undermined and falls, how may we see its weak and feeble parts,
unable to sustain themselves, ruinously drooping upon the same deceitful earth,
rotted by that, and tangled within it self.

God grant them as much Grace, as they have Cause, to repent of their
ingratitude, that if the Magistrate does not humor them in all the odd
punctilio's of their disputable and troublesome persuasions, still are
murmuring, sad times! and persecution! O how thankful both to God and them
would the better primitive Christians have been, if they could have been
blessed with such Defendors of the Faith, who would but have encouraged them in
the Profession of its great Substantials! Call to mind the days of old, when
the Potentates of the earth took counsel against the Lord, how Christians could
not go to the Temple without danger of being sacrificed at the Altar; not put
up their prayers, but others were ready to pour out their Souls for it. How as
soon as they were discovered to follow the Lamb, they were condemned to be cast
to the Lions; and might not partake the Riches of the Gospel without utter
undoing of themselves and Families, and see in that Looking-glass the rueful
Countenance Religion has when the Civil Power is averse to it.

Nay, though he be not a Nero that is in the Throne, if he be but a Gallio, how
much does the Church of God suffer? what Contradictions? what Schisms? what
Scandals? what Disorders? what Animosities from among their own perverse and
wanton selves, where there is no restraint on them? Ammianus Marcellinus makes
this excuse to his fellow-heathen, for Julian's not persecuting the Christians,
as did some preceding Emperors, That it was not from any Inclination he had to
them, but from an Observation he had made on them, that no savage Beasts are so
cruel and quarrelsom among one another, as they, when they are at liberty; and
that therefore he did indulge them, that slily he might undo them. This having
always since been found the sad Effect of it, the destruction of a pious and
prudent Magistrate must by all be concluded a dreadful Blow to the Righteous
upon the account of Religion. Nor are they likely to suffer less by it in the

Second place upon the account of Property. If there be no King in Israel every
one will do that which is good in his own eyes: and though this seems pretty
and desirable, if a man could enjoy it alone, yet when every other has it
besides himself, he being but one to so many, the pleasure will not near
counterpoise the danger. Where each Individual sets up for an Ishmael, his hand
is against every man and every Man's hand against him, O the Insolences, the
Oppressions, the Cruelties, the Crimes of all sorts, that such a Land must be
covered with! How will the Hawks prey upon the Doves! The hungry Sharks devour
the more helpless Fry! Where there is no Law, there will be nothing but
Transgression. It was discreetly answered of the Child, when dissuaded from
taking on so for his dead Father, because he was severe and harsh to him, That
though he was a severe and harsh Father, yet he was a Father still. It is so
here, the Commodities of Government are so great, that a very froward and rigid
Father of the Country is better than none at all. For whereas in a corrupt
Monarchy there may be one Tyrant, in an Oligarchy a few Tyrants, in a Democracy
many Tyrants, in an Anarchy they are all Tyrants.

Not that the Throne does any where long stand empty. One passes away and
another comes, but the poor Subjects (as earth) abide so, and are under one or
another foot for ever. But if we should suppose, that upon the downfall of one,
in process of time, another building more fair and goodly than the former
should be erected, yet when the Foundations fail, this is undeniable, the
several parts of the present Superstructure that stand upon it, will be
generally spoiled and broken; and that, one would think, should be
consideration enough to them to be chary of it. To strip the argument of
David's Metaphor, none can reasonably hope that their lines should fall in such
an Eutopia, where there shall be nothing amiss in the Public Administrations,
but for them to determine upon resisting and pulling down their Governors,
because they are sensible of some Failures and Miscarriages in their
Government, is much such wise contrivance, as he that resolved to have his Head
cut off, that he might be eased of the Toothache. For certain it is, that among
the greatest Tyrants the Earth has ever groaned under, the Caligula's, Nero's
Domitian's there cannot one be named, that ever shed so much blood or did so
much wrong to a place, as a Rebellion or Civil War does. No, where they have
slain or undone their thousands, these have their ten thousands. Down then,
down to the place of Darkness, from whence it came, with that Antichristian
Principle, That it is lawful for the People, upon the ill Managery and Abuse of
their Power, by Arms and Force to depose and punish their Princes; seeing any
Faction that is strong enough, will be sure to call themselves the People, and
whatever they dislike shall be voted ill Manageries and Abuses. This once
admitted, lays the Axe to the Root of all Civil Society, destroys the
Foundations of all Peace and Settlement, keeps up constant Jealousies between
Kings and their Subjects, and involveth all Humane Affairs in a wild and
endless Chaos. From which the Righteous God of Order now and always defend the
World in general, and this distracted Land we live in in particular. For, If
the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?

I have done with the several heads propounded from the words to be discoursed
of; and now, O that there had never been the Execrable Occasion of proceeding
any further! Then we had not been such a Babel among our selves, nor such a
Byword to the Nations round about us! Then the Blood of our slain had not
cried so loud, nor our wickedness been unparalled! Let the day on which it it
was acted be solitary, and let no joyful voice be heard in it! Let it not be
joined unto the days of the year, nor come into the number of the Months! The
melancholy Text has yet one syllable of hope in it, that is [If] If the
Foundations be destroyed, there it is but a hazard whether it would be so or
no: but in this days sorrows even that small Cranny of Light was stopped up,
and to the high Dishonor of the Righteous God, the deep Defilement of our
native Land, the fearful Scandal of the Reformed Religion; in the Person of our
then most Gracious Sovereign, our Foundations actually were destroyed. Although
I abhor that barbarous Cruelty of tearing open Wounds, which time is closing up
equally with that pragmatick Sin of the Pulpits meddling with things pertaining
to any other Kingdom but that of God; yet it would seem a stupid offense
against both this sad Anniversary and Assembly (so far as it lies within the
Compass of of my Profession and relates to Christian Doctrine) to say nothing
of so extraordinary and calamitous a Subject. Lend me then a few Minutes for
some serious Reflections upon that Scarlet Abomination, and I shall leave you
to your Prayers to deprecate the Guilt of it, that the Lord may not require it.

This is that we chiefly are met together for. Though David's Cursing the
Mountains of Gilboa, the insensible place where Saul fell; and Jacob's the
Treacherous Cruelty of Simeon and Levi, in slaying of a Prince to whom they
were no Subjects, might seem some Plea for the vehemence of a Satyr, against
the more inexcusable Instruments of this so great a Wickedness: yet in the
annual Exposing the Body of our murdered Caesar, the great Design is not to
provoke to any Passion, but that of Grief and Sorrow. And this not for him (who
is long since entered into his Joy, and has received a Crown incorruptible and
that fades not away, which God the Righteous Judge has given him, instead of
that his Unrighteous Judges took from him) Grief and Sorrow (I say) not for
him, but for that complicated Guilt of his crying Blood, that it may not come
either upon this Generation, or those that shall come after us.

That which looks like the most threatening Symptom that it may, is that
there are so many yet among us, that needlessly adopt the Crime, and beholding
it in no other Mirror than such a one (as that Pausanias tells us was kept
in the Temple at Smyrna) which represented every thing that was beautiful as
deformed, and every thing that was deformed as beautiful, will be Justifying
instead of Mourning for it. The Houses of God would not in most places be so
unfrequented, nor this Day so slightly observed, if this Woe were not yet in
part upon us of calling evil good and good evil: and because he suffered in the
same Manner as a Malefactor, there are too many will not learn to distinguish
that it was not by the same Right. Had he been poisoned at his Table, stabbed
in his Chamber, stifled in his Bed, they would not have stuck to have called it
Murder; but now he was beheaded on a Scaffold (as if it were any thing the
more blameless for being shameless) it shall be accounted Justice.

It would be superfluous for Confutation of this to have recourse to his
Innocence, although though (like Ceraunias which Pliny speaks to look like an
ordinary and worthless Stone in fair, but shine and sparkle gloriously in dark
and stormy Weather) thousands and thousands of his once deluded Subjects were
fully convinced of that, during his Calamities, and then seemed troubled for
him, whom before they troubled: not (I say) to have recourse to his conspicuous
Innocence, this had been a daring Wickedness against all the Laws both of God
and Man, merely upon the account of his Office. It was the Aggravation of their
wickedness that they destroyed their good King, but their wickedness was that
they destroyed their King. Such a Care he, whose Vicegerents they are, has
taken of them both in the Old Testament and the New, that he that runs may
read, no man can stretch forth his hands against them, and be guiltless.

This was the constant Doctrine of all that were called Christians for more
than 500 years together; and though afterward it was corrupted, yet they that
pretend such peculiar Abomination of Popery, one would think, of all men,
should not have symbolized with it; for let all the house of Israel know
asuredly (however now with that other Harlot she wipeth her mouth) Rome,
degenerate Rome, was she by whom the Doctrine of King-killing was first
sanctified. It cannot be denied indeed, but that loose and dangerous Tenants of
that nature have been vended by some who were enemies to that Communion: but
yet this is manifest, they were of a later Date; in so much that whenever any
of their Tongues or Pens have been found fighting against the Civil Power, he
that will take the pains to enquire, may easily discover that they sharpened
their Weapons with these Philistians.

But that which is the pleasantest Scene (if any may be called so in so sad a
Plot) is to see how these two, though they seem to agree so well as to the main
Matter, ( viz. That Princes may in some Cases be deprived not only of their
Government, but of their Lives too by their Subjects) yet differing as they do
in the explication of the Manner (as Naturalists report the Combat of the
Elephant and the Dragon) have each very substantially confuted and overcome the
other. When they of the Romish Party defend such things by the high and mighty
Power of the Pope, they of the Consistory undeniably prove against them, that
Christ never made him a Temporal Judge however, and that he is but a busy Body
for meddling in these Matters: when they of the Consistory plead for such
things from the Fundamental Power of the People, they of the Romish Party
irrefragably prove against them, that they being Inferiors, are not to resist
but submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. Thus when Voluptuous
Childerick of France was deposed, and the Crown transferred to Ambitious Pipin,
then Lord Marshal, it is observable that both sides speak well of it.
Bellarmine, Harding, Fevardentius, with the rest on that side, grant that it
had been unlawful for the Nobility or Commons to have done this of themselves,
because of their Oaths; but Pope Zachary absolving them, it was well and
justifiable. Danaeus, Buchanan, Hottoman, with those on that side, prove it
malepert Pride and Arrogance in Pope Zachary to pronounce any Sentence, but the
Nobility and Commons of the Country concluding it meet and necessary, this,
they say, made the Fact lawful. Thus while the thieves that would be stealing
the Sovereign Authority of Princes fall out and quarrel, by their detecting one
another, these come honestly by their Goods again.

Our Regicides pitched upon the more plausible Plea of the two, viz. The
Original Power of the People, which (they pretended) being made over but in
trust, if they judged it abused they might reassume. But this Hypothesis is so
unsound in all its parts, it will no more bear handling than one of the Apples
of Sodom: and it could not but be wondered at that they did not relinquish it as
soon as they avowed it; were it not for what the modest President of it
returned to this excellent Prince, when he would have argued it with them,
namely, That that was a Court that would not hear Reason. When Valentinian (in
Sozomen) was pressed by the Army to a thing he thought inconvenient, he told
them it was in their power whether they would have chosen him Emperor or no,
but having done it, the Act was irrevocable; they had nothing to do now, but
leave affairs with him, and obey him. In this case there might be said more: it
was not in their power whether they would have him for their King or no, his
Crown was not Elective but Herereditary, with what face then could they affirm
it was in theirs to depose and condemn him?

No, not even by their own beloved Principle. For if this power were in the
People, then every one had an equal share in it, and ought not only personally
to have been consulted, but explicitly to have given consent to it. But
(blessed be God) the abused People were not given over to such a reprobate
sense: no, though for the better sound sake they used the Name of the Commons
and the People, they had no more ground for it than for their Pretenses to the
Spirit and new Lights. Set aside the People of the obnoxious Army, and who of
the People were they that would own it? Were they the People of Ireland? Why
then did they not signify it by some Authentic Instrument? Were they the
People of Scotland? Why then did they publish a Declaration against it as
contrary even to their Covenant? Were they the People of the Country? Why then
did they so often petition for a Personal Treaty? Were they the People of this
City? Why then did they pull up your Post and Chains, and keep a Garrison in
your very Cathedral to overawe you? Were they the Peoples Representatives in
Parliament? Why then even of those, that remained at that time among them, did
they imprison so many, before they could obtain a Vote for it? No, so far was
it from any of this, that the ablest Writer that was to be had for money, to
defend the Villainy to the World, being pinched, with the fewness and
despicableness of those who were engaged in it, has nothing to return to it,
but that sneaking Blasphemy, That it was the Mysterious Will of the Lord, and
so not many Wise, not many Mighty, not many Noble were called to it.

But yet all this should not make the Nation think themselves wholly
unconcerned in it. Although in Murder the Law makes all to be Principals, yet
great Numbers that in Conscience may be acquitted, as to that, yet (I fear)
upon the examination of things, may find enough in this to accuse themselves as
Accessories. Such they should acknowledge themselves (how good and harmless
soever their Intentions were) who by their early Activeness among, or
Assistance of his more blood-thirsty Enemies, helped them into the capacity of
thus dealing with him. The depriving him of his just power was the destroying
of the King, the depriving him of his Life was but the destroying of the Man, I
doubt not but I may bespeak multitudes of those, as St. Peter did the Jews in
the case of the holy Jesus, And now Brethren I wot that through Ignorance ye
did it, as also did some of your Rulers, following these hypocritical
Ringleaders to the War, as the two hundred men did Absalon to Hebron, in the
simplicity of your hearts and knew not any thing; yet those that designed not
the diminishing so much as a hair of his head, yet in as much as they cut off
but the lap of his garment, now they see what followed on it, in this day of
Humiliation should have their hearts smite them for it.

Let not the Distance of time since these things were done, make us fancy our
selves the more secure, as if it were a thing so out of date, as that it were
superfluous now to take any notice of it. He that considers the vengeance God
took on Amalek, destroying both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Oxen and
Sheep, Camels and Asses, and that for a Sin had been committed by their
Ancestors four hundred years before: or all the righteous Blood that had been
shed on the Earth, from that of righteous Abel, coming upon the Jews four
thousand years after; may soon be satisfied, that if we do not so repent that
God does forgive, we have no reason to hope he will ever forget us.

Because therefore his Judgments are u^^^archable, and his Ways past finding
out, that (...) cannot know the Mind of the Lord, nor in (...) things be of his
Council, as to tell to what degrees he may yet look upon it and require it, let
(...) heartily and fervently importune him this (...), That he who is plenteous
in Forgiveness and hears Prayers, would not lay this or any other either of
our National or our Personal, our Open (...) our Secret, our Old or our New
Sins to our Ch^^^e; that he would visit us according to the (...) the years
wherein we have seen evil; and as (...) once more graciously restored, so he
would always mercifully preserve both Foundation and Superstructure, King and
People, Religion and Laws, from the danger of Destruction, by any kind of
Enemies that lie in wait for them, either those that would have blown up the
Father (...) or those that did this day cut off the Son, that u^^er our most
Gracious King and all that are in (...) we may live quiet and peaceable Lives
in all God liness and Honesty; giving unto the King etern^^, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

