A MEMENTO TO THE East India COMPANIES. OR, AN Abstract of a Remonstrance,
Presented to the House of Commons, by the East India Company, in the Year 1628.

With some few Animadvertions THEREON.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

AN ABSTRACT OF A Remonstrance, Presented to the House of Commons, by the
East India Company, in the Year 1628: With some few Animadvertions thereon.
Remonstrance.
Page 2. THE Trade to the East Indies some few Years past did employ fifteen
thousand Tuns of Shipping; according to the present times there is and may be
employed ten thousand Tuns of warlike Shipping, besides three thousand Tuns
more, now here repairing for the next supply of those Voyages.

The said Shipping do employ 2500 Mariners, whereof one third part at least are
shipped from hence Land-men, who are made good Mariners by these Voyages, page
2.

This Trade, as it is great in it self, so does it yet farther enlarge our
Traffic and Strength, by furnishing this Kingdom with all sorts of Indian
Wares, not only for our own use, but more especially for the necessary wants of
Foreign Nations, which has much increased the number of our Warlike Ships to
Export them from hence.

For Proof whereof we instance the last Year when we brought in Pepper from
Indies to the value of two hundred and eighty thousand Pounds Sterling, whereof
one hundred and eighty thousand pounds was within few Weeks shipped off; the
like is done with Indico and Callicoes, and other rich Wares, insomuch that we
may boldly affirm, that by these Exportations of India Commodities for diverse
Parts, we do employ, going and coming, in those Voyages, at least 2000 Tuns of
shipping, which do require 500 Mariners to Man them.

Animadvertion.
But our Traders now, instead of supplying Foreign Nations with these India
Wares they furnish more especially, our own Nation with them, to be consumed at
Home, which must prove a quite contrary effect than in those days; And that
they may the better encourage the Home-consumption of these India Wares, they
have sent several Artists thither with Patterns and Colors, that they may the
better please our Humor and Fancies.

Remonstrance.
[Page 8.] The remotest Traffic is always most beneficial to the Public
Stock; the Example may be thus, Suppose that Pepper were worth here 2 s. a
pound, if we should fetch the same from Holland, the Merchant may pay 20 pence
the pound out of the Kingdoms Stock, and gain well by the Bargain; but if he
fetch Pepper from the East Indies he cannot give there above 5 Pence the Pound
at the most, which does sufficiently show the great advantage we have to buy
our Wares in those remote Countries, not only for that part alone which we
spend, but especially for that great quantity which from hence we Transport
yearly into other Countries, to be sold at higher Prices than it is worth here
in England; and a farther Benefit by Sale of our Tin, Cloth, Lead, and other
native Commodities, the Vent whereof does daily increase in those Countries,
which formerly had no use of our Wares.

[Page 9.] It is manifest, when we brought Indico from Turkey, that sort was
ordinarily sold for 6 s. the pound, or more, which now we sell for 4 s. Pepper
then ordinarily at 3 s. and 4 d. the pound, which now is sold for by the East
India Company for twenty pence; but for Cloves, they are now worth 11 s. the
pound, Mace in sorts 10 s. Nutmegs 5 s. the pound, because the Hollanders, by
the expulsion of our People, do keep us by force from the Trade of those
Spices; in which Wares, when we enjoyed the freedom of that Trade in the
Indies, we sold Cloves here at 5 s. 6 d. Nutmegs at 2 s. 6 d. the pound.

Animadvertion.
Seeing that the great advantage we have to buy our Wares in those remote
Countries, is especially for that great quantity which from hence is
transported into other Countries to be sold at an higher Price than it is worth
here, and not for that which is consumed at home; If then we would make this
Trade beneficial as in those days, the same Method must be observed, which is,
to consume little at home, and export much.

And a further Benefit did accrue by the Sale of our Tin, Cloth and Lead, which
then did increase, but now Silver is the chief Commodity which they send
thither, which is, as it were, the Vitals of the Commonwealth, for as the wise
Man says, it answers all things: What a Prejudice is it then for them to send
out of the Nation that which answers all things, to have in Return that which
evidently proves the destruction of our own Manufactures, and impoverishing the
Nation?

Remonstrance.
[Page 10.] The next Quaery concerns the Kingdom nearly; for it is no small
work to improve the Price of Lands, which never has, nor can be done but by
the prosperous success of our. Foreign Trade, the Balance whereof is the only
means and rule of our Treasure; that is to say, when either by issuing out of
the Realm yearly a greater value in Wares than we consume in foreign
Commodities, we grow rich: Or by spending more of strangers Goods than we sell
them of our own, we are impoverished: For the first of these courses does bring
in the Money that we have, the last will carry it away again when we have got
it; if we exceed our means by excess in Foreign Wares, or maintain a War by Sea
or Land, where we do not feed and clothe the Soldiers, and supply the Armies
with our native Provisions, by which disorders our Treasure will soon be
exhausted.

[Page 13.] The business then is briefly thus, that as the Treasure which is
brought into the Realm by the balance of our Foreign Trade, is, that Money
which only does abide with us, and by which we are inricht; so by this plenty
of Money thus gotten (and no otherwise) do our Lands improve; for when the
Merchant has a good Dispatch beyond the Seas for his Cloth, and others our
native Wares, he does presently return to buy greater quantity, which raises
the price of Wool and other Commodities, which does improve the Landlords
Rents as the Leases expire.

Animadvertion.
If it concerns the Kingdom nearly, and that it is no small work to improve the
Price of our Lands, and that it cannot be done but by the prosperous Success of
our Foreign Trade, and that the Balance is the only Means and Rule of our
Treasure, etc. It concerns the Kingdom highly to keep the Balance on the
Kingdoms side, especially in this Trade, which is so great; for the greater the
Trade is, the greater the Mischief, when the Balance is on the other side, as
it is now in the East India Trade, and has been so for many Years; For when the
Balance is on the Kingdoms side it brings in Treasure, and improves the price
of our Lands, and when the Balance is on the other side it has the contrary
effect.

By this Argument it is plain, that the Landed-Men will suffer by this Trade,
as well as the Manufacturers, tho not so soon; but as in Common Prudence, when
ones Neighbor's House is on Fire, all Endeavors are used by the Neighborhood
to quench it, not only for their Neighbor's good, but also to preserve
themselves; so that it is the Interest of Landed-Men, as well as Manufacturers,
to endeavor to put a stop to the evil in that Trade, and to turn the Scales on
the Kingdoms side, according to the Principles of the East India Company when
they made this Remonstrance, which was to make our Exportation great, of all
sorts of Commodiries, and the home-Consumption little of Foreign.

Remonstrance.
[Page 14.] In the course of Foreign Trade there be three sorts or degrees of
Gain.

The First is that of the Commonwealth, which may be done when the Merchant,
who is the principal agent therein, shall lose.

The Second is, the Gain of the Merchant, which he does sometimes justly, and
worthily effect, although the Commonwealth be a loser.

The Third is, the Gain of the King, whereof he is ever certain, even when the
Commonwealth and the Merchant shall be both losers.

[Page 15.] Suppose the Company should send out one hundred thousand pounds in
Wares or Money, into India, and receive home for the same three hundred
thousand pounds, it is evident that this part of the Public Stock is tribled,
and yet we may boldly say the Company loses, if the Return be in Bulky
Commodities, as Saltpetre, Cotton-Yarn, Indico, Callicoe, etc. the Customs and
Charges will amount to two hundred thousand pounds.

[Page 16.] A Second sort of Gain in the course of Trade is, when the Merchant
by his laudable endeavors, may both bring in and carry out Wares to his
advantage, by buying and selling them to good Profit, which is the end of his
labor, yet nevertheless the Commonwealth shall decline and grow poor, by a
disorder in the People, when through Pride, and Excesses, they do consume more
Foreign Wares in value than the Wealth of the Kingdom can satisfy and pay by
the Exportatian of our own Commodities, which is the very quality of a
Spendthrift who spends beyonds his Means.

The Third Gain is the King's, who is ever sure to get by Trade, when both the
Commonwealth and Merchant shall loose severally or jointly, as it may and does
sometimes happen when the Merchants Success is bad; and our Commodities are
over-ballanced by Foreign Wares consumed; but if such disorders be not
prevented, His Majesty, in the end, shall be the greater loser, when His
Subjects shall be impoverished.

Animadvertion.
These Three sorts of Gain cannot long continue, or at least ought not; for as
to the first, if the Commonwealth gains and the Merchant loses, the Merchant
will take care to put a stop to that Trade, by leaving it, for
self-preservation sake.

As to the Second, When the Commonwealth loses, there is the greatest
Mischief, and likest to continue, because the Merchant, who is the Agent is the
Gainer, and the Commonwealth which is the looser, is passive, and cannot so
soon hinder the Mischief growing upon it as could be wished; because it must be
done by wholesome Laws (which requires time) to repair the Breach made by these
selfish Traders, and to keep Trade in its true Course, that the Commonwealth
may be no looser, which is highly reasonable to be done, it being no more than
the prudent Trader does of himself, when he finds he is a looser, he leaves it,
and follows another.

As to the Third sort of Gain, its surest and lasting foundation must be that
which brings Gain to all: In Music, when all parts agree, there is a sweet
Melody, but if not, then Jars and Discord.

Remonstrance.
We will take that for granted which no body will deny us, that we have no
other means to get Treasure but by Foreign Trade, for Mines we have none which
do afford it; and how this Money is gotten in the managing of the said Trade,
we have already showed, That it is done by making our Commodities which are
exported to overbalance in Value the Foreign Wares which we consume.

Animadvertion.
If we have no other Means to get Treasure but by Foreign Trade, and that it
must be done by making our Commodities which are exported, to exceed in value
the Foreign Wares which we consume: So that if upon Examination of the
East India Trade, as it is now managed, it shall appear, that we consume more
of these Foreign Wares than is exported of our own, (which is the quality of a
Spendthrift, who spends beyond his Means) the Manager thereof ought to be
brought to their Primitive Principles, and grant the request the Company then
made to the House of Commons, in the Prayer of their Petition, which was, That
if it was not a beneficial Trade to the Nation, it might be suppressed.

So that it does appear by what has been said, That the East India Company in
its Primitive Time, did show, That the Benefit of this Trade did consist only
in its greater Exportation in value of our own Wares than in the consumption of
Foreign.

Now that the East India Traders do export less in value of our Wares than is
consumed here of theirs, is obvious to all that know any thing of that Trade,
and was plainly made to appear before the last Parliament, when the Commons
passed a Bill for the restraining the consumption of part of those India Wares,
and the Lords thought there was too little restrained, as appears by the
Amendments made by their Lordships to the said Bill.

There is another Mischief that does attend this Trade, and that is the great
Number of our People that are disabled of following their Trades, and are
become a wandering People, some about the Streets for Relief, some to Sea, and
some to other Countries to seek their Fortunes: For it is evident, that by so
much as is consumed of these Foreign Wares, by so much our own are lessened,
and consequently the Manufacturers are brought into great Streights: What a
Reproach would it be to this Nation, to see great Numbers reduced to Beggary,
or to leave their Native Country, to satisfy the Luxury of some that act as if
they were made only for themselves?

I well remember the Saying of some Strangers formerly, who said, That if a Man
could not get a Livelihood in England, he could get it no where, so fully
employed were our Manufactures in those Days; but now quite contrary, because
of the vast Importation and Consumption of those Foreign Wrought Silks, etc.
but especially those from China, which has been Imported but of late Years in
such great Quantities, insomuch that they have thereby so clogged the Market,
that a very great quantity have remained unsold at the Companies last Sale; and
by consequence, there can be no Trade for the Weavers while the Companies
Magazines are stored, because they cannot work at such Rates as in India, where
they can live for One Penny a day.

This Mischief will not only fall upon the Silk Manufacture, but our own Staple
Manufacture of Wool, which the Farmers that have Wool on their hands feel,
and is not like to end there, but must needs fall heavy upon Landlords, and a
Multitude of Poor that are, and may be employed in that Manufacture.

The Silk manufactured in England is generally the Returns of our Woollen from
Turkey and Italy, but more especially from Turkey, from whence we have
Raw-Silk, Grogram-Yarn, and Dy-Stuff, by which are employed not only great
number of Weavers and Dyers, but also many Throwsters, who, as well as the
Weavers, employ Men, Women and Children, from the Age of Six Years and upwards;
so that a Child from Six Years to Eleven, can get from eighteen Pence to Three
Shillings a Week; Besides many Thousands of Seamens Wives, who are used to get
a Livelihood in Winding of Silk at Home, whilst their Husbands are abroad at
Sea, and so maintain their Families; whereas otherwise they must go upon Tick,
or beg, or borrow, until their Husbands return; and then his Pay must go to
quit Scores, and have nothing left for their other Necessaries.

But if the Turkey Merchant finds no Vend for his Silk and Yarn, which is the
Returns for his Cloths, he will send no more, and then the Clothier feels the
smart, and when he cannot sell his Cloth he will buy no Wool, and then the
Farmer feels it, and when the Farmer cannot turn his Wool into Money he cannot
pay his Rent, and then the Landlord has his feeling-part with the rest: So as
in the natural Body, when one Member is wounded, it affects the whole Body, so
in the Body Politic, when the manufacturing part (which is so essential a
part) is wounded, it must needs affect the whole Body the more.

But some will say, Trade must be free, and not disturbed: We grant it, and so
it must so long as it is kept in its right Channel: What can be more free than
the Sea and the Rivers, whom none can control, yet the Creator has set bounds
to the proud Ocean, saying, so far shall thou go, and no farther; yet it is
still free in its Course; so likewise, the People of England, though they have
Laws to govern them, which are the Boundaries of a People, yet notwithstanding
they are a Free People; So we may say of Trade, that it is never the less free
for its being kept in its right course by wholesome Laws, than the Sea is by the
Shore, or the River by its Banks; for those things may be said to be free, that
are not interrupted in their true course for which they were made: Now it is
manifest that Trade was made for the Good of Mankind, and Benefit of the
Public, and so far as it conduces to those ends, it ought to be free and
uncontrolled; but as Trade cannot be carried on of it self, but by some Agent,
which is Mankind, who for the generality are biased, and more selfish than
Public Spirited, and so turns its Course out of the right Channel; like a
Flood of Waters that overflows or breaks its Banks, and brings a Deluge of
Miseries with it, whilst they fill their Coffers in fishing in troubled Waters.

So as the Sea and the Rivers are bounded that they may be kept in their free
course for the benefit of the rest of the Creation: Even so ought there to be
Bounds to Trade, that it may be kept in the true and free course for which it
was made.

FINIS.

