XII VISIONS OF Stephen Melish A GERMANE: BEING Such as Concern the Affairs now
in agitation between The French King and the Pope.

Translated by Albertus Otto Faber.

LONDON. Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the cornerhouse at the
bottom of Addle-hill, in the Year, 166^.

THE PREFACE.
BEcause of the present differences between the French King and the Pope, I
thought good to Translate these following Visions of Stephen Melish of Prague,
Cittizan of Lissa, who (as says he th^^ first Published his Visions) is a
downright honest man, Pious and dutiful to God and his Neighbor; a stranger
to Worldly Policy, and State affairs; altogether ignorant of the transactions
now on foot. Therefore we must conclude that his Visions were showed him by a
higher power. The most part of them being fulfilled, and others were
fulfilling; some also seem to be just upon accomplishment. This was the cause
that I have Translated those Visions, whose accomplishment I judged to be now
beginning; so that all good people here might have some knowledge of what
passes Beyond Sea of this nature. Consider of it, and Farewell.

A. O. F.

XII Visions of Stephen Melish a Germane, etc.
The 1st. Vision.
ON Palme-sunday (April 9, 1656) I Dreamed thus: I traveled, and a man I knew
not did accompany me; and we went forth together til we entered into a great
Palace, the name of which I knew not: And the man drew me aside, and asked me,
from whence I was? I said, of Poland. He again, Of what Religion? I, Of the
Protestants. He, Sing ye also French Psalms? Yes, said I, that is my highest
joy, when I rise, and go to sleep. Then he behaved himself lovingly toward me,
and said, Stand here by me, no evil shall happen to thee, thou shall see great
things that must be done in short. If it be somewhat thou understand'st not,
ask me, I shall tell thee. And soon he was changed into another shape, as a
spiritual person; on whose side I standing, saw exactly what I now shall tell
thee without addition.

First of all, There was set in the midst of the Palace a square silver-Table;
in the mean time came a great King, whose Vesture was of Silver-cloth, and led
the King of Sweden at his right hand. Then he sat down with his back
Southwards, and his eyes Northwards, and the King of Sweden sat at the Table
over against him; and at the right hand of this King the Elector of Aeydelberg,
of Saxen, of Brandenbourg, having their eyes turned as it were Westwards, but
their backs Eastwards.

But betwixt this King and the Elector of Saxen sat a Cardinal upon a
silver-stool at the corner of the, Table, holding a Bishops Crofier in his
hand, which was mighty thick. He was clothed with a long priests gown, (like
to the Kings) in Silver clothes, and was girded with a girdle, having upon his
head a mitre of astrange fashion.

At the left hand sat one as it were Ra-Kocy clothed according to the
Hungarian mode, beside* him an ambassador of Spain, and then one of the
Emperors Ambassadors, and others. The Ambassadors of England and Holland sat
next the King of Sweden.

Round about those Kings were set silver stools, upon which sat along the
three sides of the palace, or hall, mighty Potentates.

Then presently was given a great sound out of great Guns, and afterward
Psalms and songs were sung in the French tongue; insomuch that there was a very
great noise of Music, and all kind of instruments: I also heard voices of men
amongst this Music singing very loud, the Melody of the Psalm I knew well.

Following, there was brought in upon two levers a small silvertable, upon
which did lie the Popes Crown.

And by and by, at the Kings and Princes consent lifted up him self the
Cardinal aforesaid, and struck with the crosier upon the crown, that it did
fly into pieces; and others standing round about, trampled on the bursted
silver with their feet* At that same instant there arose to be a sudden
quivering noise, by shooting of pieces, and great ordnances, horrible and
dreadful.

After that shooting a very great triumph was made by singers and musical
instruments.

Then came a Queen and sat down next the King, She was clothed like the King:
After her followed Virgins with a melodious sound of Psalms and songs, bearing
an exceeding precious present upon a golden lever, which they did present to
the King. And then again was heard a great crack of pieces and ordnances to
confirm all this.

After came a very great multitude of the Gentry and Knight hood, and Lords,
out of all the four corners of the World, and brought to the King a crown and a
sword, which crown they set before him in the presence of all these Potentates:
But the sword they put him in his hand, even to the end that he should skirmish
against the Babylonish beast; At which they also joined their joyful
gratulation, which I understood not, because it was done in French: And J durst
not ask the Man what they said, only what J did see with my eyes, and could
apprehend with my understanding. After this was heard again a great rattling of
Guns, and singers. And there came, as it were, persons of the commonalty, and
brought to the King a costly present, and did ad their gratulations, but J did
not understand it. And all this was anew confirmed with shooting and music
sound,

Whereas now the Gentry and Knighthood aforesaid had presented the Crown, and
reached the sword into his hand, the said King proffered to the King of Sweden
his right hand, and the other Princes, Potentates and Kings; standing by, laid
thereupon their hands, kissing one another, and sung at it the 20 Psalm; At
which there was heard once more so great a shooting and musical rejoicing, as
never before, insomuch that the very earth did ring.

Then they all did arise, and went into a great temple, wherein the said King
did crown the said Cardinal, and put him on a very Patriarch-Mitre, as it were
a Cardinals-hat: And many Preachers sat there in white silk-cloaths about the
Altar, and elsewhere, and sung French Psalms, in the congregation of many
thousand people. There the King did establish him to be an intendant
Administrator of the Church of God instead of Moses, Samuel, etc.

Out of this temple now J came forth with the same man upon a very large field,
where the King did muster his Soldiers* and sent his Army toward the South
and West to fight courageously, giving his order to them how they should behave
themselves.

Then the Cardinal began a reformation in all cities, and gave them privileges
according to the manner of the old Testament. But all what could not be easily
decided was ordered should be brought before the King. It was also ordered,
that nothing in what cause soever, Ecclesiastical or Secular, must be done
without knowledge of this King and the said Potentates.

His Armies did increase of all sides round about, and his Dominion was to be
like as it were Germany, and he a King for ever; to wit, so long as the World
stands, and no alteration at all was to be expected from him, but that at the
time of his government there should be Peace, unity, and all kind of good,
like as it was in the time of Solemon. And it was clear day when I awaked.

The II. Vision.
APril 27. had I such a dream as thus: I came at a high mountain, unto which
when I had climbed up very hardly, (yet with help of others,) I was commanded
to look back. Which doing, he said to me, Do thou see that piece of land?
Yes, Sir, I see it, said I. But when I looked back again, behold there was
nothing more left then earth and ashes. Then I asked; Sir, how is that gone so
suddenly? He* Even so shall be gone the whole Land, because of their great
sins, which they do* For terror shall fall upon them, indeed upon all, as well
the fighting men, as them that are defending themselves. But them that I shall
preserve, I will bring thorrow into other countries, that they might be
preserved for a time and season; but the hypocrite, who do oppress my people,
shall be an abomination for ever. For the Lords Season is approaching, to make
manifest the works and doings of every one.

The III. Vision.
ON the 19, May (when I was already amongst the scattered, ones in Silesia) saw
I the Sun shine toward the North, and all dark, only clear toward the bottom
of it; and there arose three other Suns from the East, and West, and betwixt
the West and North. But on the highest part of the Heaven stood a very great
Sun, the greatest of all. And I did ask: Sir, Wherefore is the Northern Sun so
dark? He answered: Because that I will not by him alone* (my Ambassador)
perform the Work, least there creep in pride and opinions (or imaginations) as
though he by his own power or wisdom did effect the work, to which I have
called him. For behold, he already does not what I will, but what he will
himself: However I did not send him for his own profit and interrest, but for
my glory-sake. For I have another Workman, whom I shall send unto him, even to
the end that they shall work together, and perform the work.

At that same instant began the Northern Sun, being refreshed from the other
Suns, to arise on high, and take her course. And presently I did hear a voice
coming from far: Beware now therefore thou do nothing, but what will tend unto
the honor of God and his Worship, and unto the edification of his Church: And
ye other Suns, proceed in your course also, and go on for it is time, do not
tarry one for another, for its high time, to perform the work of God, the time
of the manifestation of his Glory is at hand.

And there came from the South a very deformed wonderful beast, who had sent
forth many messengers of strange fashions: And these went to the (great Lords)
and the common people, exhorting them, and giving drink out of a wonder-cup;
Then they did conspire, and bind themselves together with great chains, to the
end, that they might stand fast together for the maintenance of their cause.
But when the battle began, these were driven back to the South, and that
wonder-beast was overcome and vanquished, and I praised-God for the victory
given to the Suns. But a Voice came to be heard, which said; His fall is not
yet, for the Suns help not truly one another, because of their great envy,
that is amongst them, and some of them seek their own ends. But those that do
seek shall perish; For the time of him by whom God will perform the Work, is
yet not at hand: But shall not tarry very long, because his time also
approaches.

The IV. Vision.
AGain I saw a bright fiery light toward the South, all as it were, burning
up, and as it were an unquencheable fire. And there arose a very great outcry,
and many lamentations, with so thick and dark a smoke, that nothing was to be
seen. At that instant I saw red Foxes come from the East, every one having a
great tooth. And a gold yellowish Lion stood upon a green place, about whom the
foxes were leaping. And a voice was heard: Trust them not, they have falsehood
in their mind. Therefore the Lion did smile at them, and a while after rent
them in pieces. And behold that great Sun (the brightness of which was before
so great, that nothing did appear to be seen, because of his so great light*
was changed into blood also in the same region, but only for a time.

Instantly after came a fiery Man like a flame, with a black sword of Iron: And
against him a bright shining Man, like the the Sun, with such a sword like a
flash of Lightning. Betwixt those was such a fight, that many thousands did
fall in the place, and none was left remaining but very few. Between them stood
a white Eagle, and in Heaven the great Sun like to the lightning* because of
whose great heat I could not see how it ended; only that I saw, that the bright
Sun-shining Man had cut off the head of the white Eagle, and that head was
given with the Crown to the North; but the body of the Eagle was given to a red
Eagle, and the wings to the East. Presently a voice was heard, saying: To she,
O lamb, be praise and thanks; for thou art worthy to take the book, and to open
his seals. For one time is past already, and half a time, and now is half half
a time.

Presently there was a theater made for execution. Many of the great Lords were
beheaded, and priests strangled. And fear did overcome them, and some were
taken prisoners. The Popes stool also did fall with a very great fall; and
thereupon was a monstrance, which was not broken, but lay there, and no body
listed it up. And a Voice came a far off; Hasten and tarry not, for thou shall
go further, and perform the Work for which I have called thee: For the others
also do expect their redemption.

The V. Vision,
AGain I saw seven Stars rising from the East to join with the Sun that stood
on the highest Heaven. After then did arise also a red horny moon, but
proceeded not very far, and fell back again. But another horny moon from the
west did meet him, he was very bright shining, but could-not become full,
because of the clouds, flying hither and thither: Presently I heard a Cock crow
very pleasantly, after he had obtained the place alone, but he could not fly
very high. But the black eagle did fly very high, that he scarce could be
seen, holding as yet his place and much strength. Because the time is not yet
come, that his pen-feathers shall be drawn out, as if he should bear rule till
at the year of 63. In the mean time many tempests overcome many lands and
cities.

The VI Vision.
BEtwixt East and South came four feather-footed Beasts, running on, full of
blood and fire, doing horrible damage; and approached to a two-horned White
Beast, as it were, to fight together, but it was only for an appearance. For
they did join in a league against the Kings of the West and North. But they
were vanquished, because of the steadfast union of the Nations, and the great
Sun in Heaven helped them. And there are manifest the Heroes against the
Seven-headed Beast, to destroy it. For many of them at this very time will turn
backwards; nay, there is as yet, not Ten, that intend seriously to destroy the
Beast, but the time comes that the said number shall be full, and then they
will go on; so that about the year 663. there shall be spread abroad a rumor
of great wonders. God from Heaven shall please to give to the potentates one
heart, love and unity to perform his work.

The VII Vision.
OCtobris 2. I had a dream, 3 hours before day, as follows. I stood as it
were in the East, with my face Westwards, and saw before me the sun Southwards,
standing about as high as at ten of the Clock. And behold, he was grown dark,
very black like a coal. And besides him Eastwards stood a red moon, but over
against her a black two horn'd-moon: And round about the Sun seven Stars,
bright shining, as they do shine at night. But a thick mist rising from the
earth discover them all with darkness, insomuch that both I and many others
beside me were terrified, and began to fly. Immediately I saw between the West
and South in the Air, a shining brightness, or light, in shape of a Man,
standing and crying out, Woe, Woe, Woe unto you people, who call the black white,
and the white black, that ye might arise up against the Beast, to make it stand
on tip-toes, and to bring all again under it is yoke. Behold the time of his
down fall comes near, and is now here! Woe to your life, who drink out of his
cup. And at the same time he poured out a great Vial, of somewhat red, like
blood; And great lamentations arose over the whole earth, insomuch that I my
self thought nothing else but Doomsday did surprise us, and I went to prayer,
till I awakened.

The VIII Vision. 1659.
I Saw again a Sun in the North East, risen at the height of half South, and
there standing without motion: For there came great clouds from to other Easts.
And another Black Sun arose up from the West, who was crossed over by some
clouds and winds with white streaks. He went on through the black thick clouds,
and passed suddenly toward the South to the other Sun, and by how much the
nearer he approached, and the sw fter he run on, so much the brighter he
became. But when he came near the South line, as it were, between twelve and
one, there he stood steadfast like the very natural Sun. Afterward he burst in
pieces, like small crackets, shooting here and there in the Air, and made a
very great noise and crack, and fire fell down like stars. But when I lifted up
my eyes to the Heaven, I was aware of them called the Seven stars, that they
did part from one another, four of them toward the North, and the other three
toward the South, and great Winds began to blow one against another, like
great Armies, and great lamenting was heard. I fear that by discord in the
Empire some devision may arise. Woe to that Potentate who suffers himself still
to be poisoned by the Beast; but happiness to them that do look upon the Lords
work, expecting their employment at the appointed time, when the Lord shall
call upon them to act his work, and to perform it; who so will go on before the
time, and fight against the truth, will meet with evil in the end. Ah! that all
Christians were of one heart, for a great net is prepaed to draw over all the
true Believers, and to destroy them all, but the Lord laughs at it. Behold they
have already stretched out their hands for a draught, but the Lord does beat
with hammers upon their hearts, because they have begun it. Whom the Lord shall
be pleased to let live two years more, he shall see great revolutions, and the
works of God. For the fifth day does approach.

The IX Vision.
IN the Mid-lent I came (viz. in a dream) in a Garden situated westwards, in
which did grow many very fair flowers of all kinds, besides all sorts of trees.
The most part of the flowers were Lilies high, of three or four else under
propped and born up with costly supporters. But the North-east part of the
Garden stood, as it were frozen, and could not begin to sprout forth, because
there did blow a cold wind. By and by there fell down a press, written upon:
Inquisitio Hispanica. Observe, amongst the Roses and Lilies, thorns also and
thistles were grown, underneath which stood roses red and white, so that the
press could not smother all the Lilies, because it could not fall down to the
very earth. And there were grievous complaints upon the earth, that the three
Crowns, ^owed and wrapped thorrow with Lilies had suffered damage. And
presently J saw, that they did receive strength again from North-eastwards, and
that one of the Northern-crowns was changed into blood. O that the Protestants
(Evangelici) would make peace amongst themselves, against the poison of the
Jesuits, that so does overflow! Nevertheless they shall fall.

The X. Vision. October 24.
I Came into a very large field, whose width and length J cannot describe.
There was a great people; old, young and children, but all of them buried in
the earth unto the head, which only they lifted up, crying together with a
loud Voice: O Lord, holy and true, how long do thou judge, and not avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth? At that very instant came two riding
hastily upon horses dashed all over with blood and dirt; they lighted off, and
the one laid him down, the other struck him that was holding his horse with his
sword, lamenting, that he had followed his counsel, and laid him down also.
nstantly J saw a mighty multitude of people beyond which J could not see. And
above them as it were in the air^ a pulpit, upon which sat an old honest man,
who did comfort them, (when they all, both themselves, and them that were lying
down, did expect nothing but death) and exhort them to constancy; for the Lord
would not tarry any longer, because all must be fulfilled what is written in
the Books; and said, they should have yet patience for a little season, until
the number of their Brethren that should be killed still, should be fulfilled.
After having finished his speech, he began to sing the 123, Psalm.

The XI. Vision.
FRiday before Easter, four hours before the rising of Sun, I saw the whole
World in a dreadful manner breaking all in pieces, chiefly toward the North,
as if all should be turned upside down. And because there was no body that
would or could help it, all was very terrible beyond expression. But toward
the South all was changed into smoke, insomuch that because of the fume nothing
was to be seen: And westwards in blood. But from the East did arise a fair
bright morning-red (Aurora) underneath blood-red, and from thence a round
Rainbow, extending it self from the East to the West, and a loud Voice was
heard, but I could not understand, what what it said.

The XII. Vision.
I was in a great Hall, with high and clear Windows, wherein a multitude of
People was assmbled; and behold a great storm of rain came, and the clouds fell
down by pieces in the river, whence it did mightily increase, insomuch that it
reached unto the Windows of the said Hall; nevertheless it run away by the
sides very swiftly. Instantly there did appear a great brightness from Heaven,
that we could not bear it, therefore we did close the windows, fearing some
tempest. But behold a great Sun, coming from the North-east, where he does
arise in the Summer, did shine so bright and burn so exccedingly, that I know
not how to declare it, or to describe and express it by any similitude
whatsoever. (And in it was written something in Hebrew letters) And behold, all
did begin to break, and all round about us was undone at once, and brought to
nothing at all, insomuch that we as it were, hung in the air. And at the same
instant was heard such a noise, rattling, over and overturning, and an alarm,
that I cannot express it. In which terror I lay a while before I came again to
my self, and could remember how it was with me: also because of fear and
anguish, I knew not what I should pray, say, or sing.

Out of a Book, that treates concerning the Conversion of the Jews; written by
a Germane Lady, Anna of Medem, 1641.
The IV. CHAPTER.
BEing so far spent in my disease that there was no hope of life at all, they
took me off from my bed, and put me upon the straw (according to the custom of
that country.) like a dying person. Then I sunk into a very deep sleep, and I
was as it were truly dead.

But there I saw a strange man, who had two different bodies, with all the
members of men, but one only soul, of which both the bodies had their life.
The one was fair of face, but the other had an ugly countenance. This now that
was of so ugly a fashion dyed, and was carried away from the remaining living
body asunder into another chamber. Then the other living body came unto the
dead body, and spoke to them that had carried him forth thus: A^! how horrid
looks now my dead body, and stinks so ugly.

Now I first see how ugly my countenance and form has been when it was alive!
Now as I thus considered of that strange man, and much wondered at him, saying:
What is that for a man? God has never created such a man? Then there was made
an answer unto me: Thou have well said. For in the beginning God has created
man like unto his image; in sincere holiness and justice, and immortal. But by
the Devils envy Death is come into the world, and through Sin it has pierced
through into all men, because they have all sinned. And as concerning this
strange vision, the signification of it is this: The man with those two bodies
and one soul, being partly fair, and alive; to the contrary, partly ugly,
dying, and remaining dead, that is the regenerated man, every one in his
particular person created after God: In whom are two contrary natures, called
the Old man, and the New man, spirit and flesh, like as thou have seen, that
the one was very ugly and stunk: Likewise, nay more horrid is the na^ural man
with all his bad concupiscences or lusts before the eyes of God. Now as the
ugly died, so must that corrupted Adamical flesh, with all his bad lusts, die
in the regenerated man, and quite perish* For like as the dead was separated
from him who remained alive: So also must a true Christian deny all the dead
works, and serve the true God alone with a clear heart. And as the living did
not sooner acknowledge his ugly shapethen after the others death: So the
natural man as long as sin has dominion in his mortal body, cannot
acknowledge his corrupted nature, how that from the soal of the foot, even unto
the crown of the head, there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises,
and putrefying sores, that have not been closed neither bound up, neither
mollified with ointment, Isa. 1. Yea, like an unclean child that lies yet in
his blood, not being bathed, so is the regenerated man, until God have born him
again, and given him grace, that through his Spirit he might kill the old Adam.
At that time he can acknowledge by the grace of God, how greatly he had been
corrupted by hereditary sin, since he came forth from his mother. Thereupon he
begins to praise the Lord God in Heaven* the fountain of all pureness, that he
has purified him. So still he has a hatred against sin, denies himself cast
forth all, self-love Yea absolutely given over unto God in his will, with all he
has in the innermost of his Soul and body. Then he begins to live first of all
accordingly, and the Image of God is to be renewed again. For like as in a
troubled water, that is moved and agitated by wind, a Man cannot see his image;
so the image of God cannot be seen in a heart, moved by the Winds of this
World, the lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, the pride of Life, and
the hope upon perishing things, and troubled by the dirt of riches,
covetousness and ambition. This is now the declaring of the man with two bodies
and one Soul. God will be pleased, to kill in us all bad lusts, and stir us up
by his grace, that we might serve the living God in holiness and righteousness,
according to his will and pleasure.

FINIS.

