A SERMON Preached at St. MARTINS in the FIELDS, AT THE FUNERAL Of the Reverend
Doctor HARDY, Dean of Rochester, June 9th. 1670.

By Richard Meggott, D. D. Rector of St Olaves Southwarke, and one of His
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.



London, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Joseph Clark, at the Star in
Little Britain, 1670.

To the Nobility, Gentry, and other Inhabitants of the Parish of St. MARTINS in
the FIELDS.
Right Honorable, Worthy and Beloved,
WHen Epistles of this Nature are so much in Fashion, that all Things in Print
are thought undressed, if they are without them; I hope I shall not be censured
for this to You now: Because it is not an Affectation of Great Patrons, nor an
overweening Opinion of a thin Discourse, but only the Condition and Relation of
the Person, who was the Occasion of it, has given me the Presumption. You all
had a Common Right in Him, and he a Peculiar Interest in so many of You, that
in this Case to have addressed to any One, might have been Interpreted to have
forgotten Several.

It is Pity that a Diamond should be set in Lead. Could I have had my Desires,
this Excellent Person should have had a Proportionable Penicil to have drawn
Him, then You could not but have begged His Picture, as Joseph of Arimathea did
his Masters Body: But I had neither Art nor Time for such a Piece; This is so
much fitter to be covered with a Curtain, than hung out in Public View, that I
am surprised either that you should expect it, or I permit it.

I am not insensible that there want not some who are very industrious to
represent Him very differently; Concerning whom I shall say no more, than that
there are such Things, as Envy, Pride, and Spite, which like Smoke always fly
in the Faces of the fairest: But while such as give him a slighty Character
shall approve themselves more Serviceable to the Church, and such as give Him
an ill one shall appear to be without any Fault themselves, I think they are
neither to be wondered at nor regarded.

I might have said much more to his Commendation, which was true: I appeal to
his most Venomous Enemies, whether any thing I did say was false. That Passage
concerning his Conference with Doctor Hammond, which some I hear have much
questioned, I had from his own Mouth: as to that Objection against it, that he
Preached before the Lords that sat at Westminster afterward, if the Design of
that Sermon, and the Temper of those Times, be well considered of, it is rather
an Argument to confirm it.

The best, and surely the greatest part of you are so well persuaded of Him,
that such Vindications as these are unnecessary for your satisfaction: Lest
they should be burdensome to your Patience, My Prayers that you may all live
holily as He directed, and die happily as he desired, is all that shall be
added by His unworthy Fellow servant,

Your Servant in things appertaining unto God, RICHARD MEGGOTT.

Job 14.14. Later Part. All the Days of my Appointed Time will I wait till my
Change come.


IT is a sad Change, a sad and sudden Change, This which has now Assembled
us; a strong man has changed his vigorous health for rottenness; a Reverend
Divine has changed his frequented Pulpit for a Coffin; an Eloquent Orator has
changed his charming Rhetoric for Silence; a shining Star has changed his
Eminent Orb for the Grave and Darkness. And had I waved all Text but him, here
had been Theme enough to have entertained your passionate and devout Attentions.

This was the Ancients usual practice upon such Solemnities: Thus Nazienzen in
his Funeral Oration for St. Basil, St. Ambrose in his for his Brother Satyrus;
St. Bernard in his for Gerard, spend their whole discourses in the lamenting
and commendation of the Parties that were deceased.

But Christians are now grown so much worse, and the hearts of men so hardened,
that Charity has laid a necessity upon us of doing something else; and the
danger of them we are to speak to, compels us to borrow the greatest part of
that Time which was formerly employed in the Embalming of the Dead for the
Benefit of the Living.

Before therefore I attempt any account of him, whose great change is come, I
shall make my Address to you whose change is to come, that you would prepare
and provide for it. To this end it is I present you with this fair Copy to
write after, this Excellent Example to follow, [Holy Job] whose Practice and
Language in the Case you have in the Words I have now read; All the Days of my
Appointed Time will I wait till my Change come.

The Text falls asunder of it self into two Generals; Here is Job's
Dissolution and his Resolution.

His Dissolution in these Words, My change will come.

His Resolution to fit himself for it before it come, in these: All the days of
my appointed time will I wait for it.

But that we may the better come at it, I shall choose rather to Branch it into
these three Particulars.

1. Here is the term of man's life stinted, it is an appointed time. 2. Here is
the Nature of Death intimated; It is that which makes an Alteration, a huge
Alteration, when it comes; It is a change.
Lastly, Here is our Duty and Employment bespoke in one for the other; in life
to make our selves ready for death: All our days to wait for it. All the days
of my appointed time will I wait till my change come.

The first of these Severals is the stinted term of man's Life. It is an
appointed time. Although the Chaldee Paraphrast rendereth it by (...) and the
Vulgar Latin militiae, the days of my warfare; yet when the choicest Masters
of Words confess that (...) is also often used as Synonimous with (...) finis,
extremum: And the Hebrew Scholiasts expound it (...) and (...) tempus
praecisum, I shall adhere to our own Translation, which calls the Days of our
abode here in this World, an appointed time.

An appointed time. It is but time at the most. The Inhabitants of the
intellectual World, whether they be in Weal or Woe, Peace or Torment, have no
varying nor shadow of change with them: Upon this account in some Parts of
Africa they put their dead Bodies into the Ground sitting, a posture of rest
and stay, to show that what ever place they were gone to then, they should
never move nor stir more from it. But we are here on Earth upon other terms;
this is only for a time, and then we must depart from it. The Fathers, do they
live for ever? And the Prophets, where are they? Joseph is not, and Simeon is
not; and we (alas!) must not we go also? Our time is

Appointed. He that fashioned and framed our Bodies, has not observed just the
same hand in all, but has made them with provident and wise Differences: Some
are strong as Iron, others as brittle as Glass; This has the toughness of the
Oak, that the slightiness of the Reed: In one the Temperament of the Humors is
more adjusted, in another more unequal, according to the duration he did intend
them for. What is the reason that in the same Climate, Air, Diet, Exercise;
Terentia lives to 103 Years of Age, when her Sister Fulvia dies at 27?
Gesippus with all the care and helps of Art can be preserved no longer than 35.
when Thanicus lasted while above 80? Whence (I say) ordinarily is this
diversity, but from the diversity of their natural constitutions? God according
to his design of our longer or shorter continuance here, giving to every one of
us a body as it pleases him: This is the natural term of life, called by the
Schools, the Time of Gods Determination; so long men may live.

Not that every one lives just so long, and dies no sooner: No, this course
of Nature is often violated and prevented: Some die penally, by the Magistrates
Sentence; some die desperately, making away themselves; some die sottishly, by
their own intemperance; some die mercifully, are taken away from the evil to
come. Although none can live longer than this time, yet it is very common to
die sooner; although they are Bounds which we cannot pass, yet they are such as
we may fall short of.

The reaching of this Term it is not absolute, but conditional; it is promised
as a Blessing to Piety and Public Virtue, Ex. 23.25, 26. Ye shall serve the
Lord your God, etc. And I will take sickness away from the midst of thee, etc.
The number of thy days I will fulfill. Thy days, those which are thy first
portion, thou shall fulfill them: On the other hand it is threatened as a Curse
to disorderly and wicked men, Psalm. 55.23. That they shall not live out half
their days: Theirs, those which otherwise they might have attained and arrived
to. And this is the actual Term of life usually called the time of Gods
foreknowledge.

Not that in any case whenever, wheresoever, howsoever we go out of the
World, the purpose of God is made of none effect, or his appointment
disappointed: No, for the bounds which he has set us they are not fatally
immovable: Then all care in this case would prove as impertinent as
Beverovitius objected his Calling: but only possibly attainable as appears by
the enforcement of the fifth Commandment, and the case of Hezekiah. Upon
susposition of, and with respect to, means and conditions it is, that our time
is appointed. And that shall suffice to have been spoken to the first Part of
the Text, the bounds of our life upon Earth: How and upon what account it is an
appointed time. We now go on to consider what becomes of us, when this time is
out and expired, as it follows in my

Next Particular: A change will come. This good man had experienced very many
changes already: A change in his Estate, from abundant Wealth to Poverty; a
change in his Family, from numerous Sons and Daughters to be Childless; a
change in his Person, from Health and soundness of Body to Diseases and painful
Sores; but he here expects another change, much greater and stranger than any
of them. We may more than guess what that is, when we find the same word, Prove.
31.8. is rendered Destruction, and St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.51. uses the Phrase for
our Passage into the other World, We shall all be changed. Accordingly Codurcus
here translateth it, obitus my death shall come; And so (abate very few who
think it may refer to the Restitution of his former Prosperity) the generality
both of Jewish Interpreters, and our own have expounded it, viz. of his death,
and that which shall succeed it, his resurrection.

This he here calls his change, in a peculiar manner, my change, as if all
his other changes were nothing to it. This is a change, a mighty change indeed:
wicked men change for the worse; righteous men change for the better; both
righteous and wicked undergo a change, a wonderful change, and that in four
Particulars.

First, it changes our Enjoyments, for things of a quite different kind and
species. All these visible things which here we prize, and are so fond of,
disappear and have no place by it, Jam linquenda domus and tellus, etc.

There Nabal has no Sheep to shear, nor Ahab Vineyard to take possession of:
There Sampson has no Dalilah to lie in the lap of, nor Belshazar bowls to
carowse and revel in: There Agrippa and Berenice have no Train to attend them;
nor is the rich man clothed with his Purple and fine Linen. The Spirit that
is not purged and elevated above the fascinating Charms of these, that can
taste and relish nothing higher, how discontented must it wander, seeking rest
and finding none, when it comes into these Regions. Esau might as well have
taken Ship, to have hunted for Venison upon the Waves of the Ocean; or Peter
have cast his Net to catch Fish, in the Wilderness or upon the Mountains; as to
expect any gross or sensual things in the life that is hereafter. There all is
spiritual and of another nature; That is a first change that Death makes, a
change of our Enjoyments.

Secondly, A change it is, in respect of our Capacity; it changes that also.
Here the wicked is capable of Mercy, and the unconverted solicited to
Repentance: Here the Golden Scepter is held out, and the Door of Hope set open:
But men had need take heed of wanton trifling: For though now God treat with
us, then he will only judge us. Death is the longest date of the Gospel
Proclamation, and after that our state is irreversable. Now God stands at our
doors and knocks; but if we open not, then, though we stand at his door and
knock, he will answer I know you not: Herodotus tells us, that when the
Jonians, who before had refused a Peace with Cyrus, afterward in their
extremity made addresses to him, he told them this Parable: That a Musician
playing a long time to the Fish that were in the River, seeing they came not at
him, flung in a Net and caught them: to whom, as they lay panting upon the
Bank, he cries out, you should have daunced before, it is too late now. Let
this be thought on while you are in better Circumstances; that although now God
delights not in the death of a sinner, yet then he will laugh at his
calamity: Although now he beseeches to be reconciled, yet then he will be
inexorable: For that is another change that Death makes, a change of our
capacity.

Thirdly, A change it is, in respect of our condition, it changes that also.
Here it is, like our selves, compounded; and partaketh both of good and evil.
No state here so sweet but has something to embitter it; nor is there any so
embittered, but there is something to sweeten it. The Rose has prickles, and
the Nettle bears a Flower on it. But when once the soul has trod over the
threshold of this Body, and is out of doors; what ever be our portion there,
there will be no mixture in it. In Heaven there is pure Joy without any Sorrow:
In Hell pure Sorrow without any Joy. They that are in Heaven will have nothing
to disturb them; They that are in Hell will have nothing to divert them. It is
of infinite importance what becomes of us when we go from hence, for there is
no deprecating one of Agur's Extremes: The weight of glory, it is an exceeding
weight, and the burden of wrath, it is a burden too heavy for us to bear.
Here the righteous taste of the Joys of the Holy Ghost, but it is only as
Jonathan did Honey in the Wilderness, a little thereof at the end of a Rod: Here
the wicked may be chastised by Gods Anger, but it is only as the Ten Tribes
were by Jeroboam, with Rods and not with Scorpions: but in the other life, both
mercy and fury will be in their Zenith, and have no restraint, but only the
capacity of the Objects they are let out upon.

Lastly, A change it is, in respect of our continuation. We are here but for a
time, an appointed time: But wheresoever we go after Death it is for Eternity.
Whether we are placed among the Sheep or the Goats; Whether we are to be
crowned or burned, it is to be for ever; The Joy is an everlasting Joy, and the
Punishment is everlasting Punishment: The Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and the Fire is everlasting Fire: The Life is everlasting Life, and the
Destruction is an everlasting Destruction. The Ancients did use to represent
this sometimes by the Hieroglyphick of a round Ring that has no end in it:
Sometimes of a boundless Ocean that has no Shores to it: Sometimes of a
Hydra's Head that grows as fast as it is cut: Sometimes of a running Fountain
that springs as fast as it flows; but all these come strangely short of it.
Arithmetic has her Figures to cast up the Sums of Numbers, Astronomy her
Instruments to take the height of Stars, Mariners their. Plumets to sound the
depth of the Seas; But what Invention can reach the height and depth and
length and breadth of an unlimited Eternity? We may here take up the Words of
Zophar in another case; It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper
than Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth,
and broader than the Sea. O Eternity! Eternity! the Line of our Fancy is too
short to reach thee! We can imagine nothing to which we can resemble thee! A
thousand, thousand, thousand Years are in thy sight but as Yesterday when it is
past, and as a Watch in the Night! And into this Eternity do every one of us
launch out, as soon as we shoot the Gulf of Death. Now it being such a change,
so long a one, so important a one, so irremediable a one, so strong a one,
which we all must undergo, had we not need to provide and prepare for it; and
this is the

Last Particular, our Duty and Employment in order to it, to fit and make our
selves ready for it; All our days to wait till it come: All the days of my
appointed time will I wait: and here you have three Things couched in the
Expression.

First, Here is his pious Meditation of it, so the Vulgar reads it,
expectabo, he does not put it far from him, but does expect and look for it.
Machiavel in his Prince relates of Caesar Borgia, whose Design was to make
himself Lord of Italy, that he told them who were about him in his last
sickness, how he had contrived all his Affairs in order to it: He had
subjugated Romania, won over the Chief of both Factions the Vrsin and the
Colonois to be his Creatures, he had cut off Messier Romiro's Head, made
Alliance with the Spaniard, and in short foreseen and prevented all the
Inconveniences that could lie in his way, but only Death; which he said he
never dreamed or imagined would have come so soon on him. Sure there is no
oversight among men more common than this, to suppose Death farther off from
them than indeed it is. If our forgetting Death would make Death forget us, we
might pretend some Policy for it; but seeing it is a change, a change where the
time is as uncertain, as the thing is unavoydable, what greater Folly! You that
would avoid the Horrors of it when it comes, familiarize to your thoughts
before it comes; so does Holy Job here, and that is a first thing employed in
his waiting, his awful Meditation of it.

Secondly, It speaks his comfortable Apprehensions of it. Waiting it is a
cheerful Word, and argues satisfaction in, and want of the thing we wait for.
Aquila Theod. and Sym. read it (...), I will hope. Death like the Planet
Mercury, it has its Influence according as it is in Conjunction: Although upon
evil men it has a Malignant one, it being a Trap door whereby they fall into
irrecoverable Misery; yet upon them that are good, it has a benign one; it is
a Golden Gate, through which they enter into Glory. Like St. James's
unimaginable Fountain, it sends forth both sweet Waters and bitter; Although
to the impenitent it sends forth bitter Waters, Tribulation and Anguish and
Wrath: Yet to the pious it sends forth sweet ones, Glory and Honor and
Immortality. And suitable to these two different Effects, the Children of men
are differently affected with it; For although the ungodly are astonished at
it, as at the approach of their Executioner; when Saul hears he must die on
the Morrow, as stout and valiant as he was, the Story tells us, he fell all
along on the Earth and was sore afraid; Yet the Godly they welcome it, as their
Friend and Benefactor: St. Paul has a desire to depart, and Holy Job speaks
of it as that which he longed for, I will wait.

Once more, it speaks his careful Preparation in order to it. I will wait, is
as much as I will get me ready for it: And is there not need when it is above
the reach of Words how much depends upon it? What Tragic Shreiks, what
fearful Cries have some awakened Consciences sent out when they have found
themselves surprised by it? O that I might live, said a Great Man of this
Kingdom (when his Physician had given him over) O that I might live, if it were
but in a loathsome Dungeon! O that I might live, if it were but the Life of a
Toad, that I might have a space for my Repentance! Inducias domine usque ad
mane, said the Young Man in St. Gregory, Lord spare me! but a little, little
while, but while to Morrow Morning; but while I say my Prayers once more! and
so expired in Horrors. Death will not wait for us, though we are unprepared;
how does it behove us then to wait for it, and prepare for it? To wait for it
with a considering Prospect? To wait for it with a circumspect Care? To wait
for it with Oil in our Lamps? To wait for it with our Garments girt about us.

And this not to be put off to one of these Days, not to be deferred while the
latter end of our Days, not to be neglected while the evil Days come, but all
our days. Our whole Life should have an habitual serious respect to it; doing
every thing that may make it comfortable, keeping aloof from every thing that
may make it formidable. Let us accost every Action as those Mariners that were
going to Execution did the Emperor, morituri te salutant. You may die while
you are thinking, die while you are visiting, die while you are talking, die
while you are trading, die while you are sinning. Do therefore every Action as
if it were your last, and live every day as those that know not whether you
shall live another.

This is the way to make your change, whenever it shall come, to be a happy
one; and whereas the loose and profane, the carnal and the debauch, change
their Mirth and Jollity for anguish and gnashing of Teeth; Their Confidence and
stupidity for Tremblings and confused Distractions; Their Acquaintance and
Companions for Devils and mischievous Spirits; their Gawdes and Ornaments for
flames and chains of Darkness: Your change shall be for the better: You shall
change Frailty for Immortality, and Infirmity for Perfection: You shall change
this troublsome World for the Jerusalem that is above, and the Society of
corrupter Creatures, for the Church of the Firstborn which is in Heaven, and
the Spirits of just men made perfect. Nay, even our Bodies that now at present
change for the worse, from Beauty to Deformity, from Strength to Rottenness:
Even these vile Bodies after a while shall be changed also, changed into the
Likeness of Christ's glorious Body, to be shining as the Stars, hail as the
Cherubin, and reunited to our Souls for ever, both together to enjoy the
Presence of God and Pleasures for evermore. Which God of his Mercy grant us.

I have done with the Text: But know there is another Subject you expect to
hear something of: This Eminent Instrument, this useful Ornament of the Church,
Our Reverend and Dear Brother, whose Funerals we are now celebrating: And here
I am in a Straight between two, having much Objection both against speaking and
being silent; To say nothing of him were to be injurious to his Worth by
concealing it, and for me to say any thing will be the same, by underreaching
it. When this Office is to be done for Dean Hardy; It is not fit that any but
the Tongue of a Dean Hardy should have the doing it. I am in Phleton's case,
who when he was to perform the Rites of Burial to the Body of the Great
Agesilaus had no Honey; And with him must be forced to make use of Wax instead
of it; Giving you a dry and naked Narrative for want of a sweeter and more
proper Panegyric.

HIs Birth as appears by that Sermon of his Preached to his Fellow Natives,
and that other upon the burning of it, was in London; where his pious and
careful Parents gave him all the Advantages of Education. A quick Apprehension
and strong Memory helped him to his Learning with so much speed and ease, that
he commenced Master of Arts in the University of Oxford, younger than many are
admitted. So well furnished he then was with all those Abilities which might
render him serviceable in the Church, that time was dispensed with, and he
admitted into Holy Orders, several Years before the Canon Standard: And sooner
than the Laws would have put the dispencing an Estate into his Hands; Such a
one was He, that it was thought fit to put the dispencing the Mysteries of God
there.

That extraordinary which Tully mentions of Hortensius, that he pleaded in
the Forum with great Applause, when he was but Nineteen Years Old; in him was
more than paralleld, who when very little over, was a Preacher of Esteem, in,
and about our Metropolis.

Such was his Pregnancy: But instead of admiring this, I cannot but (rather)
condole it as his Infelicity: For so it proved. The Subtle Faction that had
great Occasion for such Parts as his were, in the Game they were then in
playing, by their wonted Arts of Insinuation set themselves to compass him: And
the Bird was then so young, that with their Chaff they caught him. But it were
both Unchristian and disingenuous for any to reproach his Memory with this,
when every one knows he made such early and sincere amends for it: Nor can I
suppose that any will upbraid it that he was so once, but only those that are
angry he was not so always. He was none of those, the opening of whose Eyes is
just of the same Age with his Majesty's Glorious Restoration; No, when
Rebellion was Rampant, and Schism Triumphant; when Loyalty was condemned for
Treason, and all Order in the Church bawled down for Antichristian; Then, then
he left the Tents of those too prosperous men, and returned to his Duty, when
there was nothing but Conscience to encourage him.

Being at Vxbridge when the Treaty was there, he had the Happiness to be
brought into the Company of that Hammer of all Innovation both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, the never to be mentioned without Veneration, Doctor Hammond; and to
his Solid Arguments, and Awful Advices, I have heard our deceased Brother say,
he owed his first awakenings and reducing.

He showed that he was converted himself, after a while; by improving all
Opportunities for the strengthening of his Brethren: Not only in Private but in
Public, with Courage and Faithfulness, reproving the Usurpation, Oppression,
Perjury, Sacrilege, Hypocrisy, and the rest of the reigning Sins of those
Times of Violence and Madness. I need not insist upon these Things, they were
not done in a Corner, but in the Heart of Englands chiefest City: And when the
generality of the Pulpits there, powered out little but Noise or angry Nonsense,
War or Enthusiastic Humor, His was a well of Water, where many an honest
Jacob drank, himself, and his Children and his Servants, and were refreshed;
Some being undeceived, and many confirmed by him.

But that Magnanimous Zeal which he showed against the Murder of our Late
Sovereign of Glorious Memory, ought not to be Buried in Oblivion: He not only
gave warning against it, openly, and earnestly, while that daring Wickedness
was but an Embryo: But every Year after on that Sunday which fell nearest the
Black Day it was committed on; He failed not in his Prayers to deprecate, and
in his Sermon composed for the Occasion to demonstrate, and bewail the Guilt
of it.

Thus he continued while the Happy 1660. When he reaped the temporal Rewards of
his conscientious Loyalty. In all which he acted Worthily: He had a Public
Spirit, and has left the Prints of it upon his several Preferments: Invenit
Lateritia, reliquit Marmorea: They are all the better for him.

In this Place he found a House, scarce one in these Parts so Ruinous, which,
all, by his means, much, at his Charge, is reedifyed, and so improved, that now
there is scarce one so fair and goodly.

At his Deanery, he found the Cathedral with the Stamps of the Reformation upon
it, wast and much spoil; This by the industrious Employment of his Great
Interest in the Gentry of that County, added to seven thousand pound, which he
and the Chapter disbursed freely, he repaired, and adorned in some good measure.

At Leyborn, a Living he was but a little while possessed of, He finds the
same occasion for his Munificence and Benefacture, a ruinous House again: And
that found him the same; He has well repaired it although it was a Place where
his Circumstances (if God had given him longer Life) would not have allowed him
to have made any stay, yet his Successors Good was a sufficient Motive to him.

As he made his Preferments better, so his Preferments did not make him worse;
He continued the same, the same humble, affable, obliging Person, he was, in
his least Condition. Yea, to the confutation of the clamorous Rabble, he was
the same constant diligent Preacher. Insomuch that I think I may adventure to
say, there was not a Lords Day where ever he was, whereon (if Sickness hindered
him not) he was not at least once in the Pulpit.

God grant them as much Grace, as they have cause, to repent, who have any way
maliciously aspersed him. For although I am not so partial as to believe him
without his (...), (let the that escape all themselves, cast Stones at him) Yet
as to grosser Miscarriages I am highly persuaded, that not Truth and Reality,
but Rage and Design were the movimenta Mechanica, that set their Tongues in
going.

Not only Charity, but common Reason thinks no evil, where it finds
Evidences of Good: And in him were very many. In his Behavior in his Family,
He was a Joshua, He and his House serving the Lord: Daily, Morning and Evening,
worshipping, with the Solemn Devotions of the Liturgy. In his sense of Mercies,
He was an Hezekiah, writing upon the Wall, when he was recovered of his great
Sickness, and every one of the Years after, that God added to his Life, He kept
that Day on which it seized him religiously in Fasting and Prayer. In his
Converse and Friendship, he was a Nathaniel, one in whom there was no Guile;
Cordial and faithful without Baseness or low Dissimulation. In his Preaching,
the Court, the City, the Country, all from Dan unto Beersheba, know, he was an
Apollos, an Eloquent Man, and mighty in the Scriptures.

Such was this Worthy Person, who on the 28th. of May last past, was taken
suddenly, and fatally. In a moment, quantum mutatus ab illo! How strange a
change was there! That Head, which was the tenacious Receptacle of so much
useful Learning, is now the stupefied Seat of a Disease: Those Eyes, which had
read through so many sorts of Books, cannot now by any means be kept open: That
Tongue, which dropped things sweeter than the Honycomb, cannot now pronounce an
ordinary Sentence: That Person, whom so many of all Degrees and Ranks of People
so rejoiced to see, is now become a sad and doleful Spectacle.

His Distemper being of such a Nature, you cannot look for any thing from him
in his Sickness: For though he had his Apprehension (which he discovered when
any thing was said to him, and in a very particular manner, when Prayers were
put up for him) yet he had not Expression: He could not so much as make a Will,
or call his dearest Friends by their Names.

Thus he lay notwithstanding all the Care and Art of the great Aesculapius of
this Age, his Condition being more and more hopeless, while the First of June
at Night, when, to the Grief of his Friends, the Loss of the Church, but (I
hope) the great Gain and Joy of Himself, his great change came, and he fell
asleep.

And now he is gone to his Long Home, how many Mourners go about the Streets. I
need not here break out into David's Apostrophes at the death of Saul, to beg
Lamentations or publish a Brief for Tears, perhaps no man of his Quality and
Station have had more to weep over him: His disconsolate Widow weepeth, that
She has lost so Dear and Tender a Husband. You of St. Martins weep, that you
have lost so Able and beloved a Pastor. The Poor and necessitous weep, that
they have lost so importunate and effectual an Advocate. His crowding Auditors
from all Parts weep, that they have lost so practical and melting a Preacher.
His Friends and Acquaintance weep, that they have lost -- But I must forbear:
This is but to open the Flood Gates to a soft and troublesome Passion.

We must improve such Providence as these to more manly and Christian
Purposes. You that loved him (and who that knew him did not?) You that loved
him must show greater and better Tokens of it. You that loved him, stand fast
in the Truth, which he delivered to you; being dead he yet speaks, that ye
henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine. You that loved him, mortify all the Lusts which he so
pathetically did forewarn you of; Remember the Words that he spoke unto you
while he was yet with you. You that loved him, exercise all the Graces, perform
all the Duties, which he so faithfully did exhort you to, knowing that you all
among whom he came, Preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see his Face no more.
Finally, you that loved him, prepare to follow him; Let the Meditation of his
so sudden change be one Motive to all the rest which you have, All the Days of
your appointed time (...) wait for your own. That so he, and we, are all the
Children of God, who now at sundry times and in diverse manners are parted
sorrowfully, may meet together again joyfully, to enjoy the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ with one another, for ever and ever.

Unto this King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only wise God, be Honor and
Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

