Englands Warning: That is, Three Remarkable VISIONS OF Stephen Melish, An
Inhabitant of Breslaw, the chief City in Silesia.

Englished in the Year, 1664.

Imprinted at London, in the Year, 1664.

To the Reader.
IF the Rule where to try Prophets by, given by God himself (Deuteronomy. 18.21) is
still in force, then no doubt but Stephen Melish has not brought forth his
Prophesies by the will of man, but as it is written; Holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Now it is evident accordingly, as to the matter of the fact, that very many of
those Prophecies of the said Melish have been fulfilled in Germany and
thereabouts, as he, that may confer with them the things past afterward, will
not deny. See the Annotations to each one of his Visions, printed beyond Seas
in the Latin and in the German tongue.

Why would then any body detract them Divine Authtrity, and not rather be bound
to respect them as the Counsel of the Lord of Hosts, sent unto those that are
concerned in it, as to the end of their Preservation and Welfare?

Therefore, if, like as the Counsel and Secrecy of Kings and Princes shall be
kept in silence; so on the contrary the Work of God must be praised, revealed
or made manifest: The duty of every one that fearth the Lord, requires of him
to do accordingly, and not to keep, from those at the least that are concerned,
any Counsel of him, who does nothing but he reveals his Secrets unto his
Servants the Prophets, to wit, the Lord God, Amos 3.7.

ENGLAND'S WARNING; That is, the 115th VISION of Stephen Melish, June the 15th.
1664.
THis night I had a wonderful Vision, but I do not know whether I was asleep or
awake: I was brought out of the Suburbs into the City, in broad daylight; but
as soon as I was entered into it, there it was night presently, and there
appeared an horrible sight in the Sky toward the East: And some body, I knew
not who, said unto me, Where are now those Incredulous? let them come forth and
look upon the wonderful things of God, what they may portend. And as soon as he
was yet a speaking, there came out of the Stars some bloody Rods, like unto
Brooms; their handle turned downward, and the points upward, flames and sparks
of fire sparkling forth of them; and he said unto me, Let the Burgomasters and
Aldermen, with other chief men, and the Citizens, or at least some of thy
Friends, be called for, to be Witnesses. But with all my bauling and loud
crying, I could make no body to stir, except the Watchmen of the City, that
were walking hither and thither tremblingly. Then I came to stand in the
Marketplace, and went on with a most clamorous voice, to cry what I could; for
he commanded me, Cry aloud for a Witness against them, or write it: But I had
nothing where to write upon, and it was exceeding dark, and all were asleep
everywhere.

Then he hat spoke to me like a man (but I could not know him by his
countenance, nor by his speech, yet I saw him) commanded the Drums to be
beaten. But all the noise of the Drums could make no body awake. Let the
Trumpets be sounded forth, said he, both through the Streets, and upon the
Towers; but all was in vain. Then I saw that fiery Rod (standing in the East,
just where the Sun rises in this month) turned into fire, and two other Fires,
on both sides, ascending upward in the midst of the Sky; Woods, Villages and
Cities being kindled by them, no body appearing or stirring to quench that
Burning, or to remove any thing of theirs out of it, or at the least to save
themselves by flight. I seeing all this with horror, began to quake and tremble
the more, because I knew not what would become of all that: But the man said to
me, As for thee, fall not into a fright; fear God, and admonish thy house of
Repentance daily, for to escape what shall come swiftly. But I asked him: Sir,
when is such a thing to come upon us? Tell me, and I Will tell to others. Answer
was returned; Thou also, have thou forgot that great Prodigy (on the Sun) that
has been seen through all Christendom, and beyond? And likewise of many other
Prodigious Signs over so many Lands, Cities, Villages, Towns, that have been
seen so often, to the end all should be left without excuse. That on the Sun
did happen ten years ago, when from the ninth hour till beyond midday the Sun
was taken over with darkness, and recovered his light, from the East Westward,
like unto a Sickle. For lo, 1. The Sickle from the East is coming to mow down
the moiety of Christians of the whole Europe, betwixt the South and the West.
2. But afterward he shall become a partaker also of that Sun-light. 3. The Rod
of the East shall strike both Pious and Impious; yet these unto destruction,
and those for a trial. The Fires thou have seen, are the Plagues of the angry
God, whom no body can withstand, nor escape those Plagues. The Darkness, and
deep dead-sleep, signifies their uttermost security, which men of this day are
fallen into, like unto Pharaoh; the more God threatens with punishment, and
shows his scourges, the more they become obstinate, mocking at all things.
The Kings and Princes are asleep, the Magistrates are asleep, all the People
without and within the City are asleep, being altogether very secure in their
sins; and saying, Suchlike Signs have also been of old, so they are now, and
will be after us too. But hearken to what I say: The Miracles are the Word of
God, and the daily Obtestations of his Punishments. Thy Voice are the true
Ministers of the Churches, and their Writs, that do denounce the terrible
Judgments of God. 4. The Drums and Trumpets are the Wars, that now begin of the
one against the other, to the end all might be left without excuse. Now the
eleventh hour is come, and the twelfth hour too, in which the Lord will pour
forth his Anger upon the Apostates from the Truth, and upon the Impious
Pharoahs, those cruel Rackers both of the Bodies and Souls, that kill with the
Sword, and with the venomous Doctrine of Satan together; and upon all that fear
men more than God; and upon the Secular Power, that abuses the Sword (given
unto protection of the good ones) to root out the Church, and to revenge
themselves to their own ends: and upon all unjust partial Judges, looking for
Money, and setting aside their Consciences; And upon all Simoniacous,
Luxurious, Sluggish Priests; and upon the whole Multitude, both in the City and
in the Countries, given over to Treachery, Betraying, Murder, Robbery, Pride,
Gluttony, wherewith they shorten their lives themselves. And so I, being
admonished of all this, was not to keep silence any longer, but to write this,
and to publish it.

After this I came to my self again, and the Clock struck One, and soon after
it struck Two, (or the second hour) and presently it waxed day. This makes me
to conceive a good hope, that God, after a sharp chastisement will shorten the
time, and make out of the first and second hour but one. All the day before, I
was very much troubled, as not knowing how it was with me, as if some evil
would befall me: Yet I did recommend my self to the Lord, and fell asleep, from
the eighth hour until the tenth; from thence I counted all the hours following,
even as being not asleep, but awake; feeling all my senses as lively as any man
out of sleep can do, seeing and hearing all. And therefore I arose, walked up
and down in the Chamber, and cried thus shrilly, that my folk did hear me, yet
not knowing what it signified. So then this my Dream (in case it was a Dream)
continued from the eighth to the second hour.

As concerning that Eclipse of the Sun (in the year 1654. Aug. 12) and its
natural constitution or reason, I confess my self to be ignorant therein, not
knowing any thing of it. But the man said expressly, The tenth hour was past
already, and the eleventh was approaching: Yet these two last should pass away
quickly, that so the Sun of Righteousness may receive again his shining. The
Lord God Almighty help to it for his Mercy-sake.

And this is now that remarkable Vision, which I, according to Commandment,
forthwith have written down, and send unto thee, dear Friend of God, to the end
that thou may make it known, and not to hide it from any that fear the Lord,
to stir up, if it might still be, any that would awaken out of the sleep of
sin, lest the fault fall upon us. He that will receive our Admonition, let him
receive it; he that will despise it, let him despise it, viz. them that are
wise and just by themselves.

The 116th VISION, June 20. 1664.
As concerning that Fiery Rod, together with the twofold Collateral Fire, I
saw, that it moved from the East through the South, into the West, from whence
did arise an exceeding thick smoke, rouling as it were, into the North; whence
arose an exceeding great Commotion of the Nations. They fell so fiercely
incensed one against another, that it was a terror to look upon them: they
dealt not one with another like Christians, but like as wild barbarous Nations,
bended upon mutual destruction: yet I knew not what Nations they were, because
they were not named, and by their speech or language I could not discern them.
This only I assuredly know and write, that the said Fire did stay in the West,
and still it was exceeding dark every where, which made the Fire grow hotter
and hotter, even as if the whole World should be inflamed: Nevertheless, men
were asleep very deeply, and no body any more was to awake them; and although
some did awake as it were, and looked upon that fire in the West, yet they took
no notice of it, because they all had drunk of the Cup of Malignity,
Enviousness, Fury, and Bloodthirstiness, whereof they were made so drunk, that
there was no possibility, in what Clamor, sound of Trumphets, and noise of
Drums soever, that could make them awake to consider the issue of all such
doings, in case no body would give over and leave off Persecution and
dispatching of others. After, I heard Lamentations of such as were grieved, for
that they had drunken out of the Cup of the Esauvitish Dragon, whereof the Land
was thus desolated, the King thrust out, the People destroyed, the Lords and
Pillars of the Land fallen down, the Pious ^^achers killed or banished, the
Children scattered throughout the streets, there they lay, and none was that
did help it; never such a War has been like unto this in the West. O would to
God the King might be awake, and take Counsel to prevent this uttermost
destroying Burning and Inflammation!

Above that, I have seen one of the Northern Kings, especially the King in
Denmark, standing in the Flame, as it were scorched, who will be thrust also
cut of his Kingdom, and his Cities with the key of the Sea (the Sound) fall
into the power of the VVestern Part, unless he look to i^, because that black
Smoke will spread forth its sparks of Fire in the North too; but the North
VVind will soon scatter them that ^^y may be quenched; for the Esauvitish
contrivances will (...) shortly be manifested, therefore let them well look
about, and not permit that the Southern and VVestern oppress their Neighbors
betwixt the West and North; for when the Hollanders (though they have bound
themselves a rod upon their back) should be oppressed, then the Northern also
will have business enough.

Would to God that I might be found a Liar in foretelling these Plagues to the
World, which the Lord of Heaven has been pleased to manifest, not only by the
Scriptures, and so many Prophets raised up, and other Pious men, but also by
me, poor little one; yea by so many Signs in the Sky, Earth, Sea, given forth
to forewarn us: Although I was constrained thereto, yet I believe, and am
resolved to dye upon it, that God speaks truth, and is faithful to what he
promises, and a Revenger of wickedness; yea, because he is merciful also, his
Mercy slows from him before the execution: The like is to be seen in Lot and
Jonah. But this it is, there be many that having stiff necks and uncircumcised
hearts, will rather hear and follow the counsel of the Devil, or Devilish
counsels, than the Counsel of God; and no other counsel there is left then to
cast our selves in the bottomless pit of the Mercy of God, for to escape the
Flame of the Anger of God, who even now goes about to consume the world with
Sword and Pestilence.

The 117th VISION, June 26. 64.
After I had passed three days with Prayers and Sighs unto God, in
consideration of the approaching of so great an Anger, Beseeching him he would
turn from his Anger, and grant his People before the worlds end, a friendly
Peace. I fell of a sudden in a heavy disease of the body, but in far greater
anguish of my soul, insomuch that I was crying aloud, Will the Lord cast off
for ever, and will he be favorable no more? Has God forgotten to be gracious?
Has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies? and the inward distresses of my
soul was so exceeding horrid, that there was left no comfort in the least: And
this lasted a whole day, insomuch that I knew not on what side to turn me,
being as a man left destitute of all kind of Patience. Then the Devil came too
and tempted me, endeavoring to quench that small confidence also, that I might
have left in me toward God. My Mother, my Wife, my Children, they all stood
round about me astonished, and weeping, no counsel nor consolation they could
give me, and I looking upon them was therewith the more afflicted, seeing I
must be gone and leave them in beggarliness; for there was nothing but very
Death to be expected. They overcharging me, with that I had not disposed of my
house, nor put in order the least thing. In few words, the tormenting pain of
my soul did so increase, that I fell to roar like a Lion, clamouring with a
great voice, said: On your knees, and cry unto the Lord, that he succor me. By
and by my anguished Soul felt some ease; and so I lay there, like an outwearied
wrestler, as wet as swimming in the water, until the fifth hour after noon. The
next morning I found my self much better, nevertheless feeling throughout all
the veins and bones of my right hand and side of the whole body sensible
smarts, until the fifth day; then being asleep, an ancient Man came to me, by
me never seen before nor known, and spoke to me very comfortably, Thy Dolours
Anguish and tormenting Pains within and without, signify the Dolours of the
People of God, that are now at hand: Be thou not astonished at the
representation of such within thee by the Lord of Heaven, who now shall assault
and invade the whole World because of the sins of men; and of their intolerable
Pride and Forgetfulness of God; for their sins have transcended the Clouds and
cry for revenge: And the Lord looking down sees but very few that repent,
therefore such Plagues are a coming upon them, that they will clamor like as
thou have clamoured. And thou have well done, that thou have not yielded unto
such Temptations: Give the Glory and Praise to God.

To all Christians I therefore do appeal, having felt in me such unspeakable
pain, praying them all with what humbleness soever I can; And again, I entreat
you, yea, I entreat you a third time by the Lord God; by our precious
Redemption, by the Bloodshed of Jesus Christ, and by the Gifts of the holy
Ghost that every day we are partakers of; and by that out-poured Love, crying
in our hearts with unspeakable sighs, Abba, Father; and by the Mercifulness
given to you from the Lord, and by your Conjugal-Love betwixt Man and Wife, and
by the Fatherly Love betwixt Father, Mother and Children; and by all those
Benefits given unto you and yours every day, for your Livelihood, for the
Conservation of your Cities and Countries ye are Inhabitants of, to the end, to
serve the Lord the Inhabitant of Heaven, I beseech you once more to the
uttermost; Repent, and be converted to the Lord at this very instant, lest it
may be too late after those evils are already come. Prevent those evils, I
request you, that are a rouling toward you, lest a late dislike or regret (I
see at a distance) come suddenly upon you, because ye have hearkened unto the
Voice of the hellish Dragon and his Officers.

O England! remember how thou art distracted within thy self, more inclined to
thy uttermost Destruction rather than Conservation: Therefore I, the most
little worm of all, beseech you, first, the Western King, that he desist to
hear the Voice of the said Dragon, and his Officers; let him rather hear the
Voice of God: let him desist from Provision of War, to destroy Cities, and
Peoples, and Commonwealths; and to shed that Christian blood, which has been
redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ. In case he will do so, and let the War
alone, it shall be fulfilled, that which I have written and still write, That
the Lord Jesus will enlarge him great Victories, which he shall obtain and see
very shortly. Also in like manner I entreat and obtest, by the Lord God, all
wise Counselors, and those of Love-burning-Lamps of the People of God, even as
being the Pillars and Workmen of God's House, to consider of what evil must
follow in case no body takes care to quench this horrid (by it self)
unquenchable Fire; And how it cannot be extinguished, except by the
mercifulness of God, that can be obtained, when we turn to serious Repentance,
and growing together again in mutual Charity. Is it not the Devil's work, who
by us (in Germany) has kindled a Fire, whereunto we have brought the Wood, and
poured upon it the Oil of our Sins? Let it then be your Example, and make haste
to prevent your Evil by Repentance.

O ye Wise and Discreet Ones, weigh diligently how this Fire by us has been
kindled, by those Black Four-cornereds, who seeing they must fall here,
endeavor to prepare themselves a Retreat and Refuge in some other place, (as
prudent sons of the world) viz. in the Western parts, by God's permission: for
they say, Neither shall we be there very safe. Yet what shall we do? We will
put into Confusion and Disorder the Nations, and make them bustle one against
another, to overthrow and destroy themselves mutually, that after they have
rooted out themselves, we may oversow all with our seed. O strange! how great
is the craftiness, how great is the grudg-bearing malignity of that Dragon! and
how great is our blindness, that we have not taken heed, how that by his
contrivances so many Pillars of the Church have been overthrown, so many
prudent Judges dejected and turned out, and there is no end of turning out
still: For just now they endeavor to bring to pass, that you Statesmen,
Merchants, Tradesmen, and the poor plain Country-folk betwixt your selves, and
with your neighbors, that bring you sustenance, and whatsoever is needful and
necessary for your use and employment, might fall out with one another, into a
mutual slaughter and overthrow, to waste and ruin your own Land and Country.

But this is not all: They work also, that the Kings of the Neighborhood might
join battle, especially those toward the North, whither that black Smoke went,
carrying along with him fire-sparks of a new Inflammation. Ah! beware, O ye
chief Powers and Commanders, ye Kings and Princes! Think, what will remain
after the Fire is gone, but Ashes and Dust? Ah! will ye not check that rising
Fire, thus exceeding great, that it is like to chase all throughout whole
Europe, and to inflame everywhere?

By the Mercifulness of God, once more, I beseech you; and by the safety both
of you and yours, be moved with Compassion toward your little Children, that
cannot as yet discern between their right hand and their left, that at the
least they might be saved. Look how that boiling Sea of the Wicked One's,
belching out dirt and mire, does feel its undoing, by the approaching Anger of
God, and the Dragon sees that his time will be short. Remember the words of
Christ our Lord, that when Nation shall arise against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom, then Doomsday draws near; and what at that time we are
commanded to do, viz. that we shall lift up our heads, to look upon the Work of
God. Look there how those Black Four-cornered run up and down! for their
Conscience is awakened like as a waving Sea. Let them have no place by you, nor
their persons and their suggestions neither. In case ye will not hear this
Counsel, then Anguish and Dolours will oppress you; after which, time of
repentance, nor Patience, nor hope of the Grace of God you shall have any more;
but a burning fire of the Anger of God, that ye now refuse to avoid, shall
consume you. But O that I could persuade you to prevent it! nay, I sigh, that
the Mercifulness of God may prevent you. Amen.

For as concerning me, I had no rest within me until I had written this, lest
the fault fall upon my back, like as upon Jonah, unwilling to be obedient unto
God. Steadfastly I pray, that unto thee, O Gods People, might be given the Grace
of Repentance, to prevent the Anger of God, by returning to a true Regret and
mutual Love. Alas, more Signs and Prodigies shall very shortly show unto you
God's Anger, that is kindling the World with all kind of Plagues. To you that
have begun to prevent the said Anger of God, Be constant in your purpose:
Faithful is the Lord who has promised: Heaven and Earth will pass away sooner
than his Word. And although that Fire flameth already over you, and Anguishes
and Dolours have surrounded you at this very time; yet now turn out from that
malignant Dragon, the LORD is by the way to succor you.

And I testify, that notice has been given unto you, that the LORD has
already let in a stormy Wind into the Red Esauvitish Sea, insomuch, that now
they are disquiet in their Conscience, and see, that their abiding here will
not be very long more, and the time is at hand, that all who know them, or see
them, shall either betray or kill them.

However alas! the Chief Powers have been warned enough, that the Sword has
not been given unto them, to kill, but to defend God's People; Yet they always
have showed themselves to be dumb and deaf. Now the Evil comes that is
appointed for them: they endeavor to escape and prevent it, and will by force
put the cause of it upon those of ours most subtly, according to the Dragon's
instinct and inspiration.

All Wars are of the Devil's counsel, and blown up by those Esauvitish crafts;
yea, this Turkish War too; and so, that same now shall begin in the West, to
shed blood and waste the Land. Take for instance Hungaria, where they have
begun a Reformation with force, whatsoever might become of it, and they matter
not if the Kingdom should become Tributary to the Turk, let them but obtain
what they aim at, viz. the Destruction of the Religion. But alas, ye are afar
off, the Lord from Heaven will never permit you to root out his People, rather
will he stir up a wild Nation, that shall waste all with Sword and Fire.

Tell the King in ENGLAND how wisely the HOLLANDERS have begun to act their
Cause against him! having deliberated about compassing their Design, to fall
down at the Feet of the LORD ALMIGHTY, and to put their hope in the Center of
his Mercifulness, rather than in their Strength. Therefore however they are to
be chastized, like as true Sons of David, yet they shall not escape Scot. free,
that multiply their Scourges against the Chastened of the Lord. Moreover, let
him weigh diligently (the Englander) that he is not in vain joined in Alliance
with Portugal, but to help him, as being brought under by force, Yet in time to
come a glorious Realm, to recover and settle their ancient Liberties, like as
also in other Realms. But would to God that the Realms of Hungaria and Polonia
had accepted of the Peace proffered unto them by the Turks, they would not have
been cast into the fire they burn in now. But so it happens, where Pride
bears the Rule, and fullness of bread, that from thence arises great sins and
devilish contrivances, with persecutions: Therefore it must be accomplished:
With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Those wild
Nations must make a Hurliburly, to take punishment of such as would not
acknowledge the day of their Visitation: The Ruin and Desolation of the Land
is and will come. They would abolish the Word of God, but they shall be
abolished themselves, yea even now it is upon them.

Isa. 49, v. 11 to 18. THE END.

