A SERMON CONCERNING Zeal for Religion, Consistent with Moderation.

Preached at EDENBVRGH On Sunday the 27th of April, 1690.

BEFORE The Lord High Commissioner, and the Estates of PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND.

BY Mr. GEORGE MELDRVM, A Presbyterian Minister, and till of late one of the
Episcopal Clergy of that Kingdom.

Printed at Edinburgh: and Reprinted at London, for Richard Baldwin, near the
Black Bull in the Old Bailey. 1690.

Advertisement.
THE Reverend Author of the following Discourse, is so well known in his
Country for his Learning and Piety, that there needs no Character of mine to
Recommend his Sermon. Only I think fit to acquaint the English Reader, that he
was Minister at Aberdeen, under the Episcopal Clergy, till within these few
years, and that he left that Party upon the account of some Scruples, wherewith
he has sufficiently acquainted the World upon several Occasions since.

PSALM 137, ver. 5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning.

If I do not remember thee, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth!


The words of the Text follows.

If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. THis Psalm seems to have been
penned by some of the Priests, or the Levitical Singers, in the time of the
Babylonish Captivity, it being their Office to sing Psalms, and Songs of praise
unto God with the voice, and to play on Instruments of Music, to his praise,
as ye will see it, 1 Cron. 25, and something like this of Singing, and using of
Harps you have here in the 2, and 3. verses of this Psalm.

In the first six Verses, you have an account, of the condition and state,
they, and the people of God were in, at this time, and how they were affected
therewith; Where were they? in Babylon, and Captivity there: and as in the
first verse, Sitting by the rivers of Caldea, where there were many, By the
rivers of Babylon, there we sat down; and how are they affected? why, they
weeped and this grief was not so much, for their own private particular
distress, as on the account of the desolation of the Church, and of the ruin
of the State; It was, when they remembered Zion, in the first verse, and
remembered Jerusalem in the 5, and 6 verses. Yea, so much were they taken up
with this, That when they that had carried them away captives, desired them to
sing the songs which they used to sing in their own Land, (whether in mockage,
or out of curiosity, I shall not debate) Yet those persons, could not admit a
thought of joyful songs, in a time, when Jerusalem and Zion was in such
distress: They had such an abhorrence, at any thing like mirth at such a time,
that they ingenuously, and with great seriousness profess, That ere they forget
Jerusalem with its distress, they would rather choose never to sing with their
Tongue, or play with their hand while they live, Let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth, and my right hand forget her cunning: Yea so much are they
taken up with the welfare of Jerusalem and Zion, if it did not fare well with
Jerusalem, they valied no joy, they rather wish such things to themselves, ere
they forget her, whose welfare they count above their chief joy; If I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief joy. These last words of verse 6, which I have
chosen, for the ground of my following Exhortation, they describe to us, the
disposition and temper of a gracious heart, what is that? They prefer the
public good, the welfare of Church and State, above their own Interest, If I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy, let me never have skill or ability to
sing or play any more.

These words will be plain, if I show you what is meant by Jerusalem; and what
by preferring Jerusalem to our chief Joy. And how shall we better understand
what is meaned by Jerusalem, than by a reflection on Psalm 122. where there is
a description of this Jerusalem, there is the House of the Lord, verses 1, 9.
The place whither the Tribes go up, to the Testimony of Israel, verse 4. It is
then the place of the Public Worship. Jerusalem is also the place, where the
Thrones of Judgment are set, even the Thrones of the House of David, verse 5.
The Seat of public Justice, Therefore, I may well conclude, that by Jerusalem
is meant here, both Church and State; the Church of God where is his Worship,
and State where Justice is administrat; this is it is meant here by Jerusalem,
if I prefer not the welfare of Jerusalem, i. e. of the Church and State, above
my chief joy; in the Hebrew it is, the head of my joy, the highest and chiefest
of my joy and comfort, of all my private concerns and comforts, if I prefer not
the public good of Church and State, to the chiefest of these, let me never
have any comfortable day any more.

From this we may learn and observe, That it is the duty of all, and will be
the practice of every good man, to prefer the public good and welfare of
Church and State, to their own private Interest, even to the highest of their
private Comforts. Behold the frame of the People of God in the Text, If I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy, then let my right hand forget her
cunning. Ere we do any thing that looks not like a preferring of Jerusalem, to
all our own private concerns and comforts, we rather wish we never have a joyful
or merry day after, If we prefer not Jerusalem above our chief joy, see this
enjoined and practiced. Psalm. 122. ver. 6, 7. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem,
let them prosper that love thee, for my brethrens sake, I will now say, peace
be within thee. Joel. 2.17. Let the Priests, the Lord's Ministers, weep betwixt
the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare thy People, and give not thy Heritage
to a Reproach. And Jer. 51.50. Remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem
come into your mind. O remember its state; we will find this temper, and
disposition of heart, has possessed the Saints of God in all Ages; what an
eminent height of it was in Moses, Exodus 32.11, 12, 31, 32. after the sin of
the golden Calf, when the Lord threatens to destroy the People, on that
account, how pleads he? Lord, remember Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Egyptians
will say, thou have brought them out for a mischief, pardon this people, if
not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the Book which thou have written. What a
height of a public spirit was this? and Nehemiah, though he had all the Honor
and Comforts the Court could afford, Neh. chap. 1. Yet he fasted and weeped,
and took no comfort, so long as Jerusalems walls lay in rubbish, so much did
this affect his heart, that the King could not but discern it in his
Countenance; why art thou sad, said he? And here is the cause, (says he) The
place of my Father's Sepulcher, and the City of Jerusalem lies on heaps; See it
also in Jer. chap 9. at the beginning, O that my head were waters, and my eyes
a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people. And what a height of this frame was in the holy Apostle
Paul, Romans 9.1. I could even be content to be accursed from Christ for my
kinsmen according to the flesh. Time would fail me, to tell you of Joshua,
Uriah and David, and of Daniel, of Mordecai, and Esther, and others of the
Saints in former times; but if we would search the Scriptures, everywhere we
will find that the condition of Religion, of the Church of God and their
Country, lay nearer the Saints hearts, than their own particular. Their hearts
trembled when it was in danger; when it is reproached it is a burden to them.
If it be in distress, they mourn; they mourn for Zion and Jerusalem, Isai.
66.10. Rejoice for Jerusalem, all ye that mourn for her. 1 Samuel 4.13. Eli's
heart trembled for the Ark of God. Zephan. 3.18. The reproach of her was a
burden. And when in distress, how fervent in Prayer are they? Psalm 14.7. O
that the salvation of God were come out of Zion, when the Lord brings back
the Captivity of his People, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. And
Psalm. 51. ver. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion, and build up the walls
of Jerusalem. Psalm. 25.22. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. And
how restless are they in this? Isai. 62.1, 6, 7. They will give him no rest
till he establish Jerusalem, and make it a praise in the Earth. So you see the
truth of the Doctrine, and there is good reason for it.

First, The Honor of God is concerned in it, more than any particular, and
this is the great thing lies near every good man's heart, God's honor. What
will thou do to thy great Name? How are they troubled in their hearts when the
Name of God is reproached?

Secondly, Every particular person, is but a Member of the Society of Church
and State, and the part is for the whole, and what is for the good of the
Society, their good is wrapped up in it; they should mind the good of the whole,
more than their own private concern; hence the Spirit resembles the Church to a
Body, Romans 12. and 1 Cor. chapter 12. Ephesians 4. showing, If one Member suffer, all the
rest suffer with it; so that all is for the Bodies good, and all Gifts are
given for the advancing and edifying of the Body, we live not to our selves,
neither dye we to our selves, but for God, and serving him in the public Good;
this much for the proof of the Doctrine.

For Application, I might, first, Take occasion to lament how little of this
public Spirit is to be seen among us? Ah! ah! there is matter to renew that
old Complaint, All seek their own things, but few the things of Christ, Phil.
2.21. Which is contrair to that Precept, 1 Cor. 10.14. Seek not every one their
own things, but every one the things of another. Alas! too many like that old
fat Monk, of whom it is storied, that stroaking down his Breast and his Belly,
said, Modo hic sit been, providing it be well with himself, cared little how
the World went about him; so many care little how it go with Church or State,
if it go well with their own particular: O! but this argues a sordid frame of
heart, that if it go well with themselves, and they prosper, they care little
how it goes with others about them. Alas! what a shameful sin is this, and a
cause of much sin and woe, and a sin that seminally and casually contains most
of other sins; let us be humbled for it, and afterward beware of this, and that
shall be the

2. Use of Exhortation, and here I would with all possible seriousness commend
two things to you. 1. Beware of a narrow selfish Disposition. 2. I commend unto
you, to labor for a Public frame of Spirit, that like these in the Text, ye
may prefer Jerusalem above your chief Joy. 1. Then beware of a selfish
Disposition, that Self be neither your Principle nor End, I the rather urge
this with Earnestness, because, first, I see this a very common Sin, and yet a
Sin we are hardly convinced of. First, Selfishness is the most common sin in
the World, look either to Church or State, to Magistrates or Ministers, to High
or to Low, ye may discover much of the prevalent influence of Selfishness. This
is matter of Lamentation, yea, I think it is a sad truth, that every Man and
Woman among us, now since the Fall, is born with a selfish inclination, and are
not easily convinced of the sinfulness of it. Because God has made Man with a
natural love to self, and made it as a fundamental Principle and Law of Nature;
therefore it is hard to make us sensible; when this Love gets out of due
subordination to the Love of God, and out of that due correlation, to that Love
we ought to have to our Neighbor as ourselves. This makes us we are not easily
convinced of it, and so hardly recovered from it. Some are so intent on Gain
and enlarging their Estates, without regard to Justice or Charity, as if their
desire were, that they may place themselves alone on the Earth, Isa. 5.8.
Others so intent on their Honor, and Rising in the World, that they care not
though they rise by the Blood and Ruin of them that stand in their way; yea,
such is the Deceit of men's hearts in this matter, men may pretend the public
Good, when Self is at the bottom of all. Some will pretend they are for Peace,
Order, and Public Good, when it is that they and theirs may possess the fat
Benefices of the Church or State. Sometimes Men may pretend to the Reforming of
Abuses, rectifying or preventing Disorders, when Envy and Discontent, the
casting down others, and raising up themselves acts them, yea, the Honor of
God may be pretended, when the exalting ourselves and our own Party is
designed: Yea, Ministers, if they watch not, may be led to pray for self, and
preach for self. This then being so common a sin, how much need is there, to
stir up all of you, to watch against a selfish disposition.

Secondly, I would the rather call to this, because, as it is a common, so it
is a great and grievous sin, a Mother sin; I may say a selfish Disposition is
much of the cause of all the sin in the world, it is directly opposite to the
love of God above all, and to the love of our Neighbor as our selves, which is
the sum of the Law. A man that is selfish, can with no sincerity pray, Thy Will
be done, thy Kingdom come, for he exalts his own Interest more than Gods, and
his own Will above and against Gods: And this is the cause of much iniquity in
the world, and this being so great a sin, and a Mother-sin, O hate it, and
beware of it!

Thirdly, This surely is a hurtful evil, hurtful to others, and hurtful to our
selves, it is an Enemy to all Societies being contrair to the end of Society,
to wit, the common Good, for it seeks men's private good above the common Good.
And as it divides Interests, so it divides Affections, and makes Divisions in
the Church and State; this is contrair to the disposition and temper that
should be in the Members of a Society, who should be all animat by a common
Spirit. There can be no promoting of public Ends by a private selfish Spirit.
We cannot promot the public Good without a public Spirit. This is it which
divides all Societies; this occasions all Jealousies between King and People,
all Emulation between Neighbor and Neighbor; this occcasions division in the
State, and Schism in the Church, this is a great cause of War and Confusion,
Fraud and Oppression, and what a world of mischief would selfishness do, if
Grace and Divine Providence did not put a stop to it?

Fourthly, It is hurtful to our selves, men lose themselves, by seeking
themselves, with the neglect of the common good. Men by their selfishness, they
certainly lose not only the peace of their own mind, which they might have by
doing good, and aiming at the public good, but set all others against them;
and when they divide Interests from all men, all men divide Interests from
them, for this is their Principle, that neglect of the Public, is the way to
be best preserved, and the great safety of their own particular. This is the
sure way foolishly to ruin all; as if when a House is in Fire, a Man should
think it enough it has not seized yet on my Chamber; or when a Ship is sinking
to look only to our own Cabin and Goods, without care to stop the common Leak:
O let me beseech you to beware of this.

Secondly, Let me beseech you (dearly Beloved) labor for a Public frame of
Spirit, O imitat these Worthies in the Text, prefer Jerusalem to your chief
Joy, in your esteem, desire, and endeavor, prefer the public good of Church
and State, above all our private Concerns, above all your personal and private
Comforts. Is not this a more excellent end, than selfish Interest, even the
pleasing and glorifying of God in the promoting the public Good? O that I
could prevail with you in this, it would surely be your great Advantage, and
sure if either ye regard the Honor of God, or your own true Interest, you
cannot say me nay; Let me plead with you from these Reasons.

First, The Honor of God is concerned in it. It Is more concerned in the
public Good of Church and State, than in your own personal Concern. And O! but
the Honor of God lies nigh to the heart of every one that loves God; This is
the end for which we were made.

Secondly, Mind the public Good more than your private Interest, for this makes
you like God and your Savior Jesus Christ. God is always doing Good to the
Evil and Unthankful. Christ Jesus from the Womb, to the Grave, by his Dying and
Suffering, teaches us this Lesson, even to mind others, and the Public Good,
He pleased not himself, Romans 15.3. Let the same Mind be therefore in you, which
was in Christ Jesus, who made himself of no Reputation, Phil. 2.5, 7. Who gave
himself for the good of others, and humbled himself unto Death, even the Death
of the Cross, v. 8.

Thirdly, O! but the Advantage of this would be unspeakable, if all of us were
brought to this Temper, to mind the public Good more than our own. O how
amiable a Creature would man be! and what a blessed Condition would the World
be in! and all Societies, Kingdoms, Cities, and Churches be in, if Self were
denied, and every one minded the common and public God, above their own private
and personal Interest! This would prevent neglect of Duties, and doing of hurt
to others, there would not be such a thing as Injustice, and uncharitableness
among men, Emulation, Strife and Envy; no divided Interest, and so no divided
Affection, no division in the State: No Jealousy between the Ruler and Ruled,
if this were. If there were complication of Interests, there would be an Union
of Affections: As we see in Husband and Wife, in Parents and Children. This
were a good Policy in States men, and next to Piety toward God, which leads
to the uniting People to God, and to favor with him, wherein all our Happiness
stands; and indeed what ever the World think of it, it is the greatest Wisdom
and Policy. Next I say to this, the greatest point of humane Policy for
preservation of Commonwealths and Societies were, that the Governor and
Governed have no divided Interest, so that the good or hurt of the one, is the
good or hurt of the other, and there is no manner of hope that the one of them
shall thrive by the ruin of the other. Then they would willingly take one
another for better and for worse, to stand and fall together. If the
Politicians had the Skill and Will, to make such a complication of Interests,
betwixt Sovereign and People, Ruler and Ruled, as the Welfare and hurt of the
one might depend on the Welfare and hurt of the other, and make it visible
that all might understand it; Certainly Kingdoms and Commonwealths, might be
Immortal, till either the wrath of an offended God, or the power of a Foreign
Enemy should dissolve them, for nothing within would do it, if Self did it not;
and Self will not do it where there is such Complication of Interests. O then
study to be denied to Self, and to be of a public frame of Spirit.

Secondly, Consider this would be each one of our particular Advantage, the
good of your Families and Posterity depends on the good of the Public, your
own Honor is concerned in this. Will you tell me, which of these two were a
more desirable Inscription on a Man's Tomb? Here lies a man that for his
Selfish ends, did his outmost to ruin both Church and State. Or, Here lies a
Man that in all his Consultations aimed at the Public Good: And beside the
Peace, it would minister to men's Consciences in Life and Death, our own
temporal Peace and Welfare is wrapped up in the Public Good. O! be like
Mordecai. Esth. 10.3. seeking always the wealth of his People. And beware as
Baruch. Jer. 45.5. To seek great things for thy self.

Fourthly, If we neglect the Public Good for our own particular Concerns,
Heathens will rise up in Judgment against us and Condemn us. O what a love to
their Country did they show! I shall but give you two Instances out of
Plutarch, (see Plutarch's Politics, page 39, 40. in Octavo,) the one is of
Cretinas the Magnesian and Hermias, betwixt whom there was great Animosity, but
in the time of the Mithridatick War, Cretinas says, let Hermias have the
Government and I shall remove from the City, for I am afraid that Contention
destroy the Commonwealth; but if he will not, let him leave the Country and
Government; and Hermias accepts the Condition, and acknowledges that Certinas
was the more Warlike, and sit for the Government, and so removed himself and
his Family. The other instance is of Timesias Clazomenius, an excellent man,
yet because he did inhance all the Government, he contracted the Envy and
Hatred of the People, of which he was ignorant till one day, as he passed by
some Children, who had catched a Bird in a Gin, and one of them bruising the
Birds Head, crushed its Brains, the rest said to him, we wish thou had so
bruised the Head of Timesias: the Children not knowing that Timesias was
hearing them; but he hearing them, began to consider in himself whence the
hatred of the People had arisen, which was now in the mouths of Children, and
finding that his Government was unpleasing to them, immediately he packs up all
and resolves to leave the City and Country. This says Plutarch is a saying
worthy of a noble Mind, Amo liberos, sed Patriam magis amo. I say, if we mind
not Public Good, Heathens will rise up against us, and Condemn us. Ye may now
ask, How shall we attain to this frame of Spirit? And secondly, What shall we
do for the Public Good? 1st. What shall I do to attain this public frame of
Spirit, that I may be of a temper, to prefer Jerusalem to my chief joy?

First, I beseech you, Sirs, meditate seriously on the Motives, I laid before
you, at this time, until you get suitable Affections and Resolutions raised in
your Hearts, Consideration is a chief Mean to this.

Secondly, Pray much to God for this Frame, he is the Giver of all good Gifts,
he gives liberally and upbraideth not, Ja. 1. v. 5, 17.

Thirdly, Labor for more love to God, and love to your Neighbors; if there
were more Catholic Charity, more sincere Love to God above all, and more
Charity to our Neighbors, it would make us to seek more the Public Good than
our own.

Fourthly, Eye the Example of the Lord Jesus, and his Saints and Servants, Heb.
12.1, 2. Mind these things seriously, and seek of God that he would work them
in you.

Next you may ask, What shall we do for the Public Good? there are some
things, that even the meanest, in their most private Capacity may do for the
Public Good; other things more incumbent to the Honorable Members of the High
Court of Parliament, that they may do for the public Good.

First, Some things the meanest in their most private Capacity may do for the
public Good. The meanest of all may, 1. Pray for the Public, this is our
Duty, Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, peace be within thy walls,
and prosperity within thy palaces, pray for this; this is it that all may do,
and all ought to do, Isa. 62.6, 7. Ye that make mention of the Lord, and are
the Lord's remembrancers give him no rest, keep no silence, till be make
Jerusalem a praise on the earth. Its God only that shakes Kingdoms and
Churches, and God only can establish Kingdoms and Churches, and he cannot only
Stablish but make them a Praise again upon the Earth. O seek him that he would
settle Church and State again, and seek it importunately, the thing is weighty,
and the time dangerous, and give him no rest; he loves a holy Impudence and
Importunity in this, Luke 11.8.

2. I recommend to you, Labor to be at Peace with God, or else your Prayers
will come no speed, Job* 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at Peace,
and so shall good come unto thee: O! Peace with God quiets all; Tranquillus Dei
tranquillat omnia. Job. 34.29. If he give quietness, who then can make trouble?
O* therefore make Peace with God! This all of us should endeavor after.

3. I recommend to you for the public Good, Turn away every one of you from
that which may obstruct the public Good, every one of you adds Fuel to the
Fire, to the common Fire. Remember to turn from your Provocations; Your
Iniquities separate between you and your God, your sins hides his face from
you, Isai. 59.2. Your Iniquities turns away good things from you, Jer. 5.25.
Therefore turn every one of you from the evil of your way; away with Pride and
Vanity, away with Unrighteousness and Ungodliness; away with Filthiness and
Drunkenness, with Injustice and Oppression, and so Iniquity shall not be your
ruin.

4. I beseech these in the most private Capacity, Labor what ye can to get
these things that contribute for the Establishing and Settlement of Church and
State; And what is that? even Righteousness and Holiness: Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to any people. Holiness,
Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Meekness, Love, Charity and Justice. Isai.
33.6. Wisdom and strength is the stability of thy times; and these are the
things that tends to public Good, and therefore seek after them; and above all
these things, put on Charity which is the Bond of Perfectness, Col. 3.14.
Follow Peace, and love all men, especially these of the Household of Faith.

Now these things, Persons in the meanest Capacity may do. And I would humbly
offer in the next place, some Things to the Honorable Members of the High
Court of Parliament, as more especially incumbent to them, in such a Case as
this. And if any should ask, Who are you that should give Advice to so high and
honorable a Court? I humbly acknowledge my own meanness and unfitness for this
Work, and would gladly have declined it if I could, but whatever my meanness
be, I am a Servant of a great Master, before whom the greatest on Earth are but
as Grasshoppers; and if I have Warrant from him to speak, I must not forbear,
for fear of you least he confound me before you, but I hope, I shall deliver
nothing, but what is agreeable to his Word, and with all due Humility.

And first, I recommend to you to be at Peace among your selves, and study to
unite in sincere Aims and Endeavors, for the public Good of Church and State.
This is the great thing needful in this matter. It is storied of Themistocles
and Aristides the Athenians, when sent upon a public Work, they agreed well,
notwithstanding of any private Animosity that was betwixt them. Come, says
Aristides, let us lay aside our Differences, and leave them upon the Borders of
the Athenians, though we should be necessitat to take them up again when the Work
is done. O lay aside Disserences, and remember our Savior's word, Matthew.
12.25. Every Kingdom divided against it self, shall be brought to Desolation;
this is your Adversaries great Strength, therefore take heed of this; I think
Protestants, when Difference grows, should be jealous, least the Church of Rome
have a Hand in this Matter, for Divide and Impera, is her Maxim. But surely to
unite in Common Good, is the great Duty of all.

The second thing I recommend to you. O study by your Example and Authority, to
Disgrace and Suppress all Debauchery and Impiety in the Country and Armies,
remember that Word, 1 Samuel 2.30. Him that honors me I will honor, and he
that despises me shall be lightly esteemed. Remember it, it is not enough to
profess a Zeal against Arbitrariness in the State, or Popery in the Church, if
we continue by Debauchery and Impiety to profane our Holy Religion; this is no
less offensive to God than Popery; God expects from us Reformation of our
Hearts and Lives, that as we profess a more Holy Religion than others, so we
may lead more holy Lives, else we cannot expect God will be with us; but our
Sins will provoke God to repent of the Good he thought to have to done, and to
return to do us evil after he has done us good, Jer. 18.10. and Josh. 23.15.
our Sin will be the greater, and the Judgment the more heavy, that it is after
so wonderful a Revelation: And no Wisdom or Strength will keep off Wrath, if we
go on in Sin; Ezra 9.14. And there is nothing fears me more than that. Alas,
we are not reformed and become better, by all that God has done, Isai. 9.13,
14. Bestir your selves, noble Patriots; O study by your own Example to disgrace
the hateful Sins of Cursing and Swearing, of Filthiness and Drunkenness, of
Pride and of Oppression, and all Injustice, and endeavor to suppress these and
such like Sins, as by a due Execution of Laws made, so by a supply where there
is any defect of such wholesome Laws. And I wish a due care may be taken to
suppress Debauchery in the Army. It is a common regrate that too many in it, I
speak not of all, I know the contrary of some, but too many neither fear God
nor regard Man. There is indeed to look to it, that they be Men of Skill and
Fidelity, and not Impious, for how can they be true to Man, who have no fear of
God, the Debaucheries of some, and the Irregularities of others, does much
prejudice to the common Cause, and both ought to be restrained. Certainly it is
a shame for those, who stand up for a holy Religion, to be leading filthy
lives, Cursing and Damming on the Streets, Drinking and Debauching, etc. I
beseech you restrain these. Surely at such a time, there is need both People
and Soldiers mind that word, Deuteronomy. 23.9, 14. When the host goes forth against
the enemy, then keep thee far from every wicked thing, for the Lord thy God is
among you: and if he see any unclean thing among you, he will leave you to fall
before your Enemies; this holy care were the way to Victory and Peace. Psalm.
81.13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways. I should have soon subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves to
him, but for them they should have remained for ever.

Thirdly, I would humbly offer this as my advice, go forward zealously, in
settling the Government of the Church of Christ, according to his own
appointment. This is a choice mean to promote Piety, and to suppress Sin. I
recommend to you that word of Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded
by the God of Heaven, let it be done diligently for the House of the God of
Heaven, for why should wrath come from the God of Heaven upon the Realm of the
King and his Sons. I cannot but commend you, and bless the Lord, that with so
much Unity and Harmony you have gone some footsteps already, go on, and the
Lord be with you, and let none give way to these prejudices, wherewith some
endeavor to possess men's minds against Presbyterial Government, as an
intolerable yoke and rigid, as some Pamphlets now passing would represent it;
for if you give way to such, ye may cast at the Christian Religion ere long,
for it has been evil spoken of by the Adversaries; and tho there ought to be a
due Zeal against Error and Vice, yet I am confident there shall be that due
moderation, which the Gospel prescribes, used toward all that are Pious and
Orthodox, that shall be satisfying and pleading to every one that loves truth
and holiness: Neither, I beseech you, impute the irregular Practices of some
unto the Principles of the whole Party, for these things we do disown. I am
sorry for the Sufferings of any, but if any had designed a representation of
their Suffering, I wish it had wanted that Gall and Venom against the Civil
Government, wherewith some Pamphlets are filled, and that there had been more
Candor, Ingenuity, and Honesty; used in relating matters of Fact, the want of
which perhaps may occasion such a search as may discover, that the Sufferings
of some, has been rather the effect of their own scandalous sins, than of
others hands. And though I have a great Charity to all that are pious and sound
in the Principal Doctrines of the Faith, though they differ in lesser things; yet
I must crave leave freely to profess, before this great Auditory, that ere I
did intrude my self, or consent to be obtruded on an unwilling People (as it
was in most places of the West) I had rather beg my Fraught to have carried me
over to America, to preach to a willing People: And it is an old Canon in the
Church, Nemo invitus obtrudatur.

4. As I beseech you to advance Holiness toward God, so endeavor to promote
Righteousness toward Man, that in all Courts of Judicature, there may be such
Judges as are mentioned, Exodus 18.21. Men fearing God, loving truth, and hating
covetousness; and charge them, as Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. That such judge righteously
between man and man, and have no respect of persons in judgment, for they judge
for the Lord. And provide, as much as in you lies, that there be no
partiality, nor perverting, nor delay of Justice, but that Judgment may run
down like a Stream, and Righteousness like a mighty River.

5. I humbly beseech you of that Honorable Court, consider what you may do for
the Peace and Safety of the Country; its Case may be better known to many of
you, than to me; yet I must crave leave to represent unto you the Case,
especially of some Northern parts; some are ravaged and spoiled with some
barbarous Highlanders, and others burdened with Free Quarter, for want of the
pay of the Army, and the Cries of the Poor cry for your pity, and call for your
speedy help. Ye that settled the Government, will ye not uphold it? and study
the safety of the Country under it? If this Ruin fall under your hand, it may
ruin Posterity, ruin Religion, and prove a great grief of heart to you, that
are wanting of doing your duty, while it is in the power of your hand to do it,
Eccl. 9.10. I presume not to prescribe Methods to you, but humbly plead the
Cause of the Distressed, and that ye would consider the Danger we are in.

6. I recommend to you the Care of the Education of Youth, the Visiting and
Reforming of Schools and Colleges, and the Case of the Children of some Great
Ones now abroad, at Popish Schools. It may be worth your Consideration, what
may be done, to recover and reduce them, and to prevent the like in time coming.

And lastly, Study to promote Peace in the Nation, of Unity among your selves,
and Charity among all: Mind these things seriously; and with these two
Qualifications I leave them.

1. What ye do in these things, do it sincerely, from right Principles, as ye
would approve your selves to God; for though ye do good, if ye do it not in a
right manner, you lose your reward of him. Ezra 4.2. I read of some, when the
People were going to build the Temple, said, Come, let us build with you, and
yet designed but to mar the work; God forbid that there be any such among you.
2. Time is precious, and what ye do, do diligently and without delay, Eccl.
9.10. Do it with all your might: Remember you must be Accountable ere long to
God for every Opportunity put in your Hand. Not only will God reckon with you
for the evil you do, but for the Good ye might have done, and did it not; And
therefore as ye would not have grief in your Heart, for neglect of it, at Death
and Judgment, improve Seasons and Opportunities for doing good. I leave one
Word with you, Esth. 4.13, 14. It is Mordecai's word to Esther, Mordecai
commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thy self, thou shall escape in the
King's House, more than all the Jews; for if thou altogether hold thy Peace at
this time, then shall their Enlargement and Deliverance arise to the Jews from
another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed: and who
knows, whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this. God
bless what has been spoken, and to Him be Glory for ever. Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin.
THE Cabinet Opened, or the Secret History of Madam de Maintenon, with the
French King. Translated from the French Copy.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most secret Transactions and
Assairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of Cardinal de Richelieu. To which is added, a particular Relation of
the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for the
advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of K. James I, his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original.

The History of the most illustrious William Prince of Orange: Deduced from the
first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most
considerable Actions of this present Prince. The Second Ed.

A Collection of Fourteen Papers, relating to the Affairs of Church and State,
in the Reign of the late K. James.

The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of I. The Laws and Government. II.
Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs. By the honorable
Sir W Coventry. The Third Edition carefully Corrected, and cleared from the
Errors of the First Impression.

An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact
as they occurred. The Second Edition. To which is added the most remarkable
passages, omitted in the former. Collected by a Fellow of the said College.

The Absolute Necessity of standing vigorously by the present Government: Or, a
View of what both Church men and Dissenters must expect, if by their unhappy
Divisions, Popery and Tyranny should return again.

The Justice of the Parliament, in inflicting of Punishments subsequent to
Offenses, vindicated; and the Lawfulness of the Present Government asserted.

An Account of Mr. Parkinson's Expulsion from the University of Oxford, in the
late Times; in vindication of him from the false Aspersions cast upon him, in a
late Pamphlet, entitled, The History of Passive Obedience.

The way to Peace among all Protestants; being a Letter of Reconciliation, sent
by Bp. Ridley to Bp. Hooper. By Mr. Sam. Johnson.

Purgatory proved by Miracles: Collected out of Roman Catholic Authors. With
some remarkable Histories relating to British, English, and Irish Saints. With
a Preface concerning their Miracles. By Mr. Samuel Johnson.

A Seasonable Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness and Mischiefs of
Impositions in Matters of Religion: Recommended to serious Consideration. By
Mr. Andrew Marvel, late Member of Parliament.

The Revolter. A Tragi-Comedy, acted between the Hind and Panther and Religio
Laici.

A Collection of Poems, Satyrs, and Songs, against Popery and Tyranny. In Four
Parts.

An Answer to the Bp. of Rochester's first and second Letters, etc.

The Intreigues of the French King at Constantinople to imbroil Christendom;
discovered in several Dispatches past between him and the late Grand Seignior,
Grand Vizier, and Count Teckley; all of them found among that Count's Papers.
With some Reflections upon them.

Plain English: In relation to the real and pretended Friends to the English
Monarchy. Humbly offered to the Consideration of his Majejesty, and his Great
Council, the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled. The Second Edition.
With a short Preface, and an Appendix, concerning the Coronation Oath
administered to K. James II.

The New Non conformist: Or, Dr. Sherlock's Case in Preaching after a
Deprivation, incurred by the express Words of a Statute: Fairly stated and
examined. With short Reflections upon Mr. Cook's Sermon, Feb. 2. 1690, which
was Licensed by the Archbishops Chaplain.

The Fate of France: A Discourse wherein, after having Answered the groundless
Exceptions that are made against the lawful conduct of the English, in securing
themselves from Popish Tyranny, etc. it is showed, That by the Happy Revolution
in England, all the Designs of the French King for the Universal Monarchy, are
disappoined; and the rational grounds to believe his Downfall near. In Three
Dialogues betwixt Father Petre, Father La Chaize, and two Protestant Gentlemen.

The Anatomy of a Jacobite-Tory: In a Dialogue between Whig and Tory,
occasioned by the Act for Recognizing K. William and Q. Mary.

The Great Bastard Protector of the Little One. Done out of French. And for
which the French King put forth a Proclamation, with a Reward of Five thousand
Louis d'Ors, to discover the Author.

A true Narrative of the Murders, Cruelties, and Oppressions, perpetrated on
the Protestants in Ireland, by the late King James's Agents, since his Arrival
there. Published for the Information of the Jacobites, that endeavor his
Return again.

Reflections upon a Form of Prayer, lately set forth for the Jacobites of the
Church of England, and of an Abhorrence tendered by the late King, to some of
our Dissenting Bishops, upon his present Majesty's Landing.


