MEMOIRS Of the most Remarkable ENTERPRISES AND ACTIONS OF James Duke of York,
ALBANY and VLSTER.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.

MEMOIRS OF The most Remarkable Enterprises and Actions OF James Duke of York
ALBANY and VLSTER.
JAMES Duke of YORK, Brother to our Gracious Sovereign Charles the Second, King
of England, etc. descending from James the Sixth, King of Scotland, who bore an
unquestionable Title to the Crown of England from James the Fourth, King of
Scotland, who married Margaret Eldest Daughter of Henry the Seventh, King of
England; by whom he had James the Fifth, who had one only Child Mary Queen of
Scots, who had also one only Son James the Sixth, who from James the Fourth had
undoubted Right to the Kingdom of Scotland, and from Margaret King Henry the
Sevenths Eldest Daughter (the Male Line being quite extinct) a certain Title to
the Crown of England, from whose Line descended our late Sovereign Lord King
Charles the First, and in the same our present Gracious Sovereign Charles the
Second (whom God preserve.) Also out of the aforesaid Royal Lines came James
Duke of YORK, Brother to our King.

Omitting any further Discourse of his Birth or Education, we proceed to the
most memorable Occurrences of his Life in his Manhood.

In the Time of his Fathers and his Brothers (our Gracious Sovereigns) late
Troubles, Anno 1648. on July the 27th, when the Parliament having gotten the
Fleet, but perceiving their own insufficiency, rendered themselves to the
Prince, viz. (our present King) then made Captain General of his Father's
Forces. The Parliament having some inkling thereof, Commissioned Colonel
Rainsborough (formerly a Seaman) to the Command thereof; whom the Mariners of
the Kings Party fairly put on Shore, having posed him with this Question of
Engaging for their Sovereign. With this Naval Force the Prince departed from
Holland, and came into Yarmouth Road, where it was deliberated, whether he
should land, and attempt the Relief of Colchester; there were then in Company
with him at this adverse Season, his Brother the DUKE of YORK.

1648. On Apr. the 23d The DUKE of YORK (in the Time of the late Troubles)
being disguised in Women's Apparel, made his escape from St. James's by Water,
and landed at Dort in Holland, by the help of one Mr. Bamfield, who was
purposely sent over on that Design by the Queen.

Also Anno 1652. In the encounter of Estampes in in France the DUKE of YORK
(then on the Kings side) so valiantly behaved himself, that the Marshal De
Turenne his General, gave a very obliging Character of him, as highly meriting
in that Service; which procured him special regard and honor from that Court,
and all the Grandees of that Nation.

Anno 1657. The DUKE of YORK commanding a part of the Spanish Army, was
marching to join with other Forces to the Relief of Montmedy Castle in Lorrain,
besieged by the French Marshal De Ferte; while the English Forces joined with
four Regiments of Horse, were advancing from Vervins, part of them, to the
number of 300, quartered in a Castle somewhat distant from the Body, the DUKE
with a Brigade attaqued, and thereupon they presently yielded, and took up Arms
with him.

In the same year Mardike being taken September 23th and put into English
hands, the taking whereof was very grievous to the Dunkirkers, and Spanish
side, and therefore it was resolved by Don John to hazard a Scalado and assault
by night: the DUKE of YORK and the Marquess of Caracene ordered and were
present in the business; and the King our Sovereign, and the Duke of
Gloucester, had conveyed themselves to Dunkirk to see the management of this
Attempt. On the 22d. of October. at night, some 4000 English, Scotch and Irish,
and some Spaniards, about ten a Clock at night began the Storm with Hand
Grenades, and all sorts of Assaulting Engines, and were got into the Trenches,
and mounted their Scaling Ladders; but the English within, being in readiness,
and Reynolds Morgan and Lillingstone being at that same time there, the
Assailants were with great Slaughter repelled and beaten down; the great Guns
from the English Fleet (Riding at the Splinter) Firing their Broad-sides, being
directed by four great Links (set up in the Corners of the Fort) how to miss
it: nevertheless about four a Clock the Duke commanded the Assault to be
renewed again; which was done with greater Fury, but to as little Advantage;
which Event with the approaching Daylight caused a Retreat, the dead being
most of them carried off in Wagons.

In the following year 1658 when the Dunkirk Fight was managed chiefly on the
Spanish-side, by the DUKE of YORK (accompanied with the Duke of Gloucester) the
Military renown of whose Actions was raised in the French Kings Service, he did
not only maintain the Fight, till the irrestible daring Gallantry of the honor
seeking Red-Coats made the Spaniard abandon his Punctilio's, and mend his
Retreating Pace, but sustained the Impression upon the Flight, and at least
saved the day.

Anno 1660 About the time of his Majesty's Restitution, the King being
entertained at the Hague in Holland, and entreated by several Commissioners in
the Name of his Majesty's People, to return and resume the Scepter and
Government. The King preparing to depart, before which departure the Dutch
magnificently treated him, But on Sunday the 20th of May, the King heard De
Hardy Preach before him; the place intended was the Erench-Church, after their
Sermon; but they knowing of it, being greedy to see the King, would not come
out of their Seats; so it was done in the Princesses Lodgings; here the King
touched many of the Evil. In the mean while the DUKE of YORK took the Oath of
Allegiance of the Fleet, having gone aboard the Naseby, where the General
treated him; which Ship, at his departure, he called the Charles, as afterward
the whole Fleet was new Christened in their way homewards.

Anno 1662. The Queen sailing for England, but through the untowardness of the
Wind, being protracted of her desires in meeting the King, and her Arrival
being in England expected every day, a fortnight before, caused the King to
send down his Brother the DUKE of YORK, Lord high-Admiral, to attend on her
upon the Coast, and to compliment her in his Name: whereupon his Highness
hasted to Portsmouth, and on the eleventh of May attended by the Duke of
Ormond, the Earl of Suffolk and Chesterfield, the Lord Berkley and other
persons of Honor went aboard the stately Yacht, with which the City of
Amsterdam presented the King, to Coast about the Isle of Wight to meet her
Majesty. On the same day Sir Joseph Douglas making toward Portsmouth, with an
Express from her Majesty to the King, was met by his Highness the DUKE of YORK,
five Leagues off the Isle of Wight, who commanded him back with him to the
Fleet. On Sunday Morning about ten a Clock, they discovered the Royal James,
but there was so great a Calm, that they could not reach the Royal Charles,
till six at Evening. No sooner had the General espied his Highness Yacht, but
he went out in his Barge to meet him, the Royal Banner being all the while
veiled till he was aboard. When his Highness came into the Ship, the Soldiers
gave three several shouts, and all the great Guns in the Royal Charles (which
from that time to the Queens entrance had been silent) proclaimed his Welcome.
After which, several ships of the Fleet paid him their salutes. Being conducted
to her Majesty's Cabin, he was placed in a Chair on her right hand, where
after several expressions of Joy for her Majesty's happy Arrival on the Coast
of England, and having presented his Majesty's high Respects to, as exceeding
Affection to her; his Royal Highness took his leave, to retire himself to his
Yacht for that night: and the next morning Sir Joseph Douglas was agoin
dispatched to the King, in the illustrious company of the said Duke of Ormond,
and the Earls; but was forced to Tide it thence, and sometimes lay at Anchor,
and could not reach Portsmouth till the Evening.

Anno 1663. At the beginning of November the DUKE of YORK Lord High-Admiral of
England, going toward his Charge at Portsmouth, having received a Gracious
farwell from his Majesty in a short while after, he went aboard, and joined with
the Prince Rupert, and Earl of Sandwich; so that it was no easy thing to
unlock the Narrow Seas.

But the Action beween the English and Dutch Fleets at home being but little,
the DUKE of YORK finding that the Netherlands had laid up their Ships, and that
there was no need of keeping so great a Navy abroad; with all his Train on the
seventh of September arrived at White Hall, leaving a considerable number of
stout Vessels, under the Conduct of the Earl of Sandwich having before his
departure, by a Speech which he made them, inspired the Seamen with Resolution
cheerfully to obey the commands of their Admiral in whatever Enterprise he
should have further Order to prosecute.

In the same and following year, the Hollanders preparations for War being open
and public, therefore the King journied from Port to Port, to hasten out his
Fleet, as also by his presence to to encourage the Seamen, that by the 25th of
March ending the year 1664. The Fleet was magnificently prepared, with all
necessary Provision, being ready to receive their Admiral the DUKE of YORK, who
some days before, went very early in the Morning to his Charge, attended with
diverse eminent and honorable Volunteers.

Anno 1665. In the War with Holland, the DUKE of YORK impatient of their stay,
resolved to give 'um a visit upon their own Coasts and accordingly with 114
Sail, made for the Texel, within five Leagues whereof, he came to an Anchor;
some of the Fleet venturing within two Leagues of the Shore, where the DUKE
took a full View of the Dutch Ships. Some few days after, they showed
themselves just before the mouth of the Harbor, to the great amazement of the
People ashore. Nor did the English forsake their Stations for a long Season,
being now increased to 120 Sail, which made the Hollanders erect Beacons all
along the Coast of Holland, from the Texel to the Maes, to give notice upon any
Attempt of Landing.

The DUKE did stay longer than he intended, partly in expectation to draw the
Dutch to an Engagement; partly by reason of cross winds, and harie weather.
Among many Fogs, there happened one for the Hollanders good: for the DUKE
having commanded three Frigates out of his own Squadron, and four out of the
White and Blew, to try if they could meet with any Holland Merchant men
returning toward the Vly the Fog was so great, that only the three first could
Sail. Had not this Fog prevented, the whole Fleet had fallen into the hands of
the English, however ten Sail were taken, laden with Wine and Brandy; only one
West-India-ship of good value, another from Lisbon, and the last English Vessel
taken by them before in the Soundings: there were afterward at times fourteen
or sixteen more taken, and eight or nine run aground: which was the fatal
account the Hollanders had of their Burdeaux-Fleet this year.

Anno 1672. Then the DUKE returning from the Fleet to London, put an end to all
expectations of any considerable Actions at Sea in this aforesaid year.

Anno 1673. The DUKE met the Duchess of Modena about the latter end of
November in that year (the arriving at Dover in order to her intermarriage with
his Highness) and some few days after coming from Gravesend to London, by
water, was by his Majesty and diverse of the Nobility met in Barges upon the
River, and so conducted to White Hall, where, after her Royal Highness had been
received in the most obliging and kind manner by her Majesty, she was Conducted
to St. James's, within few days after their Royal Highnesses gave Audience to
the French, Portugal, Swedish and Danish Ambassadors, as likewise to the
Residents of Venice and Newburg, who all went to Compliment them upon their
late Marriage.

Since the Discovery of the Popish-Plot his Highness has resided much in
Scotland.

Further,

Fitz-Harris going to take his leave of Father Gough an English-Priest, at
Paris, the said Gough affirming in Discourse, that the DUKE of YORK was a
Catholic, Fitz Harris requiring of him how long the DUKE had been a Catholic,
he Answered the Queen Mother had made him so.

Mr. Dugdale in his Information given before the House of Commons relates that
one Francis Evers a Jesuit, telling him it might not be long before they might
expect good times, for that the DUKE of YORK having declared himself a
Roman Catholic, had given a good assurance to the Pope, besides being a Prince
of that Resolution, etc. that if ever he made any engagement, he would never
revoke it, which gave them great hopes of dispersing the dark Clouds of Heresy
(as by them called) He not only having engaged himself solemnly to them for the
establishing of their Religion, but also that he would restore them to all
their Church Lands, and other privileges taken from their Church formerly. But
from several private Gentlemen, as well as Priests, he gives an account, that
he heard it debated at several of their private Meetings, what the DUKE of
YORKS pleasure was, that as he had given them an assurance of his part, they
should not be negligent to do theirs, and that they should be in all readiness,
with all necessaries when the King should dye, to assist him against the
Protestants.

Again, the aforesaid person relates, that he being in Company with Mr. Evers,
pressed of him to know the Reason why they should kill Sir Edmundbury Godfrey?
Mr. Evers told him, that the DUKE of YORK had sent a Message to Coleman, after
he was taken, that he should not Confess any thing, he returned the DUKE an
Answer back, that it had been his misfortune, to declare all that he knew of
the matter to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and he heard that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
would come in a Witness against him, in regard he had been so diligent in
taking Examinations: The DUKE returned him Answer back again, that bid him be
sure not to confess, and he should not need to fear Sir Edmund Bury-Godfrey,
and that there should be care taken, or somewhat to that purpose.

Also Mr. Dangerfield gives Account, that about the Months of September or of
October 1679. That Mrs. Cellier and himself then waiting of the Lord
Peterborough, to be introduced to the DUKE of YORK, after some Discourse, his
Lordship took them into the DUKES Closet (at White Hall) where having kissed
the DUKES hand, Mr. Dangerfield gave his Royal-Highness a little Book,
containing a Scheme, and the pretended Discovery he had made in the
Presbyterian Plot, which the Duke after some short perusal of, thanked him for:
and also for his diligence in the Catholic Cause: desired him to go on, and
wished him good success in all his undertakings: adding in these words, viz.
That the Presbyterian Plot was a thing of most weighty Consequence; and if well
managed, would be conducible to the safety of the Catholic Cause: not
questioning but the effects of it would Answer their expectations, especially
in the Northern parts. where I am well assured the Major part of the Gentry are
his friends, and have given sufficient Demonstration of their Affections to
him, likewise of their intents to prosecute the Presbyterian Plot to the
utmost. After this his Highness ordered that Mr. Dangerfield and Mrs. Cellier
to be careful of what they communicated to the persons who were to be Witnesses
in the New Plot, lest they should be caught in the subornation and thereby
bring a terrible Odium upon the Catholics, and so they be made incapable of
any further Service. After this, the Duke informed them, that in a Month or
two's time the Commissions would be ready; but ordered them in the mean time to
bring their parts to bear with the Commissions, and particularly ordered Mr.
Dangerfield to find out some persons, which were fit to be trusted, and that
should accept of such Commissions which should be delivered by a person
appointed for that purpose, but not to be known to them to be any other but a
Presbyterian: So that when occasion should require, they might, together with
those which Mr. Dangerfield Mrs. Cellier, etc. had then, be ready to swear in
the Plot, and that the Presbyterians were raising Forces against the King and
Government, and had given out Commissions to that purpose. And in Order to
this, Mr. Dangerfield in some short time after procured several to accept of
such Commissions, when they should be ready; whose business in the mean time
was, to spread Reports in the Coffee-houses, that the Popish-Plot was a
contrivance of the Presbyterians.

For their encouragement in the prosecution of that Sham-Plot, the DUKE
promised, that he would take care that money should not be wanting; but ordered
them to use all the expedition the thing would allow to make a Discovery
thereof to the King. After which, the Duke said, The Catholic party would be
eased of the Charge in regard it would be defrayed some other way.

The DUKE then made diverse Vows and bitter Execrations to stand by them in the
thing, and engaged on his honor to be their Rewarder. Adding, that such
considerable Heresies were not to be slighted: further promising, that to whose
Lot soever it should happen to be imprisoned, according to their fidelity and
stedfastness in the Cause, so much the more should their Reward be augmented:
and that all care possible should be used to support and preserve them: and
particularly, desiring Mr. Dangerfield to keep up to the courageous and active
Character which his Highness had heard of him. All which Mr. Dangerfield
promised to do.

Mr. Dangerfield some time after went to wait on the Lord Peterborough, from
the Lady Powis, to the end that he might move the DUKE to get him with all
expedition to the King: he then being ready.

About four days after this, my Lord Peterborough sending for Mr. Dangerfield,
and took him to the DUKE again (who was then in his Closset at White Hall) and
the DUKE told Mr. Dangerfield, that he must prepare himself to wait on the
King, to give his Majesty a more particular Account of the Presbyterian Plot
than what the little Book made mention of, (which Book the DUKE said he had
given to the King) And that he had so ordered the matter, that Mr. Dangerfield
should be furnished with money, to enable him in the prosecution thereof. But
his Highness charged him to consider well his Story, before he waited on the
King.

Then the Duke told him, that by his diligence, he had gained a good Reputation
among the Catholics, and that he should by his Service to that Cause, highly
merit: Adding, that in a short time, he should see the Catholic Religion
flourish in these Kingdoms, and Heresy torn up by the Roots, and that he had
heard of the Proposal which had been made him by the Lords Powis and Arundel,
about taking off the King, and about his Refusal; as also, what he had
accepted, touching my Lord Shaftsbury, and of all his Transactions in the
Presbyterian Plot: saying in these very words, viz. If you value the Religion
you profess, and my Interest (as you say you do) and your own future Happiness,
take my Advice, and depend upon my Honor and Interest for your Advancement.

For, Sir, you look like a Man of Courage and Wit: therefore less Discourse may
serve with you than another. So that if you will but move by the Measures that
I will give you, you shall not only escape with safety, but be rewarded
according to the greatness of your Actions.

To which Mr. Dangerfield Replied, that he would stand and fall in defense of
the Roman Catholic Religion, and his Highness Service; adding that he was not
a little concerned for his refusing to kill the King, by whom he was well
satisfied by his Ghostly Father, stood Condemned as an Heretic. But this he
did offer, that if his Highness would command him to the Attempt, he would not
fail, either to accomplish it or to loose his Life.

Upon which the DUKE gave him twenty Guinnies, and said, that if he would be
rigorous in what he had already undertaken, he would so order it, that his Life
should not be in the least danger: adding, we are not to have men taken in such
daring Actions, but to have them make an effectual dispatch, and be gone; some
time after this, when Mr. Dangerfield was ready to convey the Letters into
Colonel Mansels Chamber, he went to the Lord Peterborough who brought him to
the DUKE, whom Mr. Dangerfield told, that he was ready to fix the Letters in
Colonel Mansels Chamber, to which his Highness answered that he must make
haste, that he might be empowered to make a General search of the like Nature,
for said the DUKE, since I saw you last, the Lady Powis has informed me, that
there are abundance of Letters and Witnesses Ready, so that it is now high time
to begin.

FINIS.

