MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE OF ANTHONY LATE Earl of Shaftsbury; WITH A SPEECH OF THE
English Consul at Amsterdam concerning him, AND A LETTER From a BURGER there
about his Death. Offered to Consideration of the Protestant Dissenters.

printer's device of Walter Davis, featuring a black horse MIEVEX VAVLT MOVRIR
E VERTV QUE VIVRE EN HONCTE


LONDON, Printed for WALTER DAVIS. 1682/3.

MEMOIRES.
THere is nothing which of late has been more surprising than the
consideration of the wonderful Industry which a sort of Deluded People, for so
in charity I would distinguish some of them, from others who act out of Malice,
Interest, and Revenge, and what pains they have taken to make themselves and
all others uneasy: and to see this toilsome and laborious Diligence, inevitably
and in its natural and most rational consequences, tending to the pulling down
upon their own heads the united vengeance of Heaven and Earth, the severity of
Humane Laws, which by provoking, they daily exasperate to use the utmost rigor,
and the more terrible and inexorable punishments of Hell and Damnation, as
certainly the portion of those who resist the Higher Powers as that there is a
God, and that the Scriptures are so true, that Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but not one single Iota of those dreadful Comminations pass unfulfilled.
This consideration, as it increases my astonishment, so it moves my compassion;
nor is the Compassion I have for the Dissenters from the Government of England,
for such indeed are all those who are commonly called Dissenters from the
Church, and eo Nomine punished by the Laws of the Civil Government, the Peace
of which they disturb and endanger, only a bare pity, which looks no farther
then a few tender Expressions, Alas poor Creatures! or God help them! or such
like; but I have long had in my thoughts to do something that might tend to
their real advantage, and secure them from the dangerous Precipice of Ruin
here, and Damnation hereafter, upon which they seem to stand.

It is the misfortune of these People, to have the blind lead the blind, their
pretended Guides blinded with Rage, and the fear of losing their Shrine-making,
which brings them in their Gains, will not let them see their danger, but
exhort them to obstinacy against the Laws and Government, under the color of
Constancy and suffering Persecution for Religion, when there is not the least
foundation of truth in it; and they wildly buoy them up with expectations of
some miraculous deliverance from Heaven, while in the mean time, they endeavor
to draw all their hopes of assistance from Hell; and support them in their
obstinacy against the Laws, and their Lawful Governors, by the expectation of
a revolution in the Government it self, which they have and do with their
utmost art and industry endeavor to undermine and overthrow.

The successless attempts they have of late made against it, would if they
would sit down and bestow a few moments cool Reflection, be sufficient to
convince them, that they are not at all either the Care or the Favorites of
Heaven; and I am persuaded, that would they but see how like Pharaoh and his
Chariots, and his Horsemen, and all his Host, they have pursued the Church
into the midst of the Sea, and that the Waves have begun to return toward
their strength, that the Wheels of their Chariots have been so often taken off,
and have driven so heavily, they would be obliged to say with the Egyptians,
Let us fly from the face of the English Israel, for God sighteth for them
against the Egyptian Dissenters; and I wish they do not by their obstinacy
drive the Allegory too far, and repent when it is too late.

Among all the variety of thoughts upon which I might fix, in order to do this
miserable and mistaken People a real kindness, I could not think of any more
proper, than the exposing to their view one of the great occasions of their
Delusion, the late E. of Shaftsbury, the diseases of whose Mind lay in a great
measure concealed from their eyes so long as he lived, as many times those of
the Body do to the most learned sons of Hermes, till the death of their
Patients, does by dissection of their bodies give satisfaction to their doubts
and curiosity; and not only so, but may be of advantage too to the living, by
showing the true causes of some effects, which were before wholly unknown, and
therefore incurable: And truly this is the principal reason of this Anatomy
Lecture upon the Life and Death of that Noble Peer. And if we find in his
Character, that his Religion was always calculated for the Latitude of his
Interests and Designs, that he could therefore certainly have none, who could
be occasionally contented with any; that he could under an Usurper countenance
and promote the trampling down of the Laws and Liberties of the English Nation,
and therefore could not by inward Principles be an Enemy either to Popery or
Arbitrary Government; it may be a means to undeceive such as have been seduced
by his Speeches and Professions, to believe him so great a Pillar of the
Protestant Religion, and so strong a Bastion against Arbitrary Government; and
not only so, but may teach them for the future, to give no credit to any such,
who hereafter by a sTATE Metempsychosis, shall seem to have received the Soul
of Shaft sbury by transmigration, and shall with the same principles and
pretenses stand in opposition to the established Government, and thereby
endeavor to maintain their Ground, and secure their own heads from punishment,
by courting and animating a Popular Faction to oppose the Government, which in
all humane probability must end in the ruin and confusion of those refractory
and obstinate opposers of the Peace and Happiness of the Nation. I know it will
look like a cowardly and ungenerous insolence, to tread hard upon the fame of
the Dead, and if it contradicts the old Proverb, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, to
speak well of the Dead, I must say this by way of Anticipation to that
Objection, that the dead must first have deserved to be well spoken of; and
that the intention of this Paper was never levelled at so low a mark as to
trample upon the Fame of his Lordship, but to prevent the mischiefs which yet
he may do even after his death, if the world shall still be permitted to go on
in the belief that his Lordship was all that which he pretended to be; and
others who shall step up into the place of this head of the Hydra, which
Providence has newly cut off, shall be also supposed to succeed him in those
imaginary Qualifications and Excellencies of Zeal for his Country and the
Protestant Religion, which this Paper undertakes to demonstrate he was as far
from, as Catiline, or Sejanus, or their far surpassing Oliver, ever were from
being Friends to their Country, the Liberty, Peace and Happiness of the People
who had the misfortune to be under the power of their Tyranny.

This Noble Peer was born in the County of Dorset, to a competent good fortune,
but with a spirit which very early showed he was of a turbulent, restless and
changeable Temper, rather subtle than Politic, and malicious than Wise; and
to contribute to this unsettled humor, especially in Religion, he was committed
in his Minority to the tuition of one Mr. Strong, a Nonconformist Minister,
whom afterward, in gratitude, he got preferred for his Excellent Talent in
haranguing the People against the King and the established Government both in
Church and State, to be placed at St. Margarets in Westminster, as I doubt not
but diverse still living there can remember: From this Minister he received
those early prejudices against Episcopacy, which stuck by him to his last; and
it may be, the wanting of a good Foundation of that Apostolical and Primitive
Christianity taught and maintained in the Church of England, did not only
prejudice him against that constitution and form of Government, but gave him,
as it has done thousands besides, those loose and rolling sands of opinion,
which makes them shift their Religion with every tide of alteration in matters
of State.

Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, for such was then his Title, was very young at the
breaking out of the late Horrid Rebellion raised by the Faction of Dissenting
Protestants, which were united in one common interest (the only way that I know
of Uniting Dissenters) against the King and the established Church and
Government; and in the beginning of the Civil War, he was Captain of a Troop of
Horse in the Royal Party, though there do not remain upon Record any great
Monuments of his Chivalry; but the Kings affairs beginning, after many sharp
conflicts with the Rebels, to be in some disorder, the young Knight Errant, who
was resolved that Victory should be his Mistress; upon what party soever she
bestows her smiles, quickly turned Apostate, and at the same time, with his
Troop, quitted his Loyalty and the Kings Service.

The young Deserter, who now began to set up for a Politician, was a very
welcome man among the Traitors, for this seasonable Treason; and it was not
long before he got into the Commons House, where he met with notable Tutors in
Antimonarchical, Rebellious, and Seditious Politics; and his natural Talents
lying that way, he quickly grew a Proficient in all the Arts of traducing the
King, his Ministers and Government, and haranguing the Nation out of all the
little remainders of Loyalty, by frighting them with the Dangers and Fears of
Popery and Arbitrary Government; with which as they had first excited the
People of the several Sects and Schisms, Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. to rebel, so they animated them to persist
desperately in that unnatural War, by telling them, that should the King and
Royal Party prevail, Popery and Arbitrary Power would inevitably swallow up
all. By these Arts they prevailed to that degree, that the whole World was a
witness of the infamous Tragedy, which was acted upon the Person of the most
Excellent Prince King CHARLES the First.

But it happening that the Traitors who had been Unanimous so long as the King
had either Interest, Power or Life, which they could fear, when by taking away
his, they thought they had secured their own lives, after having divided the
Kings and Church Lands, and the spoil of the whole Nation, among themselves,
this Vnton came to be dissolved; and the Independents having supplanted the
Presbyterians in the Army, the Army were resolved to dissolve the Parliament,
and Rule by the power of the Sword: And here our little Politician again turns
Renegado to the Parliament, as before he had done to the King; and judging that
Oliver was now like to be the Supreme Governor of the Nation, he immediately
strikes in with his Interest, and contributes his utmost endeavors to make him
Lord Protector of the three Kingdoms; and that he might rivet himself the
closer into the favor of the Usurper, he was very sollicitous to marry
Cromwell's Daughter, that so though he could not have the honor himself, his
Posterity however might come to be Princes of the Blood: But though he was not
very successful in his Amors, yet he was in his Politics still, for he got to
be of the Protectors Council of State, where, to the Book, his Hand, A. A.
Cooper, may be seen to a thousand of the most Arbitrary, Illegal, and
Tyrannical Orders, for the raising of Money without Act of Parliament, and for
imprisoning the Subjects contrary to Magna Charta, and the so much Magnified
Petition of Right: Nay his little Honor, for he was not yet a Peer, was also
then a violent Persecutor of the People of the Lord, following the example of
Oliver, and the thriving Religion, who filled the Jails with Quakers,
notwithstanding they were very good Protestant Dissenters, and many of them had
been helpful to him, in Cursing Meroz, and fighting the Lords Battles against
the Mighty.

The disappointment however of the honor of being the Protectors Son-in-Law,
did not a little shock the Ambition of Sir Anthony, and having a most admirable
faculty of never forgiving any person, or to speak in his own Language, having
ever the good fortune to be revenged upon those who did him any injury, though
for the present he put it in his Pocket, yet it was but as he did his Book of
Memoires, to be ready upon occasion to return it with a vengeance; and
therefore the same whirlwind that hurried away Oliver, inspired the
Triple-named Knight with resolutions to quit scores with that trifle of a
Protectoret Richard, for the sins of his Father Oliver, in refusing him his
alliance: So soon therefore as he saw Queen Dick begin to totter in the
Coach-box of Government, he was resolved to have one whip or two at the
pampered Jades in the Harness, not doubting but to break the neck of the
Charrioteer, although his Father had the fortune to escape the danger of the
Horses presented to him by the German Prince in Hyde-Park; he got in therefore
with the Rump, who voted down Richard's highness into plain Dick Cromwell
again; and in all those several turns, where the Government was made a mere
Football, and now the Rump run away with it, then the Committee of Safety got a
kick at it, sometimes Wallingford-House had it at their foot, sometimes Lambert
and his Levellers, Sir Anthony still was at the Goal of the Winning Party, ever
giving those whose heels were last tript up the Go-by; as true to his
Principles as the reeling Needle in a Storm is to its beloved North, which
though it be twirled about the 32 points of the Compass, yet at last settles
and points to its kind Star: So did our Knight, who was always resolved to be
somebody, and to sail by the Star of his own Interest, let the wind blow from
what quarter of the World it pleased.

The Nation grown weary of this tumbling and tossing of the Government from one
hand to another of the Factious true Protestant Rebels, begun after the dear
bought Experience of being seduced, at the rate of so many Millions of Treasure
and whole Seas of Christian blood, to grow weary of the pretended Reformation
and Reformers, of the standing Armies, Major Generals, Free Quarter, and
Endless Taxations, with which they were oppressed, to defend that Freedom and
Liberty which they found was in reality a most intolerable slavery; and now it
was evident that Ship Money and all the Monopolies, were but as a little finger
of the Kings compared to the Loins or Rump of a Parliament, and there seemed to
be such an Universal Wish throughout the three Nations, for the Restoration of
the King, our now Gracious Sovereign, that wise Men every where now began to
see it must be so; the best most ardently hoping it, and the worst who feared
it, struck with such a pannick fear and horror that they durst not oppose it;
and General Monk who with the first perceived the Motion of the Angel in this
Troubled Pool, was resolved to help the Cripled Kingdoms into the Water, that
they might be healed. And here our Politician made a most meritorious virtue of
Necessity, as many others of the Faction did, who glory much of their helping
to restore his Majesty, when in truth, they saw if they did not, it would be
done without their help. Sir Anthony finding the wind freshing up thus strongly
for the Coast of Loyalty, brought all his Tacks aboard, and stood in with Monk
with all the Sail he could make, to bring in the King, cunningly foreseeing
that this would bring him into Reputation and Play again under Monarchy, as he
had before been against it; but for a parting blow however, he was one of those
who thought to have broken Monk's neck, and thereby have made their own Game,
by imposing upon him that Arbitrary Order and the greatest affront that was
ever done to the City of London, by pulling down their Gates, Posts and Chains,
and marching his whole Army into the City. These were then no Crimes with Sir
A. A. Cooper, no Violations of the City Charter; though lately the marching of
the Royal Guards through it, and the Guards themselves, have by him and his
Party been thought and called a thousand Standing Armies and Illegal,
Arbitrary, Mercenary Popish Guards, and motions made not to permit any of them
to march through the City of London.

Well, in comes the King, and (with his August and Sacred Person and
Government) Law, Liberty and the best Reformed Government and Religion in the
World, Peace and Plenty Crown the Land, Joy and Gladness smiles in every Face,
nay the greatest of his own and his Fathers Enemies, the infamous Regicides
only excepted, drink Brimmers of the Royal Bounty, all are pardoned, many
preferred to places of Honor, Trust and Reputation: And if you will but draw
the Curtain, you shall see Sir Anthony sitting as a Judge at the Old Bayley,
helping to Hang Draw and Quarter his Quondam Masters, whose treasonous Commands
he had formerly obeyed, but had the good luck to keep his hand from Bradshaws
Ink. So true it is, Ille Crucem sceleris pretium tulit his Diadema; For not
long after those notorious Villains deservedly got their Necks incircled with a
Halter, Sir Anthony got his Temples impaled with a Coronet, being advanced to
the honor of a Baron of England, and Chancellor of the Exchequer; and indeed
running so very hard up the hill of his own Ambition, which was to be the
Premiere Minister of State, very many who then observed it, made presages of
what has since fallen out.

Not long after, happened the difference between his Majesty and the States of
the United Netherlands; and as the Noble and never enough Lamented Earl of
Ossory told him, (upon occasion of his reflecting upon his Grace the Duke of
Ormond, in the House of Lords, to which he was able to make no Reply) his
little Lordship advised the shutting up of the Checquer, breaking the Triple
League, seizing the Dutch Smyrna Fleet, and several other things, which since
his Lordship and his Faction have so often charged as miscarriages upon his
Majesty's Government; and being now advanced to be Lord Chancellor of England,
so sollicitous was his Lordship for the Protestant Religion and Interest, that
he made that famous Speech of Delenda est Carthago, animating the great Council
of the Nation the Parliament, to prosecute the War against the Dutch, though
Dissenting Protestants, with the same animosity, as Cato did the Romans, to the
utter subversion of the Pagan Carthaginians, to level the proud and Rebellious
City of Amsterdam, after the example of that Affrican City, which contested
with Rome for the Empire of the Universe.

And here you see his Lordship upon the top of the Hill; but it was not long
before he fell into the displeasure of the Commons, who for some Councels of
his, tending as they said to the breach of their Privileges, were framing
Articles against him; of which by his Espials being advertized, he immediately
makes a short turn, and strikes in with those of the Commons House, who then
called themselves the Country Party, against the Court Party, as they were
invidiously distinguished, and having the Purse, Seal and Mace taken from him,
which before hung in his eyes that he could see no such matter, those beams
were no sooner removed, but he pretended to see Popery and Arbitrary Government
as plainly coming in upon the Nation, as in a clear day a man may see Callis
Sands from Dover Cliff.

The whole Nation being in a violent agitation upon the Dissolution of the Long
Parliament and the breaking out of a Popish Plot, his Lordship who was
admirable at the sport of fishing in troubled Waters, was now got into his own
Element, and resolved at once to be revenged of all his Enemies, and who but he
to be the head of the United Faction of Dissenters throughout the Nation; by
way of eminence, he had the Title of the Protestant Peer, as if all others who
did not come under his protection had been Papists. All the Applications of the
Party, all Informations, all Counsels and Cabals were at Thanet-House; there
the Protestant Joyner College, and fourteen of the Jury who brought in the Bill
against him Ignoramus, who were of his Lordships Neighborhood, the Anabaptist
Booksellers Smith and Harris, Jack Starkey, etc. the Libellers of the
Government, Care, Ferguson, etc. found warm Entertainment; there was the
constant Rendezvous of the Basket-hilted old Olivarian Officers, who had lost
their Crown and Church Lands, there all those mischiefs were contrived which
have given the Government and Nation so much trouble; thither the Green Ribbon
Club and their Foreman Sir R. P. used to repair constantly to take their
Measures for what was to be done in the Commons House, there the famous Bill of
Exclusion was hatched, which was to invade the Prerogative of God Almighty, as
well as the Kings; from thence came the Seditious Addresses and Petitions of
the Furious Dissenters, insolently to teach their Representatives to demand the
Militia of the King, to exhort him to part with his Evil Counselors; so they
called, as they did his Fathers, the Loyal Nobility, Friends to the Crown and
Church; promising to assist them in their demands with their Lives and
Fortunes, and above all not to supply the King with a Penny of Money but upon
those Conditions, though at the same time, the Nation was constantly alarmed
with the formidable power, and dangerous greatness and designs of the French
King upon us. From thence came the Invention of stealing the Sword from the
Kings Scabbard, by putting on such Sheriffs as Bethel, who as it is averred
under the Town Seal of Hamburgh, offered his service to be the late Kings
Executioner, and such Sheriffs, returning such true Protestant Juries, as would
crack Oaths as fast as a Squirril does Nuts, as Wilmores, etc. who could return
Ignoramus upon a Bill of Indictment of High Treason though sworn by a thousand
legal Witnesses: There was found the Traitorous Association, which was to
overturn the Foundation of the old English Government, and destroy not only
Monarchy, but the very Essence and Constitution of Parliaments, vesting the
Government in the hands of such Persons, as should take that damnable Oath.

It were endless to recount all the Speeches of this Noble Peer, made in the
House of Lords, not to trust the King, or to give him Money, etc. or the whole
shoals of Lewd and Seditious Pamphlets, Letters to Friends, Appeals to the
City, Dialogues between Tutors and Pupils, which were Written, Printed and
Dispersed by his Direction and Approbation; every Coffee house, every Town,
City, and corner of the Land is full of these treasonous and disloyal Papers;
and the late abominable Pamphlet of the second part of the Growth of Popery, a
Libel that has more Lies than Lines in it, as it is confidently reported came
as a parting blow from his Amanuensis, Ferguson.

And they who saw his Lordship march with his Armed Guards to the Parliament at
Oxon, will without difficulty believe, that the Design of seizing his Majesty's
Person there was hatched in Aldersgate Street, and though, notwithstanding the
legal Trial of College, and his Conviction for that Treason, it is endeavored
to ridicule that matter, yet I doubt not but a little time will make further
clear discoveries of it to the world.

But now we must think of bringing his Lordship to his Journeys end, for after
all his endeavors, and those of his Faction, to subvert the Government, had
proved insuccessful, and even his Irish Evidences, whom he drew over to accuse
his Grace the Duke of Ormond, proving himself not only guilty of Subornation,
but of Plotting against the Government, and the Tide of Loyalty turning very
swift upon him, beyond his foresight or expectation, his Lordship durst not
trust to the innocence of his Actions, or abide the Legal Trial of his Peers;
but thinking Heels the best security for his Head, he resolves to fly for the
same, in hopes that the Treason which he had tap'd and left abroach at parting,
might work so effectually as yet to give him the hopes of another squeek at
least for his Life; and whether should his Lordship retreat but to that
Carthago of Amsterdam, which, had his advice been followed with success, had
not been capable of securing his Lordship: But his Lordship found but very cold
entertainment there, for the Delenda est Carthago, which was by public Order
of the States General entered upon their Books of Journals, came fresh into
their Memories, so that he was neither Complemented upon his arrival, nor any
notice taken of him by either the Magistrates or Ministers of the Established
Church there; nor indeed by any other sort of People than a few pitiful
Brownists, the despised Dissenters of Holland, such persons being his
Companions, as had either fled from Justice like himself, or were the Sons of
Traitors, and persons disaffected to the Person of his Majesty and his
Government, such as Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Phelps, Mr. Venner, Mr. Medlay, Ald.
Freeman Israel Hayes, Hayes's Son, Thomas Garret; and John Starkey, who for
printing diverse seditious and treasonable Pamphlets, was forced to leave the
Mitre, and hang upon his Lordship for subsistence, but gave him little
Reputation among the sober and discerning Protestants of that Country, as will
appear by a Letter from thence, to a worthy Citizen of London, and a Speech
made to the Lords the Burge-Masters by the late English Consul, which I shall
here present the Reader with.

My Lords the Burge-Masters,
I Am come to take my leave of your Lordships, and to let you know, that the
King of Great Britain my Master has thought fit to discharge me of any further
attendance in this City, in the quality of Consul of the English Nation, his
Majesty being graciously pleased to honor Mr. Henry Bull Merchant, with a
Commission to be Consul in my place.

And now my Lords, I am come to give your Lordships thanks for the many favors
and civilites I have received during my residence in your City, as freeing me
from paying those Taxes and Duties your Burgers pay.

My Lords, give me leave to assure your Lordships, that during my living in
your City, I have studied all ways and means that might render me acceptable to
the Magistrates and Government of our City, and so far as lay in my power have
endeavored to facilitate the preserving a right and amicable understanding
between such as deserved the Character of Loyal Subjects to the King my Master,
and the Burgers of this City; and my Lords, although I am called to other
Employments, yet wherever I am, or in what condition soever, I shall not
ungratefully forget the Oblig ations I have received from your Lordships, but
constantly wish and pray for the welfare and prosperity of your City, and do
every thing in my power that may add to, or preserve the now alliances between
my Masters Subjects and Yours.

My Lords, I have but one word more to say, and that is, that as I have now
made my sincere profession of Friendship and Service to your Government and
City, so I must beg leave to Caution your Lordships in one particular; I know
your Lordships are wise in a high degree, and need no man's Advice or Caution,
but as I look upon it as a Duty incumbent upon me to the King my Master, and
the true respects I have for your Lordships, I cannot but take notice of some
reports I meet with in your City, which are, that several bad men, obnoxious to
the King my Master, and his Government; nay such as have been so impudently
bold as to Print and Publish Treasonable and Seditious Libels against the
Honor and Dignity of the King my Master and his Government, and against the
Honor of his Loyal Ministers of State, such whose spirits are so turbulent,
and Phanatically Seditious, that they are not contented to act mischiefs
against their own Prince and his Government established by Law, but have wished
the worst of Evils to their Protestant Neighbors and their Government, as may
be seen by that uncharitable Speech Delenda Carthago: Now my Lords, I say if
such bad men as these shall fly hither, and be protected, and made Burgers of
your City, it may as I humbly conceive, in time do prejudice to the fair
understanding and friendly alliences now had between the King my Master and the
States General, which may reach this City, the Consequences of which, I leave
to your Lordships wise and grave Considerations.


The Letter I mentioned before was to this effect.

Sir,
YOur Letter of the 15th of Jan. last, in which you sent me a brief Character
of the Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir W. Waller, and Mr. Ferguson, came not to my
hands until the very day that the Earl of Shaftsbury died; yet I have made use
of it, by giving Copies of it to some of our Magistrates, and also to some of
the Preaching Ministers of our Church, who believing his Lordship to be such a
sort of Christian as you have represented him, are very glad that Providence
has eased them of so ill a Guest as he might have proved to be to their
Government, fearing that his bad Principles might in time have poisoned the
giddy Mobile of Amsterdam, as he had done in England; I hope his death will
disperse the small Inconsiderable Party he had with him in our City. When his
Lordship first came to Amsterdam, his Agents Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Israel Hayes and
others, endeavored to persuade us, that there were several Noblemen, and above
200 Rich Merchants of London, that were all designed to guit England, and if
possible get themselves made Burgers of our City; all which proves very false,
for I find that these great numbers of Rich Noblemen and Merchants, are sum'd
up in a Bankrupt Knight, a scandalous Scotch Independent Parson, formerly
Teacher of the Brownist-Church in Amsterdam, and about two or three miserable
poor Printers and Booksellers, who now the Earl is dead, must either live upon
the Poors Box of the Brownists-Church, or else with Ropes about their Necks,
beg their Pardons of the mercifullest of Princes: And here give me leave to
remark something you mention in yours to me, and that was where you say, that
certainly the turbulent restless soul of the Lord Shaftsbury, could not long
subsist, and live amongst such a Rascality of People as his Lordship had to
converse with, the which I understand was one great cause that hastened his
Death; for I am informed, that when he found that the Magistrates and Ministers
of Amsterdam did not visit and court him, as was promised his Lordship by the
English Phanaticks at Amsterdam, especially being refused to be made an Upper
Burger, as they term it here, and his Lordship receiving rather a
discouragement from the Magistrates than otherwise, I say this was it which
seemed to shorten his days, and so he died miserably in a Broken Coffee-mans
House, one of the Elders of the Brownist's Church. I will say no more, but wish
that all the Enemies of your King, this State, and the Prince of Orange, may
make no honor abler an Exit than this once Great Peer of England has done.

Yours to Command. etc.


By this time you see in what Reputation our Noble Peer was like to have stood
in Holland, as well as in England; and that we may commit him to his long
repose, for his Religion, he was as good a Protestant, as any one can be
suposed to be, who could atheistically call the New Testament the New Cheat;
his Fortitude was evident as well as his Loyalty, by the Courage he had to
oppose a most potent Monarch, and his Natural Liege Lord; Mother -- to whom in
his splendour, with the Purse, Seal and Mace, he made a public visit, shall
depose for the severe virtue of his chastity; and his timely flying from
Justice, and opportunely dying, will demonstrate his Conduct and Prudence; the
Exiles who will want it, shall attest his Charity; the Dissenters upon whom he
has, by animating them against the Government, intailed the severity of the
Laws, and left them fluttering in the Net which he had escaped, will stand
obliged to him for their sufferings; and I hope the King and the whole Nation
whom he has informed of the Temper of men of his Principles, Designs and
Faction, will have reason to thank him for their future Settlement and
Establishment against the Real Fears and Dangers of Phanaticism and Arbitrary
Tyranny its inseparable Companion.

I have nothing more to add, but to wish the Dissenters who have been fond of
this Noble Peer even to Idolatry, to read in his, their own Destiny; there is a
long Arrear due to them for the former Rebellion, the Blood and Rapine, the
Sacrilege and Hypocrisy of them and their Fathers; and a new Reckoning too for
their Insolent Disobedience to the best and most merciful of Princes, their
ingratitude toward God and Men, their stubborness against the best Reformed
Church in the World, and refractoriness to the most Excellent Civil Government
under the Sun, which they have as wickedly, as vainly attempted to subvert:
They have had a long time given for Repentance, but they may see if they be not
wilfully blinded, that there is a time coming, if they withstand Gods and the
Kings Clemency and Mercy, when they shall be paid all this long Arrear; and in
the opinion of many wise men, who have particularly remarked how Providence
has by their own folly baffled all their late Designs, blasted their Hopes,
and cut off the Engineers of the Faction, it looks as if they were even weary
of that happiness they might yet enjoy, and that with their own hands they
would pull down those punishments upon their own heads, which commiserating
Heaven and a Compassionate Prince have so long delayed to execute upon them;
for certainly they must be weary of their Lives, and out of their Wits, who
dash out their own Brains against the Government in hopes to overturn its
strong Foundations. I wish they may recollect themselves, and remember the Earl
of Shaftsbury, who when he might have lived Glorious, Easy, and Happy by
obeying his Prince, and Country Laws, died a miserable, despised Fugitive, the
Scorn of the present, and the Contempt of all future Ages.

FINIS.

