SELF-CONVICTION: OR AN ENUMERATION OF THE Absurdities, Railings, against the
College, and Physicians in general; (but more especially, the Writers against
the Apothecaries) Nonsense, Irrational Conclusions, Falsities in matters of
Fact, and in Quotations, Concessions, etc. of a nameless Person.

AND ALSO An Answer to the rest of Lex Talionis.

Collected and made by CHRISTOPHER MERRETT, Dr. in Physic, Fellow of the
College of Physicians, etc.

LONDON, Printed for James Allestry, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1670.

SELF-CONVICTION; OR AN ENUMERATION OF THE Absurdities, Railings against the
College of Physicians, etc.
Courteous Reader,
TWo days since, there came to my hands, a Book entitled, Lex Talionis, etc.
and also a pretended discovery of the frauds of the Doctors professing, and
practicing Pharmacy. I soon ran it over, and found little but railing and
nonsense in the former part of it, and not one proof made in the later;
inquiring into the Author of it, I was informed that the Apothecaries gave out,
Mr: Stubbs was so; though common Fame long since said, that he intended
something to that purpose against Dr. Goddard, and my Self; and though the
former report was strong, yet it could never enter into my thoughts, that he
had the least finger in a piece so illogical, and absurd, both as to matter and
language. I cannot say whether the Apothecaries Company, or any single person
of them did compose it, from whom I might expect an answer, which they promised
at our College about a Month since; but this I shall say, that if they are the
Authors of it, they have done most imprudently, in publishing a paper at such a
time, when they make overtures to the College. From the bold daring at Latin
and Greek, and misusing the College, together with the rest of the Errors
recited in my View, p. 60. which this nameless Writer is guilty of, any one may
conjecture rightly of what Company he is. And although this Book appear in the
form of a Libel, without name or License to it, so that in reason it concerns
me not to take public notice of it at all; but more especially, since I could
find nothing in it, worthy of a reply; yet since it is the fashion of the
ignorant part of the World, to think every Book answered, if there come forth
another with that Title, though it contain nothing at all of that nature, I
thought fit to resolve it into its parts, finding I had little else to do, then
by collecting together the nonsense, railing, etc. as the only way to reply,
hating with all my Soul all personal abuses, and therefore shall not take up
the common way of retaliation, by reviling again my adversary, but by showing
openly the man in his own words and expressions, sufficient to convince any one
of his unworthiness and folly, and shall follow the method proposed in the
Title.

Observe, That A. signifies the Anonymus, or nameless person, and M. Dr.
Merrett.

I shall begin first with his revilings against the College.

Because A. every where complains, that the Physicians, out of malice write
against them, and forsake their Shops; I leave it to the Reader, whether the
reason given by M. p. 32. Where I say that the odious and daily comparisons and
intrusions, daily complained of by my Colleagues, were a great cause of my
departing from them; besides, their railings at the College in general, and
bespattering them with notorious untruths; their Cheats (which I often say was
an ungrateful task for me to discover) be not cause sufficient for Physicians
to make all their own Medicines; which A. has fully made out in these words,
p. 4. A. The Law might as well have set 2 Shoe-makers, as Censors, to be Judges
of the Apothecaries Medicines; Those Censors for the most part not
understanding the tithe of the Medicines and Drugs in the Apothecaries Shops:
M. which, lest his ignorant Reader (to whom he says he writes) should forget,
repeats, p. 8. Most of the Doctors not understanding the tithe of what is
commonly used; M. and in answer to what I object, they bring not their Servants
to be examined according to their Charter; A. says, The Master and Wardens are
best able to pose by examination, and try whether their Servants be well
instructed or not. M. Pray A. ask Mr. Littler, whether when Warden, 5 of their
Servants examined by me together, could answer to one Question was asked them?
nay whether they did not all of them commit 6 Errors, in making the most vulgar
Medicine, the Lenitive Electuary, where it is enjoined, that the decoction of
the ingredients should be made S. A. But as to this part, when occasion serves,
more shall be said and to many other things: and whether also the Masters and
Wardens had not approved them, before they came to this examination. A. p. 15.
There is too much of Self in the College; p. 20. nothing must be left out of
the Physicians Medicines, though never so impertinent, as you may observe in
their Dispensatory corrected by Culpeper, and he says elsewhere, witness the
Pharmacopaea Land. corrected by Culpeper; the Medicines in the Dispensatory (no
thanks to them) were in print in several Authors long before theirs, p. 23. on
the Faith of the College. (I think that is no better then other men's) and this
I know, with others that have tried when they had formerly a public Laboratory
in Amen Corner, with Chemists of their own providing; there was as base
Medicines, and Preparations, put off by them, as any other Chemists in London,
p. 24. Here you have the Colleges profound proposals, for an Agreement. M. This
is not so, it is far below the College, (and is no truer then what some of them
gave out, they were desired by the College, not to give an answer to our
Books,) to make any proposals to Apothecaries. A. Being mere Chimaeras, and
resolutions to the contrary; and a mere imposing, not only on the Apothecary,
but the rest of the people; therefore most absurd. Ibid. After all their
proposed method for agreement, being so unreasonable and base.

M. The next thing shall be his railings, and odious comparisons. A. For
doubtless the discreet Apothecary being learned, may make a far abler
Physician, than the Physician an Apothecary; for it is but joining the Theory
to his Practice, and he may be complete; but a Physician cannot so easily
attain to Pharmacy, being a mystery. M. Which in vulgar acceptance is the
knavish part of a Trade. A. For the parts of Physic may be attained by the one
as well as the other, p. 9. It Is true that some Doctors Bills could not be made
without some alteration of the Apothecary, the same I affirm, p. 30. and p. 11.
Seriously, I will sooner make use of an experienced, learned Apothecary, then
some Physicians. Ib. There is nothing that the greatest Arcana-monger can
attain, but the learned and ingenious Apothecary may attain to the same or
better. When the Doctors have taught Ladies, etc. to make Clysters, they had
best give them too. (M. I think Apothecaries themselves do not give Ladies
Clysters.) A. The people in England, have received as much good by the taking
of a pennyworth of Mithridate or Treacle, as others who have given 10 s. to a
Doctor for a Fee. Supposes Apothecaries, understanding, intelligent persons,
fit for the practice in Physic, p. 16. A little Chemistry will go a great way
with them, and experiments. p. 17. I could tell a way to Commence Doctor, and
easier learned then an Apothecary will take an Apprentice. M. Pray A. Teach us
the way. A. I believe some of them have come in that way, and Equipage. For now
there must be the little Coach and 2 Horses, which in these days are very usual
appendices to them. So that to say a Doctor goes to see a Patient, is too
pedantic for our Age, and being thus attended, half a piece for a Fee is but
ill taken, and popt perhaps into their left Pocket, and possible may cause the
Patient to send to his Worship (before he will come again) to the hazard of
another Angel. M. To which A. adds, p. the 3d. A Velvet Jump, a pair of silk
Stockings, and a Cane with a silver Head, p. 17. M. And from this handsome
support of Physicians (A. Pray take heed of that) A. Ib. The Doctors were never
so eminent, and encouraged as of late times, there being more Knighted then
has been known in so short a time. Their Worships Greatness, p. 19.
Apothecaries are as capable of Philosophy, Arts, Anatomy, and the practic part
as themselves, and many of them underderstand them better then some licentiate
Doctors. M. A Name often used, but never tells what he means by them. A. Ib.
The Ladies having learned to make Electuaries, Plasters, Ointments, Conserves,
etc. (that is, those only they know how to make up) M. And sure no Apothecary
can do more. A. And by that time Physicians have taught them to make Clysters,
and Decoctions, they may be as famous as the Doctors. p. 20. If the Doctors
should set upon making their own Medicines, and (which will not suit with their
grandeur) wear blew Aprons. M. Which the Masters now scorn to do. A.
Apothecaries may with much ease understand, and make themselves as able
Physicians as any that practice. p. 23. In acute pains it will be best to let
the Doctor alone, and use the next honest Apothecary. Because we cannot trust
the Apothecaries for Chemical remedies, which they may do as well as they can
trust the Physicians. p. 24. Doubtless Apothecaries are better acquainted with
Materia medica, then most Physicians, and learned as to the Descriptions, and
Qualities of Plants. p. 25. That Apothecaries are able to practice Physic, was
proved from the nature of Diseases, and the several ways they admit of Cure (M.
Make sense of it if you can) A. And pray you why may they not be Masters of
this as well as your self, some of them? ib. Let but a rational, learned
Apothecary ( M. Titles never given to them by any but by A.) add but the Theory
to his former Observations, he may be better fitted for practice, and I will
sooner engage him then many Physicians. An Apothecary by industry and
Observation, may be a Master of as great Arcanums, as any whatsoever
practicing. The ingenious Apothecary being well read in Physic, viz. in
Frambesarius, Riverius; who till of late days was the only approved Author. M.
(Absurd) for he died not long since. And in Enchiridion medicum, which costs
but 1s. 6d. may be as fit and capable of the practice of Physic, as any person
whatsoever.

M. By all which, he has manifestly proved, and the first impudently in print
too (much like his Brother Cocket, mentioned in the short View) p. 24. what I
have alleged of their railings, and private back-bitings, to which he
answers nothing. But now to my use of terror, as he calls it.

Now this being apparently so, what learned and ingenious Physician can brook
such unworthy and unsufferable affronts, as I have elsewhere said? And I leave
it to all men's judgments, whether it be not high time for the College, and all
Physicians to vindicate their honor, which cannot be done by any other way
then what has been proposed by my Book; and to wipe off all those imputations
of ignorance in Materia Medica, and Pharmacy, which will necessarily follow
upon making their own Medicines, and for the which this A. has railed upon me
and others my Fellow Writers against them, as will appear in the next
Paragraph. And whether the College will not be judged by the present and after
Ages, negligent of their own concerns in not so doing. And that they do not act
the same against the Apothecaries they heretofore did against the Surgeons,
for a far less crime committed by some meaner persons of that Company, to wit,
for saying, the Physicians could only read upon, but not dissect bodies.
Whereupon the Physicians excluded them from dissecting bodies at their College;
and soon taught the World, how well they could work at it. And hence it is,
that so many worthy discoveries have been made by them, since they have put
their own hands to dissect. The like advance will happen to the practical part
of Physic, when Physicians vouchsafe to work upon natural things themselves,
and I am sure will find both greater satisfaction, and also thereby advance
their own skill and profession, to their full worth and dignity, as well as the
public to greater profit and contentment.

A's Revilings against us are, p. 1. By opprobrious, and unhandsome
Billings-gate Language, p. 2. Discourse alias Railing. He shamefully insinuates
ridiculous stories. Pose his Worship, Eight-ly, Tenth-ly, etc. This lies a
little too wide. M. Good Sir, not so much as 8000 l. in one year for Fees. A.
Frothy Objections, new Whims, and Inventions, Whims and Novelties; Quarrelsome
Doctor, Worshipful Doctor, your. Unchristian and false Pamphlet, Closet
Doctors, his Stories, notorious Falsities, and elsewhere sordid Allegories, e.
g. to abuse Apothecaries, a pitiful shift, mere Chimaeras. Abusers, and
Traducers of the whole Company, Opprobrious language, Unreasonable and base
designs, As envicus as Diabolus. Strange uncouth expressions, Doctors
Calumnies, Frothy Discourse, a Saint Doctor, Dis-ingenious, and absurd
practice, as ridiculous as the Author; Old quacking shifts, gingling discourse,
Calumniators, a most severe and uncharitable Censure. The Doctor is so
deficient in Physiologie, that he thinks any Apothecary honest. M. Understand
it who can for me. From a debauched Doctor Apothecary and Surgeon, Libera me
Domined M. With many more the like.

Now because he often complains of the (...) I give them; here shall follow all
I meet with my Book; Illiterate persons, Unskillful, every pitiful fellow,
pitiful, ignorant, and self-ended Souls. I know no other Epithets I have given
them; whereby it appears how justly he accuses me of malice, revilings, and
disgracing them with truth (as will appear by and by) if by his not answering
(as every man will think) he confesses, to what A. answers not.

Next follow his falsities in matter of Fact, and miss Quotations. A. Custos
Argentorum, successful, for not unsuccessful. Cheats, for Artifices. The
Censors examiners; where he leaves out the Apothecaries; besides, I am sure
that the Goldsmiths, and Pewterers, have not any supervisors that are not of
their own Company. A. Limons and Citrons, for Syrup of Limons and Citrons. A.
Inventing matter and designs, and discover them himself, Dr. M. a good
Apothecaries Physician. Apothecaries used in the small Pox. M. p. 3. He omits
Privet Beryes, and there asks, what is got by selling Dog Beryes, for Spina
Cervina; surely somewhat, because the one is found almost in every Ditch, the
other much more rarely. He mistakes Pil. stomach. sec. genesis in the London
Dispensatory, unless sec. genesis in some language invented by him signifies cum
gummi. He makes a good verse of variabimus tela, for Arts. An old Proverb
Garrulus medicus laboranti morbus. M. This Proverb is not in Erasmus Chiliads.
A. Sp. of CC. cried up by me, contracting with Apothecaries forgot by me; vid.
View. p. 18. A. You promised Surgeons should apply Blisters and Medicines to
the Feet. M. Where do I say so? A. Dr. M. not excused from filling Cupboards
with many Medicines, etc. One of your selves, Dr. Goddard with his Drops. M.
Whom you might have distinguished from my learned Colleague, Dr. Jonathan
Goddard, had you not a mind to have asperst him, as well as elsewhere you do
the Judicious Dr. Thomas Cox, from Dr. Daniel Cox, whom you there grossly
mistake; for I assure you, he is not so good a Friend to your ways as you
imagine, but the other Goddard was none of our selves. Apothecaries may be the
veriest Knaves, he omits without discovery. In one place I complain of strong
Pills given, he leaves out strong, though little to his advantage, and makes no
difference betwixt a Vomit, and Pills. I say Physicians in the late Wars, kept
up, as to learning, the honor of the Nation; A. replies, The Apothecaries, p.
17. outdid them in supplies, when the Exigence of affairs required. M. And to
mention but one more amongst multitudes (which I am necessitated to omit)
because I design to be brief, viz. when he often calls us Aggressors; But that
Apothecaries have been the Aggressors first, i. e. by usurping our profession
(which he himself confesses) they have done for a hundred years last past,
without being ever questioned for it, as I have said elsewhere; besides, their
revilings of us, as has been proved, but if our discoveries in print of the
former, and also of their Cheats, which I can prove have been as ancient as
their practice; then I must confess we are the Aggressors, which I think no
ingenious person will judge, but lay that accusation upon themselves, because of
their first assaulting us in our employments and Credits.

Nonsense. Some whereof happily may be for his want of Grammar (I cannot better
excuse him) which he has sufficiently showed in false improper Greek, and
Latin, which he uses, though but little, and whereby he must needs show
himself an Apothecary, such a one as I have described in my View. A. Dr. M. and
Dr. Cox, contradict themselves, as they have done in all Ages. The old
Medicines are better and more safe then his new Inventions, as Hippocrates
affirms. Treacle-water so much magnified by fire. Authentic Medicines.
Medicines the Apothecaries support and notions. For a Physician to give his
Medicines gratis, is enough to discourage any ingenious person to follow it. M.
And to say no more, but what every Reader may observe in many places, that they
are unintelligible.

Next follow his Concessions of what I have alleged against them. A. As the
failings of some few. He might have passed over other Apothecaries failings.
These discoveries might have unadvisedly slipped from the Apothecaries, or their
Servants; Nemo omnibus horis sapit. M. But doubtless they will be closer
hereafter. A. He acknowledges good Apothecaries Physicians. Dr. Goddard ( M.
He means him with the Drops) Had the knack as well as the Apothecaries.
Questionless these mistakes are rare. The Closet Doctors may be mistaken as
well as the Apothecaries. A little ordinary practice among some of them. Good
reason Apothecaries should cry up their good Physicians. He teaches the
Company better manners in his own words, when they come next to dine at their
Hall; if the Apothecary had made a Physicians Bill, the Patient would have been
truly his Patient. He confesses also, that Nostrums do undo them. M. As for
his Logic, especially in that part wherein he promises to discover the Frauds,
and Abuses, committed by Doctors professing, and practicing Pharmacy; he argues
all along. A. They may be Cheats, ergo they are; and therefore persuades
himself, that Dr. M. who has discovered so many Cheats and falsities does
practice them. M. I say Apothecaries were Physicians Servants; A. infers, that
I say, the whole Company is so; now he there says, Apothecaries have no
dependence on Physicians; it is true of practicing Apothecaries, but to say
others have not, is nonsense; and through all his Book, he thus reasons. A.
Possibly, Doubtless, Questionless, Perhaps, Likely, I suppose, I hear, it is
more then probable, it may be, it is feared, I believe, without doubt, or I do
not believe; much may be said, etc. M. And this is all the proofs he has in
what he asserts, you shall scarcely find a page in his Book, where this
reasoning is not, I am sure in most pages several times. It Is most certain,
that he has not given one instance to prove any Frauds in Physicians*
according to his Title Page, more then showing a possibility, that it may be
so. He reasons here as well as he does all along, that Apothecaries may be
learned and able in Physic; Ergo, they are so. And that Physicians will never
Cheat, I think I have given a solid reason elsewhere, that so to do is to his
disadvantage. And for the same reason, I cannot but think, that the practicing
Apothecaries who sold Myrtle leaves for Sena, etc. to those they call their own
Patients, did give good Sena, but to the Doctors Patients, Myrtle leaves. And
here I might conclude, this pitiful Writer having sufficiently confuted
himself: But I shall briefly run over what he objects more in his Book; adding
by the by, what he omits to answer. In the head of Cheats, he answers to the
first, that other men may be Knaves as well as Apothecaries; he answers nothing
to Cheat, the 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. 9th. and 10th. to the complaints
of multiplying Bills, nothing to the first, 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th.
and acknowledges the 9th. of the good Apothecaries Physician, that in setting
down in their Bills Pearl, and Bezoar, he answers, that some Physicians have
plied their Patient with Sp. CC. Elixir Proprietatis. Whereof I think no man
can give one Patient half an Ounce in a weeks time, which at his rate will cost
but 2s. 6d. though a Chemist told me they would give him but 1s. 6d. an ounce,
when they have run upon his Book, p. 5th. p. 6th. A. says, This lies a little
too wide, to make Customers pay 11, or 12 shillings for a pint of Juleb. M. For
once let it be but 10s. but he tells me I have left out the main ingredient,
which causes the Apothecaries Bill to be sharp. One whereof he says, is the
Apothecaries freedom in lending the young Physician a room and Servants to
attend him, and the Mistress too, Urgente necessitate, P O for that. M. This I
understand not, I hope he means no hurt to the Husband, however it is unjust the
Patient should pay for the Apothecaries freeness to the Physician. The second
reason, as he says, is forgot by me. M. It Is given in my 18th. page. As to
their affronts to the College, page 21. 22. 23. 24. he only barely says, A.
They would have introduced an unlimited power, which the wisdom of our Nation
thought very unequal, and would not allow. M. It Is more then you know, for the
Committee, as I said, never gave a report of that business to the Parliament.
p. 8. A. says, I call them saucy for calling the sick their Patients. M. But I
demonstrated it to be nonsense, which is not so of the Attorney and his
Clyent, which are as truly relatives, as Physician and Patient. p. 8. A. says,
I suppose not any eminent Practitioners in London, in former times have made
their own Medicines. M. Perhaps not, because Apothecaries then used none of
those mischiefs complained of in my Book, and therefore the Physician need not
then put himself to that trouble and charge as now he does. As to the benefits
arising by practicing Physicians, he says nothing at all in page 28. 29. nor
any thing of any moment, of the inconveniences of sending Bills to them, p.
29. 30. to page 34. where he says, A. The giving of Medicines by the
Physicians gratis; This is a wise knack of a Doctor, just as broad as long; if
you will pay for the Goose, he will give you the sauce. M. Nay, there is a
great difference; for grant advice to be the Goose, and the Medicines the
Sauce; and suppose the Patient, or buyer, will give 5s. for the Goose (for
every one gives the Physician as he pleases and is able) the Knavish Cook, to
follow his simile, which in the Case proposed is the Apothecary, may make him
pay as he list, even to 40s; now without doubt, every man will rather pay 5s.
together for both, then dividedly trebble his charge. p. 17. He stands up for
the old Medicines, whereof in page 31. A. says, The Apothecary need not be
troubled, to his great charge in making, and having in readiness, so many
unprofitable and uncouth Medicines. M. So that he has here answered that
Objection for me. Yet I will add to that, one more of my own, i. e. if the
Opium were left out of those greater Compositions, I think no Apothecary would
give 4d. a pound for it, for any use, unless it were to put Opium to it, and
make it up again; and I have to some Physicians merrily compared Mathew's Pill
to those great Medicines, who have given the preeminence to the later. Besides,
I never said they were bad Medicines, but that better, and at smaller charges,
might be made. But I will say no more of those great Idols of the Apothecaries,
and other ignorant persons that know not, nor ever consider` the reason and
nature of Medicines, p. 12. As for my Objection against the so common use of
Sugar, in Syrups, Conserves, etc. may not the same be confronted by his page
31. where he desires, that a new Pharmacopaea Land. may be set forth, wherein
may be spared of the Medicines in the old. M. I doubt not but when that
reformation he desires comes, that these Conserves, Syrups, Lohocks, etc. and
most of the distilled waters, which make up the bulk of the Shop, will be the:
he desires to be spared; and by this your proposal, what pitiful empty Shops
will you have? in the same place you would have an addition of some other
laudable Medicines, which you need not doubt will be some of those you call the
Whims and Novelties of the Closet Doctors. In the same page you direct also,
that Medicines may be contracted, but for so doing you rail at me in your 20
page. p. 15. A. makes no difference at all in Sena, but puts the uncertainty of
working only to the person to whom it is administered, for which he quotes
Hippocrates in his false Greek (...). ibid. he calls filii Artis, a new Sect;
which he prophecies, may be as bad or worse then the Apothecaries; but for that
we may take his advice, given p. 13. where he advises us to keep them to our
selves, as he says, it is best so to do. p. 16. You say I cajole the
Surgeons, and put the Apothecaries and them together by the Ears; Why then
you resolve to fly in the faces of the Surgeons, for acting but what they
ought; for to be sure they will not quarrel with them. p. 18. Whereas you say,
In the Plague time, the Doctors with their Worships greatness fled. M. I
answer, that few Apothecaries that were able to maintain themselves abroad,
stayed in London. Neither did any Physician leave the City till the College had
made choice of as many of themselves, as the City thought meet to attend that
service. Besides, many Seniors of our College remained, as many I dare say, as
there did of the better sort of Apothecaries in proportion, and doubtless,
'twas as acceptable service to the Citizens of London (whom he here Claws) to
have City Physicians in the Country with them, where they might have some
employment also; as to stay in the City to the hazard of their lives, when they
had scarce any Patient that remained there. p. 18. He acknowlegeth all I said,
from p. 51. to the latter end of 59. viz. my digression against the Common
Mountebanks to be true; and surely, there is no reason, but all indifferent
persons should think, both my detections to be as sound and solid in all the
rest, as A. does this, p. 20. A. confesses, That Chimistry is part of the
Apothecaries Trade, and denies not but they will fall upon the Trade of
Druggists, and Distillers also, p. 21. M. He seems to answer to answer my
argument (which he calls my greatest, because he says nothing to any of the
rest) drawn from the unlawful encroachment of one Trade upon another. His
answer is nothing to the purpose; for says A. One that has a good opinion may
make use of an Apothecary. M. It Is true he may, and offends not the Law but
himself; But how does this justify the Apothecary that practices on him; and
can another mistake disanul the Law, forbidding Apothecaries, etc. to
practice? And by this reasoning of his, any man may be a Divine, Lawyer,
Surgeon, Apothecary, etc. (I doubt his Company will not thank him for it)
nay any man may set up any Trade in London (he says, somewhere I may do so) by
this Logic, if he can but get Customers. He goes on and replies to what I
allege, that the Apothecaries practice against Law. A. Answers, Any one may
apply outward applications, and inward Medicines, by the Statute (I Will tell
him) it is that of 34 H. 8. and withal several Pleas made by Mountebanks, who
were all overthrown upon it. Besides, some of the Judges were of opinion that
this was repealed by 1 Mar. vid. Butlers Case in Crokes Report, part 1. you
conclude this with your good Latin, somewhat better then your Magna in parva,
and call it a Maxim in Law; Quod quisque norit, in eodem exerceat. This Maxim
is against all reason, and therefore Law in your sense. I never heard of it,
surely you mistake stake it for that common Maxim of theirs; Quisque in sua
Art credendus, or in sua Art peritus. The former is a practical consequence
from the later, and that is a supposition needful in our Law.

To the rest of the Book and Postscript, he says nothing, but only of the
relation I had from a Clergy Man, who names no person; but A. has made his
name out of the letter thus, the silly Apothecary knows no more then to write
to a wholesale Apothecary in your City, out of which he has Christened Wright
the Apothecary. I say of my Friend, he is well known in Physic, whence he
infers he is a practiser too, and then quotes against his practice the decrees
of the Church, and Dr. Primrose, and then tells you this story might have been
better concealed for the honor of the Divines profession (just as much as it
was against Physiology before for me to do the like) it being contrary to the
rule of Charity, and his great Master, to divulge his Brethrens faults, how
then shall a Divine preach? you would like him well enough, if he had spoke,
though untruths against the Physicians; and though you in many places revile me
for detecting your Cheats, and proving them; yet you must be praised for your
Lex Talionis, a mere Libel; A. And in truth there is as much reason for
Apothecaries to change professions and preach, as they to practice Physic,
though I am for neither; M. (but by his Logic, if they will practice Physic, he
will preach) A. This observe, You shall seldom read or hear of any mischiefs or
abuses, such as these are put in print by the Doctors, but the Parson must have
a finger in the Pie, witness in late times, In Nomine Domini, etc.

And thus Reader, you have seen how he has abused the Physicians and Divines,
and this makes it probable, that if a Lawyer should tell him how grossly he
mistakes in page 21. the application of the Maxim, how he would deal with him.

And now to confirm what I have said throughout, I desire the Reader to peruse
the 2d. part of the usefulness of Natural Philosophy, Written by the Honorable
Mr. Boil, a Person who spends both time and purse for the advancement of all
public good, without interest or passion; and you will find him there, not
only affirm, but prove a good part of what I have said; with some quick and
sharp glances against Physicians, that do not improve Medicines. I shall
mention but two, page 142. he says of the inventors of Mithridate, and
Treacle, A wise Man might use a remedy which scarce any but a Fool would have
invented. Add hereto, what the Learned Zwelfer, the first Physician that ever
went about to reform Dispensatories (too hard a task for Apothecaries.) All
others being either transcribers only, or a little alterers of the Shop
Medicines says of Treacle, and Mithridate, p. 428. What was said before and
premised of Theriaca Andromachi, may be deservedly said of Mithridate, both as
well to the Composition its self, as to the rule of preparing it; and a little
after, I may rather laugh at, then examine some of the ingredients; and no less
worthy of laughter then examination, are there many other ingredients in this
pompous Composition. Which passage is much more severe then what I said of them
in my View, p. 38. where I say briefly, that they consist of confused and
contrary ingredients, and that they are unintelligible and unreasonable
Compositions. By this passage out of a person whose Book all Physicians highly
honor, besides what I allege in the same place* how falsely this ignorant A.
speaks (for you are to believe says he, this infallible Doctors, ipse dixit)
and that it is but one Doctors opinion; and is as true, as he twice affirms,
these Compositions were commended by me to the Nation, because my name was to
the Dispensatory. I confess my name is fixed to it, but as Candidate only, not
as Fellow; and therefore I had no hand in that Book, and had I been then Fellow
of the College, I should have given my suffrage and approbation to it,
notwithstanding any thing I say in my View, 20 years after the publication of
that Pharmacopaea. And again Mr. Boil in p. 138. ' It Is certain (says he) that
the Bills of Apothecaries, especially in Chronical Cases, do often prove so
chargable, that even when the remedies succeed, by that time a poor Patient is
recovered, he is undone, and pays for the prolongation of his life, that which
should have been his livelihood. Now Sir, if you please to add this or any
other of his Books to your Library, you may find more reason in a few pages of
his, then in the whole Library you have commended, and Certe, in your own word,
you will not judge this Noble Person to have written (as you say of us) out of
malice, or design, nor railingly, though more sharply then our selves.

Add hereunto the opinion and practice of that Pious and Learned Divine Mr.
Baxter, well known for his life and works, who not long* since told me, in the
presence of one of my Colleagues, and an Apothecary, and several other persons
of quality, that when he practiced Physic in Kiderminster (wherein he is
rationally skilled) he durst never trust an Apothecary, but practiced all his
own Medicines; and when he gave over, he introduced another into his practice,
on this condition only, that he should dispense his own remedies.

And so having spent a few idle hours, in reading and animadverting on your
frivolous papers, I hope you and such as you will leave your railing, and
follow your practice, which I did neither in my former Book, nor in this
Pamphlet restrain you from, or set any Conditions, Articles, or Limitations
upon you, according to all your desires, as your other Antagonists do, and
therefore have reason to expect, you will without murmuring, and tricks, let
the Closet Doctors peaceably enjoy their practice, and then let us try whether
you, or such as you, are the abler and honester Physicians, and Apothecaries;
and leave the World to judge, whether our Medicines are not more safe, more
pleasant, more durable, and of greater efficacy, and less charge by far, and
less fulsom, then yours of the Shops, and by this means we shall all be Friends.

Postscript.
COnsidering Reader, This Pamphlet should have come abroad 12 days sooner, but
for some impediments, and delays it met with, being all that time out of my
hands; Now in this interval, perusing again the Lex Talionis, I thought fit to
add somewhat in relation to what it allegeth against Physicians in general, and
also against the blew Apron, or Closet Doctor Apothecaries (as A. calls them)
pretermitting wholly some passages omitted in each head, and clear inferences
easily deducible from each of them, enough having been quoted to satisfy any
indifferent person; But before I proceed, I shall only take notice of the
disingenuity of the Apothecaries, who before all intelligent men, disclaim that
Book, saying the same I have said of it, but telling unconsidering, and
ignorant persons, that our Books are fully answered; so ready are they by
double dealing to support their cause, since no other way can do it.

The first thing A. allegeth against Physicians in general, is, in his Preface
in these words. They abuse the Apothecaries, persuading away, and taking from
them their friends, and acquaintance, employing, and sending their Bills,
contrary to civility, and Equity, to whom they please, to the great prejudice
of most of them, and therefore you will never blame some of them, for
practicing, being necessitated thereunto for a livelihood. p. 14. the Doctors
began first with the Apothecaries, by invading his interest, and causing some
of them to practice out of necessity, page 29. for it can be nothing less then
incivility, to make a Gentleman, or other to forsake his friend, by employing
whom he pleases as his Apothecary, and this is their common practice. M. An
Example thereof, he there gives of a Saint Doctor. ib. p. 29. A. Another humor
of the Doctor, which will necessitate the Apothecary to practice, is this, by
having a prejudice against him (and this is common) so that they will not
suffer his acquaintance to make use of him, nor send their Bills to him (though
this be very dis-ingenuous and absurd) but to another* Apothecary. M. And then
another story of a practicing Apothecary, and after that thus concludes. A.
Here are two such plain Cases, and so common, that unless the Doctors on their
parts will engage, not to deal so dis-ingenuously against all Equity and
Reason* the Apothecary can have no assurance of a subsistence by his
profession, but in practicing of Physic, and p. 31. A. proposes, That if a
Patient sends for a Physician, he may make use of what Apothecary he
pleases, for to make up, and administer those things prescribed, nothing more
reasonable, though nothing less practiced, p. 32. A. asks, Whether the common
practice of Physicians ( most of them having a particular Apothecary) to whom
usually they send their Bills (though contrary to the Patients desire) and I
know what they usually say as to the justifying of it, if this has not been
the very cause of the necessitating the Apothecary to practice Physic for his
necessary support. M. And for this reason in several places, he makes the
Physicians the Aggressors in this quarrel.

To answer and prevent which Objections, I have said somewhat in my View, p.
46. and I doubt not but the Reader would have been satisfied, if A. had been
pleased to have published the reasons, he says, he knows Physicians allege
for justifying their so doing, some whereof I shall here recite. One is a just
Lex Talionis, which A. by his Title approves of, which sure he likes as equal
and just, viz. that I say in my View, that they commonly shuffle out those
Physicians that write only for the Patients good, to bring in their good
Apothecaries Physician, to the manifold greater charge of the Patient, and
nothing more ordinary then for them to brag of this.

Secondly, All those discoveries made in their substituting, detracting,
falsifying, using of unsound Druggs, their tricks of raising Bills, and most of
the advantages I have mentioned, both to Physician and Patient, being well
reflected on (where I show the advantages both Patient and Physician have in
making their own Medicines, not needful here to be recited) will most clearly
prove so many solid reasons, if not a necessity of Physicians carrying away
their Patients (as they call them) to an Apothecary, whose honesty they know
both for the true making, and prizing the Medicines, and over whom they have
some power in those particulars.

Thirdly, Physicians do it for their own reputation. For the errors, and
deceits of the Apothecary always reflect on them, as well as the life and
health of the Patients are concerned thereby.

Fourthly, It Is granted by all, that the Patient is wholly ignorant of the
Apothecaries Medicines, and practices, which the Physician does, or cannot but
better know either upon his own experience, or by information of some others
that know them, whether this or that Apothecaries Medicines be good, or
honestly made, and therefore has more reason to trust his reputation, and his
Patients life with one he knows, then with one he knows not, nor has ever
heard of, and for securing both, no Patient will but thank him for it.

Fifthly, When an Apothecary has practiced of his own head, and the Physician
is not called in till extremity of danger, what reason is there, that he should
take upon him the discredit of the Patients Death (if past Cure) or why should
he teach that Apothecary to practice further by curing of him? And thus much
and no more of the Equity, and reason of carrying away Patients from
Apothecaries, though most of the pages in my View, may supply intelligent
Readers with reasons why Physicians should commonly deal thus with them; and
this I will here say, I never did so without sound reason, and to the good
content of the Patient, accounting in this Case the success wholly to depend
upon my self, being bound in all reason to make good the honesty and skill of
the commended Apothecary.

The next railing expression is, A. That it is incivility so to do. To this I
answer, that Civility comes from Civis a Citizen (as no man that understands
Latin doubts it does) and consequently, if Civility signifies the practice of
Citizens (as it does as clearly as the other) for Civility comes from Civilis,
which signifies no more then the City usage; then it is most plain, that this
practice of Physicians is most Civil: for I appeal to each single Citizen,
whether or no he thinks it not fair, and equal, to recommend his acquaintance
in way of trading to other men of the same Trade his known Friends, then which
I think there is nothing more commonly practiced in the City. And therefore for
so doing, he does tax all the Citizens of incivility, absurdity, and
dis-ingenuity, for which I presume they will thank him as much, in p. 20. where
A. says, Physicians may sell Grocers Wares, as well as make Medicines, if they
please. Neither have I heard any complaint made by any Apothecary, when a
friend has carried them from one to another; besides, why is it not uncivil
for one Apothecary to carry away another Customer?

The next thing I shall speak to is, his great Complaint against Physicians
making their own Medicines, p. 1. A. says, That few wise men think this is for
the public good, and honor of the profession, and ibid. This is the only way
in the World to break Apothecaries. p. 2. There Is knavery in all Trades, the
Physicians not excepted, p. 10. The very naming of Physicians giving Medicines
gratis, is enough to discourage any ingenious person to follow it. ibid. New
inventions and experiments are dangerous. p. 13. New Models, new vampt merely
out of design, and in several places whimsyes, p. 31. he proposes somewhat as
to the avoiding those many prejudices, as may arise by new inventions (as to
the sanative part) not manifest. M. As to this Objection, I answer briefly,
that having declared at large the great improvements may be, and are made in
Physic, and that such improvement is, and has been made, to the great help,
comfort, and content of Patients, as experience has taught them; if A. had had
any prudence or well meaning to the public good, he would not condemn those
things others have found good by, and which he wholly is ignorant of; which no
civil or modest man will do, though in the same place he desires an addition
and publication of such laudable preparations, as shall be judged fit and suit
the Therapeutic, according to the causes of Diseases, now of late more
perfectly known. Where he acknowledges that the old preparations of the Shops,
do not (at least) so well suit the Therapeutic, and that some preparations may
be fitted that will, or else why does he desire an addition of such? Now I am
to tell him, that such Medicines the Closet Doctors make. But the great cry of
this A. and his Brethren is, because we will not (as he says) set them forth
and make them manifest, viz. to every Apothecary and his Servant to practice
by, and then to vilify and abuse the Inventors, and Founders of them,
especially when they are made Masters of those things, which are better kept
secret, to the Honor and livelihood of the Inventor, and good opinion of the
taker; for since so it is, that the best Medicine possibly can be made, must
necessarily sometimes prove unsuccessful, if it come once into a Shop, and be
made common, it loses its value, and esteem it had whilst it was in private
hands, to the great disadvantage of the Patient, and hence it is that
Apothecaries making use of some private receipt of a Physician, frequently gets
more money by concealing it as his own, then the Inventor ever did. And this
private way of getting receipts from Physicians, is the principal, if not the
sole cause of setting up Mountebanks in the World. But because examples prove
more with the vulgar then reason does, I shall conclude this Objection by an
instance in a Person much commended in several places by this A. viz. Dr.
Willis (who was the great Practitioner I mentioned in my View, of whom an
Apothecary said, that his Boy could write as good a Bill as he (some of whose
Books you to no purpose quote in p. 26. 27.) has gained that great opinion in
the World by concealed Medicines made by himself, and prudently distributed in
his own practice, and to his own Apothecary only, or by himself; and surely, if
this A. had any thing to do in the World, he must take notice of it. Two of
which, viz. his preparation of Steel, and Brimstone, he mentions not in one
place only, are not unknown to some of the Closet Doctors, as well as many
other secrets, of as good if not better effects as they, such are those you
call whimsies used by those that detect your Cheats. It Is certain you commend
not this practice in the learned Dr. Willis. Sure I am, an Apothecary told me
he had seen a preparation of Steel, for the receipt whereof he would have given
an 100 l. but being showed by a Closet Doctor, such a preparation which he
preferred before that other, no more words were made of it. Such are the
whimsies, and novelties, invented by such you so much rail at in your own
defense, being able to do no otherwise. And having thus a second time absolved
my Conscience in the performance of my double promise (equivalent to an Oath)
to prosecute by all lawful ways, illiterate Empirics. I now now resolve to sit
quiet, and leave any further defense to such, whom it concerns perhaps more
then my self, and the rest, who by making their own Medicines, and by their
Pens endeavor the public good, and the honor of their profession, slighting
the malicious forgeries, and tricks contrived against us. I say the vindication
from the slanders mentioned in Lex Talionis (the common language of most
Apothecaries) reflects wholly on such as make not their own Medicines. For such
as do, must be knowing in Drugs, and Simples; must know the whole process of
preparing, and ordering them into Medicines, which they are willing to
demonstrate (there being no other way) to any person whatsoever. And do hereby
offer (without the least vainglory) to accept any proposal to be made by the
Company of the Apothecaries, whereby they may clear to the World by manual
operation and visible demonstration, how far some of the Closet Doctors surpass
them, both in the knowledge of all natural things, and in well ordering them
for Medicines, together with the ratio componendi. And all this upon whatsoever
conditions the Apothecaries shall think fit to propose. Which if they do not
(as I am sure they will not, though many advantages shall be allowed them) then
let all the World judge, how falsely and undeservingly they slander us, and as
they have done my self in special; And we doubt not to prove them in the whole*
Empirics, in their own Trade, as I have said in my View. And now I must beg
pardon of all Learned men, especially those of my own Art, that I have
descended so low, as to cope with such unworthy Adversaries; hoping the zeal
for our profession, will plead my excuse; and for this my expectation, the
Tongues and Pens of many give me full assurance.

FINIS.

