A SHORT REPLY TO THE Postscript, etc. of H. S.

Showing his many Falsities in matters of Fact; the impertinencies of his
promised Answers to some Physicians that have written against the Apothecaries:
his conspiracy with Apothecaries to defame them, the R. S. and many Learned men
of our Nation.

Made by Christopher Merrett Dr. of Physic and Fellow of the College of
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for James Allestry, and are to be Sold at his Shop in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1670.

TO THE READER.
THere coming to my hands a Pamphlet entitled Campanella revived; with a
Postscript concerning the quarrel depending betwixt H. S. and Dr Merret, and
wondering there should be a quarrel depending betwixt my self, and any other
person, having never wrote, or said any thing against any single person, I soon
run over his Epistle to the Reader, and found Henry Stubbs subscribed to it,
who in other Papers styles himself a Physician at Warwick. A person whom I
never saw, but have seen Books of his writing against very learned and worthy
persons, and whose best parts have been employed in wrangling with men far
better then himself, and therefore amongst all knowing persons his Pen is no
slander; Wherefore my resolution was not to return any answer at all. But upon
second thoughts, and by the advice of some other learned Friends and Colleagues
I soon dispatched these Papers, which had come abroad three weeks ago, had our
Presses bin at leisure.

Before I come to speak particularly to his Postscript, I shall mention several
falsities and untruths delivered in this Pamphlet against the R. S. and my
self, and Secondly shall offer my reasons to impartial men to make it plain,
that the Apothecaries are the Authors, Fomentors, or adjutors in it. Thirdly I
shall detect their cunning contrivances, in defending themselves from having
their Books (especially this Pamphlet) made Libels.

As for the Falsities in matter of Fact; in his preface to the reader he says
the Royal Society would have incorporated the College of Phisicians into their
Society, but that the prudent and grave did decline, a thing never dreamt on;
it is true Mr. Colwell my Countreyman, a very noble Benefactor to the R. S. and
my self, considering the College of Physicians was consumed by Fire, and that
the R. S. also wanted a convenience for their meetings, we both judged it meet
to propose to each Society, that a common place of meeting might be erected at
the common charges of them both; which design none of our College but judged to
be much for their advantage, and most of the Council of the R. S. approved at
first, but upon second thoughts rejected; urging that both the name of the
place and honor would be wholly the Physicians, and therefore never endeavored
to incorporate the Physicians into their Society, a thing very incongruous and
absurd in it self; because his Majesty had established them as two
Corporations with distinct Laws and Government. When this conjunction of
purses only was first proposed at a College meeting, one only prudent and
grave person did not decline (as Mr. Stubs says) but thought fit, we should
consider on it, but since upon more mature deliberation the same prudent person
would have brought it on again.

A second falsity is, that the R. S. promoted the Anti-College of
Pseudo-Chymists encouraging Odowde and his adherents in opposition to the
Physicians. This I confess is news to Physicians here who are sure never any
thing was proposed, or endeavored by the Society to that purpose. Who have
been observant enough of whatsoever they have seemed at least to entrench on
our Faculty.

Thirdly, H. S. has four falsities complicated together in these words. Nor
would I have any man to believe that there are so many eminent Physicians of
the R. S., for neither is the number of those admitted considerable: few of
note but have deserted it again, the rest approve not of it, so that all they
talk of will not amount to three understanding Persons. To which I reply that
in the List of the last year 1669, I find 34 Physicians to be members of the R.
S. and that the number of them is considerable, will appear by having yearly
four or five or more of the Council, the whole number amounting but to 21. And
that none of the Physicians have deserted them is manifest, because they have
not signified in writing their mind to the President as their statutes require.
But that those that remain approve not of it is most false, and will be so,
'till the Physicians find them invadors of their Faculty, prejudicial to the
Arts, Church, or State, and if there be but two understanding Physicians (as
you deny there are more.) You may be sure the rest of the Faculty persuaded by
the reasons of these two and their own interest will soon leave them.

Fourthly, In the Poscript H. S. affirms, That all the books written on that
subject (the Apothecaries) proceeded from them, (the Royal Society.) I perceive
Mr. Stubbe has not read all Books (a great accusation against the R. S. all
along his papers) or else extremely prevaricates, I am sure Bartholinus who
published in Latin two treatises, written by two several Physicians, entitled
the frauds and abuses of Apothecaries, nor Dr. Hodges nor Dr. Manwaring. nor a
very late writer (who is Anonymus) were ever members of the R. S. And for my
self I do affirm that not one member of the R. S. but those that were of the
College of Physicians also, joined with some others that were never of the R.
S. did know any thing concerning the Publication of my View; so far are they
from being principal incendiaries in this affair, as H. S. most falsely
alleges they were.

Fifthly, He affirms, that there wanted not some of them (the R. S.) who
purposed to erect a Laboratory, and Shop whence all should be furnished cheaper
and better than now, as to general Medicines, etc. This also is wholly false,
and will be believed so till he names the persons that thus act.

Sixthly, H. S. makes me confess that this quarrel betwixt the Physicians and
Apothecaries was of no longer continuance than that of the R. S. Whereas in my
View p. 21. I affirm the Apothecaries have continually traduced the College,
troubled them at the Council board, Parliaments, etc. and that Anno 1639. a Quo
Warranto was granted against them, besides I now say this open Contest had its
rise some years before, and not long after their Corporation was erected in the
15th year of K. James, by the procurement of some of our College, and whosoever
shall read over our Annals (as I have done twice) will find the Apothecaries to
have been constant underminers and enemies to our Profession and Corporation.

Seventhly, His Postcript falsely affirms that I made him the Author of Lex
Talionis. For thus he begins his Postscript. Sir, the news you writ me about
Dr. Merrett did at first a little surprise me, and had I not during this last
year been accustomed to the puny stratagems of the Virtuosi, I should have
wondered much to understand that I was entitled to the Lex Talionis, or that
Apology for Apothecaries to practice Physic. But the Comedians finding their
anger insignificant against me, by reason the advantages their ignorance had
given me over them; have ascribed unto me a Book which admits of an easy
reply, and which interferes with the College of Physicians, that so they might
seem to baffle, and inodiate me at once in the judgment of that profession for
which I seemed concerned: I cannot make any defense not having seen his Book.
Whereupon observe another false accusation of the R. S. in his making them
Authors of it; whereas none of them before the Publication saw line of it:
Secondly what honest and fair intelligence this Physician at Warwick has, for
in that Book I clearly absolve him of being the Author of it, for in page the
first I only say that I was informed, (and say so still) that the Apothecaries
gave out Mr. Stubbe was the Author of Lex Talionis, and though common fame long
since said that he intended somewhat to that purpose against Dr. Goddard, and
my self; and though this report was strong, yet it could never enter into my
thoughts, he had the least finger in a piece so illogical, and absurd both as
to Matter and Language; whereby the Reader may plainly see how clearly and too
honorably I vindicate him from being the Author of that Book, and upon what
grounds and informations Mr. Stubbes raises his reviling discourses, and this
I writ contrary to the opinion of some persons of quality and parts. Because
said they he cares not what he writes against the R. S. and each member of it,
and that the reviling Language well suited his usual writing.

In the next place I shall take notice of some mistakes (to speak more gently)
in his Pamphlet, and whereon he intends to rear his Fabric. In his Preface. In
Opposition to Dr. Merret, I deduce the Original of the Apothecaries, from the
times of Hippocrates and Aristotle, through the Roman and Greek Empires, etc.
which he repeats in his Postscript. In my view p. 27. I only speak negatively
of the Apothecaries antiquity in England, and p. 28. I prove out of my Lord
Cook that K. Henry the sixth had none. How impertinent then will his discourse
be, and quite besides the purpose? (a practice much used by him in his
writings.) However I will be content he shall show that he is well verst in
Lexicons and Indices, etc. but shall mind him in that impertinent discourse,
that he fetches not their antiquity as the Apothecaries ridiculously do from
the Holy Scripture, wherein indeed the name of an Apothecary is four times
found; but those texts being examined, will carry no other sense than of
perfumers and makers of sweet Ointments, trades to this day familiar in the
Luxurious Eastern parts of the World. Secondly Whether amongst the Greeks (...)
does not primiraly signify Poison, and secondarily, Spices, dying things, etc.
and whether the word simply used was not taken in an ill sense, and
consequently, whether Pharmacopaeus does not properly signify a Maker of
Poisons. Thirdly, In what good company, and for what good acts they are
recorded in Authors, because in Horace I find them ranked with the basest of
men, Ambubeiarum Collegia Pharmacopolae. I find also in Cicero, pro A.
Cluentio, mention made of a Pharmacopola Circumforaneus, who in one night
poisoned a Citizens Wife of Rome, and ran away, but he was no Roman. But
whereas you say that you will prove that there were in these elder times such
Apothecaries as now there are (I do not mean Incorporated, which by your
promise you are obliged to do:) You will do somewhat, though little to the
purpose, as I have said, if you can prove, that they made and sold Medicines in
Shops before the time of Avicen, and were not perfectly Servants, and
subordinate to Physicians.

The second thing proposed was, that the Apothecaries have a hand in all things
written against the R. S. and in this Poscript: As to the former, I am informed
by one that is of the Apothecaries Club, that all the Papers against the R. S.
were sent by Mr. Stubbe to this Club to have them Printed and dispersed abroad,
and that they sent him intelligence: Besides his bitter expressions against the
R. S. in the Poscript; most whereof is a Letter written to some of that
company; where he says, I advised them to reflect on our common Enemies the R.
S. and see if they were not the principal Incendiaries, and that I looked upon
it as a design of theirs to aggrandize themselves upon the ruin of the
College, (a thing they have always endeavored) and the Apothecaries. And p.
22. The Writings of the Virtuosi have been the principal cause of all those
Controversies, and which if they be not refuted, it is in vain to attack Medela
Medicina, Manwaring, etc. I have been informed also by several other persons of
Credit, and worth, beyond any of this Junto, that F. B. an Apothecary, and
active against the R. S. and who long since vapoured he would answer my Book,
showed them H S. Manuscripts against the R. S. and he, with his Brethren the
Apothecaries, derided the R. S. talked over what Mr. Stubbe has since
published; and much more, in a ridiculous manner, to the great dishonor of the
Society, in their Clubs and Coffee Houses, places where men talk any thing, and
belie, and bespatter whom they please, and surprise with falsities, and
ridicule the ignorant and unwary. Now, whether those Apothecaries were not the
learned Persons he mentions in his Preface to the Legend, he sent to, to
experiment their judgment, that his several parcels and fragments were joined
together with some alterations and new connexions, without any review of his at
London; in fine, had not some public spirited Gentlemen there undertook to
transtate the Italian pieces, and to see the work transcribed, and the
insertions made, and the connection in some measure supplied, I could never had
leisure to finish my intendments; to which I add from the same Persons, that
several passages in H. S. Papers were blotted out, some added, other where
interlinings, and alterations made. I say upon this passage, that it is very
evident that this Club of Apothecaries, convey false Intelligence to H. S. and
have correspondence with him; and further, that they misinformed him of my
entituling H. S. to be Author of Lex Talionis, and were the cause of publishing
this present Postcript at this unreasonable time: Since he says in the
forecited place, The passages now Printed out of Campanella were to follow his
Vindication of Aristotle, etc. (which has not yet been made public) and the
breach that Piece has made, in some other Papers, as he affirms in this
Postcript. By which it appears the Apothecaries were the Authors or Adjutors in
this scandalous Pamphlet. Add hereunto the many falsities alleged in these
Papers, agreeable to what I often accuse them elsewhere. And lastly,
considering what power these Apothecaries, my implacable Adversaries, have over
his Papers, and what thereof they have used I leave to indifferent Readers,
whether the Apothecaries were the Contrivers, or Makers of this Libel against
me; and if so, then the credit of it will of it self fall to the ground, but if
it came purely from H. S. 'twill find little repute from any learned, pious, or
sober Person. By all which it appears, that the said Company is in perfect
opposition to the R. S. As for my self, I think no rational man will deny, that
the false news concerning my entituling Mr. Stubbe to Lex Talionis did give
occasion to this Postcript, and did proceed from an Apothecary, for who else
could be so malicious as to inform him of so great an untruth without sending
him the Book? And how honestly Mr. Stubbes deals, in saying, he never saw that
Book, since his Postcript wad dated from Ragley, June the 14th. several weeks
after the publication of my Book, in which time he might have been easily
informed of the falsity of his information in this particular.

The next thing is, the unfair ways they have in publishing their Papers
against me: The Author of Lex Talionis was proved in my Answer to it to be a
Libel without name of Author, Printer, or Licenser. This great Goliath of the
Apothecaries, has so Printed his, that I can neither find Printer, Licencer,
nor prove H. S. to be the Author of it, though his Name be affixed to it; nor
will the prime disperser of it, nor some of his correspondents acknowledge him
to be so.

And thus having dealt with the Author as with Lex Talionis, in first
rehearsing his untruths, and then briefly refuting him; so having done with Mr.
Stubbe as to the first part, I shall come to what is remaining in the
Postscript, and I shall speak next to two heads, the one wherein we agree, the
other wherein we seem to differ. I agree with him in this clause writ to the
Apothecaries, in the following words, his own, That I could never invent or
meet with any arguments that could induce me to allow of practicing
Apothecaries, and that I understood so well the extent, and difficulty of my
Profession, that however they might in some cases prosper; and page 21. But I
protested against any encouragement for Apothecaries to practice.

And in this also we are of the same mind, that there were many defaults
needing regulation in them; moreover, that they (the Apothecaries) would not
delude themselves, that they could prosecute their Trades long; if that famed
Body of men (the College of Physicians) did resolve against them, with whose
determinations, I did not doubt, but all intelligent Practicioners in the
Country, and Counties, would comply: And elsewhere he professes, He will write
against the Divines, Mountebanks, Emperics, and Apothecaries, and such idle
Experimentators that practice Physic. As to the practice of Apothecaries, the
whole drift, and all the arguments in my Book, as also those other that have
writ against them aim at that mark only, but Mr. Stubbe says farther, He
cannot invent, nor meet with any arguments for it, and doubtless would have
written more bitterly then us all, if he had rightly considered the interest of
the Profession: Besides, I wish that the Apothecaries might thrive and prosper
as long as they keep themselves within the Laws of reason, and of the Land,
which are directly against their practice; I assert also that the College have
resolved against them, in Voting it honorable for their Members to make their
Medicines. I say with him, and prove that there are many faults in them needing
regulation, which defaults I have reduced to several heads, and enumerated
them, and I think Mr. Stubbe will not countenance them in destroying and
dishonouring that famed Body of Men, the Corporation of Physicians, which I
have fully proved they have always endeavored to do by Overt Acts, as also
the intolerable affronts, tricks, and devices they use against them in their
practice. I have acted also for many years together for what he hopes for in
page 21. That Physicians would consider their common interests, in opposition
to the Thompsons and Odowds, etc. and act with that moderation which became
wise men, and who were tender of continuing the renown of their Faculty, which
would suddenly else devolve into the hands of Emperics, and demean themselves
with that moderation which might end in an accord with the Apothecaries. How I
have acted in this Your hope, I shall briefly relate, and how I have prosecuted
for many years together by the College Order: All the Trigs, Barkers, Odowds,
etc. and forced many Mountebanks from this City, and have published in Print,
by their Order and for their Use, all that relates to their Privileges, and
whatsoever has been disputed in Law concerning their Rights, since their first
foundation; so that things are now so well settled, that Emperics may be
prosecuted without miscarriages. I have upon all occasions awaited the College
Council, and spent much time with them upon their Charters and Law affairs; I
have also spent many hours with the best of the Apothecaries, to compose all
differences betwixt them and us, I have answered all their Objections,
consulted and endeavored to secure them from their petty fears, and all
pretended inconveniences which might arise from our Charter to their Company;
told them, The College would grant them whatsoever they could in reason desire,
if they would confine themselves to their Trades, and not usurp on our Faculty;
and I think none of them but will say how civilly I have entertained them at my
House, and with what moderation I have endeavored to make an accord between
them and us, but what prevarications, inconstant resolutions they used with me
in this affair, I hope I shall have no occasion farther to declare, and that my
Book tended to the continuing the renown of my Faculty, I frequently say, and I
think no rational man can doubt thereof. Since therefore I have really and
publicly acted what Mr. Stubbe owns (as is before recited) I wonder with what
face he can say, He has answered all in my Book, or this which follows, As
for Dr. Goddard who has writ more warily and with greater prudence, I only
dissented from him in the Antiquity of Apothecaries, and treated him as a
Physician, whom I pittyed for being mixed with so illiterate a company, which
words imply Dr. Merret writ warily and prudently, for sure every comparative
must have its positive, besides the same reasons and almost all the same
arguments are urged by us both against the Practicing Apothecaries, and we
concur also in most of our arguments, for the necessity and usefulness of
Physicians making their own Medicines; only my Learned Colleague recites
Hypothetically, the abuses of Apothecaries, which every rational man may easily
make affirmative, and that this is his wary way of writing. Besides all the
arguments and designs of us both, are to limit the Apothecaries in their
Practice. Lastly, we agree in this, That it was the interest of Physicians to
emply Apothecaries as a distinct Profession, and that it was the prudence of
States that it should be so; all this I fully assent to, and say in my View,
that it would save the Physician a great deal of money, time, and charges,
which those that make their own Medicines are necessarily put unto, supposing
still the Apothecaries kept themselves within their bounds, as to Physicians,
and made their Medicines honestly, and dealt justly in their Trade, and I
cannot think but all Physicians will be of the same mind with me, if the
Apothecaries fail in either or both, or act according to what I have said in my
View, so that if Mr. Stubbe makes this an universal proposition, he must prove
it lawful (which he denied before) That the Apothecary may practice Physic, and
cheat the Customer; which certainly no State will allow.

And so much for what we agree in. We seem, and perhaps but seem to differ
only in this which he affirms, p. 19. That the reasons to be alleged against
the Physicians preparing their own Medicaments, were such as admitted of no
Answer nor Evasion among understanding men: and page 20. Upon this account I
did largely handle that Question, Whether Physicians ought to make their own
Medicines, which I resolved in the Negative, and urged all those arguments
(with several illustrations) which have hitherto persuaded with prudent
Governors and Physicians to establish the received Usage. And in his Preface
to the Reader, I show with what prudence both Physicians, and the civil
Magistrates concurred to their Institution, and I have largely entreated on
that Question, which the Virtuosi, in order to the ruin of the Faculty of
Physician, and of the Trade of Apothecaries, to the great alteration of the
practice of Physic, and aggrandizing of themselves, have started, and with much
confidence and more ignorance handled. Which great brags and vapors of his,
and his performances herein, will amount to just nothing if the Question be
stated as we put it, and it ought to be, for we say and prove that Physicians
were established in all Nations before the Apothecaries, and that Physicians
did in all places first make their own Medicines by their own Servants; and
that in process of time by the Physicians connivance, multitude of business,
and to save themselves both trouble and charges, did permit and perhaps assist
them (as has been proved in England they did) to procure them liberty of the
States, to make and compound Medicines and that the Apothecaries are every
where subordinate to the Physicians, and that the Physicians have been by no
state restrained from making their own Medicines, and have inspection and
correction over them; we farther prove that as affairs now stand betwixt the
Physicians and Apothecaries in England, that they ought to make their own
Medicines if they intend to support their own Faculty and the honor of it, and
to wipe of all those false aspersions unjustly cast upon them by the
Apothecaries of London: and that this is the only way to advance their skill in
their own profession and in all Natural knowledge, as also the avoiding the
unsufferable charges imposed upon our Patients by the high Bills of the
Apothecaries, and the uncertainties of our successes by reason of their
detracting, substituting, putting in false, decayed and unwholesome ingredients
into our receipts, to the great discredit of our Faculty, and the unavoidable
danger to the lives and healths of the Sick. I say this is the true state of
the present question, and therefore all Mr. Stubbe's promised answer and
triumph before his reasons alleged, will be as impertinent to the present
business, as his promised discourse concerning the Antiquity of Apothecaries:
for the question is not as he proposes it, what arguments have swayed prudent
Governors and Physicians to establish the received usage at such times, I say
when Apothecaries were bounded by the Laws and their own civility and interest,
and where the Apothecaries were limited to a certain number from usurping our
faculty: but whether as things now stand in England, we ought not (I think Mr.
Stubbe will not say de Jure we ought not) in prudence, and for the public good
to make our own Medicines, for if he does, I am sure there are few of his mind,
and the undertaking of many in this City, and very many more in the Country,
and many gratulatory Letters to me will, clearly evince the contrary.

In the next place I will consider his advice given to the Apothecaries in his
Letter to them, in these words; I did therefore earnestly recommend unto their
considerations an Union: Which recommendation whether the Apothecaries have
followed or no by tendering the Committee of the College some propositions, and
whether the project he says is not difficult, and which he would not intimate
that the College would join effectually therein, I say whether they were the
effect of this Letter let every man judge, and whether inferiors ever offered
their superiors propositions with such boldness, and incivility; for having
disputed amongst themselves about an hour, whether they should deliver their
proportions before the College delivered theirs to them, or whether both should
deliver them interchangeably ( such punctilios have Princes with Princes,
Ambassadors with Ambassadors, viz. equals with equals) at last they did deliver
theirs first, without either Title, or Date, rudely written, and interlined.
Their proposals or humble desires were as they Phraise it. First that the
Physicians would not prepare, or compound Medicines as Apothecaries, to their
prejudice, and secondly that they would not deprive them of their friends and
acquaintance, by pretense of any private Arcanum, or otherwise. And then they
humbly offer two things; First, that the Physicians would not only join
together with them in a frequent search of all that keep Apothecaries shops,
and Secondly, in the procuring of an Act of Parliament for the regulating of
Physic, whereby to suppress all Empirics and illegal practicers, and makers of
Physic, as common enemies to both. Now let the considerate Reader judge by
reflection on what I have collected from Mr. Stubbs, whether these are not the
result of his project, Secondly how their humbly desire, and humbly offer suits
with their dispute about the manner of their delivery, and whether their
implying of Physicians abilities to prepare and compound Medicine, Crosses not
what they every where object against us, and for which they have traduced us in
Parliaments. And again whether they imply not by their frequent search of
Apothecaries Shops, the increasing frauds of Apothecaries, because they desire
that this search may be frequent, having been formerly but once a year, and of
late years none at all, and withal the abilities of Physicians for this
search, quite contrary to (their privately cried up to unwary people, though
disowned by them to all understanding persons) Lex Talionis, who says in
express terms, p. 4. the Law might as well have set two Shoemakers as Censors,
to be judges of the Apothecaries Medicines, those Censors for the most part not
understanding the Tithe of the Medicines, and druggs in the Apothecaries shops,
and p. 8. most of the Doctors not understanding the tithe of what is commonly
used.

Now to pass by their tautologie of Private Arcanum as much as to say red
scarlet, or Apothecarie Pharmacopoeus; I will briefly consider the absurdity of
the matter it self. They desire that Physicians will not prepare and compound
Medicines as Apothecaries to their prejudice; to which I say, we never intended
to make them as Apothecaries, which I have showed in my View to be done
slovenly Fulsomely of unsound and unwholesome simples: But I suppose their
meaning is, we should not make them for our own Patients, and compound them,
this being to their prejudice, though it be never so much for our patients
advantage, for without this preparing and compounding, I see not how our Art
can make any Farther progress. For I have showed in my view, that the want
hereof has been the cause our Art has been at a stand, and gained no progress
for some hundreds of years; besides by this desire they would have the College
renounce their former vote, that it was honorable for their members so to do,
and also to divest our selves of one of the principal parts of our faculty
mainly relating to the improvement of our Art, and immediately concerning the
lives and healths of our Patients. Again if they mean the College should tie
their members from doing so, they desire that which neither Law, common sense,
nor reason will allow and which they cannot do; as well may the Surgeons
desire that Physicians would not dissect bodies themselves, to their prejudice
and so deprive themselves of two main branches of their profession Anatomy and
Pharmacy. Besides this word (to their prejudice) is of so large extent that it
may be stretched out to deny a Physician power to make Medicines for himself,
Family and Relations, then which there is nothing more absurd.

A second desire is, that the Physicians will not deprive them of their friends
and acquaintance by the pretense of any private Arcanum, or otherwise. I am
glad to see that my view has wrought them out of one piece of nonsense, viz.
the calling the sick their patients; but yet observe how they Pride it above
the rest of the Citizens of London, of much better rank than themselves, by
disdaining to call them Customers.

As to the depriving them of their customers, I have treated largely in my
Postscript in answer to Lex Talionis, and farther say that if the pretense of a
private Arcanum were the only cause thereof, I should not wholly (all
circumstances rightly put) allow of it. But for their otherwise closeing up
this (as to our prejudice did the former) I have elsewhere proved by many
reasons this desire to be frivolous, and uncivil. For it is strange if a
Physician finds an Apothecary to be faulty in honesty or skill or both, or to
act quite contrary to the prescription of the Physician, or the Life and Health
of the Patient, or that he has not a good Medicine in his shop, or that he
endeavors to disgrace the Physician and remove his Patient to a good
Apothecaries Physician; that in these cases, and in many other such as these a
Physician should not deprive them of their acquaintance. Next they humbly offer
that we would join with them in a frequent search of the shops: this alone has
some pretense for the public good, but in reality endeavors an advancing
themselves into an equality with the College. For whereas in the Act of
Parliament the power is granted to the Physicians alone to destroy bad
Medicines, and only to take with them the Master and Wardens of the
Apothecaries Company; Bur here they humbly offer that Physicians and
Apothecaries may be joined together, and be hail fellows well met. But if they
refer this only to a frequent search we are beholding to them for putting more
trouble, charge, loss of time and business upon us; it being impossible for us
to act by others, as they do by their Servants. Besides our Corporation never
gained any thing by their searches, but troubles, and Suits of Law and the
particular Censors revilings, for performing their duties according to their
Oaths in destroying bad Medicines. But doubtless in a short time the Censors
will more effectually perform the trust herein, and with more boldness and a
greater neglect of revilings, or other prejudices can arise to them from so
doing. Nor is it to be expected that this search will be performed as it ought
to be, till the Company of the Apothecaris shall bid open defiance to our
College, as they have, and do by clear consequence, or till this search shall
be made by such Censors as prepare their own Medicines.

As to our conjunction with them for the procuring an Act of Parliament for the
regulating of Physic. I suppose the Apothecaries mean not to be sharers with us
in this regulation, being a business beyond their Sphere and capacity, and only
proper to our College, but if these words whereby to suppress all Empirics and
illegal practicers and makers of Physic, etc. explain the former, then I say we
need no Act of Parliament for this: Nor in our late addresses to this present
Parliament desired any such power, and their Word illegal implies as much, and
therefore 'twere foolish to desire that we have already; Nay, as I have
elsewhere proved, that practizing Apothecaries are illegal practicers, by the
express Letters of our Charter, and Empirics, having noe lawful calling
thereunto, but surely they mean not so; so that all this seems to be but a
blind to that which follows, viz. makers of Physic; this is the Alpha and Omega
of their desires, the Alpha excludes Physicians only, the Omega is Universal,
makers of Physic; which whether it extends to Surgeons who by the Apothecaries
Charter are allowed to make their own Medicines, and by all Laws have right
thereunto: and whom his Majesty and the Merchants trust before the Apothecaries
to furnish their Fleets and Ships, and also to Confectioners, Chemists,
Distillers, to Ladies and Charitable persons, that make Medicines for the poor
and their families, etc. I leave all those that are concerned to judge, and the
Apothecaries to explain, all this being to their prejudice, however this I say,
it concerns not Physicians at all who make Medicines, but who practice with
them; neither have I heard of any Law in any Country forbidding persons to
make Medicines, nor I think will it ever be forbid: the Laws only provide who
shall direct them, or who shall dispense them in Shops. But how these makers of
Medicines are prejudicial to both I understand not. I confess with their Hector
H. S and their little Lex Talionis twill be mainly prejudicial to the
Apothecaries, but 'till I understand by Physicians themselves how it will be
prejudicial to them, I shall say no further here, having proved it in my view
to be to their great advantage: and shall only add that these Overtures were
highly resented by the whole College at their meeting as in reason they ought
to be.

Upon the whole I shall remark two things. First, that they endeavor to
ingross and monopolise to themselves all the power of making Medicines, and
thereby depriving Physicians of what is essential to their profession, and
their very Birthright, and to suffer one of their hands to be cut off in the
acting part of their Faculty; and that in some things they endeavor to gain a
power equal to that of Physicians, but not a word to gain the only thing we
want, an ability to punish delinquents for ill practice, which will light most
heavily on them if duly executed. Secondly, observe that there is nothing in
their desire but what was prompted by their Patron H. S.

I shall now probably conjecture at the reason of Mr. Stubbs beginning this
quarrel. I understand by several persons and also by some Letters of his
written to a Noble person, that civil women about Warwick, will not advise with
him, so that he must shortly leave that Town; add hereunto his restless nature
and frequent shiftings from place to place, no where settled nor quiet may
induce him to repair to London, in expectation of some practice from the
Apothecaries, and that he uses several insinuations to the College of
Physicians, perhaps in hope to procure of them a License to practice there,
which very wise men suggest he designs to do, the former is very probable, and
that he might become a good Apothecaries Physician here, and that when he comes
to Town he may have use of their Wives especially Lex Talionis Urgente
necessitate, and in the next Edition of his Book set H. S. after it instead of
P. O. As for his design on the College I suppose 'twill never take, for he
tacitly grants (by his supposition and not confronting it) that heats and
indignities had passed from the College to the Apothecaries. Besides above 20
of their Society are members of the Royal Society also, all which H. S. calls
Coxcombes, Illiterate, Impertinents, Comediants, Ignorants, Ridiculous, etc.
And more particularly that the number of Physicians in the R. S. will not
amount to three understanding persons, besides elsewhere he names but three
persons of the R. S. of any worth, whereof the learned Dr. Wallis is one
against whom when he was Library keeper he railed in most invective language;
so that there he excludes all Physicians from learning or parts, and therefore
'twill be as ridiculous in him to address himself to them as he does to make
the R. S. to address themselves to the Physicians. And now I come to the bottom
of the Plot, betwixt him and the Apothecaries against my self, as may appear by
what has been said before; and this clause proves in the 22 page. The passage
of Campanella being taken out thence, has occasioned that breach in it, which
I have not now leisure to redress.

Now why he should maim that piece that he cannot redress, cannot appear to any
fober man to have any other intendment, then to bring in his railing Postscript
stuffed with so many falsities, and slanders; and if this common traducer had had
any Sobriety, Prudence, or Religion: (neither of which all I have converst with
say he has a grain of) he would not have premised such a Libel before his
promised treatise.

I shall now rehearse what ignominy he throws upon me. I answer says he all
that Dr. Merrett had alleged, and showed his intolerable ignorance in that
Book, and if we might take an estimate of his parts from that writing, 'twas
manifest he might better employ his time in studying the method of Physic, then
composing Medicaments, that after 30 years practice 'twas evident he understood
not the rudiments of that Noble Science nor could state a case therein. As to
your answer of my Book it appears by what I have said a little before, that H.
S. has nothing to allege against Dr. Merrett; and for showing his intolerable
ignorance in that Book, I only say that I have discourst it over with knowing
persons of all conditions, well skilled in all kinds of learning, the ablest in
my own Faculty; nay with the Apothecaries themselves, yet never had the least
reflection of ignorance cast upon it, a considerable part whereof consists in
matter of fact, known by all Physicians of this City of any eminence; and all
objections made by the Apothecaries (as to matter of fact) clearly evinced in
my Postscript of the second Edition, the rest of the Books being clear
undeniable, deductions will free me from ignorance in it. But how well H. S.
infers, is apparent by many other places of this Postscript, p. 21. His words
are these, the disasters of the late Dutchwars, the Plague, and Fire of London
were less inconveniences then the perpetuity of the R. S. that these
Calamities admitted of some remedies hereafter, but the evils they are likely
to occasion us will never be corrected by any humane prudence, and I doubted
whether God would support us by his providence, when they had debauched the
Nation from all piety and honesty, as well as civil wisdom, H. S. every where
pretends piety though he be proved in print to have preferred a little gain
before his Religion, and said to a person of honor, it was not half a crown
difference in what Religion he bred his Children, and for his Morality how he
has debauched some younger persons, it is too long for me to recite. Besides
his inference out of Campanella that the R. S. are bringing in Popery, is so
absurd that no fresh man of the University would own for fear of being
rediculous. But to infer such a conclusion out of my Book, which has neither
a case stated, nor a word of the Rudiments of Physic, plainly proves his
extreme malice and the exceeding weakness of his judgment. But H. S. goes on
and if we might take an estimate of his parts from that writing. If H. S. had
pleased, or does read Books of real learning and that on several subjects, he
might have taken notice that my labors have some esteem with the learned pens
of this age, and would have made another estimate of my parts, and that the
Doctors can compose medicaments better then the whole Company of Apothecaries;
his offer not accepted of by them does clearly evince, and has been thought by
his contemporaries, and colleguesto have not only studied, but fully understood
the method of Physic, and that above 30 years ago he understood the rudiments
of that Noble Science, and could state a case therein, or else the Universities
are to be blamed for admitting of him to his degrees, and hereby our College
also is highly accused and slandered for admitting one thus ignorant 20 years
ago; much more to have chosen him for so many years to be one of their Censors,
and to read a Public Anatomy Lecture amongst them 15 years since: in which he
had some opportunity to show his skill in both, and I may modestly say those
Pathological Lectures found some applause, as both the College Register, and
several importunities for the Printing of them make manifest, and perhaps the
publication of them shall declare. Add hereunto that the immortal Dr. Harvey
was to blame in nominating with some Eulogy such a pitiful Physician to be his
Library keeper, who necessarily was to converse with learned forreiners and
travailers in the Art of Physic. Lastly my conversation has been, and frequent
consultations with ablest of my profession. But I am too large on this subject,
especially finding two worthy Divines Dr. Sprat and Mr. Glanvil traduced in
their own profession by this person (whose mouth nothing less then a Sergeant
can stop.) His words of them are these, p. 22. Whose abilities in matters
relating to their profession are so contemptible that 'twere folly, etc. But
this detraction cannot much prejudice these Divines as being fixed in their
employment, but his abominable scandal cunningly driven on by the Apothecaries,
may do me; and for which end only this Postscript was writ who Candestinely may
use this slight to my disadvantage to tell ignorant people not verst in men nor
books, or to such who are propagators of false news, that Dr. Merrett has been
proved in Print, and that by a very learned writer, not to understand the very
rudiments of Physic, and to add more what their malice can invent, and
doubtless this was the sole reason of contriving and unseasonably publishing
this Libel, as all circumstances may evidence to understanding men.

Aug. 3. Since this Pamphlet was in the Press, I Received a note enclosed in a
Letter from Mr. John Starkey a Bookseller near Temple-Barr, the propagator of
H. S' s. Postscript, who denied not to me nor my Servant, that it came from the
said H. S. The words sent me by said Mr. Starkey were these. When you see him
next you may tell him. That if he please know the ground of the supposition,
it is the case of the Apothecary, giving a strong purge before the fit of a
Quartan, mentioned in his Book. He has neither given us an account of the
habit of the patients body, the time of the year, the Type and time of the
quartan, whether beginning or inveterate with or without signs of connextion,
(I suppose it should be concoction) nor of the Purge it self, nor how long
ministered before the fit, all which are requisite to the true state of a case,
as every Physician knows, and yet would have us condemn the Apothecary, for
doing that which (whatever the event may have been) for ought I can see, no
understanding Physician can condemn, as I shall demonstrate out of a multitude
of eminent Physicians; so that if we may judge by that case no man can make any
other collection. Before I animadvert on this passage, I shall recite it as
it is in my view, p. 45 of the first, and p. 62 of the second Edition; it is in
these words. As for their skill in practice we daily see their gross errors
and omissions, (which I now add some Physicians and in Print too call murders)
being called where they have given Medicines. I shall instance only in one that
happened at the writing hereof, viz. that an Apothecary gave strong purging Pills
on the fit day of a gentle quartan Ague, which turned it into a violent Fever,
to the great hazard of the Patients life. Observe first, how fairly H. S. cites
me, I say strong purging pills, H. S. a strong purge; just as Lex Talionis, I
say on the fit day of a gentle quartan Ague, H. S. before the fit of a quartan.
For this his misreciting of my words may much vary them and alter much my sense.

Secondly, take notice of his intolerable ignorance (to use his own words) in
saying the type of a quartan. For type is joined with a Fever in general,
distinguishes the species of Fevers into Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan. And when
a Physician asks what type a Fever has, the Answer a Quotidian, double
Tertian, etc. Because type is as Galen, etc. (...) (i. e.) the order of
intention and remission. So that I might hence conclude and deservedly too,
that H. S. understands not the Terms, and consequently not the very Rudiments
of that noble Science he seems so much concerned for.

Thirdly, observe his Logic. He says I have neither given an account of the
habit of the Patient, etc. and thence concludes that Dr. Merret understands not
the Rudiments of Physic, nor can state a case therein, H. S' s Logic right, and
such as is used at Billings-gate. I do not state this case in my Book, and
therefore he infers can state none at all, excellent reasoning. Any man may
better Collect from Mr. Stubbes his plus ultra p. 148. that he caused himself
to bleed october 20 being not well at Warwick, by reason of a violent defluxion
into the glandules of the throat, that he knows not how to put a case in
Physic, because he does not set it down with all the circumstances belonging to
the disease it self. And ib. 138. Amongst other preparatives to the Bath I
caused my self to be let blood for my health. But to conclude, H. S.
understands cannot put a case in Physic, because he does not fully state the
two present cases I judge to be very hard, and less to the purpose to
demonstrate out of a multitude of Eminent Physicians the badness of his
practice in both cases, which is easy enough to do in his way. Certainly no man
but would think this inference to be more concluding that H. S. is a subverter
of the Monarchy of England, and of the repute of the Clergy, because he says
in his Preface to the History of the R. S. there were times wherein he thought
it our interest to do both. But then supposing (but not granting) the case had
been stated (as 'twas not by his own confession) and Stated too amiss;
Certainly from one particular to reason universally to a whole Science is most
brutish. I think H. S. would judge so if a man should conclude by his
rendition of good nature in English by un homme de bonne nature, and l'homme
d'un box naturel, in French, which signifies no more then a man of good natural
parts, or of his (...) in Greek or (...). I say if a man should conclude by H.
S. mistake in this said case that he understands neither French nor Greek and
is no Critic, I should confess such a concluder to be a foolish and malicious
adversary to him. And who would not laugh at a person that should conclude a
Smith or other Tradesman to be wholly ignorant in his whole Trade and every part
thereof, because he mistakes in putting one case in his Art. But I trifle as
well as he.

Fourthly, His inference seems by himself to be far fetched, and unknown to me
(as indeed it was) or else why should he say to his correspondent? if he
(meaning my self.) please to know the ground of the supposition, 'its the case,
etc.

Fifthly, I answer the nature of my Book required not the putting down the case
and all the circumstances thereunto belonging. And 'twould have been judged
absurd in a treatise of that nature to have put a case of practice understood
only by Physicians. If the Apothecary complained of, had found himself
aggreived, and had urged it, then indeed to have put the case fully might have
been expected, but not otherwise. But if H. S. will arraign every Physician, as
he does me, for accusing Apothecaries (who are Empirics) of ill practice,
without putting the case home, few Physicians would avoid this censure of
intolerable ignorance. Nay if Mr. Stubbes or any other had desired to have had
the case put, I should not have refused to have done it.

Sixthly, whereas H. S. requires an account of many things, I say, when I put
that case to a Physician I shall add several material things (whereof he seems
ignorant) to put it full, and as it ought to be.

Seventhly, I say Physicians daily do, and lawfully may speak in general, that
such a man was killed by such an Apothecary, by not letting him blood, giving an
Opiat, Vomit, or Purge in such a disease, without relating all the
circumstances of it; and though some ignorant people may judge him malicious
for saying so: yet neither Physician nor these ignorants will traduce him for
ignorance in that case, much less in his whole Art.

Eighthly, H. S. concludes Dr. Merrett would have us condemn the Apothecary for
doing that which (whatever the want were) for ought I can see, no understanding
Physician can condemn, as I shall demonstrate out of a multitude of Physicians.

To this I reply that all civil men of the faculty would have thought a Fellow
of the College of Physicians affirmation had been sufficient enough against a
practicing Apothecary, without putting the case at all; and examples enough may
be shown Physicians so doing. And though I rest not wholly on the event with the
vulgar, which I have sufficiently confuted elsewhere, yet to make a judgment on
ill success from bad practice is rational. H. S. proceeds, for ought I can see
(modestly said.) Why he confesses he knows nothing of the Case, neither the
habit of the Patient, and c. and therefore he is to demonstrate out of a
multitude of Eminent Physicians, that it is lawful to give strong purging Pills
on the fit day of a gentle quartan, let the circumstances and symptoms of the
disease, and the condition of the Patient be what they will, or else H. S.
opposes not at all what the view affirms; and he here puts himself on as
wild a task as Lex Talionis, who would prove out of Hippocr. that the old
Medicines were better then mine. The Reader may plainly fee, that H. S.
undertakes to confute a Story he knows nothing of, and to demonstrate out of
Authors, he knows not what himself: And so let H. S. pass with his third
impertinence not yet Printed, for I am weary with this pitiful stuff.

H. S. in the said note appeals to some of our College, and permits me to chose
whom I please to be as judges in the case. Bravely said, were H. S. in London
he would soon find the Censors of the College, and the whole body severe judges
against him, and that this young Physician at Warwic were impudent to appeal to
them in so notorious a scandal, besides the accused, not the accuser appeals;
and too be sure their sentence would be against him, not only for so bruitishly
traducing one of their members, (their statute of civil conversation where of
H. S. has none requiring the contrary to what he acts) but also for
maintaining so their fellows, and his promised Support of them would make them
(as it does) very good sport.

H. S. concludes his letter to the Apothecaries thus, p. 22. This was the
subject of that Book, which I doubt not but will be approved by all judicious
persons; and the College will see I can write against Dr. Merret, without
derogating from them; or rather that my intendments were to SUPPORT them and
not disserve the APOTHECARIES in the least. I intend to make it public in
Michaelmass term.

I shall make a short commentary on this Epiphonema of H. S. setting out his
confidence of judicious persons approving this Book, which sober men would have
left to the Censure, and opinion of the Readers; and not have so long before
hand triumphed and sung the praises on his own undertakings. Of which I shall
say in general what the most learned, and indifferent persons judge of his
writings, that they are wholly void of judgment, reason and Logic, and consist
only of railings, impertinent readings, and contain little but Pedantic
learning, Antiquity and Grammar, of little use to such as write of things. But
to the particulars. This was the subject of that Book. And was this all? The
Title page mentions a Postscript concerning the quarrel depending betwixt H. S.
and Dr. Merret, and yet the Postscript its self has the least part of this
quarrel. The greater part whereof directly opposes the R. S. only, much of it
relates to the College and Apothecaries, something to Dr. Goddard and not much
to my self besides the falsity in the beginning, so that the whole Postscript
seems to be written only to defame me: so well does the Title and Postscript
answer one another. Besides this, you will doubtless run an impertinent Risco
for the old Medicines, and against the new discoveries in your Pedantic way,
and no man knows whether H. S. goes on. I doubt not this Book will be approved
by all judicious persons. Surely scarcely by any, not by the learned persons
the Apothecaries you sent your Papers to, to experiment them, etc. For you
restrain them from practice, tell them many things needed regulation in them,
that the College resolving against them would destroy their trade; that you in
your intendments were to Support the College; you rank them in the lowest place
of Emperics and Quacksalvers. Certainly none of these things will the
Apothecaries approve, nor Physicians neither; you oppose their vote, that it is
honorable for their members to make their own Medicines: you suppose that
indignities and heats had passed from the College toward the Apothecaries, you
recommend to the Apothecaries an union with the College, and as they apply it
to make them our Peers, you say of 20 of their Society members also of the R.
S., that they are Coxcombs, Impertinents, etc. as before. You here proudly take
upon you to be their support as if they were not able, or willing to support
themselves, but an extraneous person ignorant of their affairs, so infamous and
notorious must do it for them, you would deprive all Physicians of their
Essential privilege, nay which is common for all persons to do, viz. making
their own Medicaments, you call some of the Fellows of the College principal
incendaries. And therefore you may very well doubt whether Physicians really
so, and who are the most proper judges of this matter will approve your Book at
all, I am sure none I have conversed with, will in the least, you profess your
self an implacable adversary to the R. S. threaten each Virtuosi there, and
surely not one member of that illustrious body will approve your Book.

As for Divines you have written against them in general and endeavored to
distroy their very order, and particularly against the learned Dr. Wallis, Dr.
Sprat, and Mr. Glanvil, and say of the two latter, 'twere folly to expect much
from them where they profess; and if they displease you, you will say of all of
them as you do of the two latter, that their abilities in matters relating to
their profession are contemptible.

As for Gentlemen of the long Robe, and all persons Loyal to the King, few of
them either read or value your writings, and several of these are members of
the R. S. also. And on good grounds think you would act over again your former
disloyalties.

And if none of the three professions will approve of your Book, then certainly
neither will either of the Universities, as neither do they disapprove of Dr.
Merretts view, I am sure many foreigners Dutch and French besides judicious
persons of all orders have given the Author thanks for it; and more especially
such as have found double advantage by it, as well to their healths as purses.

Besides it is strange this Physician at Warwic should conceive so well of his
Book, founded wholly either on falsities or impertinencies, as has been proved,
and also on defamations so gross, and deductions so absurd and ridiculous as
has been said.

H. S. proceeds. And the College will see that I can write against Dr. Merrett,
without derogating from them; or rather that my intendments were to SVPPORT
them, and not disserve the Apothecaries in the least.

Here you sind H. S. performing some wonders, first he can write against Dr.
Merrett, and not derogate from the College, if he means he can rail at, and
misrepresent Dr. Merrett, and not in express terms the College, perhaps H. S.
can out of his rich magazine of both perform his promise. But doubtless the
College cannot conceive but that the writing against one or more of their
members will derogate from them, especially acting but their duties according
to their faith given, and asserting their Honors, Rights, Privileges,
Statutes, and Votes, and speaking their own private Language and Discourses.
And surely no man can judge otherwise then that Dr. Merrett in his Book
intended the good and welfare of the College, and has industriously
prosecuted that end before his own profit, and undergone all tasks though never
so ungrateful in order thereunto. How then H. S. can write against Dr. Merrett
and not derogate from the College, I think none of them can see. And farther H.
S. will be hard put to it, to bring one instance to prove any Corporation ever
thought themselves not derogated from, when one of their members, has been
traduced for asserting their rights. And H. S. if displeased, will then call
them the College of insensaty for so doing, as he does the R. S. and
consequently a consequently a considerable number of them already.

But here he not only professes he will not derogate from them, (a great
kindness in him toward learned men, though in many places he has diminished
and decried many of them) but rather (says he) that my intendments were to
support them (the College) and not disserve the Apothecaries in the least.
Behold here the intendments of this man of might, doing wonders if not
impossibilities. He intends to do more then the established Laws and Charters,
orders of the Council board, proclamations of the King; judgments of Courts,
the understanding labor industry and expenses of the College, and all their
interest ever could effect. Behold here this Hoghen Moghen PATRON and SUPPORT
of the College, nay which is more for all this he will not disserve the
Apothecaries in the least. He can blow in one breath hot and cold, he can
support the College, and reserve to them alone the practice of Physic (which is
all the support they crave) and yet not disserve the Apothecaries in the least,
whose only aim and endeavor is, and has been to supplant and depreciate the
Physicians; whereby to gain all the practice into their own hands, and without
which (they say) they cannot gain a livelihood.

So that if H. S. take from them the practice of Physic (which he twice does in
this Postscript) he does them the greatest disservice imaginable; but if he
means to support the College, he must take out of their hands the practical
part of our faculty, and so consequently (as the Apothecaries confess
themselves) undo them, and certainly this is not to disserve them in the least,
but in the whole. So that (as matters now stand) it is impossible to support the
one, but he must disserve the other. And if his project (he says is not
difficult) can secure the Physicians in their practice from the usurpation of
the Apothecaries, and not do the latter disservice (the sole intendment and end
of our Books) we shall confess him the only seeing person, and that he sees
more at a distance then we do upon the place, and shall for working this
admirable and incredible wonder both admire and thank him.

Lastly, the support of Physicians implies the securing them from the frauds
and abuses committed in remedies, and the chargeableness of their Bills, the
removing whereof (a thing impossible) must needs be disservice at least to the
Apothecaries, and he is bound to make good and justify, or deny all those
complaints mentioned in my view, or else he does disserve them. But perhaps he
means by not disserve them, he will do them no harm in the least, though
positively he will not serve them in the least, and then they are but a little
beholding to him, unless he will say that two negatives not and dis make an
affirmative and so reserve to himself by this ambiguous expression a power of
doing them no prejudice, or doing them real service if occasion, and his
advantage prompt him to it.

Now here I shall make a very short Apology for speaking and treating so
harshly and personally (contrary to my genius and reply to LexTalionis) the
Author of this Postscript; had he not maliciously, conspiringly, and upon no
provocation given, nor upon any grounds raised such a defamation upon me in my
own profession, I should not have made the least reflection upon him.

Secondly, because many ignorant and vain persons understand not, or at least
take little or no notice of what is substantial; 'twas but just to take off by
this way the scandal designedly cast upon me, and to invalidate his conclusion,
as Lawyers do the testimonies of their adversaries by a lawful recrimination.
Neither have I said more then was necessary for my own defense. The rest, and
what I have said will shortly be made public concerning his life, and more
fully, and if I am not misinformed, will render him the most notoriously ill
natured, as well as ill mannered man in this Nation; especially in one that
pretends to learning, and who has had University education. He has his hand
against every man, and therefore cannot in reason but expect that every man's
hand will be against him. And did I not confine my self to his Postscript, I
could show multitude of absurdities, impertinences, falsities, weak inferences
wanton expressions, and mistakes of his in some other writings of his, I have
read since the publication of his Campanella, and this Postscript. All which I
doubt not but Mr. Glanvil will effectually and shortly perform. And now I leave
him to make public what he pleases at Michaelmas Term, when he is like to
have other Irons in the fire. Besides he may now perceive by a third Author, a
worthy member of our College and of the R. S. also, who this day published some
papers writ in the year 1664. at the request of several Fellows of the College
of Physicians, that many of us now have, and have had the same thoughts
touching the practice of Physic in England, and invasion of our Art by
Apothecaries; and that they are more dangerous Enemies to our practice then all
the others you mention Divines, Quacks, and Mountebanks, etc. I have seen
several other treatises on the same subject, which in time may come abroad too,
writ long since by those which are not members of the R. S. but of our College
only; so that he will have work enough to derogate from the College, and that
this writing against me, is written at least against many of the College, and
those not the meanest of that Corporation, or famed body of men.

Whereas H S. does in his last page so confound things and persons, that I
cannot tell to whom some passages relate: Yet it is manifest what ever he faith
throughout, has reference to the Virtuosi; and that therefore I may give full
answer to all his Postscript: I shall take notice of two things, in the one he
says their Medicines are delusory, and their new discoveries we very well knew
before. But this is said most insensibly and blindly, (in his own Language) for
how can any man know or judge of those Medicines made privately by a single
person, that they are delusory or were known before. When it is scarcely
possible any man can know any of the ingredients themselves, much less of the
preparing and compounding them. And how can H. S. tell who have or have not
been conversant with the practice of the most eminent Physicians, or read their
Books, when they intend not to tell him what their new discoveries are?

As to the second where he affirms, Ordinary prudence would have foreseen the
issue of those kinds of writings. I speak thus in my view, knowing that hereby
a whole Company of men, (who by their number, noice, and tricks) may be able to
decry and Physician, will become my implacable adversaries, etc. but not
fearing the utmost their malice can invent or proclaim, etc. This I expressly
foresaw, that the Apothecaries were not able to answer the Book, unless by the
railing pen of a Lex Talionis, which H. S. himself dislikes, and 'twas easy
also for me to see that the Apothecaries would procure some mercinary pen to
act their part of falsities and railings, and that you were the only person
likely to perform this task for them, all this I say I foresaw and foretold,
and much more concerning these writings; as well as I did foretell in print the
Fall of your Patron, under the name of Hen. Vanus, when he was in the prime of
his prosperity, a considerable time before the Kings return. You conclude with
a performance too great for the Merretts and the Sydenhams, and never say, what
this performance is? what you mean by the Sydenhams I know not, but this I may
modestly say, that the Merretts can perform as much as the H S' ss. or the
Talion asses.

Observe Reader I will not any more be diverted by the Pens of either of them,
or their accomplices; all whose notorious and illiterate malice, their
forgeries and falsities or impertinent answers: I shall here after pass over
without any other reply, then that of a scornful silence, as H. S. phraiseth
it; permitting him or them to ramble up and down in their impertinencies, and
pretended answers, as he does to the Plus Vltra, and the History of the R. S.
cavelling only at some few passages in a large Book; and sometimes setting up
himfelf a man of clouts, and so fighting with it, and that is all you are to
expect of him at Michaelmas Term against Dr. Goddard and my self. One thing I
had almost forgot to mention, wherein perhaps he might assault my Book, not
spoken of in his Postscript; but in his plus ultra, viz. his commendation of
the ancient Medicines, for this time let the Learned Zwelfer often commended by
himself answer for me, and when he has answered him (which is impossible to be
done) I shall in few sheets of paper make some Additions to what Zwelfer has
said on that Argument; and for the future shall think it no disiepute to be
detracted from by this Physician at Warwic, who has endeavored to diminish my
most honored friends, the ever renowned Dr. Harvey, Mr. Boil, Dr. Willis, Dr.
Lower, and the inquisitive sober and discreet persons Mr. Henshaw, Mr. Evelyn,
etc. and many other Famous men of our Nation: And shall conclude with an
admonition to the Apothecaries, that it is convenient for them to vindicate
their reputation from the base titles of Wittals and Cuckolds cast upon their
Company, and to vindicate the College also from the slanders of their Lex
Talionis, and to give him just punishment and that they may have some ground
for their search, I shall give them some directions to find him out; my
information was by a person of Quality well acquainted with his hand writing,
who saw his directions for the Printing of it; and has often heard him speak
the same Language comprised in that Book: together with the merry and feigned
stories in it, if this be sufficient light for them to ground their discovery
on, he is a Brother Apothecary, and shall be named unto them, if the Company
desire it by their Master and Wardens.

POSTSCRIPT.
DESIRES the Reader to read in my view page 48. l. 17. Silver-smith, and
acquaints him (that since there is no end of Libelling) he is to expect from me
no more on this subject, unless the Company of the Apothecaries or any other
person or persons for them shall write upon the whole or any part of the view;
and transmit in writing under his, or their hands, objections or answers to
some third person of known integrity, who shall soon receive Dr. Merretts
answer thereunto, and shall publish all together, and both parties conform to
his instructions in the managery of this controversy, so that some end may be
put thereunto. Which is the only fair way can in my opinion be taken in this
affair.

July 14th 1670.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 20. l. 28. r. propositions, p. 26. l. 13. r. importunings; p. 29. l. 11.
r. understands not and p. 31. l. 12. r. the event, p. 33. l. 27. ^. whither H.
S. p. 36. l. 22. r. insensati.


