A MORAL PARADOX: Maintaining, That it is much easier to be VIRTUOUS then
VICIOUS. By Sir George Mackeinzie.

JER. 9. 5. -- They weary themselves to commit iniquity. EDINBURGH, Printed for
Robert Broun, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the
North side of the Street, a little above the Cross, Anno Dom. 1667.

TO Sir ROBERT MURRAY, One of the Honorable Members of the Royal SOCIETY.
Sir,
THough I cannot but with much thankfulness resent your favors (wherein ye did
both prevent, and outdo my wishes) yet it were a disparagement to them, that I
should look upon my self as your debtor for them, seeing ye bestowed them so
freely, that they appeared gifts, not obligations. And so in this Dedication, I
design to pay, not them, but my respects. Neither intend I by it, to recommend
you to Posterity, for in that I would disoblige Fame, which has resolved, by
speaking truth of you, to repair and atton its former guilt, in having so often
ly'd of others. But, Sir, I have chose you to be the Patron of this Book,
because your practice is the strongest Argument, whereby I can evince what is
undertaken in it, which is to prove, That there is more ease in Virtue then in
Vice. And seeing to undertake the proof of this, were the next crime to the
doubting of it: And since your Worthiness, and my esteem of it, are much raised
above the frail helps of Complement, or a wearying Dedication, let me assure
you, and the World of both, by the innocent vanity I take in the title of

Your sincere friend, and humble Servant, Geo. Mackenzie.

It is easier to be Virtuous then Vicious.
AS these Spies deserved ill of the Israelitish Camp, Numb. 13
who having inflamed their breasts with desires of conquering Canaan, by
presenting them of it is Vines, whose each Cluster was a Vintage, and each Grape
a Bottle; did thereafter, by a cruel paricide, destroy these same inclinations
which they had begot, by telling those their hopeful Brethren, that the
Country was as unconquerable, as pleasant; And that it is men were Giants, as
well as it is fruits. So by the same measures we have reason to fear, that these
Divines and Moralists, are unhappy guides to us poor Mortals, who after they
have edged our inclinations for Virtue, as the most satisfying of all objects,
do thereafter assure us, that it is attended with as much difficulty, as it is
furnished with pleasure: And that like some coy Lady, it possesses charms, not
to satisfy, but to exact our longings. This infortunat error has in all
probability, sprung either from the vanity of these Bastard Philosophers, who
having cheated the people into an esteem for themselves, as Virtuous, resolved
by a second Artifice, to highten that esteem, by persuading these their
admirers, that Virtue was a work of as much difficulty, as it met with praise.
Or else from the zeal of some Preachers, who, to make us antedate our
Repentance, resolved to persuade us, that Faith and these other Spiritual
Virtues, could not but be hardly attainable (as certainly they are) when Moral
Virtue, which is a lower Story of perfection, was of so difficult an ascent. Or
(which is yet most probable) our laziness, and Vicious habits being called to
an account for these misfortunes, which they occasion, have run themselves
under the protection of this defense, that Virtue is most difficult and
uneasy, and is destitute of both pleasure and advantage: By which conceit,
many are diswaded in this age, from undertaking a resolution of being Virtuous,
though otherwise they much honor it; and wickedness is not only furnished by
this, with an excuse to detain such as it has already overtaken, but with
charms to entangle these who are yet stated in an indifferency for either. And
though the heat of zeal in Preachers, should not be too much disproved in this
age, where in the coldness of their hearers charity, needs those warmer
influences, and though they may be allowed to bend our crooked humors to the
contrary side of what they incline to, of design to bring them to a desired
straightness. Yet if we consider that infallible Theology delivered by our
Savior, we may find, that he invited his Disciples, by assuring them, that his
yoke was easy, and his burden very light, and by upbraiding them, for wearying
themselves with their sins, and for troubling themselves about many things. And
since the former Artifice, has either by being too familiarly preached, lost
its operation, with such as love curiosity, or by being too severely pressed,
discouraged too much these who love too well their own flesh and blood, to
welcome any Doctrine that stands so opposite to it: I wish these same Preachers
would now endeavor to reclaim mankind, by assuring them, that Virtue is much
easier, and much more advantageous then Vice. Imitating in this their great
Master, who, after his Disciples had wearied themselves with catching no Fish
all the night over, did, by persuading them to throw out their Nets upon the
other side of their Boat, put them upon the way of catching more at one
draught, then they had caught in their former whole nights fishing. But leaving
(with much resignation) my Ghostly Fathers to manage the course of our
Devotion, as their knowledge and piety shall judge most fit; I shall endeavor
to clear from reason and experience, that Moral Virtue is of less fatigue, and
suits better with our natural inclinations, then Vice, or Passion does. And
although I fail in an undertaking which is too noble an enterprise, to receive
its accomplishments from so weak a hand, yet if I shall excite others, out of
pity to me, or glory because of the subject, to defend what I could not, or to
love that Virtue which I recommend, I shall rest satisfied with a return, which
because it will be above my merit, I have already placed above my expectation;
and so I may meet with a foil, but cannot with a disappointment.

All creaturs design ease, Ease commended.
and for this, not only Bruits do toil, but inanimat things likewise show; for
it so much of inclination, that they will destroy all intermediat objects, that
hinders them from joining to their center, to which they have no other
tendency, but because there they find that ease, which is desired by their
nature: and because all things find ease in it, therefore all things flee
thither, as to the loveliest of all stations. And that happiness consists in
ease, is clear from this, that either we want that we need as the
accomplishment of our nature, and then nature most move toward the acquisition
of what it wants; or else we want nothing, and then nature will enjoy it self
without any further motion, nam natura nihil agit frustra; and it were most
frustraneous for nature, to seek what it wants not: From which we may conclude,
when we see any creature restless, and in motion, that certainly it either
wants something to which it moves, or is oppressed by a surcharge of somewhat,
from which it flies. This has made Philososophers conclude, that all motion
tends to some rest; Lawiers, that all debates respect some decision; Statesmen,
that all War is made in order to Peace; Physicians, that all fermentation and
boiling of the blood or humors, betokens some dissatisfaction in the part
affected; (And to show how much happiness they place in ease, they term all
sickness diseases) which imports nothing more, then the absence of ease, that
happiest of States, and root of all Perfections; and that Divinity may sing a
part in this requiem, Scripture tells us, that GOD hallowed the seventh day,
because upon it he rested from his creation, and that Heaven is called an
eternal Sabbath, because there we shall find ease from all our labors, there
GOD is said, when well pleased, to have savored a sweet savor of rest, and he
recommends his own Gospel as a burden that is easy. That then wherewith I
shall task my self in this discourse, shall be to prove, that Virtue is more
easy then Vice.

For clearing whereof, Vicious persons most dissemble Virtue, which is
difficulter then to be virtuous.
consider, that all men who design either honor, riches, or to live happily in
the World, do either intend to be virtuous or at least pretend it; these who
resolve to destroy the liberties of the people, will style themselves keepers
of their liberties; and such as laugh at all Religion, will have themselves
believed to be reformers; and of these two, the pretenders have the
difficultest part, for they must not only be at all that pains, which is
requisite in being virtuous, but they must superadde to these, all the troubles
that dissimulation requires, which certainly is a new and greater task then the
other; and not only so, but these most over act Virtue, upon design to take off
that jealousy, which because they are conscious to themselves to deserve, they
therefore vex themselves to remove: Moses the first, and amongst the best of
the reformers, was the meikest man upon the face of the earth; But Iehu who was
but a counterfit Zelot, drove furiously, and called up the Bystanders to see,
what else he knew they had reason not to believe; and the justest of all
Isreal's Chair-men, took not so much pains to execut justice, as Absolon, who is
said to have staid as long in the gates of Jerusalem, as the Sun stayed above
them, informing himself of all persons and affairs, though with as little
design to redress their wrongs, as he showed much inclination to know them; and
all this, that the people might be gained to be the instruments of his
unnatural Rebellion; and such is the laboriousnesse of these seeming coppiers
of Virtue, that in our ordinar conversation, we are still jealous of such as
are too studious to appear virtuous, though we have no other reason to doubt
their sincerity, but what arrises from their too great pains, from which we may
conclude, that these who intend to be virtuous, have a much easier task then
these pretenders have, because they have not their own conscience, nor the
jealousness of others to wrestle against; and which is yet worse, these want
that habit of Virtue, which renders all the pains of such as are really
virtuous easy to them, and what is more difficult, then for these to act
against customs, which time renders a second nature; and which, as shall be
said hereafter, is so prevalent, as to facilitat to virtuous persons the
hardest part of what Virtue commands: Besides this, these dissemblers have a
difficult part to act, seeing they act against their own inclinations, which is
to offer violence to nature, and the working not only without the help of that
strongest of all seconds, but the toiling against it, and all the assistance it
can give: which how great a torment it proves, appears from this, that such as
have as much generosity, as may entitle them to the name of Man, will rather
weary out the rage of torture, then injure their own inclinations. I imagine
that Haman was much distressed, by being put to lead Mordecai's horse in
compliance with his Masters commands; and one who is obliged by that interest,
which makes him dissemble to counterfit a kindness for one whom he hates, or
emit an applause of what he undervalues, is certainly by that necessity more
cruciat by a thousand stages, then such as intend upon a virtuous account to
love the person, and really to praise that in him, which they are forced to
commend; which is so far from being a torment, when it is truly virtuous, that
that real love makes him who has it, hungry of an occasion to show it, and to
pursue all means for hightning that applause, which torments the other consider
what difficulty we find in going one way, whilst we look another, and with
what hazard of stumbling that attempt is attended, and ye will find both much
difficulty and hazard to wait on dissimulation, wherein we are tied to a double
task, for we must do what we intend, because of our inclinations, and what we
pretend, because of our professions; and if we fail in either, which is more
probable, then where simplicity only is professed, (two tasks being difficulter
then one,) then the world laughs at us, for failing in what we proposed: And we
fret at our selves, for failing in what was privately designed; and not only
does dissimulation tie us to a double, but it obliges us to two contrary tasks,
for we needed not dissemble, if what we intend, be not contrary to what we
pretend; and thus men in dissimulation do but (like Penelope,) undo in the
night, what they were forced to do in the day time.

Dissimulation makes Vice likewise the more difficult, in that dissemblers are
never able to recover the loss they sustain by one escape, for if they be
caught in their dissimulation, or dogged out to be impostors (which they cannot
miss, but by a more watchful attendance, then any that Virtue requires) then
they of all persons are most hated, not only by these whom they intended to
cheat, but by all others, though inconcerned in the crime, and both the one and
the other do yet hate it, as what striks at the root of all humane society: and
for this cause, murder under trust, is accounted so impious and sacrilegious a
breach of friendship, that Lawiers have hightned its punishment, from that of
ordinar murder, to that of treason; and the grossest of Politicians have
confessed this dissimulation to be so horrid a crime, that it was not to be
committed for a less hire then that of a Kingdom: Whereas virtuous persons
have their escapes, oftener pitied then punished, both because these escapes are
imputed to no abiding habit, and because it is not to be feared that they will
offend for the future, seeing what they last failed in, was not the effect of
any innate and permanent quality, but was a transient and designless frailty.

Dissimulation is from this likewise more painful then the Virtue which it
emulats, that the Dissembler is oblidged not only so to dissemble, as that
these whom he intends to cheat, may believe him serious; but so likewise, as
that others may understand that he is not serious: Thus I have my self seen a
Gentleman, who dissembled a love and fondness for one whom he was oblidged to
persuade that she was his Mistress, act so ccovertly that perfidious part, that
his real Mistress, was really jealous that he dissembled with her, and not with
the other: And to remove this, put the Gallant to as much new pains as his
former cheat had cost him. And I have heard of the like accidents, though in
different actions; As of a Rebel, who counterfeited Loyalty so, that his
Accomplices did really distrust his fixedness to these damned Principles which he
still retained. And in ordinary conversation ye will often find, that in
dissembling with the one party, ye lose still the other; and it is impossible
to regain them who are so lost, but by a shameful discovery of the former
cheat: and after all that loss, this doubt is still left, How can I know but
this man dissembles with me, who is so exquisite in that Art, as even to have
made me jealous, that his dissimulation was not counterfeit? Virtue requires
fewer instruments then vice


Let us a little consider how few instruments Virtue requires, and we will find
it easy to be Virtuous: It requires no Arms, Exchequer, Guards, nor Garrison;
It is all these to it self, in every sense wherein it needs them: whereas Vice
is a burden to its votaries, as well in the abundance of those attendants which
it requires, as in the difficulty of those seize which it proposes. And
this is that happy Topic, from which our wise Savior reproved Martha, when he
told her, that she wearied her self about many things, whereas there was one
thing necessary. By which, seeing he commended Devotion, I may well press from
it the excellency of Moral Virtue. The ambitious man is obliged to have his
House planted with a Wood of Partisans, as well to secure that condition which
so many envy and rival, as to magnify himself by so unequalled attendance.
This desire to command, made Hannibal force a passage through the Rocky Alps;
Caesar to commit himself to the mercy of a stormy Sea, and so many weary
Journeys. This obliged Xerxes to entertain vast Navies. And Darius such Armies,
as reduced all mankind into one Incorporation. And so much does Ambition tie
its dependers, to depend upon such numbers, that though that Armies of Laquays
which attend them, signifies no more then so many following Ciphers; yet the
substracting of any one of these, does by so much lessen the value of what they
follow. Does not Pride require Flatterers? and these Flatterers Salaries, and
the provision of these Salaries, much pains and anxietie? Does it not require
precedence, a suitable estate and applause? And are not these inattainable,
without more toil and fatigue, then any thing that Virtue enjoynes?
Covetousness requires Assiduous Drudgery, and Mines as bottomless as the
desires which craves them: It craves every thing which others have, and every
thing which it self can imagine. Luxury seeks only after what is unusual, and
what is rare. It must in Apicius, crave food from the Indies, fetched to Rome,
in Heliogablus Fishes when far from the Sea, and more for one belly, then might
enrich thousands of Nobler Creatures. Lust requires plurality of Women,
abundance of strength, numbers of Pimps, and much Money. Whereas Virtue craves
only what is fit, and persuades us to believe that only to be fit, which is
absolutely necessary* Cato's Table is completely furnished with one Dish, and
his Body with one Vesture. Huic aepulae vicisse famem. And the Philosopher
going by well and rich furnished Shops, could cry out with pleasure, Oh! How
many things are there, of which I stand not in need? Not only are these many
Instruments troublesome, because they are superfluous, but likewise, because by
their number they add to these natural necessities, under which even Virtuous
men are weighted, as long as they are men. These who have so numerous Families,
cannot remove when their necessity calls them, but they must expect till their
retinue be ready, and when these are prepared, it is no easy clogg to draw so
many after them; or when any misfortune overtakes any of these many, they must
suffer in these, as often as each of these suffers in themselves; and their
miseries are augmented by every new Increment that is added to their fortunes.
A great Treasure is not only an incitement to make its Master be assaulted, or
betrayed, but is likewise uneasy to be transported: And Cresus many Baggs are
overtaken, when Moneyless Solon escapes with safety. I shall then conclude,
that Virtue is easier then Vice, because it requires fewer Instruments.

(...) cause it cannot find them at home. Covetousness must scorch in the
Indies its suitors; it must freez them in Nova Zembla; it terrifies them at
Sea, and Shipwracks them upon the Shore. Whilst Virtue recommends to us, to
seek our happiness in no foreign pleasures: And Diogenes finds without danger
in his Tubb, what these Sailers pursue in their dangerous Bottoms. But Vice
might plead it self less guilty, if its designs were only difficult, but
difficulty is not all, for Vice either requires what is impossible, or what by
not being bounded, may very easily become so. Covetousness makes nothing
enough, and proposes not only what may satisfy, but what may be acquired.
Ambition likewise will have every man to be highest, which is impossible,
because there cannot be many highests; and the first attainer leaves nothing to
his implacable rivals, but the impatience of being disappointed, which not only
disquiets their present ease, but begets in them projects of attaquing him by
whom they conceive themselves vanquished. And these designs being formed, by
persons whose judgments is much disordered by interest (which like fired
Powder, flees out, not always where it should, but where it may) and against
persons already secured, by Power, Fame, Law, and other advantages, they ripen
into no other issue, then a last ruin to these, who were so foolish, as not to
satisfy their present humor with their present fortune.

Philosophers have divided all Vices into these, Vice in defect and in excess
are equally uneasy.
which consist in excess, and these which imply a defect, the one shooting as
far over the mark as the other comes short of it; and if we compare Virtue with
either of these, we will find it more easy then either, for as to these which
overreach Virtue, they must be as much more uneasy then it, as they exceed it;
for having all in them which that Virtue possesses which they exceed, they must
require either in acquisition or maintenance, all the pains that the exceeded
Virtue exacts. Thus prodigality requires all the spending, and pains that
liberality needs, and running equally with it all it is length; it begins to
require more pains and travel where it out-shoots the other, and thus
prodigality bestows not only enough as liberality does, but it lavishes out
more then is fit, taking for the standard of it is bounty, all that it has to
bestow, and not either what it self can spare, or what it is object needs:
Jealousy pains it self more, then true love, with all those extravagancies,
which are so unsufferable to the party loved, and so disquieting to the lover
himself, that Physicians have accounted this a disease, and the Law has made
it a crime. As to these Vices, which by being placed in defect, seem to require
as much less trouble then the Vice they fall short of, as the others require
more, because of their excess; yet so uneasy is Vice, that even these though
they exceed not virtue in their measures, do yet exceed it in their toil: For
nature designs accomplishment in all it is productions, and therefore frets, and
is disquieted at these immature effects; and is as much more wounded by these,
then by virtuous productions, as the grafts are by being spoiled of their
greener fruits, or as a women is by her too early birth. We see a miser more
cruciat by his scanting penuriousnesse, then a noble person by his generous
liberality, for these are obliged to keep themselves out of these occasions of
spending (a task great enough* because all men endeavor, both out of envy, and
out of humor and sport, to draw them unto these snares) and when they are
within their own circle, they are forced by that restless Vice, to descend to
thousand of tricks, which are as wearieing, as unhandsome. I have seen some so
careful of their estates, that they brook'd better to have their names and
souls burdened then these, and to preserve which they were at more trouble then
any can have the faith to believe, besides these who had the humor to do so:
If to hold or draw with our full force be a trouble, both these are the posturs
of covetousness, wherewith it is kept upon constant guard, and in continual
employment; and if at any time they remit any thing of that anxiety, they
repine at their own negligence, and imagine that they lost as much as they
hoped once to have gained. Fear is the defect of courage, but yet it is more
uneasy then courage, and really this alone has more uneasienesse, then all the
fraterny of Virtues, for Virtue is at worst bussied about, what is; but fear
bogls at what is not, Vices oppose one another, whereas each Virtue assists its
fellow.
equally with what is.

Vice likewise is therefore less easy then Virtue, because it proposes only
an aim, which is fixed and stable, whilst vice and fancy leaves us to an
indetermination, that is uneasy as well as dangerous, when it has pressed us,
to make Armies fall as sacrificed to the idol of our Ambition, and for
humouring of that passion, to bring Cities as well as Men level with the
ground: Then it will in the next thought persuade us, even to laugh at our
Ambition, and to exchange it for love to a Mistress or Companionrie as it once
served the otherwise Great Alexander. The practice of one Virtue facilitats
other Virtues


As Virtue makes good neighbors, so all the Virtues are ^o far such amongst
themselves, that not only they interfeer not with one another, but the exercise
likewise of the one, facilitats the practice of the others; thus whilst we
practice temperance, we learn to be just, because temperance is the just
measure of enjoying, and using all contingents; and we learn by it to be
patient, patience being a temperance in grief, sorrow or affliction: Patience
is likewise the exercise of fortitude, and fortitude is a just proportion of
courage, and a temperat exercise of boldness. And this occasioned the
Philosophers to term this noble alliance, the golden chain of Virtue, each
being linkt with, and depending upon it is fellow. But if we turn the prospect,
we will find that though dissension be a special Vice so charactered, yet all
Vices, have somewhat of that ill natured humor in them; and agree in nothing,
besides that each of them disagree with each other, which makes the practice of
them both tedious and disagreeable, for all of them consisting, the one in
excess, the other in defect; they cannot but disagree, excess and defect being
in themselves most contrary: thus prodigality opposes avarice, cowardlieness
courage, and fondness hatred; and as virtuous persons have a kindness for one
another, because the object of their love requires, as well as admitts rivals,
so Vice endeavoring to engrosse what it pursues, makes rivals altogether
unsupportable. Ambition pouses on each of it is dependers to be chief, and yet
allows only one of these many to enjoy, what it makes all of them desire. Thus
avaric's task is to impropriat the possession of what was created, and is
necessary to be distribute amongst many thousands: And envy will not only have
its Master to be full of applause, but will likewise starve the desires, and
merits of others, judging that it self cannot be happy if others be. Vice then
must be less easy then Virtue, because it has more enemies then Virtue; and
because the Virtues are more harmonious amongst themselves, then Vices are.

Vices not only make enemies to themselves, Providence resists vice
but by a Civil War (as a just judgment upon them) they destroy one another,
providence intending thereby, to hinder the growth of what, though it prosper
not well, yet is already too noxious to mankind; and upon the same principle of
kindness to what bears his image, GOD Almighty, and His Providence, do design
the unsuccesfulness of Vice, as being obstructive of his glory, as well as
destructive to his creatures, being equally thereto engaged, by a love to his
own honor and service, and by a hatred as well to these who commit Vice, as to
the Vice which is committed. Thus GOD confounded those Tongues who had spoke so
much blasphemy against him, whilst they were endeavoring to raise a Tower as
high as their sins. And when David intended to spill Nabals blood, GOD is said
to have stopped him from being an unjust Executioner, whom he intended to make a
most just Judge. And since Balaams Ass opened its mouth to speak this truth,
they must be more stupid then Asses, who will not believe it.

The Law likewise by its punishments, The Law makes Vice uneasy.
contributes all its endeavors to crush Vice, and to arrest its success,
forbidding by its Edicts, any person to assist it, and making not only
assistance, but counsel; not only counsel, but connivance; not only connivance,
but concealment of it, to be in most cases so criminal, that all the honors
which Vice promises, or the treasures it gives, cannot be able to redeem those
who are found to have slighted this prohibition. Must it not then be difficult
to be vicious? where Assistants and Counselors are so over-awed, and the
intenders so terrified, that few will engage as instruments? and these who do,
are so disordered by fear, that vicious projecctors are as little to expect
success, as virtuous persons are to wish it for them. And to evidence how much
opposition the Law intends for Vice, it not only punishes Vice with what it
presently inflicts, but it presumes it still guilty for the future, semel
malus, semper praesumitur malus; and upon that prsumption many vicious persons
have suffered for that whereof they were otherwise innocent. Though Rebellion
has promising charms, to allure the Idolaters of Ambition and Fame, yet the
Law does so far stand against it, that few will concur with the contrivers,
except such fools as have not the wit to promote it, or some desperate persons,
with whom few will join, because they are known to be discontent, and though
revenge relishes blood with a pleasing smack; yet the severity of excellent
Laws cools much of that inhumane heat, and lessens the pleasure, by sharpening
the punishment. Vice then must be uneasy, seeing the Law opposes it, and
renders its Commission dangerous, Men are in interest obliged to oppose Vice
and so it is uneasy
as well as odious.

Men likewise join with GOD and the Law in a Confederacy against Vice, and
though they too often approve it in the warmness and disorder of their passions;
yet in their professions and conventions they laugh at it, and inveigh against
it; and though the pressure of a present temptation, overcomes them so far as
to commit what they dissallow, yet they do it but infrequently and with so many
cheks from within, as that it is commission cannot be thought easy: Consider,
how amongst men, we hate even these Vices in others, which we are guilty of our
selves, and how we even hate these Vices in others, by which we our selves reap
no small advantage. Alexander gloried to destroy that base person, who had
murdered his greatest enemy Darius; and David is commended, for having caused
kill him, who but said, that he had killed Saul; who will employ one who is
perfidious? and so uneasy is Vice, that much pains and discourse will not
persuade us to believe one who uses to lie, whilst we will soon believe what
is really a lie from one who uses not to abuse our trust; few Judges are so
pointedly just, as not to think that they may favor a Virtuous person; good
men do likewise reward such as own an interest so allowable, and wicked men own
such as are virtuous out of design, thereby to expiat their former Vice, and to
persuade the world, that they are not really vicious, though they be esteemed
so: so that seeing reward as well as inclination, and just men as well as injust
advance Virtue, and oppose Vice, Vice cannot be but be more uneasy then
Virtue, which is all is to be proven.

I am from reflecting upon the progress and growth of Vice, Vice mak^ us fear
all men.
convinced very much of it is uneasieness; If we look upon Rebellion, Revenge or
Adulteries, we will find them hatched in Corners as remot from commerce as those
Vices are themselves from Virtue, and as black as the guilt of their
contrivers, and almost as terrifying as the worst of prisons are to such who
are but in any measure virtuous; none of the contrivers dares trust his
Colleague, and which is yet worse, none of them has courage enough to reflect
upon what he is to do; he most be too ill to be successful who is so
desperately wicked, as not to tremble at the wickedness he projects, and these
blushings which adorn the face, when they are the motions of modesty, become
stains and blemishes, when they are sent there by fear, or a troubled
conscience; and it is very pretty to observe with how much art and pains, such
as are guilty of Vice, endeavor to shun all discourses, that can renew to them
the least reflection upon their former failings, and how they most often times
disobliege their own envy and malice, in not daring to vent or reproach others
with that guilt, which might be easily retorted; and thus vicious men have as
many masters, as their vices have witnesses: and though they are bold enough to
commit vice, yet they often times want the courage to own it; and servants, if
conscious to these crimes, become thereby necessar to their masters, nor do
wicked and vicious persons fear only such as do, but (which is more extensive)
such as may know their Vices, and tremble at it is memory, as if the Sun or Moon
would divulge their secrets, and by accident they have often confessed crimes upon
mistakes, and have made apologies for that whereof they were not accused, which
has made the Confessors to be laughed at for their error, as well as hated for
their crimes.

Another Argument to enforce that Virtue is more easy then Vice, It is more
natural to be virtuous then vicious
is, that seeing nature is the spring of all operations, certainly that must be
most easy, which is most natural; and when we would express any thing to be
easy to a person or nation, we say, it is natural to them, and miracles are
uneasy and difficult, because they run the counter-tract of nature, being
either above, against or beside it is assistance: But so it is that Virtue is a
more natural operation then Vice, both because it less infests nature then
Vice does, and because nature discovers more of a bent to act virtuously then
vitiously, which are the only two senses in which any thing is said to be
natural.

That virtue of these two prejudges nature least, is clear from this, that
sobriety cherishes it, when it is run down by intemperance, murder kills it,
gluttony choaks it, and jealousy keeps it not alive but to torment it; and
generally when ever Nature is distressed, it flies to Virtue, either for
Protection, as to Courage, Justice and Clemency, or for recovery, as to
Temperance, Industry and Chastity: Few gray hairs owe their whiteness, except
to that innocence whose Livery it is, Rapine, oppression, and these other
Vices, hightening their insolence against man, to that point, that he must
serve them in being his own Burrior, to be commended for nothing else, save
that they rid the World of such who came only to it, to deface that glorious
Fabric, whereof the Almighty resented so the pleasure of having created it,
that he appointed a day of each seven to celebrat its Festivals. Are not some
sins said to be sins against our own bodies? Not because all are not so in some
measure, but because some are so in so eminent a measure, that the Apostle, who
knew much of all men's inclinations, thought that there being so much such, was
enough to restrain such persons from committing them, as were yet so wicked, as
not to obey a Savior who died for them. And why is it that Laws are so severe
against Vice? but because it destroys and corrupts the Members of the
Commonwealth? I have often, notwithstanding of the Precepts of Stoicisme, which
forbids me to be so effeminat, as to pity any thing, and notwithstanding of the
principles of Justice, which forbids me to pity persons who are flagitious, yet
been driven to that excess of compassion for the state of vicious persons, that
I have no more remembered even the wrongs that they have done me, to see the Pox
wear out a face which had been so often Fairded, and the Gout felter feet, that
as the Psalmist says, were swift to do ill, are but too ordinary encounters to
excite compassion: But to see the Wheel fatned with the marrow of tortured
miscreants, and the Rack pull to pieces these Receptacles of Vice, are great
instances how great an enemy Vice is to Nature; under whose ill conduct, and
for whose errors it suffers torments, which are much sooner felt then expressed.

Since then Nature is so opposed by Vice, it cannot be it self so unwise in the
meanest of these many degrees which we ascribe to many creatures whom it makes
wise, if it disposed not mankind to entertain an aversion for Vice, which is so
much its enemy. Shall the Sheep, the silliest of all Animals, or the earth, the
dullest of all the elements, flee from its oppressors? And shall Nature, which
should be wiser then these, because it bestows these inclinations upon them,
which makes them pass for wise, be so imprudent, as not to mould men so, as to
incline them to hate Vice, which so much hurts it? Is there any Vice committed,
to which we may not find another impulsive cause then Nature? And are not most
Vices either committed by custom, by being mistaken for good, by interest, or
inadvertence, as shall be showed in the close of this Discourse? And seeing
Nature designs to do nothing in vain, it is not imaginable that it should
prompt us to Vice, wherein nothing but vanity can be expected, or from which
nothing else can be reapt. These who are so injurious to Nature (because it
appears Nature has been less liberal to them, of understanding, then to
others) as to fasten this reproach upon it, of inclining men to Vice, do
contradict themselves, when they say that Nature is satisfied with little, and
desires nothing that is superfluous; whereas all these Vices which consist in
excess, do stretch themselves to superfluity; whilst upon the other side, these
Vices which consist in defect, are yet as unnatural, because in these the
committers deny themselves what is necessary for them, and so are most
unnatural: Nature desiring to see every thing accomplished in its just
proportions, and satisfied in its just desires.

All Vices have their own peculiar diseases, Each Vice brings a special disease.
to which they inevitably lead; Envy brings men to a leanness, as if it were
fed with its Masters flesh, as well as with its enemies failings; Lust the Pox
and Consumptions; Drunkenness Catarhes and Gouts, and Rage, Fevers and
Phrensies; which is a demonstration of their uneasiness, and incommodiousness:
And I might almost say, that those Vices are like Frogs, Lice, and other
despicable and terrible insects, generated and kneaded out of excrementious
humors; Lust is occasioned by the superfluity and heat of the Blood;
Drunkenness by a dryness of the Vessels; and Rage by the corruption and
exuberancy of Choler. Consider how much the grimaces of anger disfigures the
sweetest face, how much rage discomposes our discourse, and by these and its
other postures, ye will find Vice an enemy to Nature: So that in all these,
Nature labors under some distemper, and is distressed in its operations, and
acts them not out of choice, but as sick men rise to hunt for what their
Physicians deny them. And from all this it follows, that vice is neither
natural in its productions, nor in its tendencies, not being designed by Nature
in the one, nor designing to preserve Nature in the other.

I confess there is a rank of Virtues, which are supernatural, such as Faith,
Hope and Repentance, but either there could be no contradistinction of these
from such as I treat of, else these of which I hear speak, must be natural; To
deny our selves, if we will follow Christ; and that flesh and blood did not
teach Peter, to emit that noble confession of Christ's being the Son of the
Eternal GOD, proves that some spiritual truths, are above the reach of reason,
yet with relation to those other moral Virtues, that same inspired Volumne
assures us, that the Gentiles, who have no Law, Romans 2. 14.
do by nature the things contained in the Law, these not having the Law, are a
Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
the Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts in the mean time
accusing, or else excusing one another; and elsewhere the wicked are said to be
without natural affection, Romans 1. 31.
are not all sins even in the dialect of Philosophers and Lawgivers, as well
as in the Language of Canaan termed unnatural? What is Paricide, Ingratitude,
Oppression, Lying etc. but the subversion of these Laws, whereof our own
hearts are the Tables? Does not Nature, by giving us Tongues to express our
thoughts, teach us, that to disguise our thoughts, or to contradict them, is to
be unnatural: And seeing the not acknowledgement of favors, obstructs the
future relief of our necessities, it must be as unnatural to be ungrate, as it
is natural to provide supplies for our craving wants.

I will not fully exhaust the miseries that wait upon Vice, The horror of
Conscience makes Vice uneasy.
by telling you, that no man who is really vicious, sins without reluctance
in the commission; But I must likewise tell you, that though all the preceding
disadvantages were salv'd, yet the natural horror which results from the
commission of Vice, is great enough to render it a miracle, that any man should
be vicious, our Conscience can condemn us without Witnesses, though we bribe
off all Witnesses from without, or though by Sophistry and Art, we render their
Depositions insuccessful: And though Remissions can secure us against all
external punishments, yet the Arm of that Executioner cannot be stopped; and if
ye consider how men become thereby inconsolable, by the attendance of friends,
and the advantage of all exterior pleasures, ye cannot but conclude that Vice
is to be pitied, as well as shunned, and that this alone makes it more uneasy
then Virtue, whereby the greatest of misfortunes are sweetened, and outward
torments, by having their Prospect turned upon future praise and rewards,
rendered pleasures to such as suffer them; and are looked upon as ornaments, by
such as see them inflicted, and draw praises from succeeding ages. -- Hic murus
ahaeneus esto.
Nil conscire sibi, nulla palesscere culpa.
was the determination of a Pagan, who could derive no happiness from these
Divine Promises upon which we are obliged to rely for rewards; which though
they be too great to be understood by the Sons of Men, yet are not so great,
but that they may be expected by us, when we shall be adopted to be the Sons of
that GOD, whose power to bestow, can be equaled by nothing, but by his desire
to gratify. After success has crowned vicious designs, yet Vice meets with
this uneasinesse of remorse, wherein the souls of men are made to forget the
pleasure of success, and are punished for having been successful: And these
will either not remember their success, in which case they want all pleasure,
or if they think upon them, that thought will lead them back to consider the
guilt and baseness to which they owe it, which will vex and fret them. Virtue
afflicts at most but the body, and in these pains, Philosophy consols us, but
Vice afflicts our Souls; and the Soul being more sensible then the body (seeing
the body owes its sensiblenesse to it.) Certainly the torments of Vice must be
greatest, and this seems the reason why our Savior, in describing the torments
of Hell, places the worm which never dies, before the fire that never goes
out; And that the rebukes of a natural Conscience, are of all torments the most
insupportable, appears from this, that albeit death be the most formidable of
all torments (men suffering Tortures, Physic, Contumelies, Poverty, and the
sharpest of afflictions, to shun its encounter) yet men in exchange of these,
will not only welcome Death, but will assume it to themselves, adding the guilt
and infamy of self-murder, the confiscation of an Estate, and the infamous want
of Burial, to the horrors of an ordinary death; and all this to shift the
present gnawings of a Conscience. The horrors likewise of a guilty Conscience
does in this appear most disquieting, that those who have their Conscience so
burdened, do acknowledge, that after confession, they find themselves as much
eased, as a sick Stomach is relieved by vomiting up these humors, whose
disquietnesse maks such as suffered them, rather sick persons, then Patients:
Whereas what ever be the present troubles which arises from virtue, yet if
they continue not, they are tolerable; and if they continue, custom, and the
assistance of Philosophy will lessen their weight, and at best, the pain is to
be but temporary, because the cause from which they descend is but momentany:
If they be not sharp and violent, they are sufferable; and if they be violent,
they cannot last, or at least the Patient cannot last long to endure them.
Whereas these reflections that disquiet us in Vice, arising from the soul it
self, cannot perish whilst that has any being. And so the vicious soul must
measure its grief by the length of Eternity, though Vice did let out its joys
but by the length of a moment, and did not fill even the narrow dimensions of
that moment, with sincere joy; the knowledge that these were to be short lyv'd,
and the fear of succeeding torment, possessing much of that little room.

The first objection whose difficulty deserves an answer, Virtue si more
pleasant then Vice.
is that Virtue obliges us to oppose pleasurs, and to accustom our selves with
such rigors, seriousness and patience, as cannot but render it is practice
uneasy; and if the Readers own ingenuity supply not what may be rejoined to
this, it will require a discourse, that shall have no other design besides its
satisfaction, and really to show by what means every man may make himself
easily happy, and how to soften the appearing rigours of Philosophy, is a
design which if I thought it not worthy of a sweeter pen, should be assisted by
mine, and for which I have in my current experience gathered together some
loose reflections and observations, of whose cogency I have this assurance;
that they have often moderated the weildest of my own straying inclinations,
and so might pretend to a more prevailing ascendent over such* whose reason and
temperament makes them much more reclaimable: But at present my answer is, that
Philosophy enjoins not the crossing of our own inclinations, but in order to
their accomplishment; and it proposes pleasure as it is end, as well as Vice,
though for it is more fixed establishment, it sometimes commands what seems rude
to such as are strangers to it is intentions in them. Thus temperance resolvs to
highten the pleasurs of enjoyment, by defending us against all the insults of
excess and oppressive loathing; and when it lessens our pleasurs, it intends
not to abridge them, but to make them fit and convenient for us, even as
Soldiers, who though they propose not wounds and starvings, yet if without
these they cannot reach those Laurels, to which they climb, they will not so
far disparage their own hopes, as to think they should fix them upon any thing
whose acquist deserve not the suffering of these. Physic cannot be called a
cruel employment, because to preserve what is sound, it will cut off what is
tainted; and these vicious persons, whose laziness forms this doubt, do answer
it when they endure the sickness of Drunkenness, the toiling of Avarice, the
attendance of rising Vanity, and the watchings of Anxiety; and all this to
satisfy inclinations, whose shortness allows little pleasure, and whose
prospect excluds all future hopes. Such as disquiet themselves by Anxiety
(which is a frequently repeated self murder) are more tortour'd, then they
could be by the want of what they pant after; that longed for possession of a
Neighbors estate, or of a public employment, maks deeper impressions of grief
by their absence, then their enjoyment can repair; and a Philosopher will
sooner convince himself of their not being the necessar integrants of our
happiness, then the miser will by all his assiduousnesse gain them.

There are but three instances of time, and in each of these, vicious persons
are much troubled; the prospect of usual insuccessefulness, difficulties or
inconveniences do torment before the commission; horror, trembling and
reluctance do terrify in the act, and conscience succeeds to these after
commission, as the last, but not the least of these unruly torments. And as to
the pleasurs of Vice, it can have none in any of these parcels of time, beside
the present, which present, is by many Philosophers scarce allowed the name of
time; and is at best so swift, that it is pleasurs most be too transient to be
possessed. I confess that revenge is the most inticeing of all Vices, and so much
so, that a wicked Italian said, that GOD Almighty had reserved it to himself,
because it was too noble and satisfying a Prerogative to be bestowed upon
mortals; yet it discharges at once it is pleasure with it is fury, and like a be
languishes after it has spent it is sting, and when it is once acted, which is
often in one moment, it cease from that moment to be a pleasure and such as
were tickled once with it, are afraid of it is remembrance, and think worse of
it, then they did formerly of the affront, to expiat which, it was undertaken;
Thirty Pieces of Silver might have had some letchery in them at Judas first
touch, but they behooved to have a very unresembling effect, when he took no
longer pleasure in them, then to have come the next week to offer them back:
and because they were refused, to rid himself of his life and them together.

The pains of Vice may be conluded greater then these of Virtue, from this,
that virtuous persons are in their sufferings assisted by all the world,
vicious persons doing so to expiat their own crimes, and virtuous persons doing
the same, to reward the Virtue they adore: and if these endeavors prove
insuccessful, every man by bearing a share in their grief, do all they can to
lessen it; but vicious persons have their sufferings augmented by the disdain,
and just opprobries thrown upon them by such as were witnesses to their Vices;
and such as had any inclination for them, dare not appear to be their
well-wishers, least they be repute Accomplices of their crimes.

I need not fear so much weakness in this my Theme, as to bring up a thousand
of these instances to its aid, that ly every where obvious to the least curious
observation. What is more laborious then Pride? wherein by robbing from others
what is due to them, the acquirers are still obliged to defend their new
Conquests with more vigilance, then Virtue needs? The proud man must be greater
then all others, and so must toil more then they all, his task being greater
then all theirs jointly. And the jealous man must never be satisfied, till he
know not only what is truth, but what he fears to be so, being most unhappy in
this, that if he get assurance of what he suspects, then he is made really
miserable; or if he attain not to that assurance, he must still toil for it,
and must make himself miserable by his pains, till he become really so, by
being informed of what at one instant he wishes to be false, and endeavors to
make true. Revenge is most painful, both in persuading us that these are
affronts, which of their own nature are no affronts, and then in bringing on us
much more hazard then their satisfaction can repay: For one word spoke to us,
which (it may be) the speaker intended as no injury, how many have by murdering
the speaker, or some such rash attempt, deprived themselves of the privilege
of seeing their friends without horror, or of coming abroad without imminent
danger, skulking in dens like thieves, imprisoned for fear of prison, and dying
daily to shun the death they fear. Whereas Socrates, by laughing at him who
spat in his face, had then the pleasure to see himself at present satisfied,
and did foresee the hopes of future praises. Guiltiness must search out
corners, it must at all rates secure favorits, it must shun to meet with such
as are conscious to its guilt, and when ever two men speak privately in presence
of such as are vicious, they persuade themselves that somewhat is there spoke
to their disadvantage; and like one who labors of a sore, they must still be
careful that their wound be not touched.

To conclude then this Period, consider, that every thing that is uneasy must
be unpleasant, and that Vice is more uneasy then Virtue, appears from the
whole foregoing Discourse.

I hope the preceding Discourse has cleared off all these doubts that can
oppose this (though new) yet well founded truth, Why most men are vicious.
leaving only this objection here to be answered. If Vice be less easy, and
less natural then Virtue; why do the greater part of mankind range themselves
to its side? leaving Virtue as few followers, as it professes to desire
admirers? In answer whereto, I confess that this objection proves men to be
mad, but not Vice to be easy; even as when we see men throw away their
clothes, run the fields over, and expose themselves to storms, leaving their
convenient homes, and kind family: we conclude such as do so to be mad, but are
not induced to believe that what they do is easy. And certainly Vice is a
madness, as may appear convincingly from this, that when we see others run to
these excesses (which we thought Gallantry in our selves, when we were acting
the like) we ask them seriously, What, are ye mad? And Hazael, 2 Kings 8. 13
when the cruelty he was to (and did) commit, was foretold him by the Prophet,
did with admiration ask, What? am I a Dog, that I should do these things! And
the Prodigal, when he freed himself from these vicious roavings, Luke 15 17
is said to have come to himself; by which word Madness is usually expressed:
Men are said to be mad, when they offer violence to their Body; and it is a
more advanced degree of madness, to offer violence to our Souls, which we then
do (besides the ruining of our Bodies) when we are Vicious. And to such as
prefer their Bodies to their Souls, I recommend the Survey of such Bodies, as
have wasted themselves in Stews and Taverns, or have left Limbs upon the Field
where they last quarrelled after Cups, for Vanity, or Mistrisses. The second
answer is, that men mistake ofttimes Vice for Virtue, and are enticed to it by
an error in their Judgments, rather then any depravedness in their Affections.
Thus Drunkenness recommends it self to us, under the notion of kindness; and
Prodigality, under that of Liberality: Complacency likewise is the great Pimp
of much Vitiousness to well disposed persons, and many are by it enticed to
err, to gratify a mistake in their friendship, for they are persuaded that
friendship and kindness are so innocent and sweet qualities, that it cannot
command what is not as just as it self.

Custom also, as it is a second nature, so it is a Stepmother to Virtue, and
whilst we endeavor to shune the Vice of being vain, and singular, we slip
into these Vices which are too familiar to be formidable, and which we would
not have committed if the mode and fashion had not determined us thereto
against our first and pure inclinations; thus the Germans believe Drinking to
be kindness, and the Italian is by the custom of his Country induced not to
tremble at, but to love Sodomie. We have interest likewise to blame, for much
of that wickedness, which we falsely charge upon nature: For this brib's us to
oppose what naturally we would follow, but above all want of consideration, is
the frequent occasion of many of these disorders, so that Virtue is not
postpon'd by choice, but by negligence; neither would it be more difficult for
us to be virtuous in many of our actions, then it would be for us to consider
what we are about to do. And I may seal up this Period with the blunt complaint
made by a poor woman, who after her affection and interest had forced from her
many passionat regrates against her sons debordings, concluded thus, alace! my
son will never recover, for he cannot think: therefore I must conclude, that
seeing it is easy to think, it must be likewise easy to be virtuous.

It is indeed hard for one who is drunk to stand upright, or for one who has
his eyes covered with mire to see clearly; and yet, standing upright, or seeing
clearly, are not in themselves difficult tasks: Just so Virtue is easy in it
self, though our pre-ingagement to the contrary habit, rather then to the Vice
it self, renders it is operations somewhat uneasy; whereas, if we had once
imbued our Souls with a habit of Virtue, it is exercise would be far easier to
us, then that of it is contrary; for it would be assisted by reason, nature,
reward and applause, all which oppose the other. He who becomes temperate,
finds his temperance much less troublesome, then the most habitual drunkard
can his excess; who can never render it so familiar, but that he will be
constrained to make faces when he quaffs off a tedious health, and will at some
times find either his quarrels, the betraying his friends secret, or his
crudities to importune him. No liar has so much accustomed himself to that
trade, but he will discover himself sometimes in his blushes, and will be often
distressed, to shape out covers for his falseness; whereas he who is free from
the bondage of that habit, will always find it so easy, that he will never
hear a lie, without admiring with what confidence it could have been forged.

Whereas to know the easiness of Virtue, we need only this reflection, that
every vicious person thinks it easy to conquer the Vice he sees in another: He
who whoors admires the uneasiness and unpleasantness of drinking; and the
Drunkard laughs at the fruitless toil of ambition, which shows that Vice is an
easy conquest, seeing the meanest persons can subdue it.

Though truth and newness do of all other motivs court us soonest to
complacency, and that my present Theme can without vanity pretend to both; yet
so studious am I of success, where I have a tenderness for the Subject for
which I contend, that for further conviction of it is enemies, I must recommend
to them to go to the Courts of Monarchs, and there learn the uneasiness and
unpleasantness of Vice, from it is splitting those in Oppositions and Factions,
which afford the reasonable on-lookers as disagreeable a prospect, These
proves the uneasiness also of private quarrels and ill humors,
as that of a ship-wrackt Vessel. And when Faction has once dismembered a
Society, is it not strange to see what pains and anxiety must be showed by both
opposites, to discover and ruin each others projects? Other men toil only to
make themselves happy, but those must labor likewise to keep their opposites
from being so; they must seek applause for themselves, and must stop it from
their enemies; they must shun all places where these are entertained, and all
occasions which may bring them to meet though inclination or curiosity do
extremely bend them to go thither: they must oppose the friends of their
enemies, though they be desirous and oblieg'd upon many other scores to do them
good Offices: they grow pale at their appearances, and are disordered at what
praise is given those, though bestowed upon them for promoving that public
good wherein the contemners share for much of their own safety: and it is most
ordinar to hear such factious Zealots swear, that they would choice rather to
be destroyed by a public Enemy, then preserved by a Rival. From all which it
is but too clear, that all vicious persons are slaves; which as it is the
uneasiest of states, so to shun a loss of liberty, most men refuse to be
virtuous. If we go to Physicians we will find their shambles hung round with
the Trophies of Vice: For Temperance, Chastity or the other Virtues send few
thither, but wantonness repayes there it is one moments pleasure with a years
cure, and makes them afraid to see that disfigured face, for whose
representation they once doted upon their flattering mirrours. There lie such
prisoners as the drunken Gout has fettered, and there lie louring such as
Gluttony has oppressed. Let us go to Prisons and Scaffolds, and there we will
see such furnished out with the envoyes of injustice, malice, revenge and
murders. Let us go to Divines, and they will tell us of the horrid exclamations
of such, as have upon deathbed seen mustered before them, those sins, which
how soon they had their vizards of sensuality and lust pulled off, did appear
in figures monstrous enough to terrify a Soul which took leisure to consider
them.

Juvenal Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent. And though the
consciences of Soldiers have oft-times their ears so deafned with warlike
sounds or welcome applauses, that they cannot hear; and their eyes so covered
with their enemies gore, that they cannot see these terrifying shapes of inward
revenge: yet, if we believe Lucan, neither could the wrongs done to Caesar so
far legimate his fury, nor the present joy or future danger so far divert him
from reflecting upon his bypast actions: Nor could the want of Christianity
(which enlivens extremely these terrors beyond the Creed of a Roman, who
believed, that gallantry was devotion) so far favor his cruelty, but that he
and his soldiers were the night of Pharsalia's battle thus disturbed; Lucan,
Book 7.

But furious dreams disturb their restless rest;
Pharsalia's fight remains in every breast;
Their horrid guilt still wakes: the battle stands
In all their thoughts; they brandish empty hands,
Without their swords: you would have thought the field
Had groaned, and that the guilty earth did yield
Exhaled spirits, that in the air did move,
And Stygian fears possessed the night above.
A sad revenge on them their conquest takes,
Their sleeps present the furies hissing snakes,
And brands; their country-mens sad ghosts appear:
To each the image of his proper fear*
One sees an old man's visage, one a young,
Another t^rtur'd all the evening long.
With his slain brothers spirit; their fathers sight
Daunts some: but Caesar's soul all ghosts affright.
But that I may rest your thoughts from the noise and horror of these objects,
The Character of a Philosopher and his ease.
let me lead them into a Philosophers Cell or House (for Virtue is not like
Vice, confined to places) and there ye will see measurs taken by no less noble
or less erring Pattern, then Nature. His Furniture is not the offspring of
the last fashion, and so he must not be at the toil, to keep Spies for
informing him, when the succeeding mode must cause these be pulled down, and
needs not be troubled, to fill the room yearly of that contemned stuff he but
lately admired. He is not troubled that another Candlesticks are of a later
mould, nor vexed, that he cannot muster so many Cabinets or Knacks as he does.
He spends no such idle time as is requisite for making great entertainments,
wherein Nature is oppressed to please fancy, and must be by the next days Physic
tortured to cure its errors: His Soul lodges cleanly, neither clouded with the
vapors, nor cloyed with the crudities of his Table; he applies every thing to
it is natural use, and so uses meat and drink not to express kindness
(friendship doing that office much better) but to refresh, and not to occasion
his weakness. His dreams are neither disturbed by the horrid representation of
his last days crims, nor by the too deep impressions of the next days designs,
but is calm as the Breast it refreshes, and pleasant as the rest it brings; his
eyes suffer no such eclipse in these, as the eyes of vicious men do, when they
are darkened with Drunkenness or excessive sorrow, for all his darknesses
succeed as seasonably to his recreations, as the day is followed in by the
night In his Clothes, he uses not such as requires two or three hours to their
laborious dressing* or which overawe the wearer so, that he must shun to go
abroad to all places, or at all occasions, least he offend their luster; but he
provides himself with such as are most easy for use, and fears not to stain
these, if he keep his Soul unspotted: He considers his Body and Organs, as the
casement and servants of that reasonable Soul he so much loves; and therefore
he eases them, not upon design to please them, but to refresh them, that the
soul may be thereby better served; and if at any time, he deny these their
satisfaction, he designs not thereby to tortoure them, for Gratitude obliges
him to repay better their services (and a man should not be cruel even to his
beast) but he does so, lest they exceed these measours, whose extent Virtue
knows better to mark out then they; or else he finds that during the time he
ministers to these appetites, he may be more advantagiously employed, in
enjoying the pure and spiritual pleasurs of Philosophy. But leaving this utter
Court, let us step into a Philosophers breast (a Region as serene as the Heaven
whence it came) and there view, how sweet Virtue inspires gentle thoughts,
whose storms raise not wrinckles like billows in our face, and blow not away
our disobliged friends. Here no mutinous passion rebels with success, and
these petty insurrections of flesh and blood, serve only to magnify the
strength of reason in their defeat. Here, all his desires are so satisfied with
Virtue as their reward, that they need, nor do not run abroad, begging pleasurs
from every unkown object: And therefore it is that not placing his happiness
upon what is subject to the Empire of fate, capricious Fortune cannot make him
miserable, for it can resume nothing* but what it has given, and therefore,
seeing it has not bestowed Virtue and Tranquillity, it cannot call it away; and
whilst that remains all other losses are inconsiderable, and as no man is
grieved to see what is not his own destroyed, so the Virtuous Philosopher,
having always considered, what is without him as belonging to Fortune, and not
to him, he sees those burnt or robbed with a dis-interested indifference: and
when all others are allarum'd with the fears of ensuing Wars and Invasions, he
stands as fixed (though not as hard) as a Rock, and suffers all the foaming
waves of fate and malice to spend their spit and froth at his feet: Virtue and
the Remembrance of what he has done, and the hopes that he will still act
virtuously, are all his treasures, and these are not capable of being pillaged;
these are his inseparable companions, and therefore he can never want a
divertising conversation: And seeing he is a Citizen of the world, all places
are his Country, and he is always at home, and so can never be banished; and
seeing he can still exercise his reason equally in all places, he is never (like
vicious persons) vexed that he must stay in one place, and cannot reach another;
like a sick man, whose disease makes him always tumble through all the corners
of his bed. He is never surprised, because he forecasts always the worst; and
as this arms him against discontents, So if a milder event disappoint his
apprehensions, this heightens his pleasure. He lives without all design, except
that one of obeying his reason; and therefore it is that he can never be
miserable, seeing such are only so, who are crossed in their designs; and thence
it is, that when he hears that his actions displease the world, he is not
troubled, seeing he designed not to please them and if he see others carry
wealthy pretenses to which he had a title, he is little troubled, seeing he
designed not to be rich. The frowns or favors of C^andees alter him not, seeing
he neither fears the one, nor expects promotion from the other. He desires
little, and so is easily happy, seeing these are without contraversie happy who
enjoy all they desire; and that man puts himself in great debt, who widens his
expectations by his desires: Thus, he who designs to buy a neighboring Field,
must straiten himself to lay up what will reach it is price, as much as if he
were debtor in the like sum; and desire leaves still an emptiness which must be
filled. He finds not his breast invaded (like such as are vicious) by contrary
passions, envy sometimes persuading, that others are more deserving, and vanity
assuring that none deserves so much. His passions do not interesse him with
extreme concern in any thing; and seeing he loves nothing too well, he grieves
at the loss of nothing too much; joy and grief being like the contrary motions
of a swing, or pendula, which must move as far (exactly) to the one side, as it
run formerly to the other. He looks upon all mankind as sprung from one common
stock with himself, and therefore is as glad to hear of other men's happiness,
as others are to hear of their kindred and relations promotion. If he be
advanced to be a Statesman, whilst he continues so, he designs more to
discharge well his present trust, then to court a higher, which double task
burdens such as are vicious; and having no private design, if the public which
he serves find out one fitter for the employment, he is well satisfied, for his
design of serving the public is thereby more promoved. And if he be preferred
to be a Judge, he looks only to the Law as his Square, and is not distracted
betwixt the desires to be just, to please his friends, to gratify his
dependers, and to advance his private gain. The Philosopher is not raised by
his greatness above, nor deprest by his misfortunes below his natural level:
For, when he is in his grandeur, he considers that men come to him but as they
go to fountains, not to admire it is streams (though clear as crystal) but to
fill their own pitchers; and therefore, he is neither at much pains to preserve
that state, nor to highten men's esteem of it; but considers his own power as he
does a River, whose streams are always passing, and are then only pleasant when
they glide calmly within their Banks. Injuries do not reach him, for his Virtue
places him upon a hight above their shot, and what calumnies or offenses are
intended for him, do but like the vapo^rs and fogs, that rise from the earth,
not reach the Heaven; but fall back in Storms and Thunder upon the place, from
which they were sent: Injuries may strick his buckler, but cannot wound
himself, who is sensible of no wounds, but of those his Vices gives him: And if
a Tyrant kill his body, he knows his immaterial Soul cannot be stabbed, but is
sure it will flee as high as the Spears (nothing but that clog of Earth
hindering it to move upward to that it is Center) and that from thence, he will
great Pompey (in Lucan) smile down when he shall see with illuminat eyes his
own Trunck to be so inconsiderable a piece of neglected Earth. And to conclude,
the Philosopher does in all his actions go the straightest way, which is
because of that the shortest, and therefore the easiest.

When I have constellat all these touring Elogies, which Gratitude heaps upon
it is benifactors, which foolish Youths throw away upon their Mistresses, and
which Flatterers buzze into the depraved ears of their Patrons, when I have
impoverisht invention and emptied eloquence of their most floury ornaments.
When I shall have decocted the pains of a whole writing age, into one
Panegirick, to bestow a Complement upon Virtue, for the ease it gives us, and
the sweets of it is Tranquillity; I shall have spent my time better, then in
serving the most wealthy or recreating Vice; and yet I shall obliege Virtue by
it less, then by acting the least part of what is reasonable, or gaining the
soonest reclaimable of such as are vicious. And therefore I shall leave off to
write, that I may begin to act vetuously; though one of my Employment may find
a defense for writing moral Philosophy, in the examples of Cicero, Du Vair that
famous French President, the Lord Verulam, and thousands of others.

I have (to deal ingenuously) writ these two Essays, to serve my Country,
rather then my Fame or Humor, and if they prove successful, Heaven has nothing
below it self, wherewith it can more bless my wishes: but if these succeed not,
I know nothing else wherewith I would flatter my hopes; and so whatever be the
event of this undertaking, (as my resolutions stand now formed) Adieu for ever
to writing.

FINIS.

