THE ACCOMPLISHED PHYSICIAN, THE HONEST APOTHECARY, AND THE SKILFUL CHYRURGEON,

DETECTING Their necessary Connection, and dependence on each other.

WITHAL A DISCOVERY Of the Frauds of the

QUACKING EMPIRICK, THE PRAESCRIBING SURGEON, AND THE PRACTICING APOTHECARY,
WHEREUNTO IS ADDED

The Physicians Circuit, The History of Physic; And a Lash for Lex Talionis.
Homine semidocto quid iniquius? London, Printed, and are to be Sold in
Little-Britain. 1670.

THE PREFACE TO THE VULGAR READER.
READER,
TO those whom Nature has raised out of a refined mould, and are by their
Education sublimed to a higher sphaere, as the Gentry and Literate Persons of
England, this Discourse is no wise directed, unless accidentally by a
superficial view, they should give themselves the divertisement of admiring the
folly, indiscretion, and fond passion of the Uulgar, whom moving erratically in
a lower region, is the proper task of these Sheets, to reduce to a more certain
and less planetary motion.

As the Art of Physic through its excellency has ever dignified Physicians to
that Degree, as to appear most acceptable to Kings, Princes, and all others of
the highest rank; so likewise have Physicians retributed a just gratitude to
their Art, by super adding to it that luster and splendour, derived from their
most succesful Cures and excellent Practice, and particularly from that so
famed Aesculapian College of London, and other Doctors of Physic, who by their
Study and Experience, through Travel have of right merited that title: These
and their Art have of late years been rendered subject to the same fate Religion
and the Law not long before, of being subverted by the ignorance and ambiiton
of such whose brain is as subject to vapors, as the climat wherein they live,
being all manner of ways ignorant of the delicious fruits of life, that are
reaped from a constancy in their Church-worship, their subjection to
Government, and in their due Veneration of Learning. Their ignorance is
discernable in their senseless liberality, of conferring the honor and title of
Doctor upon every Quack, Empirick, Surgeon, Apothecary, and almost every one
that carries but the scent of Mithridate about him; and the Ambition of these
is no less ridiculous in receiving that mock-title. However since it is their
vulgar humor so to do, I have for their better understanding corresponded with
it so far, as to continue the same titles of Physician, Doctor, Churchyard and
Hackney Physician applied to the same parties, viz. to Quacks, Empiricks,
Praescribing Surgeons, and Practicing Apothecaries, for the most part meaning
no other but such, unless where for distinction the Reader will occur with the
addition of Accomplished. My name I have purposely concealed, because from this
small labor I promise my self no other advantage, than a complacency in my own
sentiment, of having performed a duty, that Noble Art, and it is most Ingenious
Artists, require from all, that have received a benefit from it and them, in
defending its honor and eminency from the abuse and violation of such mean and
pitiful animals, as are above mentioned.

And among that fry, none arrogate a greater sharp in the practice of Physic,
than the praescribing Surgeons, who seem to be enfranchised in it, since now a
days Physicians take so little inspection into their boutchery, and inhumane
practice, which because I shall not much insist upon in the ensuing Discourse;
I will insert an instance or two here: One I knew, that against a Diarrhoea or
looseness, gave the Patient two drams of Diapalma Plaster made up in Pills, for
several days, which through the quantity of lythargir it contained, gradually
poisoned the party. Another presented his Patient with half an ounce of
Mercurius Dulcis a day, for ten days together, which absolutely destroyed the
tone of the stomach, subverted the temperament of the brain, and at last
rendered him paralytick. A third upon the exhibition of red Praecipitate ill
praepared and worse applied, after innumerable stools praecipitated the Patient
into his Coffin; this and many other disasters were the consequence of a huge
Army-Bone-Setter's practice; who for his Prophanations, and Atheistical
opinions is the Monstrum horrendum of all men; and for his extreme illiterature
is the only he, I should admire, that through his impertinent and fastidious
boldness did arrive to the least repute, were it not his attendance on a great
person had given a seeming appearance of his bungling skill.

After all this, I must in short acquaint you with the remainder of my scope,
chiefly aiming to distinguish those Praescribing Surgeons, and Practicing
Apothecaries, by their dangerous and fraudulent practice, from skilful
Surgeons and Honest Apothecaries; for both which I have not only a due
respect and esteem, but shall hereby endeavor to convince all accomplished
Physicians of the necessity of their employments, and dependence on their Art,
making it my only request, not to take amiss, what may be expressed in Drollery
or earnest against those of their fraternity, that are no less injurious to the
Noble Practice of Physic, than the necessary Employ of Skilful Surgeons and
Honest Apothecaries.

My vulgar Reader I hope will not be offended with my franck humor of having
objected their fickle-headed inconstancy, which quality being set aside, it may
without partiality be asserted, they are a people, whom for their more than
ordinary endowments of Mind, singular Valor and address in their Arms, Nature
particularly has distinguished from all other Nations of the Continent, by
seating them in a most beautiful Island, and putting in their hands the Scale
of Justice, to compose or decide the Disputes of all Foreign Princes by their
invincible Power at Sea and Land.

The Accomplished Physician, AND The Honest Apothecary.
TO discommend what so many are fond of, is a character no ways obliging; and
therefore discovering the familiar cheats and impostures of those, whom our
vulgar does so passionately affect, must necessarily prove a work of very
slender merit. However, since I do not compute the vain applauses of a
credulous rabble the just price of my labors, nor dread the venomous darts of
those I make the subject of my discourse, but chiefly rendering my self to that
virtue, whereby men are spirited to work a public good to their private
disadvantage, shall now open to your sight, the skulls of such as are commonly
entrusted with your health, where you may behold the wheels of their brain,
framing subtle practices, to drain your dropsical purses, and play the fool
with your consumptive bodies.

But that all this should be transacted with a delight to the Patient, may seem
no less than a riddle, though easily resolved; for as in cheating there is a
Bonum utile, so in being cheated there is a Bonum jucundum, the Impostor
usually impressing an expectation more pleasant than ordinary on his Patients
fancy, which does not a little tickle his dull spleen. This confirms the truth
of the Motto, Vulgus vult decipi, The vulgar will needs be cheated; a saying
that is more applicable to the commonalty of this Horizon, than of any other in
Europe. For that once a a Heel-maker, should arrive to an Estate of many
thousands, by selling Barley water with a few drops of Spirit of Salt in it,
were in no other City possible, than on Tower-Wharf in London; or that a
rational people should permit their purses to be gelded, and their bodies
anatomized alive by a huddle of Empiricks, as that Hatband-maker, once of
Moorfields; the Gunsmith in Barbacan; that old doting piece of Nonsense in
Southwark; besides many more, not worth the value of my Inck and Paper, can
only be reported of our English: Or that not long since, a French Mountebank
Doctor, (who for many years in his own Country, could scarce counterpoise his
ordinary expenses, with the fruits of his practice,) should in less time than
the common life of a Physician, extract a mass of two hundred thousand
Iacobus's out of the Mines of English Churchyards, is an Argument for other
Nations, to accuse us of an extreme wantonness in our pockets. But I must
praetermit illustrating that Subject, not being embarked in a design of
reproving, but informing my vulgar Reader.

The Law looks very grim upon Gypsies for cheating young folks, though of a
very small part of their money, by conjecturing at their Fortunes, which
possibly may often correspond with the purpose of their praediction, though other
times may vary: But vulgar Physicians, and those of no indifferent report, do
not only conjecture grossly at the Diseases of their Patients, but also most
times make a shameful difference between their conjectures, and the state and
event of those Diseases, whereby the party is defrauded of a great part of his
money, and like a fool his expectation frustrated.

Here may be demanded, which of these is the greatest cheat; the Gypsy, who
for a trifle it may be a Beggars Alms, gives his Auditor a divertisement of a
pleasant discourse, leaving him withal to a free election of crediting what he
pleases, or the vulgar Hackney Physician, who imposes an obligation on his
Patient, to believe his impertinent sentiment of his infirmity, and for so
doing is satisfied with no less than a whole gripe of Half Crowns? Certainly,
where there is a due propo^tion observed between the recompense and the merit,
that cannot be comprehended within the circumference of a cheat, and therefore
one might justly aver an indemnity in the Gypsies penny, though no small cheat
in the vulgar Empiricks Iacobus.

But to prevent your censuring me, overbalanced with a prejudice to those, that
so much abuse that noble Profession; I Will conduct you into their usual road and
method, of examining their Patients, and making inquiry into their Diseases,
wherewith being acquainted, you may (though of never so unpolisht a skull) as
readily pronounce a Verdict, as the best Lye-a-bed till noon.

This knack does chiefly consist in three notions, viz. First, that a Patients
grievance is either a discernable evident disease, which his own confession
makes known to you, what it is; or Secondly an inward pain; or Thirdly, one of
these two Endemick Diseases, a Scurvy, or Consumption, or a third, the Pox.
This is their Theory, which is so deep engrafted on their Dura Matter, and may
be acquired with less industry, than fourteen years study at one of our
Universities; for so much time is requisite to make a man grow up to a Doctor,
the formality whereof in most places consists in, Accipiamus pecuniam et
dimittamus asinum.

Next I Will inform you in the application and uses of these three Notions. If a
sick man makes his address to a Vulgar Physician, he demands his complaint;
The Other replies, he is troubled either with a Vomiting, Looseness, Want of
Stomach, Cough, Bad digesture, Difficulty of breathing or Phtisick, Faintness,
Jaundise, Greensickness, Dropsy, Gout, Convulsion-fits, Palsy, Dizziness or
Swimming in the brain; Vomiting, Coughing, or Spitting of Blood, an Ague, a
Continual great heat or Fever. These are all evident Diseases the party himself
expresses he is troubled with. But his sickness not being an evident Disease,
which he himself can explain, the Vulgar Doctor concludes it must be either an
inward pain, or an Endemick disease. The Patient then making complaint of an
inward pain, to his old trade of guessing the other goes, inquiring-first in what
part; if he answers, he feels a pain in the right side under the short Ribs, he
tells him it is an Obstruction or stoppage in the Liver; if in the left side in
the opposite part, then it is a stoppage of the Spleen; if in the belly, it may
be he calls it a Colic, or wind in the Guts; if in the back or loins he
persuades him, it is Gravel, Stone, or some other Obstruction in the Kidneyes;
if a stitch in the Breast, he terms it a wind, or sometimes a Bastard, or other
times a true Pleurisy.

Lastly, if the party be reduced to a very poor and lean carcass, by reason of
a long taedious Cough, Spitting of blood, or want of stomach, or Feebleness, or
almost any other disease or pain, then be sure, he tells him, he is in a
Consumption, or at least falling into one. But being troubled with several
diseases and pains at once, as running pains, saintness, want of stomach,
change of complexion, so as to look a little yellowish, duskish or greenish;
then the other whispers him, he is troubled with the Scurvy. If diseased with
ulcers or running sores, red, yellow, blew, or dark spots, pimples, or botches
in the face, arms, legs, or any other part of the body, that is determined to be
the Scurvy likewise, supposing the party to be a sober discreet person; but if
appearing inclined to wantonness, by reason of his youth or sly countenance,
then the forementioned disease is to be called the Pox. In most diseases of
women they accuse the Mother. In children their guess seems far more fallible;
for a child within the six Months being taken ill, restless, and froward, if
there appear no evident disease, he ever affirms it is troubled with gripes;
upon which he prognosticates, that not speedily being remedied, the child will
fall into Convulsion fits; but this not happening according to his praediction,
to prevent the forfeiture of his skill and repute, endeavors to possess the
Mother and rest of the Gossips, it had inward fits. The child being past six
Months, and falling indisposed, then instead of gripes, it is discomposed by
breeding of teeth. But having bred all his teeth, and being surprised with any
kind of illness, the vulgar Doctor avouches, it is troubled with Worms. In
short, take away these three words, Obstruction, Consumption, and Scurvy, and
there will remain three dumb Doctors, the Hackney-Physician, The Prescribing
Surgeon, and the Practicing Apothecary.

Hitherto we have only discovered to you the ordinary Physicians conjecturing
compass, whereby he steers his course to arrive to the knowledge of his Patients
diseases; there yet remains we should unlockt'other ventricle of his Brain, to
behold the subtlety of his fancy, in groaping at the causes of diseases, which
though the Poet declares, ( foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,) to be
clothed with the darkest clouds, yet he by virtue of this following principle,
aims at this mark immediately, viz. That most diseases are caused by Choler,
Phlegm, Melancholy, or Abundance of blood. Of these, two are supposed to be
hot, namely Choler and Abundance of blood; and the other two cold, to wit
Phlegm and Melancholy, and consequently causes of hot and cold diseases. These
four universals being reduced to two general Categories under the notion of hot
and cold, any one having but the sense of distinguishing Winter from Summer,
may in the time of an Hixius Doxius instantly appoint a cause for almost every
disease. So that a Patient discovering his trouble, it may be a Want of
Stomach, Bad digesture, Fainting, Cough, Difficulty of breathing, Giddiness,
Palsy, etc. his Vulgar Physician has no more to do, but takes him by the fist,
to feel whether he be hot or cold; if he finds him cold, then summons in his
cold causes, Phlegm and Melancholy, which ready and quick pronouncing of the
cause upon a mere touch does almost stupefie our Patient through admiration of
this Aesculapian Oracle, hitting him in the right vein to a hairs breadth; for
quoth he, Indeed Mr. Doctor, I think you understand my distemper exceedingly
well, and have infallibly found out the cause, for every Morning as soon as I
awake, I spit such a deal of Phlegm, and moreover I must confess my self to be
extremely given to Melancholy. This jumping in Opinions between them, makes Mr.
Doctor swell with the expectation of a large fee, which the Patient most freely
forces upon him, and so the fool and his money are soon parted. Now it is two to
one but both are disappointed, the one in his unexperienced Judgment, the other
in his fond belief; for state the case, the disease takes its growth from
choler or abundance of blood, or any other internal cause, there is scarce one
in a hundred of those that are indisposed, who is not subject to hauk and spit
in the morning, and being reduced to weakness by reason of his trouble, must
necessarily be heavy in the passions of his mind, and incident into Melancholy
thoughts through the memory of his mortality, occasioned by this infirmity. So
that seldom mirth and cheerfulness are housed in indisposed bodies, because
they are deficient of that abundance of light and clear spirits, required to
produce 'em. No wonder the vulgar is so opiniater in the affair of their
temperament, when belabored with a disease, since in their healthful state
it is impossible for a Physician to engage their opinions otherwise, then to
believe themselves to be Phlegmatic and Melancholy. My self have often been
praesent at the demands of a censure upon the temperament of several, whom some
the infallible rules of Art did adjudg Sanguin, others Choleric, etc. to this
they would ever reply, they found themselves Phlegmatic and Melancholy; for
every morning they spitted up such a great quantity of thick clotted phlegm,
that they must needs thence infer their bodies to be Phlegmatic; And
Melancholy they were assured did possess 'em, for (say they) though for the
most part in company they appeared cheerful and pleasant; yet being alone they
were subject to lapse into Melancholy. To this reply was returned, that all
men, especially those that are accustomed to Suppers, were subject to hawk and
spit phlegm at their awaking, by reason of the vapors, (occasioned through the
heat of the Body, drawing inwards to the center, and melting the Phlegmatic
and soluble humors of the Body,) the Stomach and Bowels do transmit to the
Brain, during their sleep, which as soon as the spirits are Ioosned, (for
through sleep they are tied and locked up,) and begin to move, are praecipitated
and distill down to the Palate, which to the Brain performs the office, the Neck
does to the Head of an Alembick; and indeed the Brain and its hollownesses
being placed a top of the pipes of the Body, is not unlike an Alembick head,
for attracting and distilling moist humors.

To return to the point of declaring, how the vulgar strives even with violence
to be cheated, not in their Purses only, but in their fancy and Opinion; And in
this particular our Women are so violently eager, that if the vulgar Physician
can but make a true sound upon the Treble of their Fancy, will produce such a
harmony, as shall sound his praise through City and Country; and without these
Female Instruments or She Trumpets, it is almost impossible for a Vulgarist to
arrive to a famous report, who having once by his Tongue harmony enchanted the
women, does by the same cheat subject the Opinions of men to his advantage,
women generally usurping and impropriating the affair of their Husbands health
to their own management; for if a man chance to be surprised with sickness, he
praesently asks his Wife, what Doctor he shall send to, who instantly gives her
direction to him, that had her by the Nose last. In this piece of subtilty our
Doctor shows himself no less cunning than the Serpent in Genesis, who to cheat
Adam thought it expedient first to deceive Eve.

Now without any further praeamble, I must tell you the humor, many a sick
woman delights to be coaksed in by the ordinary Physician, viz. she loves to be
told, she is very Melancholy, though of never so merry a composure, and in that
part of the Letany, Mr. Doctor is a perfect Reader: For a Woman making
complaint she is troubled with Drowsiness, want of Stomach; Cough, or almost
any distemper, he answers her she is in an ill State, and troubled with great
and dangerous Diseases, and all engendered by Melancholy; and then tells her
once over again, she is very Melancholy, and says he probably occasioned by
course Treats at home, or some unkindness of Friends, which makes the poor
Heart put finger in her eye, and force a deep sigh or two, and all this
possibly for being denied a Tankerd on Bartholomew Fair, or a new Gown on May
Day, which being refreshed in her memory, does certainly assure her, the
impression of that Melancholy to be the original of her trouble, though some
months or years past, especially since her Physician discovers to her as much,
and for so doing admires him no less, intending withal to give an ample
Testimony to the world of her Doctor's great Skill: But this is not all, he
pursues his business, looking into her Eyes, where spying a small wrinckle or
two in the inward or lesser angle, he tells her, she has had a child or two,
namely a Boy or Girl, according to the place of the foresaid wrinkle in the
right or left inward angle; Thence persuades her, that at her last lying in,
her Midwife did not perform her office skilfully, or did not lay her well,
whereby she received a great deal of praejudice, as Cold, wrenching, or
displacing of the Matrix, etc. which instance squaring so exactly with the
praemeditated sense and opinion of his she Patient, (most Women though never so
well accommodated in their Labor, being prone to call the behavior of their
Midwife in question,) he has now produced a far greater confidence than
before; and last of all to complete his work now at the Exit of his gulled
Patient, of rendering her thoughts, opinion, and confidence vassals to his
service, fame, and advantage, makes one overture more of a great cause of some
of her symptoms, declaring to her, she is much subject to Fits of the Mother,
occasioning a choking in her throat; and herein they also jump in their
Sentiments, scarce one Woman in a hundred but one time or other is assaulted by
those uterin steems, especially upon a tempest of any of her Passions of
fright, fret, anger, love, etc.

If I have hitherto reproached the vulgar Physician for executing his employ
with so little Ingenuity, far greater reason may move me to condemn the
Water-Gazer, who by the streams of the Urin praetends to gratify his Patients
nice curiosity of being resolved, what was, what is, and what Disease is to
come; and what is more, some by their great cunning aiming to discover as much
by the Urinal, as the Astrologer by the Globe. The fame unto which the English
Doctor, still residing at Leyden, had promoted himself, by his most wonderful
sagacity in Urins, is not unworthy of your note, hundreds or rather thousands
repairing to this stupendous Oracle, to have the state of their Bodies
described by their Urin. But when I relate to you the first means, that gave
birth to our Countrey-man's repute, I shall soon remove your passion of
admiring him. Upon his arrival at the place forementioned, he had in his
company a bold fellow, that haunted the most noted Taverns and Tap-houses,
where by way of discourse divulged the good fortune that was happened to the
Town, by the arrival of an English Doctor, whose great Learning and particular
Skill in Urins would soon render him famous to all the Inhabitants; this being
pronounced with a confidence suitable to the subject, occasioned three sick
Scholars, (two Hecticks and one Hydropical,) then present, to make trial of the
truth of his words the next morning, agreeing to mix all their Urines in one
Urinal, and to commit the carriage of it to him, that was Dropsical. In the
interim Mr. Doctor is advertised of it by his Companion, which made him so
skilful, that when the Hydropical Scholar praesented him with the Urinal, to
know the state of his diseased Body, he soon gravely replied, that he observed
three Urins in this one Urinal, whereof the two lowermost parts of the Urin
appeared to him to be Consumptive, and the third that floated a top Dropsical,
withal that their condition was desperate, and at the expiration of six
months, they should be all lodged in their graves. This admirable dexterity of
discerning Diseases by the Urinal, was soon proclaimed by the Scholars
themselves, who all having finished the course of their lives within the time
praefix'd, proved an undoubted argument of his unparalel parts in the Art of
Physic, which immediately procured him an incredible concourse of people for
many years together.

That the effects of confoederacy in promoting a Physician to a popular vogue,
are as powerful as sinister and dis-ingenious, may evidently be deduced not
only from this Narrative, but from the common design of vulgar Empiricks, who
to raise their fame as high as a Pyramid, send forth several Mouthers, to
Mouth in all public places, Taverns, Coffee and Alehouses, their vast
abilities, expecting with that bate to hook in as many Patients as will swallow
it. Others are no less skilled, in counterfeiting their great practice, by
causing their Apothecary, or others, to call 'em out of the Church at an
Afternoon Sermon, to hasten post to a suborned Patient, to the intent, that the
world be advertised of the weighty business this Doctor is concerned in.
Neither do I tell you a new thing, that some few years past, a little prating
Empirick, by insinuating into the speaking men and holders forth of
Conventicles, had enticed a far greater employ, there his real capacity in
Physic could praetend to, but being now well mounted on Horseback, turns his
Tail to those, that had so long held the Stirrup to him. Others by their
Equipage, Eminent houses, and occasioning one and the same Patient to repair
needlessly to them twenty or thirty times, manifest a decoy even taken notice of
by the vulgar. These few most disingenious ways, I do here purposely bring on
the board, omitting many others, to convince the public, that the only means
for a Physician to advance himself honorably to practice, is by discovering
his real abilities, in curing Diseases by quick, certain, and pleasant
Medicines, and therefore nothing should render his parts more suspicious, than
by attempting their discovery, by such fallacious and ignoble devices; for
certainly the conclusion is most Sophistical, that because this Doctor is drawn
in his Coach, the other rides on Horseback, or another has a Lacquey at's heels,
therefore he must be excellently qualified in his Profession. But Vulgus vult
decipi.

If now I describe by way of advice to those that are entering upon the Study of
this Divine Art, the method of attaining to a point of excellency in it, that
may serve our vulgar for a better rule, to distinguish their seize by the
course they have passed through; first, it is most necessarily requisite, our
young Student should be perfectly instructed in the Latin and Greek Tongues,
being the universal keys to unlock all those Arts and Sciences, and no less a
grace to the future Physician. It Is in this particular many of our Embryonated
Physicians, that have of late years Transported themselves to Leyden and
Utrick, to purchase a degree, have been found very defective, insomuch that I
have heard the Professors condemn several of them, for their shameful
imperfection in that, which is so great an adornment, and of so absolute an use
in the Study of Physic. Neither can less be suspected of some of the more aged
vulgar Physicians, making choice to manage their consultations in the vulgar
Tongue. Secondly, being thus qualified for a Student, he ought to apply himself
close to the Study of Philosophy, for which Oxford and Cambridge may justly
challenge a praeeminence above other Universities. Here it is our Student learns
to speak like a Scholar, and is informed in the principles of Nature, and the
constitution of natural bodies, and so receiving a rough draught in his mind,
is to be accomplished by that excellent Science of humane Bodies. But because
according to the first Aphorism of the first Master Hippocrates, Art is long,
and Life is short, he ought to engage his Diligence, to absolve his
Philosophical course in two years at longest, and in the interim for his
Recreation and Divertisements enter himself Scholar to the Gardener of the
Physic Garden, to be acquainted with the foetures of Plants; but particularly
with those, that are familiarly praescribed by Practitioners, to praevent being
outwitted by the Herb-women in the Markets, and to enable him to give a better
answer, than it is storied once a Physician did, who having praescribed
Maidenhair in his Bill, the Apothecary asked him which sort he meant, the other
replied, some of the Locks of a Virgin. Thirdly, supposing our Student to have
made a sufficient progress in Philosophy, may now pass to Leyden, and enter
himself into a Collegium Anatomicum, Anatomy being the basis and foundation,
whereon that weighty structure of Physic is to be raised; and unless he
acquires a more than ordinary knowledge and dexterity in this, will certainly
be deceived in the expectation, of ever arriving to the honor, of being justly
termed an Accomplished Physician. A proficiency in that part fits him for a
Collegium Medicum Institutionum, and afterward for a Collegium Practicum, and
then it is requisite he should embrace the opportunity of visiting the Sick in
the Hospital, twice a week with the Physic Professor, where he shall hear him
examine those Patients, with all the exactness imaginable, and point at every
Disease and its Symptoms as it were with his finger, and afterward propose
several cases upon those distempers, demanding from every young Student his
Opinion, and his grounds and reasons for it; withal requiring of him, what
course of Physic ought to be praescribed. This is the only way for a young
Physician to attain to a habit of knowing Diseases, when he sees them, and a
confident method of ouring those, that may repair to him, without running the
hazard of being censured by the Apothecaries, or derided by 'em for his Bills,
as too many are, that at Oxford and Cambridge have only imbided a part of
Senuert's Institutions, and overlooked Riverius his Practice, and thence
attaining to an imperfect and unhappy Skill, by enlarging the Churchyards in
the City or Country; but what is more, he shall escape the danger, a young
Student I formerly knew in Oxford praecipitated himself into, by imagining
every Disease he read, was his own* I must likewise advise our Student to take
his Lodgings there at an able Apothecaries house, to contract the knowledge of
Drugs, and of praeparing, dispensing, and mixing them into Compositions, and
then by means of his other qualifications, may boldly praetend to direct,
inform, correct, and reprove those Apothecaries, which the chance of his
Practice shall conduct him to; for it would be adjudged ridiculous, should a
Physician undertake to reprehend, and afterward bend his force, to suppress and
decry Apothecaries, privately or publicly, without having first acquired a
particular experience in their Art. Here it is again, the vulgar Physician is
wrapped up in a cloud, and the Apothecaries dance round him; he praescribes
Medicines he never saw, they praepare them according to their own will and
pleasure. Whether you would not attribute a great honor to a certain vulgar
Physician, whom the Commonalty of this City did embrace as their Minion, for
his great abilities in Physic; he entering a Druggist's Shop in Cheap Side,
spyed a great piece of a remarkable white light spongy Drug, took it in his
hand, and inquired what it was; to whom the Druggist said, do you not know it
Mr. Doctor? who replied, No; Why, said the other, it is that you have
praescribed a thousand times in your Bills, and you praescribed it to me but
the other day; Pray what is it then; said the Doctor? the other answered him, Sir,
it is Agarick; Agarick, quoth the Doctor, is this Agarick? O wonderful?

Neither is it over those alone the Physician justly claims a super-intendence,
but over Chyrurgeons likewise; and therefore in this his course of Study, would
contribute to his future qualification, in sojourning a year with an
experienced Manual Operator, without any hinderance to his other affair, and
there by an Ocular inspection, and handling of all his Instruments, demanding
their names, uses, and manner of using, withal by insinuations to visit his
Chyrurgical Patients, and see him dress them, would render his Study in
Chyrurgery so plain and easy, which otherwise might be thought difficult, that
it should enable him to give Laws to Chyrurgeons also, especially to those that
execute their office with that rashness, indiscretion, and dishonesty, as I
once was told a Chyrurgeon did, who being met by a friend upon the street, was
inquired of, whether he was going in so great have? The Other made answer, to get
a brave Gelding out of a Gentleman's Leg; which being but superficially hurt,
he to accomplish his design, did by sharp gnawing Ointments and Plasters
purposely widen the Wound, until at length by his tampering, a Gangraene
happened, and thereupon his Leg was taken off below the knee, which soon after
put a period to his life. To this may be subjoyned another gross error,
Fabricius Hildanus (if I mistake not) makes mention of, and committed by a
Chyrurgeon, that was called to remove a hard tumor in the Belly, which by the
application of an Emollient Cataplasm, being brought to softness, he judged it
ripe and fit for opening, and accordingly made a deep Incision into the Tumor,
whereout in stead of Matter, there gushed some softened Excrements, the whole
business being nothing but a stoppage and swelling of the Guts through the
Ordure that was hardened; which a Laxative Glyster would have removed in an
instant. No less mistake, and in the same case of the stoppage of the Guts,
with some small Inflammation, was committed the other day by a French
Chyrurgeon, who learnedly praescribed a Glyster of eight or ten Ounces of
Spirits of Wine, with four or five Ounces of Oil of Turpentine, which rendered
the Inflammation Mortal; and so the Brewer, for that was his Vocation, though a
young man, was by those fatal hot Liquors that were infused into his Guts,
removed out of this world, who in my opinion in the beginning of this accident,
did not appear with the least Character that might praesage his death.

These two years having given occasion to our Student to acquire a System and a
brief compraehension of the Theory of Physic, and of the Practice likewise;
nothing more remains, than to amplify his commenced Knowledge and Experience
by his further Travails, to which end takes his Journey to Paris, to be
acquainted with the most famed Physicians, and informed in their way of
Practice, by surveying their praescripts at the most frequented Apothecaries,
to visit for a year every day the Hospitals of L' Hostel Dieu, and La Charity;
in which latter it is customary for any three or four young Physicians, to
examine and overlook the new entered Patients, to name their Distempers among
themselves, and propose their Cures, for to compare afterward their opinions
with the Physicians, that are appointed for the Hospital; It is here, where
twice a Week he may see Mounsieur Ianot (if living, for it is above sixteen
years since I saw him) the most reputed Chyrurgeon of this Age, perform the
most difficult Operations of Chyrurgery, as Trypaning, Amputating, Cuting of
the Stone, Tapping of the Belly and Breast, with the greatest dexterity
imaginable. Here he may also observe Wounds and Ulcers cured by virtue of those
famed Waters, viz. The White water, and the Yellow water* the former being Aqua
calcis, the latter the same with an addition of Sublimate.

The Art of praeparing Medicines Chymically, having merited a great esteem for
its stupendous and admirable effects in the most despaired Diseases, shows a
necessity of being instructed in it, and therefore a Student may for the price
of three Pistols, purchase a most exact Skill in it, of one Mounsieur Barlet, if
surviving.

Having attained his Scope in this place, his curiosity ought to direct him to
Monpelier, where he will meet with a concourse of the greatests Proficients in
Physic of Europe, converse with the Professors and Physicians of the place,
and out of 'em all extract choice Observations, Secrets, and most subtle
Opinions upon several Diseases, which design can scarce be compassed in less
than another year. Now we must suppose our Student to merit the title of an
able experienced Physician, and raised far above those vulgar ones, that never
felt the cold beyond the Chimneys of their homes. He is now rendered capable of
understanding the greatest mysteries, and most acute opinions in Physic, which
he is chiefly to expect from those reputed Professors of the Albo at Padua,
where he is likewise to continue his diligence in visiting the famed Hospital
of San Lorenzo, and observe the Italian method, of curing Diseases by
alterative Broaths, without Purging or Bleeding, that Climat seldom suffering
Plethories in those dry Bodies: he cannot but be wonderfully pleased with the
variety and excellent order of the plants of their Physick-garden, by them
called Horto di Semplici. Neither will he receive less satisfaction from the
curious and most dexterous dissections, performed by the artificial hand of the
Anatomy Professor. Having made his abode here six months, may justly aspire to
a degree of Doctor in Physic, which the fame of the place should persuade him
to take here, being the Imperial University for Physic of all others in the
world, and where Physicians do pass a very exact Scrutiny, and severe Test.
Hence may Transport himself to Bolongne, and in three months time add to his
improvements, what is possible by the advantage of the Hospital, and the
Professors. Last of all in imitation of the diligent Be, sucking Honey out of
all sweet Flowers, our Doctor must not neglect to extract something, that his
knowledge did not partake of before, out of the Eminentest Practitioners at
Rome, examine the chief Apothecaries Files, and still frequent those three
renowned Hospitals of San Spirito in the Vatican, San Giovanni Laterano on the
Mount Celio, and that of San Giacomo di Augusta in the Valley Martia, besides
many others; as that of San Tomaso, San Ludovico, Santa Maria della
Consolatione, Sant' Antonio, Sant' Andrea, etc.

As a Picture is raised to the highest point of admiration by the variety of
excellent colors; so the Intellectuals of a Physician are incomparably adorned
with the addition of those various accomplishments, his Travails through
several Countries afford. Wherefore ought not to content himself, with the sole
improvement of his profession, for so vast an expense, trouble, and passing
through so many dangers, but like an expert Chemist, draw essences of all
discourses, the ingenuity of those Travailers from other parts of the world do
offer. There should not a particular thing of note in any City escape his view,
especially at Rome, where six months is too small a space to examine all those
Holy Relicts, and antiquities, though employed to a full advantage, without
losing a day. The same movement should also incite him to visit the renowned
City of Naples, and take a Survey of the antiquities and wonders of Nature
about Puzzuolo. Having thus in all particulars satisfied his curiosity, may
consult about the most advantageous way homewards, which is to Embark in a
Felouck to Legorn, to observe the excellent contrivance of this so famed Sea
port; not omitting to admire enough that incomparable piece of Art of the four
Slaves in Brass, that are placed at the Fountain near the inner mole. Hence may
pass to Pisa to behold the Pendent Steeple, and thence to Lucca, where he
cannot but estrange how so small a Commonwealth does secure it self from the
violation of so powerful Neighbors. Being returned the same way to Legorn,
takes the opportunity of a Felouk to Genoa, thence by Land to Milan, where he
must not forget to see the finest Hospital of the Universe, and the invincible
Citadel, which the world has so much discoursed of. Hence passes the Alps and
that stupendous Mount St. Godart to Altorf and Lucern, both Popish Cantons,
and thence to Bazil the chief of the Protestant Cantons, resolving not to leave
this City without admiring the great Masterpiece of Holbeens Dance of the Dead.
Here he is to purchase a Boat for two Crowns to carry him down the River Rhine
to Strasburg, where being arrived, gives the Boat to him that guided it thither
for his pains; besides the handsomness of this old City, that inimitable piece
of Clock-work in the great Church, and the height and artifice of the Steeple;
there is little else worth your note, except a Monastery, where you may taste
Wine of a hundred and fourscore, and another sort of two hundred years old,
contained in Hogsheads, that for the truth of the business, have the
Magistrates Seal upon them. Hence by Boat or Coach passes to Heydelberg, the
chief Residence of the Prince Elector Palatin, for his great wisdom, prudence,
and conduct the most admired by the whole Empire; neither is it without reason,
that so many are by their curiosity conducted hither, to observe the splendour,
government, and wonderful order of this Court; and to please themselves with
the sight of his Highnesses Guards of Cavalry, who have the repute for the best
managers of Horses, and the best Disciplined in their Arms beyond any in
France; And his Guards of Blew Coats far to outdo the Low Country Soldiers
in their Exercises. The English Gentlemen ow the greatest honor to this
Prince, for that honorable and particular reception they have in his Court.
The Castle for its situation and Structure merits your view, whence you are
not like to return, without having tasted of the Liquor, that is drawn out of
the great Tun of Heydelberg. Hence by Boat descends the Necker to Manheim, a
very complete little Town, and thence down the Rhine to Worms, the ancientest
City of the Empire, and so to Mentz, the Staple for all Rhenish Wines, where
the Inhabitants will tell you of a Perpetuum Mobile, a Clock that went exact
for seven years together, without being wound or drawn up, which by the Death
of the Inventor is left unrepair'd. Thence to Bachrach, a Garrison Town
rendering obedience to the Prince Palatin, and noted for the production of
those small Rhenish Wines, which being exalted with an Artificial flavor, (as
the vulgar improperly calls it,) please our English palats, beyond the other
sorts, though the least in esteem among the Germans and other exact discerners,
because they are fired Wines, (as they term 'em) that is, not being endowed
with a sufficient quantity of Spirits, and strength, to put themselves into a
Natural fret, (as all other Wines do) are forced into one by kindling a fire
round the Vessels that contain them, whereby also are rendered subject to be
palled in a short time. Rinckhow, Oppenheym, Mosel, Necker, Franckoner,
Stinkerd, Bleykerd, and Hochmer Wines, in taste and wholsomness excel all
others, and are called Rhenish Wines, not from their growth upon the Borders of
the Rhine, but from their Transportation down that River. Cobelents, Andernach,
and Collen are the next Towns. Thence by Land to Brussel, Gaunt, Ostend,
Nieuport, Dunkirk, Gravelin, and Calis, and thence to the place his
inclinations for his future settlement may praefer; where by his vast
experience and knowledge being rendered conspicuous in the secure and certain
method of his Cures, will soon give occasion to the vulgar, to discern the
difference between him and the ordinary Churchyard Physicians, who by their
sordid deports, and dangerous practice, make it their business to ease the
blind people of the weight in their Pockets, and plunge 'em into worse
Diseases; and therefore of all Cities none can esteem it self more happy than
this of London, for being graced with so great a number of accomplished
Physicians, many of whom have contributed their parts to the repute and fame of
their Country, by their accurate and learned Pens, so much admired by other
Nations, and their Writings honored by frequent impressions. It is the
singular respect and esteem I ever had for them, that at present has animated
me to render the vulgar sensible of the excellency of their accomplishments, to
whom they one a particular honor for their readiness, in employing what their
great Expenses, Travails, and indefatigable Study have gained, in the
assistance and relief of their languishing Bodies against Death and its causes.
Neither is it that only should give them so great a share in your opinions,
but the splendour and eminency their Art and Profession is invested with, since
Princes can for a time wave the important affairs of their Throne, to admire
the least part of it, in beholding the wonders of Nature-in Spagyrical
praeparations and Chemical transmutations; And what is more! Since the great
King of Heaven and Earth, Christ, to promote his glory and honor, assumed the
Profession of a Physician, in curing Lunaticks, Blind, Lame, and all other
Diseases: Wherefore if hence only the descent of the Nobility of the Art of
Physic be derived, it is an invincible argument, that none should dare to
assume it, but persons signally qualified, inferring it to be no less sin, than
a great crime in those Empiricks and Apothecaries, that praesume and incroach
upon it, to the hazard of peoples lives, and guilt of the punishment, the Law
of God and Man imposes upon wilful Murder. But then should all those that have
too early been abandoned to their Graves, return to demand justice for the
poisonous Pills and infected Potions, what would the survivers in case of a
Colic do for such, as Secundum Artem should handle the Glysterpipe? And should
they in earnest for this be summoned before a Bar, they would wittily plead,
there can be no Murder without a praemeditated malice, which though their Pills
were guilty of, their intention was sincere, and therefore the indictment lies
only against the Pill, and not the Practicing Apothecary; so that only he may
kill by Law.

My scope hitherto has directed me to undeceive the Hoodwinckt vulgar; which
so far I have performed, as the Theory of Churchyard Physicians tends to, in
their gross and groundless conjectures at their Diseases, wherein a mistake
threats no less danger than a Pilot is apprehensive of upon an erroneous
discovery of his port, in which case he may easier escape perishing upon a Rock
or Shelve, than a Patient upon a conjectural error of his Doctor, and I must
tell you, that it is in no wise rare, if his compass of conjecture exposed to
your reading fol. 7. misleads him eleven times in twelve, being far easier to
guess at a cast of a Dye, where you have only five to one odds. And as for the
Practicing Apothecary, that lump of confident ignorance, who follows only the
shadow of Physicians, if his gaping conjecture hits but one distemper in
twenty, swells in his own conceit, though he sends the remaining nineteen with
a Letter to St. Peter. Can you but admire with me here at the wisdom of Nature,
refusing to repose that secret treasure of knowledge in such hollow Skuls. But
if you could engage your self to an intent mind, to observe with what prudence
and discretion, the Accomplished Physician applies his profound remarques of
Anatomy, and Diagnostick or discerning Rules of Physic, to the infallible
discovery of your Diseases, you will with me conclude the Grounds, Rules, and
Maxims of the Art of Physic to be most certain, evident, and demonstrable,
beyond the least suspicion of a conjecture in it, and withal attribute to it
an eminency above all Arts and Sciences, whose subject is locked up from our
external senses, as the internal constitution of the Body of man is.

By the thread of my discourse I am now arrived, to display the practical
errors, which do more immediately Operate for the benefit of the Clerk and the
Grave-maker. It Is an ill fate you will say, that attends a man, when he is
surprised with a Disease, whose dangerous Symptoms look grinning and daring
upon the Hackney Physician, and he standing amazed, and pusillanimous, forsakes
Nature in her encounter with the Distemper, where for want of a seasonable
relief, is compelled to yield. This was the case, lately a Country Gentleman
was unfortunate in, who being strong and Plethorick, by riding Post happened to
melt the grosser part of his humors, which through obstructing the Nerves that
move the Tongue, suddenly deprived him of his Speech, (a Symptom called an
Aphonia) and proving an extreme amazement to a Vulgar Physician, who not being
sufficiently qualified in experience, gave his Opinion, it was a Surfeit, which
was only to be committed to nature; But the next morning being ushered in with
an universal deprivement of all his senses and motion, termed a Catalepsis,
spurred his Friends to implore the aid of another, who at first sight readily
discovering the Disease (which his experience confirmed to him, had few Ounces
of Blood been extracted but one day before out of the Jugulars, would certainly
have been removed) told them, the error of omission could in no manner be
rectifyed, since death in few hours would be ready to take possession.

This preceding error relating to a Disease less frequent, does not occasion so
many deplorable effects, as those that are committed in Distempers, that are
more ordinary, as continual Fevers, which are often engendered by a Surfeit, an
ancient Norman word, signifying an over-doing; but particularly implying an
over-eating, or over-drinking. This gluttonous English Distemper I look upon,
to import a greater danger, for being so ill handled by the Hackney Physician,
who besides bleeding, omitting to Purge the Bowels and Glanduls about the Guts,
of those malignant excrementicious humors, their continual cramming engenders,
causes that ebullition of the Blood (which in the beginning was moderate) to
exaestuate and fret to that degree of malignity, which through that error
praecipitates thousands every year to their Tombs. These humors that thus lurk
about the Guts, and kindle so malignant a heat, are not capable of being
concocted, for they are essentially against Nature, and already separated, and
therefore ought especially in the beginning, to be evacuated by such Purgers,
as are least inflaming, and least disturb the Blood, whereby they may
certainly, if making choice of a cooling Purgative, praevent a malignity in
bodies that are so crammed. Neither can this be performed by Glysters, since
their force is limited by the Valve of the Colon. And yet greater may the
error be adjudged, when upon neglect of a suitable Purge, sweating and drying
Powders are praescribed, which force and disperse those malignant and dormant
excrements into the Vessels, and worst of all is the error, when those
poisonous Vesicatories are applied, to attract malignant Excrements from the
center into the Arteries, that escaped the force of the sudorifick Powders.
Have I not been an eyewitness, that a Patient in the declination of his
Fever, and in a mending condition, had a Vesicatory applied to the Nape of the
Neck, by the impertinent advice of a Churchyard Physician, which some few
hours after, rendered him Phrentick, and not long after Speechless. Brevity
obliges me to omit many instances of accidents, and of death it self,
occasioned by those venomous Spanish flies. Neither can I forget how four
Hackney Physicians lately consulted in a slight distemper of a Tradesman, whose
complaint was a difficulty of Urin and a Vomiting, accompanied with a small
heat; this at the beginning was taken for a malignant Fever, and for Cure
bleeding and sweating was advised, by which latter his Urin was totally
suppressed, through depriving the Blood of its Serum; the Vomiting increased,
and the heat in effect turned into a malignant Fever, with an appearance of
red Spots, and at that very instant gave direction for Bleeding, the bad effect
whereof was soon discovered by his untimely death. To show the error of this
course, I need only say, I have seen this very Distemper ten and ten times
removed at the beginning, with one dose or two at most of Salt of Vitriol.

How Bleeding, that noble and great Remedy, is abused by our Hackneys, is taken
notice of even by the Vulgar, whose experience (for reason in Physic they do
not praetend to) tells them, it is death in the Measles and Small Pox in our
Climat, especially to great persons.

It Is a pleasant speculation for those that know better, to observe the
practice of the Hackneys in the Country, how they Vomit their Patients with
Crocus, and scowr them with Ialap, drench 'em with Watercresses and Brook
lime, and feed 'em with Nettle Pottage to the crop, terming all Diseases,
except Fevers and Agues, the Scurvy.

But let me not be deficient in mentioning our Groaping Doctors, who praetend
it is difficult to discern a Disease in a man without groaping his Sides, and 's
Belly; and impossible to discover the fits in a Woman without feeling, much
less to Cure her; Whick knack is taught 'em by the Physicians of Paris.

And was it not a Skilful praescription of a Country Doctor, who was sent for
forty miles off, to consult with one of the eminentest Physicians of London, to
praescribe three Drams of Laudanum opiatum, for one Dose, in the absence of the
other, who fortunately giving the Patient a visit before the Bill was carried
to the Apothecary, modestly to cover the shame of the former, (who was far sent
for, and like to have been dear bought,) slipped the Bill into his Pocket, and
left another in stead, directing only a just Dose of three Grains, which having
for that night eased the patient of his pains by a moderate slumber, and not
answered the expectation of the Countryman in a deeper sleep; he next morning
did not fail giving the Apothecary a check for not obeying his orders, and
therefore commanded him home, to make up a Dose of one Dram and thirty Grains,
which was but the half of what he used to ordain for his Patients in the
Country; but the honest Apothecary had more wit, than to be one of his
accessaries, well knowing, such a quantity was enough to cast him and six more
into a dead sleep; nothing ever wrought so much upon my curiosity, as to be
informed, what number the Burials of March and April amount to in the Parish,
where this famous Church-yard-man keeps his residence.

This ungrateful task does more tire me, than had I employed six times the
Paper in recording the excellent methods the Accomplished Physicians praescribe
to their Patients, how expertly they take their advantage of the Disease at
certain times and seasons, in giving Medicines to conquer it, when the Patient
is strongest, and the Disease weakest; How they accommodate to every particular
Distemper, Constitution, Age, and Sex, a particular Remedy; alter, increase,
and lessen it according to every emergent occasion; how they praeinform the
Patient of every critical and counter natural change, of every danger and of
every step the Disease makes, following its tract to the very innermost part of
the Body, and never cease pursuing, till they have rescued their Patients from
all assaults and dangers of their intestin enemy.

It Is time I should pass to the second part of my discourse, where I meet with
a subject, which I can entitle nothing but the (...) and froth of Physic, a
term the Practicing Apothecary will not judge misapplyed, since it is that he
offers his Patient in exchange for good metal. But I shall forego my aim, if I
proceed on my way, without first halting a little at the Original of the word
and meaning of Apothecary, which from (...) and (...) a Box, denotes it to be a
word, imposed anciently upon Druggists, whose multitude of Boxes placed in
order in their Shops, and containing all sorts of Drugs, gave occasion to that
denomination, and for that reason is improperly transferred upon such, whose
office is only conversant about praeparing of Drugs and Simples, thence more
appositely termed Pharmacopaei, or Makers up of Medicines, and Pharmacopolae,
or Sellers of praepared Medicines, whom in their late budding and growth some
very accomplished persons have looked upon as poisonous Weeds, started up to
choke the sweet Flower of their Practice, and consequently so planted into
Families, as not easily to be rooted out by their Manifesto's, requiring for
their further illustration a brief deduction of their first rise, and upon what
score those Makers up of Medicines were assumed into the drudgery of Physic.

You must note Physic to have had the same beginning with all other vast Arts
and Sciences, from confused notions and experiments, which upon their more
certain confirmation, were thought fit to be recorded in the Temple of Apollo,
whither people in case of sickness took their recourse, to make choice of what
came nearest to their purpose, but missing of that, necessity obliged them to
expose their sick before their houses, to move those that passed by, if any of
'em had been troubled with the same Distemper, to divulge their Remedies, which
afterward were to be added to the forementioned Records. Time having collected
a multiplicity of all sorts of Medicines, invited a great number of
Philosophers to that Temple, whose eminent parts did enable them, to make
better use of those observations than the Vulgar, and by degrees digest them
into order, and thence framing general rules, soon acquired a habit of knowing
and curing most Diseases, which gave occasion to the people, to make use of 'em
as Physicians; and such were Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Democritus, which
latter had the honor of being Master to Hippocrates, a Disciple who afterward
proved the greatest and only Master in Physic, of all those that had gone
before him, or since to this day have come after him. The method then in use to
train up youth to this Profession, was, to place them Apprentices with able
Physicians, who adjudged it necessary, to take their beginning from Chyrurgery,
the subject whereof being external Diseases, as Wounds, Swellings, Members out
of Joint, and others that were visible, proved more facil and easy to their
immature capacities, and wherein they might suddenly be rendered serviceable to
their Masters, in easing them of the trouble of dressing, clensing stinking
Ulcers, and applying Ointments and Plasters, a nauseous employ, which they
ever endeavored to abandon to their Scholars with what expedition was possible.
This as it was the easiest, so it was the first and ancientest part of Physic,
and from which those that exercised it, were anciently not called Chyrurgeons,
but Physicians, though they attempted no other Diseases, but such as were
external, according to which sense Aesculapius, the first Physician or Inventor
of Physic, and his Sons Podalyrius and Machaon, are by History asserted, to
have undertaken only those, that wanted external help, internal Diseases being
in those days unknown, and by temperance in their diet wholly debarred; and if
accidentally an internal Distemper did surprise them, they applied a general
Remedy (knowing no other) of poisoning or killing themselves with a Dagger or
Sword, thereby choosing rather to dye once and finish their misery, than to
survive to be objects of peoples pity, or to endure the shock of death by every
pain or languor, especially since the sage judgments of that age, did esteem it
a signal virtue, to despise and scorn the vain world, by hurrying out of it in
a fury, a Maxim most of the Philosophers were very eminent in observing; and
was likewise extended to Children, that brought any Diseases, external or
internal, with them into the world, their cure being performed immediately, by
strangling or drowning them. Neither was this Art of external Physic of a
short continuance; Pliny writing, that six hundred years after the building of
Rome, the Romans entertained Chyrurgical Physicians from Peloponesus. Idleness
and gluttony at length exchanged their ease into a Disease, which soon put them
upon necessity of experimenting such Remedies, as might reestablish them into
that healthful condition, exercise in War and temperance in Diet had for so
many ages praeserved their Ancestors in.

Upon a competent improvement of their Scholars in this external practice of
Physic, and their deserving deportment, they thought them worthy of giving
them entrance into their Closet, to be instructed in such matters, as the most
retired places of their Cabinets contained, which were their Remedies and
Medicines, and the manner of praeparing them. A jealous lover could not
contrive the sole impropriation of his beautiful Mistress with greater study,
than they the sole possession of their Medicines, these through their
commonness losing as much of their value and esteem, as the other by being
known to more than one. Pachius a Roman Physician of great fame in the Reign of
Tyberius, (as Scribonius largus libr. de Compos Med. Cap. 23. writes,) made
great gains of his Medicine, named by himself Hiera. Pach. for its frequent
successes in the most difficult Diseases, but he whilst he lived, would not
impart the composition to any. But after his death he bequeathed it to Tyberius
Caesar in a Book written to him, which before could not be drawn from him upon
any score, though all means were used to know what it was, for he did praepare
it, when he had locked himself up, and would not commit it to any of his
Servants, for he would cause many more things to be beaten than it contained,
purposely to deceive his people. Here is to be observed, that for its great
effects he imposed the name of Hiera upon it, or the Holy Medicine, which being
once made public, and the ingredients known, was deserted naked of its
virtues, ceasing to perform those wonderful Cures, which whilst it was by the
Inventor reserved secret it did; as if the Divine Power finding it self abused
in its bounty, of having bestowed a secret Treasure on a Physician, did
withdraw it self, upon the contempt of imparting it to the Vulgar. For, that
God is the first and chief Physician, has been the constant faith of all Ages,
and that Physicians were the Sons of the Gods, was commendably asserted by
Galen, and therefore it was truly spoken, that Medicines were the hand of God,
thence meriting only such names, as related to their Divine Original; thus a
certain Antidote was called (...) Aequal to God, another (...) given by God,
another Divine; several compositions had the inscription of (...), or Sacred.

Upon this so true and undoubted a consideration, I need not pry for a cause of
those frequent and ever constant unfortunate events, that accompany the
Medicines of most of our Practicing Apothecaries, unless as they seem to own,
the Trivnal Deity should now neglect to punish with shame and disaster, such as
with polluted hands do offer to defile those Sacred means, which it has
intended for its glory, the contrary whereof is sufficiently attested by him in
the Strand, who with three doses of Mercurius Dulcis, given against the Worms
to three Children, did the same day worm 'em all out of their lives: And by him
in the -- who upon the exhibition of twenty Grains of Extractum Rudij, sent a
Gentleman a hundred and nineteen times to his Close Stool, and the next day to
his perpetual Mansion; but I am confident, without any praemeditated malice,
since he was extremely surprised, that so small and unproportionate a dose
should prove so cruel to his Customers Guts, not having the grace to call to
mind, it was the abuse of that excellent Medicine, in misapplying it to the
Disease. A farther testimony was given by another in the Old Baily, praesenting
his Customer (or Patient as they use to term him, for this intruth was one)
with a Collyrium, or Eye-water, to eat away a Pearl in his Eye, which through
its gnawing quality occasioning a great pain, did attract such a quantity of
humors, as caused a perfect Suffusion, and an incurable blindness in both
Eyes, an application that could not promiss better success, upon the neglect of
Bleeding and Purging, both implying a necessity of being praemised before the
use of any painful Medicine, to drayn the body of those humors, which
otherwise the smart and pain would attract to the part affected. The error was
of no less importance, when in a great looseness or Diarrhaea, an Apothecary
with Crocus Martis and Opium suddenly putting a stop to the Flux, impelled the
Chanal of those hot impetuous humors into the Veins and Arteries, where by
moving the Blood into a Tempest, occasioned a mortal malignant Fever in one of
his chief Customers. And at this praesent day nothing is more capable of
fermenting the Choler of a certain wealthy Merchant, than the name of an
Apothecary, a practical one having by impertinent repetitions persuaded him,
his wife upon the swelling and pitting of her Legs, (a symptom common to Women
with Child) and the swelling of her Belly, was certainly Dropsical, which as it
was occasioned by a stoppage only particular to Women, was only to be remedied
by removing it, and opening the passages; and to that purpose did four times a
day ply her with his Electuarium e tribus, as he called it, which was Powder of
Steel, Antimony Diaphor. and barren Savin powdered, all mixed with Honey into an
Electuary, the force whereof did in a few days answer his intention of opening
the passages, and expelling an Embryon, or a perfect Conception, upon which the
Purgamenta were driven down with so rapid a violence, that the Matrix was left
dry, exanguious, thick, and corrugated, without the least hopes of ever
Conceiving again; you may conjecture, what an insupportable grief this moved in
one, who setting aside the confluence of all external circumstances fortune had
heaped upon him, could have nothing more contributed to his entire felicity in
a most beautiful Lady, and her amiable deports, than the addition of issue, of
which until then the space of six years had not given the least appearance.
Fatal likewise was the miscarriage of a Scrivener, who being discommoded by a
very acute pain and inflammation in his Ear, applied a repellent Medicine of
Rags dipped in Aq. Sperm. ran. and Ol. Ros. advised to him by a Practical man,
which forcing the Inflammation to the Brain, immediately occasioned a Frenzy,
and not long after a Corpse. These few Tragical Narratives selected out of a
hundred or more, I have here exposed to your view, which may suffice for the
repraesentation of their dangerous practice; How ineffectual, costly, and
defrauding their general practice is, I shall in its proper Paragraph give you
a breviat of.

Time persuades my return to the place whence I deviated, to continuate the
ancient manner of educating a young Physician, who though rendered serviceable
to his Master, having acquired the knowledge of his Medicines and their
praeparations, yet remained as little capable of using them, as the
Instrument-Smith a Razor, or Lancet; and therefore bended his endeavors to
arrive to the Art of discerning every Disease by its signs, and making
observations upon the Prognostics, all critical and praeternatural changes,
the Dose, Constitution, and all other circumstances of giving those Medicines,
which he did gradually accomplish by his sedulous attendance on his Master, and
his practical Discourses and Lectures from him on every Patient he visited.
Lastly, upon his attainment to a degree of perfection in the Art, discovered to
his Master by his private examination, all the Physicians and Commonalty of the
place were summoned to be praesent at the taking of his Oath in the public
Physic School, which served in lieu of making him free to Practice, or taking
of his degree. The Oath was as follows.

I Swear by An Egyptian, and the first Inventor of Physic.
Apollo the Physician and The Son of Apollo begotten upon Coronis the daughter
of Phlegia.
Aesculapius, and by The two eldest daughters of Aesculapius.
Hygea, and The two eldest daughters of Aesculapius.
Panacea, and I do call to witness all the Gods, and likewise all the
Goddesses, that according to my power and judgment I will entirely keep this
Oath and this Covenant. That I will esteem my Master that taught me this Art
instead of my Parents, give him his Diet, and with a thankful Spirit impart to
him whatever he wants; and those that are born of him, I will esteem them as my
male Brethren, and teach them this Art if they will learn it without hire or
agreement. I will make partakers of the teaching, hearing, and of all the whole
Discipline my own and my Masters Sons, and the rest of the Disciples, if they
were bound before by Writing, and were obliged by the Physicians Oath, no
others besides. I will according to my capacity and judgment, praescribe a
manner of Diet suitable to the Sick, free from all hurt and injury. Neither will
I through any bodies intercession offer Poison to any, neither will I give
counsel for any such thing. Neither will I give a Woman a Pessarie to destroy
her Conception. Moreover I will exercise my Art, and lead the rest of my life
chastely and holily. Neither will I cut those that are troubled with the Stone,
but give them over to Artists, that profess this Art. And whatever houses I
shall come into, I will enter for the benefit of the Sick; and I will abstain
from doing any voluntary injury, from all corruption, and chiefly from that
which is Venereal, whether I should happen to have in Cure the Bodies either of
Women, or of Men, or of Freeborn men, or Servants. And whatever I should
chance to see or hear in Curing, or to know in the common life of men, if it be
better not to utter it, I will conceal, and keep by me as secrets. That as I
entirely keep, and do not confound this Oath, it may happen to me to enjoy my
Life and my Art happily, and celebrate my glory among all men to all
perpetuity; but if transgressing and forswearing, that the contrary may happen.

Between these bounds of secrecy, veneration, honesty, and gratitude the Art
was for many hundred years maintained; for in the time of Galen, and many Ages
after him, Medicines for their greater secrecy were used to be praepared, and
composed by Physicians, as you may read libr. de virt. Centaur. where it is
observable, their men were wont to carry their Physic ready praepared in Boxes
after them, which they themselves according to the exigency of the case did
dispense. This custom was continued, until Wars ceasing, people began to be as
intent upon the propagation of mankind, as the cruelty of the former Martial
ages had been upon its destruction, whence the world growing numerous, and
through idleness, and want of those diversions of their Military Employ,
addicting themselves to Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Whoredom, did contract so
great a number of all inward Diseases, that their multiplicity imposed a
necessity upon Physicians, (being unable to attend them all as formerly) to
dismember their Art into three parts, whereof two were servil, namely
Chyrurgery, and Pharmacy, and the other Imperial and Applicative, or
Methodical. The servil parts being committed to such as are now called
Chyrurgeons and Apothecaries, the former were employed in applying external
Medicines to external Diseases; the latter in praeparing all ordinary internal
and external Medicines, according to the exactest praescription and direction
of the Physicians, whose Servants were ordered to fetch the praescribed
Medicines at the Apothecaries, and thence to conveigh them to their Patients,
by which means the Apothecary was kept in ignorance, as to the application and
use of the said Medicines, not being suffered to be acquainted with the
Patients, or their Diseases, to praevent their insinuations into their
acquaintance, which otherwise might endanger the diverting their said Patients
to other Physicians, or at least their praesuming themselves to venture at
their Distempers. Neither were the Physicians Servants in the least probability
of undermining or imitating their Masters in their practice, not knowing the
Medicines or Praescriptions. Besides all this, those Remedies, from which the
chief efficacy and operation against the Disease was expected, still remained
secret with the Physicians, who thought it no trouble to praepare them with
their own hands. Thus you may remark, the Physicians necessary jealousy of
their underlings, and their small pains, proved the sole means of impropriating
the practice of their Art to themselves, and yet by the advantage of their
Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons, were capacitated to visit and cure ten times
greater number of Sick than before, which in a short time improved their fame
and estate to a vast treasure; whence it was well rhimed, Dat Galenus opes, dat
Iustinianus honores. But at length their honor and vast riches in the eye of
Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons, proved seeds sown in their minds, that budded
into ambition of becoming Masters, and into covetousness of aequaling them in
wealth, both which they thought themselves capable of aspiring to, by an
empirical skill, the neglect and sloth of their Masters had given them occasion
to attain, since they did begin not to scruple, to make them Porters of their
Medicines to their Patients, and to entrust them with the praeparation of their
greatest secrets. This trust they soon betrayed, for having insinuated into a
familiar acquaintance with their Masters Patients, it was a task in no wise
difficult to persuade them, that those that had made, and dispensed the
Medicines, were as able to apply 'em to the like Distempers, as they that had
praescribed them, who had either forgot, or were wholly ignorant how to
praepare them; so that now they were as good as arrived to a copartnership with
their Masters, in reputation and title, both being called Doctors alike, and
there being no other difference between them; than that the Master Doctor,
comes at the Heels of his Man Doctor, to take in hand the work which he or his
Brother Doctor, (the Chyrurgeon) had either spoiled, or could no further go on
with it; this is even like Tom went to Market, and Tom met with Tom. A very
fine case the Art of Physic and its Professors are reduced to; and that not
only of late days, but of almost seven hundred years, for before that time
Apothecaries had scarce a being, only there were those, whom they called
Seplasiarij, from their selling of Ointments on the Market of Capua, named
Seplasia; Aromatarij, and Speciarij, or such as sold Drugs and Spices. Though I
must confess Apothecaries may offer a just objection, in praetending to a far
greater antiquity, since the original and necessity of their employ was derived
from the Egyptian Bird Isis, spouting Seawater into its Breech for a Glyster.

As things in motion pass their seasons of growth, height, and declination, so
the Art of Physic having passed the two former, is now in its declination
exposed to be reduced to the extremest contempt, scorn, and almost a total
abolishment by the praesumptuous arrogance of every one, who upon a long course
of Physic to remedy his Infirmity, having gained a familiarity with the use
and names of those numerous Medicines, advised to him by some Practical
Apothecary, or Praescribing Chyrurgeon, at his recovery concludes himself as
capable of practicing as either of them. Upon such an occasion as is here
instanced, the Heel-maker, the Hatband-maker, the Gunsmith, that doting old
piece in Southwark, the Woman at Hamstead, and many others fell to Quack, and
to Practice, and by the addition of some small help of a book of Receipts, have
advanced themselves in fame and credit, among our capricious Vulgar, beyond any
of their Practical or Praescribing Masters. But all this notwithstanding, since
the Art of Physic partakes in vicissitude with those things, that from the
lowest ebb have flowed back to their greatest height, it is an argument she is
not seated beyond the hope of being restored to her greatest luster, and
flourishing splendour, as formerly she was, when Physicians were courted and
reverenced by multitudes of Sick, and attended with a train of their own
Servants, their Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons all diligently expecting their
commands, to a tittle and every the least circumstance executing their duty,
and concurring with the people, in calling them, for the wonders they did,
Tutelar Gods. Whence I conclude the Trade of an Apothecary and the Vocation of
a Chyrurgeon to be of absolute necessity; for its impossible any Physician of
moderate practice, can afford himself the time of visiting his Patients, (which
in this City do often happen to live dispersed, and very remote from one
another,) and afterward repair to his Study, and take their particular cases
into a more deliberate and serious consideration, than the talking noise of
Visiters, Nurse, and others about the Sick will permit; unless as too many are,
he is accustomed to make use of the Empiricks Conjecturing Compass, and so
slubber over the Disease; not being sensible all this while, it is the life of
a man hung to a thread, depends on his care, which by the least of his mistakes
or neglects will certainly snap in pieces; whereby God is robbed of the Glory,
which would have been due to him by his cure, the Prince deprived of one of his
Subjects, it may be main a pillar of his Throne, Wife and Children by the loss
of Husband and Father reduced to beggary, and possibly to Whoredom or Theft for
a livelihood, Creditors are necessitated to a Bankrupt for the death of their
Debtor; all which important and weighty consequences are to be placed to the
account of Debet of the Physician. That besides these parts of his duty
devouring a very great share of his time, there should be a remainder
sufficient for him with his own hands to praepare all the Medicines, the
Diseases of his Patients shall require, is not to be imagined; for supposing
the number of his Patients not to exceed three or four, their Diseases in one
or other to be complicated or double, as a Pleurisy complicated with any other
inflammation, or obstruction of the Kidneys, Guts, Bladder, etc. Which former
by its self presses for the praeparation of a Julep, a Linctius, a Glyster or
two, a Cordial, a Cataplasm, a Sudorifick Antipleuritick, an Hypnotick, etc. In
summa eight or ten taedious Medicines are to be made up in one day for one
single Patient, it may be as many more for a second, third and fourth; so here
are about forty Medicines to be praepared, carried away, and applied all in one
afternoon, a task that more probably ought to employ three or four than one;
But what if a Physician receives into cure thirty or forty, as in Spring and
Fall many do, to expect from his hands the praeparation of the sixteenth part
of the Medicines, were most absurd. So that necessarily from this
self-praeparing of ordinary Remedies, would issue a neglect and omission of
many requisite Medicines, and in want of some proper ones, the substituting of
improper, and consequently this reformation must infer a greater number of
inconveniences, than the praesent practice is subject to. Moreover that a
Physician should consume the better part of his time in this so servil and
drudging employ, were to slight the Imperial and Commanding part of Physic, to
lose the honor and respect due to him from those his Underlings and others,
and absolutely to turn a pure Empirick, by minding the praeparation and
application of his Medicines more, than the Theoretick and Methodical Science
of Physic; which ought to be praeserved and improved by his continuated Study,
wherein he must now be exposed to a perpetual disturbance by the noise of the
Mortar, and have his spirits dampt by the unpleasant steems of Glysters,
Ointments, and Plasters, and necessitated to convert his house, which the
honor of his Profession requires neat and splendid, into a Hogsty. How this
greasy, stinking Glyster-Pipe and Plaister-Box Doctor can be endured in the
praesence of some delicate tendersented Ladies, that are his Patients, you may
justly admire, when upon his feeling of their pulse with his unctuous fist,
they shall apprehend themselves to stink of Threacle and Mithridate all the day
after. But setting aside the forementioned reasons, and allowing the necessity
and decency of reducing those two parts of praescribing and praeparing
Medicines into one body again, the Physician having only the possession of the
better part, must go backwards to learn the worser from the Druggist and
Apothecary; to wit from the former, the knowledge, choice, and prices of all
his Drugs, wherein he must run the hazard of being cheated by him, in buying
Quid pro Quo, a rotten Drug for a sound one, and paying a double rate more than
the value of the commodity, which may happen for three or four times at least,
until he has Purchased a competent craft for buying and selling. From the
latter his quondam servant the Apothecary, he must be instructed in all the
Artifices and dexterous ways of praeparing Simples, mixing and dispensing them
into compositions, of dissolving Gums, expressing of Oils, and Juyces,
praeserving and candying of Flowrs, Herbs, Stalks, and Rinds; powdering and
rasping of Woods and Barks; rubbing the posteriora secundum artem for to apply
Leeches, besides a hundred other particularities* knacks, and ornaments, as
gilding of Electuaries, Bolusses, and Pills, and standing in a handsome decent
posture at the Mortar, and with a Bonne grace to found a March, or Chyme a Tune
with the Pestil, as he is pulverising, thereby to awake peoples drowsy eyes,
and make 'em look up to see what Trade lives there; and lastly of tying up
Gallipots and Viols, with old Taffety, rangeing of 'em in order on the Stall,
to give passers by a nota been of the great Trading of that Shop; in fine,
seven years is no more than a just space, to conquer the difficulties of their
mysterious Trade, which not considering the loss of time, how much it may
contribute to the further adornment of the Accomplished Physicians, I refer to
better concocted Judgments.

In the next place let us ponder, whether it consists with the Maxims of Policy
to extirpate and subvert their Corporation, though supposing the better half of
'em to be such as I have termed Practical men, and to whose ill conduct in
their practice the Bills of Mortality may owe the greater half of the number of
Burials. At praesent the Country being so much depopulated by Plague and Wars,
the supposition may merit some consideration, however the advantages their
continuance imports to the public seem to overbalance the Scales. 1. The
number of their Trade aequaling, if not exceeding any other, implies so many
Families, whose necessities of Victuals and Clothes occasion a considerable
Trade. 2. Druggists, Chemists, Merchants of Drugs, Seamen that Transport the
Drugs, Seedsmen, Herb-women, Gardiners, Laborers, and many others having so
great a dependence on Apothecaries, would all by their extirpation sustain a
damage of that importance, as should disenable them of contributing so
considerably to the common Trade of necessaries, as such a vast number of
Families require. 3. By the ruin of all those Trades and Families, it is
certain the King would take a share in the damage, losing so valuable a Custom
as that of Drugs, and in time of War, and other occasions, by the impair of his
Subsidies and Taxes, which the consequence of so great a proportion of Subjects
ruinated in their Vocation must necessarily produce. 4. Churches have been
laid even with their foundation by the late dreadful Fire, and therefore
through the zeal of our times it is ordained, they shall be again raised to
their former structure by a Revennue from the Fire, coals; but this sufficeing
only for the outside, the inside, as Pews, Benches, and Pulpits, is to be built
by the product of purchases of Graves, which if Apothecaries be suppressed, and
practice wholly left to Physicians, will come in but slow, and therefore for
the quickening of that great work, they ought to be encouraged. 5. The antiquity
of this so necessary Trade compraehending some hundreds of years, pleads
strongly for the right of their continuance. 6. Humane policy cannot conceal
its jealousy in a point so essential as the life of man, and therefore it is
but just, it should require some small counterpoise, to balance and justify
the actions of Physicians, when quaestion'd in the death of any, which the
Apothecary is ever ready to do, by showing the praescriptions, and averring the
excellency of the Medicines. Moreover Physicians are mortal men, and may (and
often have) in a debauched humor praescribe improper Medicines, and most
improportionate Doses, which an Apothecary by the experience of his Trade may
discover, and repair for a rectification to the Physician next morning, when
the cloud is over with him. And what is yet more, the Apothecary may inform the
Physician, though praescribing according to the exactest rules of Art, the Dose
of his praescription to be too large for the particular constitution of a
Patient, which his former experience of him confirms, that the sixteenth part
of it will work most strongly with him; and I must tell you, some lives have
been saved by these kind of admonitions, and yet no dishonor to the Physician.
The only objection against the inference of these politic reasons, is deduced
from the authority of Plato, asserting that it is a sign of an ill governed
Commonwealth, where there are a great number of Physicians.

To rommage into the very bottom of this controversy, let us suppose the
praemisses insufficient for an inference, and enquire whether it were possible,
to give them a lift out of their Quacking, or rather out of their honester
Calling of praeparing Medicines. I say no, for considering their great number,
wherein they exceed Physicians; their being more popular among the Vulgar than
they; the daily obligation they impose upon most Trades, by buying their
necessaries of them, or otherwise employing them, all whom the duty of
retaliation and gratitude persuades to make use of Apothecaries in their way;
the multitude of their Relations and Kindred, that out of impulse of nature,
more than reason, will endeavor to promote their interest; it is an argument to
convince me, that the Physicians addresses to the Vulgar by their manifesto's,
will prove insignificant, well knowing that Judges so ignorant as they, will
rather incline to the ignorant party; and therefore to praevent their putting
on Plush Jackets, to appear as like Physicians, as the Monkey did a Lawyer,
when he had got's Masters Cap on, and so to Quack openly, it will prove of
greater concern to reduce them to their duty, by the course I shall describe
anon, than to labor their suppression in vain.

Hitherto I have entertained my Reader with a discourse of the whole intrigue
in the Trade of Apothecaries, my own curiosity I will praefer next, in amusing
at the grounds and reasons, why Apothecaries in most Kingdoms do generally
Quack and Aemulate Physicians in their practice, rather than subject themselves
to the just Laws of Physic, which in most Commonwealths they are the most
inviolable observers of. It is not the Witchcraft of money or promises, can
prevail with an Apothecary in Flanders, Holland, or any of the Imperial Cities
of Germany, to hazard his reputation, or disturb his Conscience, by giving to
any the most harmless of Purges, without a Bill from a lawful Physician;
whereas in France scarce any Apothecary but will praesume to advise Glysters,
purging potions, and Ptisan, which latter he has always ready, and sells it
by the quart. The cause of this difference is to be discovered in the people,
the Apothecaries, and the Physicians. The Commonalty in a Commonwealth are
universally more industrious, saving, and thrifty, giving an undeniable reason
for it, that they are obliged so to be, to provide for sickness and poverty; at
which time namely of sickness, the meanest Tradesman or Labourer is as willing
to show his gratitude to the Physician, for the praeservation of his life
(which he puts a greater value upon, than to entrust with an Apothecary) as the
best of the Magistrates. On the other hand in a Kingdom the popularity is more
profuse and Prodigal, by reason there being a great concourse of people and
principally of Nobility and Gentry of great Estates, occasioning an universal
Trade, extended to the meanest, makes money easier to come by; whence the
Vulgar spending it as easy, in case of sickness, find themselves destitute of
a capacity to satisfy a Physician honorably, and therefore are forced to apply
themselves to Empiricks, or Practicing Apothecaries, where they may have advice
and Physic at the same charge. The difference between the Physician of a
Kingdom, and a Commonwealth, is, that the former respecting the support of his
honor and ease, judges his merits by far to exceed the latter, who imagines
himself well satisfied with the value of a shilling for each visit, and for
that reason is upon the least occasion sent for; whence it happens, his visits
sometimes are so multiplied, that I have known several to have made fourscore
and a hundred visits a day.

Once more I must disgust your Palate, with the relation of the nauseous,
ineffectual, and fraudulent practice of Apothecaries, who with their ends of
Latin, choking terms, and stifling phrases, strive to confound and amaze the
simple vulgar. If you are not too melancholy, you may smile at this Story, a
Practical Apothecary coming to see his Customer, a Cobbler, that lay indisposed
of a Colic, observed him to crack a fart, (for so it is expressed in the
Original,) upon which says the Apothecary, Sir, that is nothing but the
Tonitruation of flatuosities in your Intestines; this was no sooner out of his
mouth, but the Cobbler cracked another, and replied to his Doctor, Sir that is
nothing but your Hob-gobling notes thundering winds out of my Guts, which
litteral return of his terms of Art in plain English, though by chance, obliged
the Apothecary to this expression, I beg you pardon Sir, I suppose you have
studied the Art of Physic, as well as my self, and want not my help; and so
away went Don Ieronimo di Capo di Bove. After this give me leave to be serious,
in examining their general practice in all Diseases. Suppose your self to be
troubled with any Distemper, it matters not which, for all is one to him you
are to send to; upon his arrival he feels your Pulse, and with a fixed eye on
your countenance, tells you, your spirits are low, and therefore it is high time
for a Cordial; the next interrogatory he puts gravely to you is, when was you
at Stool Sir? If not to day, he promises to send you a Laxative Glyster by and
by; and if you complain you have a Looseness, then instead of one Laxative, he
will send you two healing Glysters. If besides you intimate a pain in your
Stomach, Back and Sides, then responding to each pain you shall have a Stomach
Plaster, another for the right side, a third for the left, and a fourth for
the Back; and so you are like to be well patched, and fortified round your
middle. Now before we go farther, let us compute the charge of this first day.
Here is a Cordial composed by the direction of some old dusty Bill on his File,
out of two or three musty Waters, (especially if it be toward the latter end
of the year, and that his Glasses have been stopped with corks) viz. It may be a
Citron, a Borrage, and a Baum Water, all very full of Spirits; if River Water
may be so accounted; to these is to be added one Ounce of that miraculous
Threacle Water, then to be dissolved a Dram of Confectio Alkermes, and one
Ounce of nauseous Syrup of Gillyflowers; this being well shaked in the Viol,
you shall spy a great quantity of Gold swiming in leaves up and down, for which
your Conscience would be burdened, should you give him less than five
shillings; for from the meanest Tradesman he expects without the least
abatement, three and six pence, the ordinary and general price of all Cordials,
though consisting only of two Ounces of Baume Water, and half an Ounce of Syrup
of Gillyflowers. Your Glyster shall be praepared out of two or three handfuls
of Mallow leaves, and one Ounce of common Fennil seeds, boiled in water to a
pint, which strained shall be thickened with the Common Electuary Lenitive, Rape
Oil and Brown Sugar, and so seasoned with Salt. This shall be conveyed into
your Guts by the young Doctor his man, through an engine he carries commonly
about him, and makes him smell so wholesome, for which piece of service, if you
praesent your Engeneer below half a Crown, he will think himself worse dealt
with than those, who empty your necessary Closets in the night. The Master
places to account for the Gut-Medicine, (though it were no more than water and
salt,) and for the use of his man, which he calls Porteridge, eight Groats;
Item, for a Stomachick, Hepatick, Splenetick, and a Nephritick Plaster, for
each half a Crown. What the total of this days Physic amounts to, you may
reckon. The next afternoon or evening, returns the Apothecary himself, to give
you a visit, (for should he appear in the morning, it would argue he had little
to do,) and finding upon examination, you are rather worse than better, by
reason those Plasters caused a melting of the gross humors about the Bowels,
and dissolved them into winds and vapors, which fuming to the head, occasion a
great Headache, dullness and drowsiness, and part of 'em being dispersed through
the Guts and Belly discommode you with a Colic, a swelling of your Belly, and
an universal pain or lassitude in all your Limbs; thus you see, one day makes
work for another; however he has the wit to assure you, they are signs of the
Operation of yesterdayes means, beginning to move and dissolve the humors,
which successful work is to be promoted by a Cordial Apozem, the repetition of
a Carminative Glyster, another Cordial to take by Spoonfuls, and because your
sleep has been interrupted by the unquietness of swelling humors, he will
endeavor to procure you for this next night a Truce with your Disease, by an
Hypnotick potion, that shall occasion rest. Neither will he give you other
cause than to imagine him a most careful man, and so circumspect, that scarce a
Symptom shall escape his particular regard, and therefore to remove your
Headache by retracting the humors* or rather as you are like to discern best by
attracting humors and vapors, he will order his young Mercury to apply a
Vesicatory to the nape of your Neck, and with a warm hand to besmear your Belly
and all your Joints, with a good comfortable Ointment, for to appease your
pains The Cordial Apozem is a Decoction, that shall derive its virtue from two
or three unsavory Roots, as many Herbs and Seeds, with a little Syrup of
Gillyflowers, for three or four times taking, which because you shall not
undervalue by having it brought to you all in one Glass, you shall have it sent
you in so many Viols and Draughts, and for every one of 'em shall be placed
three shillings to your account, which is five parts more than the whcle stands
him in; for the Cordial potion as much, for the Hypnotick potion the same
price, for your Carminative Glyster no less, and for the Epispastick Plaster a
shilling. Thus with the increase of your Disease you may perceive the increase
of your Bill, and therefore it is no improper observation, that the Apothecaries
Practice follows the course of the Moon. The third day producing an addition of
new Symptoms, and an augmentation of the old ones, the Patient stands in need
of new comfort from his Apothecary, who tells him, that nature begins now to
work more strong, and therefore all things goes well, (and never ill;) but
because nature requires all possible assistance from Cordials and small
evacuations, he must expect the same Cordials over again, but with the addition
of greater ingredients, it may be Magistery of Pearl, or Oriental Bezoar in
Powder, the former being often times but Mother of Pearl dissolved in distilled
Vinegar, the latter a cheat the Armenians put upon the Christians, by ramming
Pebbles down a Goats throat, afterward killing him, and extracting the stones
before witness out of his Maw, which they sell for those rare Bezoars, whereof
the quantity of fifteen Grains I have known, has been taken by a Child of a
year old, that lay ill of the Small Pox, without the least effect of sweat or
any expulsion through the Pores. And besides the repetition of a Glyster, and
the renewing of your Plasters, for the profit of your Physician you must be
persuaded, to accept of a comforting Electuary for the Stomach, to promote
digestion; of a Collution to wash the slime and filth from your Tongue, and to
secure your Gums from the Scurvy; of a Melilot Plaster to apply to the Blister
was drawn, the night before; of some Spirits of Salt to drop into your Beer at
Meals, of three Pills of Ruffi to be swallowed down that night, and three next
morning, which possibly may pleasure you with three Stools; but are to be
computed as 2 Doses, each at a Shilling; the Spirit of Salt a Crown the Ounce;
for the Stomach Electuary as much, for the Glyster as before; for your Cordial
in relation to the Pearl and Bezoar, their weight in Gold, which is two pence a
Grain, the greatest cheat of my whole discourse; for dressing of your Blister a
shilling; for the Plaster as formerly. Here I praesume that candor in you, as
not to believe me so disingenious, as to take the advantage of Apothecaries, in
producing any other than the best methods of their practice, and that which
savours the least of their frauds, for in comparison with others, (though these
are very palpable, in regard there is not a valuable consideration respected,
or a proportionable Quid pro Quo,) they are such as may be judged passable, yet
when you are to reflect upon the total, that shall arrise out the Arithmetical
progression of charge, of a fortnights Physic, modestly computed at fifteen
Shillings a day, without the inclusion of what you please to praesent him for
his care, trouble, and attendance, I will not harbor so ill an opinion of him,
or give so rigid a censure, as your self shall upon the following Oration, your
Glysterpipe-Doctor delivers to you with a Melancholy accent, in these terms;
Sir, I have made use of my best Skill and Endeavors, I have been an Apothecary
this twenty years and upwards, and have seen the best Practice of our best
London Physicians, my Master was such a one, Mr. -- one of the ablest
Apothecaries of the City, I have given you the best Cordials that can be
praescribed, it is at your instance I did it, I can do no more, and indeed it is
more properly the work of a Physician, your case is dangerous, and I think if
you sent for such a one, Dr -- he is a very pretty man; if you please I will
get him to come down. Now Sir, how beats your Pulse? the loss of the money your
Bill imports, adds to your pains, through the remembrance it is due to one,
that has fooled you out of it, and deserved it no other way, than by adding
wings to your gross humors, that before lay dormant, and now fly rampant up
and down, raking and raging, which had you not been penny wise and pound
foolish, you would have praevented, by sending for a Physician, who for the
small merit of a City fee, (for which you might also have expected two visits)
would have struck at the root of your Distemper, without tampering at its
Symptoms, or Branches, and by virtue of one Medicine restored you to your
former condition of health, from which you are now so remote; being
necessitated, considering your doubtful state, to be at the charge of a
Physician or two, to whom upon examination of what has been done before, the
Apothecary shall humbly declare, he has given you nothing but Cordials, which
word Cordial, he supposes to be a sufficient protection for this erroneous
practice; and I must tell you, that had his cordial method been continued in a
Fever, or any other acute Distemper, for eight or ten days, your Heirs would
have been particularly obliged to him, for giving you a Cordial remove out of
your possession, and that through omission of those two great Remedies, Purging
and Bleeding, the exact use whereof, in respect of time, quantity, and other
circumstances, can only be determined by Accomplished Physicians.

I should accuse my self of partiality, did I conceal, what may be pleaded for
their Practice. Many a substantial Citizen may have the fortune of a Servant
taken Sick in his house, who should he upon every flight accident of that
nature fling away (as he calls it) ten shillings on a Physician, might justly
be esteemed an ill manager of his concerns, when an Apothecary at a venture by
giving a Vomit, Purge, or Glyster, may for the charge of a shilling or eighteen
pence remove the Distemper, which that now and then he performs with success,
is universally known and taken notice of, and therefore in such cases, is so
commonly sent for, or else could not judge any man so little commiserating the
condition of his Servant, as to expose his life to a certain danger. Besides
the Apothecary finds himself more galiard and confident in this his practice on
inferiors; for if they miscarry, he excuses whatsoever error he has
committed, by asserting, he was importuned or rather forced to it by their
Master. On the other hand, should an Apothecary being thus called in to a sick
Servant, or a mean Tradesman, whose condition by reason of his charge of Family
and Children is little better, refuse this assistance, disobliges the Master,
loses the practice of his Family, or turns away his Patient, who shall
immediately send to the next, that shall most willingly embrace the employ;
whence may be observed, the one necessarily spurs on the other to practice. A
third import greater than any of the former is, that Physicians all, or most,
being tied to particular Apothecaries, praescribe their Bills in terms so
obscure, that they force all chance Patients to repair to their own
Apothecaries, praetending a particular secret, which only they have the key to
unlock; whereas in effect it is no other than the commonest of Medicines,
disguised under an unusual name, on design to direct you to an Apothecary,
between whom and the Physician there is a private compact of going snips, out
of the most unreasonable rates of the said Medicines, wherein if you seek a
redress, by showing the Bill to the Doctor, he shall most religiously aver,
it is the cheapest he ever red. The consequence hereof as to your particular is
a double fraud; and as to Apothecaries in general, their number bearing the
proportion of at least ten parts to one of noted Physicians, to whom allowing
each his Covenant Apothecary, who constituting but one part of the ten, the
remaining nine parts of the number are compelled either to sit still, or to
Quack for a Livelihood; at or least eight of them, for we'll suppose one part of
the nine in a possibility, of acquiring competent estates, in a way more
honest, than that of the Covenanteers, by their wholesale Trade, of fitting
Chyrurgeons Chests for Sea, and supplying Country Apothecaries with
Compositions. Lastly, all Accomplished Physicians are likewise exposed to
manifest injuries from those Covenant Apothecaries, who being sent for by
Patients, after a short essay of a Cordial, will overpower them by persuasions
to call in a Doctor, who shall be no other than his Covenant Physician, by
which means the former Physician, that by his extraordinary care and Skill had
obliged the Family before, shall be passed by, and lose the practice of that
Patient. And should it happen, the sense of gratitude of the forementioned
Patient, should engage him to continue the use of his former Physician, yet
this Covenant Apothecary shall privately cavil at every Bill, and impute the
appearance of every new small pain or symptom, (which necessarily in the course
of a Disease will happen) to his ill address in the Art of Physic, and shall
not give over, before he has introduced his Covenanteer, whose authority in
the fraud of a Physic Bill, he supposes to be most necessary.

But since I have omitted nothing, relating to the concern of their practice, I
will not be defective in proposing what may tend to the interest of their so
unreasonable profit, as people judge. The necessity of their Neighborhood to
you, to be at hand on all important occasions, is an argument, they pay great
Rents in many places, to the satisfaction whereof, and the support of their
Families, it is not the profit commonly allowed over and above what commodities
stand Retailers in at the Merchants or wholesale men, will plentifully suffice,
so that it is no more than reason, they should be considered in the Rates and
Prices of their Medicines, for the Mystery, pains, and Art of praeparing them,
and afterward conveying them to your house, where their time in waiting on
you, and answering many of your impertinent quaestions, or running to and fro
for you to the Doctors, and often being called by you out of their beds in the
night, ought I judge likewise to be taken notice of. Secondly, all Honest
Apothecaries at the years end rid their Shops of two thirds of their decayed
Compositions, and rotten Simples, which at their seasons they are obliged to
praepare a fresh, and keep them ready for your use, if unhappily your Disease
should require any of 'em; whence it appears the greatest justice, you should
be charged for Medicines, that are purposely so praepared and reserved for you
though never praescribed, in the higher Rates and Prices of such, you at any
time have occasion for. Thirdly, An Apothecary being obliged to repair to a
Physicians Covenant Apothecary, to purchase his Fantastical Nostrum at the
unreasonable rate he is pleased to value it at, does not a little inflame the
reckoning. Fourthly, The unskilful Physician praescribing an Ounce of Pearl in
a Cordial Emulsion, puts the Patients Purse into a Disease, and gives him but
little ease. Moreover to praescribe Bees praepared in the Winter, or four or
five Ounces of Peach Kernels in the Spring, or to ordain a restorative
Electuary out of Parats tongues, and Hawks livers, as a most egregious
Physician of our Town did, is an argument, you need not to stair if your Bill
amounts to pounds sterling. And when your glorious Physician has marked you
down an Apozem of a yard and half long, I would not have you dispute with your
Apothecary, for demanding more than what is usual for one, that contains but a
simple or two, which possibly shall operate more effectually, and the Physician
will know more certainly, which of the Simples did the feat, whereas in a great
composition it is impossible to determinate which of them contributed most to the
Cure. These defects and abuses in the practice of Physic in relation to their
prices, chiefly depend on the great bulk of the London Dispensatory, being
overburdned with at least two thirds, though considering the time it was framed
in, might well have vyed with any of its cotemporaries, for excellent and
select Compositions. But the experience of our so wonderfully improved age
declares, most methods of Physic can more commodiously be performed with a
less than one third of its Contents. To what purpose so many scores of Syrups,
which upon their unavoidable fermentation through the heat of the Summer,
undergo a dissipation of the imbibed or infused virtues of Simples, differing
afterward in nothing from nauseous Molasses? so great a number of distilled
Waters seems rather intended for pomp, than the absolute necessity of such
Phlegmatic and insiped Liquors, as most of them are. Aqua Gilberti, and
Cordialis frigida Saxoniae, are through the addition of Coral, Pearl, Bezoar,
and precious Stones, considerably advanced in price, but not the least particle
in virtue, accusing the Inventors of a defect in experimental knowledge, which
would have discovered to them, there had been nothing so Volatile or Salin in
those forementioned Stones and Pearl, that such weak Menstruums were capable of
extracting. And he that revises the Composition of Confectio Hamech, will
conclude it a very senseless one, for being rendered so adstrictive, by that
great proportion of Myrobalaas. Mithridate and Threacle if ever they had been
causes of those great effects former ages adscribed to them, would certainly be
promoted to higher virtues, were they corrected by the substracting many of
their poisonous and hurtful ingredients. Neither could I ever give my self a
satisfactory reason, why those ancient and pure Empirical Compositions, whereof
Mesues was so diligent a Collector, were recommended by those learned
Physicians to their Apothecaries, without reducing their Empirical and
senseless multitude of ingredients to a less and more rational number, in the
Compositions of Species Confect. Liber Pulvis Bezoard. Magistr. Diarrhod.
Abbat. and of many others; Likewise the Chemical praeparations described in the
latter end of the said Pharmapoea, are as mean, as they are defective;
Antimonium Diaphoreticum is not so much fixed, but often moves Vomits; the like
effect may be imputed to their Bezoardicum Minerale. Their Mercurius vitae
proves for the most part Convulsive toward the latter part of the operation;
their Oleum Vitrioli too corrosive, and not at all volatile; their Turbith
Mineral is as churlish, as it is a crude and barren praeparation. The body of
the Chalybs praep. not being sufficiently opened by distilled Vinegar, does not
answer the Physicians expectation in obstinate obstructions. Their Magisterium
Coral. and Perlar. differ little from chalk in powder, or lime well washed. In
fine, nothing is more worthy of the consideration of those so eminently
Accomplished Physicians of the College, than the reformation of their
Pharmacopoea, the correcting of its Compositions, in retrenching the number of
the ingredients, and reducing the body of the whole into a far less number of
Simple Waters, Syrups, Electuaries, Powders, Compound Purgatives, Ointments and
Plasters, whereby they will singularly pleasure Honest Apothecaries, in
detracting so considerably from that needless and almost endless pains and
trouble, the praesent Dispensatory injoyns, and save them the labor of running
to one another to borrow Medicines; and lastly, since by this small determinate
number of Simples and Compounds little or nothing will remain to be flung away
at the years end, they may afford their Medicines two thirds cheaper, and yet
be no less Gainers, and for this the public will in gratitude become their
aequal Debtors with Apothecaries.

To this praeceding Catalogue of clamourous abuses of Practicing Apothecaries,
I will annex such others, as the immoderate thirst of lucre, and the sweet ease
of laziness, do tempt them to; and therefore if in the praeparation of prolix
compositions, as of Sir. Arthem. Sir. Chamaepit. Mithridate and others, they
omit half a score Simples or more, and supply the defect of 'em by a double
proportion of others, you may judge, they intend nothing but the contracting
their business, and the humouring their inclination to idleness. And if in the
Species of Diamoschu they omit the Mosck, in Pulv. e Chel. Cancror. the Bezoar,
in Pulv. Cardiac. Magistr. the Ambergrise and Leaf Gold, in Pulv. Bez. Mag. the
Unicorns horn, and the Pearl, you may imagine they design a double profit; the
one by saving those dear Ingredients, and the other, by charging the said
Medicines at as high a rate to the Patients Bill, as if they had been added in
their full proportion. Secondly, At the Druggists there being two sorts of all
Drugs, the one good, sound and dear, the other though of the same kind, course,
almost rotten and very cheap; we may be jealous, that those who aim at an
Aldermanship by a quick step, do for the most part make use of the latter sort
of Drugs in all their Compositions, and in the praeparations of the praescripts
of Physicians; whose Bills its most certain are by some Apothecaries
unfaithfully dispensed, by adding a less quantity of the Ingredients, or such
as will prove ineffectual, on design either to protract the course of Physic,
or to defame the Physician. Thirdly, the humor of a Tradesman to play the
Gentleman is too visible in many Apothecaries, who pass their time either
Physician like in visiting Patients, or rendering themselves to the recreations
of the times, wherein they are plentifully supported by the revenue of their
Shop, which their men manage according to the idleness and negligence Servants
are all addicted to in the absence of their Masters; whence supposing a
praescription to be erroneously or dangerously praepared, and the Patient upon
the taking of it surprised with urgent symptoms, or yield to his last fate, it
shall not be divulged to you, the man that made up the Medicine was a raw
Apprentice, or had been drinking Drunk, whilst the Master was breathing his
Nag in Hide-Park, in all which transaction, it is the Physician that must father
the ill success.

Were you here to pass your sentiment on the praemisses, you would conclude I
had spoken for and against the Apothecaries, which how far I seem to have
written for them, it is time I should resolve you. First, in answer to what I
objected seemingly on the behalf of the reasonableness of their Practice. Our
most perfect English Law imposes death upon those who exact money (though out
of a necessity for a Livelihood) from any, by threatening their lives, if so,
what can we suppose a greater argument against Apothecaries, that exact great
Sums in their long Bills for Medicines, which beyond threatening, have
artificially taken away their lives? for it is observable our Law is so intent
in the praeserving of the life of every (though the meanest) of the Kings
Subjects, that if a proof be pursued, that the untimely death of any person was
caused by an error in Physic, administered by one that had no legal warrant for
it, the crime is severely punished with a Rope.

But since the condition of inferior Tradesmen and Servants will not admit of
great expenses in Physicians fees, besides large prices for Medicines, the
Honorable College of Physicians would singularly acquit their duty to the
public, in praeventing their rash inconsiderate humor of running to
Mountebanks, Empiricks, or practicing Apothecaries for cheapness (so seeming,)
by appointing every three or four years one or two Junior Physicians in every
Ward, whose visiting Fee they should be obliged by Oath, shall not exceed a
shilling, and their Chamber Fee six pence, by which means many lives might be
praeserved, the young Physician gain considerably enough by the frequency of
Patients and the multitude of Visits, and very much improve his experience.
Likewise there ought a Pharmacopoea Pauperum to be annexed to the other, which
consisting in cheap, few, and effectual Medicines, and praepared by two or
three Apothecaries, authorized for that purpose in every respective Ward, and
every Medicine reasonably rated by the Physician at the end of his
praescription, it would certainly praevent the ruin of many mean Families in
case of a great Sickness, which often cannot stand them in less than twenty or
thirty pounds, at the rate Physic is practiced now.

Physicians of late have made some sputter about the dishonesty, stubborness,
and incapacity of Apothecaries in their Trade, but seeking redress among
incompetent Judges, the vulgar, mistook their case, and so must begin again.
The Carrier in the Fable complaining to Jupiter, his Ass was sullen and would
not go the way he would have him; Jupiter returned no other answer, than that he
had given him hands; implying he might make use of them in taking the Ass by the
Haltar, and driving him on with a Battoon. The Moral applied to this affair can
give no offense, since Fables never created exceptions. So then the College of
Physicians having the means in their own hands, which their Charter and several
acts of Parliament had conferred on them, may without much difficulty arrive to
the end of their design, by summoning the chief of their Corporation before
them, and offering whether they will accept of an Oath, to be taken every seven
years or oftener, (to put them in mind of their duty,) in this form, or any
other they shall think fit. They shall swear they will praepare the Medicines
and Compositions of their Dispensatory faithfully without altering or
substituting Quid pro Quo, or omitting or adding any Simples, which they engage
shall be the sound and good; and that they will praepare and dispense the
praescriptions of Physicians exactly without the least alteration, omission or
addition, without cavilling, deriding, or reviling any thing therein contained.
That they shall not sell their Medicines at higher prices than the College
shall think fit to tax or rate them. That they shall not praesume to give a
Vomit or Purge, without a Bill from a Legal Physician. That they shall not give
a Patient more than one Cordial or Glyster on an urgent occasion, which may
satisfy the Patients impatiency, until a Physician be sent for, provided
always, that this shall not extend to hinder them from selling Mithridate,
Threacle, Simple Waters, Syrups, or any thing else a Customer will buy of 'em.
That they shall not feel Pulses, examine Patients, puzzle or fright them to
cause them to send for another. That they shall dispense Laudanum, Mercurius
vitae, and some other weighty Medicines with their own hands. That they shall
give Physicians a due respect and honor, oppose the frauds and insinuations of
Empiricks and Practicing Apothecaries. That they shall not keep any Medicine in
their Shops longer, than the College praescribes a time for their continuing
good and sound. That they shall not sell Sublimate, Praecipitate, Arsenick or
any other sort of quick poison to any inferior or unknown Customer. That they
shall conceal the Diseases of Patients, or whatever other secrets are committed
to them in the Cure. That they shall likewise keep secret such praescripts of
the Physicians as they shall enjoin them to. That they shall not publicly or
privately advise or sell any Medicine that may occasion Women to miscarriages,
or kill their Conception. That they shall discover the frauds and errors
committed by Practicing Apothecaries, if suspected to have caused the untimely
death of any. That they shall not let Blood, dress Ulcers, or invade any part
of the Skilful Chyrurgeons employ. Besides what else is convenient to be added.
An Oath being no more than necessary in a Trade, where frauds and abuses are so
practicable, I am confident no Honest Apothecary can or will refuse it, since
containing no particular, that cuts off from the privilege or full extent of
his Trade. Those whom the honesty of their intentions shall persuade their
submission to these rules, may be distinguished from others, by being called
College Apothecaries, to whom it is likewise most just, the Physicians shall
engage upon the reputation of their Profession, not to praepare any Medicines,
but such as are very difficult, requiring art and care, and whereon the weight
and principal efficacy of Curing great Diseases does depend, but that they
shall send these also to be dispensed by them, and consequently shall leave off
praescribing of Nostrums that were used to be praepared by their Covenant
Apothecaries. Moreover that they shall not divert any Patient from his
Apothecary, or in the least hint at his incapacity, to cause any suspicion or
praejudice in the Patient; that they shall ever refuse to make use of a
Practicing or any other than a College Apothecary, but endeavor the
suppression of all such and Empiricks, for their mutual interest and advantage,
and ever be obliged to give a good Character of them in particular. That they
will tax and rate their compositions and praescriptions conscienciously, and
with a particular regard had to their Rents, charge of Servants, loss of time,
and all other necessary circumstances. That they shall not Usurp any Authority
or Majestical command over them, other than of praescribing, directing, and
informing what is necessary for the good of the Patient and their Customer, and
consequently esteem 'em as free Tradesmen.

But if it shall be made to appear, a College Apothecary has in any
particular, broken his Oath, he shall be expelled and extermined as a perjured
person, out of the College Practice, without the least hope of ever being
received in again. Likewise a Collegiate Physician being found peccant, ought
to be degraded of the honor, of being a member of so honorable a Society.

The irregularity of the Practice of Physic being in a great measure to be
imputed to the perverse qualities of some of themselves, the Collegiate
Physicians ought to pass an engagement, They shall depose all envy and malice,
by desisting to decry or depress one another by clandestin sinister reflections,
but on the contrary, rather aiming at that part of a Gentleman, to give a
generous Character of one another. That they shall not undertake the Cure of
any Patient, who has made use of another, before the former Physician is
dismissed with his due satisfaction. That if two or more are called to a
consultation, they shall go out together, and no single one tarry behind, to
insinuate into the opinion of the Patient or his Friends. That all
consultations shall be made in a room private to themselves, and all their
particular judgments shall be left wholly to be approved and decided by the
Physician that was first called, who ought likewise to praescribe only. That
being called, where an Empirick or Practicing Apothecary has by an irregular
method brought the Patient into a manifest danger, and an irrecoverable
condition, he shall be obliged to acquaint the College with it.

By a line of impartiality I have drawn this tract, not being conscious of any
pique I have to any party therein mentioned, and for that reason can assert, I
have produced what may be urged for Physician and Apothecary, to the least
circumstance, and have likewise annexed a way for accommodation between 'em,
but how well or how ill I leave to the Reader; and so farewell.

Sunt bona mixta malis, sunt mala mixta bonis. FINIS.
A LASH for LEX TALIONIS; OR, A just Repraehension of the Practicing Apothecary.
THis preceding discourse was almost finished in the Impression, when I chanced
to spy somewhat new, pricked up against a post in a Ballad-sellers Stall, at
first appearing like some strange News from Tripoly, but upon a nearer
approach, observed a very worthy person Dr. Merret named in the Title of Lex
Talionis, and in the ensuing page* Dr. Goddart, both very Accomplished and
Eminently Learned in their Profession; also a third, Dr. Daniel Cox, a person
as ingenious as learned. These to whom the generality of judicious men dedicate
a character more ample, than my narrow bounds will permit to express, were
assaulted in their honor and reputation by a clandestin scurrilous Cabal of
four or five Practicing Apothecaries, raking up in the Libel forementioned all
the filth and dirt the Sinck of their imagination stunk of, but with no other
success than the bespattering of themselves, and defiling their own Nest. The
provocation for this was no more than what passers by give to those snarling
Animals, that bark at 'em, because they are none of the house; it being the
sentiment of those Learned men in their Treatises, that the people were
extremely imposed upon by some fraudulent Apothecaries, whom they endeavored
to divert from their impious practice by a threat, they would attempt the
praeparation of their own Medicines, which the urgent occasion of a sickly
season, and many inconveniences attending a private Pharmacy might easily
praevail with them, to render back to those, whose established employment it
had been for some ages. This was the opinion of all sober and honest
Apothecaries, with a censure, that the foresaid Pamphlet was Indicted by some
Hermaphrodite Apothecary-Doctor to deserve a small piece, or to raise himself
by causing a division between Physicians and Apothecaries; these latter
detesting those scandalous reflections on the whole Corporation of Physicians,
and others in particular by inserting their names, a sort of impudence not
common in a civilized Government, and what is more, of givng the Lie to a
Gentleman, which the Lex Talionis of all Nations recompenses with a Bastonade.
But give Diabolus his due, the particular naming of persons being left out, it
might pass for a piece of Bouffonerie, the chief Author being fitter sor a --
-- -- on the little Theater of a Bartholomew Booth, than -- sure he would have
bursted had he not gi'n vent to his witty Hogshead, that was thus upon the
fret; and when he has been well rackt till the Lees drop into his Breeches, his
manners will show more fine. However I Will pass one hours time to give an essay,
how facil it is to retort, but without reverberating heat: (fol. 7. Lex
Talionis) That the young Physician must be lodged gratis in the Apothecaries
house, and attended on by the Servants, and by the Mistress into the bargain; a
filthy Bird that befowls his own nest. Cancaro! What Is his meaning? confesses,
he holds his Trade by a contented tenure in Capite; or by giving Purges at's
house, when the sign is in Capricorn, and for that reason the English Mounsieur
comes not thither, without muzling his Nose under his Cloak. But the Gentleman
has forgot to tell you, his Trade is the only means the Physician has to shab
off his Tympany-Cousin to the young Apothecary, in hopes of his Practice for
her Portion, urgente necessitate, Po for that. sol. 24. The Apothecaries having
a laudable custom once a year (and oftener too) as many as please, to go
Herbarizing (don't say Simpling) in Gutturlane, where any not knowing may be
instructed by those, who well understand, and are learned; -- O Learned
Herbwomen! (fol. 25.) he recites a fictitious story of a Carrot top; A most
praegnant invention of his Carrot-pa^e imagination. (fol. 2.) for Certes says
he, an incomparable Gallus, whither his Brother Apothecary was carried the last
Sessions in the little Coach (fol. 17.) with two Wheels, up Holborn and -- such
another his Glyster-pipeship may keep in Time, for it would be too pedantick
for our age to say the Apothecary goes to his Country house. fol. 17. Of late
times there being more (Doctors) Knighted, than known in so short a time. If
this be the contest, as many of you shall be exalted to a Knighthood of the
burning Pestil, with the figure Chapter in the record of your Manual; but that will
spoil your Palmestry I doubt. (fol. 2.) But Domine, was it salva conscientia,
(fol. 25.) when for a truth one of your small Brethren in the Margin of's Bill,
put down Item for Item and Item of Pulvis ad Anginam, being nothing but Album
Graecum, each paper at half a Crown; for forty papers justo five pounds for
White Dogs -- and what you please besides for Tobith and's little Cur? Hush
hush, all comes out; it is not forgotten the poor Lady in -- marched off of an
Ala mode, she had got by taking some Pills Mr. Nameless had roul'd between's
Teeth, to make 'em take gilt the better. Hereafter pray leave off that trick.
'Tseems Mr. Nameless had been basely paid for's Glyster; And how deservedly
then the Bon Droll styles 'em (fol. 19.) a Society, generally (none excepted?)
very honest and sober men, Oiboh! Pray do n't go by to Artichoak Leaden -- str.
Pills, Potions, and Quack-advice you may have, and after that a long
Arithmetical Scrowl, little shorter than a Shentlemans Genealogy: This his Jong
Picaro shall humbly present to you, and if you bid 'um send Ursus major, and
you will pay his B^ll; expect not a Farthing abatement from the favor of a
Quantum meruit; for here is a plain Assumpsit; if you understand not this Knack,
the Iereboams shall make you -- Probatum est; for it is on Record more then once
in several of the Courts. (fol. 17.) The Battle is to the strong; but they are
strong, so^ they never break; and how can they? three Patients in the Spring
makes their Pot boil all the year. It Is well put in, a word of the battle; for
generally they go armed with the Ivory pocket Pistol, and the Box of gilt
Bullets; and Auri sacra fames, the good Old Cause, even it is that they fight
for. (Fol. 18.) Their canting and formally praying over their Patients, etc.
this is granted was the practice of three noted Physicians, and they got well
by it, What then? Have thou not heard of a Precious Brother of thine, who like
a little Stonehorse mounted the great Tub, and with a sense of feeling, how
heartily did he recommend his precious Elizir vitae to dis dear Sisters, and so
powerfully did press it home to 'em; and at length O how fervently did they
embrace it! All had been well, and they had still continued in the same
persuasion, had not that wretch Brother Nameless held forth his poisonous Box
of Ointment, almost to the utter destruction of their sweet enjoyment, and
their comfortable fellowship; But how precious an Antidote was Mercurius Dulcis
then, to rebuke that evil spirit Lust and Conven tickling had let in among 'em?
Nemo omnibus horis sapit, may as well be verified of this Apothecary as any
other, when he bought dried Eels for Vipers, to make Trochisci, for his Venice
Threacle, an Admirable Antidote! (fol. 9.) for doubtless (says he) the discreet
Apothecary being learned, may make a far abler Physician than he an Ahothecary;
for it is but joining the Theory of Physic with his Practick, and he may be
complete; what? a complete Mountebank! conceditur; but quomodo pulvis signior
Apothecary, the joining of the Theory with the Practick? possibly the joining
of Culpepper with the Glysterpipe; or Poor Robin's Almanac with the Pestil and
Mortar; seriouslr a very complete Physician. Complamatum est; and from that
rule (fol. 12) all Fools or Physiciaus indeed, or both, if he will accept on it:
(fol. 25.) for ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, i. e. ex quovis wooden
Apothecary non fit Medicus. But whence had your Worship all those ends of
Latin? sure they are the parings of some University Cobbler; for confident I am
the learned Author's Gotham assistants are scarce guilty of knowing the first
letter of the Greek IN the title, though it proved their neck Verse (fol 25.)
the Apothecary if he would understand the practice (a contradiction now
confessing their ignorance in the Practick) and Theory of Physic, or any
question that can be asked, (what turn Astrologer too!) let him buy
Frambesarius, the best piece ever Duns studied to answer's Quodlibets; that is
the use on it. Though when he trug'd to Cambridg for a degree of Blockhead in
Physic, Don Quixot falter'd most abominably, being better versed in Priscian
than Galen. Quot sunt parts Medicinae? Answered quinque. Primo, to persuade a
Customer in health he is sick. Secundo, to give him a Pill that shall make him
sick. Tertio, to ^amp him up with Cordials. Quarto, to make im believe he is
well, though now sick indeed. Quinto, to present 'im with a long Bill; if trap
be the word go on and prosper. (fol. 26.) he comments on an ingenious book de
Fermentatione, like an Asinus ad byram; as if the learned Author had not been
able to explain's own thoughts, nevertheless runs on mistaking the thing all
along. But my friend, when you have thoroughly perused the Praxis Riverli (fol.
26.) and Primroses Enchridium, still it will be but Simia est simia, etiamsi
aurea gestet insignia, in English a debauched Apothecary. Neither will your
Asinary canting on the fermentation (fol. 27.) for a specimen of their
wonderful pretended progress in Physic, excuse 'em from being -- in print;
(fol. 25.) Let but a rational learned Apothecary, etc. Guarda la gamba! A
rational learned swabber in Physic, a Pot-carry! and why may not a Rational
learned Chimneysweeper add but somewhat of the Theory (verba codicis) to his
former observations, be better fitted for practice, and I would sooner engage
him than many a Pot-carry. I mar'l tro' your Worship forgets they have
traveled too as well as Physicians; it is confessed they have; but 'twas on
Balaam's Ass, from the Village of Ignorance, through the Town of Cheat'em in
Long-bill-shire, till they came to the strong Castle of Impudence. Pass par la
still, but in your Travels, have a care of the little Coach, they make an ugly
halt by the way, unless the Coachman will engage to bring you back, and yet *t
would be dangerous to take's word. Pray good folks, a word of advice; leave off
this rambling, off with your traveling garb, the Plush Jacket, and the broad
brim'd Hat, it is but Vulpes sub pelle Leonis, and on with your blew Aprons
again, the Music of the Pestil and Mortar will sound pleasanter than the
Passing Bell; for Pot-carry is but quasi to the Pit-carry, and your Practicing
quasi Prating. Now let us Blazon the Primitive of your derived so eminent
Profession, as he call's it. Apothecary Pot-carry, Pot-carry Pit-carry,
Pit-carry Picaro. O Picaro, art thou the Father of so eminent a Generation!
then may I say with the Author in the farewell of his Prologue; From a
Picaro-Pit-carry-Apothecary Libera me Domine.

FINIS.

