A GUIDE FOR CONSTABLES, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the
Highways, Treasurers of the County Stock, Masters of the House of Correction,
Bailiffs of Mannours, Toll-Takers in Fairs, etc.

A TREATISE BRIEFLY SHOWING The Extent and Latitude of the several Offices,
with the Power of the Officers, herein, both by Common Law and Statute,
according to the Several Additions and Alterations of the Law, till the 20.
year of His Majesty's Reign.

Collected by Geo. Meriton, Gent.

^ondon, Printed for A. Crook, W. Leak, A. Roper, F. Tyton, G. Sawbridge, J.
Place, W. Place, J. Starkey, T. Basset, R. Pawley, and S. Heyrick, Booksellers
in Fleetstreet and Holborn, 1669.

To all Constables Tythingmen, Headborroughs, Bursholders, etc.
Sirs,
HAving many times considered of the large Extent of the Constables Office, and
how little skill or knowledge many of you have, who are often called to take
upon you the same Office, and also how few Authors there be who have writ on
this Subject, Mr. Lambert, Mr. Wingate, and Mr. Shephard being the Chief, whose
Rules at this day are very unsafe for the Constables to square their Actions
by: for Mr. Lambert's Book, being a Discourse principally of the Common Law
Cases, is now much altered by Statute since, and that Book of the Office of a
Constable Fathered upon Mr. Wingate, I am verily persuaded was none of his
work; for there are some unwarrantable Authorities and gross Errors in it,
which could not have slipped his ingenious Pen if the Work had been his; and
for Mr. Shephard's Book, it is stuffed full of Acts and Ordinances of that
Convention at Westminster, (which in the late times of Usurpation and Rebellion
was owned for a Parliament,) which Ordinances are now of no force; Therefore
none of these being safe or warrantable Rules for the Constables to walk by,
but blind Guides to lead them into the bypath and crooked Meanders of many
Errors; I thought thereupon that some little Treatise of this Subject might not
only prove very useful, but also very beneficial for the generality of People
of this Kingdom; which consideration has occasioned me to publish this small
unpolished Epitome; and though I know the Book will fall under many hard
Censures of those who are far better able to undertake the work; yet I hope,
Dear Friends, my willingness to contribute any thing to your Service, though
but a Mite, does claim your favorable Acceptance of my pains; Remembering the
old saying -- est voluisse satis, and there is nothing of so little regard but
has something of worth in it, and I despair not of some profit hence to you
for whom it is intended, and for whose ease, satisfaction and direction it was
collected and published by him, kind Friends, whose ambition and desire is, and
shall be

Redd-Hall, Feb. 25. 1667/8. Yours ready to serve in what he may, George
Meriton.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. OF the Derivation of the word Constable, how many sorts of
Constables, the Antiquity of the Office, the several Appellations of this
Officer in several places, who ought to be chosen to the said Office, and how
and where to be sworn, with the form of the Constables Oath. page 1 Chap. 2.
The Constables Office about Affrays. 12 Chap. 3. The Constables Office about
Alehouses, etc. 18 Chap. 4. The Constables Office about Arms. 22 Chap. 5. The
Constables Office about Foreign Bone Laces, Cut work, Imbroidery, etc. 24 Chap.
6. The Constables Office about Irish Cattle. 25 Chap. 7. The Constables Office
about Chimney Money. 27 Chap. 8. The Constables Office about Conventicles. 30
Chap. 9. The Constables Office about Clothiers. 31 Chap. 10. The Constables
Office about the Customs. 33 Chap. 11. The Constables Office about Setting
Dogs, etc. 36 Chap. 12. The Constables Office about Escapes. 37 Chap. 13. The
Constables Office about Excise. 41 Chap. 14. The Constables Office about Fish.
42 Chap. 15. The Constables Office about Forceable Entries, etc. 43 Chap. 16.
The Constables Office about Hedg-breakers, etc. 44 Chap. 17. The Constables
Office about Highways. 48 Chap. 18. The Constables Office about Stoned Horses.
53 Chap. 19. The Constables Office about Hue and Cry. 55 Chap. 20. The
Constables Office about Laborers and Servants. 58 Chap. 21. The Constables
Office about Maltmaking. 61 Chap. 22. The Constables Office about the Militia.
63 Chap. 23. The Constables Office about Moss-Troopers. 64 Chap. 24. The
Constables Office about Disturbing Ministers. 65 Chap. 25. The Constables
Office about the Peace. 67 Chap. 26. The Constables Office about Physicians. 70
Chap. 27. The Constables Office about the Plague. ibid. Chap. 28. The
Constables Office about conveying Prisoners to the Gaol. 72 Chap. 29. The
Constables Office about Purveyance. 74 Chap. 30. The Constables Office about
Quarter Moneys for Maimed Soldiers, Prisoners, etc. 80 Chap. 31. The
Constables Office about Popish Recusants. 82 Chap. 32. The Constables Office
about Riots and Routs. 84 Chap. 33. The Constables Office about Rogues and
Vagabonds. 86 Chap. 34. The Constables Office about Profane Swearing. 97 Chap.
35. The Constables Office about Prof^ning the Sabbath. 98 Chap. 36. The
Constables Office about Tobacco Pl^nting. 101 Chap. 37. The Constables Office
about Weights and Measures. 102 Chap. 38. The Constables Office about Watches.
104 Chap. 39. The Constables Office about executing Warrants. 106
The Contents of the Chapters in the Churchwardens Office.
Chap. 1. The Antiquity of the Churchwardens Offic^, and how they are to be
chosen. 119 Chap. 2. The Churchwardens Office about Profanation of the Sabbath,
and of the Church. 124 Chap. 3. Some few Cases concerning Actions for and
against Churchwardens. 127 Chap. 4. The Churchwardens Office about disposing of
Seats in their Churches. 133 Chap. 5. The Churchwardens Office about
Reparations and Rates. 137 Chap. 6. Some Cases wherein the Churchwardens are
equally concerned with the Constables and Overseers of the Poor. 143 Chap. 7.
The Churchwardens Office about passing Accounts, together with the heads of
most of the things which they are to present at the Visitation Courts. 148
The Contents of the Chapters in the Overseer of the Poor's Office.
Chap. 1. Of the Antiquity of the Officers, their Qualifications, and how and
when to be chosen. 157 Chap. 2. Of the several sorts of Poor People, and what
Poor the Overseers are to provide for and relieve, or set to work. 161 Chap. 3.
The Duty of the Overseers about putting forth and binding Apprentices, with the
form of the Indenture for such purpose. 167 Chap. 4. Several Cases about
Settlements, and also touching Bastards, etc. 175 Chap. 5. The Overseers Office
in making of Rates, and passing Accounts. 188
The Contents of the Chapters in the Surveyors Office for Highways, etc.
Chap. 1. Of the Choice of these Officers, how many sorts of ways there are,
with some few general Cases Concerning Highways. 197 Chap. 2. The Duty of the
Surveyors about setting and calling the Parishioners to the common day works
for the Highways, and about taking and digging for Gravel, Chalk, Sand, etc.
202 Chap. 3. The Surveyors duty about cutting down Bushes, Trees, and scowring
of Ditches in the Highways, and also touching Presentiments and Inquiries about
Defaults in passing of Accounts, and Traveling of Wagons, Wains, etc. 209
Chap. 4. Some heads of the Stat. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2. concerning the Ways,
Sewers, Pavements, etc. in London, and the Scavengers office. 218 Chap. 5. Some
particulars gathered out of the Acts, 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1. and 16, 17. Car. 2.
Chapter 10. about the repair of the Highways in the Northern Post Road from London
to York, etc. 225 Chap. 6. Several Cases about the Repairs of Bridges, with the
Names of the Statutes, which concern particular Bridges. 234 The Treasurers
Office for maimed Soldiers and Mariners in General. 242 The Treasurers Office
for Prisoners and Hospitals, etc. in general. 251 The Office of Masters of
Houses of Correction, and of the Workhouses in London and Westminster, etc. in
general. 256 The Office of Bailiffs of Mannours in General. 266 The Duty of
Governors of Fairs and Markets, etc. in general. 269
Licensed,

Sept. 19. 1669. Roger L'Estrange.

A GUIDE FOR CONSTABLES.
CHAP. I.
Of the Derivation of the word Constable, how many sorts of Constables, the
Antiquity of the Office, the several Appellations of this Officer in several
places, who ought to be chosen to the said Office, and how and where to be
sworn, with the form of the Constables Oath.

THE word Constable is derived or compounded of two old Saxon words, Cuninge,
or Kininge, which signifies King, and Stable signifying Stability; showing
that these ancient Officers were reputed to be as the stability or stay of the
King and Kingdom: Co. 4. Part. Inst. fol. 123. Lamb. Office of Constable. 5. and
Dalton's J. P. Chap. 16. fol. 46.

There are only two sorts of Constables, of whose Office this Treatise makes
particular mention, and that is High Constables of Hundreds, and Petty
Constables in Towns and Parishes.

Now by the opinion of sothe men, these High Constables were first ordained to
be chosen by the Statute of Winchester, and they were to make view of Armor
twice every year, and to present before the Justices assigned defaults of
Armor, Watches, Highways, Hue and Cry; and also such as lodged Strangers for
whom they would not answer. Lamb. 5. Rast all 379. C. D. 13. E. 1. C. 6.
Dalton's J. P. Chapter 16. fol. 46.

And that the Petty Constables in Towns and Parishes, were after devised for
the aid of the High Constables of Hundreds, about the beginning of the Reign of
King Edward the Third. Lamb. Duty Constable. page 9.

But others are of opinion, that the High Constables were Conservators of the
Peace within their several Hundreds and Limits, by the ancient Common Law.
Crompt. 6. and 222. 12. H. 7. fol. 18.

And that whereas the Sheriffs of Counties at the first had the Government of
their Counties committed to them, that afterward by reason of the multitude of
people, it being then too great a task for one man to undertake, thereupon
Hundreds were deduced and derived out of the Counties, and in every one of them
was ordained a Conservator of the Peace, who was called the High Constable; and
after this Buroughs or Towns were made, and within every one of them also was
ordained a Conservator of the Peace, who is called the Petty Constable: and
this was long before the time of King Edward the Third, as appears by the
derivation of the words, and that they were in the time of the Saxons, so that
it may seem as well the High Constables, as the Petty Constables and their
Authorities, were by the Common Law; and that the old Statutes concerning them,
are but a Recital of the ancient Common Law, 12. H. 7. fol. 18. a. Dalton's J.
P. Chap. 16. fol. 46.

Now there be other Officers of much like Authority to the Constables, as the
Bursholders in Kent, the third Borough in Warwickshire, and the Tythingman,
Burroughhead, or Headburrough or Chief Pledge in other places; but yet the
Office of a Constable is distinct and (as it seems) is of greater Authority
than these other: for it is held by some that these Bursholders,
Thirdburroughs, Tythingmen, etc. being in a Town or Parish where a Constable
is, that in such case they cannot meddle, because the Constables be (in
comparison of them) Head Officers, and that the others are but as Assistants to
the Constables in all Services of his Office when the Constable is present, and
in his absence then these others are to attend the service; and that there are
many other things which the Constables may do, and wherewith the Bursholders
and the rest cannot meddle at all; and yet in Towns where there be no
Constables, and that the Barsholders, Tythingmen, etc. be there the only
Officers for the Peace, as also in such case where the Power or Authority of
Bursholder, Tythingman, etc. is declared to be equal with the power of the
Constable, in all such cases and things, their Office and Authority be in a
manner all one. See 1. Jac. C. 7. Lamb. page 4, 6, 9, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55.
Dalton's J. P. Chap. 1. fol. 3, 4.

Where any Statute does appoint offenders to be punished by the Constable, or
other inferior Officer, in such case the Tythingman, Headburrough, etc. may do
it, for they are supposed to be Inferior Officers to the Constable. Dalton's
J. P. Chap. 1. fol. 4.

Note that these Officers are to be attendant to Court Leets, Justices of the
Peace, and Coroners, for the executing of their Warrants, within their several
Precincts.

And now as to the choice of these Constables, you shall understand that the
Law requires that every Constable be Idoneus homo, that is apt and fit for the
execution of the said Office, and he is said in Law to be Idoneus, who is
endued with these three things, honesty, knowledge, and Ability. Co. 8. Lib.
Rep. fol. 41. in Grieslyes case there.

First, he ought to have honesty to execute his Office truly, without malice,
affection or partiality. Secondly, Knowledge to understand what he ought to do.
And lastly, Ability as well in substance or estate, as also in body, that so he
may attend and execute his Office diligently, and not, through impotency of
body or want, to neglect the place; for Constables chosen out of the meaner
^ort, they are either ignorant what to do, or dare not do what they should, or
are not able to spare the time to execute the Office: they ought therefore to
be of the ablest sort of men, and are not to be chosen either by House or other
Custom, if they be not fit persons for the office. Co. 8. Lib. Rep. fol. 41.

And if any one shall be chosen Constable, which is not thus qualified and
enabled, he may by Law be discharged of his said office, and another fit man
may be appointed in his place. Co. 8. Lib. Rep. fol. 42.

Clergymen, Justices of the Peace, Lawyers, Physicians, Attorneys, Women
whether Maids, or Widows, Madmen, Infants, old, sick, decrepid persons, nor
poor people, are not to be chosen to the office of Constable.

And note, that a man is to serve this Office in respect of his personal abode
and place of Resiancy, and not in respect of his Land in another place, for if
he have Lands in one place, and keep house in another place, he must serve
where he lives, and not where his Lands lie.

A custom in a Parish or Town, that the Office of Constable shall go by the
house is not good; for if a woman have an house there, she is eligible, which
is against Law; but a custom that every man, sufficient in the place, shall
serve the office himself, or find a sufficient man to serve it, may be good.
Cro. 1. Part. Rep. fol. 283.

A Leet choosing unable or unfit Constables is cause of forfeiture of the Leet,
and such choice is void; and two Justices of Peace, upon complaint to them
made, may remove such a Constable, and choose and swear a new one. Dalt. J. P.
Chap. 16. fol. 47. Steel's Rep. fol. 71. Mich. 22. Car. 1. B. R. Bolstred's 1.
Part. Rep. fol. 174.

The High Constables are most usually chosen at the Quarter Sessions of the
Peace for that County, and are either to be sworn there, or else by warrant
from the Sessions to be sworn elsewhere; and if it happen that they be chosen
out of the Sessions, then ought they to be chosen by the greater number of the
Justices of that Division where they dwell, Lamb. 190. 13. E. 1. Stat. Winch.
Dalt. J. P. Chap. 16. fol. 46.

And in such manner as they are to be chosen, in the same manner, and by the
like Authority are they to be removed; for eodem modo quo quid constituitur,
dissolvitur.

By the Stat. of the 34. H. 8. Two Justices of the Peace, the one being of the
Quorum, may appoint the High Constables in Wales. 34. H. 8 Cap. 26.

Now for the Swearing and choosing of petty Constables, it properly belongs to
the Court Leet, but in ancient time they were yearly appointed by the Sheriffs
in their turn, and were their sworn and received their Oath, and so they may be
still. Bacons use of the Law, page 5, 6. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 16. fol. 47. and Chap.
121. fol. 366.

And now by the Stat. 14. Car. 2. It is provided that if any Constable of a
Parish dye, or remove, that any two Justices may make and swear a new one, to
continue till the next Leet or Quarter Sessions, and then the Steward of, or in
the Leet or Justices at the Sessions are to swear another, or to approve of him
that is chosen; and if any such Officer shall continue in his place above a
year, the Justices at their Quarter Sessions may discharge him, and put another
in his place, till the Lord of the Leet shall keep his Court and place in
another. 14. Car. 2. Chap. 12.

Constables lawfully chosen, if they shall refuse to be sworn, the Justices of
Peace may bind them over to the Assizes, or Sessions of the Peace. Dalt. J. P.
Chap. 16. fol. 47. vide Crawlyes Case. Cro. 1. Part. fol. 409.

A Constable of an Hundred, or Parish, may not make a Deputy to execute his
Office, as some hold opinion, but a Deputy may do under him many parts of his
Office in his Name, so still as the Constable must answer for it. Bolstreds 3.
Part. Rep. fol. 77, 78.

If any Action be brought against a Justice of Peace, Mayor, or Bailiff of a
Corporation, Headburrough, Port-Reeve, Constable, Tythingman, Collector of
Subsidies or Fifteens, Churchwardens, Sworn-men, Overseers of the Poor, or
their Assistants, for any thing done by reason of their several Offices, they
may plead the general issue, and give the special matter in Evidence. 7. Jac.
Cap. 5. 21. Jac. Cap. 12. Wingate Abr. St. Title Evidence.

And all Actions, brought against such Officers, must be laid in the County
where the fact was done, and in case where the verdict passes for the
Defendant, or the Plaintiff is Nonsuit, or discontinues his suit, these
Officers shall be allowed double costs, to be recovered as other Defendants
recover their costs. 7. Jac. C. 5. 21. Jac. C. 12. Wingate Abr. Stat. Tit.
Evidence.

The form of the Constables Oath is as follows:
YOu shall swear well and faithfully to serve our Sovereign Lord the King, and
the Lord of the Manor in the Office of a Constable; you shall see the Kings
Peace to be well and duly kept and preserved to the utmost of your power; you
shall Arrest all such persons as in your presence shall ride or go armed
offensively, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach ^f the
Kings Peace: You shall do your best endeavor that the Statute of Winchester
for the Watch in your Town be duly kept, and that Hue and Cry, and the Statutes
for punishment of sturdy Beggars, Rogues, Vagabonds, Night-walkers, and other
idle and wandering persons within you Liberties be duly put in execution: You
shall do your best endeavor upon complaint to you made to apprehend all
Fellons, Barrators, Rioters, and persons making Affrays; and if any such
persons shall make resistance with force, you shall levy Hue and Cry, and shall
pursue them till they be taken; you shall have a watchful eye to such persons
as shall maintain or keep any common house or place, where any unlawful Games
or Plays are or shall be used, as also to such persons as shall frequent or use
such places, or shall exercise or use any unlawful Games or Plays there, or
elsewhere contrary to the Statute: At your Assizes, Sessions, or Leet, you
shall present all and every the off^nces committed or done contrary to the
Statutes made and provided for the restraint of inordinate haunting and tippling
in Taverns, Inus, and Alehouses, and for repressing of drunkenn^ss and profane
swearing. You shall true presentment make of, all Bloodshedding, Affrays,
Outcryes, Rescues, and other offenses committed or done against the Public
Peace, within your Limits: You shall well and truly execute all Precepts and
Warrants to you directed from the Justices of Peace, and others in Authority in
this County: And you shall well and duly, according to your knowledge, power,
and ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the Office of a
Constable, so long as you shall continue in the said Office.

So help you God.

Or the Oath may be given to the Constable in short thus;

YOu shall Swear, that you shall well and truly execute the Office of a
Constable (or Tythingman) for the Parish (or Tything) of C: for this next year
(or half a year, as the case is) and until another be sworn in your Room, or
you shall be legally discharged thereof.

So help you God.

CHAP. II.
The Constables Office about Affrays.

IF any man shall make an Affray or Assault upon another, in the presence of
the Constable, or if any man in his presence shall threaten to kill, beat or
hurt another, or shall be in a fury ready to break the Peace; in every of these
cases the Constable may commit the offenders to the Stocks, or to some other
safe custody for the present (as the quality of the person requires) until
such time as he can carry them before some Justice of the Peace, or to the
Gaol, until they shall find Sureties for the Peace; which Surety the Constable
himself may also take by an Obligation to be sealed and delivered to the Kings
use: and so was the opinion of Walmesty, Owen, and Beamond, in the Argument of
Skarretts Case, Tr. 35. El. Co. Ban. Rot. 1458. but my Lord Anderson said, that
the Constable ought to carry the parties that he should see breaking the Peace,
before a Justice to find Sureties for the Peace; and at this day this is the
most usual and safest way, vide 3. H. 4. 9. and 10. Bacons use of the Law, fol.
5. Dalton's J. P. Chap. 1. fol. 4, 5. and Chap. 118. fol. 340. Kitchins
Court Leet, etc. fol. 69. a 22. E. 4. fol. 35.

In case where the Constable had taken such an Obligation to the use of the
King, he was to send it into the Exchequer, or Chancery, from whence process
should be awarded to levy the debt, if the Peace were broken. Dalton's J. P.
Chapter 1. fol. 5. Bacons Use of the Law. 5.

The Constable in the Kings Name ought to command Affrayers, or such as are
about to make an affray, to avoid or surcease, and to depart on pain of
Imprisonment; and if the Constable being present at an Affray, does not his
best endeavor to part them, it being presented by the Enquest at the Sessions
of the Peace, such Constable may be fined for it. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 8. fol. 33.

If any person be dangerously hurt in an Affray, the Constable (or any other
person) may arrest the offender, and carry him to a Justice of Peace, who is
either to Bayl him till the next Gaol Delivery, or to commit him to the Gaol
until it be known whether the party hurt will live or dye thereof. Bro. faux.
Impr. 35, 44. 3. H. 7. 1. 10. H. 7. 20. Lamb. 136. 38. E. 3. 8. and 11. Dalt.
J. P. Chapter 8. fol. 33. Kitchen, fol. 68.

If the Affrayers will not depart, but shall draw weapons, or give any blow,
the Constable may command assistance of others for the pacifying of the Affray,
and may justify the beating or wounding of them, if they make resistance; and
if either the Constable, or any in his Assistance be slain, it is Murder in the
Affrayers, Lamb. 135. 1. H. 7. 7. 3. H. 7. 10. Co. 4. Lib. Rep. fol. 4. and Co.
9. Lib. Rep. fol. 66.

The Constable (if the Affray be great or dangerous) may in the Kings Name make
Proclamation that the Affrayers shall keep the Kings Peace, and depart, etc.
And if the Affray be in an house, and the doors shut, the Constable may break
into the house to see the peace kept, though none of the parties have taken any
hurt; and if the Affrayers fly into another man's house, the Constable upon
fresh pursuit may break into such house, and apprehend the Affrayers. Dal. J.
P. Chapter 8. fol. 34. 33. Lamb. 135. 7. E. 3. 19.

And where the Affrayers fly into another County, the Constable seeing this,
may freshly pursue, or cause them to be pursued, and to be taken there: but
then in such case the Constable can meddle no further (but as every private man
may do) to carry them before some Justice of Peace of the County where they are
taken, to cause them to find Sureties for the Peace. Crompt. 146. b. and 172.
b. Dalt. Chapter 8. fol. 34. and Chapter 118. fol. 340. Plo. 37.

But in case where the Affrayers fly into a Franchize only within the same
County where the affray was, there the Constable, seeing this, may freshly
follow and take them out of such Franchize. Crom. 146. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 8. fol.
34.

Note that after the Affray be over, the Constable without a Warrant cannot
Arrest the Affrayers, except some person be in peril of death by some hurt
there received; but before the affray begun, and during the time thereof, he
may Arrest them without Warrant: 38. H. 8. Bro. faux. Impr. 6. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
8. fol., 34. Kitchen 69. b.

Where the affray is made out of the presence or sight of the Constable, and
one comes to the Constable and tells him of it, and wishes him to go and
see the Peace kept, and the Constable will not, in such case it is held by some
that the Constable shall not be fined by the Justices at their Sessions upon
presentment thereof by the grand Enquest; but quare hereof for it is against,
his Oath if he do not see the Peace kept. Cromp. 146. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 8. fol.
33.

Note that it is properly no Affray, unless there be some weapons drawn, or
some stroke given or offered to be given, or other attempt to such purpose: for
if men shall contend only in hot words this is no affray, neither may the
Constable, for words only, lay hands upon them, unless they shall threaten to
kill, beat, or hurt one another, and then may the Constable arrest such
Persons, and carry them before a Justice of Peace, to find Sureties for the
keeping of the Peace; and yet such threatening, as aforesaid, is no Affray. Bro.
faux. Impr. 6. Cromp. 135. Dalt. J. P. chapter 8. fo. 34. and 158.

If an affray or an assault be made upon the Constable upon himself, he may not
only defend himself, but also put the parties offending in the Stocks, till
such time as he can carry them to a Justice of Peace, or to the Gaol; and if he
be not able to arrest them himhimself, he may then call others to his
assistance, who may justify to arrest the parties. 5. H. 7. 6. Bro. fx. Imp.
41. 3. H. 4. fol. 10. and Dalt. J. P. Chapter 8. fol. 35. Kitchen page 69. a.

CHAP. III.
The Constables Office about Alehouses, etc*

IF the Constables and Churchwardens upon a Warrant directed to them from one
or more Justices of the Peace, against an Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, or
Victualler, for suffering Tippling in his house, or for his measure of Ale and
Beer, do not distrein and levy the forfeitures according to the Statute; that
is 20. s. for selling less than a full Alequart of the best Ale or Beer, or two
quarts of the Small for one penny, and 10 s. for Tippling in his house; or if
there be no distress to be found, if the Officers neglect by the space of
twenty days to certify the same default of distress to the Justices, in any of
these cases the Officers forfeit forty shillings to the use of the Poor, to be
levied by distress on their Goods by Warrant made to any indifferent person,
from any one or more Justices of the Peace under their Hand and Seal, and for
want of Distress, the Delinquents by any such Justice of the Peace may be
committed to the Gaol, there to remain until they have paid the same
forfeitures; but note the distresses in all these cases must be kept six days,
and if the parties do not within that time pay the forfeitures, then the
distress is to be apprized and sold, and the overplus returned to the owners.
Wingate Abr. Stat. Title Alehouses, etc. 1. Jac. Chapter 9. 1. Car. 1. Chapter 4.
Dalton's J. P. Chap. 7. fol. 28. Young's Vade Mecum, Sect. 1, 2, 3.

And if the Constable, or other inferious Officer of the Parish, shall neglect
to execute the Justice Warrant against Townsmen, or others, for Tippling in any
Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling house, or against men for being drunk, that is 3
s. 4 d. for Tippling, and 5 s. for being drunk, to be levied by distress on the
offenders Goods, and sale thereof after six days default of payment, rendering
the overplus to the owner, and for want of distress, and not being able to pay,
the Tipler is to be set in the Stocks for the space of four hours, and the
Drunkard six hours; and if in any of these cases the Constable neglect to do
his duty, he forfeits ten shillings to the use of the Poor, to be levied upon
his Goods by distress and sale as aforesaid; these offenses are to be inquired
of within six months after they are committed: And all Constables,
Churchwardens, Headburroughs, Tythingmen, Alecunners, and Sidemen, may be
charged on their Oaths to present the said Offenses 4. Jac. Chapter 5. 21. Jac. chapter
7. Young's Vade Mecum, Sect. 4, 5. Dalt. J. P. Chap. 7. fol. 28. Wingates Abr.
Stat. Title, Alehouses, etc.

If any keep an Alehouse without License, he forfeits Twenty shillings to the
use of the Poor, which the Constable and Churchwardens (upon Warrant from the
Justice before whom the offense is proved) shall levy by distress upon the
Offenders Goods, and for default of payment within three days after the said
distress taken, then the same is to be sold for to satisfy the penalty,
rendering the overplus to the owner; and in case the Delinquent has not
wherewithal to satisfy, the said Justice may commit him to the Constable to be
openly whipped, and if the Constable neglect to execute the Warrant, or do
refuse, or do not execute upon the said Offender the punishment of whipping,
then the Justice may commit the Constable to the Gaol without Bail, there to
remain until the said offender shall be by him punished as aforesaid* or until
the Constable shall pay 40 s. to the use of the Poor of the Parish. 3. Cap.
Chap. 3. Wingate Alr. Stat. Tit. Alehouses, etc. Dalton's J. P. Chapter 7. fol. 31,
32.

If a common Innkeeper or Alehousekeeper will not lodge a Traveller, he
proferring to pay ready money for his Victuals, then in such case the Constable
may cause such Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, etc. to be Indicted at the Sessions
or Assizes, where he may be fined and imprisoned, or the party grieved may have
his Action of the case against the Innkeeper or Alehousekeeper; but note, they
are not bound to lodge or find Victuals without ready money first paid, if it be
required. Co. 9. Lib. Rep. fol. 87. b. 10. H. 7, 8. 4. H. 7. 22. 5. E. 4. 2.
Dalton's J. P. Chapter 7. fol. 28.

CHAP. IV.
The Constables Office about Arms, etc.

IF any person shall ride or go armed offensively before the Kings Justices, or
before any other the Kings Officers or Ministers during their Office, or in
Fairs or Markets or elsewhere by Night or by Day in Affray of the Kings People,
and breach of the Peace, or wear or carry any Guns, Daggers, or Pistols
charged; in such case, the Constable upon the sight hereof may seiz and take
away their Armor and other weapons, and cause them to be apprized and answered
to the King as forfeited, and carry them before a Justice to find Sureties for
the Peace. 2. E. 3. Chapter 3. 7. R. 2. 13. 20. R. 2. Chapter 1. 14. E, 3. fol. 33. Co.
3. Part. Inst. fol. 162. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 9 fol. 35. and 159.

But note the Kings Servants in his presence, Sheriffs and their Officers and
other the Kings Ministers, and such as be in their Companies assisting them in
the execution of their Office, and all others in pursuing Hue and Cry, where
any Felony or other offenses against the Peace be done, may lawfully bear
Armor or Weapons, 2. E. 3. Chap. 3. Co. 5. Lib. Rep. fol. 72. in St. John's
Case, 3. H. 7. fol. 1. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 9. fol. 36.

All High Constables, Petty Constables and other Officers within their several
Parishes are to be aiding and assisting to such persons as shall have warrant
from the Lord Lieutenants or any two of their Deputies under their Hands and
Seals, to search for and seiz all Arms in the custody and possession of any
person or persons whom the said Lieutenants or their Deputies shall judge to be
dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, and to secure the same, and give account
thereof to the said Officers; but such search is to be made in the day time
only between Sun rise and Sun set, and not otherwise, unless it be in Cities
and their Suburbs, Towns Corporate, and Market Towns, or houses within the
Bills of Mortality, in which places search may be in the night, if the Warrant
so direct; no dwelling house of any Peer of the Realm is to be searched, unless
the Warrant be from the Kings Majesty under his Sign-Manual, or in the presence
of the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the said County or
Riding, and in all places and houses aforesaid, where search is made, in case
of Resistance to enter with force; and such Arms so seized, where the
Lieutenants or their Deputies, or any two of them think, may be restored to the
owners again. 14. Car. 2. Chap. 3.

CHAP. V.
The Constables Office about Foreign Bone-Laces, Cut-work, Imbroidery, etc.

THe Constables upon Warrant to them directed from the Justices of Peace, or
chief Officers of the Cities, Towns Corporate, etc. are to search within their
respective Counties, Cities, Towns, etc. in the Shops being open Warehouses
and dwelling house of such person or persons, who shall be suspected to have
any Foreign Bone Laces, Cutworks, Imbroideries, Fringes, Bandstrings, Buttons,
or Needleworks made of Thread, Silk, or any or either of them, made in the parts
beyond the Seas, and where they find any such to seize the same. 14. Car. 2.
Chap. 13.

CHAP. VI.
The Constables Office about Irish Cattle.

IF any great Cattle, Sheep, or Swine, or any Beef, Pork, or Bacon (except such
as is for the necessary Provision of the respective Ships or Vessels in which
the same shall be brought not exposing the same or any part thereof to Sale)
shall by any wise whatsoever be imported or brought from Ireland, or any other
part beyond the Seas into the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, of Town of
Barwick upon Tweed; in such case the Constable, Tythingman, Headburrough,
Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor, or any of them within their respective
Liberties, Parishes, or places, may take and seiz the same, and keep the same
during the space of eight and forty hours, in some public or convenient place
where such seizure shall be made, within which time, if the owner or owners, or
any for him or them shall make it appear unto some Justice of Peace of the same
County where the same shall be so seized, by the Oath of two credible witnesses
that the same were not imported from Ireland, or from any other place beyond
the Seas, (except the Isle of Man) then the same, upon the Warrant of such
Justice of Peace, are to be delivered to the owner or owners without delay. 18.
Car. 2. Chapter 2.

But in default of such proof and Warrant, then the same to be forfeited, and
one half thereof to be disposed to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the
same shall be so found and seized: and the other half thereof to his or their
own use that shall so seiz the same. 18. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

Such Cattle as are Imported from the Isle of Man, (before excepted) into
England, etc. are not to exceed the number of six hundred in one year, and they
are to be of no other breed than of the breed of the Isle of Man, and all to be
landed at the Port of Chester, or some of the members thereof, and not
elsewhere, and this Act continues for seven years, and from thence to the end
of the first Session of the next Parliament. 18. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

CHAP. VII.
The Constables Office about Chimney Money.

THe High Constables and Petty Constables Duties about Chimney money by the 14.
Car. 2. Chapter 10. and the 15. Car. 2. Chapter 13. is now much altered, and particular
Officers appointed for that purpose. 16. Car. 2. Chapter 3.

All Justices of Peace, Chief Magistrates, Treasurers, and Under-Treasurers,
Constables and other his Majesty's Officers are within their several Limits and
Jurisdictions to be aiding and assisting to his Majesty's Officers appointed
for the collecting of the duty of Hearth-money. 16. Car. 2. Chapter 3.

The Officers appointed by his Majesty for the Chimney money, once every year,
being accompanied with the Constable, or Tythingman, Treasurer, or Under
Treasurer, or other public Officer of the place, and in all Parishes and
places where there are no Constables, Tythingmen or other public Officers as
aforesaid, there without any such assistance, may enter in the day time into
any dwelling or other house, Edifice, Lodgings and Chambers in any of the Inns
of Court, or Chancery, Colleges, and other Societies, to search and examine
whether there be any more Fire-hearths and Stoves in the same, then were
formerly returned or certified, and what are increased and decreased since the
last Certificate, and if they find any variance in the number returned, both
the Officer and Officers appointed by his Majesty, and the Constable or
Tythingman, or other Officer aforesaid, are to certify the same under his and
their hands to the Clerk of the Peace, etc. 16. Car. 2. Chapter 3.

If the party, after Demand made by his Majesty's Officers, or their Deputies
at the house, chamber or place where the duty shall arise or grow due, make
default or refuse to pay by the space of one hour after such demand, then the
Officer or his Deputy may at any time with the assistance of the Constable,
Tythingman, or other Officer as aforesaid, in the day time levy the said duty
and all the Arrearages thereof, by distress and sale of the Goods of the party
or parties so refusing or making default, rendering the overplus to the owners,
over and above the duty and Arrearages, and necessary charges of taking the
Distress; which Charges arenot to exceed one Moiety of the Duty and Arrearages.
16. Car. 2. Chapter 3.

Note that no Arrearages of Hearthmoney are to be distreyned for after the
space of two years next after such duty becomes due: and if any violence,
opposition, or injury be done by any person or persons to any of his Majesty's
Officers or their Deputies in the due execution of their Office, and the same
proved by Oath before any one Justice of the Peace, or chief Magistrate, etc.
such Justice or chief Magistrate, etc. if they think fit, may send the offender
to the Common Gaol for any time not exceeding one month. 16. Car. 2. Chapter 3.

The Constables are to have two pence in the pound paid them by the Collector
to whom they pay the Chimney money by them collected within their Constableries,
and are to pay nothing to the Collectors for their Aquittances, 16. Car. 2. Chapter
3.

CHAP. VIII.
The Constables Office about Conventicles.

IF any Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman, neglect to execute the Warrants
to them directed for Sequestring, Distraining and Selling the Estate or Goods
of any Seditious Conventiculer to be Transported: or neglect to distrain and
sell the Goods and Chattels of such offender for the levying of such sums of
money as shall be imposed on them for the first and second offense; in such
cases the Officer for his neglect shall forfeit five pounds, the one moiety to
the King, and the other to him that sues for the same in any of the Kings
Courts of Records. 16 Car. 2. Chapter 4.

Note, if any person be any time sued for putting in execution any of the
powers in the Act against Conventicles, such person shall and may plead the
general issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff be
Nonsuit, or a verdict pass for the Defendant, or if the Plaintiff discontinue
his Action, or if upon Demurrer Judgment be given for the Defendant, every such
Defendant shall have his or their trebble costs. 16. Car. 2.* Chapter 4.

CHAP. IX.
The Constables Office about Clothiers.

THe Constables and other Officers, upon Request to them made, are to be aiding
and assisting to the Wardens and Assistants for regulating the Trade of
Worsteds and other Stuffs, called Norwich Stuffs, made within the City of
Norwich and County of Norfolk, 14. Car. 2. Chapter 5.

The Constables also within the West Riding of the County of York, are upon
Warrant from the Justices of Peace, Masters and Wardens of the Corporation of
Clothiers within the said Riding, or any Thirteen of them to levy such Fines,
Forfeitures and Penalties as shall grow due from any Clothier, by virtue of the
Act of the 14. Car. 2. by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods rendering the
overplus to the owner upon Demand. 14. Car. 2. Chap. 31.

The makers of Cloth must pay to their Carders, Spinners, and other Laborers
their wages in ready money, and not in Wares, and shall deliver them Wool
according to due weight on pain to forfeit six pence for every default; and the
Carders, Spinners, Weavers, Fullers, Dyers, Shearmen, and oother Laborers are
to do their work faithfully in pain, to forfeit double damages to the party
grieved. 4. E. 4. Chapter 1. Fitz. J. P. 203. and Wingate's Abr. Stat, Tit.
Draperie.

And every Justice of Peace, High Constable, or Steward of Leet, out of a
Corporation, and in a Corporation every head Officer where no Master is, and
every Master shall hear and determine the complaints of every such Clothier or
Draper, as well for non-payment of the Laborers wages, as the damages
aforesaid, by due examination of the parties, for which said damages they have
power to commit the offenders to the Gaol until the party grieved shall be
satisfied. 4. E. 4. Chapter 1. Wingate's Abr. St. Tit. Draperie.

The High Constables also, or Justices of the Peace, have power to enter into
any House, Lands, or other place, to search for any Tenters, Ropes, Rings,
Headwrinches, or other Engines, for stretching of Cloth, and if they find any
to deface them; and if the owners shall afterward use them again, then these
Officers may take and sell them, and give the money to the poor. 39. El. Chapter 20.
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Draperie.

CHAP. X.
The Constables Office about the Customs.

WHere a Warrant comes from my Lord Treasurer, or any of the Barons of the
Exchequer, or chief Magistrate of a Port, to any person for the search of
uncustomed Goods, such person with the assistance of a Sheriff, Justice of
Peace or Constable, who are to be aiding and assisting upon request, may enter
into any house in the day time, where such Goods are suspected to be concealed,
and in case of Resistance, may break open such houses, and seize and secure the
same Goods so concealed in any house, 12. Car. 2. Chapter 19.

No house is to be entered by virtue of the Act aforesaid, unless it be within
the space of one month after the offense supposed to be committed; and if the
Information, whereupon any house shall come to be searched, do prove to be
false, then in such case the party injured shall recover his full damages and
costs against the Informer, by Action of Trespass to be brought against such
Informer, 12. Car. 2. Chapter 19.

And by the 14. Car. 2. such person or persons as are authorized by Writ of
Assistance, under the Seal of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, are to take a
Constable, Headborough, or other public Officer inhabiting near the place, and
in the day time are to enter and go into any House, Shop, Sellar, Warehouse,
Room, or other place, and in case of Resistance break open the Doors, Chests,
Trunks, and other package there to seiz, and from thence to bring any kind of
Goods or Merchandise whatsoever, prohibited and uncustomed, and to put and
secure the same in his Majesty's Storehouse in the Port next to such place
where the seizure shall be made. 14. Car. 2. Chap. 11.

All Officers belonging to the Admiralty, Captains, and Commanders of Ships,
Forts, Castles and Blockhouses, and all Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs,
Constables and Headburroughs, and other the Kings Majesty's Officers and
Subjects whatsoever, whom it may concern, are to be aiding and assisting to all
and every person and persons which are or shall be appointed by his Majesty to
manage his Customs: and if the Officers of the Customs, or any acting in aid
of them, shall be sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested, such persons, their
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, may plead the General Issue, and give the
several Acts relating to the Customs, or any of them in Evidence, in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Justice. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 11.

CHAP. XI.
The Constables Office about Setting Dogs, etc.

EVery Constable, or Headborough, (upon a Warrant under the hands of two or
more Justices of the Peace) has power to search the houses of persons
suspected to have any Setting Dogs, or any manner of Nets, for taking of
Feasants or Partridges, and the Dogs and Nets there found, to take, carry away,
detain, kill, destroy, and cut in pieces. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 37. fo. 90. 7. Jac.
Chapter 11.

But note, that they cannot search the houses of such as have Free Warren, or
are Lords of any Manor, or have Freehold of Forty pounds by year or more, of
some Estate of Inheritance, or Eighty pounds by the year for Term of Life, or
be worth in Goods Four hundred pounds, for these may keep Nets or Dogs to take
Feasants or Partridges in their own grounds or Precincts. 7. Jac. Chapter 11. Dalt.
J. P. Chapter 37. fo. 90.

CHAP. XII.
The Constables Office about Escapes and Arrests.

IF a Constable, or any other, which has a Prisoner under Arrest for Felony,
or Suspicion thereof, voluntarily lets or suffers the Prisoner to go where
he will at liberty (though this be breaking of Prison) yet it is Felony in the
Jailer, Constable, or him that leteth such prisoner escape, but it is no Felony
in the prisoner; but if such a prisoner shall escape by the negligence of his
Keeper, and against his will and knowledge, then it is Felony in the the
Prisoner, because a breach of Prison, and the Jailer, Constable, etc. may be
Fined by the Judges or Justices for such escape. Bro. Coron. 112. 224. 316. 454
and Bro. Escape 31. Stamford fo. 32. 44. Ass. Pl. 18. Dyer fo. 99. Dalt. J. P.
Chapter 106. fo. 272.

If the Constable, or other Officer, shall voluntarily suffer a Thief, being in
his custody, to go into the water and drown himself, this Escape is Felony in
the Constable, and the drowning makes the Theif Felo de se; but if the Thief
shall suddenly (without the assent of the Constable) kill, hang, or drown
himself, this is then but a negligent Escape in the Constable, and Fineable as
aforesaid. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 106. fo. 272.

The voluntary letting a Felon to escape before he be arrested for the felony
is no Felony in the party that suffers him to escape; but if the Constable
suffer one to escape when he knows he has committed a Felony; in such case he
may be indicted and fined for suffering the escape; and quaere if it do not
make him Accessory to the Felony. 9. H. 4. 1. Stam. 32. Bro. Escape. 43. Dalt.
J. P. Chapter 106. fo. 272.

If a man be Arrested for suspicion of Felony by the Constable, or other
person, and after they shall have Intelligence that there is no such Felony
committed, here they may set the party Arrested at Liberty again, and they
shall not be charged with the Escape; for there can be no Felon, where there is
no Felony committed. 13. H. 7. 7. and Cromp 40. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 106. fo. 275.

But if a Felony be committed in Deed, and one is Arrested for the same, or for
Suspicion thereof; though the Constable or other person that made the Arrest,
shall after have certain Intelligence and knowledge that the Party Arrested is
not guilty of the offense, yet they may not set the party at liberty, for he
must not now be delivered by any man's discretion, but by due course of Law;
otherwise it will prove a voluntary Escape, and so Felony, or at least Finable.
Cromp. 40. 44. Ass, 12. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 106. fo. 275.

In all cases of misdemeanour, where a private person has Authority to Arrest
any for any offense, it is requisite for him to carry and deliver the Prisoner
to the Constable, or some other Officer. vide 20. E. 4. 6. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 118.
fo. 338.

But in case where a Justice of Peace, Constable or other Officer comes to a
Felon to arrest and take him, and he perceiving, flies into another County
before he can be taken, in such case the Felon shall be carried before some
Justice of Peace of that County where he is taken, and must be committed to the
Gaol of that County, although the Felony were committed in another County. Bro.
faux. Impr. 25. 11. E. 4. fo. 5. a. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 118. fo. 340.

If a man be Arrested for Felony, and the Constable carry him to the Gaol, and
the Jailer will not receive him, then the Constable must bring him back to the
Town where he was taken, and that Town shall be charged with the keeping of him
until the next Gaol Delivery, by the opinion of the Book. 10. H. 4. or the
Constable may in such case keep the Prisoner in his own house, as it has been
held by some. See 11. E. 4. Bro. faux. Impr. 25. in fine. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 118.
fol. 340, 341.

But in such case where the Jailer refuses to receive a Prisoner as above said,
or takes any thing for receiving him, upon Information thereof to the Justices
of the Gaol Delivery, they will punish him for his offense. 4. E. 3. C. 10.
Poulton Prison 6. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 118. fo. 341.

The Constable, or other Officer, that shall Imprison in the Stocks any Felon,
may lock the Stocks, and if need be, may also put Irons on the Prisoner, and
when he conveyeth him to the Gaol, or to the Justice, he may pinion him, or
otherwise make him sure, so that he cannot escape. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 118. fol.
342.

CHAP. XIII.
The Constables Office about Excise.

THose Officers under the Commissioners of Excise, called Gagers, are to have
the Constable along with them, when they enter by night into the Houses of any
Brewer, Innkeeper, Victualler, etc. to Gage their Coppers, Fats, or Vessels, or
to take an Account of their Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry, Syder, Strong Water,
Metheglin, Mead, Coffee, Chockolet, Sherbet or Tea, brewed, made or distilled
in the said Houses, 12. Car. 2. Chapter 23, 24.

Such persons as shall be convicted before the Justices of Peace, or
Commissioners of Excise, of any offense and Forfeiture within the Acts for
Excise; The Constables, upon Warrant to them directed from the Justices of
Peace, are to levy the penalties upon the goods of the offenders by distress
and sale thereof, rendering the overplus to the owners, and for want of
distress, they are to carry the party to the Gaol, there to remain till
satisfaction be made. 12. Car. 2. Chapter 23, 24.

The Constables are also upon Warrant to them directed to Summon all
Alehousekeepers, etc. to appear before the Commissioners of Excise at such days
and places as shall be appointed in the said Warrants from time to time.

CHAP. XIV.
The Constables Office about Fish.

THe Constables and Churchwardens, by Warrant from any one or more Justices of
the Peace (where any offense is committed in destroying the spawn and breed of
Fish, along the Sea-shoar, or in any Haven or Creek, or within five miles of
the mouth of any Haven or Creek, by Fishing with Nets of less Mesh then three
Inches and an half between knot and knot) are to levy the penalty by distress
and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the overplus to the owners; the
penalty is Ten shillings and forfeiture of their Nets. 3. Jac. C. 12. Wingate's
Abr. Stat. Tit. Fish. Fishers and Fishing.

If any Ling, Herring, Codd, or Pilchard, Fresh or Salt, dried or bloated, or
any Salmons, Eels or Congers, taken by Foreiners, Aliens to the Kingdom of
England, shall be imported, uttered, sold, or exposed to sale in this Kingdom,
in such case the Constable, Headborough, etc. or any other person may take and
seize the same, and one half thereof must go to the use of the Poor of the
Parish where the same is so found and seized, and the other half to the use of
the party that seizes the same. 18. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

CHAP. XV.
The Constables Office about Forcible Entries, etc.

IF a Constable, or any private person of the same County do refuse to attend
and assist the Justices of Peace, upon request to remove a Force, or to convey
the parties to the Gaol, he may be imprisoned for his neglect, and make Fine to
the King. 15. R. 2. Chapter 2. Dalton's J. P. Chapter 22. fo. 57.

CHAP. XVI.
The Constables Office about Hedgebreakers, etc.

ALl such lewd persons as are convicted before a Justice of Peace for taking
away any Corn growing, Robbing of Orchards, breaking Hedges, etc. and their
procurers and receivers knowing the same, i^ they cannon* give the Parties
grieved such satisfaction as the Justice shall think fit, then the Justice may
commit him to the Constable to be whipped for the first offense, and the like
pain for the second offense. And if the Constable, or other inferior Officer,
do not by himself, or some other see the same be done accordingly, then the
Justice may commit such Officer to the Gaol, there to remain without Bail,
until the said offender be by the said Constable, or some other by his
procurement, whipped as aforesaid, and this is by the 43. El. Chapter 7.

But now by the 15. Car. 2. every Constable, Headborough, or other person in
every County, City, Town-Corporate, or other place, where they shall be,
Officers and Inhabitants, have power to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended
such persons as they suspect, for having or carrying, or any wise conveying any
Burden or Bundles of any kind of Wood, Underwood, Poles, or young Trees, or
Bark or Bast of any Trees, or any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rales, or
Hedgwood, Broom or Furze; and any Constable, Headborough, etc. by Warrant under
the hand and Seal of one Justice, etc. may enter into the Houses, Outhouses,
Yards, Gardens or other places belonging to the Houses of such persons as they
shall suspect to have any Woods, underwoods, etc. and wheresoever they shall
find any, such to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended the person suspected
for cutting the same, and those also in whose houses or other places belonging
to them any such Wood, Underwood, etc. shall be found to carry before some
Justice of Peace of the County, City, etc. and if the party cannot give a good
account to the Justice how he came by the same Wood, etc. by the consent of the
owner, such as to satisfy the Justice, or shall not within such time as the
Justice appoints produce the party of whom he bought it, or some other credible
witness to depose upon Oath such sale of the said Wood, etc. then such person
shall be deemed convicted of the cutting and spoiling Wood, etc. within the
meaning of the Statute of 43. Eliz. aforesaid; and for the first offense, if
they do not give the owner such satisfaction, and within such time as the
Justice shall appoint, and pay over and above down presently to the use of the
Poor of the place where the offense is committed such a sum of money as the
Justice shall appoint, not exceeding ten shillings, then the Justice may commit
the party offending to the House of Correction for so long time, not exceeding
one Month, as he shall think meet, or otherwise to be whipped by the Constable
or other Officer; and if such person offend again, and be convicted as before,
then he must be sent to the House of Correction for one month, and there held
to hard labor; and if he offend the third time, and be convicted, then he must
be used as an incorrigible Rogue. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

And if any person buy any burdens of Wood, Poles, Sticks, Underwood, etc. of
any who may justly be suspected to have stolen, or unlawfully come by the same;
then upon complaint to a Justice of Peace, Head Officer, etc. if upon
examination by Oath, etc. he find that the same were bought of such person as
aforesaid, then the Justice may order the party that bought the same to pay the
Trebble value of the Wood, etc. to the party from whom they were stolen or
unlawfully taken; and in default of present payment, the Justice may issue out
his Warrant to the Constable to levy the same by distress and sale of the
offenders Goods, rendering the overplus to the owner, and for lack of such
distress then to commit the party to the Gaol at his own charge, there to
remain one month without Bayl. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

Note, that none is to be punished by this Law who has been punished by a
former Law for the same offense, nor is any to be questioned for any offense
within this Statute, unless it be within six weeks after the offense committed.
15. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

CHAP. XVII.
The Constables Office about Highways.

THe Churchwardens and Constables, or Tythingmen of every Parish are upon the
Monday or Tuesday in Easter week (afternotice given publicly in the Church the
Sabbath day before) after Morning Prayer ended, with the advice and consent of
the major part of the Parish then present, to choose two or more of the
sufficient Inhabitants of the place, to be Surveyors or Supra-visors for their
Highways for the next year, and give notice thereof to the parties chosen in
writing, under pain of five pounds to be forfeited by the same Constable,
Churchwardens and Parish by the Stat. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6. which Statute is to
continue till the end of the first Sessions of the next Parliament, or they may
be punished by Fine or Amerciament in the Quarter Sessions, by the discretion
of the Justices. 2. 3. P. and M. Chapter 8.

The Constables and Churchwardens are then also to appoint Six days betwixt
that and the Four and Twentieth day of June for the amendment of the Highways,
and to give public notice thereof in the Church the next Sunday after. 2. and
3. P. and M. Chapter 8. and 5. Eliz. Chapter 13.

Stewards in Leets have power to enquire after the breach of the Act of the 2.
and 3. P. and M. about Highways, and to set Fines upon such as make default at
their discretion, and shall within six weeks after Michaelmas deliver Indented
Estreats thereof under their Hands and Seals, viz. one part thereof to the
Bayliffe or High Constable of the Liberty, and the other to the Constable and
Churchwardens of the Parish where the default was made, 2. and 3. P. and M. Chapter
8.

And in default of presentment thereof in Leets, the Justices of Peace in the
Sessions shall enquire thereof, and set such Fines as they or two of them quor.
unus, shall think fit; whereof the Clerk of the Peace shall deliver Indented
Estreats under his Hand and Seal, within six weeks of Michaelmas, in like sort
as aforesaid. 2. 3. P. and M. Chapter 8.

And these Estreats of the Stewards of Leets, or Clerk of the Peace, shall be a
sufficient Warrant for the Bailiff or chief Constable to levy the said Fines by
way of Distress; and if no Distress can be found, or the party do not pay the
Fine within Twenty days after lawful demand thereof he or they shall* forfeit
double so much; all which Fines and Forfeitures shall be bestowed by the
Constable and Churchwardens on the Highways in the same Parish. 2. 3. P. and
M. Chapter 8. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 71.

And the Bayliffe or High Constable is yearly, between the first of March and
last of April, to render unto the Constable and Churchwardens to whom the other
part of the Estreate was delivered, a true Account of the Moneys received by
them, in pain of Forty shillings, and the said Constables and Churchwardens
have power to call the Bayliffe or High Constable before two Justices of the
Peace ( Quor. un.) to pass the Account, who have power to commit such Bailiff
or High Constable until they have satisfied all the Arrearages by them
received. 2, 3. P. and M. Chap. 8. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26 fo. 70.

And upon passing such Account, every Bailiff or High Constable shall have
allowed Eight pence for their pains for every pound collected, and Twelve pence
for the Fee for the Estreate delivered. 2, 3. P. and M. Chapter 8. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
26. fo. 70.

Any two Justices of Peace, upon complaint to them made by the succeeding
Constables and Churchwardens, may call before them the precedent Constables and
Churwardens, and may take their Accounts, and compel them, as aforesaid, to pay
in all Arrearages in their hands. 2, 3. P. and M. Chapter 8. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26.
fo. 71.

All Fines and Forfeitures assessed in the Sessions upon the Stat. 5. El. about
Highways, must be Estreated by the Clerk of the Peace, and must be levied,
accounted, and employed as is appointed by the 2, 3. P. and M. Chapter 8. 5. Eliz.
Chapter 13.

The Surveyers upon Warrant from Two Justices of Peace are to levy by distress
and sale of Goods, the Forfeitures of all such persons as offend against the
18. Eliz. 10. in not Scowring their Ditches, etc. and if they neglect by the
space of a year after the offense committed to levy the Forfeiture: Then the
Justices may send to the Constable and Churchwardens to levy the same. 18.
Eliz. Chapter 10.

The Constables or other Officers by Warrant from any of his Majesty's Justices
of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, or Justices of the Peace to them
directed, are to levy by Distress and Sale of the offenders Goods and Chattels,
all such penalties (rendering the overplus to the owner) as shall be forfeited
by any person upon the Act of the 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2. for repairing the Highways
and Sewers, and for paving and keeping clean the Streets in and about the
Cities of London and Westminster, etc. and for default of distress or
non-payment of the said penalties within six days after demand thereof, or
notice in writing left at the house or dwelling place of the offender, by the
said Constable or other Officer; the said Offender not being a Peer of the
Realm, may be committed to the Common Gaol of the said County or City
respectively, by the Warrant of any such Justice under his Hand and Seal, there
to remain without Bayl or Mainprize until payment 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Constables Office about Stoned Horses.

NOne ought to put to feed upon Forests or Commons (except they be Commons
where Mares are not usually kept) any Stoned Horse, being above Two years old,
and not Fifteen hands high from the lower part of the hoof to the upper part of
the wither (every hand containing four inches Standard measure) in pain to
forfeit the same Horse. 32. H. 8. Chapter 13.

If any Stoned Horse of lesser Stature be put to feed in any such Common
(unless it be in the Fen-grounds of the Isle of Ely, and of the Counties of
Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk, or Suffolk; where they
need be but Thirteen hands high) any man may seize them to his own own use, so
that first by the assistance of the Keeper of the ground, or Constable,
Bailiff, Headborough, or other such Officer of the Parish adjoining, such Horse
be brought to the next Pound, and there by such Officer, in the presence of
three other sufficient men, he be measured and found lower than the Statute.
32. H. 8. Chapter 13. 8. Eliz. Chapter 8. Wingate Abr. St. Tit. Horses.

Those that refuse to Measure, or to be present at Measuring do forfeit Fotty
shillings a piece for every such default, to be divided between the King and
the Prosecutor; but note that an Horse that makes an Escape into such Common,
shall not be questioned, so that he stay not above Four days after notice
thereof at the owners House, or in his Parish Church. 32. H. 8. Chapter 13.

Forests and Common grounds must be driven yearly at Michaelmas, or within
Fifteen days after, by the Keepers, Constables, or other Officers abovesaid, in
pain of Forty shillings; and they have power to drive them at any other time of
the year at their pleasure, and such likewise have the owners of the ground.
And if upon the drift any unlikely Tits shall he found, they may be killed. 32.
H. 8. Chapter 13. Wingate Abr. Stat. Tit. Horses.

Note that this Act of the 32. H. 8. Chapter 13. is not to extend to the County of
Cornwall. 21. Jac. Ch, 28.

CHAP. XIX.
The Constables Office about Hue and Cry.

THe Constables and Officers of every Town, to which Hue and Cry shall come,
ought to search in all suspected houses and places within their Limits, and as
well the Officers as all other persons which shall pursue the Hue and Cry may
attach and stay all such persons, as in their search and pursuit they shall
find to be suspicious, and thereupon shall carry them before some Justice of
Peace of the County where they are taken to be examined, where they were at the
time of the Felony committed; and if any Default be in the Officers, they may
be fined by the Justices for their Neglect. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 28. fo. 75.

In case of a Robbery where Damages are recovered against one or some few
Inhabitants of the Hundred, and the rest refuse to contribute thereunto, in
such case two Justices of the Peace ( Quor. un.) dwelling within or near the
Hundred, may for the levying thereof set a Tax upon every Parish within that
Hundred; according to which the Constables and Headboroughs of every Town must
Tax the particular Inhabitants within their Constableries, and then levy the
money upon such as refuse by Distress and Sale of their Goods, restoring them
the overplus, and after the money is gathered, they are to deliver the same to
the Justices, or some of them that made the Rate within ten days. 27. Eliz. Chapter
13. Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Robbery. Poult. Hue and Cry. 6. Dalton's J. P.
Chapter 48. fo. 132.

The Hundred where fresh suit shall cease, shall answer half the Damages to the
Hundred where the Felony was committed, to be recovered in any Court at
Westminster, in the Name of the Clerk of the Peace of the County where the
Felony was committed, and here the death or change of the Clerk of the Peace,
shall not abate the Suit; to be taxed and levied as aforefaid. (...). Eliz. Chapter
13. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Robbery.

Note, that the Hundred is not chargeable for the Robbery, when any one of the
Malefactors shall be apprehended, or when the Action is not prosecuted within
one year after the Robbery committed; and note also that the Hue and Cry shall
not be deemed Legal, unless the pursuit be both by Horse and Foot. Wingate's
Stat. Tit. Robbery. ^rac. Li. 3. fo. 121. vide Co. 7. Lib. fo. 6, 7. 23. Eliz.
Dyer fo. 370. Dalt. J. P. fo. 133.

He that goes not at the command of the Sheriff or Constable at the cry of the
County, that is, upon Hue and Cry to arrest Felons after Attainder shall be
grievously fined and imprisoned. West. 1. Chapter 9. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 172. 2.
H. 7. 15* b. 5. H. 7. 5. a.

CHAP. XX.
The Constables Office about Laborers and Servants.

THe Constable in the time of Hay and Corn-Harvest, upon the request to him
made by any man who wants Laborers, for the avoiding of the loss of Cor^,
Grain, and Hay, may cause all such Artificers, as he shall see meet to labor,
to serve by the day for Mowing, Reaping, or otherwise, for the getting in of
Corn or Hay abroad, according as they see them fit and able to perform; and if
such persons shall refuse to work, after they are requested thereunto by the
Constable, the Constable may then set them in the Stocks by the space of two
days and one night; and if the Constable neglect to perform his Office, ^e
forfeits 40. shillings. 5. Eliz. Chapter 14. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Laborers.

And it is also provided by the said 5. Eliz. that no person retained in
Husbandry, or in any Arts appointed by that Statute, shall depart after the
time of such Retainer expired, out of the City, Town, or Parish where he last
served, to serve in another without a Testimonial, to wit, (in a Town
Corporate, under the Hand^ and Seals of the Magistrate and two House-holders
there, and in the Country under the hands and Seals of the Constable or
Constables, and Two Householders of the Town or Parish where he last served)
which Testimonial must be Registered by the Minister, for which he is to have
Two pence, and then to be delivered to the Party. 5. Eliz. Chapter 4. Wingate's
St^t. Tit: Laborers.

But these Testimonials are now very seldom used, although the Statute be very
penal in the same; for the Master that retains a Servant without such a
Testimonial, forfeits five pounds, being thereof convicted upon Indictment
taken in the Sessions of the Peace, and every Servant which shows not such a
Testimonial to the chief Officer in a Corporation, or to the Constable or such
other Officer, Minister or Churchwardens of the place where he is to dwell, may
be imprisoned till he procure one, and if he produce not one within one and
Twenty days, next after the first day of his Imprisonment, or if he shall show
a false or counterfeit one, then he is o be whipped and used as a Vagabond.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 31. fo. 86. 5. Eliz. Chapter 4.

The Form of a Testimonial is after this manner:
Memorandum that A. B. Servant to C. D. of Kirk-Leaventon, in the County of
York, Husbandman, is Licenced to depart from his said Master, and is at his
Liberty to serve elsewhere, according to the Statute in that Case made and
provided. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and Seals this
Tenth day of November, in the 19th year of the Reign of our most gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second; Annoque Domini 1667.

Jo. Mettcalf Constable of Kirk-Leaventon. Householders there. T. H. G. B.

If it be one that lives with a woman, then say, is Licenced to depart from his
Mistres or Dame as she is; and if his Master be not an Husbandman, but a
Tailor, Smith, Joyner, or some other Trade, then name him accordingly in the
Testimonial*

CHAP. XXI.
The Constables Office about Malt-making.

THe Constables and Bailiffs of any Town, where any deceitful Malt shall be
made, or mingled to be sold contrary to the Stat. 2. E. 6. may from time to
time view and search all such Malt as shall be made, or put to sale within any
of their Towns, being evil made, or mingled with evil Malt, contrary to the
Statute; then the said Constable or Bailiff, so finding any such deceitful
Malt, with advice of any one Justice of Peace, may cause the same to be sold to
such persons, and at such reasonable prizes as to the discretion of the same
Justice shall seem expedient. 2. E. 6. Chapter 10. 21. Jac. Chapter 28. 3. Car. 1. Chapter
4 Dalt. J. P. Chapter 33. fo. 86, 87.

Now these deceitful Malts are of three sorts, to wit, such as are not well
made, and that is where Barley Malt has not in the making thereof in the Fat,
Floor, ^^eeping and drying thereof, Three weeks at the least, except it be in
the Months of June, July, and August, and in those Months it must have 17.
days; for under such times it cannot be well made nor wholesome. 2. E. 6. Chapter
10. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 33. fo. 87.

Secondly, No Malt ought to be put to sale, unless before the sale thereof, by
treading, rubbing, and fanning it, they take out of every Quarter half a peck
of dust, or more, on pain to forfeit 20. pence for every Quarter otherwise
sold, to be divided between the King and the Prosecutor. 2. E. 6. 10.

And Thirdly, If any Malts be put to sale, which are not well made, as
aforesaid, according to the limited time, or which are made of Mow-burnt or
Spired Barley, or mixed of good and bad together, they forfeit for every Quarter
so put to sale Two shillings to be divided between the King and the Prosecutor,
as aforesaid. 2 E. 6. Chapter 10. and Wingate's Stat. Tit. Malt.

Note, That none shall be punished by this Act, who only make the Malt for
their own provision, nor for the penalties of 20. pence, or 2. shillings per
quarter, unless the Action be prosecuted within one year. Wingate Stat. Tit.
Malt. 2. E. 6. Chapter 10. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 33 fo. 87.

CHAP. XXII.
The Constables Office about the Militia^*

THe Constables by Warrant to that purpose, under the Hand and Seal of the Lord
Lieutenant, or any three or more of the Deputy Lieutenants, are to Levy such
Sums, Forfeitures, Penalties and Payments, as shall be charged upon any person,
or persons within their several Constableries, for the furnishing of Arms,
Horse, or Foot, or payment of Soldiers, etc. according to the Acts for the
Militia. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 3. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 4.

And where sufficient Distress cannot be had, then the Lord Lieutenants, or
their Deputies, by like Warrant to the Constable, may commit such Offender to
Prison until he shall make satisfaction according to the said Forfeiture,
Payment, or Penalty. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 4.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Constables Office about Moss Troopers.

THe Constables and other Officers within the Counties of Northumberland and
Cumberland, upon Warrant from the Justices of the Peace are to Levy by Distress
and Sale of the Parties Goods (rendering the overplus to the owners) all such
sums as shall be charged upon any person within their several Constableries, by
the Justices at their Sessions, for the safeguard of the Counties against the
Injury, Theft, and Rapine of Moss-Troopers; and the Justices also may examine
any complaint against the Constables or other Officers that shall neglect, or
refuse, or fail to give obedience to the Act, or do any thing in disturbance
thereof, and bind over such person to the Quarter Sessions to be proceeded
against according to Justice. 14 Car. 2. Chapter 22.

This Act took force from Michaelmas 1662. and was to continue five years, and
now by the Stat. 18. Car. 2. it is continued for seven years longer, which is
till Michaelmas, 1674. 18. Car. 2. Chapter 3.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Constables Office about the Disturbing of Ministers.

IF any shall purposely, without Authority, disturb a Preacher lawfully
licenced in his Preaching of the Word, Praying, or Administering of the
Sacraments, either by their talking, laughing, humming, or the like, any one of
the Constables or Churchwardens of the place may of his own Authority presently
apprehend the party, and carry him before a Justice of Peace of the same
County, who upon due accusation may, if he think fit, commit him to safe
custody, and within six days after, taking with him another Justice of the
Peace, they may examine the matter; and if by proof of Two Witnesses they find
it true, they must commit him to the Common Gaol, there to remain for Three
Months, and from thence to the next Quarter Sessions, at which upon the parties
Recon^iliation, and entering into Bond, for the good behavior for one whole
year (at the discretion of the Justices he may be Released) but if he persist
still in his obstinacy, he must remain in P^ison still without Bayl, until he
shall reconcile, and be penitent for his offense. 1. Mar. Sess. 3. Chapter 3.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Sacraments. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 41. fo. 103.

He that rescues an offender in this kind, shall suffer like Imprisonment, and
forfeit five pounds besides, and the Inhabitants that suffer such an offender
to escape, being presented before the Justices of Peace in the Sessions within
the County, or Corporation where the escape was made, do also forfeit Five
pounds. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Sacraments. ^. M. Sess. 2. Chapter 3.

This Act does not restrain the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Law, howbeit
none are to be punished twice for one offense; Quaere of this Statute, for some
think it is Repealed by the 1. El. Chapter 2. vide Lamb. 199. Cromp. 14. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 41. fo 103, 104.

CHAP. XXV.
The Constables Office about the Peace.

THe Constable may do what he can to keep the Peace, but he cannnot take Surety
of the Peace at the Request of any man. Cromp. 6. 12. H. 7. fo. 18. a.

Note, That the breach of the Peace is said to be any injurious force or
violence used against the person of another, his Goods, Lands, or other
Possessions, whether it be threatening words or furious gestures, or force of
the body, or any other force used in terrorem. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 3. fo. 9.

The Constable, or other Officer, before he Arrest the party upon a Warrant for
the Peace, ought first to acquaint him with the matters, and withal, to require
or charge the party in the Kings Name, to go along with him before the Justice,
to find and put in Sureties according to the Warrant; and if the party refuse
either to go before the Justice, or to find Sureties; then the Officer by
virtue of the said Warrant may and ought fothwith Arrest him, and convey him to
the Gaol without carrying him to any Justice, and there the party is to remain
until he shall voluntarily offer and find Sureties; and then such Officer must
be at the next Sessions of the Peace, there to deliver his said Warrant in, and
to certify all that he has done thereupon. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 69. fo. 166. 5. E.
4. 13. Lamb. 92. Bro. fx. Imp. 18. Cromp. 235.

But if the party yield to go and find Sureties, then the Officer may not
absolutely Arrest him, but yet the Officer is not bound to go up and down with
the party to find Sureties, but may keep him till he can procure Sureties to
come to him; and if afterward the party shall make any resistance, or shall
offer to go his way, then the Officer may Arrest him and carry him to the Gaol,
or else imprison him in the Stocks until he can provide aid to carry him to the
Gaol. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 69. fo. 166.

If a Constable, or other Officer, having a Warrant from a Justice of Peace to
Arrest a man, to find Sureties for the Peace, do afterward receive a
Supersedeas out of the Chancery, etc. or from another Justice of the Peace of
the same County, to discharge the same Surety of the Peace, and yet
nevertheless the Officer will urge the party to find Sureties by virtue of the
Warrant, the party may refuse to give it, and if he be Arrested or Imprisoned
for such Refusal, he may have his Action of false Imprisonment against such
Officer; for such Supersedeas is a Discharge of the former Precept or Warrant.
Lamb. 101. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 69. fo. 168.

If any shall abuse a Constable in doing of hi^ Office, the Constable may have
the party bound to his good behavior for it. Fitz. Bar. 202. Cromp. 135.

If a Constable be informed that a man and a woman be in Adultery or
Fornication together, or that a Man and a Woman of evil Report are gone to a
suspected house together in the Night, the Constable may take company with him,
and if he find them so, he may carry them before a Justice of Peace, to find
Sureties for the good behavior. 13. H. 7. 10. Bro. Travers. 432. Dalt. J. P.
Chapter 75. fo. 189.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Constables Office about Physicians.

THe Constables and other Officers in London, and within seven miles round,
are to be aiding and assisting to the President of the Colle^^e of Physicians,
and all persons authorized by the said College for the due execution of the
Laws and Statutes belonging to the said College, upon pain of (...) into
contempt to the King. 1. M. Par. 1. Sess. 2. Chapter 9. Wingate's Stat. Tit.
Physicians.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Constables Office about the Plague.

IF any person Infected, or being or dwelling in an house infected with the
Plague, shall be by the Constable commanded to keep his house, and
notwithstanding shall wilfully go abroad and converse in company, having any
infectious Sore on him, it is Felony; and if such person shall not have such
Sore about him, yet for his offense he shall be punished as a Vagabond, by the
appointment of any one Justice of the Peace, and further shall be bound to his
good behavior for one whole year, Wingate's Stat. Tit. Plague 1: Jac. Chapter 31.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 39. fo. 91.

The Justices of Peace, or any one of them, and other Head Officers in
Corporate Towns, within their several limits, may appoint Searchers, Watchmen,
Examiners, Keepers, and Buriers for the persons and places infected; and if any
person infected, or dwelling and being in an house infected, shall contrary to
the commandment or appointment of the Justice of Peace, or Constable, etc.
wilfully attempt to go abroad, or to resist such their Keepers or Watchmen,
then may such Watchmen with violence force them to keep their houses, and if
any hurt happen thereupon, the Watchmen shall not be impeached therefore. 1.
Jac. Chapter 31. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 39. fo. 91. Cromp. 122. b. Wingate's Stat. Tit
Plague.

If the Constable or other Officer wilfully neglect to levy the money (by
Warrant from two Justices of Peace, upon the Statute for Relief of any Town
infected with the Plague) by Distress and sale of the Goods of such persons as
refuse or neglect to pay; then they forfeit for every such offense Ten
shillings to be employed to the said Charitable use. Wingate's Stat. Tit.
Plague. 1. Jac. C. 31. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 39. fo. 91.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Constables Office about conveying Prisoners to the Gaol.

AN Offender which is to be conveyed to the Gaol, if he be able, must bear all
charges, both of himself and of those that guard him; and if he refuse to
defray and bear the charges, or shall not at the time of commitment pay or bear
the same, then upon a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, the Constable of the
Township, where the Offender has any Goods (being within the same County) may
sell so many of the parties Goods as in the discretion of the Justice shall be
thought sufficient to satisfy the said charges, the Apprizement to be made by
Four Inhabitants of the Parish where such Goods be, and the overplus to be
rendered to the owner. 3. Jac. Chapter 10. Dalt. Chapter 43. fo. 104. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Prison.

And if the offender have no Goods to satisfy the charges, then the charge
must be born by the Town where the offender was taken, which must be laid on by
way of Tax by the Constable, Churchwardens, and two or three other honest
Inhabitants, and where there are no such Officers, then four of the principal
Inhabitants of the Parish must lay on the Tax, which being allowed under the
hand of a Justice of Peace, every Inhabitant must pay their proportion
according to the Tax; and if any refuse to pay the Constable, Tythingman, or
other Officer, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, may levy the same by
Distress (and after Apprisement by four Inhabitants there) may sell the same,
rendering the overplus to the party so refusing. 3. Jac. Chapter 10. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Prison.

Here if the Constable, or other Officer, that distrains, be sued, he shall
plead Justification, and upon verdict for, or Nonsuit of the Plaintiff, he
shall recover trebble Damages, besides Costs of Suit. 3. Jac. Chapter 10.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Constables Office about Purveyance.

THe Constables duty about Purveyance, upon the Stat. 36. E. 3. Chapter 2. 5. E. 3.
Chapter 2. 20. H. 6. Chapter 8. 23. H. 6. Chapter 14. and 2, 3. P. and M. Chapter 6. is now of
little or no use; for it is enacted by the 12. Car. 2. That from henceforth no
Moneys, or other things shall be taken, rated or levied for any Provision,
Carriages, or Purveyance for the King, hi^ Heirs, etc. or for the King, Queen,
o^ any of their Children, for the time being, or any of his Household, of any
Timber, Fuel, Cattle, Corn, Grane Malt, Hay, Straw, Victuals, Cart, o^
Carriage, Oxen, Horses, Ploughs, Wains or other Carriages, or any other thin^
from any Subject, without the full an^ free consent of the owner first obtaine^
without menace or inforcement; bu^ note, that this aforesaid clause being found
to be two prejudicial to the King, if the Subjects might not be forced at
reasonable prizes to furnish the King with Carriages, it is therefore altered
by the Stat. of the 13. Car. 2. Chapter 8. and is thus enacted.

That the Clerk or Chief Officer of the King^ Carriages three days before his
Majesty's Arrival, by Warrant from the Greencloth, shall give notice in writing
to two Justices of the Peace adjoining to the place where his Majesty is to
come, to provide such a number of Carts and Carriages as the said Officer shall
need for the work, and to express the time and place where the said Carts and
Carriages are to attend: and then these Justices are to require the Country to
provide the number of Carts and Carriages of four able Horses, or four Oxen and
two Horses a piece, at six pence a mile for every mile they go laden, to be
paid them in hand at the place of lading; and no carriage to be enforced to
travel above one days Journey, from the place where they receive their Lading;
and if any refuse, or shall not be ready at the time and place, not having good
cause to show to the contrary, the said Justices upon due proof thereof and
conviction of the offense by the Oath of two Witnesses, or the Oath of the
Constable, or other Officer, may (by their Warrant) cause to be levied of the
Goods of the offender forty shillings by distress and sale, rendering the
overplus to the owner. 13. Car. 2. Chapter 8.

If any Justice of Peace, Officer, or Constable, shall take any Gift or Reward
to spare any person from making such Carriage, or shall impress more carriages
then shall be directed from the Greencloth, upon due proof and conviction
thereof, the parties offending shall forfeit ten pounds to be recovered by any
person by Action of Debt in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record: And if any
person shall take upon him to Impresse Horses, Oxen, Car^^ and Carriages, other
then the persons aforesaid, upon conviction of the offense he shall suffer the
punishment contained in the 12. Car. 2. Chapter 24. which see in the ensuing case
of Pre-emption* vide 13. Car. 2. Chapter 8.

No Pre-emption shall be allowed to the King his Heirs or Successors, no^ to
the Queen, or any of the Children of the Royal Family, in Market, or out of
Market; but it is now lawful for all Subjects to dispose of their goods as they
please, and if any person shall make any Purveyance, or Impress any Carriages
(otherwise than as is appointed by the 13. Car. 2. Chapter 8. in the two
before-going Cases by order of the Green cloth) or other things by color of
any Authority of Purveyance for the King, etc. contrary the 12. Car. 2. Chapter 24.
then two or one Justice of Peace next adjoining, and the Constable of the place
where such offense shall happen, at the request of the party grieved, shall
commit the party offending to the Gaol, until the next Sessions, there to be
Indicted and proceeded against for the same, and the party grieved shall have
his Action against the offender, and therein shall recover trebble damages and
trebble costs, 12. Car. 2. Chapter 24.

Two or more Justices of the Peace by Warrant from the Lord High Admiral of
England, or two or more of the Principal Officers, or Commissioners of the
Navy, or of the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance, or the Lieutenant of his
Ordnance, are to provide Carriages with Horses and Oxen out of the Country, not
being above 12. miles distant from the place of lading, the owners of which
Carriages, or their Servants, are to receive for every load of timber 12. pence
per mile, and for every Tun of other Commodities 8. pence per mile; and such
persons as refuse or neglect to make their appearance, then upon Oath by the
Constable, or two credible Witnesses before the Justices, etc. such person
refusing, or neglecting, forfeits Twenty shillings to be levied by Distress and
Sale of his Goods and Chattels by Warrant from the said Justices, Mayor, or
other chief Officer, or from the principal Officers or Commissioners of his
Majesty's Navy, or Master or Lieutenant of his Majesty's Ordnance,
respectively, rendering the overplus, if there be any (the charge of
Distraining being first deducted) to the owner. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 20.

Note, That no Horses, Oxen, Cart, Wain, or other Land carriage, shall be
enforced to travel more da^s Journey from the place where they receive their
Lading, or be compelled to continue longer in the employment, than shall be
appointed by the order of the said Justices of Peace, and that ready money be
made to the parties in hand at the place of Lading, according to the Rates
aforesaid. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 20.

If the Justices, Mayor, chief Officer, Constable, or any person appointed,
shall take any Gift or Reward to spare any, or maliciously charge or grieve any
person through Envy, etc. they forfeit Ten pounds, to be recovered in any of
his Majesty's Courts of Record. And if any take upon them to Impress Horses,
Oxen, Carts, etc. other then the persons aforesaid, they are to be punished as
is appointed by the 12. Car. 2. Chapter 24. which see before in the case of
Pre-emption. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 20.

Note, that this Act of the 14. Car. and the 13. Car. Chapter 8. stand upon
continuance till the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

CHAP. XXX.
The Constables Office about Quarter Moneys for Maimed Soldiers, Prisoners,
etc.

THe Constables and Churchwardens are to levy, by Distress and Sale of the
offenders Goods, such money as is rated upon any person within their Constablery
for the Relief of poor maimed Soldiers and Ma^iners, rendering the overplus to
the owner. 43. Eliz. 3. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers. 14. Car.
2. Chapter 9.

And this Money, so collected, is to be paid quarterly to the High Constable of
the Hundred Ten days before every Quarter Sessions, or else the Constable and
Churchwardens, their Executors, etc. forfeit Twenty shillings: And the High
Constable is to pay in the Collection Money (to the Treasurers appointed by the
Justices) every Quarter Sessions, or otherwise he, his Executors, etc. forfeits
Forty shillings; which foreitures are to be levied and employed by the
Treasurers for the increase of their Stock for the uses aforesaid. 43. El. Chapter
3. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 9. and Wingate's Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

The High Constables are to make Quarterly payment, at every Sessions unto the
Collectors appointed by the Justices, of all such Sums of Money as are raised in
every Parish, and paid to them by the Churchwardens or Constables, for the
Relief of the poor Prisoners in the Gaol, under pain of Five pounds. 14. Eliz.
Chapter Wingate's Stat. Tit* Prison and Prisoners.

The Constables and Churwardens are to levy, by Distress and Sale of the
offenders Goods, so much Money as is rated upon any person within their Parish,
for the Relief of the Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and also of
Hospitals, and Almshouses, and relief of the Poor within their County, rendering
the overplus to the owner; and for want of such distress the Justice of Peace
may commit the party to Prison, there to abide till it be paid, without Bail or
Mainprize; which Money the Churchwardens are to pay to the High Constable Ten
days before the end of every Quarter Sessions: and if the Churchwardens their
Executors, etc. fail to pay this Money, they forfeit Ten shillings; and if the
High Constable, his Executors, etc. fail to pay the Treasurers of the County
the same money at the Quarter Sessions, they forfeit Twenty shillings; which
Forfeitures the Treasurers may levy by Distress and Sale as aforesaid, and the
Moneys to be employed to the uses aforesaid. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Poor People. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 53. fo. 135.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Constables Office about Popish Recusants.

POpish Recusants above Sixteen years of Age shall within Forty days after
their conv^ction repair to their usual dwelling, and not remove above Five
miles from thence, in pain to forfeit all their Goods, and Lands, and Annuities
during L^fe; and if they have no certain abode, then are they to repair to the
place where they we^e born, or where their Father and Mother dwells, and within
Twenty days after their arrival, there to give their Names in writing to the
Minister, Constables and Headboroughs, which Minister is to enter them in a
Book to be kept for that purpose, and he together with the said Constables and
Headboroughs are to certify the same to the next Quarter Sessions, where the
Justices of Peace must cause the same to be enrolled. 35. Eliz. Chapter 2.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Crown.

The Constables and Churchwardens of every Parish, or the one of them, or if
there be none such, then the High Constables of the Hundred there, are once
every year to present at the General Sessions of the Peace, the monthly absence
from Church of every Popish Recusant and their children, being above the age of
nine years, and their Servants together with the age of their Children as near
as they can know them, in pain to forfeit respectively for every such default
Twenty shillings; which presentment the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk shall
Record without Fee, in pain of Forty shillings. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Crown. 3.
Jac. Chapter 4.

If the Minister, petty Constable, or Churchwardens of any Parish, or any two
of them shall complain to any Justice of Peace, of any person suspected for
Recusancy, then any such Justice may tender the Oath of Supremacy to the person
suspected, and if he refuse to take it, then the Justice may commit the party
to the Gaol, there to remain until the next Assizes or Sessions of the Peace;
and if then the party refuse again, ^e incu^^^ Praemunire; but if it be a Woman
Covert, she shall only be imprisoned, there to remain without Bayl till (...)
^ake the said Oath. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Crown. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 45. fo. 10^.
(...). Chapter 6.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Constables Office about Riots and Routs.

SHeriffs, Constables, and all other the Kings Officers, shall suppress
Rioters, and imprison them, and all other offenders against the Peace.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Riots, etc. 27. R. 2. Chapter 8.

Knights and all other Temporal persons under that degree, that be above the
Age of Fifteen years, and be able to Travel, upon warning given, are to be
assistant to the Justices, when they shall be reasonably requested to suppress
Riots on pain of imprisonment, and to make Ransom to the King. 2. H. 5. 8.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Riots, etc. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 46. fo. 114.

Note, where three persons or more shall come or assemble themselves together,
to the intent to do any unlawful Act, with force or violence, against the
person of another his Possessions or Goods, as to kill, beat, or otherwise to
hurt, or to imprison a Man; to pull down an House, Wall, Pale, Hedge, or Ditch;
wrongfully to ente^ upon, or into another man's Possession, House or Lands, etc.
or to cut or take away Corn, Grass, Wood, or other Goods wrongfully, or to hunt
unlawfully in any Park or Warren, or to do any other unlawful act, (with force
or violence) against the Peace, or to the manifest terror of the people; if
they only meet to such a purpose or intent, although they shall after depart of
their own accord, without acting any thing, yet this is an unlawful Assembly,
because of their intention at the first. Bro. Tit. Riot. 4. 5. Cromp. 68. Co.
3. Part. Inst. fo. 176. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 85. fo. 217. Terms de Ley verb. Rout.
Lamb. 179. 181.

If after such meeting, as aforesaid, they shall ride, go, or move forward
toward the execution of such Act, whether they put their intended purpose in
execution or not, this is a Rout. Bro. Riot. 4. Co. 3. Part. Inst. fo. 176.
Terms de Ley verb. Rout. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 85. fo. 217.

And if they do any such thing indeed, then it is a Riot. Co. 3. Part. Inst.
fo. 176. Terms de Ley verb. Riot. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 85. fo. 217. Bro. Riot. 4.
and 5.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Constables Office about Rogues and Vagabonds.

THe Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman, assisted by the Minister and one
other of the Parish, is to ^ee (or do it himself) Rogues and Vagabonds, which
shall be taken begging, stripped naked from the middle upwards, and openly
whipped till their body be bloody, and then sorthwith to be sent away from
Constable to Constable the next straight way to the place of their birth; and
if that cannot be known, then to the place where they last dwelt by the space
of one whole year, before such punishment; and if that cannot be known, then to
the Town through which they last passed unpunished: And when they come there,
if it cannot be discovered where they were born, or last dwelt as aforesaid,
then are they by that Constable to be conveyed to the House of Correction or
Common Gaol of the County, to be employed in work, or placed in some service,
and so to continue by the space of one year; or in case they be not able in
body, that Town is to keep them, till they may be placed in some Almshouse
within the same County. 39. Eliz. Chapter 4. Wing. Stat. Tit. Vagabonds. Resoluc.
Judges. Sect. 714. Bolstr. 2. Part. Rep. fo. 258.

After such whipping, the Vagabond is to have a Testimonial under the Hand and
Seal of the Constable, Tythingman, etc. and the Minister, testifying the day
and place of his punishment, the place to which he is to be conveyed, and the
time limited for his passage thither; which time, if by his own Default he
exceeds, he shall from to time incurr the like punishment, till he arrive at
the place limited; the substance of the Testimonial is to be Registered by the
Minister in a Book, which he is to keep for that purpose in pain of Five
shillings; see the form of the Testimonial, page 96; Wingate's Stat. Tit.
Vagabonds. Dalt. J. P. fo. 129. Poulton Vagab. 3.

If any Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, be found negligent in the due
execution of the Act of the 39. Eliz. aforesaid, he forfeits Ten shillings for
every Default, and all such persons as shall in any wise disturb or hinder the
execution of the Law, or any part thereof, concerning the punishment of Rogues,
forfeit Five pounds, and to be bound to the good behavior; and observe
therefore that by the Resolution of the Judges, Sect. 13, 14. where a Rogue is
to be conveyed from Constable to Constable the next straight way to the place
of his birth, in such case, if the Constable of any Parish will not receive
such Rogue, to convey him to the next Constable, etc. this is a forfeiture of
Five pounds in such Officer that shall not receive the party, to convey him or
her, and he may be bound, as aforesaid, to the good behavior, and if he
receive him, and do not convey him to the next Constable, it seems he incurrs
the like penalty. 39. Eliz. Chapter 4. Poul. Vag. 5. and 11. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 47.
fo. 128. and Resol. Judges. Sect. 13, 14.

Every person shall apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, such Rogues as he
shall see or know to resort to his house to beg, or receive any Alms, and him
or them shall carry, or cause to be carried to the next Constable, or else
shall forfeit for every such default Ten shillings; and the Constable is to
whip and convey such Rogues as before directed, on pain of Twenty shillings 1.
Jac. Chapter 7. Poul. Vag. 5. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 47. fo. 128. Wingate's Stat. Tit.
Vagabond.

Two Justices of the Peace ( quor. un.) by Warrant under their Hands and Seals,
may cause to be levied by Distress and Sale of the offenders Goods all the
Fines and Forfeitures aforesaid, appointed by the Stat. 39. Eliz. C. 4. and 1.
Jac. C. 7. after Conviction of the party, which must be either by confession or
proof of two sufficient Witnesses before the said Justices; Poul. Vag. 1. 39.
Eliz. C. 4. 1. Jac. Chapter 7. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 47. fo. 149. Wingate's Stat. Title
Vagabond.

If the Constables or Tythingmen neglect to make privy search for Rogues upon
Warrant from the Justices of Peace, and to appear before the Justices at their
meeting appointed for that purpose, to give an Account upon Oath in Writing
under the Minsters hand, testifying what Rogues, etc. they have taken in that
search, or since the last meeting, and how many have been punished, or
otherwise sent to the House of Correction, or if they neglect safely to convey
such to the House of Correction, as by the said Justices Warrant are to be
committed thither, they are to incurr what fine the Justices please to set upon
them, so that it exceed not Forty shillings. 7. Jac. Chapter 4. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Vagabond.

Any Justice of Peace may Reward any person or persons, who shall apprehend and
bring before him any Rogue, Vagabond, or Sturdy Beggar, by granting to such
person a Warrant under his Hand and Seal to the Constable, or Tythingman of the
place, through which the Rogue, etc. did pass unapprehended, ordering the
Constable, etc. to give such person Two shillings for every Rogue so taken; and
if such Constable, etc. refuse or neglect to pay the same, the Justices of the
Peace may proceed against such constable, etc. according to the Statute of the
1. Jac. Chapter 7. before mentioned, and then compel him to pay so much money as he
has forfeited by the said Statutes, and allow the said Two shillings out of
the said forfeiture to the said person, and also reasonable allowance for loss
of time, as they shall think fit: 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

And if any person shall apprehend any Rogue, etc. at the Confines of any
County, which passed through any Parish of another County unapprehended, then
the person so apprehending such Rogue must carry him to some Justice of Peace
of that County through which he passed unapprehended, who (upon a Certificate
under the hand of some Justice of Peace of the County where such Rogue was
apprehended) is to grant his Order or Warrant under his Hand and Seal to the
Constable, etc. to pay Two shillings, as aforefaid; which if he refuse or
neglect, then the Justice is to proceed against such Constable, etc. and cause
him to pay Ten shillings to the party, or so much thereof, for loss of time, as
the Justice shall think fit. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

Whereas Constables, Tythingmen, etc. are at great charges in Relieving,
conveying with Passes, and carrying Rogues, etc. to the Houses of Correction,
and c, It is enacted that all Constables, Tythingmen, etc. so out of Purse,
together with the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, and other
Inhabitants of the Parish, may make a Rate and Tax all the Inhabitants of the
Parish, chargeable by the 43. Eliz. which Rate must be confirmed by two
Justices of the Peace under their Hands and Seals; and if any person refuse to
pay his part thereof, then by Warrant from Two Justices the Constable may levy
the same upon the parties Goods, that refuses, rendering the overplus to the
owner, if any be. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

Note, That all these persons following, being above the Age of seven years,
Man or Woman, Sole or Covert, that wander from their usual place of abode,
abroad every where begging; or if they do not beg, yet if they wander and
loyter abroad without a lawful Pasport, and give no good reason for their
Travail, are accounted Rogues: All Scholars and Seafaring men which beg,
wandering persons, that use unlawful Games, subtle Craft, or Plays, or
pretending themselves to have skill in Physiognomy, Palmestry, or the like, or
to be Fortunetellers; all Proctors, Patent gatherers (except for Fire)
Collectors for Gaols, Prisoners, or Hospitals, wandering abroad, Fencers,
Bearwards, Common Players of Enterludes, and Fiddlers or Minstrels wandering
abroad, All Juglers, Tinckers, Pedlers, and petty Chapmen, and Glass-men
wandering abroad, especially if they be not well known, or have not a sufficient
Testimonial; all counterfeit Egyptians not being Felons; all persons delivered
out of Gaols, which beg for their Fees, or otherwise do travel beging, such as
go to or from the Bathes and do not pursue their License, Soldiers and
Mariners that beg, and counterfeit a Certificate of their Commanders; All
Laborers which wander abroad out of the Parish, and refuse to work for wages
reasonably taxed, having no living otherwise to maintain themselves; and such
as go with a general Pasport, which is not directed from Parish to Parish; all
these are accounted Rogues, Vagabonds, and Sturdy Beggars: And all Servants
departing out of their Service (to wit, forth of one City, Town or Parish to
another, or out of one Hundred or County to serve in another) without a
Testimonial, or which shall be taken with a false one, and those that are sick
of the Plague, and wilfully go abroad in company against the command of
Officers are to be punished as Vagabonds: but observe that none but the
wandering Rogue is to be sent to the place of his birth, or last habitation; for
those poor people which beg in their own Parish, without the appointment of the
Overseers, or in the Highways, are to be sent to the House of Correction. 39.
Eliz. Chapter 4. and 17. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2. 1. Jac. Chapter 7. 21. Jac. Chapter 28. 7. Jac.
Chapter 24. 5. Eliz. Chapter 4. Poult. Vag. 2. and 7. Resol. Judges. 13, 15. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 47. fo. 123, 124, 125. and Cro. 2. Part. Rep. fo. 577.

Note, That the Wife, and Children under seven years of age, being vagrant,
must go and be placed with the Husband; and if the Husband be dead, then with
the Wife where she was born, or last dwelt; and vagrant Children above seven
years of Age, must be sent to the place of their birth; and if the vagrant
Parents with their Children under seven years of Age be placed at the place of
birth of the Parents, or at the last place of dwelling, as the case falls out;
if afterward the Parents, or either of them die, or run away, yet the Children
once settled, must remain there still, and may not be sent to the place of
their birth, though afterward they attain to the age of seven years; and the
Wife being but a vagrant Rogue, ought to be sent to the Husband, though he be
but a Servant in another Town; and the Rogue whose place of birth or dwelling
cannot be known, having Wife or Children under seven years of age, they must go
with the Husband to the place where they were last suffered wilfully to pass
through unpunished; where the Children must be relieved with the work of their
Parents, though their Parents be committed to the House of Correction. 39.
Eliz. Chapter 4. Poult. Vag. 2. Resoluc. of the Judges, Sect. 4, 5. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
47. fo. 125.

Now the Form of a Testimonial, for the conveying a Rogue that has been
banished, is as follows;
JOhn Roo a Sturdy Vagrant Beggar (of tall stature, gray haired, and blind of
the left Eye) aged about fifty years, was this 2d. day of February, in the
Twentieth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles
the Second of England, etc. openly whipped at Kirk-Leaventon in the County of
York, according to Law, for a wandering Rogue; and is assigned to pass forthwith
from Parish to Parish, by the Officers thereof, the next straight way to A. in
the County of Westmerland, where as he confesses he was born; and he is
limited to be at A. aforesaid, within Ten days now next ensuing at his peril.

Given under the Hands and Seals of J. H. Minister of Kirk-Leaventon aforesaid,
and J. M. Constable there. Wingate's Stat. Tit.
CHAP. XXXIV.
The Constables Office about Profane Swearing.

IF any person or persons shall profanely Curse or Swear, for every time so
offending they forfeit Twelve pence; the offense to be proved within Twenty
days after it is committed, by the Oath of Two Witnesses, or by confession of
the party before any Justice of Peace, or Head Officer of any City or Town
Corporate; who thereupon may issue out their Warrant to the Constables* and
Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor of that Parish where the said offense
shall be committed, and the said Constables, etc. are to levy the sum and sums
of money by distress and sale of the offender; Goods, rendering the overplus, if
any be, to the owner. 21. Jac. Chapter 20. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 4. Wingate's Stat. Tit.
Swearing. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 55. fo. 138.

Note, Where no Distress is to be had, the offender, if above Twelve years of
age, shall by Warrant, as aforesaid, be set in the Stocks Three whole hours;
but if the offender be under the age of Twelve years, and shall not forthwith
pay the said sum of Twelve pence per Oath, then he or she is to be whipped by
the Constable, or by the Parent, or Master, in the Constable's presence. 21.
Jac. Chapter 20. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 4. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 55. fo. 138.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Constables Office about Profaning the Sabbath.

THe Constable by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, (or the chief Officer of any
City, Borough, or Town Corporate) under their Hand and Seal, against such as
use unlawful Games on the Sabbath day, as Bull-baiting, Bearbaiting,
Enterludes, or other unlawful Exercises within their own Parish, or out of
their own Parish at any such Sports whatsoever, may levy the penalty of Three
shillings and Four pence by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering
the overplus to the owners; and in default of Distress, the Constable is to set
the Offenders in the Stocks by the space of Three hours: Note, that the party,
offending in these Games, must be questioned within a month after the offense
committed. 1. Car. 1. Chapter 1. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 23. fol. 63.

If any one on the Sabbath day keep, or be present at any Wrestlings,
Shootings, Bowlings, Ringing of Bells for pleasure, Mask, Wake, Church-Ale,
Dancing, Games, Sport, or pastime whatsoever, they forfeit Five shillings, if
he or she be above Fourteen years of Age, and if under that Age, then Twelve
pence by him that has the government of the party, to be levied by Sale and
Distress by the Constable, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, or chief
Officer, as aforesaid; and for want of Distress to be set Three hours in the
Stocks; and every Carrier going with his Horses on this day, or Wagoner, Carter
or Waynman, going with any Wagon, Cart, or Wayn, or Drover with his Cattle,
forfeit Twenty shillings for every offense, to be levied also by Distress and
Sale of his Goods, if he be questioned within Six weeks after the offense done;
but there must be but one Twenty shillings forfeited for one Journey, although
they pass through several Parishes, and this Twenty shillings that Parish shall
have where the Distress is first taken, 3. Car. 1. Chapter 1. Dalt. Chapter 50. fo. 134.

And if any Butcher by himself, or any for him, shall kill or sell any Victuals
upon the Lords day, he forfeits Six shillings and Eight pence, to be levied by
the Constable by Distress and Sale, as aforesaid, upon Warrant from a Justice
of Peace, etc. the offense to be questioned within Six weeks after it is
committed, and the parties to be convicted before any Justice of Peace, Mayor,
or head Officer, etc. upon their own view, proof of Two Witnesses or more, or
the parties own confession; and the Justice, Mayor, etc. may reward the
Informer with a Third part of the penalty. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 1. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
50. fo. 134.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The Constables Office about Tobacco Planting.

ALl Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, and every of
them, upon Information or Complaint made to them, or any of them, by any of the
Officers of the Customs, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, that
there is any Tobacco set, sown, planted, or growing within their Jurisdictions
or Precincts (except such as is growing in any Physic Garden of either
University, or in any other private Garden, where the quantity of ground
planted exceeds not one half of one Pole, in any one place or Garden) they are
within Ten days after such Information or Complaint, to cause to be burnt,
plucked up, consumed, or utterly destroyed all such Tobacco so set, sown,
planted, or growing. 12. Car. 2. Chapter 34.

And if any person or persons shall resist, or make forceable opposition
against any person or persons in the due execution of this Office as abovesaid,
every person or persons for every such offense, shall forfeit the sum of Five
pounds to be recovered in any Court of Record; and be also committed to the
common Gaol of the County where the offense was committed, there to remain
without Bayl or Mainprize, until he, she, or they, do enter into Recognizance
to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, with Two sufficient Sureties in Ten
pounds penalty, not to do or commit the like offense again. 12. Car. 2. Chapter 34.
15. Car. 2. Chapter 7.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The Constables Office about Weights and Measures.

EVery City, Borough, and Market Town within England, ought to have common
Weights and Measures sealed, at which the Inhabitants themselves may freely
weigh; and all Forreiners must pay for every Draught under 40. pound a
Farthing, for a Draught between Forty and an Hundred, must pay an half Penny,
and for a Draught betwixt an Hundred and a Thousand they must pay a penny;
wherewith the Weights are to be maintained, and the Officers which attend that
Service are to be rewarded at the discretion of the said Inhabitants. 8. H. 6.
Chapter 5. Wing. Stat. Tit. Weights and Measures.

Every City which wants such Weights and Measures forfeits Ten pounds to the
King, every Borough Five pounds, and every Market Town Forty shillings; and the
chief Officers of such places, whether they be Constables, Bailiffs, or others
are, upon Request to them made, to mark and sign such Weights and Measures to
any of the Kings Subjects, taking for the marking of every Bushel one penny; and
none ought to sell with any other Weights or Measures, but such as are so
marked. 8. H. 6. Chapter 5. 11. H. 7. Chapter 4. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Weights and
Measures.

Majors and chief Officers are, etc. are at least once every year to view all
Measures and Weights within their Jurisdiction, and break or burn them which
they find defective, and also may inflict punishment upon the Offenders; for
the first offense Six shillings Eight pence, for the second Thirteen shillings
and Four pence, and for the third offense Twenty shillings; and besides, may
adjudge them to the Pillory. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Weights and Measures. 11. H.
7. Chapter 4.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Constables Office about Watches.

THe Constables, etc. of every Town, are to cause Night Watch to be kept from
Ascension till Michaelmas, in their Towns, which Watch must continue from Sun
set to Sun rise, and may be by two or four men, according to the greatness of
the Town. 13. E. 1. Chapter 4. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 60. fo. 140. Poul. Watch. 1.

These Watchmen are to apprehend all Strangers that pass by them in the Night,
and must examine them; and if they find cause of suspicion in them, then they
may keep them till the Morning; and if the parties refuse to obey the Arrest,
then the Watchmen may levy Hue and Cry for the taking of the said
Night-walkers; or the Watchmen may justify the beating of them upon their
resistance, and set them in the Stocks till the morning, and then if no
suspicion be found in the parties, they may let them go quit: but if they find
suspicion in them, then the Watchmen may deliver them to the Constable, who is
to convey them to a Justice of Peace to be examined, and to be bound over, or
committed until they be acquitted according to due form of Law. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
60. fo. 140. and Chapter 109. fo. 292. 5. E. 3. 14. 5. H. 7. 5. a. Lamb. Office.
Constable.

These Watchmen are also to apprehend Rogues, and Vagabonds, Nightwalkers,
Evesdroppers, Scouts, and such like, and such as go armed, etc.

And note, that these particulars following have been held for Law concerning
Watches.

First, That the Watch must be by men of able body, and sufficiently armed, and
that no man is compellable to watch, except ^^e be an Inhabitant within the
same Town.

Secondly, That such as are Inhabitants within the Town, are not compellable to
watch at the will of the Constable, but only when their turn comes, according
to the use and custom of the place, which most commonly is by turn, or house.

Thirdly, If a man, who is compellable to watch, shall contemptuously refuse to
watch, upon the command of the Constable; it has been held, by some, that the
Constable in such case, ex Officio, may set the party in the Stocks for his
contempt; but the safest way is for the Constable to present such person for
his Default at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, or else to complain of him
to a Justice of Peace, who may bind the offender to the good behaviou^, and so
over to the next Quarter Sessions, etc. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 60. fo. 141.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The Constables Office about Executing Warrants.

A Justice of Peace may direct his Warrant to the Sheriff, Bailiff, Constable,
or other Officer, or to any other Indifferent person by Name, though he be no
Officer, 14. H. 8. 16. Bro. Peace. 6. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 332.

A Warrant directed by the Justice of Peace to the Constable, or other sworn
Officer, and to a Stranger who is no Officer, and the Warrrant is made to them
jointly and severally, and is delivered to the Stranger who executes it, this
is good enough: and if a Warrant from a Justice of Peace be directed to two men
jointly to Arrest another, yet any one of them may do it alone. Cromp. 147.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 332.

If a Justice of Peace direct his Warrant to the Sheriff, he may by word
command his Undersheriff, Bailiff, or other known and sworn Officer, to serve
it without any Precept to them in writing, and they upon such Commandment of
the Sheriff may lawfully do it. Lamb. 91. Bro. fx. Impris. 43. and Trespass.
339. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 332.

But if the Sheriff in such case do command a Stranger, who is neither his
Servant nor Sworn Officer, then he must do it by Precept in writing, or
otherwise an Action of false Imprisonment lies for the Arrest. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
117. fo. 332.

Where a Warrant is directed by a Justice of Peace to the Sheriffs Bailiff, or
his Servant, or to the Constable, or other private person to Arrest one, such
person cannot command another to do it, neither by word nor writing, but must
do it himself. Co. 9. Lib. Rep fo. 69. 14. H. 7. 9. b. 20. H. 7. 13. 21. H. 7.
14. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 332.

The Officer, to whom any Warrant shall be directed, ought with all speed and
secrecy to seek and find out the party, and then to execute his said Warrant.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 332.

A sworn and known Officer (^be he Sheriff, Undersheriff, Bailiff, or
Constable) needs not to show his Warrant to a man when he comes to serve it
upon him, although he demand it; but he who is no sworn Officer ought to show
his Warrant, upon demand, or otherwise the party may make resistance and not
obey him; and a sworn Officer also upon the Arrest, though he will not show his
Warrant, yet he ought to acquaint the party with the contents thereof. M. 8. E.
4. fo. 14. a. Bro. fx. Impr. 23. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 332, 333. Co. 6. Lib.
Rep. 54. and 9. Lib. fo. 68.

Note, That an Officer gives sufficient notice what he is, when he faith to
the party, I Arrest you in the Kings Name, etc. and in such case the party at
his peril ought to obey him, though he knows him not to be an Officer; and if
he have no lawful Warrant, the party grieved may have his Action of false
Imprisonment against him. Co. 9. Lib. Rep. fo. 69. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 333.

If a Constable or other Officer Arrest a man for the Peace, or the like,
before that he have a Warrant, and then afterward does procure a Warrant (or a
Warrant comes after to him) to Arrest the party for the same cause, yet the
first Arrest was wrongful, and the Officer is subject to an Action of false
Imprisonment. Dyer fo. 244. Lamb. 93. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 333.

Where a Warrant is granted out against J. N. the son of T. P. and the
Constable or other Officer takes J. N. the son of L. P. although he in truth be
the same person that offended, and against whom the complaint was made, yet
this Arrest is tortuous, and the Officer liable to an Action of false
Imprisonment. 10. E. 4. fo. 12. Bro. fx. Impr. 38. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 333.

But it is said by some, that where Two or Three are known by the Name of J. R.
of K. Yeoman, and upon a Warrant or other process granted out against one of
them, another of them is Arrested, in such case an Action of false Imprisonment
will not lie against the Officer; tamen Quare hereof. 11. H. 4. fo. 90. 5. E.
4. fo. 51. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 333.

Where an Officer has received a Warrant, he is bound to pursue the effects of
his Warrant in every behalf; or otherwise his Warrant will not excuse him of
that which he has done. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo 333.

The Constable, or other Officer, upon a Warrant from a Justice of Peace for
Treason, Felony, the Peace, or good behavior, or in any other case where the
King is party, may by force of such Warrant break open a man's house to Arrest
the Offender; but in such case he ought first to signify the cause of his
coming, and require them to open the Doors, before he break them open. Co. 5.
Lib. Rep. fo. 9. 7. E. 3. 19. Cromp. 171. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 78. fo. 204, 205. and
Chapter 117. fo. 333.

If a Constable or other Officer has arrested a man by virtue of his Warrant,
which he has from a Justice of Peace, and then takes his promise that he will
come to him such a day to go to the Justice with him, according to his Warrant
(and so he lets the party go) who comes not again at the day appointed, in
this case the Officer cannot take him again upon the same Warrant, because he
was suffered to go by the consent of the Officer; but if the party arrested had
escaped of his own wrong without the consent of the Officer, in such case upon
fresh suit he may take him again, and again so often as he escapes, although
he were out of view, or that he do fly into another Town, or County; and it is
said that the Officer in such case, though the party be taken in another County
after the Escape, yet he may bring the party before the Justice on whose
Warrant he was first Arrested. Cromp. 214. a. 148. 172. and 173. Dalt. J. P.
Chapter 117. fo. 333. and Chapter 118. fo. 340.

By the opinion of the Court of the 14. H. 8. it was held there that a Justice
of Peace cannot make a Warrant to arrest a Felon, unless he be Indicted of
Felony, (or that the Justice himself has a suspicion of the Felon) But if the
Constable, or other Officer, shall serve such a Warrant, he may justify the
same, though the Justice did err in awarding thereof. 24. E. 3. 9. 14. H. 8.
16. Bro. Peac. 6. and fx. Impr. 8. and 9. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 331.

Note, That where a Justice of Peace does make a Warrant for a matter wherein
he has Jurisdiction, though it be beyond his Authority, yet it is not
disputable by the Constable, or other such Officer, but must be obeyed and
executed by them; as if the Justice shall make a Warrant to Arrest one for the
Peace, or good behavior, etc. without any cause, the Officer shall not be
punished for executing the Warrant: But if a Justice of Peace shall make his
Warrant to do a thing out of his Jurisdiction, or in a Cause wherein the
Justice is not Judge, then if the Officer shall execute such a Warrant he is
punishable for it; for the Officer is not bound to obey him who is not Judge of
the Cause, no more than he is bound to obey a mere Stranger; and so note that
the Officer is bound at his peril to take notice of the Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Judge. See Plo. Com. 394. b. 22. Ass. fo. 64. 14. H. 8. 16.
Lamb. 67. 94. Co. 10. Lib. Rep. fo. 76. Cromp. 74. Bro. fx. Impr. 8. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 117. fo. 334.

If any shall abuse the Justice of Peace his Warrant, by casting it into the
dirt, treading it under feet, burning it, etc. for such contempt the party may
be bound to his good behavior, and may also be Indicted and Fined for the
same, for it is the Kings Process. Cromp. 149. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 117. fo. 334.

Where Hue and Cry either by the Common Law, or by force of any Statute is
levied upon any person, the Arrest of such person is lawful, although the cause
of the Hue and Cry be Feigned; and if the Cause be Feigned, he that Levies the
same shall also be Arrested, and shall be Fined and Imprisoned; but common Fame
and voice is not sufficient to Arrest a man in case of Felony, unless a Felony
be done indeed. 29. E. 3. 9. 38. E. 3. 6. Co. 3. Part. Inst. fo. 118. 21. H. 7.
28. a.

FINIS.
Conductor Generalis.

A GUIDE FOR Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highways,
Treasurers of the County Stock, Masters of the House of Correction, Bailiffs of
Mannours, Toll-Takers in Fairs, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1669.

To all Churchwardens, Overseers, etc.
Gentlemen,
THese following Offices, as well as that of the Constable, have been touched
also by Mr. Lambert, and Mr. Sheppard: but since the one writ there have been
many hundred new Statute-Laws; and the other, writing in the late times of
Rebellion, has molded his Work suitable to the Manners then in fashion, and
many of the Rules laid down by Mr. Sheppard in these several Offices, which
thwart the Laws of the Kingdom, and Privileges of the Church, are now out of
doors: I have therefore (for the ease and satisfaction of those who desire to
be put in the right Way and sure Road in the executing of these several
Offices) collected and published this small Treatise, briefly laying down the
Authority and Duty of Churchwardens, Overseers, etc. in their several Offices.
The desire of praise could not carry me aloft, who want wings for it; but the
main thing, here aimed at, is the good of my Countrymen, and I hope to reap the
fruit of my labor in it, that is, your kind acceptance, Dear Friends: which if
I may obtain, it is all that is desired by him who is, and shall be

Yours, Ready to serve you George Meriton.

A GUIDE FOR CHURCHWARDENS.
CHAP. 1.
The Antiquity of the Churchwardens Office, and how they are to be chosen.

1. IT is said by some Historians, that Dionysins in the year of our Lord 267.
divided both in Rome and other places, Churches, Churchyards, and Parishes to
Curates, and Diocesses to Bishops, and this was about 87. years after Britain
had received the Christian Faith: For though Historians do not all agree when
the Christian Faith was first planted here, yet it is thought by most of them
to be in the Reign of King Lucius, about the year of our Lord 180. but how long
after it was before these Officers called Churchwardens were appointed, it
cannot certainly be known; but Mr. Lambert and other Authors do agree, that
they are very ancient Officers, and by the ancient common Law they were, and
are still to take care, see to, and preserve the Goods of the Church, viz. the
Church Books, Communion Cups, etc. and other decent Ornaments and furniture of
the Church, which they do find there at their coming into the Office.

2. As to the choice of these Officers it is appointed by the Book of Cannons,
printed in the first year of King James, An. Dom. 1604. That all Churchwardens,
Questmen, Sidemen, or Assistants in every Parish shall be chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and the Parishioners, if it may be: But if they cannot
agree upon such a choice, then the Minister shall choose one, and the
Parishioners another; and without such a joint or several choice, none shall
take upon them to be Churchwardens, neither shall they continue any longer then
one year in that Office, except perhaps they be chosen again in like manner;
and these Officers are to be yearly chosen in Easter-week. Can. 89, 90.

But note, where there is an ancient custom in any Parish for the choice of
Churchwardens contrary to this Canon, in such case the custom is to be observed
before the Canon, as appears by several Cases hereafter mentioned.

4. If the Parishioners of a Parish have used time out of mind, etc. to elect
one Churchwarden, and the Vicar another, and afterward a Canon is made that
the Vicar shall elect two, and he does so accordingly, and the Parishioners
elect one according to their custom and the Ordinary disallows him, and
establishes the other two elected by the Vlcar; in this Case a prohibition
shall be granted. P. 5. Jac. B. R. the Parishioners Case of Rovenden in Kent.
Rolls Cases 2. Part. fo. 287.

5. A Prohibition was* granted against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of
St. Magnus nigh London Bridge, by force of a Canon, upon a surmise that the
Parish had a custom to choose two Churchwardens, Tr. 7. Ca. 1. B. R. bet.
Shirlye and Brown, Rot. 1391. Rolls Cases, 2. Part. fo. 287. The like against
a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of Alhallows, London, P. 17. Jac. B. R.
War^ers Case, and P. 5. Jac. the Parishioners of Walkbrooks Case in London.
Cro. 2. Part. Rep. The like against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of St.
Thomas in London, P. 15. Car. 1. B. R. Evelins Case, Cro. 3. Part. and the like
granted between Draper and Stone for Abchurch in London, P. 4. Car. 1. B. R.
Rot. 420. Rolls Cases, 2. Part. fo. 287.

6. An Attorney cannot be made a Churchwarden: if he be put in and refuse, and
so be sued in the Spiritual Court, he may have a Prohibition; P. 14. Car. 1. B.
R. Wilsons Case, and Tr. 15. Car. 1. B. R. Barkers Case. Roll's Cases, 2. Part.
fo. 272.

7. By the Stat. 15. Car. 2. All Vestry men, or those who are members of any
Vestry within any Parish in the Cities of London and Westminister, Borough of
Southwark, and Weekly Bills of Mortality, and in all other Cities, Boroughs and
Towns Corporate, where Select Vestries are used in the Kingdom of England, are
within one month after their Election, before the respective Archbishop,
Bishop, or Ordinary, Vicar General or Chancellor of the Diocese to make and
subscribe as follows:

I A. B. do declare that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
up Arms against his Majesty. And that I do abhor that traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his Majesty's Authority against his person, or against those
that are Commissionated by him. And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the
Church of England, as it is now established. And I do declare, that I hold
there lies no obligation on me, or on any other person from the Oath commonly
called The Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of
Government either in Church or State; And that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 5.

8. He that refuses this Subscription within the time aforesaid, is ipso facto
deprived of such his place of Vestryman, and a new one to be chosen; and if
such new one refuse also, or if such person who shall have right of Election,
shall not proceed to Election within one Month after such vacancy, then the
respective Archbishop, Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese may under his Hand and
Seal elect and nominate a discreet person of the respective Parish, who after
Subscription within the time aforesaid is to stand. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 5. This Act
is to continue till the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

CHAP. II.
The Churchwardens Office about Profanation of the Sabbath, and of the Church.

9. THese Officers are diligently to see that all the Parishioners duly resort
to their Parish Church upon all Sundays and Holydays, and there continue the
whole time of Divine Service, and none to walk or stand idle, or talking in the
Church, Churchyard, or Church Porch during that time; and all such as shall be
found slack or negligent in resorting to the Church (having no great or urgent
cause of absence) they shall earnestly call upon them, and after due
admonition, if the amend not, they must present their Names to the Ordinary of
the place. 5. 6. E. 6. Chapter 1. Canon 19. 90. 111.

10. If the Churchwardens find any person absent from the Church upon Sundays
or Holydays, in the time of Divine Service, Preaching, or other holy Exercise,
such person is to pay 12 d. to the use of the Poor; and this extends as well to
all Women Covert, as to other persons: or the Churchwardens, if they please,
may present such person in the Ecclesiastical Court. But note that none are to
be punished twice for one offense, so that they must not pay their twelve
pence, and be presented too. 1. El. Chapter 1. Hobbart's Rep. fo. 97.

11. And if they find any Tippling in an Inn or Alehouse, etc. then, besides the
twelve pence for being absent from the Church as aforesaid, they forfeit three
shillings four pence more for Tippling, and the Master of the House ten
shillings for suffering them to Tipple; which forfeitures are to go to the use
of the Poor. 4. Jac. Chapter 5.

12. The Churchwardens or Questmen are to suffer no Plays, Feasts, Banquets,
Suppers, Church Ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts or Leets, Lay Juries, Musters,
or any other profane usage to be kept in the Church, Chapel, or Churchyard;
neither the Bells to be rung superstitioufly upon Holydays, or Eves abrogated
by the Book of Common Prayer, nor at any other times, without good cause, to be
allowed by their Minister of the place and by themselves. Canon 88.

13. Neither the Minister, Churchwardens, nor any other Officers of the Church,
shall suffer any man to preach within their Churches or Chapels, but such as
by fhewing their License to preach shall appear unto them to be sufficiently*
Authorized thereunto: And the Churchwardens or Questmen are also to see that in
every meeting of the Congregation the Peace be well kept, and that all persons
excommunicated, and so denounced, be kept out of the Church. Canon. 50. 85.

CHAP. III.
Some few Cases concerning Actions for and against Churchwardens.

14. NOte, that the Law does make of these Officers a kind of a Corporation,
viz. Persons enabled by that name to take moveable Goods or Chattels, and to
sue and to be sued at Law concerning such Goods for the use and profit of their
Parish; for the property of the Goods of the Church is in them, and they are by
that Name enabled to take them for the use and profit of the Parish: and
therefore a man may well in his lifetime, or by his last Will, give or grant
Money, or other moveable Goods to the Churchwardens, or Parishioners of such a
Parish, for the Reparations of the Church, or for buying of Books, Communion
Cups, Linen Cloths, or other decent Ornaments or furniture for the Church. 12.
H. 7. fo. 27. Finch's Law. Lib. 2. Chapter 17. page 178. Kitchen. page 278. a.

15. But they cannot take an Estate of Lands to them by Name of Churchwardens
only, for if a Feoffment be made to the use of the Churchwardens of D. this is
avoid use, for they have no capacity to take such Purchase. Finch. Lib. 2. Chapter
17. page 179. Rolls Cases, 1. Part. fo. 393.

16. Neither can they prescribe to have Lands to them and their Successors; for
they are no Corporation to have Lands, but for Goods for the Church only. P.
37. El. C. B. Longley and Meredines Case. Rolls Cases, 1 Part. fol. 393.

17. If a Man buy a Bell, and hang it up in the Steeple, or make a Pew and set
it up in the Church, though he make neither words nor writing hereof, yet by
this the Bell and Pew are so dedicated to the Church, that the party that did
owe them, can never have them again; for if they should come to remove them,
the Churchwardens might sue them for it. 8. H. 7. 12. 10. H. 4. fol. 9.
Kitchen. page 277. a.

18. They can have no action at Common Law to recover any Goods of which they
never had the possession: But if the Churchwardens be once possessed of any
Goods, or Ornaments belonging to the Church, and afterward, the same things
are taken from them, then they have the same remedy for the things, as other
men have for the goods taken from them: And therefore if such Goods be stolen,
they may have an Appeal of Robery, and if they be otherwise taken away or
abused; as if a Bell be broken, or the like,. the Churchwardens may have an
Action against him that does it: and in this Action they recover Damages to the
use of the Parish, and not to their own use. Tr. 8. E. 4. fo. 6. b. 37. H. 6.
32. Finch. Lib. 2. Chapter 17. page 178, 179. Abr. Dass. fol. 76. Kitchen. page
277. b. and 278. a.

19. And it seems also, that the party that does steal or take away any Goods
belonging to the Church may be punished for it as for a sacrilegious offense:
And observe, that if the Churchwardens from whom the Goods were taken be out of
their Office, their Successors, as it seems, may sue for, or recover the same,
or damages for them to the use of the Parish* Vide M. 31. and 32. El. B. R.
Hadman and Kingwoods Case. Cro. Rep. 3. Part.

20. But note, That the Churchwardens have no such property in the Goods of
their Church, as thereby to have power to give, sell, release, hurt or impair
them, without the assent of the Sidemen or Vestry. Vide 38. El. Methold and
Winnes Case. Rolls Cases. 1 Part. fo. 393. and see Hill. 7. Jac. B. R. in
Starkie and Bartons Case. Cro. Rep. 2. Part. and vide 13. H. 7. 9.

21. If the Churchwardens shall give or impair the Goods in their custody, the
Parishioners may choose new ones, who may have an Account against their
Predecessors. 8. E. 4. fo 6. b. Finch. Lib. 2. Chapter 17. page 179.

22. If the Organs be taken out of the Church, the Churchwardens may have an
Action of Trespass for the same, for the Organs belong to the Parishioners, and
not to the Parson; and therefore the Parson cannot sue such party in the
Ecclesiastical Court that took them. Tr. 12. Jac. B. R. per Curiam. Rolls Cases
1. Part. fo. 393.

23. But if the Walls, Windows, or Doors of the Church be broken down, or the
Trees in the Churchyard be cut down, or the Grass thereof be eaten up, the
Parson or Vicar, and not the Churchwardens shall have an Action for it, for
they are a Corporation only as to moveable Goods, and see 8. H. 6. fo. 9. where
the Parson brought an Action of Trespass for breaking and entering into his
house and close, which was the Church and the Churyard. 10. H. 4. fo. 9. 21. H.
7. fo. 21. and Parson's Law, page 191.

24. The Churchwardens, by the assent and agreement of the Parishioners, may
take a ruinous Bell, and deliver it to a Bell-founder, and agree with him that
he shall have four pounds for casting it, and that he shall retain the same
till the four pounds be paid: and such Agreement of the Parishioners shall
excuse the Churchwardens in a Writ of Account brought against them by their
Successors Churchwardens. M. 37, 38. El. B. R. Methold and Winnes Case. Rolls
Cases. 1. Part. fo. 393.

25. If a Presentment be made by the Churchwardens in the Ecclesiastical Court,
That J. S. one of the Parishioners is a Railer and a Sower of Discord amongst
his Neighbors, a Prohibition lies in such case; for this belongs to the Leet,
and not to the Spiritual Court, unless such Railing were in the Church, or such
like place. M. 16. Jac. C. B. Rot. 716. Smith and Pannel's Case. Hobarts Rep.
fo. 246. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 286.

26. If the Churchwardens of a Church sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for a way
to the Church, which they claim to belong to all the Parishioners by
Prescription, in such case a Prohibition will be granted, for this is a
temporal cause. P. 16. Jac. B. R. between the Churchwardens of Bythorn and Bow,
Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 287.

27. If the Churchwardens of C. sue in the Ecclesiastical Court. J. S. for that
he, and all those whose Estate he has in such an House, etc. at the
perambulation of the Parishioners of the Parish, did use to find a refreshing
for them (to wit) Bread and Ale, and suffer them to rest there; here a
Prohibition shall be granted, for that they claim it in nature of a Corrody;
and if that should be suffered, a great inconvenience would ensue, M. 13. Jac.
B. R. The Churchwardens of Vffington's case in Barkshire, Hill. 15. Car. ^. B.
R. The like Prohibition prayed in one Lock's case, which was referred to
Justice Jones. Rolls Cases 2. Part. fo. 287. The like Prohibition granted in
one Reynold's Case. Mores Rep. fo. --

28. If the Churchwardens of a Church sue in the Court Christian J. S.
supposing by their Libel, that he and all those who had an Estate in certain
Lands adjoining to the Churchyard have used time out of mind to repair so much
of the Fences of the Churchyard, which were next adjoining to the said Land, in
this Case a Prohibition will be granted; for this ought to be tried at the
common Law, in so much as that it does charge a Temporal Inheritance; M. 14.
Car. 1. B. R. the Churchwardens of Claydon and Duncombe's Case, Rolls Cases. 2.
Part. fo. 287.

CHAP. IV.
The Churchwardens Office about disposing of Seats in their Church.

29. THese Officers are to look to the repair of the Seats in the Church, but
the disposing of the Seats in the body of the Church, belongs of common Right
to the Ordinary of the Diocese, so that he may place and displace whom he
pleases, except in some cases: Rolls Cases, 2. Part. fo. 288.

30. For if a Man and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estate he has in a
certain Message, have used time out of mind, etc. to repair an Isle of the
Church, and to sit there and none else, the Ordinary in such case cannot
displace him; for if he do, a Prohibition lies, because he has it by a
Prescription for a reasonable consideration. M. 10. Jac. C. B. Pimme's case,
per Curiam, Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 288.

31. If a man prescribe that he and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estate
they had in a certain Message, did use to sit in a certain Seat in the body of
the Church, time without mind, etc. in consideration that he and they, etc.
have used time out of mind, to repair the said Seat, if the Ordinary remove him
from such Seat, a Prohibition may be brought; for the Ordinary has no power to
dispose of it, for it is a good Prescription, and by intendment there has been
a good consideration for the commencement of such Prescription. Tr. 12. Jac. C.
B. Crosses case, M. 13. Jac. C. B. Laugh and Hussyes case. and M. 13. Jac. C.
B. Boothby and Days case, Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 288.

32. But if a man prescribe to have a Seat in the body of the Church generally,
without consideration to repair the same, then the Ordinary in such case may
displace him, M. 11. Jac. B. R. per Curiam and M. 13. Jac. C. B. inter Bootby
and Bailey, Hobart's Rep. fo. 69. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 288.

33. The Ordinary has nothing to do with the Seats in the Chapels belonging
to the houses of Noblemen; Tr. 12. Jac. C. B. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 288.

34. But if a Layman by the dissolution of Monasteries has a Monastery in
which there is a Church, parcel of it, and he suffers the Parishioners for a
long time to come to it, and do Divine Service, and to use it as their Parish
Church, this (unless for all the whole time the party has used to place men in
their Seats himself) shall give Jurisdiction to the Ordinary to order the
Seats; for that now in fact is the Parish Church, although that before it were
not subject to the Ordinary. Tr. 12. Jac. C. B. Buzard's case, Rolls 2. Part.
fo. 288, 289.

35. If there be a custom in a Parish, that twelve of the Parishioners may
choose Churchwardens, which Churchwardens have power by the custom to repair
the Seats and make new ones in the body of the Church, and to appoint what
persons shall sit in them; and the Churchwardens so elected do erect a new Seat
in the body of the Church, and appoint a certain man to sit there, and and
afterward the Ordinary decrees that another shall have the Seat; here a
Prohibition lies: For the custom has fixed the power of disposing the Seats in
the Churchwardens, P. 16. Jac. B. R. Brabin and Tredennick's case for a Seat in
Breock Church in the County of Cornwall: but the reason, of granting the
Prohibition in this case, was partly because that the Sentence of the Ordinary
was that Tredennick should have the Seat to him and his Heirs, and that none
should disturb him in pain of Excommunication, which is unreasonable, and by
such Sentence he and his Heirs should have it, though they were no Inhabitants
within the same Parish. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 289.

CHAP. V.
The Churchwardens Office about Reparations and Rates.

36. THese Officers are to see that the Church and Churchyard be well repaired
and kept clean: and they are to provide Books of Common Prayer, Books of
Homilies, a Parchment Book for registring Christnings, Weddings and Burials in,
Fonts, Pulpits, Tables, Chests for Alms, Communion Cups, Ornaments and other
Furniture, and a Chest with Three Locks and Keys for putting the same in: and
they are also to provide Bread and Wine for the Sacrament according to the
number of the Communicants. And for these purposes they may rate the Parish for
money to do it, for which see 37. H. 6. 30. 11. H. 4. 12, 11. H. 7. 27. 12. H.
7. 10. F. N. B. 54. 91. Canon 20. 70, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85.

37. Upon making of Rates for Reparations, etc. they are to be done by the
Churchwardens with the Assent of the greater part of the Parishioners, and upon
a general warning given before they assemble for that purpose; and note, that
the Ecclesiastical Court has cogniz^nce of the Reparation of the body of the
Church. See Jeoffry's case. Co. 5. Lib. Rep. fo. 67. and Rolls Cases. 2. Part.
fo. 289. M. 31, 32. El. B. R.

38. If a man stay and inhabit in one Parish, and have Lands in another Parish
which he occupies there, he may be charged for such Lands for the Reparation of
the Church of the Parish where the Lands lie: because he may come there when he
pleases, and he is to be charged in respect of the Lands. Co. 5. Rep. fo. 67.
M. 31. and 32. El. B. R. Jeoffry's case, and Tr. 11. Jac. C. B. Andrews case,
per Curiam. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 289.

39. But if an Inhabitant of a Parish Lease out his Lands which he has in
another Parish, reserving Rent, then he shall not be charged in the Parish
where the Land lies in respect of the Re^^, because there is a Parishioner and
Inhabitant which may be charged. Co. 5. Rep. fo. 67. b. M. 5. Jac. C. B. Rolls
Cases 2. part. fo. 289. and see P. 41. El. B. R. Paget and Crumpton's case.
Cro. Rep. 1. Part. fo.

40. Neither can a Man who Inhabits in one Parish, and occupies Lands in
another Parish, be charged in that Parish where the Lands lie for the Ornaments
of that Church according to his Land; for the Inhabitants only ought to be
rated for them, and so it was adjudged by the Court, M. 20. Jac. B. R. Rolls
Cases. 2. Part. fo. 291. Winches Rep. fo. per Yelverton.

41. Neither can a Man be charged in the Parish where he does inhabit for the
Lands which he occupies in another Parish, toward the Reparation of the
Church in the Parish where he lives; because then he might be twice charged,
for he may be charged in the Parish where the Land lies, as is showed before,
Sect. 38. P. 16. Jac. B. R. Sir William Butler Verse. Rolls Cases. 2. part. fo.
289. Co. 5. Rep. fo. 67.

42. If a petty Chapman take a Stall in the waste of a Manor for Rent, within
the Market for two or three hours every Market day to sell his commodities, the
Market being held there one day every week, but he inhabits in another Parish,
here he cannot be rated to the Reparation of the Church for such Stall or
Standing. M. 20. Jac. B. R. between Holms and the Churchwardens of Kettering in
Northamptonshire, resolved, and a Prohibition granted accordingly. Rolls Cases.
2. Part. fo. 289.

43. If a Citizen of London build an house in the Parish of A. and inhabit
there in the time of Sickness in London, and has not any Land in the Parish,
and afterward he is assessed 20 s. for the Reparation of the Church, where
others that have an 100 Acres of Land in the same Parish pay but 6 d. yet
notwithstanding no Prohibition lies in this case in the Court Christian,
because they have the Jurisdiction of the thing, and therefore he must be
ordered according to their Law. M. 5. Jac. C. B. Sir Robert Ley's case. Rolls
Cases. 2. Part. fo. 289.

44. If there be a Chapel of Ease within a Parish, and one part of the Parish
have used time out of mind, etc. to repair the Chapel themselves without the
rest of the Parishioners, and there to hear Service, and Marry, and all other
things, but only that they bury at the Mother Church; here notwithstanding they
shall not be discharged of the Reparation of the Mother Church, but must
contribute to it; for the Chapel was ordained only for their ease. M. 13. Jac.
C. B. between the Churchwardens of Ashton and the Inhabitants of Castle
Bromage. Rolls 2. Part. fo. 289. and Hob. Rep. fo. 66.

45. If all the Parishioners in the Parish are not rated, but some are, and
some are not; and those who are rated are sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, yet
they cannot have a Prohibition but must plead this matter in the Spiritual
Court. M. 11. Jac. B. R. per Curiam. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 291.

46. If the greater part of the Parishioners of a Parish, where there are four
Bells, agree that there shall be made a fifth Bell, and it is made accordingly,
and they make a Rate for payment for it; this shall bind the remainder of the
Parishioners, although they did not agree to it; for otherwise any obstinate
persons might hinder any thing intended, and what is fit for the Ornament of
the Church. M. 2. Car. 1. B. R. Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 291.

47. Note, That a man ought to be rated according to his personal Estate, and
not according to his Lands for the Ornaments of the Church. M. 20. Jac. B. R.
Rolls Cases. 2. Part. fo. 291.

48. These things hereafter mentioned are accounted Church Reparations, viz.
the Walls of the Church and Church Steeple, the Churchyard Walls of Stone or
Brick, the Windows of Stone or Brick, and the Bars of Iron and Glass, the Roof
of Timber, with Laths, Nails, Prigs, Dogs, and Bolts of Iron, the covering of
Lead, Tile, Slates, or Shingles, the Floor with Stone or paving Tile, the Doors
of Timber with Locks, Keys, Ridges, Hooks and Nails, the furniture of the
Steeple with Stairs, Floors, Bells, Wheels and Ropes, the Pulpit and the Pews
or Seats, not made by private men, and all these are to be performed by Land
Rate, etc. though the occupier lives in another Parish, as, afore-shewed.

49. But these hereafter mentioned are not properly Church Reparations, viz.
the Communion Table, with the Coverings thereof, the Communion Cups, the Bread
and Wine for the Communicants, the Bible and other Books appointed to be in
Churches, the washing of the Communion cloths, the Candles for the Lecture
days, the Surplace, the Pulpit Cloth and Cushion, the Clerk and Sextons wages,
and expenses of the Churchwardens and Sidemen at the Visitation; and therefore
all these are to be performed Ratably by the Inhabitants of the Parish, and not
by out dwellers.

CHAP. VI.
Some Cases wherein the Churchwardens are equally concerned with the Constables
and Overseers of the Poor.

50. IF any of their own authority shall wilfully disturb any Minister in his
Preaching or Reading of Divine Service, the Churchwardens or Constables may of
their own Authority apprehend such persons, and bring them to a Justice of
Peace to be dealt with according to Law. 1. Mar. Chapter 6. See The Constables
Guide, Chap. Disturbing of Ministers, etc.

51. These Officers are to join with the Overseers of the Poor in the execution
of their Office, for they have an equal Authority and charge with them in the
execution of the whole Office; therefore see afterward in the Office of
Overseers of the Poor, Chapter 1.

52. If a Rogue be brought to these Officers, they must receive him and look to
him, or forfeit 5 pound, and be bound to the good behavior, Stat. 39. El. See
Constables Guide, Chap. Rogues, etc.

53. These Officers, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace, may levy the
forfeiture for Cursing and Swearing, which is twelve pence upon the Offenders
Goods, 21. Jac. Chapter 20. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 4. See Constables Guide, Chapter Swearing,
etc.

54. If any forfeiture be by any offense about killing Hares, Pheasants or
Partridges, and the Justice of Peace force the payment thereof to these
Officers, they are to see it employed to the use of the Poor of the Parish. 1.
Jac. Chapter 27.

55. These Officers are to present the Offenses against the 1. Jac. for
suffering Tippling and Drunkenness, and selling by unlawful measure, and are to
execute the Warrants from the Justices concerning the same, 1. Jac. Chapter 9. 1.
Car. 1. Chapter 4. 21. Jac. Chapter 7. 4. Jac. Chap. 5. See Constables Guide. Chapter
Alehouses, etc.

56 These Officers also are to execute the Warrants against such as profane the
Lords Day by Sports, etc. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 1. and Chapter 22. See Constables Guide.
Chapter Profanation of the Sabbath.

57. These Officers also are to execute the Warrants against such as destroy
Fish unlawfully. 3. Jac. Chap. 12. See Constables Guide. Chapter Fish, etc.

58. These Officers are also to join with the Constables, in the making of
Rates for the Relief of poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, and for conveying
Prisoners to the Gaol, and to execute the Warrants for the same; 43. El. 14.
El. Chapter 5. 3. Jac. Chapter 10. See Constables Guide. Chap. Quarter Moneys, and
Chap. Conveying Prisoners to the Gaol.

59. These Officers are also to join with the Constables in the choosing of
Surveyors for the Highways, and in the setting down of days for the work, and
in the oversight of the High Constables Account for the Moneys they do receive
upon any forfeiture about the Highways; and they may also with the help of two
Justices of the Peace ( Quor. unus) force High Constables that have received
any moneys forfeited for default of Highways, to account for it, and pay in,
what is in their hands to be employed about the Highways; and these Officers
also are to execute the Justices Warrants for all such penalties about
cleansing the streets and repairing Highways, as are forfeited by the 14. Car.
2. Chapter 2. vide 2. 3. P. and M. Chap. 8. See Constables Guide, Chapter Highways.

60. These Officers have equal Authority with the Constables or Overseers of
the Poor, about the seizing of foreign Cattle imported into England, etc. 18.
Car. 2. Chapter 2. See Constables Guide, Chapter Irish Cattle.

61. These Officers, together with the Overseers of the Poor, are to execute
the Justices Warrant for levying the penalty of five pound upon the parties
Goods that is not buried in Woollen, which penalty is to be employed to the use
of the Poor of the Parish, where such party is buried. 18. Car. 2. Chapter 4.

62. These Officers in the several Parishes within the Cities of London and
Borough of Southwark, etc. upon every Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week,
together with the Constables, Overseers of the Poor and Surveyors of the
Highways of every Parish respectively, or the greater number of them, giving
notice unto, or calling together such other Inhabitants of their respective
Parishes, as have formerly born the like Offices, they or the greater number of
them are to make choice of, and shall nominate and appoint two or more able
persons, that are Tradesmen of their Parish, to be Scavengers for the Streets,
Lanes, and other open passages of each Ward or Division within the said Parish
for the year then next following, and until others be chosen and settled in
their places. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2*

CHAP. VII.
The Churchwardens Office about Passing Accounts, together with the Heads of
most of the things which they are to present at the Visitation Court.

63. ALl Churchwardens at the end of their year, or within a month after at
the most, are before the Minister and Parishioners to give up a Just Account of
such Moneys as they have received, and also what particularly they have
bestowed in Reparations, or otherwise for the use of the Church: And last of
all, going out of their Office, they must truly deliver up to the Parishioners
whatsoever Moneys or other things of Right belonging unto the Church or Parish
which remains in their hands, that it may be delivered over by them to the next
Churchwardens by Bill Indented. Vide Canon 89.

64. And if they refuse to do this, they may be presented at the next
Visitation Court for it, or the succeeding Churchwardens may have an Action of
Account against them by the Common Law, and compel them to give an Account, and
answer for their doings during the time of their Office; And if they have done
the Parish any wrong, to make amends and satisfaction for the same to the use
of the Parish for the harm it has received by their default: And in this
Account the old Officers shall have allowances for all the needful Sums of Money
laid out or spent by them, either upon the Reparations of the body of the
Church, Tower, or Bells, etc. or for Relief of the Prisoners in the Gaol, or
otherwise where the Law does enjoin them to pay or disburse any money. Vide 8.
E. 4. fo. 6. b.

65. Now as touching the Churchwardens presentiments. Note, That no
Churchwardens, Questmen or S^demen of any Parish shall be enforced to exhibit
their presentiments to any having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, above once in
every year, where it has been no oftener used, nor above twice in any Diocese
whatsoever, except it be at the Bishop's Visitation; for the which Presentiments
of every Parish, Church, or Chapel, the Register of any Court where they are
to be exhibited, shall not receive in one year above four pence, under pain for
every offense therein, of suspension from the execution of his Office for the
space of one month toties quoties, but the Churchwardens may voluntarily upon
their own Account present oftener if they please. Canon 116.

66. But no Churchwardens, Questmen or Sidemen, shall be called or cited, but
only at the said time or times before limited, to appear before any
Ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever, for refusing at other times to present any
faults committed in their Parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical Laws;
neither shall they, nor any of them, after their Presentiments exhibited, at any
of those times be any further troubled for the same, except upon manifest and
evident proof it may appear, that they did then willingly and wittingly omit to
present some such public crime or crimes as they knew to be committed, or
could not be ignorant that there was then a public fame of them, or unless
there be very just cause to call them for the Explanation of their former
Presentiments; In which case of wilful omission, their Ordinaries shall proceed
against them in such sort, as in causes of wilful perjury in a Court
Ecclesiastical it is already by Law provided, Canon 117.

67. Note, That one of the two times for Presentiments is always to be about a
Week or a Fortnight after Easter, at which time also the old Churchwardens are
to leave the Office, and new ones are to come in; but the new ones are not to
be sworn till the old ones have given in their Presentment, and every Parson or
Vicar, and in the lawful absence of the Parson or Vicar, then their Curates and
Substitutes are to join in every Presentment with the Churchwardens, Sidemen,
and Questmen; and if the Churchwardens, etc. refuse to present, then every such
Parson and Vicar, or in their absence, as aforesaid, their Curates may
themselves present to their Ordinaries at all such times, and when else they
think meet. Canon 113, 118.

68. The Heads of the Articles, most commonly exhibited to the Churchwardens to
make their Presentiments upon, are as follows;

69. Whether their Church and Chancel, Bells and Ropes be good and well
repaired, and the Ten Commandments, Lords, Prayer, and Creed, drawn out in fair
Letters, the Kings Arms set up, Assessments made for the Repair of the Church,
and who refuses to pay? If they have a Font, Communion Table, Carpit,
Tablecloth, Flaggons with Cups and Cover for Bread, and Wine, Reading Desk,
Pulpit with a Cushion and Covering fit for it, a Common Prayer Book of the
largest Volume; and the Bible of King James' s Translation in folio, with a
Book of Homilies, and Book of Canons, and a Surplice? If the Tombs, Monuments
and Grave-Stones be safely kept from removing and breaking; a Book of Parchment
for Registring, Christnings, etc. A chest with three Locks to put the same and
the Church Ornaments in, with a Box for Alms, and a Table of Degrees prohibited
in Marriage, set forth 1563. hung up in the Church? And if the Parsonage house
and out houses be in good repair; and the Churchyard well fen^ed to keep out
Swine, etc?

70. Then, Whether their Parson, Vicar, or Curate, read the Common Prayer at
Morning and Evening Service, wear his Surplice, bid Holydays, Preach every
Sunday, or read a Homily, Catechize, observe the 5. November, 30. Jan. and 29.
May, and keep Perambulations, preach sound Doctrine, and vent no Sedition
against the King or Government, Celebrate the Lords Supper three times every
year at least, whereof at Easter for once; Baptize Infants with Godfathers and
Godmothers, visit the sick, and pray with them, Bury the Dead according to the
Book of Common Prayer, Marry none Clandestinely, Preach in his Gown, be a man
of a sober and chaste life, a Peacemaker amongst his neighbors, and one that
takes care to reduce Sectaries, Popish Recusants, Separatists and Refractory
persons to the Obedience and Doctrine of the Church, and reads the Book of
Canons to the People at least once every year, and the 39. Articles twice every
year, according to his Majesty's Letters published 1662?

71. Then, Whether all their Parishioners of due Age, resort to the Church to
Divine Service, behave themselves Reverently there, Kneel, Stand up, and make
Answer according to the Rubric of the Common Prayer Book? Whether any work, or
sell wares on Sundays or Holydays, or Vintn^rs, Victualers, Innkeepers, or
others, receive any into their houses to tipple on those days? Whether any
Marry within the prohibited Degrees, be Adulterers, Fornicators, Blasphemers,
Swearers, Drunkards, or Sorcerers; and if all above sixteen years old receive
the Lords Supper at least three times every year, Easter to be one? and whether
any keep their Children unbaptized, Women after Delivery in due time come not
to be Churched, or any bring not their Dead to be buried after the Service of
the Church, keep Conventicles, have been married without Banes or License at
unlawful hours? and whether their Almshouses, Hospital, School, or Spittle, if
they have any be well and godlily used, or any thing detained from it? What
L^gacies given to pious uses; and if the Parishioners be placed in Pews or
Seats, without offense or contention?

72. And lastly, Whether their Parish Clerk and Sexton (if they have any) be
duly chosen, can write and read, be of an honest life, and make the Responses
to the Hymns and other Suffrages? and if the Schoolmaster and Usher, Physician,
Chyrurgeon, or Midwife, (if they have any of them) teach or practice without
License? if the Churchwardens be duly chosen in the Week after Easter, by the
Parson and Parishioners, according to the Canon or Custom? and if the old
Churchwardens have been diligent to keep the Church in good Repair, to preserve
all the Furniture thereof, and walk out of the Church usually about the midst
of Divine Service, to see who are abroad in the Alehouse, or elsewhere absent
or evilly employed?

73. These are the heads of most of the Articles that are inquired of at the
Visitation Courts; but it is probable there may be some small alteration,
according to the use of the several Diocesses in several places.

FINIS.
A GUIDE FOR Overseers of the Poor.
CHAP. I.
Of the Antiquity of the Officers, their Qualifications, and how and when to be
chosen.

1. THis Office of Overseers of the Poor, is a Name and Office of great
Excellency and Antiquity, and may beseem the best and not the meanest men in a
Parish; for this is not the least Office, to be called Overseers of the Poor;
for as God himself has a special respect to the miseries of the Poor, so they
be like God which provide for the necessities of the Poor.

2. Now it is certain, that the Antiquity of this Office is of above sixteen
hundred years standing, as appears by holy Writ; for we find St. Stephen the
Protomartyr, a man full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and
Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a Proselyte of
Antioch, chosen to this Office, as appears Acts 6. 5. and see Acts 20. and 28.
and 1 Cor. 16. 2. 3.

3. As for the qualifications of these Officers, they ought to be substantial
persons, having competency of Wealth, Wisdom, a good Conscience, and of honest
report; see Acts 6. and 3. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 93.

4. Now these Overseers of the Poor, here with us in England, are certain
Officers appointed yearly to be joined and assistant to the Churchwardens of
the Parish, in the oversight and ordering of the Poor of the Parish, and they
are to be appointed by two or more Justices of the Peace of the County (whereof
one to be of the Quorum) dwelling in or near the Parish or Division, etc. who
who are yearly under their Hands and Seals, at E^ster, or within a month after
to appoint 4. 3. or 2. substantial Householders, (according to the greatness of
the Parish to be joined with the Churchwardens of the Parish) and all these
together are to look to the Poor of the Parish; for the Churchwardens of the
place have an equal power and charge with the Overseers, and may be punished
for their neglect, if they refuse to meddle herein, 43. El. 2. 21. Jac. Chapter 28.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 93. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

5. The major part of these Officers, without the rest of them, may do any
thing belonging to their Office. But they are to have the allowance and consent
either in particular or in general of Two Justices of the Peace ( Quor. unus)
to every thing they do about their Office. And these Officers, or such of them
as shall not be let by just excuse, (to be allowed by two Justices) are to meet
monthly in the Church on Sunday after Evening Prayer, and there they are to
consider of some meet directions about their Office and they are to use all
possible diligence in their Office, ^in pain to forfeit for every such Default,
20 s. 43. El. Chapter 2. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

6. The Inhabitants of the Townships within the great Parishes of Lancashire,
Cheshire, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Northumberland, Bishopric of Durham,
Cumberland and Westmerland, are to take care for the Poor of their Townships,
and Villages only, and are yearly to choose Overseers for the Poor within their
several Townships and Villages: And these Officers shall have the same power in
the place where they are chosen, for the relief of the Poor there, and forfeit
the like penalties for their neglect, as such like Officers for entire Parishes
shall do. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

7. And if it happen that Overseers be not appointed according to the 43. El.
then every Justice of Peace, or Head Officer, of that Division or Corporation
shall forfeit 5 l. to be levied by a Sessions Warrant, and employed to the use
of the Poor of the Parishes where such default is made, 43. El. Chapter 2.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

CHAP. II.
Of the several Sorts of Poor People, and what Poor the Overseers are to
provide for and relieve, or set to work.

8. NOte, that there are three forts or degrees of Poor, as first the Poor by
impotency and defect, as the aged and decrepit that are past their labor; the
Infant Fatherless and Motherless, and not able to work, the person naturally
disabled either in Wit or member, as an Idiot, Lunatic, Blind, Lame, etc. not
being able to work, and the person visited with grievous sickness or disease,
though casually, yet thereby for the time being impotent: All these the
Overseers are to provide for, that they have necessary Relief and Allowances
proportionable and according to the continuance and measure of their maladies
and needs, and of these it may be said, Si non pavisti, occidisti: Dalt. J. P.
Chapter 40. fo. 100.

9. Then Secondly, The Poor by casualty, as a person casually disabled or
maimed in his body, as the Soldier or Labourer, etc. maimed in their lawful
Callings, the Householder decayed by casualty of Fire, Water, Robbery,
Suretiship, etc. and the poor man overcharged with Children: All these (and
such like others) having ability and strength of body, but not sufficient means
to maintain themselves, are to be set to work by the Overseers, and being not
able to live by their work, they are in Charity to be relieved in some
reasonable proportion, according to their several wants and necessities. Dalt.
J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 100.

10. Then lastly, The Thriftless Poor, as the riotous and prodigal person, that
consumes all with play or drinking, etc. the dissolute person, as the Strumpet,
Pilferer, etc. the Slothful person that refuses to work, etc. and the Vagabond
that will abide in no place or service; and for all these the House of
Correction is the place where they are to be sent to, and being of able bodies
there they are to be held to hard labor, and to maintain themselves, by their
labor and work, without charging the Town or Country for any allowance. 7.
Jac. Chapter 4. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 101.

11. But it seems that if any of these last sort of Poor happen to prove
impotent, and also in cases of manifest extremity, then they are to be relieved
by the Town. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 101.

12. If the Parents be able to work, and may have work, they are to find their
Children by their labor, and not the Parish; but if they be overcharged with
Children, they may have help, by having some of their Children put out
Apprentices by the Overseers. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 98.

13. The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and the Children and
Grandchildren of every poor impotent person not able to work, being of
sufficient ability, shall relieve such poor persons in such manner, as the
Justices of Peace of that County (where such sufficient person dwells) at
their General Quarter Sessions shall Assess; and if such party refuse to abide
the order they forfeit 20 s. for every month to the Poor of the Parish, which
forfeiture is to be levied by the Churchwardens and Overseers, or one of them,
by Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace ( Quor. unus) within their
Limits, by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, and for want of distress,
any two such Justices may commit the Offender to Prison, there to remain
without Bail till the said Forfeiture be paid. 43. El. Chapter 2. Resol. Judges 16,
17. Dalt J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 98.

14. But note, That if a man marry a Grandmother that has no Estate, the
Grandfather in Law is not chargeable: But if she have an Estate caused without
such marriage, or that comes after marriage by descent or otherwise to her,
here he may be charged: But where they have raised themselves to an Estate by
their own Industry there it is doubtful: But in no case shall he be charged
longer than his Wife lives; and it seems also Bastard Children are not within
this Law, neither can the Justices do any thing herein against a man that lives
out of their County. See Boulstred's Rep. 2. Part. fo. 245, 246, 247.

15. No Poor may beg but in their own Parish, and there by License of the
Overseers of the Poor; and they may not License them to beg in the Highways
there, and without the License of the Overseers they may not beg at all. Res.
Judges 15. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 99. 39. El. 3.

16. No Inhabitants may serve any Poor at their Door, but those of their own
Parish, that have License from the Overseers of the Poor to beg there, under
pain of 10 s. for every time they do so, 1. Jac. 7. Dalt. J. P. Chap. 47. fol.
129.

17. These Officers to make provision for a poor man that wants an House (but
not for a common Herdsman or Shepherd) with consent of the Lord of the Manor
first had in Writing under his Hand and Seal, either by themselves, or with a
Sessions Order, may erect a Cottage upon any part of the Waste of a Manor, and
lodge Inmates therein, notwithstanding the Stat. 31. El. 7. But such Cottage
may not be afterward employed otherwise than to lodge impotent persons there;
for if it be, then it falls within the penalty of the 31. El. aforesaid, 43.
El. Chapter 2. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

18. All such persons married or unmarried, having no means to maintain them,
use no ordinary and daily Trade of life to get their living by, and such
persons also as can get no work, are to be set on work by the Overseers; and
any one Justice of Peace may send to the House of Correction, or Common Gaol,
such as shall not employ themselves to work, being appointed thereto by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish. 43. El. Chapter 2. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 40. fo. 93.

19. And to this purpose the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor may by,
and with the consent of two or more Justices of the Peace ( Quor. unus) etc.
Set up, use, and occupy any Trade, Mystery, or Occupation, only for the setting
on work, and better relief of the Poor, of the Parish, Town or place, where
they are Overseers, etc. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 4. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 94.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

20. If a Stranger come into the Parish into any Tenement, under the yearly
value of 10 l. The Overseers may require sufficient Security of him, for the
discharge of the Parish, and if he refuse, they may complain to the Justices of
Peace within 40 days after the party come there, and they may order him to do
it, or otherwise remove him. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

CHAP. III.
The Duty of the Overseers about putting forth and binding Apprentices, with
the form of the Indenture for such purpose.

21. IN the putting out of Children Apprentices, there ought to be regard had
to the Master, the Child and the Parents, First to the Master, that he be of
ability and honesty, otherwise by some device or hard entreaty they may provoke
their Apprentices to depart or run away; and regard is also to be had to his
Trade or Faculty, lest the Apprentice consume his time without learning any
thing: Secondly, Regard is to be had to the Apprentices to put them out timely,
and while they are young and tractable (so that they be above the Age of seven
years) otherwise by reason of their idle and base Educations they will hardly
keep their Service, or employ themselves to work: Then lastly, Regard is to be
had to the Parents to take away such from them as are brought up to live idly
and loosly, or else such as are a burden and charge to their Parents. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 40. fo. 94, 95.

22. Note, That the choice of these Apprentices are to be out of the poorest
sort of Children, whose P^rents are the least able to relieve them, and they
are to be above 7. and under 15. years of Age, when they are first bound. 7.
Jac. Chapter 3. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

23. And these Officers are to have the consent of two Justices of the Peace,
in the placing out of such Apprentices; and they may bind the Man-child till 24
years of age, and the Woman-child till 21. years of age, or till she be
married, which shall first happen: And these Apprentices may be bound to
Weavers, Masons, Dyers, Fullers, or any other Trade, as well as to Husbandry or
Housewifery. See 43. El. Chapter 2. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 31. fo. 83. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Poor People.

24. Now this placing of Apprentices may be to any man, whom the Officers and
Justices think fit to receive them, within the same Parish, or elsewhere in
other Parishes within the same Hundred either with, or without money; therefore
it is fit in this case to consider, if the Child be young, and the party to
whom they place it not very able, then they may give money, if they please, as
the party and they shall agree. Resol. Judges, 1633. Quest. 1.

25. All men that have, or may have use for Servants, as Knights, Clergymen,
Gentlemen, and Yeomen, as well as Tradesmen, are bound to take Apprentices;
yea, though wealthy men Table themselves, or live so privately, that they have
no use for a Servant, yet they may be compelled to take them; or else to pay a
sum of money for putting them Apprentices elsewhere; and if they refuse to pay
the sum imposed upon them, Two Justices of the Peace may make their Warrant to
levy the same by distress and sale of the offenders Goods. Resol. Judges, 1633.
Quest. 4. Poulton 2. 4. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 95.

26. Or the Refusers to take Apprentices may be presented and indicted for the
same, upon the Stat. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2. at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 95. Resol. Judges, 1633. Quest 7.

27. An Apprentice put to a man in respect of his Farm when his Lease expireth,
the Apprentice shall go still with the Farm, if the first Master be so pleased;
otherwise it is where an Apprentice is put to a man in regard of his ability,
or for other respects. And where any differences are between the Officers and
the man that is to receive an Apprentice, about money, and what money shall be
given, or otherwise, here the Justices thereabouts, or, in their defaults, the
Sessions must end it. Resol. Judges, 1633. Quest. 2. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 95.

28. If the Parents of poor Children shall refuse to let their Children be put
forth Apprentices (without good cause showed) such Parents may be bound over,
by the Justices, to answer their said Default; and if the Children shall
refuse, the Justices may send them to the House of Correction, there to remain
till they be content to be bound and serve. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. and 31. fo. 96.
and 78.

29. Note, That this binding must be by Indenture, and may not well be done by
a Verbal Agreement; and the Indenture must be either between the Justices,
Churchwardens and Overseers, or them, and the Apprentice on the one part, and
him that takes the Apprentice of the other part, as appears by the form of the
Indenture in the end of this Chapter; and he must be named by the name of
Apprentice expressly, or else he is no Apprentice, though he be bound. Crompt.
184. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 31. fo. 82.

30. And this binding is as effectual to all purposes, as if the Children were
of full Age, and did bind themselves by Indentures and Covenants; and all such
as are bound by the Overseers, as abovesaid, may safely be received and kept as
Apprentices by their Masters. 1. Jac. Chapter 25. 21. Jac. Chapter 28. Dalt. J. P. Chapter
31. fo. 83. 3. Car. 1. Chapter 4, 5. El. Chapter 4. Crompt. 184. b.

31. Note, That money, given to put out poor Children Apprentices, is to be
employed in Corporate Towns by the Corporations, and in other places by the
Parson or Vicar, together with the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers of
the Poor, or the most part of them; who shall not forbear, or refuse to employ
the same acordingly, in pain to forfeit 5. marks, each of them so making
default, to be divided betwixt the Poor of the Parish and the Prosecutor 7.
Jac. Chapter 3. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

32. And the party, taking any money with such Apprentice, shall give good
Security by Obligation to repay it at the end of seven years next ensuing the
date of the said Obligation, or within three months next after the end of the
said seven years; and if such Apprentice shall die within the seven years, then
within one year after his or her death; and if the Master, Mistress, or Dame,
happen to die within the seven years, then within one year after their death:
so as the money may be employed in placing the Apprentice with some other of the
same Trade, to serve out his time, at the discretion of the parties trusted as
aforesaid. 7. Jac. Chapter 3.

33. And the money so given shall be employed within three months after the
Receipt thereof; and if there shall not be apt persons found in the places
where it is given to be Apprentices, it shall then be employed in the Parishes
next adjoining, by the Parties that are trusted with it in the place where it
was so given, and there also Bond shall be taken, as before is declared. 7. Jac.
Chapter 3.

34. Note, That if the Master shall put his Apprentice into Apparel, it is a
Gift in Law, and he cannot afterward take it away, though he should part with
his Apprentice. Bro. Transgr. 93.

35. An Apprentice cannot be discharged from his Apprenticeship, but by four
Justices of the Peace at the least, and in open Sessions, or else by the
Agreement of the Master and Apprentice, and under his Masters hand in writing,
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 31. fo. 79.

36. The Form of these Indentures, mentioned before, is as follows, viz. This
Indenture made the 29. day of September, in the 20. year of the Reign of our
most gracious Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Dom. 1668. Witnesses that J. W. and G. B. Overseers for the Poor in
the Town of Kirk-Leaventon, and J. R. Churchwarden of the same Town, by and
with the consent of Sir J. P. Knight and Baronet, and T. M. Esquire two of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace for the North Riding of the County of York, have by
these Presents placed and bound J. T. (being a poor fatherless Child) as an
Apprentice with E. H. of Kirk-Leaventon aforesaid, Widow; and as an Apprentice
with her the said E. H. to dwell from the day of the Date of these Presents,
until she the said J. T. shall come to the Age of 21. years, or be married,
which shall first happen, according to the Statu^e in that case made and
provided; by and during all which time and Term the said J. T. shall the said
E. H. her Dame well and faithfully serve, in all such lawful business as the
said E. H. shall put her the said J. T. unto, according to her power, wit, and
ability, and honestly and obediently in all things shall behave her self
toward her said Dame and Children, and all the rest of the Family of the said
E. H. And the said E. H. for her part promises, covenanteth, and agrees that
she the said E. H. the aforesaid J. T. in the Art and Skill of Housewifery the
best manner that she can, or may, shall teach and inform, or cause to be taught
and informed, as much as thereunto belongs, and she the said E. H. knows;
and also during all the said Term to find unto her said Apprentice, Meat,
Drink, Linen, Woollen, Hose, Shoes, Washing, and all other things needful or
meet for an Apprentice. In Witness whereof, etc.

37. Note, If it be a Boy that is to be bound Apprentice to Husbandry, or any
other Trade, then he may be bound till 24. years of Age, as is showed before in
this Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Several Cases about Settlements, and also touching Bastards, etc.

38. NOte, There have been formerly many Controversies, what time should be
accounted a Legal Settlement; but now all Objections in that point are
answered; for it is appointed by the 14. Car. 2. that 40. days shall be
accounted a Legal Settlement; but then this Settlement ought neither to be
obscure, interrupted, nor brought about by practice.

39. As touching Settling of Poor People; Note, That the Justices are to meddle
with none but those who are impotent, and such as are like to be chargeable to
the place where they are. Boulstr. Rep. 1. Part. 347.

40. And as to this, know that it is enacted by the 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12. That if
any Stranger come into a Parish to settle there in any Tenement, under 10 l. a
year, and he refuse to give such Security for the Discharge of the Parish as
two Justices shall think fit; then any two Justices ( Quor. unus) may upon
complaint to them made by the Churchwardens or Overseers, within 40 days after
the Stranger come into the Parish, make their Warrant to send him to the place,
where he was last legally settled as a Native, Householder, Sojourner,
Apprentice, or Servant 40 days or more; so that by this, it seems to be the
opinion of this Parliament, that no man that Rents 10 l. a year, or above, is
to be accounted such a poor man as to be removed by order of the Justices:
where any person finds himself agrieved by the two Justices order, he may
Appeal to the next Quarter Sessions held for that County for his Relief. 14.
Car. 2. Chapter 12.

41. But any person may go into any County, Parish, or place to work in time of
Harvest, or at any time to work at other work, so as they carry with him or
them a certificate from the Minister of the Parish, one of the Churchwardens,
and one of the Overseers of the Poor, that they have a dwelling House wherein
they Inhabit, and that they have left Wife and Children, or some of them there,
and is declared an Inhabitant there; and in such case, if the person shall not
return to the place aforesaid, when his work is done, or shall fall sick or
impotent, while he is in the said work, yet this shall not be accounted a
Settlement; but any two Justices may send the person or persons to the place or
places of his or their Habitation; and if any person shall refuse to go, or
shall not remain in the Parish where he ought to be settled, then the Justices
may send such person to the House of Correction, there to be punished as a
Vagabond, or to a public Workhouse to be employed in work or labor. 14. Car.
2. Chapter 12. This Statute, as to the point aforesaid, is to continue to the end
of the first Sessions of the next Parliament.

42. Note, That no man but a Vagrant Beggar, ought to be sent out of any Parish
to the place of his birth or last habitation; for if any refuse to work in the
Parish where he is settled, or to work for the wages assessed, then he is by
the Justices to be sent to the House of Correction. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 730.
7. Jac. Chapter 4. Resol. Judges, 9. Dalt. J. P. Chap. 47. fo. 126.

43. If a Scholar in the University, or in a Grammar School begin to be
suspect, he may be, or if he do become impotent, and is like to be charge to
the Parish where he is, he must be sent to his Parents if he have any,
otherwise to the place where he was last legally settled before he came to
School. Resol. Judges, 1633. Sect. 31.

44. If one be born, and live 20. years in A. and then go to B. and there live
in a House and pay his Rent, and after he comes to C. and there works 20. Weeks
as a Labourer in a Quarry of Stones, where he breaks his back, and becomes
impotent, and there is taken vagrant and begging, in this case he must be sent
to A. the place of his birth, and there must be provided for. Resol. Judges,
14. Car. 1.

45. If a man that has a Wife and Children take an House in one Parish for a
year, and during this time he is illegally forced out of his Possession; then
he takes an House as an Inmate in another Parish, out of which he is put within
two or three days, and then not having any place to be in, he gets into a Barn
in the third place, and there his Wife is delivered of another Child; in this
case they are all to be sent to the Parish out of which they were first
illegally forced. Resol. Judge. 1633. Sect. 24.

46. One born in D. left that place for the space of 20. years, then lived in
S. took an house and paid rent, and left that place also 6. or 7. years, and
then came to L. in another County, and there was 20. weeks, did work, and there
became impotent, and did wander and beg in the same place, and was taken as a
Vagrant, and it was ordered he should be passed and settled at D. where he was
born, by the Judges at Worcester Assizes. 14. Car. 1. Boulstr. Rep. 1. Part.
fol. 357.

47. No Child under the Age of 7. years shall be adjudged a Rogue within the
Stat. 39. El. Chapter 4. But it seems such Children vagrant and begging must be
sent and placed with the Father or Husband of the Wife; and if he be dead, then
with the Mother (where she was born, or last dwelt by the space of one year)
and such Children, once thus settled or placed, must there remain, and not be
sent from thence to their place of birth, though after their Parents die or run
away, or that the said Children grow above the age of 7. years; yea, though the
said Children after beg and prove vagrant in the Town, for there they must be
set to labor by the Overseers of the Poor. Resol. Judges. 4. 9* 10. Poult.
Vag. 2. and Dalt. J. P. Chapter 47. fol. 125.

48. But Children, above 7. years of age, going about vagrant or begging in the
Country, shall be punished as Rogues, and sent to their place of birth. Dalt.
J. P. Chapter 47. fo. 125. and Resol. Judges. 4. 39. El. Chapter 4.

49. The Wife, being a Vagrant Rogue, must be sent to her Husband, though he be
but a Servant in another Town; and where the Husband and Wife have an House,
(though as an Inmate) and either of them Rogue about, in this case they are to
be sent to the place where the house is. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 47. fo. 125. Resol.
Judges. 3. and 5.

50. The Rogue, whose place of birth or last dwelling cannot be known, having
Wife and Children under 7. years of age, they must go with the Husband to the
place where they were last wilfully suffered to pass through without
punishment, where the Children must be relieved by the work of their Parents,
though the Parents be committed to the House of Correction; and if the Rogue
have Children above 7. years of age, that Rogue about with him, then they are
to be sent to the House of Correction also with the Parents, and when they come
out again, then to their several places of births. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 47. fo. 123.
and Sheppard's Guide for J. P. page 252. Resol. etc. b.

51. If I live in an house in A. there with my Children, but I work in B. where
I am hired by the year, in this case my Children shall be in A. but if I have
an house in B. they shall be placed there. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 99.

52. A. being a Wanderer with three Children born in three Parishes comes to
Dale with them to her Sister, and there dies shortly after, here the Children
must be settled in the several Parishes where they were born, and not in the
Parish where the Mother dyed. Boulstr. Rep. 2. Part. 351.

53. No man is to be put out of the Town where he dwells and is lawfully
settled, nor to be sent to his place of birth, or last habitation but a Vagrant
Rogue, nor to be found by the Town, except the party be impotent, but they
ought to set themselves to labor, if they be able and can get work; And if
they cannot get work, then the Overseers are to set them to work: And if in
such case such persons wander abroad begging out of the Parish, then they may
be sent as Vagabonds (from the place where they shall be taken wandering or
begging) to the place of their birth. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fol. 99.

54. If a Maid Servant be gotten with with Child at A. by her Fellow Servant
(or by another young Man of the same Town) and after both their Services ended
they marry, and then the young man is retained at B. and afterward the Woman
is delivered of her Child, in this Case she with her Child are to be sent to
the Father at B. and there must be settled. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 99.

55. If any disturbance be made to any Settlement lawfully ordered by the
Justices, either by the Constables refusing to receive and convey a Rogue where
they ought to do it, or by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor in
refusing such an one as is duly sent to be settled there, in such case they
forfeit 5. l. by the 39. El. Chapter 4.

56. If a Woman unmarried be hired weekly, Monthly, half yearly, or yearly, in
one Parish, and there be be gotten with Child, and then goes into another
Parish, and there is settled in Service, or otherwise for two or three months,
and then she is discovered to be with Child, in this case she and her Child
shall be settled in the Parish where she then is, and must not be sent to the
Parish whence she came. Resol. Judges. 1633. Sect. 12.

57. If a Woman be delivered of a Bastard Child in one Parish, and then go into
another Parish with her Child, in this case the Child after it is Nursed, is to
be sent to and settled in the place where it was born, and not to remain with
the Mother. Resol. Judges. 1633. Sect. 21.

58. If A. have a Bastard Child by B. born in Dale, 10. years since, and the
Reputed Father marries another Woman, and they breed the Child 10. years in the
Parish of Sale, and the Mother of the Child is in Service all this while, and a
Single Woman, the Reputed Father dies; In this case the Child is to be sent to
the Mother first, to be maintained by her if she be able, and if not, it must
be kept by the Parish of Sale, where it was settled with the Father 10 years.
Boulstr. Rep. 2. Part. fo. 350.

59. If a Woman have a Bastard Child, and is like to be chargeable to the
Parish, and she is sent to the House of Correction for it (as she may be by
Law) in this case it has been questioned whether the Child must go with her,
or remain in the Town where it was born, (or settled with the Mother) and there
to be relieved by the work of the Mother, or by Relief from the Reputed Father,
upon the 18. El. and it seems most reasonable to be so; and yet the common
opinion and practice is otherwise, (to wit) to send the Child with the Mother
to the House of Correction: And this may also seem reasonable where the Child
sucketh on the Mother. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 11. fo. 39.

60. If a Woman with Child be sent to the House of Correction, and there be
delivered, the Child must be sent back to the Parish where the Woman came from,
there to be relieved. Also if a Woman be traveling, and have her Child with
her, and is apprehended and sent to the Gaol, and there hanged for Felony, in
this case the Child shall not be chargeable to the place where the Gaol is, but
to the place where it was born (if it can be known) otherwise to the place
where the Mother was apprehended; and so was the opinion of Sir Nicholas Hide.
3. Car. 1.

61. The Two next Justices ( Quor. unus) in (...) to the limits where the
Parish C^^^ch is, may take order as well for the punishment of the Mother and
Reputed Father of a Bastard Child, as also for the Relief of the Parish where
it is born, by charging the Mother and Father with the payment of money weekly
toward the keeping of it, or otherwise; And if the Mother or Father perform
not the Justices order therein, they are to suffer Imprisonment without Bayl,
except he or she give Security to perform, or else to appear at the next
Sessions, and abide, the order of the Justices there, if any be made there, and
if none be made, then to stand to the first order. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 11. fo. 37.
and 38. 18. Eliz. Chapter 3.

62. Note, That this Order may be made by any two Justices of the County (
Quor. unus) as it is held by some, but most properly by the two next Justices;
and the question must be about such a Bastard Child as is like to be a charge
to the Parish; and the Security must be given to the Parish where the Child is
born, to secure the Parish from the charge of the Child or to keep the Child:
it must be a Parish within the County where the two (...) have power, and the
Order must be certain how long the Reputed Father must keep the Child, secure
the Parish, etc. and it must be made against the person that is suspected to
have gotten the Bastard Child, and not against another person to contribute
toward it, because it was gotten in his house, etc. and the Order must express
the Child by the name of a Bastard Child, and not the reputed Child of such an
one; and the Justices for the better discovery of the matter, may upon Oath
examine the Mother herself concerning the Reputed Father, the time, etc. Dalt.
J. P. Chapter 11. fo. 37. 18. Eliz. Chapter 3. 7. Jac. Chapter 4. See Steel's Rep. fo. 154,
245, 246, 247, 388. and see Pridgeon's case. Hill. 9. Car. 1. B. R. and Slater's
case. Pasch. 13. Car. 1. B. R. Cro. Rep. 1. Part.

63. Where the Putative Father or Mother of a Bastard Child shall run out of a
Parish or County, and leave their Children upon the charge of the Parish,
having Estates sufficient to discharge the Parish, there the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor of the place where the Child is born, may seiz so many of
the Goods and Chattels, or Rents of his other Lands, for the discharge of the
Parish, and bringing up and providing for the Child, as any two Justices shall
order; and thereupon the Sessions is to dispose and sell the Goods and
Chattels; and the Sessions may order the Officers aforesaid, what they shall
receive of the Rents and Lands also for the purposes aforesaid. 14. Car. 2. Chapter
12.

CHAP. V.
The Overseers Office in making of Rates, and passing Accounts.

64. THese Officers, or the greater part of them (for the doing and performing
of the things they have in charge) may raise weekly, or otherwise by Taxation
of every Parson, Vicar, and other Occupier of Land, House, or Tithes,
Cole-mines, or saleable Underwoods, within the Parish, Town, etc. such a sum as
they shall think fit; and this Rate they must have allowed and confirmed under
the hands of Two Justices ( Quor. unus) and then by Warrant from them, or any
other Two Justices ( Quor. unus) they may levy, by distress and sale of the
Goods of the party refusing to pay, the said Tax, rendering the Overplus to the
owners; and in Default of Distress two such Justices may commit the party to
Prison, there to remain without bayl till it be discharged by him. 43. El. Chapter
2. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 4. fo. 97. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor People.

65. Now these Rates ought to be well and truly made, according to men's visible
Estates, real and personal, within the place only, and not for any Estate
elsewhere; at Lincoln Assizes. 9. Car. 1. by Justice Hutton and Crook.

66. Note, That a Parish in Reputation shall be a Parish within this Law; so
that if A. be an ancient Parish that has Officers in it, and there be a Town
within this Parish, which for a long time has been used and reputed as a
Parish, and has all Parochial Rights, as Churchwardens, etc. here this place
may be Rated as a Parish toward the Poor. Hutton's Rep. fo. 93. and M. 3, Car.
B. R. Hilton and Paul's case. Cro. 3. Part. Rep.

67. This Tax must be set upon the Tenants and Occupiers of Lands, and not upon
the Landlords living within or without the Parish; for the Tenant only is
chargeable for the Land. Bulstred's 1. Part. Rep. fo. 354.

68. The Parson, having a full Tenth Part of the Profits of the place, may be
rated to a Tenth Part. Resol. Judges. 1633. Sect. 32.

69. He that does occupy Lands in his his own hands, lying in several Parishes,
he must be charged in every Parish for his Land lying therein, only according
to the proportion thereof, and no more, but for his personal Estate, it seems
reasonable he should be charged for it in the place where his person is; All
Lands Ancients Demeasn Guildable, and Copyhold are to be charged with these
Rates, which ought to be according to the value, or by the pound, and not
according to the quantity. Sed Consuetudo tollit Legem.

70. The Rate for Stock or Goods is thought reasonable to be set after the
proportion of Lands ( viz.) an 100 pound in Stock to be rated after 5. or 6.
pound a year in Land.

71. Note, That in some special cases a man may be rated beyond his ability, as
where one brings a charge upon a Parish; or under any pretense brings in a man
that may be chargeable in a Parish, he may, if there be cause for this, be
raised in his Rate to the full value of his Estate, and so was the opinion of
Sir Nicholas Hide. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 97.

72. Where the Inhabitants of any Parish are not able to relieve their Poor,
any two Justices ( Quor. unus) may tax other Parishes and places within the
Hundred, yea, the whole Hundred, if need require; and where that is not
sufficient, the Justices in their Sessions may tax the County in part, or
wholly at their discretions. 43. El. Chapter 2. Wingate's abr. Stat. Tit. Poor
People. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

73. If any persons find themselves agrieved in any Tax or other Act done by
the Overseers, or by the Justices of Peace, they are to be Relieved at the
Quarter Sessions. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 97. Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor
People.

74. The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and Children of every poor
person, shall be assessed toward their Relief, as the Justices of the Peace in
their Sessions of the Peace in the County where such Father, etc. dwells shall
limit and appoint, in pain to forfeit 20. s. a Month to the use of the Poor to
be levied by distress and sale as aforesaid, and for want of distress to be
committed to Prison till the Forfeiture be paid. 43. El. Chapter 2. Wingate's Abr.
Stat. Tit. Poor People. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 98.

75. Head Officers in Cities and Corporate Towns, and Aldermen of London, have
in their several Precincts like Authority that Justices of Peace have in their
Counties, and no other Justices of Peace are to enter and intermeddle there.
Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People. 43. El. Chapter 2.

76. If any Parish shall extend into two Counties, or part thereof to lie in
any City or Corporate Town where they have Justices; Then the Justices of every
County, etc. are to intermeddle only within their own limits; and every of them
respectively within their limits are to execute this Law concerning the
nomination of Overseers, binding of Apprentices, granting Warrants to levy
Taxations, taking Accounts of Overseers, and committing such as refuse to
account or to pay their Arrearages; and yet the Overseers shall without
dividing themselves, execute their Office in all places within the said Parish,
but shall give up Accounts to the Justices, or Head Officers of both places.
Wingate's Abr. Stat. Title. Poor Perple. 43. El. Chapter 2. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo.
97, 98.

77. These Officers within four days after the end of their year, and that
other Officers are nominated, are to yield up a true account to two Justices (
Quor. unus) of these things following, 1. What sums of money they have received
or rated, and not received? 2. What stock of Ware or Stuff is in their hands,
or in the hands of any of the Poor? 3. What Apprentices they have put out, and
bound according to the Statute. 4. What Poor they have set to work or relieved?
5. What Poor they have suffered to wander and beg out of their Town, or in the
Highways, or in their Town without their directions? 6. Whether they met
monthly to consider of the things belonging to their Office? 7. Whether they
made their Rates indifferently upon all men, according to their ability? 8.
Whether they have endeavored to gather and levy such Assessments? 9. Whether
they have neglected the Justices Warrants to them, or any of them directed for
the levying of any forfeiture according to the Stat. 43. El. Chapter 2. Dalt. J. P.
Chapter 40. fo. 96.

78. Now if the Churchwardens or Overseers, or any of them, shall refuse to
make and yield a true and perfect Account to the said Justices, of all such
money and of all such Stock as aforesaid, any two Justices ( Quor. unus) may
commit them to the Common Gaol, there to remain without Bayl, till they have
made a true account, and satisfied and paid to the new Overseers so much of the
said Sum or Stock, as upon the said Account shall be remaining in his or their
hands, etc. And if they make a false account, they may be bound over to the
Assizes or Sessions, and there an Indictment may be preferred against them.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 96.

79. Also if any of the Churchwardens or Overseers shall refuse, or deny to pay
and deliver over to the new Overseers the Arrearages (Sums of Money or Stock)
which shall be in their hands, and due and behind upon their Account to be made
as aforesaid, any two such Justices of Peace may make their Warrant to the
present or subsequent Churchwardens and Overseers, or any of them, to levy the
same by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering to the Parties the
Overplus; and in default of such Distress, any two Justices of the Peace may
commit him or them to the Common Gaol, there to remain without Bayl, until
payment or delivery of the said Sum, Arrearages, and Stock be made. 43. El. Chapter
2. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 96.

80. If any such Stock shall be in the hands of any of the Poor to work, and
such Poor shall refuse to deliver the same, two such Justices may make the like
Warrant, to levy the same by distress, and for lack thereof may commit such
Offenders to the Gaol as aforesaid. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 96.

81. And for these aforesaid, and all other Negligences of the Churchwardens
and Overseers, in the execution of their Office, about the Poor, etc. every of
them for every default he makes forfeits 20. s. which Default must be proved
either by the Offenders own Confession, or by Examination of Witnesses; and it
is to be levied by the new Churchwardens and Overseers, or one of them, by
Warrant from two Justices, as aforesaid, by Distress and Sale of the Offenders
Goods; and for want of Distress, two such Justices may commit the Offenders to
the Gaol, there to remain without Bayl, till the said Forfeitures shall he
paid, which said Forfeitures are to be employed to the use of the Poor of the
same Parish. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 40. fo. 97. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2.

FINIS.
A GUIDE FOR SURVEYORS OF Highways and Bridges.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Choice of these Officers, how many Sorts of ways there are, with some
few General Cases concerning Highways.

1. THese Supravisors or Surveyors of the Highways are Officers yearly chosen
by the Constables and Churchwardens of every Parish: and by the 14. Car. 2. the
Churchwardens, Constables, or Tythingmen of every Parish, Town or Hamlet, for
the time being, are upon Monday or Tuesday in Easter week, with the advice of
the major part of the Inhabitants to choose two or more sufficient Inhabitants
of the Parish, Town, or Hamlet, to be Surveyors of the Highways for the year
following, and they are to give notice thereof in writing to the persons chosen
next Sunday after; and for default of such choice the Constables,
Churchwardens, and Inhabitants of every Parish, Town, or Hamlet, shall forfeit
and loose, 5. l. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

2. And after choice made of these Officers, as aforesaid, and notice given
them, they are forthwith to take the Office upon them, in pain to forfeit 20 s.
2. 3. P. M. Chapter 8. Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways.

3. The Constables and Churchwardens are then also to appoint six days betwixt
then and Midsummer, to be set a part for the amendment of the Highways, and
must give public notice there* of in the Church the next Sunday after Easter,
5. El. Chapter 13. 23. P. M. Chapter 8. Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways.

4. Note, That there are three kind of ways, (to wit) first a Foot way, called
Iter quod est jus eundi, vel ambulandi hominis. Secondly, a Foot way, and an
Horse way, called actus ab agendo, and this vulgarly is called a Pack or Drift
way, and is both Foot way and Horse way. Thirdly, a Cart way, etc. called via
or Aditus, (and this contains the other two, and a Cart way also) for this is
jus eundi, vehendi, and vehiculum and jumentum ducendi; and this is twofold, to
wit Via Regia, the Kings Highway for all men, and communis Strata, belonging
to a City or Town, or between Neighbors. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 67.

5. Note, That the Kings Highway (or via Regia) leading either to the Market,
or from Town to Town, the Freehold and soil thereof, and the interest of all
Trees, and other such Profits thereupon growing, do belong to the Lord of the
Soil, or the Lord of the Manor; and therefore such Lords are chargeable to cut
down the Trees and Bushes growing in such Highways; and it is called the Kings
Highway; for that the King at all times has therein passage for Himself and
his People, and may punish all Nusances therein, though otherwise the Interest
be in the Lord to bring his Action for digging therein, or other like Trespass
there done. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 68. and see R^lls Cases, 1 part. fo. 392.
2. E. 4. 9. 8. E. 4. 9. 17. E. 3. fo. 43. Bro. Chemine, 10. 11. and Leet. 3.
27. H. 6. fo. 9. 8. H. 7. fo. 5.

6. Generally the owner of the Soil on both sides of the way shall have the
Trees growing in the way: But the Lord of a Rape, within which there are Ten
Manors, may prescribe to have all the Trees growing within any Highway within
such Rape, although the Manor or Soil adjoining belong to another person, for
the usage and taking of the Trees is a good badge of Ownership. P. 11. Jac. B.
R. between Sir. Tho. Pellam, and Wiat, and Blake, Rolls Cases. 1. Part. fo. 392.

7. Where any person shall enclose any part of the Highway, such person shall
be chargeed to amend the Highway next adjoining to the said Enclosure. And if
one man have enclosed on one side, and another man on the other side, they
shall be both charged to mend the same way. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 69. and see
Tr. 10. Car. 1. B. R. Sir Edward Duncomb's case, Cro. 3. Part. Rep. and 6. Jac.
and 19. Jac. so Resolved. Rolls Cases, 1. Part. fo. 390.

8. But otherwise generally Highways must be sufficiently amended at the charge
of the whole Town: And it is not enough for the Inhabitants to do their full
Six days work yearly, except their ways be all well and sufficiently repaired
thereby; For if all their said ways be not sufficiently amended, the whole Town
may be Indicted therefore; and if Six days work in the year will not serve to
amend them, the Surveyors may, yea, must appoint more days. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26.
fo. 69. 14. Car. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

9. The owner of Lands, if he be not the occupier thereof, ought not to be
charged toward the repair of the common Highways; but the Tenant who occupies
the Lands is to be charged. Hill. 11. Car. 1. B. R. in one Foster's case, per
Curiam. Rolls Cases. 1. Part. fo. 390.

CHAP. II.
The Duty of the Surveyors about Setting and Calling the Parishioners to the
Common days works for the Highways, and about taking and digging for Gravel,
Chalk, Sand, etc.

10. THese Officers are to see that the Parishioners do their work on the days
appointed, and that according to these Rules following, viz. every person
having in his own Occupation a Plough Land in Tillage or in Pasture in the same
Parish, or keeping there a Plough or Draught, shall find and send on every day
to the place appointed by the Surveyors, one Wayn or Cart provided, after the
fashion of the Country, with Oxen, etc. fit for the carriage, and with
necessary Tools fit for the work, and with two able men, who are there to do
such work with their Wayns, etc. as they shall be appointed (by the Surveyors)
by the space of eight hours every of the said six days, on pain of 10 s. every
day default is made. 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 8. Rastall. 199. Lamb. 459. Wingate's Abr.
Stat. Tit. Highways, Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 68.

11. And every other Householder, Cottager, and Labourer of the Parish, Town,
etc. (able to labor and being no hired Servant by the year) must by himself,
or some other able man, be then and there ready to work every of the said six
days, by the space of eight hours, as aforesaid, where they shall be appointed
by the Surveyors, under pain to forfeit 12 d. for every day they make Default.
2. 3. P. M. Chapter 8.

12. Note, That all persons being chargeable but as Cottagers by the 2. and 3.
P. M. yet if they be in Subsidy 5 l. in Goods, or 40 shillings in Lands, or
above, they must find two able men to work every of the said six days. 18. El.
Chapter 9. Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 68.

12. If any of the Carriages shall not be thought needful by the said Surveyors
upon any of the said days, they may appoint in stead of a Team, two able men to
work, as aforesaid* who shall not fail in pain that the party that should send
them shall forfeit 12 pence for every day that either of them makes Default.
Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. (...) 2. 3. P. M. Chapter 8. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. (...)

13. He that shall occupy a Plowland in Tillage or Pasture, lying in several
Parishes, shall be chargeable only in the Parish where he dwells, and he that
occupies several Plowlands in several Parishes, shall be charged in each Town
or Parish where such Land lies (to wit) to find in each Town or Parish one
Cart furnished as aforesaid, though he be no Inhabitant there. 18. El. Chapter 9.
Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 68.

14. Now for the further opening of these things, note, that it is said that a
Plow Land is not of any certain content, but ordinarily it is so much as one
Plough may plow in one year, which in some Countries is more, and in some less,
according to the heaviness of the Soil* Co. 9. Rep. fo. 124. Co. on Lit. fo.
69. and vide Lamb. verb. Hide. 35. H. 6. fo. 29.

15. And note, That a Plow Land or Carve of Land may contain House, Meadow,
Pasture and Wood: And if one have so much of this as will keep a Plough and
yield Tillage for it, if part of it were eared in this case, it seems he is to
send his Plough. vide Co. 4. Lib. Rep. fo. 37. b. and 9. Rep. fo. 124.

16. He that has a Plough Land, and no Plough, but does suffer his Land to lie
fresh, yet he is to find a Plough for this work, and so it has been agreed by
the Judges. Mich. 21. Jac. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 72.

17. He that keeps a Plough or Draught for carriage, although he occupies
little or no Land, but carries or plougheth for other men, yet it seems he is
to send his Cart to the Highways; and if a Man keep only two Horses and a Cart
for his own business, in this case it seems he is to come with his Cart and two
Horses with a man to manage them. Vide Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 72.

18. It is held by some, that so many Ploughs or Draughts men have, and use
frequently about their own business in Summer, so many they are to bring with
them to the Highways; so that if a man have one Plough and five or six Horses,
and shall plough seven or eight score Acres of Land, and shall usually go in
the Summer time with two Carts or Draughts; in this case, it seems he is to
come with two Carts or Draughts to this Service: And he that occupies 40 or 50
Acres of Land, and keeps only three Horses, and one Draught or Cart, he is to
come with one Draught or Cart. vide Dalt. J. P. Chapter 26. fo. 72.

19. Note, That an Indictment by the Common Law may be brought against any
Parish, for not repairing their Highways, and so they are bound to make them
good at their peril; and if Six days will not serve, the Surveyors may appoint
more, and charge all persons within their limits who are chargeable by Law to
come to the work, and if he who is to send a Team neglect, he forfeits 10 s.
and the labourer that neglects to come forfeits 18 d. for every day, but then
by 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6. the Surveyors are to pay them for their work for all the
days above six days, according to the Rates of the Country; and if they cannot
agree, the next Justice of Peace living out of the Parish is to determine the
business between them. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

20. These Officers may, if they see cause, for the amendment of the Highways,
take and carry away so much of the Rubbish, and smallest broken stones already
dug, of any man's Quarry lying within the same Parish without leave of the
owner, as they shall think needful, or gather the loose Stones lying dispersed
in any man's grounds; But they may not without License dig in any man's Quarry
for new Stones, nor take the great Stones already dug; and if there be no
such Rubbish to be found in any man's Quarry within the said Parish, then may
they enter into any man's several ground within the Parish, lying near the place
where the ways are decayed, and there (if they see any hopes of finding
materials fit for the Reparation thereof) without leave of the owner they may
dig for Sand, Stones, Gravel, etc. so that it be not in the Houses, Gardens,
Orchards, or Meadows of any man; for they are not to come there without License
of the owner; and in such place where they may dig without leave, they are not
to make a pit above ten yards in hreadth or length; and they are to take care
that the place be filled up again at the charge of the Parish within one month
after, upon pain to forfeit five marks to the owner of the ground to be
recovered by Action of Debt, and this is by the 5. El. Chapter 13.

21. The same power also is granted to Surveyors by the 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6. to
dig for Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Stones, etc. in any man's ground in the Parish
next adjoining to the place where the ways are in decay, if there be not
sufficient in the same Parish; Provided it be not in the House, Garden,
Orchard, Court, Yard, Park with Deer in it, or in the Meadow of such party; and
this they may do without paying any thing for the same Sand, Gravel, etc. only
Damages to the party for the carriage of the same over his Grass, etc. and the
pits and holes are to be filled up in such manner, and under such penalties as
are prescribed in the 5. El. in the Section, next before showed. 14. Car. 2.
Chapter 6.

CHAP. III.
The Surveyors Duty about cutting down Bushes, Trees, and Scouring of Ditches
in the Highways; and also touching Presentiments and Inquiries about Defaults,
passing of Accounts, Traveling of Wagons, Wayns, etc.

22. IF the owners of the Grounds next adjoining to the Highways do not keep
their Hedges low, and cut down their Trees and Bushes growing in the same ways,
they forfeit ten shillings, Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways. 5. El. Chapter 13.
8. El. Chapter 10.

23. And he that scowrs not his Ditches in the ground next adjoining to the
ground that is next the Highway, to the end the water may have the better
passage out of the Highway, shall forfeit 12 pence for every Rod so left
unscowred. 18. Eliz. Chapter 10. Wingate ubi supra.

24. If any scowr his Ditch by the Highway side, and throw the scowring
thereof into the Highway, and suffer it to lie there six months, he forfeits
for every load thereof 12 pence; and the Surveyors are to make Sluices where
such banks have been heretofore made, for carrying away the water out of the
Highway. 18. El. Chapter 10.

25. Every Surveyor may cause any Watercourse, or Spring of Water, being in
the Highway, (within their Parish) to be turned into another man's several
Ditch or Ground next adjoining to the said way, in such manner as by the
discretion of the said Surveyor shall be thought meet. Dalt. J. P. Chap 26. fo.
70.

26. Note, That the Forfeitures of the Act of the 18. El. 10. must be levied by
the Surveyors for the time being (by Warrant from the Justices before whom the
party shall be convict) by Distress and Sale of Goods, which forfeitures are to
be employed toward the amendment of the Highways; and if the Surveyors
neglect to do it within one year after the offense committed, then the
Constables and Churchwardens by like Warrant may do it. 18. El. Chapter 10. Wingate
Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways.

27. The Surveyors or one of them are to present to the next Justice of Peace
every default upon the 2. and 3. P. and M. Chapter 8. and 5. El. Chapter 13. within one
month after it shall be made, in pain of 40 s. and the Justice is in pain of 5
l. to certify the same at the next Quarter Sessions, where the Justices have
power to inquire of the Default, and shall set such Fine upon the Delinquents,
as they or two of them ( Quor. unus) shall think fit. 5. El. Chap. 13. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 26. fo. 70.

28. Note, That the Presentment of a Justice of Peace in Sessions, upon his own
knowledge, shall be a good Conviction, whereupon the Justices in Sessions, or
any two of them ( Quor. unus) may assess a Fine, as well as upon a verdict of
Twelve men; but in this case the Delinquent shall be admitted to his Traverse
as in other cases. 5. El. Chapter 13. vide Rastall. 199.

29. The Defaults and Offenses upon these Stat. 2. and 3. P. M. 5. El. and 18.
Eliz. are inquirable by the Justices of Peace in their Sessions, or by Stewards
in Leets, either of which have power to set Fines upon Offenders at their
discretions; of which Fines Indented Estreats (in the Sessions under the Hand
and Seal of the Clerk of the Peace, in the Leet under the Hand and Seal of the
Steward) shall be delivered within six weeks after Michaelmas, one part of the
Estreate to the Bay liff or High Constable of the Liberty, and the other part
to the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish where the Offenders live. 2,
3. P. M. Chapter 8. 5. Eliz. Chapter 13. 18. Eliz. Chapter 10. Wingate's Abr. Stat. Tit.
Highways.

30. And these Estreats shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Bailiff or Chief
Constable of the Liberty to levy the said Offenses by way of Distress; and if
no distress can be found, or the party do not pay the Fine within 20. days
after lawful demand thereof, he or they shall forfeit double so much; all which
Fines and Forfeitures are to be employed and bestowed toward the amendment of
the Highways in the Parish where the offenses are committed. Wingate's Alr.
Stat. Tit. Highways, 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 8.

31. The Bay liff, or High Constable, shall yearly betwixt the first of March
and last of April render an Account unto the Constables and Churchwardens, who
have the other parts of the Estreats of the Fines, of what money they have
received in pain of 40 shillings; and the said Constables and Churchwardens
have power to call the Bay liff or High Constable before two or more Justices
of the Peace ( Quor. unus) to pass his Account, who have power to commit him,
until he have satisfied all the Arrearages by him received, save 8 d. in the
pound for his own Fee, and 12 d. in the pound for the Clerk of the Peace, or
Steward of the Leet; and in this case the succeeding Constables and
Churchwardens have the same power as their Predecessors had. 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 8.

32. Two Justices of the Peace by the Stat. 18. El. may take Accounts of the
Surveyors of the ways, and of the petty Constables and Churchwardens, for such
Forfeitures (within that Statute) as they have Levied. 18. El. Chapter 10. Dalt. J.
P. Chapter 26. fo. 71.

33. By the 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6. Every person elected a Surveyor of the Highways,
shall within one month after his year expired yield up to the Inhabitants of
the Parish, Town, or Hamlet, at some public meeting appointed by the
Inhabitants, a perfect Account of all moneys he has received and paid within
the year, by reason of his said Office, and of whom, what sum, and to whom he
paid the same, what moneys are in Arrear for Fines, Forfeitures, Penalties,
etc. And if any overplus be in his hands, he shall turn the same to the next
Surveyor for the use of the Parish, Town, or Hamlet, to be disbursed in and
about the Highways the year following. And if the Surveyor shall not make such
account and Payment, then two Justices near the Parish upon complaint may
examine the business upon Oath, and upon default found in the Surveyor, they
may commit him to the Gaol of the County, City, etc. there to remain till he
have made a true Account and Payment. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

34. All Justices of Assize, Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of Peace are
empowered to hear and determine all matters concerning Charitable Gifts, for the
amending and keeping in Repair any common Highways, Pavements, Streets, etc.
within their Commission, and to make Orders for the due Employment of such
Gifts (except the Gift be made to the use of any College, Hall, Free School,
or Hospital, who have proper Visitors of their own) and to determine all
offenses and defects in Surveyors concerning the same; and in case any person
be agrieved by such order, he may appeal to the Court of Chancery, as in case
of a Decree made upon the Statute of Charitable Uses. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

35. No Traveling Wain, Wagon, Cart, or Carriage, wherein any Goods, Burdens,
or Wares shall be carried or drawn for hire (other than such Carts and
Carriages as are employed about Husbandry, and managing of Lands, and in
carrying of Hay, Straw, Corn unthreshed, Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shipping,
materials for building, Stones of all sorts, or such Ammunition or Artillery as
shall be for his Majesty's Service) shall at any one time Travel, be drawn, or
go in any public or common Highway with above 7 Horse, Beasts, whereof six
shall draw in pairs, nor with above eight Oxen, or six Oxen and two Horses; nor
shall at any time, carry above 2000. weight between the first of October, and
the first of May, (except such particulars as abovesaid) nor above 3000 weight
between the first of May and the first of October; nor above five quarters of
Wheat, Meal, Mesline, Rye, Pease, Beans, Tares, nor above eight quarters of
Barley, Malt, or Oats; nor shall any Wagon, Wain, or Carriage, be employed for
the said uses, the wheels whereof are less in breadth than four inches in the
tire, upon pain every owner of such Wagon, Wain, or Carriage, Horse, Beasts,
or Oxen, shall for every of the said offenses forfeit 40 shillings, to be
divided into three equal parts, one to the Surveyors of the Highways where any
of the offenses shall be committed toward the repair of the Highways of the
Parish there, one other part to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish where
the offense is committed for the Relief of the Poor there, and one other part
to him that shall discover and prosecute for every of the said offenses; The
penalties to be levied by Distress of all or any the Horse, Beasts or Oxen, and
to be distributed as aforesaid, by the Constable, Surveyors of the Highways
and Overseers of the Poor; and in case the penalties be not paid within three
days after Distress, then the same to be sold, rendering the overplus, the
charges of keeping and selling first deducted. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

36. Note, there are several Statutes which concern particular Highways in
which these Surveyors are little concerned; I shall therefore only name the
Statutes, and they who desire to be further informed therein, may look the
Statutes at large.

37. Stat. 39. El. Chapter 19. For reparing the Highways in the Wild of Sussex,
Surry, and Kent, used for Iron Works, Stat. 37. H. 8. Chapter 3. For Huntington
Lane near to Chester; Stat. 14. H. 8. Chapter 6. and 26. H. 8. Chapter 7. For laying
out new Highways in the Weild of Kent or Sussex* Stat. 1. M. Par. 2. Chapter 5.
For the Cawsey between Dorchester and Sherborn. Stat. 18. El. Chapter 10. about the
Kings Ferry in Kent.

CHAP. IV.
Some Heads of the S^at. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2. concerning the Wars, Sewers,
Pavements, etc. in London, and the Scavengers Office.

38. FOr the enlargement of the Highways, Streets, P^vements, Gutters and
Sewers in and about London; these things are to be known, that ^^ere are
Commissioners to be appointed under the Kings Great Seal; any Five or more of
which Commissioners may direct and order the pulling down and removing of
Nusances and I^croachments, and the inlargin^* altering, new making or
cleansing of V^^lts, Sinks, and Common Sewer^, and may enlarge or straiten the
passages as they see cause, according to the L^mitations laid down in the said
Act. 14 Car. 2. Chapter 2.

39. For the raising of Money for the Commissioners to effect their work with,
they are ^o License 400 Hackny Coaches and no more, every of which is to pay
five pound per annum to the Commissioners, and every load of Hay is to pay six
pence, and every Cart load of Straw two pence every time they stand upon the
new paved Streets about the Mews, etc. mentioned in the Act, to the
Commissioners, or to such as they shall appoint, ^4 Car. 2. Chapter 2.

40. The Commissioners also are to or^er and direct the Scavengers, and such
lik^ Offi^e^s and others, ^o the carrying away of F^^t^ and D^rt in the
Str^^ts; and every Householder in London Westminster, Borrough of Southwark,
and places a^jacent, are to sweep and cleanse the Streets, Lanes, Allies, and
public places, before their houses, twice every week (to wit) Wednesdays and
Saturdays, and made it ready for the Scavenger to carry away, on pain of 3 s. 4
d. for every neglect. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

41. And no person whatsoever, upon pain of five shillings, is to throw any
Filth, Dirt, Ashes, or noysom thing into the Streets, Lanes, Allies, or against
the Walls of any Church or Churchyard, or other Houses, nor throw the same into
any Vault or Sink; but they are to keep the same in their Houses until the
Scavenger come, and then they are to carry it out to him, or otherwise put it
in his Cart, upon pain to forfeit for every offense twenty shillings. 14. Car.
2. Chapter 2.

42. None are to hoop, wash, or cleanse any Pipe, Barrels, or other Casks or
Vessels, in any of the Streets, Lanes, or Passages aforesaid, nor set out any
empty Coaches to make or mend, or rough Timber or Stones to be sawn or wrought
in the Streets, on pain of twenty shillings for every offense; and every
Householder is to repair and keep paved the Streets, Lanes, etc. before his
House unto the Channel or middle of the same Street, upon pain of twenty
shillings for every Rod, and after that proportion for a less quantity for
every Default; and twenty shillings per week for every week after till it shall
be well paved and amended: such Streets as have been otherwise repaired are to
keep their old custom; and every Householder also, whose House adjoyns next the
Street, is to hang out his Light from Michaelmas till Lady Day, from such time
as it begins to grow dark till nine of the clock in the Evening upon pain of 12
d. for every default. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

43. Every Justice of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, or Justices of
Peace in the places aforesaid, within their several Limits, may upon their own
knowledge, or view, confession of the Party, or proof of one Witness upon Oath
convict any person, etc. of the offenses aforesaid, whereby they shall incur
the penalties aforesaid, one moiety to the repairing and cleansing of the
Street, etc. the other to the Discover; but in case the Justice himself convict
the party upon knowledge or view of himself, then all the penalty is to be
employed for the repairing of the Street or place where the offender lives: And
these Forfeitures are to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods
by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any such Justice, etc. rendering the
overplus to the party, and for Default of Distress or Non-payment within six
days after demand, or notice in writing left at the offenders dwelling house by
the Constable or other Officer, the offender (not being a Peer of the Realm)
may by such Justice be committed to the Common Gaol, there to remain till
payment. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

44. Within London, and the Liberties thereof, the Scavengers, Rakers, and such
like Officers are to be elected, and such payments made by the Parishioners to
them, for cleansing the Streets, as has been used by custom; and in
Westminster also they are to observe their customs for Election and Payments as
aforesaid, and in all other Parishes and places upon every Tuesday or Wednesday
in Easter week the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor, and
Surveyors of the Highways of every Parish aforesaid, giving notice or calling
together the Inhabitants of the Parish that have born such Office, they, or the
greater number of them shall appoint Two Tradesmen of their Parishes to be
Scavengers for the Streets, etc. of each Ward for that year following; which
persons being appointed and confirmed under the hands of two Justices of Peace,
within their Limits, etc. are within seven days after to take the Office upon
them, on pain of twenty pounds upon every Refuser; and if after this, others be
chosen, and refuse as aforesaid, they are to suffer the like penalty: which
penalties are to go toward the repairing of the Streets of the Parish, where,
etc. to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, by Warrant from
any Justice of Peace within the limits, etc. directed to the Constables, or
other Officers, or ^^^ two of them, rendering the overplus to the owners; and
for want of Distress or Non-payment six days after demand, the Offenders to be
committed by any such Justice to the Common Gaol, there to remain till payment.
14. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

45. Within twenty days after Election and Confirmation as aforesaid, the
Constables and other Officers and Inhabitants as aforesaid, or the greater
number of them, shall set a Rate according to the pound Rate, to be imposed
upon the Inhabitants of the Parish, Ward, etc. for the year following, which
being allowed and confirmed by two Justices of the Peace of the place
aforesaid, respectively, shall be yearly paid by every Inhabitant, upon demand
thereof by the Beadle of the Parish, or other Officer appointed to collect the
same, and in case of refusal, two such Justices may grant their Warrant to levy
the same by Distress and Sale; and for want of Distress, to imprison the
offender as aforesaid, (not being a Peer of the Realm) till payment be made.
14. Car. 2. Chapter 2.

46. The Rakers and Scavengers eve^^ day in the week (except Sundays and
Holydays) must bring Carts, Dungpots, or other fitting Carriages, into the
Streets within their respective Wards, Parishes, and Divisions, where such
Carts, etc. can pass; and at and before their approach by a Bell Clapper, or
otherwise, shall make a loud noise, and give notice of their coming; and so
into every Court, etc. where Carts cannot pass, and abide and stay there a
convenient time, that all persons concerned may bring forth their respective
Dust, Ashes, etc. to the said Carts, all which, the said Rakers and Scavengers
shall carry away on pain of 40 shillings for every offense and neglect
respectively. 14. Car. 2. Chap. 2.

CHAP. V.
Some Particulars gathered out of the Acts, 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1. and 16, 17. Car.
2. Chapter 10. about the repair of the Highways in the Northern Post Road from
London to York, etc.

47. FOr the amendment of the ancient Highway and Post-road leading from
London, (for many miles in the County of Hertford, Cambridge, and Huntington)
to York, and so into Scotland, and likewise from London into Lincolnshire, and
from the City of Norwich, S^. Edmunds-Bury, and the Town of Cambridge to
London; and from London to Newmarket, and so into Norsolk and Suffolk,
beginning at Puckridge in Hertfordshire, and so to Barley in the same County,
it is provided, as follows:

48. The Justices of Peace at their Easter Sessions yearly, for the respective
Counties aforesaid, from time to time are to nominate and appoint nine
sufficient able persons, residing and inhabiting within the said several
Counties, to be Surveyors of the several places in the ways aforesaid, for the
year then next following, the Justices for the County of Hertford, to appoint
the Surveyors for the ^^gh-way, lying in the several Towns and Parishes within
the said County, and Justices for the Counties of Cambridge and Huntington
respectively to do the like; and the Justices and these Officers are not to
meddle out of their respective Counties: After the choice of the Surveyors, the
Justices are to give them notice in writing, and if they neglect or refuse the
Office, the Justices at their Sessions may set any Fine under 10 pounds upon
every such person so refusing or neglecting; and in case any one so chosen
shall die, or shall be discharged of his Office, then any two or more Justices
of the County, near to the Highway and places, may appoint some other fit
person in his place, and give him notice thereof under their Hands and Seals;
and if he refuse or neglect it, then to be under the same penalty, as the
Refusers of them that were first elected. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

49. The Surveyors within a week after no^ice given them of the r^ choice,
having no l^wful impediment to beallowed by the Justices that do choose them,
are to meet in each of their Counties respectively, in some convenient place of
each County appointed by the Justices at their Quarter Sessions, to veiw and
survey the same ways, and to consider what Reparations shall be needful, and
they are in each County to provide Stones, Gravel, and other materials and
necessaries for the work. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

50. Any three of these Surveyors for each County, being met together as
aforesaid, with the approbation of two or more Justices of the County living
near to the Highways or places aforesaid, may appoint a Receiver or Collector
of Toll, and such other Officers as they shall find necessary to carry on their
work, for which a moderate allowance is to be given. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

51. Any three or more of the Surveyors are to appoint and require all the
Inhabitants within three miles of the places aforesaid, and in the same County
that are by the former Laws of P. and M. and* Queen Elizabeth chargeable to
find Wain, Team, or Cart for the amending of the Highways, and other persons
chargeable in person only, to labor herein for three days in a week, so that
it be not in Seed-time, Hay, or Corn-Harvest, to come or send their Wains,
Carts, or Teams provided, as by Law they ought to do, for repair of the
Highways, and when they are come, to appoint them their several work, and to
pay them after the rate of the Country for their work; and if any difference
be, two Justices of the Peace of the County are to end it; he that fails to
send his Wain, etc. for every day forfeits ten shillings, and the Labors
resusing or neglecting for every day 18 pence. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

52. Any three or more of the Surveyors may appoint any to dig, take, and carry
away so much as they shall think needful of the Gravel, Chalk, Sand, or Stones
out of the Waste or Common of any neighboring Parish or place near adjoining
to the place in decay, without paying any thing for it; and if it be not there
to be had, then they may take it out of any man's several ground (not being an
House, Garden, Orchard, Yard or Park stored with Deer) in any Parish chargeable
toward the repair of the said Highway, giving only satisfaction to the owner
of the ground for the damage he has thereby, accordingly as the Justices at
any of their Quarter Sessions shall set down, if any difference be: And they
are withal speed convenient to fill up and level such Pits as they shall make,
or else to rail them about, that they be not dangerous to Man or Beast. 15.
Car. 2. Chapter 1.

53. The Surveyors are always at the Quarter Sessions next after Easter to give
in an Account under their Hands to the Justices of all the money they have
received from the Collector or Receiver of the Toll, and what they have laid
out about the Highways, or in the execution of their Office; and if they have
any money in their hands, they are to pay it to the Surveyors for the next year,
or to their Treasurer or Receiver; and then they are to have allowance for
their pains; and if they shall not account and pay in the money in their hand,
or if the Collector or Receiver of the Toll refuse to pay in the money to the
Surveyors upon Request, Then they respectively at any Quarter Sessions may be
committed to Prison, till they do so account and pay in the money. 15 Car. 2.
Chapter 1.

54. If the Justices at their Quarter Sessions make any Rate for the repair of
these Highways, the Surveyors are to collect and receive it, and in case of
Refusal they or their Receivers and Collectors may distrain for it, and sell
the Distress rendering the overplus to the owners, and they or their Receivers
are to receive all the Fines and Forfeitures named in the Act, and to employ
them toward the Repair of the Highways; they might also (with the consent of
the Justices at their Quarter Sessions) borrow money to repair the said
Highways, and engage the Toll for it in their respective Counties, by
Indenture under their Hands and Seals for any time under nine years, for
Security of the Repayment of the Money borrowed with Interest, and therewith
repay the same. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

55. The Collector of the Toll for these Highways is to demand and receive
Toll or Custom, for all the Horses, Coaches, Carts, Wagons, Droves, and Gangs
of Cattle, that shall pass, be led, or driven in or through the Toll Gates at
Stilton in Huntingtonshire, at Arrington Bridge in Cambridgeshire, and at Wades
Mill in Hartfordshire, after the proportion following; That is to say, for
every Horse one penny, every Coach six pence, every Cart eight pence, every
Wagon twelve pence, every score of Sheep or Lambs one half penny, and so
proportionably for greater or lesser numbers; for every score of Hogs two
pence, and so proportionably for greater or lesser numbers, not being under
Five; for every score of Oxen or Neat Cattle five pence, and so proportionably
for greater or lesser numbers; and if any refuse or neglect to pay, the
Collector may distrain the Horse, Coach, Cart, Wagon, Oxen, or other Cattle
aforesaid, or any of them, and keep them till the Toll be paid, and damages for
keeping the Distress. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1. and see 16. and 17. Car. 2. Chapter 10.

56. Note, That no Passenger is to pay twice in one day at the same place,
neither is any Soldier in his March, or Post-rider to pay Toll, and certain
adjacent Towns also to the said places appointed for taking of Toll are
exempted. See the Statute it self. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

57. The Toll at Stilton and Arrington Bridge is to continue 11 years, to begin
from the 7th of July in the 15th year of the King, if the ways be not well
amended, and the moneys borrowed paid in again, before the expiration of the
said Term; and the Toll at Wades Mill is to continue for 21 years, after the 11
years expired, if the ways be not adjudged to be well amended in the mean time,
and all moneys borrowed for that purpose, with the Interest thereof repaid
again* 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1. 16. and 17. Car. 2. Chapter 10.

58. The Collector of the Toll at Wades Mill is to account weekly to the
Receiver General, and the next Justice may give the Collector an Oath to make a
true and perfect Account, and such Account is to be returned to the next
Quarter Sessions for the County, by the Justice that gives the Oath. 16. and
17. Car. 2. Chapter 10.

59. All persons who by Law are chargeable toward the repairing of the
Highways aforesaid, shall still remain so chargeable, by the 15. Car. 2. Chapter
1. and shall also pay six pence in the pound yearly, according to the true
value of their Estate, toward the repair of the said Highway during the
continuance of the Toll, which shall be paid to the Treasurer of the said Toll;
and in default of payment six days after demand the Surveyors are to distrain
for it, and sell the distress, rendering the overplus to the owners, if any be.
16. and 17. Car. 2. Ch 10.

60. The Receivers or Collectors of the Toll, that shall be in the Office at
the end of the 11 years, if they upon their Account shall then have any money in
their hands, they are to bring the same to the Justices at their next Quarter
Sessions, under pain to forfeit double so much, to be recovered by Distress and
Sale of their Goods. 15. Car. 2. Chapter 1.

CHAP. VI.
Several Cases about the Repairs of Bridges, with the names of the Statutes
which concern particular Bridges.

61. WHere a Common Bridge in the Kings Highway is in decay, and that it
cannot be proved or known, who, nor what Lands are chargeable to the repairing
thereof; in this case Four Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of the
Quorum) within the Shire or Riding wherein such decayed Bridges be, and if they
be in a City or Town Corporate, then four such Justices of Peace there, may,
within the limits of their several Commissions, call before them the
Constables, or two of the most honest Inhabitants of every Town and Parish
within the Shire, Riding, City, or Town Corporate, wherein such Bridge or any
parcel thereof shall happen to be; and the Justices (upon the appearance of the
Constables or other Inhabitants, and with their assents) may tax every
Inhabitant in any such City, Town, or Parish within their limits, to such
reasonable sum of money as by their discretions they shall think convenient,
as well for the repairing of such Bridge, and also for the making and repairing
of the Highways by the space of 300 Foot next adjoining to the ends of any
such Bridge. 22. H. 8. Chapter 5. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13. fo. 40. Co. 2. Part. Inst.
fo. 701. 702.

62. But note where the Franchise, City, or Borough is a County of it self,
and has not four or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one or more are of the
Quorum, in this case no other Justices of the Peace of any Shire or County have
any power to meddle there by this Act, but such decay must be reformed by the
Common Law by such Remedies, as they were before the making of this Statute of
22. H. 8. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 702.

63. And note that this Taxation ought not to be made by the Justices without
the consent of the Constables or Inhabitants, nor by them without the Justices;
and this Tax ought to be upon every Inhabitant in particular, and not to be set
upon the Hundred, Parish, Town, etc. for then one or few might be distrained
upon for the whole. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 704.

64. After such Taxation made as aforesaid, the said Justices of Peace shall
cause the Names and Sums of every particular person so by them Taxed to be
written in a Roll indented in Parchment for every Hundred, and sealed with
their Seals. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 704. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13. fo. 40.

65. And the said Justices may make two Collectors of every Hundred, for the
Collecting of all such Sums of Money, by the said Justices set and taxed; which
Collectors receiving the one part of the Roll indented, have power thereby to
collect: all the Sums of Money therein contained, and if refusal be made upon
demand, then to distrain and sell such distress, rendering the overplus to the
owner if any be, Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13. fo. 40. 22. H. 8. Chapter 5. Co. 2. Part.
Inst. fo. 705.

66. The said Justices also are to appoint two Surveyors, who shall see such
decayed Bridges and ways repaired and amended from time to time as often as
need shall require, to whose hands the Collectors must pay the moneys by them
received. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13. fo. 40. 22. H. 8. Chapter 5.

67. And the said Collectors and Surveyors, and their Executors and
Administrators, and every of them shall from time to time make a true Account
to the said Justices of Peace, of the Receipts, Payments, and Expenses of the
said Sums of Money; and if any of them refuse so to do, then the said Justices
of Peace from time to time by their discretions may make out process against
the said Collectors and Surveyors, their Executors and Administrators by
Attachment, Precept, or Warrant, under their Hands and Seals returnable at
their General Sessions of the Peace; and the said Justices may allow such
reasonable Costs and Charges to the said Surveyors and Collectors upon their
Account, as to them shall seem convenient. 22. H. 8. Chapter 5. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13.
fo. 40.

68. If any such Bridge be wholly in a City, or other Corporate Town, the
Inhabitants of the said City or Corporate Town must repair it; and where such
Bridge lies out of such City or Corporate Town, the same must be made by the
Inhabitants of the Shire or Riding within which the same Bridge shall be; and
if part of the Bridge be in one Shire or Riding, City, or Corporate Town, and
part in another, then every of them shall be charged to make and repair such
part as shall lie and be within their own limits. 22. H. 8. Chapter 5. Co. 2. Part.
Inst. fo. 702. Dalt. J P. Chapter 13. fo. 41.

69. B^t otherwise no Village or Freeman shall be compelled to make any B^idge,
but such as of old time, and by Right they were wont to make. Magna Charta. Chapter
15.

70. By the Common Law some persons were bound to repair Bridges, Ratione
tenurae suae Terrarum. etc. and this was binding, into whose hands soever the
Estate did come; but they which have Lands on the one side, or on the other, or
on both, are not bound in Common Right to repair the same. 44. E. 3. 31. 21. E.
4. 46 5. H. 7. 3. Crompt. 186. 8. H. 7. 5. b. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 700.

71. If a man, which holds 100 Acres of Land, ought to repair a Bridge by
tenure of the same, do al^en 20 Acres thereof to one man, and 10 Acres to
another man, in such case every owner or occupier of such lands must be charged
proportionably for their said Lands. Regist. 268. a. F. N. B. 235. B. Co. 2.
Part. Inst. fo. 700.

72. Again, some by the Common Law were bound by Prescription to repair a
Bridge, but herein their is a diversity between Bodies Politic or Corporate,
Spiritual or Temporal, and Natural persons; For Bodies Politic, etc. may be
bound by usage and prescription only, because they are local, and have a
perpetual incession, and never die; but a Natural person cannot be bound by the
Act of his Ancestor, without Assets, or some profit to be taken therefore, 21.
E 4. fo. ^8. b. ^7. Ass 8. Crompt. 187 Co. 2. Part. fo. 700 Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13.
fo 41

7^. B, Common Right Bridges are to be amen^ed by the whole County, if it be
not known who ought to do the same otherwise. Pasch. 10. E. 3. 28, 29. Co. 2.
Part. Inst. fo. 701. Crompt 186. b. ^r. 10. Car 1. the case of Longford Br^^ge.
Rolls Cases 1. Part. fo. 368. and Cro. R^p. 3. Part the same Case.

74. It a man E^ect a M^^l for his own particular profit, and cut a new course
for the wa^er to come to it, and makes a new Bridge over the same, and the
Kings Subjects use to ride over the same as over a common Bridge; such Bridge
ought to be repaired by him who has the Mill, and not, by the County, because
he erected it for his own benefit. 8. E. 2. B. R. adjudged for Bow Bridge and
Channel Bridge against the Priour of Stratford. Rolls Cases. 1. Part. fo. 368.

75. Such as are chargeable to repair a Bridge may enter upon any other man's
Land or Soil adjoining, and lay their Stone, Lime, Timber, or other things
necessary there for the repairing and amending thereof, and the owner of the
Lands shall have no Action therefore; for it is for the common profit: and the
party that is chargeable to repair a Bridge, must also maintain the way at each
end thereof (though the Soil be to another) and if the ends be broken by the
Water course, he must follow the Watercourse, and repair the way, etc. Crompt.
186. b. 43. Ass. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 13. fo. 42.

76. It is provided by the 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6. That all Bridges shall have
sufficient Walls or Posts, and Rails on each side thereof, four foot high at
the least, and that the same be from time to time sufficiently kept and
repaired. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6.

77. The Names of some Statutes for particular Bridges follow, 18. H. 6. Chapter
28. for the making of Burford and Culhamford Bridge. 18. El. Chapter 17. and 27*
El. Chapter 25. for maintenance of Rochester Bridge. 18. El. Chapter 20. for Repair of
the Bridges within a mile of Oxford, 23. El. Chapter 11. for the maintenance of the
Bridges over Toffe in Wales 39. El. Chapter 23. for making and repairing of Newport
and Carlion Bridges over the River Vsk 39. El. Chapter 24. for building and
maintenance of a Bridge at Wilton upon Wye near Ross in HerefordsHire; 43. El.
Chapter 16. for erecting and repairing Ed^n and Presberk Bridges in Cumberland. 3.
Jac. Chapter 23. for making and repairing Chepstow Bridge, 14. Car. 2. Chapter 6. for
building and repairing Laycock and Rey Bridges in Wiltshire, and Stratford
Bridge in Middlesex.

FINIS.
A Guide for Treasurers of the County Stock, for the Relief of Poor Maimed
Soldiers and Mariners.
1. THese Treasurers are certain Officers appointed by the Justices of Peace,
to have the charge of the Receipt and disbursement of money taxed and levied
upon the whole County, yearly for the relief of poor maimed Soldiers and
Mariners; For the Justices of Peace are yearly at their Quarter Sessions, about
Easter, to choose or appoint one or two persons (according to their
discretions) of the County for the taking and distributing of the Moneys
collected for the purposes aforesaid: And these Treasurers, by the words of the
Statute; ought to be Subsidy men of 10 pounds in Lands, or 15 pounds in Goods,
(but it seems, if they be sufficient men, this is not stood upon) and these
Officers are to continue in their Office one year, and new ones then to be
chosen in their rooms. 43. El. Chapter 3. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Captains.

2. Now for the raising of Money for these Treasurers, the greater part of the
Justices in their Quarter Sessions have power to charge every Parish within
their limits toward a weekly Relief of Maimed Soldiers and Mariners, so that
no Parish pay weekly above 10 pence, nor under two pence, nor any County, which
consists of above 50 Parishes, pay above 6 pence one Parish with another, and
this is by the 43. El. Chapter 3. but it is provided further by the 14. Car. 2. Chapter
9. that the Justices may tax every Parish more than the Rates abovesaid, so as
it exceed not two shillings and six pence, nor be under three pence per week.
And these Sums, thus taxed, must be assessed in every Parish by the
Parishioners (or in their Default) by the Constables and Churchwardens (or in
their Default) by the next Justice or Justices of the Peace. 43. El. Chapter 3.

3. And the Constables and Churchwardens have power to levy the Tax in every
Parish of every person refusing to pay the same, by Distress and Sale of his
Goods, rendering the overplus to the owner; and in the Constables and
Churchwardens Default, the next adjoining Justice may distrein for the same.
43. El. Chapter 3. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Captain. and Dalt. J. P. Chapter 53. fo. 135.

4. When the Tax is levied, the Constables and Churchwardens are to deliver it
quarterly (ten days before every Quarter Sessions) to the High Constable of
their Division, who must deliver to the Treasurers of the County at the same
Quarter Sessions all the same money; and if the Constables or Churchwardens,
their Executors, etc. fail in the payment to the High Constable within the time
aforesaid, then they are to forfeit 20 shillings; and if the High Constable
fail to pay the Treasurers every Sessions, then he forfeits 40 shillings; which
Forfeitures, as it seems, the Treasurers may levy by Distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods, without any Warrant, rendering the overplus to to the owner:
and these Forfeitures are to go in Augmentation of the Treasurers Stock, 43.
El. Chapter 3.

5. The Maimed Soldier or Mariner which was pressed, shall repair (if he be able
to Travel) to the Treasurers of the County where he was pressed; if he were not
pressed, then to the Treasurers of the County where he was born, or where he last
dwelt by the space of three years, at his Election; but if he be not able to
Travel, then to the Treasurers of the County where he Lands; and he is to bring
with him a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Chief Commander, or of
the Captain under whom he served, containing the particular of his hurts and
services, which Certificate shall also be allowed by the Muster Master, or the
Receiver General of the Rolls for the Muster, under one of their hands. 43 El.
Chapter 3.

6. Then upon such a Certificate, the Treasurers aforesaid may allow the party
Relief to maintain him till the next Quarter Sessions, and then the major part
of the Justices may allow him a Pension, which the Treasurers must pay him
Quarterly, until it shall be revoked or altered by the said Justices; and this
allowance is not to exceed 10 pounds per annum to a common Soldier, nor 15
pounds to an Officer under a Lieutenant, nor 20 pounds to a Lieutenant. 43. El.
Chapter 3. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

7. But note, where Soldiers and Mariners arrive far from the place where they
are to receive Relief, The Treasurers there shall give them Relief, and a
Testimonial whereby they may pass from Treasurer to Treasurer, until they shall
come to the place required; And this shall be done upon the bare Certificate of
the Commander and Captain, although they have not as yet obtained any allowance
from the Muster Master, or Receiver General of the Muster Rolls. Wingate's
Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers. 43. El. Chapter 3.

8. If any Soldier or Mariner beg, or counterfeit a Certificate, he shall be
punished as a common Rogue, and shall loose his Pension, if he have any. 43.
El. Chapter 3. Wingate ubi supra.

9. When out of the County where the party was pressed a fit Pension cannot be
satisfied, it shall then be supplied by the County where he was born, or where
he last dwelt by the space of three years. Wingate ubi supra. 43. El. Chapter 3.

10. By the 14. Car. 2. Chapter 9. It is provided that every Officer, Soldier, or
Mariner maimed, indigent, aged, or disabled in body for work, in the Service of
King Charles the first, or of his Majesty that now is, during the late Wars, or
which are so impoverished by their sufferings under any of the late usurped
Powers, as that they are destitute of any competent subsistence or livelihood,
and have continued faithful to their Trust, and not deserted the same, by
taking up Arms against his late Majesty, or his Majesty that now is, or
otherwise; is to repair to the place where he was last settled before he took
up Arms, (with a Certificate of his Service and hurts received under the hand
of his Captain, or other Commissionated Officer) and there repair to the two
next Justices, who upon examination of the truth of such Certificate (upon Oath
of the Party and such Witness as he shall produce) may by Warrant unto the
Treasurers assign him Relief unto the next Quarter Sessions, to be holden for
that County or Liberty; at which time a yearly Pension may be settled on him,
which must not exceed 20 pounds to any one person, which Pension is to be with
power of Revocation or Alteration; and in case where the Captain or Officer
appointed to make such Certificate is dead, the Justices upon Request to them
made in behalf of the party maimed, aged, indigent or disabled, as aforesaid,
by persons of credit, are to give such Relief, as in cases of Examination as
aforesaid. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 9.

11. And touching the Widows and Orphans of such as dyed in the Service
aforesaid, it is provided, That (over and beside such Relief as they shall gain
by their labor and work, and what shall be allowed by the charity and
benevolence of the Parish, Town, or Hamlet where they are settled) the
Treasurers for the maimed Soldiers for such County shall allow such further
Relief from time to time, as shall be adjudged meet by two next Justices of the
Peace of such County; and the said Relief is to be paid out of the Surplusage
of such Stock of Maintenance as shall remain in the hands of the said
Treasurers after such Pensions and Payment of them made; And of which
surplusage and allowance made unto such Widows and Orphans the said Treasurers
shall give account from time to time, and the same distribute as by the
Justices shall be directed: 14. Car. 2. Chapter 9.

12. The Treasurers are to Register all their Receipts and Disbursements, and
must enter the Names of the Parties relieved into their Book, and also the
Certificate, by virtue whereof the disbursements are made; and where they
disallow of a Certificate, they are to set down the Reasons of their Refusal
under the Certificate, or on the back thereof. 43. Eliz. Chapter 3. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

13. If any Treasurer wilfully refuse to give Relief in the cases aforesaid,
the Justices of Peace in their Sessions may set a Fine upon him, which may be
levied by Distress and Sale of his Goods. Wingate ubi supra. 43. Eliz. Chapter 3.

14. These Officers at the end of their year, within 10 days after Easter
Sessions, are to give up a just account to the succeeding Treasurers of all
their Receipts and Disbursements within the time of their Office; and then if
they have any money in their hands, they are to deliver it to their Successors;
and if any such Officer his Executors or Administrators shall not give up such
Account within the time aforesaid, or shall be otherwise negligent in the
execution of his Office, The Justices at their Sessions may Assess what Fine
they please upon him; so that it be not under five pounds, but what they please
above five pounds upon him his Executors or Administrators. Wingate ubi supra.
43. Eliz. Chapter 3.

15. In Corporations the Justices there are to put this Act in execution, and
not the Justices of the County; This Act is not to prohibit the City of London,
to make a Tax if need require, differing from that above limited in this Act,
so that no Parish pay above three shillings weekly, nor under 12 pence weekly
one Parish with another. 43. Eliz. Chapter 3.

FINIS.
A Guide for Treasurers of the County Stock, for the Relief of Poor Prisoners
in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and for Hospitals and Almshouses in their
several Counties.
1. THese Officers are to be yearly chosen by the Justices at their Quarter
Sessions about Easter, and they must be two for every County, Riding, etc. and
by the words of the Statute they ought to be Subsidy men, of 5 pound in Lands,
or 10 pounds in Goods at the least, or near that value; and these Officers are
to continue in their Office but one year, and then others to be chosen, and
they are to have the charge of the Receipt and Disbursements of the money taxed
and levied upon the whole County yearly, for the Relief of the Prisoners in the
Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and for the Relief of Hospitals and Almshouses
within the same County. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2.

2. And for this purpose the Justices of Peace of every County and Corporation,
or the major part of them, at Easter Sessions yearly, or as often as they shall
think fit, may rate every Parish at a certain sum to be paid weekly; but so as
no Parish may pay more than six pence, nor less than half a penny, and one
Parish with another, not above two pence through the whole Coun^y or
Corporation, which sum so rated, the Constables and Churchwardens in every
Parish, or any of them, (or in their default the next Justice of Peace) have
power to Assess, and to levy by Distress and Sale of the Parties Goods refusing
to pay, Rendering the overplus to the owners; and for default of Distres^, the
said Justice may commit the party to Prison till it be paid. Wingate's Stat.
Tit. Poor. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2. Dalt. J. P. Chapter 53. fo. 135.

3. And these sums, collected and levied as aforesaid, the Churchwardens or
Constables of every Parish are to pay to the High Constable of that Division
ten days before every Sessions, in pain that they or their Executors, etc.
shall forfeit ten shillings; And the High Constable is to pay over the Sums
received to the Treasurers, or one of them, every Quarter Sessions, in pain
that he, his Executors, etc. shall forfeit 20 shillings; and these Forfeitures
are to be levied by the Treasurers by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods,
rendering the overplus to the party offending, which Forfeitures are to be
employed by the Treasurers for the uses aforesaid. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2. Wingate's
Stat. Tit. Poor.

4. And such Sums as the Justices shall appoint for the Kings Bench and
Marshalsey (which must be 20 shillings yearly out of each County to each of
them) These Officers must pay over in convenient time to the Lord Chief Justice
of England, and Knight Marshal for the time being, equally to be divided to the
uses aforesaid, taking their Acquittances for the same, and in default of the
said Chief Justice the next antientest Justice of the Kings Bench. Wingate ubi
supra. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2.

5. They are to pay yearly also, by a Quarterly Payment, such sums of money as
shall be set down by the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, unto the
Masters and Governors of the Houses of Correction; the which if they do refuse
or neglect to do, the same Masters or Governors (without any Warrant) may levy
the same of the Goods of the said Treasurers by Distress and Sale rendering them
the overplus. 7. Jac. Chapter 4.

6. And the Surplusage of the money, by the Treasurers received they must
distribute and bestow for the Relief of the poor Hospitals of the same County,
and for the Relief of those that have sustained Losses by Fire, Water, the Sea,
or other Casualties, according to the discretion of the Justices of the Peace
of the same County. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Poor. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2.

7. These Officers, at the end of their year at Easter Sessions, are to give an
account to the succeeding Treasurers, of all their Receipts and Disbursements
in the time of their Office; And then also, if they have any money in their
hands, they are to deliver up the same to the succeeding Treasurers. And if any
Treasurer, so elected as before, shall wilfully refuse to take upon him the
said Office of Treasurership, or to distribute and give Relief, or to account
according to that order the Justices shall set down, the Justices may Fine them
at their Sessions, which Fine must not be under three pounds. 43. Eliz. Chapter 2.

FINIS.
A Guide for Masters of the House of Correction, and Governors of the
Corporations, or Workhouses in London, Westminster, etc.
1. THe Governor or Master of the House of Correction is an Officer appointed
by the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, to have the Oversight and
Government of the House of Correction within their County or Riding, of whom
the Justices are to take sufficient Security for the continuance and
performance of the Service belonging to his Office; and the Justices are to set
down what allowance they shall have for their pains, (which may be charged upon
the County) and for the Relief of such as shall happen to be weak and sick in
their custody, and for the Stock to set on work such persons as shall be
committed thither; and they may set down other orders concerning the same
according to their discretions; and the money, allowed to these Officers by the
Justices as aforesaid, is to be paid Quarterly before hand by the Treasurers of
the County for the Relief of the Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey;
and if the Treasurers refuse or neglect to pay it, the Master of the House of
Correction may levy the same, or so much thereof as shall be unpaid, upon the
Treasurers Account, by Distress and Sale of their Goods, rendering back the
overplus of the money. 39. El. Chapter 4. 7. Jac. Chapter 4.

2. Now the Office and Duty of this officer consists in these things following,
viz. To look well to the same House, and the backside thereof, and to all the
Implements and Goods he does find there, and to look to all such lewd persons
as he finds there at his entrance, and to receive all such Rogues, Vagabonds,
and idle or disorderly persons, as by any of the Justices of Peace shall be
sent thither. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 731.

3. He is also to keep safely all such as are committed to his custody, and not
to suffer them to wander abroad about the Country, or to escape away without
order of Justices. 7. Jac. Chapter 4. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 734.

4. He is also to see and take care, that amongst the persons committed to his
charge, if there be any Sick, or otherwise Impotent, that stands in need of
Relief, that he do relieve them, according to their necessity. 7. Jac. Chapter 4.
Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 732.

5. And for the rest that are able to work, he is to see and take care that
from time to time as long as they remain there, they be set to work and labor;
for during that time, they must in no sort be chargeable to the Country for any
allowance, either at their coming in, or going forth, or abode there, for they
are to have such and so much allowance only as they shall deserve by their own
labor and work; and if they will not work and perform their Task, he is to
punish them as he sees cause, with putting on Fetters or Gives upon them, and
by moderate whipping of them. 7. Jac. Chapter 4. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 731.

6. And lastly, at every Quarter Sessions the Master is to give an account of
all such persons as have been committed to his custody; And if he offend in any
of these particulars before rehearsed, or in any other Duty incident to his
Office, the Justices of Peace may impose such Fines and Penalties upon him for
the same, as they shall think fit; and these Fines must be paid unto, and must
be accounted for by the Treasurer of the County Stock for the Kings Bench and
Marshalsey, etc. 7. Jac. Chapter 4. Co. 2. Inst. fo. 734.

7. Now touching the Corporations and Workhouses in London and Westminster,
and within the Borough Towns and places of the County of Middlesex and Surrey
within the weekly Bills of Mortality, and their Officers; these things are to
be observed following: First it is ordained, that there shall be one or more
Corporation or Corporations, Workhouse, or Workhouses within the Cities of
London and Westminster, and the Buroughs and places within the Counties of
Middlesex and Surrey, lying within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, consisting of
a President, Deputy President, and Treasurer; and the Lord Mayor to be
President of the Corporation Workhouse or Workhouses within the City of
London, and the Aldermen and 52 other Citizens to be chosen by the Common
Counsel to be Assistants, which President and Assistants, or the major part of
them, are to choose a Deputy President, and Treasurer, and all other necessary
Officers to execure the powers appointed by the Act; and a President, Deputy
President, Treasurer and Assistants are to be appointed by the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, for the City of Westminster and
the Liberties thereof, for the Corporation or Corporations, Workhouse or
Workhouses within the same; and for the said places within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality in the Counties of Middlesex and Surry, a President Deputy and
Treasurers are to be chosen by the major part of the Justices of the said
Counties at their Quarter Sessions, of the most able Inhabitants and
Freeholders of the said Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, for the Corporation
or Corporations, Work or Workhouses of the said Counties. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

8. And upon Vacancy, Death, or otherwise of any of the Presidents, Deputy
Presidents, Treasurers or Assistants in the City of Westminster and places
aforesaid, in Middlesex and Surrey, the major part of the Justices at their
General Quarter Sessions have power to elect others in their rooms; and at
every Quarter Sessions the said Justices are to take an account in writing of
all the Receipts, Charges and Disbursements of the Officers and Treasurer of
such Corporation or Corporations, Workhouse or Workhouses, how, and how many
poor people have been employed and set to work in the year last past, and what
Stock there was and is remaining. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

9. The President, Deputy President, Treasurers and Assistants aforesaid shall
be Bodies Politic and Corporate for ever, and shall have a perpetual
Succession, and may sue, plead, and be impleaded by the Name of President and
Governors of the Poor for the respective places aforesaid, in all Courts and
places of Judicature within the Kingdom of England and Wales, etc. and may
without License in Mortmain, Purchase, or receive any Lands, etc. not exceeding
the yearly value of 3000 l. per annum, of the Gift, Alienation or Devise of any
person or persons; and every of the Corporations may keep Courts for the ends
and purposes in the Act expressed, at such time and place as shall be appointed
by the said President, his Deputy or the Treasurer; who are upon the desire of
any four of the said Corporation, at any time to cause a Court to be warned
accordingly, and may from time to time make Common Seals for the use of the
Respective Corporations. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

10. The Respective Presidents and Governors of the said Corporations, or any
two of them, or any person authorized and appointed by them, of any two of
them, may from time to time apprehend, or cause to be apprehended any Rogues,
Vagrants, Sturdy Beggars or idle and disorderly persons, within the said Cities
and Liberties, Places, Divisions, and Precincts, and cause them to be kept and
set to work in the several and respective Corporations or Workhouses. 14. Car.
2. Chapter 12.

11. If the President and Governors of any of the said Corporations shall
certify under their Seals, at any time their want of money for a Stock, and
what Sum they think fit for the same, to the Common Counsel of the City of
London, and the Burgesses and Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions for
Westminster, or to the Justices of the respective Counties for Middlesex and
Surrey in their Quarter Sessions, then they are from time to time to set down
and ascertain such competent sums of money for the purposes aforesaid, not
exceeding one years Rate usually set upon any person for, and toward the
Relief of the Poor; and the same to proportion out of the several Wards,
Precincts, Counties, Divisions, Hundreds, and Parishes, as they shall think
fit, and according to the said Proportions for the said several Wards,
Precincts, and Parishes to Tax and Rate the several Inhabitants, within the
said respective Wards, Precincts and Parishes; in which Tax if any shall find
himself agrieved, he or they are to appeal to the Justices of the Peace at
their next open Sessions, where the business is to be finally ended. 14. Car.
2. Chapter 12.

12. And any Alderman of London, or his Deputy, Burgesses and Justices of Peace
of the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, by Warrant under their Hands and
Seals, may Authorize the Churchwardens, or Overseers of the Poor within the
places and Parishes aforesaid, to receive and demand of every person and
persons such sums of money as shall be assessed upon them, by virtue of the
Taxations and Constitutions aforesaid, and for default of payment within ten
days after demand or notice left at the dwelling house or lodging of every
person assessed, then to levy the same by Distress and Sale of his Goods,
rendering him the overplus. 14. Car. 2. Chapter 12.

13. The Respective President and Governors, or seven of them may make and
constitute Orders and Bylaws for the better relieving, regulating, and setting
the Poor to work, apprehending and punishing of Rogues, and Vagabonds, within
the Cities, Liberties, and places aforesaid,, provided the said Bylaws be
presented to the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, and confirmed by
the order of the said Court; And the Presidents and Governors; or four of them
of any of the said Corporations or Workhouses, may choose and entertain all
such Officers as shall be needful to be employed in and about the premises,
and remove them as they see cause, and make such reasonable allowances unto
them out of the Stock belonging to the Workhouse, as they shall think fit. 14.
Car. 2. Chapter 12.

14. This Act is not to prejudice any the Franchises, Rights, Liberties, or
Privileges heretofore granted by any Kings or Queens of this Realm, to the
Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of St. Peter's in Westminster. 14.
Car. 2. Chapter 12.

FINIS.
A GUIDE FOR Bailiffs of Mannours.
1. THe Bailiff of a Manor is an Officer chosen by the Lord of the Mannour',
and this Officer by the ancient Saxons was called a Reeve, for the name Bailiff
was not known among them; but came in with the Normans, it seems. Terms de Ley
verb. Bailiff.

2. This Officer is to Summon and call the Lords Courts, and to collect his
Rents, Fines, Harriots, Amerciaments, and other profits happening within the
Manor as they grow due; and he may seiz or distrain for them ex Officio,
where seizure and distress is justifiable without any special command of the
Lord, he may also pay Quit-Rents. Terms de Ley, ubi supra.

3. It is said he may also order his Lords Husbandry, distrain Beasts, damage
Feasant, repair any Houses, Hays, or Pales; and for that purpose cut down
Timber or Trees; but it is not safe for him to build a new House, or set up an
old House that is fallen, or to make any new Additions or Alterations as to Tyle
the House, which before was Thatched, or pale it where before it was hedged, or
the like, without a special command from his Lord so to do; for otherwise he
will be a Trespasser to the Lord.

4. It is said also, that he may take any Cattle for his Lord to compast his
ground as an Agistment, and cut down Underwoods that have been used to be cut,
and he is to over-see and order the Labor of other Laborers and Servants
under him about his Lords work.

5. And lastly, These Officers are to give Account to their Lords of all their
Receipts and Disbursements, and pay in to him the money remaining in their
hands, being required thereunto; and if they refuse, the Lord may compel them
thereunto by an Action of Account given to him for his Relief in such case.
Bro. Bailiff. 31. 8. E. 4. fo. 13.

FINIS.
A GUIDE FOR Governors of FAIRS.
1. THe Owner, Governor, Ruler, Farmer, Steward, Bayl^ff, or Chief Keeper, of
every Fair and Market overt, are to appoint and limit ou^ a certain and open
place, within the Town, Place, Field, or Circuit, where Horses, Mares,
Geldings, and Colts must be sold; and they must appoint one sufficient person
or more to take Toll, and keep the same place from ten of the clock before Noon
until Sunset of every day of the aforesaid Fair or Market, upon pain to loose
for every default 40 shillings. 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 7. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 715.

2. And the Toll-gatherer his Deputy or Deputies are to take their due and
lawful Tolls for every Horse, Mare, etc. at the place and times aforesaid; And
they are to have before them at the taking of the said Toll, the Parties to the
Bargain Exchange, Gift, Contract, or putting away of every such Horse, Mare,
etc. and also the same Horse, Mare, etc. so sold, exchanged, or put away; and
then the Toll gatherer must write in his Book the Names, Sirnames and dwelling
places of all the said parties; and the color with one special mark at the
least of the said Horse, Mare, etc. on pain to forfeit for every default 40
shillings. 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 7. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 715.

3. And the said Toll-gatherer is within one day after the Fair, etc. to bring
his Book to the Owner, Governor or Ruler, etc. of the Fair, or Market, who is
then to cause a note to be made out of the same, of the true number of all the
Horses, Mares, etc. Sold at the said Fair or Market, to which note he must set
his hand or mark, on pain of 40 shillings; And if the Toll-gatherer neglect to
bring the Book as aforesaid, he also forfeits 40 shillings. 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 7.
Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 715.

4. Note, that where no Toll is due, the Book-keepers Fee for entering every
Contract is one penny and no more, 2, 3. P. M. Chapter 7. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 716.

5. Now since the making of this Stat. 2. 3. P. and. M. It is further provided
by the 31. Eliz. That every Seller or Exchanger of any Horse, Mare, etc. in a
Fair or Market, which is unknown to the Toll-Taker or Book-keeper, must procure
one credible person that is well known to the Toll-taker, or Bookkeeper, who is
to vouch and testisie his knowledge of the Seller, and the Toll-taker or
Book-keeper is to enter both the Names and Sirnames, Mysteries and places of
dwelling of the Seller and Voucher into his Book, with the color, mark, and
price of the Horse, Mare, etc. so sold or exchanged; and he is to give the
Buyer, if he require it, a note in writing out of his Book, concerning the
^ontract subscribed with his hand, for which he is to have two pence. 31. El.
Chapter 12. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 717. and 718.

6. Every Toll-taker or Book-keeper that suffers a Sale to pass without a
Voucher, unless he know the party of his own knowledge as aforesaid, and every
person making false Testimony or Avouchment in the behalf aforesaid, and every
Seller unknown to the Toll-taker, not bringing a Voucher, and causing the same
to be entered as aforesaid, forfeits five pounds, one moiety thereof to the
King, and the other to the Prosecutor; and also the sale of such Horse, Mare,
etc. to be void. 31. El. Chapter 12. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 718.

7. And note, That though an Horse, Mare, etc. be at the sale used in all the
points aforesaid, with Voucher, etc. yet the Right owner, his Executors, or
Administrators, may redeem a stolen Horse, if they cla^m him within six months
after the stealing, at the Parish or Corporation where they shall find him, and
make proof within 40 days after by two sufficient Witnesses before the next
Justice of Peace of the County, or before the Head Officer in a Corporation,
that the Horse was theirs, and repay to the Buyer such price for the Horse, as
the same Buyer shall upon his own Oath before such Justice or Officer testify
he paid for him. 31. El. Chapter 12. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Fairs and Markets. Co. 2.
Part. Inst. fo. 718.

8. And if a stolen Horse be not sold in Fair or Market, according to the Rules
aforesaid, then such sale does not alter the property of the right Owner, but
he may Seiz or Replevy him wheresoever he finds him, 31. El. Chapter 12. Wingate
ubi supra. Co. 2. Part. Inst. fo. 718.

FINIS.
An Appendix to The Guide for Constables, at the latter end of the sixth
Chapter, concerning Irish Cattle.
But these former Remedies not proving so effectual for the prevention of the
transporting of the Cattle aforesaid, it is further provided, That whenever,
and as often as it shall happen, either through any fraudulent Agreement, or
unfaithful Connivence of any Constable, Headborough, Tithingman, Churchwarden,
or Overseer of the Poor, or that it shall happen any otherwise howsoever, that
any great Cattle, Sheep, Swine Beef, Pork, or Bacon, after the first Seizure of
them, or any of them, by virtue of the aforesaid Act, shall be driven, brought,
carried into, or found in any other Parish or Place, than where the same shall
be first seized as aforesaid; That then, and so often, and from time to time,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Constable, Tithing man, Headborough,
Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor of every or any such other Parish or
Place, where such great Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Beef, Pork, or Bacon, shall be
brought, driven, or carried into, or found as aforesaid, to seiz, take, and
dispose the same, and every or any of them as forfeited, The one Moiety thereof
to the Use of the Poor of such other Parish or Place where such Seizure shall
be made, the other to the Use of such Officer or Officers who shall seiz the
same as aforesaid; Any other or former seizure or Seizures, in any other Parish
or Parishes, Place or Places, notwithstanding. An. 20. C. 2. Maii 1668.

FINIS.

