TOUCHSTONE OF Wills, Testaments, AND Administrations.

BEING A COMPENDIUM OF CASES and RESOLUTIONS Touching the same.

Carefully collected out of the Ecclesiastical, Civil and Canon-Laws, As also
out of The Customs, Common Laws, and Statutes of this Kingdom.

By G. MERITON, Gent.

Licensed Feb. 26. 1667/8.

LONDON: Printed for W. Leak, A. Roper, F. Tyton, T. Dring, J. Place, W. Place,
J. Starkey, T. Basset, R. Pawlet, and S. Herrick, Booksellers in Fleetstreet
and Holborn. 1668.

To all his loving Countrymen.
Dear Friends,
HAving received a deep impression in my thoughts of that Christian-like Moral,
Non nobis solum natisumus, sed partem Parents, partem Amici, pariem Patria
vendicant; I thereupon begun seriously to excogitate how I might lay out that
small Talent which the Lord has lent me, to the profit and good of my Country:
and taking notice of the Quotidian enmities, Contentions, and Quarrels, which
arise amongst men about the Devises, Bequests and Legacies of their dead
Friends, which most commonly happens by reason of the vicious penning of their
Wills and Testaments, and is chiefly occasioned through the scarceness of
Writers on this Subject in our English Tongue; there being very few Books in
the same Language save Mr. Swinbornes excellent Treatise Testamentary, which is
now almost out of Print, and can hardly be gotten at any Stationers; and
besides, the price thereof does exceed many honest Countrymans purse; and so
many men are left in mists of ignorance, by reason whereof their Wills and
Testaments are often so strangely drawn, with so many dubious, knotty, and
sometimes nonsensical Clauses and Sentences therein, as that often the
Testators meaning can searcely, and sometimes not at all be found out;
whereupon it happens that sometimes the Bequests and Devises are void, and so
the Legataries loose that which was intended them: otherwhiles they are forced
to sue for their Legacies, whenas Doubts a rise upon the Testators words and
meaning in his Will, and then often the Remedy proves worse then the Disease,
and more Charges spent in the Law for the recovery of the Legacy, then
sometimes it is worth: Therefore, that my honest Countrymen may be partly
informed in some particulars how they may dispose of their Estates at their
deaths, and that they may make their Wills according to Law, so that their
intentions and meanings may not be perverted and wrested to a wrong sense after
their Deaths, and those who were intended and expected to reap benefit by the
Testators death, robbed of their just Rights and Dues; I have thereupon taken
the pains to collect several Cases and Resolutions out of the Ecclesiastical,
Civil, and Canon-Laws, and also out of the Customs, Common-Laws, and Statutes
of this Realm touching Wills and Testaments, their several sorts and forms,
what shall be a good Will, who may make one, and who may be an Executor, and of
the several ways of appointing them; and also touching Tutors, Childrens
Portions, Devises, and Legacies; together with the Probat of Wills, passing
Accounts, payment of Mortuaries; and of the power of the Ordinary in granting
of Administrations; and touching Appeals, and several other things, whereby my
Countrymen at an easy charge and with little expense of time, may now take a
view of those things which have so long been kept from their sight under the
Vizard-Mask of an unknown Tongue, and they thereby deprived of the knowledge
thereof. And now, Dear Countrymen, (for to you only do I speak) if I can have
but your good will, and good word for all this, it shall suffice

Your loving Countryman and servant, GEORGE MERITON.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. WHat a Testament is, with the several kinds and forms thereof, and
the difference between a Testament, a last Will, and a Codicil. page 1. CHAP.
II. What shall be a good Testament or Will, and what not. p. 25. CHAP. III. Who
may make a Testament, and who not. p. 44. CHAP. IV. Who may be an Executor, and
who not. p. 65. CHAP. V. Of the several ways of appointing an Executor. p. 77.
CHAP. VI. Of appointing Tutors, and touching Childrens Portions. p. 99. CHAP.
VII. What things are Deviseable by Will, and what not. p. 113. CHAP. VIII.
Several Cases concerning the bequeathing of Legacies, and also touching
Devises. p. 125. CHAP. IX. Several Cases concerning the Duty of an Executor. p.
159. CHAP. X. Of making of an Inventary, proving of the Will, with the Fees
thereof, and before whow it ought to be proved; and of passing an Account, and
paying of Mortuaries. p. 199. CHAP. XI. Of the power of the Ordinary in the
granting of Administrations, and some few Cases touching Appeals, and also of
the Office of an Administrator: and how far the Ordinary is chargeable for the
Intestates Debts. p. 223.
THE TOUCHSTONE OF WILLS and TESTAMENTS.
CHAP. I.
What a Testament is, with the several kinds and forms thereof; and the
difference between a Testament, a lest Will, and a Codicil.
1 A Testament is derived of Testatio Mentis, and most properly is defined
after this manner: Testamentum est voluntatis nostrae justa Sententia, de eo
quod quis post mortem suam fieri voluit. A Testament is a just sentence of our
Will touching that which one would have done after death. Brac. Latches Rep.
fol. 137. Cowells Instit. pa. 117. Swinbornes Wills, etc. part 1. Sect. 2. in
princ. Justinians Inst. Tit. 10. l. 2. de Test. numb. 1.

2. Every Testament is a last Will, but every last Will is not a Testament; for
a last Will is a general word, and agrees to every several kind of last Will,
or Testament; but it is properly to be called a Testament, when an Executor is
named: for by the naming an Executor, it differs from the rest. Franc.
Mantica de Conjectura ultimar. voluntatum, lib. 1. Tit. 5. Swin. part. 1. Sect.
1. Simo. de Praetis. de Interpretatione ult. vol. lib. 2. Dubium 1. Solutio 9.

3. Observe that of Testaments, some be written, some unwritten or Nuncupative;
some solemn, some unsolemn; some privileged, and some unpriviledged of every
kind, whereof we shall speak a word or two. Michael. Grass. Thesaur. com.
opinion. Sect. Testa. Question 10, 11. numb. 1, 3. Franc. Mantica de Conject.
ult. vol. lib. 1. Tit. 7. Swin. part 1. Sect. 8.

4. Now as to the formal making of a Solemn Testament, many things are
requisite by the Civil Law. As 1. That there be seven Witnesses present at the
making thereof. 2. They must all be required to be there on purpose: for it is
not sufficient, if they were there only by chance, and unrequested. 3. Every
Witness must subscribe his Name with his own hand, if he can write, or else two
or three others for him. 4. The Testator with his own hand also must write his
own Name, and the Name of him whom he will have to succeed him, and have all
his goods; and if the Testator cannot write, then he must name the party (that
shall succeed him) before the Witnesses. 5. The Witnesses must be such as are
not prohibited in that behalf. 6. The Witnesses must see and behold the
Testator, and not hear him only; and the Witnesses also must seal the
Testament, either with their own, or the seal of some other. And lastly, the
Testament must be finished at one time, without any Intermission, except
natural, such as cannot be avoided: And if any of these particulars be wanting,
then it is reputed for a solemn Testament; but here in England, we are not
necessarily tied to observe this strict form of making our Testaments.

5. For with us it is sufficient, if the Testator do appoint his Executor, and
declare his Will before two or three Witnesses, whose probation of the same, as
concerning the appointment of an Executor, or disposing of Goods and Chattels,
is good enough; ^ and such a Testament is called an unsolemn Testament.
Lyndwood in C. Statut. verb. Probatis lib. 3. Provincial. Constable. Cant. Brac.
lib. 1. c. 16. Swin. part 1. Sect. 3. and part. 4. Sect. 24. Glan. l. 7. C. 6.

6. But if the Testator devise any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, then the
Testament must be in writing, and done in the lifetime of the Testator, and
approved by him for his Will before his death; except in some special Cases.
See the next Chapter, Number. 37. 32 H. 8. cap. 5. Noy's Maxims p. 97. and Swin.
part 1. sect. 11. and part 4. sect. 25.

7. Also if a man pleases, he may make his Testament in writing, wherein he
disposes of his Goods and Chattels only; and may also use the testimony of more
Witnesses then two, and procure them to subscribe their names to every sheet of
the Testament; which is very safe, and may prevent many forgeries. Swin. part
1. sect. 10. number. 4.

8. The most usual form of Wills and Testaments with us The form of a Testament
or ^ast Will.
here in England, is after this manner. In the name of God Amen. The tenth day
of April, 1667. in the nineteenth year of the Reign of our most gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second of England, etc. I Peter Style of B. in
the County of York, Gent. being sick and weak in Body, but of sound and perfect
memory (thanks be to Almighty God for the same.) And calling to mind the
uncertain state of this transitory life, and that all flesh must yield unto
death, when it shall please God to call: and being desirous to settle things in
order, do make this my last Will and Testament, wherein is contained my last
Will and Testament in manner and form following; revoking, and absolutely
annulling by these presents, all and every Testament and Testaments, A special
Revocation of a former Will See the next Chapter, Number. 34.
Will and Wills heretofore by me made and declared either by word or by
writing, notwithstanding any promise to the contrary, or Clause derogatory in
the same; And this to be taken only for my last Will and Testament, and none
other* First, I bequeath my Soul to Almighty God my Maker, and to Jesus Christ
my Redeemer, and to the Holy Ghost my Sanctifier; and my Body to the Earth from
whence it came, to be huried in such decent and Christian manner, as to my
Executors shall be thought meet and convenient; there to rest until my Soul and
Body shall meet again, and be joined together at the joyful Resurrection, and
be made partakers of the never-fading joys of immortality, which God in mercy,
through the merits of Jesus Christ alone, has promised and prepared for all
those that truly and unfeignedly repent and believe in him. And touching such
Temporal Estate of Goods, Chattels and De^ts as the Lord has been pleased far
above my deserts to bestow upon me, I do order, give, bequeath, and dispose the
same in manner and form following. Imprimis, I give and bequeath unto my Son
Henry Style, when he shall attain the age of one and twenty years, the sum of
Forty pounds of Observe the difference between these two Bequests; In the first
Case nothing is due till the age of 21 years; but it is otherwise in the second
Case, for there it may be recovered by the Executors or Administrators of the
Child, though he die before the age of 21 years.
lawful money of England, to be paid to him by mine Executors hereafter named.
Item, I give and bequeath to my Son Thomas Style Forty pounds of like money, to
be paid to him (by my said Executors) when he shall attain the age of one and
twenty years. Item, I give, etc. And lastly, I make, constitute, ordain and
appoint my dear and well beloved Wife Mary Style sole Executrix of this my
last Will and Testament, to whom I bequeath all the remainder of my Goods and
Chattels, moveable and immovable, after the satisfaction of my Debts, and
payment of the Legacies above by me bequeathed. And to her care and tuition
also I leave all my Children, and I do A clause whereby the tuition of the
Testators Children is committed to the Executor.
hereby nominate and appoint my said Wife Tutrix to them and every of them,
until such time as they shall severally attain their ages of one and twenty
years. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal, the day and
year first above written.

Peter Style.

9. But no man is tied to observe this, or any other set form in the making of
his Will, for it skills not how it be drawn, so as the Testators meaning can
but be found out; neither is it material whether the Testament be written in
parchment or paper, or the like stuff apt for writing; nor what Language the
same be written in, either Latin, Greek, French, or any other Tongue; nor
whether the same be written in Secretary, Roman or Court-hand, or any other
hand, so that the same may be but read and understood; nor is it material with
what Notes or Characters the same be made, as XX s. for twenty shillings, CL l.
for an hundred and fifty pounds, 1590 for one thousand five hundred and ninety,
with such like; or the Figure (1) instead of the Letter A. or (2) instead of
the Letter B. etc. or some other more strange Characters; yet it is good
enough, if the same by any means can be but read and understood; unless the
same Writing be but only a Preparation to the Testament, and not the Testament
it self: for then in such Case, though the same may be read and understood; yet
it is of no force, and the party shall be said to dye Intestate. Michael.
Grass. Thesaur. com. opinion. sect. Test. Quest* 10. Swin. part. 4. sect. 25.
numb. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Justinians Inst. l. 2. Tit. de Test. ordinandis numb. 12.

10. Words and Sentences also are not of necessity required for the form of a
Testament, but only for the expressing of the will and meaning of the
Testator; and therefore if the Scribe omit some words by Error, whereby the
sense is imperfect: As for Example, if he write thus; I make my Wife my of this
my last Will and Testament, leaving out this word Executrix; yet in this Case
his Error shall not hurt; it for the Law does presume more was spoken, though
less was written; and therefore she shall be taken for Executrix. Swin. part 4.
sect. 25. numb. 7. Molin. in l. 1. c. de Test. sect. de verb ob. numb. 8. in
fin.

11. Also if there be no Witnesses of a written Testament, yet if it be certain
and undoubted that the Testament is written or subscribed with the Testators
own hand, it is sufficient; but if it be doubted whether it is his hand or no,
then the Testimony of Witnesses is necessary to confirm the same to be the
Testators own hand: or where there is no suspicion of fraud, proof may be made
and allowed by comparing of hands with other writings signed by the Testator.
Maschard. de probat. verb. Testament. Conclus. 1352. numb. 60. Swin. part 4.
sect. 25. numb. 8. Michael. Grass. Thesaur. com. opinionum, sect. Inst. Q. 16.
n. 6.

12. Having spoken of a written Testament, we shall now show what a Nuncupative
Testament is, and that is where the Testator by word of mouth, before a
sufficient number of Witnesses, does declare his mind, and names his Executor;
and this Testament is of as great force and efficacy as a written Testament,
except where Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments are devised: and to the making
of this Nuncupative Testament, no precise form of words is required, neither is
it material whether the Testator speak properly or unproperly, so that his
meaning do appear, as is showed before. It is called Nuncupative a Nuncupando,
id est, Nominando, of naming an Executor; and is most commonly made when the
Testator is very sick and weak, and past all hope of recovery. Molineus in l.
1. sect. Test. ordin. ff. de verb. ob. numb. 8. in fin. Just. Instit. sect. de
Test. ordinandis in fine. Minsing. in D. sect final. Swin. part 1. sect. 12.
and part 4. sect. 26. Terms of the Law, verb. devise. Noyes Maxims, pa. 96.
Perkin, numb. 476.

13. If such a Testament be put in writing after the Testators death, yet it
remains a Nuncupative Testament still. Noyes Maxims, pa. 96. Swin. part 1.
sect. 11. numb. 2. in princ.

14. A man has that privilege in a written Testament, which he cannot have in
an Nuncupative Testament; for in a Nuncupative Testament, he must publish and
declare his mind; but in a written Testament he may seal up his mind, and
keep it secret till after his death; only it be^ooves him to show the same
after it is sealed up to some Witnesses, and say unto them, This is my last
Will and Testament, or, Herein is contained my last Will; and so let them set
their hands to some part thereof, or otherwise to take such special Notes and
Marks thereof, as that they be able to prove the Identity of the writing after
the Testators death; and in such Case it is good enough, though none of the
Witnesses were privy to the Contents thereof. Paris. Consil. 19. vol. 3. numb.
25, 26. etc. Maschar. Tract. de probat. Conclus. 10. 1352. numb. 173. Clar.
sect. Test. Quest. 4. numb. 3. Swin. part. 1. sect. 11. numb. 6, 7, 8, 9. Simo.
de Praetis. de Interpretat. ult. volun. l. 1. f. 31.

15. As touching privileged Testaments, there are three sorts thereof; viz.
Testamentum Militare, Testamentum inter liberos, Testamentum ad pias Causas:
That is, a Testament made by a Soldier, a Testament made by a Father amongst
his Children, and a Testament made for good and Godly uses. Some other there
are also, but their privileges are but small in comparison of these. Mantica
de Coni^^^u (...) voluntat. lib. 1. Tit. 5* (...) part 1. sect. 13.

16. As to the first of these, it is observable among the Civilians, That a
Soldier in Arms, and in actual service of Wars, is not disabled by any of
those impediments whereby others are di^abled to make their Testaments, except
in Cases of Furor, or lack of Reason; and for other causes also when he is
disabled Jure gentium. And whereas there be diverse which be prohibited to be
Executors or Legataries to other persons, yet notwithstanding they be Executors
or Legataries to a Soldier, except in some few Cases. And whereas also no
other person can die with two Testaments, yet a Soldier may, and both
Testaments shall be deemed good, according to the will and meaning of the
Testator. And likewise whereas another person cannot by the Civil Law die
partly Testate, and partly Intestate, yet a Soldier may. Minsing. in Tit. de
Milit. Testamen. Instituend. in principio. Fitz. Abr. Tit. Execut. number. 26.
Franc. Mantica de Conject. ult. vol. l. 6. Tit. 1. number. 32. Swin. part 1. sect.
14. Mich. Grass. The saur. com. opin. sect. Testam. Quest. 3. number. 1. Swin.
part 7. sect 11. number. 5.

17. As to the Second, where the Father makes his Testament, and names his
lawful and natural Children his Executors, and gives them the residue of his
Goods; to this kind there also belongs several privileges: for if there be
found after the Testators death, two Testaments of diverse Tenors, and it does
not appear which is first, nor which is last; in this Case the Testament made
in favor of the Testators Children shall be deemed the later, and shall take
place; whereas if neither be in favor of the Children, nor otherwise
privileged, then both are void; except it be in case of a Soldier, who by the
Civil Law may die with two Testaments as aforesaid. Also a Testament made in
favor of Children is not so easily revoked as other Testaments are: for
whereas in other Testaments the former is revoked by the latter, and that ipso
jure, without any express revocation; yet by the Civil Law a Testament among
Children is not revoked by a latter Testament, wherein strangers are preferred,
unless it be mentioned and revoked by express words; or unless the latter
Testament be made ad pias Causas, or else some great Displeasure or Enmity have
happened betwixt the Father and Children, or some like cause have come to pass,
whereby it may be made appear, that the Father did repent him of the making of
the said Will. And lastly, another privilege belonging to this Testament, is,
That if there be no Witnesses to prove the same, yet if the Testament be found
among other Writings in the Testators Chest, or like place, and undoubtedly
appear to be written or subscribed with the Testators own hand, or by him
procured to be written by some other; then in such Case it is good enough: but
this Privilege also is allowed to all other Testaments here with us in
England; as is showed before in Number. 11. See the next Chapter, Number. 33, 40.
Clar. sect. Test. Quest. 100. Franc. Mantica de conject ult. volunt. l. 6. Tit.
2. Swin. part 1. sect. 14. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. commun. opin. sect. Testam.
Quest. 86. number. 11.

18. The third kind of privileged Testaments, are those which are made to
pious uses; as when one gives his Goods to be distributed to poor Orphans,
Widows, Strangers, Prisoners, lame and diseased poor persons, or to Hospitals,
Churches, repairing of Bridges, or the Walls of a City or Town, when the same
be decayed and stand in need of repairing; and to such Testaments belong many
privileges also. As first, it may be written with strange and unaccustomed
Characters and Notes, and yet the same shall nevertheless be as effectual, as
if the same had been written after the usual and accustomed manner. Also, if
such a Testament be found cancelled, and it is not known whether the Testator
did willingly and wittingly cancel the same or no; in this Case it shall be
presumed to have been cancelled unadvisedly, and shall take effect
notwithstanding, as if it had not been cancelled at all: whereas in other
Testaments the contrary is presumed. And another Privilege is, That such a
Testament is not void for incertainty (as other Testaments are;) and therefore
if the Testator say, I make the Poor my Executors, or, I Will that my Goods be
distributed amongst the Poor; such manner of appointing Executors or Legacies
is good. Also if there be two Testaments found of diverse Tenors, and it does
not appear which is last; in this Case, if one of them be made ad pias causas,
that shall be presumed to be last made, and take effect, unless the other
Testament be inter liberos, and then that shall be deemed last, and not the
Testament ad pias causas. There are several other Privileges reckoned up by
some Authors to belong to this kind of Testament; for Tiraquel. in Tract. De
Privilegia piae Causae, reckons up 170 Privileges belonging to such Testament;
but most of them are here in England allowed to all Testaments, though they be
not made ad pias causas. Franc. Mantic. de conject. ult. voluntat. l. 6. Tit.
3. number. 3. and 43. and l. 12. number. 30. Tit. 1. and Tit. 2. number. 25, 32. Swin.
part 1. sect. 16. and part 7. sect. 8. number. 8. and sect. 16. in fin. Tiraquel.
de privilegia piae causae, c. 12, 16* and 56.

19. Unpriviledged Testaments are those which have not any Freedom or benefit
contrary to the common course of ordinary Law, but are tie^ to such
observations as the Law requires, and has appointed regularly for all
Testaments. Swin. part 1 sect. 17.

20. Now having spoken something of Testaments Solemn and Unsolemn, Written and
Unwritten, Privileged and Unpriviledged; I shall speak a word or two of Wills
and Codicils, and so conclude this Chapter.

21. The definition of a Last Will differs but little from that of a
Testament; for a Last Will is thus defined, Ultima voluntas est legitima
dispositio, de eo quod quis post mortem fieri velit. A Last Will is a lawful
disposing of that, which any one would have done after death. Franc. Mantica de
conject. ult. voluntat. l. 1. Tit. 4. number. 18. Swin. part 1. sect. 4.

22. There is also another kind of Will called a Codicil, and is defined after
this manner, Codicillus est voluntatis nostrae justa sententia, de eo quod quis
post mortem suam fieri velit absque Executoris constitutione. A Codicil is a
just Sentence of our Will, touching that which any one would have done after
his death, without the appointing of an Executor: by force of which last words,
a Codicil is made to differ from a Testament; for a Testament can no more
consist or be without an Executor, then a Codicil can admit of an Executor.
Swin. part 1. sect. 5. number. 2. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. voluntat. l. 1.
Tit. 8. number. Justinians Inst. l. 2. Tit. de Codicill is, number. 2.

23. These Codicils are most commonly made by the Testator, after he has made
his Testament, wherein he has forgotten something which he has a mind to put
in; and then it is done by way of Codicil, and annexed to the Testament: but
whether it be made before or after the Testament, it is to be taken and reputed
for parcel thereof, and ought to be performed as well as the Testament; unless
being made before the Testament, it appear to be revoked in the Testament, or
be contrary to that which is contained in the Testament. Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticum Tit. de Testam. cap. 5. Swin. part 1. sect. 5. number. 11. Justin.
Inst. l. 2. Tit. (...) Codicill is, number. 1. Vigel. method. Jur. Civilis, part
4. l. 9. cap. 23. in principio.

24. When a Codicil is made by one that dies Intestate, the Legacies therein
given, must be paid by him that has the Administration of the Goods of the
Deceased, as if he were Executor. Bro. Abra. Tit. Devis. numb. 35. Swinbor.
part 1. sect. 5. number. 10.

25. In some respects Codicils and Testaments are quite contrary to one
another; for whereas a man cannot die with two Testaments (because the latter
does always infringe the former, except in some special Cases) yet a man may
die with diverse Codicils, and the latter does not hinder the former, so long as
they be not contrary to one another. Also where two Testaments are found, and
it does not appear which was first, nor which is last; in this Case they are
both void, except in special Cases, as is showed before, Numb. 17, and 18. But
if two Codicils be found, and it cannot be known which was first or last, and
one and the same thing is given to one person in one Codicil, and to another
person in another Codicil; here the Codicils are not void, but the persons
therein named ought to divide that thing betwixt them, by the Civil Law.
Michael Grass. The saur. commun. opinion. sect. Codicillus. Swin. part 1. sect.
5. in fine.

CHAP. II.
What shall be a good Testament or Will, and what not.
26. THat Wills and Testaments may lawfully appear, it i^ necessary that there
be sufficient proof, either by writing or by witness; and as to that, know,
that two Witnesses are sufficient, if they be without lawful exception. Cowells
Inst. p. 118. Waterhouse on Fortesc. fol. 350. Glan. l. 7. c. 6. Bract. l. 1.
c. 16. Swin. part 4. sect. 21. numb. 2.

27. That is, if they be not perjured persons, or persons of infamous life, as
Malefactors, or Law-breakers; or Children, Idiots, Lunatic persons; or of the
Kindred or Alliance, or Tenants or Servants to the party producing them, or
Capital Enemies to the party against whom they are produced, or persons who are
to reap benefit by their depositions, or such like, etc. Cowel on Litt. fol. 6.
Swin. part 4. sect. 21. Maschard. de probat. verb. princ. Conclusio 1168. and
verb. Criminosus, Conclus. 469. and verb. Furiosus Conclus. 828. Swin. part 4.
sect. 21. numb. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ref. Legum Eccles. Tit. de Testamentis, c. 17.
Waterhouse on Fortescue, fol* 357 and and 358.

28. But if the exceptions be but small, and such as do but in part diminish
the Witnesses credit, as the exception of friendship, householdservant, or
suspicion of some small fault, then the number may supply the defect; and so
the Testimony of three or four Witnesses, not altogether clear from those
exceptions, is as good as the Testimony of two Witnesses without all exception.
Francis. Mantica de Conject. ult. voluntat. lib. 6. Tit. 3. numb. 8. Swin. part
4. sect. 21. numb. 3.

29. And sometimes the Testimony of one Witness is sufficient; as where the
Testator in his lifetime commits something in secret to some one person (being
loath perhaps that any other should know it) and wills that that same person
shall be credited for the Declaration of his Will; in such case that person
alone is sufficient to prove the Contents of the last Will and Testament of the
person deceased. Olden de probation, fol. 286. b. Swin. part 4. sect. 21. numb.
4.

30. The Testimony of a Legatary also is allowed in probate of Wills, but not
for his or their own Legacies, but for all the rest of the Will it is good
enough. Justin. inst l. 2. Tit. de Test. ordinan. numb. 11. Swin. part 4. sect.
21. numb. 11. Porcius in d. sect. Legatar.

31. But note, if a man in perfect health be demanded, who shall be his
Executor, or have his goods after his death (which question is very familiar
and common amongst companions) and forth with he names some person, to whom he
says he will leave his goods after his death; This is not to be taken for a
Testament, or last Will, neither is that person named to be admitted Executor,
nor to have his goods, unless it be proved that the Testator at the time when
the words were spoken, had Animum Testandi, that is to say, a full mind and
resolute purpose at that time to make his Testament or last Will; and this
purpose must be proved by circumstances, as well as by words; as, that he framed
himself very seriously to the making of the same, desiring them that were
present to bear witness of his Will, etc. Justin. Inst. l. 2. Tit. de Milit.
Testamento, numb. 1. Swin. part 1. sect. 3. numb. 24. Menoch. de Arbitria
Judicis, c. 496.

32. Note, that the last Testament does always make void the first, except in
some special cases, as where the latter is made through just fear, or by
cunning and deceitful fraud or flattery, or at the importunate request and
desire of another person, who expects to reap benefit thereby, especially if
the Testator be very sick at such time, and do it to be at quiet and rest; in
these cases the latter Testament shall not make void the former; but there must
be Witnesses to prove these things, if the parties concerned intend to make
void the latter Testament. Menoch. de Arbitrio Jud. c. 395. numb. 41. Socin.
Jun. Consil. 14. and 148. vol. 2. numb. 15. Simo. de Praetis. de Interpret.
ult. voluntat. l. 4. fol. 226. numb. 49. Swin. part 7. sect. 3. Numb. 1. sect.
4. numb. 3. and 6. and sect. 14. numb. 3 and 5. Paris. Consil. 10. l. 3. numb.
4. Noyes Max. page 97.

33. Also if the Testator have made his Will, wherein he has bequeathed
several Legacies to his own Children, or to his Brothers, and afterward makes
another Will in favor of other persons; this last Will shall not revoke this
first, without express words of revocation of the first Will, as is showed
before in the first Chapter, Numb. 17. Mich. 2 Car. 1. Eyres and Eyres Case in
Chancery, Cro. 1. part Rep. fo. Swin. part. 1. sect. 15. number. 5.

34. But in other Wills and Testaments, the latter does make void the former;
albeit the first were a written Will or Testament, and the latter but a
Nuncupative one, or that there were twenty Witnesses to the first, and but two
to the second, and that ipso jure, although there be no mention in the second
Testament of revoking the former; unless there be a Clause Derogatory in the
former Testament: as where the Testator says in the first, If I make any
Testament hereafter, I will that the same shall be of no force; then in such
Case it is most safe and convenient in the latter Testament to revoke the
first, by saying, I make this last Will and Testament, Notwithstanding that
Clause Derogatory in my former, whereby I would that no Will or Testament
afterward to be made by me should be of any force. Vasq. de succes. Resoluc. l.
1. sect. 1. number. 26. Pasc. 14 Eliz. Dyer fol. 310. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com.
opin. sect. Testam. Quest. 99. number. 4, 5. Swin. part 7. sect. 14. number. 4. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Perk. number. 478. Paul* de Cast. Consil. 206. Vol. 1.

35. Also where the Testator has made two Testaments, a former and a latter,
and afterward lying sick, they are both brought unto him, and being desired to
show which he intends shall stand, and he says, that the first should be his
Last Will, or if he take that of the first date, and deliver it for his last
Will; then in such Case that Will shall stand, and the other shall be void.
Perkins number. 479. Mich. 44 E. 3. fol. 33. Pacis Consultum page 81.

36. Likewise if an Executor be named in the first Testament, and none in the
second Will, then the first Testament shall stand, and the latter shall be
added only by way of Codicil. Vigel. Method. Jur. Civilis part 4. lib 9. c. 23.
in princip. Swin. part 7. sect. 14 number. 5.

37. Where it is said before, that where Lands are devised, the will must be in
writing, and done in the lifetime of the Testator; yet if the Clerk be skilful
in the Law, and takes Notes from the mouth of the Testator, for the devise of
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and afterward proceeds to write the same
in Form; but before it be finished or showed to the Testator, he departs this
life; yet this is held and adjudged a good Will in writing, within the Statute
of 32 H. 8. to convey Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments. Mich. 6 E. 6. Sackvil
and Browns Case. Dyer, fol. 72.

38. Also a written Will done in the lifetime of the Testator, or by Notes as
abovesaid, is good to convey Lands, though it be unsealed or unsubscribed, nor
no Executor named therein; and such a Will which only concerns the bequeathing
of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, ought to be proved in the Chancery.
Hill. 22 Car. 1. and Pasch. 23 Car. 1. B. R. Styles Regest. practicale, p. 357.
Pacis Consultum, p. 80. Noye's Maxims page 97.

39. If the Testator after he has begun his Will, and before he have finished
it, be suddenly stricken with Death or Insanity of mind, or some other
impediment, so that he cannot finish the same; or if he have begun the same,
and deferreth the finishing thereof till some other time, and in the mean time
dies, or otherwise becomes Intestate: In these Cases, though it seem by the
Civil Law that such Testaments are void wholly; yet by the Law of Nations, and
with us here in England, such Testaments are good for so much as is therein
already bequeathed. Michael Grass. Thesaur. com. opinion. sect. Testament.
Quest. 12. and 19. Mascha. de Proba. verb. Testa. Conclus. 1352. numb. 70.
Swin. part 7. sect. 12. numb. 4, 9, and 10. Pacis Consul. p. 81. Simo. de
Praetis. de Interp. ult. voluntat. l* 1. fol. 195.

40. If there be two Testaments found, and it cannot be known which of them was
first made, nor which was last made; in this Case they are both void, unless
one of them be made in favor of the Testators children, or those who after his
death are of right to have Administration of his Goods, if he had died
Intestate; and the other Testament made in favor of Strangers; and then in
such Case the Testament made in favor of the Children or Friends, etc. shall
prevail and stand good, as is showed before in the first Chapter, numb. 17.
Francis. Mantica, de conject. ult. volunt. l. 2. Tit. 15. number. 17. Swin. part
1. sect. 15. number. 2. and part 7. sect. 11. number. 2.

41. Or if one of the Testaments be made Ad pias causas, and the other not,
then the Testament Ad pias causas shall prevail, unless the other be Inter
liberos amongst the Testators Children, and then it shall prevail, and not the
Testament Ad pias causas, as is showed before in the first Chapter, Number 18.
Francis. Mantica de conjectura ult. volunt. l 6. Tit. 3. number. 43. Swin. part 1.
sect. 16. number. 7. and part 7. sect. 11. number. 6.

42. Also where there are two Testaments, and one of them is proved before the
Ordinary, etc. and the Executors are entered to the possession of the Goods,
and then the other Testament is found, and it cannot be known which was first
made, nor which was last made; in this Case the Testament already proved shall
stand, and the Executors shall not be dispossessed of the Goods by means of the
other Testament of the same Date. Sichar. in D. lib. ult. Swin. part 7. sect.
11. number. 4.

43. If a man be so extreme sick, that he is almost at the point of Death, and
can scarce speak; yet if he be of good understanding and sound mind, as may
appear by his Gestures and sensible Speeches; in such Case he may make his
Testament, so as it come of his own accord, and not at the earnest request or
importunity of his Wife, or some covetous person, who expects and greedies
after benefit by the same. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. volunt. l. 2. Tit.
6. number. 5, 9, and 10. Socin. Jun. Cosil. 183. vol. 2. number. 27, 31, 34, and 39.
Mich. 1654. B. R. Hatcher and Newborns Case. Still. Regest. Practicale, p. 359.
Swin. part 2. sect. 25. number. 2, 5, 6, and 7. Simo. de Praetis. de Interp. ult.
volunt. lib. 2. Dub. ult. Soluc. 4.

44. If the friends of such a sick man, or any other persons, do without his
knowledge prepare a Will in writing, and bring it to him, and read it, and ask
him if that shall stand for his Testament, and he answers, Yea, and immediately
after dies; in this Case such Testament is not good, unless the Testator had
first uttered his mind to the Writer or Inditer thereof, or had requested them
to write his Will; or unless the Testator being of perfect mind and memory, had
by plain and express words, or other apparent conjectures, confirmed the same,
and not only by answering, Yea. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. volunt. l. 2.
Tit. 6. number. 10. Swin. part 2. sect. 25. number. 11. Gabr. l. 4. commun. conclus.
Tit. de Testam. conclus. 2. number. 13, and 17.

45. If a man through just fear and constraint of some other person, do make
his Testament, such a Testament is void, especially when afterward the
Testator declares, That he would gladly alter his Testament, but for fear of
such a person; and then such Testament is void, at least, as to such a person
by him named, of whom he is afraid. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com. opin. sect.
Testament. Quest. 23. number. Swin. part 7. sect. 2. numb. 1. and 10.

46. But here it is left to the discretion of the Judge, who ought not only to
consider the quality of the threatening, but also the persons as well threatened
as threatening; and in the persons threatened, the Sex, the Age, or Courage, or
Pusillanimity; and in the person threatening, the power, the disposition, and
whether he be a mere Boaster, or performer of his threats. Menoch. de Arbit.
Judic. Casus 135. Maschar. de Probat. Conclus. 1054. Swin. part 7. sect. 2.
numb. 7.

47. Also a Testament made by fraud is void, unless the deceit of fraud be very
small, such as would not deceive any rational man or woman; or that the fraud
be not evil, as where the Testator intending to bestow all his goods on some
vile person, omitting his honest Wife and Children; here if the Wife and
Children do persuade him that such person is dead, or by some means deceive the
Testator, and procure themselves to he made Executors, then this is not to be
repelled as an unlawful Testament. Bald. in d. lib. 1. numb. 17. Swin. part 7.
sect. 3. numb. 2.

48. Though a man have sworn not to make a Testament, yet notwithstanding he
may lawfully make one; and if he have made one, and sworn not to Revoke it, yet
he may afterward make another, and revoke the first: but then it is
convenient, that he revoke his Oath also, and say, I make this my last Will and
Testament, notwithstanding my former Testament, with the Oath therein contained
not to revoke the same. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com. opin. sect. Testament.
Quaestio 87. Jul. Clar. sect. Testament Quaestio 94. Swin. part 2. sect. 24.

49. It is necessary to the validity of a Testament, that the Testator have
Ability to make a Testament, not only at the time of the making thereof, when
the Testament receives his essence or being; but also at the time of the
Testators death, when the Testament receives his strength and confirmation:
And therefore if a woman make her Testament, and then marry, and die during
marriage, such Testament is void; or if she make a Testament during marriage,
and overlive her Husband, and then die, yet the Testament is void: but if she
make her Testament before marriage, and overlive her Husband, and then die, in
such Case the Testament is good; or if it were made during marriage, and after
her Husbands death, she does approve and confirm the same, and then die, in
such Case also it is held to be good. Plo. Com. fol. 343. 37. Eliz. C. B. Forse
and Hemlings Case, Co. 4. lib. Rep. fol. 60. Swin. part. 2. sect. 9. number. 4, 5,
6.

50. A Codicil may be added by Parol to a Will in writing, and this Parol
Codicil shall be put in writing, and affixed to the Will as a Codicil; and
this may as well be done, as a Will in writing may be revoked by Parol. Hill.
22 Car. 1. and Pasc. 23 Car. 1. in B. R. Styles Regest. Practicale, p. 357. and
Pasc. 14 Eliz. Dyer, fol. 310.

51 If the Testator make his Will by Parol, which is afterward put by another
into writing, and he put more in then the Testator did express; yet it is good,
as to so much as can be proved was expressed by the Tastator by Parol, and the
rest is void. Pasc. 24 Car. 1. B. R. Styles Regest. Practicale, p. 357.

52. One went beyond Sea, and wrote back a Letter that his Land should go in
such manner, and it was adjudged to be a good Will and Devise of his Land. Ahr.
Moors Rep. p. 63. pl. 299. Wests Case.

53. If the Testator being of sane Memory, desire another person to set his
Hand and Seal to his Will for him, and he does so; this is a good Will, though
the Testator did it not himself. Pasc. 1650. B. R. Styles Regest. Practicale p.
358.

54. If a Parol Will be put in writing, and is afterward embezelled, lost, or
destroyed; yet the Will is not thereby destroyed, if it can be proved by
Witnesses: but if it come in question, whether a Will be good or not, in such
Case proof does not avail; for matter of Law is to be decided by the Judges,
and not by Witnesses nor Juries: Ad quaestionem Facti non respondent Judices,
Ad quaestionem Juris non respondent Juratores. Hill. 22 Car. 1. Pasc. 24. Car.
1. B. R. Styles Regist. pract. p. 357,358. Cowel on Litt. fol. 155. b.

55. If a Testament bear date at Cane in Normandy, and be proved in England, it
is good enough for the Executor to bring an Action upon. Perkins, numb. 494.

56. Note that a man may dye partly Testate, and partly Intestate by the Laws
of this Realm, though it is contrary to the Civil Law: and this he may do, not
only in respect of time, but also in respect of goods and place: for if a man
have goods in diverse Diocesses, he may make Executors of his goods in one
Diocese, and dye Intestate as touching his goods in another Diocese; or, if a
man make one Executor particularly of a certain portion of his goods, the
Executor is only so far chargeable with the payment of the Debts and Legacies
of the Testators, as the portion of the goods to him allotted do extend unto;
and as touching the residue of the Testators goods, if there be not another
Executor appointed, then for such goods he is said to dye Intestate, and
Adminstration may be taken of them. Bro. Executor. numb. 2. and 154. F. N. B.
numb. 26. eod. Tit. Plo. ^o. fol. In Fox and Grieshies Case. Swin. part 4.
sect. 18. numb. 4.

CHAP. III.
Who may make a Testament, and who not.
57. EVery person, both man and woman, Christian and Jew, sound or sick, and
generally of what Estate or Condition soever he or she be of, has full power
and liberty to make a Testament, or last Will, and may therein dispose of their
goods and Chattels; saving such persons as be prohibited by Law or Custom, as
hereafter follows. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com. opin. sect. Testament. Quaestio
20. numb. 1. Swin. part 2. sect. 1. numb. 1.

58. By the Stat. 34 H. 8. Wills or Testaments made by any person within the
Age of twenty one years, of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other
Hereditaments, is not good nor effectual in the Law; for till that Age, by the
Common Laws of this Realm, they are accounted Infants. 34, 35 H. 8. c. 5.
Wingate Abr. Stat. Tit. Will. numb. 22. Dr. and Stud. l. 1. c. 21. and l. 2. c.
28. Swin. part 2. sect. 2. numb. 1.

59. But a Boy of fourteen, and a Girl at twelve years of Age, by the Civil
Law, may make their Wills and Testaments of their Goods and Chattels; and that
not only without the authority or consent of their Curator or Guardian, but
also without the authority and consent of their Parents; and though it be made
but in the very last day of fourteen or twelve years, yet it is good enough;
but before that age it is not good, although the Boy were a Soldier, or that
the Testament were made Ad pias Causas, or with consent or authority of the
Tutor. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com. opinion. sect. Testament. Quaestio 20.
Perkins, numb. 503. Cowels Instit. p. 122. Swinbor. part 2. sect. 2. number. 6, 7,
8. Noyes Max. page 97.

60. Mad folks and lunatic persons, during the time of their Furor or insanity
of mind, cannot make a Testament, nor dispose any thing by Will, no not ad pias
causas; nay, though they come to their perfect understanding afterward, yet
this does not make the Testament to take any effect, which was made during such
Furor: but if these mad or lunatic persons have clear or calm intermissions,
then during such time, they may make their Testament, and appoint Executors,
and dispose of their Goods at their pleasure; and the Furor going before the
making of such Testament shall not prejudice it. Reformat. Leg. Ecclesiastic.
Tit. de Testament. cap. 7. Pacis consultum, p. 80. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com.
opin. sect. Testam. Quest. 2. 17. Swin. part 2. sect. 3.

61. Also if a man of sound memory, who was never taken with any Lunacy or
Insanity of mind, do make his Testament of his Goods or Lands, and afterward
is taken with Lunacy or Insanity of mind, a little before his death (which
often happens through the extremity of their sickness) yet this does not hurt
the Testament which was made before: or if a lunatic person, or one that is
besides himself sometimes, make his Testament, and it is not known whether the
same were made when he was of sound mind or no; in this Case, if no Argument of
Frenzy or Folly appear in the same, then it shall be conceived to be made in
his calm Fit, and so adjudged a good Testament. But on the contrary, if any
Folly appear in the same, though it be but two or three words, as if he say, ^
Peter, when his name is John; then it makes the Testament void, as being
presumed to be made during the insanity of mind. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com.
opin. sect. Testam. Quest. 21. Vasque de succes. progres. lib. 1. sect. 1. number.
90. See Co. 4. lib. Rep. fol. 61. Swin. part. 2. sect. 3. number. 4. 14, and 15.

62 Note that every person is presumed to be of sound mind, unless the contrary
be proved; and therefore those that intend to make void a Testament by reason
of insanity of mind, must prove the same impediment; and if it be proved that
the Testator was beside himself before the making of the Testament, although
they do not prove him to be mad at the very time of making the Testament, yet
it is sufficient, and it lies on the Executors part to prove that the Testator
was of sound mind, not only to answer to ordinary and usual questions, but
that he had a disposing memory, and was able to make his Devises and Bequests
with understanding and reason, at the time of making his Testament. Franeisc.
Mantica de conject. ult. volunt. l. 1. Tit. 5. Maschard. de Probat. verb.
Furiosum, Conclus. 824. numb. 10. Vide 41 Eliz. B. R. in Marquess de
Winchester's Ca. Co. 6. Li. fo. 23. Swin. part 2. Sect. 3. Number. 6, 7.

63. An Idiot or Natural Fool, that cannot number Twenty, nor tell his Age, nor
is able to answer to any ordinary and usual Question, nor knows what is for his
advantage or damage, though it be notorious, nor is apt to be instructed or
informed by any other; such an one cannot make a Testament, nor may dispose
either of his Lands or Goods. F. N. B. de Idiota inquirendo. 34 H. 8. c. 5.
Cowels Inst. p. 123. Simo. de Praetis. de Inter. ult. volunt. lib. 2. dub. 1.
fol. 4. Swin. part 2. sect. 4. number. 1, 2.

64. But if a man be of a mean understanding, between a Wiseman and a Fool,
such an one may make his Testament; unless he be so simple, as that one may
persuade him to believe things impossible, as that an Ass can fly, or that in
old time Trees did walk, and Birds speak, or the like. Simo. de Praetis. de
Inter. ult. volunt. lib. 2. dub. 1. fo. 4. Swin. part 2. sect. 4. number. 3, 4.

65. A Married woman cannot make her Testament of any Manors, Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, by the Statute of 34 H. 8. neither can she make a Testament
of Goods or Chattels without her Husbands license; except she be a Queen or
Empress, or that she were Executrix to some other person: for in such case she
may make her Will of such Goods as she has as Executrix, without his license;
and name her Executor, who shall have them to the use of the first Testator;
but she cannot give them away as a Legacy: and if she die without Will, yet in
such case, such goods as she had as Executrix (of which the property is not
altered) shall not go to the Husband, but Administration thereof shall be
committed to the next of kin of the first Testator. But in both these cases,
the Husband shall have the Profits arising of the same, as Calves, Lambs, and
suchlike profit of Kine and Sheep. Also if the Wife have Goods by way of
Legacy from another person, in such case she cannot make a Testament, or
dispose of the same, without his license. Note, though the Husband do give
license to the Wife to give away part of his goods, yet notwithstanding he may
countermand her Testament again, either before or after her death, or at least
before the Probate thereof. But if the wife make her Testament of his Goods,
and the Executors prove the same, and the Husband delivers the Goods to the
Executors; then he cannot countermand the Testament, though the wife made it
without his license or knowledge: for by this after-act the Law presumes he
gave consent at the first. 34, 35 H. 8. c. 5. Bract. l. 2. c. 26. Bro. Devise
34. Testament 21. Executor 11. and Administrator 45. Perkins number. 501 and 502.
Noys Maxims p. 97. Mich. 2 E. 2. Devise 14. F. N. B. tit. Executor, number. 10.
Swin. part 2. sect. 9. Plo. com. fol. 525. Cowels Inst. pa. 124.

66. A Slave or Bondsman cannot make a Testament or Will, for that all he has
is his Lords, and he can dispose of nothing. Bract. l. 1. C. 9. number. 3. Fleta
li. 1. C. 5. sect. 7. number. 3. and Cowels Inst. pa. 16.

67. But if a Villain make a Testament, it is not absolutely void, but
voidable: for if the Lord enter, and seize the Villains Lands and Good^ before
probate of the Will, it make^ the Devise void; or if he claim the Villain in
his lifetime, and seize the Goods by word only, it makes the Devise void. But
if neither of these were done by the Lord, before the Executors prove the Will
and seize the Goods, then the Testament of the Villain is good in law against
the Lord; except it be in case of the King: for if his Villain give or sell his
Goods, the King may seize them at any time; for, Nullum tempus occurrig Regi.
Also if a Villain have Goods as Executor to another person, he may make a
Testament thereof, and appoint an Executor to the first Testator, who shall
have the said Goods, and not the Lord of the Villain. Bro. tit. Villenage, 50,
68, 73. Dr. and Stud. li. 2. C. 43. Littletons Tenures, li. 2. C. 11. and Swin.
part 2. sect. 7.

68. A man that is taken captive by those who are open enemies to the King,
cannot make a Testament during his captivity: for if he do, though he should
escape afterward, and then die, yet such Testament is void: but if he had made
a Testament before he was taken, and then afterward escape; or though he die
during his Captivity, yet in both cases the Testament is good; and so it is if
he be taken by those who are not proclaimed enemies, and during his captivity
he makes his Testament: or if a man who is imprisoned for Debt do make his
Testament during his imprisonment, it is good, unless it be made in favor of
those at whose Suit he is imprisoned. Mich^ Grass. Thesaur. com. opin. sect.
Testament, Quaestio 25. Franc. Mant. d^ conject. ult. Volunt. li. 2. tit. 7.
number* 2. and Bract. li. 2. C. 16. number. 5. Swin part 2. sect. 8.

69. One that is born Deaf an^ Dumb, if it appear by sufficient Argument that
he understands what (...) Testament is, may be signs make (...) Testament; and
so may any on^ that could have spoken and hear^ formerly, and is become deaf
an^ dumb by some accident: or if such person can write, then he may writ^ his
Testament with his own hand (...) and so likewise may one do that ca^ hear, but
cannot speak: and if h^ cannot write, then he may do it by signs and tokens:
and one that ca^ speak, but cannot hear, may als^ make his Testament, and
devise hi^ goods to whom he pleases. Refor. leg. Eccles. tit. de Testam. C. 7.
Swin. part 2. sect. 10.

70. But one that is born both deaf, dumb and blind, cannot make a Testament
or Will, because he has no understanding. Finches law, li. 2. C. 2. pa. 103.
Perkins numb. 25.

71. One that is blind may make a Nuncupative Testament, by declaring his Will
before a sufficient number of witnesses: but he cannot make his Testament in
writing, unless the same be read before witnesses, and then acknowledged by him
to be his last Will and Testament: for if he should acknowledge a writing for
his last Will, and do not hear it read, this will not make it amount to a Will
in writing. Swin. part 2. sect. 11. and number. 1, 2.

72. He who is lawfully convicted of High Treason, by Verdict, Confession,
Outlawry or Presentment, cannot make his Testament, or dispose of any Goods,
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments; nay, though he have made a Testament before
such conviction, yet the same is void: but if he afterward obtain the Kings
pardon, then he may make a Testament; or if he have made one before conviction,
then after such pardon the same becomes good again* Cowels Inst. pa. 123. 5 E.
6. C. 11. Swin. part 2. sect. 12.

73. He who is indicted of Felony at the Kings suit, and will not plead to the
Indictment, but stands Mute, shall be pressed to death, and forfeits all his
Goods, but not his Lands; and so it is said he may in such case make his
Testament of his Lands. Swin. part 2. sect. 13. number. 5. Dr. and Stud. li. 2. C.
41. Pulton de pace Regis, fo. 216.

74. Those who are indicted and lawfully convicted of such Crimes as are
Felony, (as Petty Treason, Murder, Homicide, Chancemedly, Burglary, Robbery,
Theft, Buggery, Rape, etc.) after their conviction can make no Testament, nor
dispose of any Lands, Goods or Chattels of their own; nay, if they have made a
Testament before, such conviction makes it void, unless they procure the Kings
pardon, and be restored to their first condition again: but if one be attainted
of Felony only, he may give away his goods by Deed of Gift, or sell them,
before Judgment be pronounced; but for Lands, the Law takes notice from the
time of the fact committed and comprised in the Indictment; but it is otherwise
in case of Goods and Chattels. Mich. Grass. Thesaur. com. opin. sect.
Testament, Quaestio 26. Dr. and Stud. lib. 2. C. 41. Bro. forfeiture, 5, 28, 65
89, 103, 113, 117. Swin. part 2. sect. 13. Stamf. 192. 33 E. 3. tit. 20.
Perkins number. 29, 41. Ass. pl. 31. Cowels Inst. pa. 123 and 124. Dalton fo. 292.
C. 110. Vide Co. on Lit. sect. 745. Rastal, Forfeiture 7. Wingate Abr. Stat.
eod. titulo, number. 5 and 8. Stat. de Catall is Felonum, and 1 R. 3. c. 3. Paseh.
8 E. 4. fo. 4. a. Kitchen Court Leet, fo. 42. a.

75. By our ancient Law, an Heretic could not make a Testament (after
convictian) of his goods and chattels: and if he were delivered over to
Laymens hands, then he forfeits his Lands also. But see now the Statute of 1
Eliz. c. 1. for by that Statute, the 2 H. 5. c. 7. which gave Forfeiture of
goods and lands in case of Heresy, stands now Repealed; so that we have
nothing in certain now, but what we receive from the Canonlaw. A Relapse into
Heresy after Recantation, is fatal. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect.
Testam. quaest. 24. Cowels Inst. p. 124. Swin. part 2. sect. 14. Dr. and Stud.
li. 2. C. 29. 2 H. 5. C. 7. 1 Eliz. C. 1. Co. 3 part Inst. fo. 43. C. Heresy.
Reformatio Leg. Ecclesiasticum, tit. de Test. c. 7.

76. He who has been condemned, or publicly confessed himself to be a
manifest Usurer, and publicly uses the same Trade, and has exacted above Ten
pounds in the Hundred for the loan or forbearance of an Hundred pounds for one
year, cannot make a Testament of his Goods and Chattels, unless he satisfy or
make restitution for the same in his lifetime, or enter caution for
satisfaction to be made after his death. Menoch. de Arbit. Judic. li. 2. casus
235. Swin. part 2 sect. 16. Fleta li. 2. C. 50. Cowels Inst. pa. 124. Mich.
Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Testament, quaest. 33. 13 Eliz. c. 8. Refor.
Leg. Eccles. tit. de Testamentis, c. 7.

77. If one make a Testament of his goods or cattle, and afterward wittingly
and willingly kill or hang himself; then such Testament is void; for his goods
and chattels real and personal are all forfeited to the King, and all debts due
to him by Specialty, but no debts due to him without Specialty, or upon Simple
contract. Stamf. pl Coronae, li. 1. c. 3. Bract. li. 3 c. 2. Cowels Inst. pa.
124. Swin. part 2 sect. 20. Co. 3 part Instit. fo. 54. 3 E. 3 Coron. 301. 8 E.
2. Coron. 420. Pasch. 8 E. 4. fo. 4. a. Dyer fo. 262. Daltons Just. fo. 236. c.
92.

78. If one who is Outlawed in a Personal Action, make his Testament of his
goods, and the Executors prove the Testament, and afterward sue the Debtors of
the Testator, who plead Outlawry in the Testator as a Bar; this has been held
as no good Bar, so that before seizure they may sue: but if the King seize the
goods as forfeited, though he give them back again to the Executors, yet they
shall not be Assetts in their hands to charge them with any debts or Legacies
of the Testators. Trin. 37 Eliz. C. B. Rot. 1306: Woolly and Bradwels case.
Brownlows 1 part Rep. fo. 55. Mich. 20 Jac. C. B. Bullen and Gervise case.
Huttons Rep. fol. 53. Dr. and Stud. li. 1. c. 6.

79. He who is so excessively overcome with drink, as that he is utterly
deprived of the use of Reason and Understanding, at such time cannot make a
Testament: but if he be not clean spent, albeit his Understanding be a little
darkened and obscured, and his Memory troubled, yet he may make his Testament in
that case. Simo. de Praetis. de Inter. ult. Voluntat. li. 2. dubium 1. solut.
4. number. 22. Swin. part 2. sect. 6.

80. Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars,
and other Ecclesiastical Ministers or Clergymen, may make their Testaments of
all such goods and chattels as they severally enjoy in their own right, and not
in the right of their Churches and Ecclesiastical Livings. Perkins number. 496,
497, 498 28 H. 8. c. 11. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Testament
quaestio 34. Cowels Inst. pa. 125. Swin. part 2. sect. 26. Dr. and Stud. li. 2.
c. 39.

81. The King, however in a capacity to make a Will, cannot make a Testament,
and thereby give away his Kingdom and Crown-Jewels or Regalia from his lawful
Heirs to another. Fitz. Abr. Devise 5. Ex. 108 Cowels Inst. pa. 125. Swin. part
2. sect. 27.

82. The Queen of England is an exempt person from the King, and may make a
Testament; and is of ability and capacity to grant, and to take, to sue and be
sued, as a feme sole by the Common Law. Co. on Lit. fo. 134. sect. 200. Finches
law, li. 2. c. 1. p. 86. Co. 4 lib. fo. 23. in Clark and Penny^^^hers Case.

83. When one is grown so old, as that he is become a Child again in his
understanding, and is deprived not only of Reason, but also of Sense almost;
or grown so forgetful, (through Age or other infirmity) that he has forgotten
his own Name; such person can no more make a Testament then a Child. Fran.
Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt. l. 2. tit. 15. number. 16. Simo. de Praetis. de
interp. ult. Volunt. li. 2. dub. 1. sol. 4. number. 22. Swin. part 2. sect. 5.

84. An Excommunicate person may make his Testament; unless he be excommunicate
for Heresy or manifest Usury, or some other cause for the which he is
prohibited to make a Testament; or unless he be excommunicate with that great
Curse which is called Anathema, and is not inflicted but upon great cause.
Swin. part 2. sect. 22. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Testament.
quaestio 24.

85. By the Civil Law, such as marry within the Levitical degrees, and
prohibited to marry by Gods Law, cannot make a Testament, or dispose of any
goods or chattels to their children begotten in such Incestuous Marriage;
unless it be so much only as will serve for their competent sustentation or
maintenance; or that they be appointed but bare Executors, without any other
benefit: or if the Parents were ignorant of the impediment of such
Consanguinity or Affinity, then the children born during such ignorance, by the
Ecclesiastical Canons are capable of all Legacies, and all manner of
Testamentary benefits, as legitimate, albeit the parents afterward should be
divorced. Observe also, that as the incestuous persons aforesaid cannot make a
Testament, or dispose of any goods to their incestuous children: so neither can
they devise their goods to any other, except it be to their parents, or brother
or sister, or uncle or aunt, or to such children as were begotten in lawful
Marriage by a former wife, if they had any.

86. Several other persons there are who fall under Ecclesiastical censures,
and are prohibited by that Law to make a Testament; but being that they are not
deprived of this privilege by our Common or Statue-Laws (which limit the power
of the Ecclesiastical Courts within this Kingdom) I shall omit therefore to
mention them; and so conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Who may be an Executor, and who not.
87. NOte, that every person may be an Executor, and is capable of a Legacy;
saving such persons as are prohibited by Law: yea, in some cases those who
cannot make a Testament or Will, may be Executors; as a child in the mothers
womb, an Infant, a Married woman, a Bondsman or Villain; and in such case the
Villain may have an Action against his own Lord, if he were indebted to the
Testator. Lit. lib. 2. c. 11. Bro. Abr. tit. Villenage 68. and tit. Executor.
Cowels Inst. p. 129. Glan. lib. 7. c. 6. Old Tenures, tit. Villenage. Fra.
Mantica de co^. ult. Volunt. li. 4. tit. 8. Swin. part 5. sect. 1.

88. And if the Testator make his own Villain Executor, he does thereby manumit
and free him from Bondage. Cowels Inst. p. 13. Bract. l. 4. C. 21. Co. on Lit.
fo. 136.

89. Note, that if he who is named Executor be an Apostata, or an Heretic,
either at the time of the making the Testament, or at the time of the death of
the Testator, or at the time when he would undertake the Executorship; in all
these cases he is to be excluded, by the Civil Law. Sichard. in Rubr. de
Haered. Instit. C. number. 5. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Instit.
quaest. 28. Swin. part 5. sect. 2, 3.

90. He who is convicted of Treason or Felony, is incapable of an Executorship
or Legacy: but if he were attainted of Felony, and afterward admitted to his
Clergy, then he may be an Executor, etc. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin.
sect. Inst. quaest. 5. Labrig. des Cases edit. anno Dom. 1599. fo. 180. number.
13. Swin. par. 5. sect. 4.

91. An Outlawed person, so long as he stands in that case, is not to be
admitted to the Executorship, nor can sue for his Legacy: but though the
Ordinary do not admit him, yet if he shall Administer as Executor, because it
is to the use of another, it is held to be good in Law. But if the Testator
bequeath the residue of his goods, or some Legacy, to the Executor being an
Outlawed person, the same is forfeited and confiscate by force of the Outlawry.
Dr. and Stud. li. 1. C. 6. and li. 2. C. 3. Labrig. des Cases edit. anno Domini
1599. tit. Execut. fol. 179. Swin. part 5. sect. 5.

92. An unlawful College (that is, such Companies, Societies, Fraternities, and
other Assemblies whatsoever, not confirmed nor allowed by Authority for a
lawful Corporation) cannot be Executor. See afterward number. 99. Perkins sect.
505 and 510. 9 H. 6. fo. 23. Swin. part 5. sect. 9.

93. Libellers, manifest Usurers, Sodomites, and other criminous persons, who
are forbidden to make a Testament, can receive no benefit by the last Will or
Testament of another person: for it is a common received Conclusion, That he
that cannot make a Testament or Last Will, by reason of some Crime by him
committed, the same person is incapable of any Legacy of goods disposed by the
last Will or Testament of another. Jul. Clar. sect. Testament, quaest. 43. number.
2. Vasq. de success. progress. li. 1. sect. 2. number. 18. Swin. part 5. sect. 10,
11. Reformat. leg. Eccles. tit. de Test. cap. 14.

94. A Recusant convicted at the time of the Testators death, or at the time of
granting Administration, cannot be Executor nor Administrator. Wingate Abr.
Stat. tit. Crown, number. 134, 141. 3 Jac. c. 5.

95. If the Testator intending to make John at Style Executor, say, I make John
at Noke my Executor; in this case neither of them is to be Executor: for John
at Style is excluded, because the Testator never spoke it; and John at Noke is
excluded, because the Testator never thought it. Swin. part 7. sect. 5. number. 2.

96. Or if the Testator say, I make my cousin John at Style my Executor, if
John at Style be not his cousin, he cannot be Executor, unless the Testator
were wont commonly to call him cousin. Michael. Grass. the saur. com. opin.
sect. Instit. quaestio 9. number. 4. Swin. part 7. sect. 5. number. 4.

97. Also if the Testator say, I make John at Style my Executor, and there is
two of that name, neither of them shall be admitted; unless one of them were of
the Testators familiar acquaintance, or his kinsman, and the other a stranger;
for in such case the stranger shall be excluded, and the other admitted. Simo.
de Praetis. de Interpretatione ult. Volunt. l. 1. fo. 97. number. 1, 3, and 100.
Fran. Mantic. de conject. ult. Volunt. li. 8. tit. 4. number. 5. Swin. part 7.
sect. 8.

98. And if both of them be of the Testators acquaintance, or both of them
kinsmen; then he which is of the greater acquaintance, or nearer of kin, shall
be admitted, and the other excluded: and in such case, he shall be judged to be
nearest of kin, to whom Administration should have been committed if the
Testator had died Intestate. Fran. Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt. li. 4. tit.
6. number. 3, 4. Simo. de Praetis. de interp. ult. Volunt. li. 1. fo. 96. number. 9.
Swin. part 7. sect. 8. number. 3, 4.

99. If the Testator make the Poor his Executors, giving them the residue of
his goods, this disposition is not void by reason of incertainty, because it is
a Testament ad pias causas. By the Poor therefore is understood the Poor of the
Parish where the Testator did dwell and keep house; and the Ordinary is to take
care that the Poor have their due, according to the meaning of the Testator.
Also, if the Testator bequeath any goods or money to the Parishioners of any
Parish, to the use of the Church; such a Bequest is good, and the Legacy may
be recovered by the Churchwardens, who albeit in every respect they be not a
lawful Corporation, yet in this respect, in favor of the Church, they are
accounted a lawful Corporation. And where it is said that unlawful Colleges or
Companies, etc. (not Incorporated by the Kings Authority) cannot be Executors;
yet in such case, if the several and particular persons, by name of an unlawful
College, etc. be appointed Executors, they are not to be repelled. Franc.
Mantica deconject. ult. Volunt. li. 8. tit. 5. number. 2. ^iraquel. tract. de
privileg. piae causae, privileg. 56. Lambert Tract. de Officio Gardianarum, fo.
43. Bro. tit. Corporation, number. 55, 73, 77, 84. Fulb. li. 1. fo. 42, 43. Swin.
part 7. sect. 8.

100. If the Testator make his own kin his Executors, in this case those of kin
who are nearest to him, and should have had the Administration if the Testator
had died Intestate, shall be first admitted, and enjoy the Executorship during
their lives; and after their deaths, then the other next of kin to the Testator
is to be admitted successively one after another, and not all together: but if
the Testator make another man's kindred his Executors, in such case they are all
to be admitted together to the Executorship. Simo. de Praetis. de interp. ult.
Volunt. li 3. fo. 91. number. 28. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com opin. sect. Instit.
quaest. 20. sect. Fidei commiss. quaestio 16. and sect. Legate. quaest. 41.
Swin. part 7. sect. 8. number. 10.

101. Where the Testator makes the next of his kin his Executor, and dies
without issue of his body; in this case the father or mother, if living, shall
have the Executorship, as next of kin to their son; contrary to the Judgment
given in the 5 E. 6. in the Duke of Sussolk's Case, which Case is now
overruled, and not held for Law. Co. 3. lib. fo. 40. in Ratcliff*s Case there.
Cowels Inst. p. 40. Trin. 22 Car. 1. B. R. Styles Regestum practicale, p. 21.
Swin. part 7. sect. 8. in fine.

102. If the Testator say, I make A or B my Executors; in this case it is all
one as if he had said, I make A and B my Executors: unless it be where the
Testator bears more affection to the one then to the other; and then he which
he bears most affection to, shall be preferred: as, where the Testator makes
his brother or John at Style his Executors; in this case the brother shall be
first admitted; and after his death, then John at Style (if he be living) shall
be admitted. Also, where one of the persons so named is incapable, then the
dis-junctive stands properly, and the other shall be admitted alone to the
Executorship. Jul. Clar. sect. Testament, quaest. 80. number. 5. Swin. part 7.
sect. 9.

103. An Excommunicate person, so long as he stands in the Sentence of
Excommunication, is not to be admitted to an Executorship by the Ordinary; nor
can he commence any Suit there for his Legacy. Michael Grass. thesaur. com.
opin. sect. Institutio, quaestio 4. Swin. part 5. sect. 6.

104. Bastards begotten and born in Adultery or Incest, are not capable of any
benefit by the Testament or Last Will of their Incestuous or Adulterous
parents; except there be only so much bequeathed, as will suffice for their
competent Alimentation or Relief, that is to say, for their Food, Clothing,
Lodging, and other meet and convenient necessaries, according to the degree and
ability of their parents; or that it be in case of Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments; for there a man may by his Testament or Will in writing devise
to his Bastard all his Lands, Tenements or ^ereditaments; and such Bastard may
sue for the same, and recover them: and so it was adjudged in the Lady Griffins
Case, upon the Testament of Sir Francis Wortly, who devised all his Lands to
his base daughter. Mich. 18 Car. 2. B. R. Mich. G^^ss. thesaur. com. opin.
sect. Instit quaest. 7. Gabr. com. Conclus. li. 6. tit. de Aliment. conclusio
1. number. 5 and 31. Menoch. praesump. li. 4. praesumptio 157. number. 3. 32 H. 8. c.
1. Brac. li. 2. c. 7. Swin. part 2. sect. 17. and part 5. sect. 7.

105. Note also, that these incestuous or Adulterous Bastards may be Executor
to any other person, saving to their natural parents, and are capable of a
Legacy bequeathed to them from any other person; yea, even to their own
Incestuous or Adulterous brethren they may be Executors, or receive any other
Testamentary benefit from them. Jul. Clar. sect. Testament, quaestio 31. number.
4. Swin. part 5. sect. 7.

106. Also where they are appointed but only bare and nude Executors, and
receive no benefit by the Testament; in such case they be admitted Executors to
their own natural parents. Simo^ de Praeti^. de interp. ult. Volunt^ li. 5. fo.
17. number. 27. Swin. part 5. sect. 7.

107. The Adulterous Grandfather may bequeath any thing to the lawful children
of his own unlawful sons or daughters, or make them his Executors: but so
cannot the Incestuous Grandfather. Covar. in D. cap. 8. de Sponsal. part 2.
sect. 5. number. 13. Bald. C. de Incest. Swin. part 5. sect. 7.

108. Several other persons there are, who by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws
are prohibited Testamentary benefits; but being that I find little or no
mention made of them, either in our Common or StatuteLaws, (which limit the
power of those Spiritual Courts here in England) I shall therefore pass them
over in silence, and proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Of the several ways of appointing a^ Executor.
109. TO name or to appoint one as Executor, is to place one in stead of the
Testator, who may enter to the Testators goods and chattels, and have an Action
against the Testators Debtors, and may dispose of the same goods and chattels
toward the payment of the Testators Debts, and performance of his Will: which
if he neglect to do, he may be sued by the Creditors or Legataries, so long as
he has Assetts in his hands. Noys Max. p. 101. Terms of the Law, verb.
Executor. Swin. 4. sect. 2.

110. Now this naming or appointing an Executor is the head of the Testament;
and as the body is dead that lacks an head, so the Testament is as it were
dead that lacks an Executor; for it is the foundation of the Testament; and
no Testament can stand without it, or be called a Testament: and though there
be never so many Legacies or Devises given therein, yet it is but a Codicil or
Will, and not a Testament; and the Administration of the goods, with such
Codicil or Will annexed, shall be committed to the next of kin of the party
deceased, as of one dying Intestate. Justin. Instit. l. 2. tit. de Legacies, N.
34. Swin. part 4. sect. 2.

111. But if an Executor be named; though no Legacy be left, or Devise made,
yet such disposition is a Testament, whether the same be Solemn or Unsolemn,
Written or Nuncupative, Privileged or Unpriviledged: and in this case the
Ordinary cannot commit the Administration of the dead man's goods, as of one
dying Intestate, if such Executor be capable and willing to undertake the
Execution of the Testament. Bro. Abr. tit. Execut. F. N B eod. tit. Swin. part
4. sect. 2.

112. And as to the appointing of an Executor, it may be done either simply or
conditionally; or from a certain time, or to a certain time; or universally, or
particularly; or in the first, second, third, or fourth degree, etc* and
^^stly, one or diverse may be appointed Executors. Bro. tit. Executor, N. 2, 9,
13, 24, 38, 117, 155. Dyer fo. 3. Cowels Inst. p. 129.

113. If the Testator say, I make A B my Executor, or, I institute A B my
Executor, or, I will that A B be my Executor, or, I desire A B to be my
Executor, or, A B shall be my Executor; these and suchlike words make a simple
nomination of an Executor, where no condition is annexed by the Testator: and
it is not material in what part of the Testament the Executor is appointed; for
the Law regards not so much the form or the words, as the meaning of the
Testator. Mich. Grass. the saur. com. opin. sect. Legatum, quaestio 43. N. 2.
and sect. Institutio, quaestio 1 and 14. Swin. part 4. sect. 4. number. 2, 3, and
11.

114. Therefore if the Testator say, I commit all my goods to the disposition
of A B; or, I commit my soul and all my goods to the hands of A B; or, I make A
B Lord of all my goods; or, I make my wife Lady of all my goods; or, I leave
all my goods to A B; or, I make A B Legatary of all my goods; or, I leave the
residue of all my goods to A B: in these cases it is presumed that such person
is intended to be made Executor, by the Testator: for it is not always
necessary to express the word Executor, neither has every Testator skill so to
do: therefore if the Testator write after this manner: In all my goods moveable
and unmovable I make A B, though the Testator do not add Executor, yet it is
to be understood and supplied Bro: tit. Executor, 98. Mich. Grass. These. com.
opin. sect. Instit. quaestio 14. Swin. part 4. sect. 4. number. 4, 5. Franc.
Mantica de conject. ult volunt. li. 4. tit. 3. number. 5 and 8.

115. If the Testator say, I make A B my Executor, if C D will not; in this
Case C D is presumed to be Executor, and may be admitted, if he please, and
exclude the other. Or, if the Testator supposing his Child or Friend to be
dead, say in his Will, Forasmuch as my Child or Brother is dead, I make A B my
Executor: In this case, if the Child or other Person be alive, whom the
Testator imagined to be dead, then he that is named Executor shall not be
admitted to the Executorship, but the Child, or other Person, whom the
Testator thought to have been dead. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. volunt. li.
4. tit. 4. Swin. part 4. sect 4. number. 6.

116. When the Testator does add something to the assignation of an Executor,
whereby the effect of the disposition is hindered or suspended, and depends
upon some future event, then such assignation of an Executor is conditional:
and there are diverse words whereby the disposition of the Testator is made
conditional; as if, when, whiles, whenever, wheresoever, and several other,
etc. M^^h. Grass* Th^s com. opin. sect. Legatum, quaestio 46. Franc. Mantica de
Conject. u^t. volunt. li. 10. tit. 5.

117. And as there are diverse words which make a conditional disposition, so
there are diverse sorts and divisions of conditions; whereof some necessary,
some impossible, some possible or indifferent: when the condition is extreme,
that is to say, either necessary or impossible; such a condition hinders not
the Executor o^ Legatary, but that he may be admited to the Executorship, or
recove^ the Legacy, as if such condition ha^ not been at all expressed. Justin
^^s^it. li. 2. tit. de Heredibus Instituendis, number. 10. Swin. part 4. sect. 5.
number. 4* and sect. 6 number. 2.

118. But when the condition is not extreme, but indifferent or possible, then
it must first be fulfilled, before the Executor be admitted, or the Legatary
recover his Legacy: but there are diverse limitations to both these Rules, as
will appear by the several cases hereafter mentioned in this Chapter. M^^h.
Grass* Thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legate. quaestio 52. Swin. part 4. sect. 6 number.
4.

119. If the Testator make A B his Executor, or give him an hundred pounds, if,
or when his Son dies; here the Executor or Legatary cannot obtain the
Executorship or Legacy till such a thing happen, but must wait the event of
the condition. Paul. de Castr. in li. extraneum, li. 1. cap. de Hered.
Instituendis. Swin. part 4. sect. 6.

120. If the Testator make A B his Executor, or give him an hundred pounds, if
he marry his the Testators Daughter, supposing her to be living, whereas she is
dead; in this case, though the condition be impossible, yet because the
Testator did think her to be living, and therefore the condition possible, A B
in this case cannot be Executor, nor obtain the Legacy: Or, if the Daughter
were living, but dyed before Marriage, in such case it is all one; but if she
were living, and afterward did refuse to marry, yet notwithstanding A B might
be admitted to the Executorship, or obtain the Legacy. Franc. Mantica de
conject. ult. volunt. li. 2. tit. 16. number. 23. Menoch. de praesumpt. li. 4.
fol. 706. number. 40. Swin. part 4. sect. 6. number. 9, 14, 15.

121. But if the Testators Daughter were willing afterward to marry with A B,
before he have obtained the Executorship or Legacy, and then he refuses her;
in this case he ought not to be admited to the Executorship, or obtain the
Legacy, unless after her refusal at first, and before her willingness he be
married to another woman, or have obtained the Executorship or Legacy, and is
possessed thereof; for then her repentance comes too late. Franc. Mantica de
conject. ult volunt. li. 11. tit. 18. number. 30, 38. Menoch. de praesumpt. li. 4.
fol. 183. number. 29. Swin. part 4. sect. 10.

122. Also if the Testator make A B his Executor, or give him 100 pound if he
marry his Daughter, and he refuses to marry her; here he cannot be admitted to
the Executorship, or obtain the Legacy, although afterward he be willing to
marry her, and then she will not marry him; unless that at such time when he
refused, he were not of sufficient age to marry: for his dissent at that time,
when he could not consent, does not ^inder him, nor is it a breach of the
condition. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legatum, Quaestio 46. number.
16. Menoc. de Praesumpt. li. 4. fol. School. number. 22. Swin. part 4. sect. 8.

123. If one make A B his Executor, or give him 100 pounds, if he erect a
Monument within three days after the Testators death: in this case, if the
Executor or Legatary do perform the same with as much speed as is possible, it
is sufficient, though it was not done within three days. Swin. part. 4. sect.
6. number. 11.

124. If the Testator charge his Executor, to whom he has given all the
residue of his Goods, That if he do not touch the Sky with his finger, or kill
his Father, to pay then to A B 100 pounds: in this case he is not bound to the
performance, for such Legacy to A B is void. Reformatio Legum Eccles. tit. de
Testamentis, C. 15. page 135. Swin. part 4. sect. 6. numb. 12.

125. Where the Testator makes thee Executor, or gives thee 100 pounds, if thou
pay 10 pounds to C D before a certain time; within which time C D dies, and
then thou payst the 10 pounds within the time to his Executor, or
Administrator* in this case, because thou did not pay the 10 pounds to C D
himself, thou can not be Executor, no^ obtain the Legacy. Franc. Manti^a de
conject. ult. velunt. li. 11. tit. 17. number. 25. Swin. part 4. sect. 7.

126. But if thou be made Executor, or 100 pounds is bequeathed to thee, if
thou pay unto the Testators Son (being an Infant) 10 pounds; in this case, if
thou pay to the Childs Tutor, it is a sufficient performance of the condition.
Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. L^gatum, quaestio 52. Francise. Mantica
de conject. ult. volunt. li. 11. tit. 17. number. 29. Swin. part 4. sect. 7.

127. Also if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee 100 pounds, if thou
go to Church on Easter Day; and when the day comes thou art willing to go, but
a^t not able to do it, by reason of overflowing of waters, or some other
necessary impediment: in this case notwithstanding thou shall be admitted to
the Executorship, and may recover the Legacy, as if thou had gone to the
Church that day: but if at the day thou were going to the Church, and by the
way committest some crime, whereupon thou art arrested and stayed; in this case
thou shall not be admitted to the Executorship, nor recover the Legacy,
because thou were the cause thy self wherefore the condition was not performed,
and the other was Actus Dei. Minsing. in sect. penult. Inst. de Haered. number. 2.
Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt. li. 11. tit. 16. number. 24. Swin. part 4.
sect. 8.

128. If the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee 100 pounds if thou marry
his Daughter within a Month; and another person does hold her purposely from
thee, that thou can not marry her within the time; yet in this case the
condition is reputed to be performed by reason of thy willingness, and thou
may obtain the Executorship or Legacy: but if such person does not detain
her purposely, but is ignorant of the Testators Will, then in such case the
condition is not taken to be performed. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt.
li. 11. tit. 16. number. 22. Swin. part 4. sect. 8. number. 19.

129. If the Testator make thee Executor, or give 100 pounds if thou bury his
body within the Cathedral Church of St. Peter's in York, and the Testator
afterward dies Excommunicate, for which his Sepulcher is denied, so that thou
can not bury him there; yet notwithstanding, because it was not thy fault,
but the Testators, thou may therefore obtain the Executorship or Legacy.
Sichard. in li. 1. cap. de Inst. and Substitut. number. 1. Swin. part. 4. sect. 8.
number. 18.

130. If the Testator make his Wife Executrix, or give her 100 pounds if she
abides with his Children; in this case, if she enter into bond to perform the
condition, or else to make restitution, she may then be admitted to the
Executorship, or obtain the Legacy. Paul. de Castr. in d. li. Mutianae, sect.
So^rus. Simo. de Praetes. ^e Interp ult. volunt. li. 5. fol. 42. Interp. 2.
dub. 1. number. 24, 25. Swin. part. 4. sect. 9. Reformatio Leg. Eccles. tit. de
Testam. cap. 31.

131. Also if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee 100 pounds, if thou
never play at Cards or Dice, or, if thou never give away thy Lands: in such
case, entering into sufficient Bonds to perform the condition, or else to make
restitution, thou may then be admitted to the Executorship, or obtain the
Legacy. Paul. de Castr in d. L. Mutianae. Simo. de Praetis. de Interp. ult.
Vol. li. 5. Interp. 2. dub. 1. numb. 25. Swin. part 4. sect. 9.

132. But if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee 100 pounds, if thou
never play at Cards or Dice, or, if thou do not at any time give away thy Lands
to A B; here thou can not be admitted to the Executorship, nor obtain the
Legacy, until the condition be brought into that state, that it cannot be
infringed. Gloss. in d. L. Mutianae, Swin. part 4. sect. 9. number. 14.

133. Those conditions which do impugn and hinder that liberty which every
Testator ought to have by the Law in the making of his Will, are accounted
unlawful; therefore if the Testator make thee his Executor, or give thee 100
pounds if thou shall make him thy Executor, or give him 100 pounds in thy
Testament; or, if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee 100 pounds, if
A B will; or, if the Testator make such a person Executor, or give him 100
pounds whom thou will appoint: in these cases, though thou name one to be
Executor, or, that A B will that thou be Executor, or have the Legacy; yet
thou shall not be admitted to the Executorship, nor have the Legacy, because
by such means that free liberty which every Testator ought to have in the
making of his Testament might be taken from him, and he deprived of that
privilege; therefore such dispositions are said to be cap^ious. Sichard. in
li. Captorias, c. de Mil. Test. number. 6. Mich. Grass. thesaur com. opin. sect.
Inst. quaestio 18. Swin. part 4. sect. 11.

134. But if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee 100 pounds, if A B
shall esteem it convenient; in this case, if A B esteem it convenient thou be
admitted Executor, or have the Legacy of 100 pounds, then thou art to be
admitted to the one, or may obtain the other: or, if the Testator make one of
his Servants his Executor, whom thou shall choose; in this case him whom thou
shall choose of the Testators Servants, shall be Executor. Note the diversity of
these two Cases, from the Cases last going before. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com.
opin. sect. Instit. quaestio 18. number. 6. Swin. part ^. sect. 11.

135. If the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee an hundred pounds if
thou never marry, or if thou marry according to the appointment or consent of
some other person; the first of these Conditions is unlawful, because it
forbids Marriage wholly; and the second is unlawful, because it is referred to
another person to make choice for thee, who perhaps may choose such an one as it
is not fit or lawful for thee to marry with her: therefore in the first Case
thou may be admitted to the Executorship, or obtain the Legacy, as if no
such Condition had been: and in the second Case, thou may make choice of a
woman thy self, (without the appointment of the other person) and marry her;
and then thou may be admitted to the Executorship, or obtain the Legacy, but
not before Marriage. Fran. Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt. li. 11. tit. 19.
Covar. Epitom. de Sponsal. c. 2. sect. 9. number. 11. Swin. part 4. sect. 12.
Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legate. quaestio 50. number. 9.

136. But if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee an hundred pounds,
if thou do not marry before the age of one and twenty years, or if thou do
not marry a widow, or such or such a woman, or if thou do not marry in the
city of York; in these Cases if thou break the Condition, then thou losest all
thy interest as to the Executorship or Legacy. Fran. Mantica de conject. ult.
Volunt. li. 11. tit. 19. number. 8, 9. Swin. part 4. sect. 12.

137. Also if the Testator make thee Executor, or give thee an hundred pounds,
if his daughter do not marry; in this Case, if she die unmarried, thou art to
be admitted to the Executorship, or obtain the Legacy: but if the Condition
were that thou should be Executor, or have an hundred pounds, if thy daughter
did never marry; in this Case, though she die unmarried, yet thou art not to be
admitted to the Executorship, or obtain the Legacy, because it shall be
presumed that thou d^dst persuade and hinder thy daughter from Marrying; and
therefore to prevent such Fraud, the Law does reject such Condition. Fran.
Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt. lib. 11. tit. 19. number. 5. Swin. part 4. sect.
12.

138. If the Testator make thee Executor after the expiration of five years
after his death, or he does make thee Executor for and during five years after
his death; this Assignation is lawful, and the Ordinary may commit the
Administration of the Deceaseds goods in the mean time to the next of kin;
during which time, the act of the Administrator is good, and cannot be avoided
by the Executor afterward: and the Ordinary may also commit the Administration
of the Deceaseds goods unadministred by the Executor, after the expiration of
the time of the Executorship, where thou art appointed Executor but for a time.
Bro. tit. Administr. 45. tit. Exec. 155. Plo. com. in Griesby and Foxes ca.
Swin. part 4. sect. 17.

139. If the Executor make his wife Executrix; and if she will not or cannot be
Executrix, then he makes his son Executor; and if his son be not Executor,
then he makes his sister Executrix; and if she be not Executrix, then he
makes his brother Executor: in this Case, the Testator is said to make degrees
of Executors; and in this example there are four degrees of Executors. And
observe always, the Executors in the first degree (as the Wife is here) is said
to be instituted, and all the rest substituted. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com.
opin. sect. Substit. quaestio 1. Swin. part 4. sect. 19.

140. Note also, that it is lawful for the Testator to make as many degrees of
Executors as he pleases; and he may substitute into the place of one Executor,
either one or more and into the place of many Executors he may substitute one
alone, or he may substitute to every Executor one, or one of them to another.
Justin. Instit. tit. de vulgari substitutione, number. 1, 2. Swin. part 4. sect.
17. Cowels Inst. pa. 131.

141. But if the Testator do institute diverse Executors, substituting one or
more to them; so long as any of them which was first instituted may be
Executor, the substitute is not to be admitted, unless the Testator do appoint
to every such Executor a substitute; for then any one of these first instituted
Executors, not being able, or refusing to be Executor, his substitute is then
to be admitted with the rest of the Executors first instituted; whereas
otherwise any one of the first instituted Executors in the first degree,
lawfully undertaking the Executorship, all the substitutes are excluded: and in
such case, if the Executor afterward dye intestate, then the Administration is
to be committed of the rest of the goods of the Testator deceased, not
administered by the Executor, except in some special cases. Mich. Grass.
thesaur. com. opin. sect. Substit. quaestio 9. Repam. in li. 1. de vulgo
Substit. number. 185, 187. Swin, part 4. sect. 19.

142. If the Testator make thee Executor if thou give ten pounds to A B; and if
thou do not, then he does appoint another to be Executor: though thou refuse to
give ten pounds to A B, yet cannot that other be Executor, unless he give ten
pounds to A B, because this condition of giving expressed in the institution,
is understood to be repeated in the substitution. Menoch. de praesumptio 177.
number. 28. Swin. part 4. sect. 19.

143. Note that every one may appoint as many Executors as he lists* so that
the number be not infinite, as to say, I make all the men in the world my
Executors: for such an Assignment (being an Argument of insanity of the mind)
is void, at least in effect. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Instit.
quaestio 13.

CHAP. VI.
Of appointing Tutors, and some few things touching Childrens Portions.
144. NOte, that every one, who may be an Executor, may be a Tutor; but no
Tutor may intermeddle as Tutor, until he be confirmed by the Ordinary; and
where one that is named Tutor is Lunatic, or absent beyond Sea, in such like
cases the Ordinary may appoint another during such impediment: Also it is the
custom of several places, that when diverse are appointed Tutors, there in such
case one alone may Administer, when the other cannot or will not intermeddle
with the Tutorship Swin. part. 3. sect. 10, 12. Cowels Inst. page 31.

145. And it is also the custom of several places, that if the Father appoint
not a Tutor by his Will to his Children, then the Mother by her Will may
appoint one; and if neither Father nor Mother appoint one then a Stranger (if
he make the Child his Executor) may appoint one; and if there be no Tutor
Testamentary then the Ordinary may appoint one Fleta, li. c. 9. Swin. part 3.
sect. 9* Vide Co. 3. li fol. 38. Cowels Inst. pa. 30, 41. Noyes Maxims, pa.
105.

146. Now as to the appointing o^ Tutors, it matters not by what form of words
they are appointed, so that the Testators meaning can but appear; nor in what
Language the Tutor is assigned, whether in English* Latin, Greek, or any other
Tongue Swin. part 3. sect. 12. Socin. Jun. Consil. 83. Vol. 1.

147. It was the custom of many places formerly, that a Boy after he had
accomplished the age of fourteen years, and a Girl after she had accomplished
the age of twelve years, might then choose their own Tutors if they pleased, and
refuse the Tutors appointed them by their Fathers Will; but now by the Statute
of 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. every Father, whether he be of the age of twenty one
years or under, may by Deed executed in his lifetime, or by his last Will and
Testament in Writing, delivered in the presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, dispose of his Children under the age of twenty one years, and not
married at the time of his death, for and during such time as they shall remain
under the age of twenty one years, or any lesser time, to the custody and
tuition of any person or persons in possession or remainder (Popish Recusants
excepted) and such dispossession of such Children, since the 24 of Febr. 1645,
or hereafter to be made, shall be good against all and every person and persons
claiming any such Child or Children, as Guardian in Soccage or otherwise.
Litt. li. 2. cap. 5. Swin. part 3. sect. 11. Vide Noyes Max. page 105. and
Cowels Inst. page 33. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

148. And such person to whom such Children shall be disposed or devised, may
have an Action of Ravishment of Ward, or Trespass against such person as shall
wrongfully take away or detain such Child or Children, for the recovery of
them, and recover damages for the same in such Actions, for the use of such
Child or Children; and they are also empowered by the same Act of Parliament, to
take into their custody, to the use of such Child or Children, the profits of
all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such Child or Children, and the
custody and management of their Goods, Chattels and personal Estate, until the
age of twenty one years, or lesser time, according to the Parents disposition;
and may bring an Action in pursuance thereof, as by the Law Guardian in Soccage
might do. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

149. Note, that every Tutor ought to take care, that his Pupil be honestly and
virtuously brought up, and must provide for him Meat, Drink, Apparel, Lodging,
and other necessaries according to his quality and condition, and ought to
dispose of his Pupils Goods and Chattels to the Pupils best advantage, in
selling of such Goods as will not keep without damage, and preserving of the
rest till the Pupil come of age: And to this intent, it is the custom in many
places, especially within the Province of York, that the Tutor at the Entry of
his Office makes a true Inventary of all the Goods and Chattels of his Pupils,
and does enter into Bond with Sureties before the Ordinary, to make a just
account; and then he is admitted and confirmed, and may seize upon the body of
the Pupil, and take possession of his Goods. Bro. tit. Guardian, F. N. B. fol.
118. b. Swin. part 3. sect. 13. and Cowels Inst. page 49.

150. Formerly there were several Ages to be taken notice of both in Boys and
Girls, when they should be out of Tutorship; as, if a Boy were in Ward, by
reason of Lands held in Knights service, he could not be out of Wardship till
twenty one years of Age; but in other cases at fourteen years of Age he might
choose a new Tutor, if he liked not his old, and might call his old Tutor then
to account: and so a Wench at twelve years of age might choose her Tutor, unless
she were in Ward by reason of Lands held in Knights service, as aforesaid; and
then she was to continue in Wardship till sixteen years of age, unless she were
fourteen at the death of her Ancestor; and then she was free, and might choose
her Tutor: but now these Wardships are quite taken away by the 12 Car. 2. and
every one may dispose of his Children to whom he pleases, observing the Rules
aforesaid, in number 147. Litt. li. 2. cap. 4. Brac. li. 2. cap. 37. number. 3.
Bro. tit. Guard. 7. 35 H. 6. fol. 52. Co. Litt. fol. 78. Fleta, li. 1. cap. 12.
West. 1. cap. 22. Mert. cap. 6. Co. 2 part Inst. fol 90 and 203, 135, 136.
Stat. Marlbr. cap. 17. Cowels Inst. page 37 and 45. Swin. part 3. sect. 14. F.
N. B. 143.

151. Note that there is a general custom within the Province of York, and in
several other places, that there is due to the lawful Children of every man,
being an inhabitant or householder within the same Province, (and dying there,
or elsewhere) a filial or Childs part and portion, which is sometimes a third
part, and sometimes an half part of the Fathers clear moveable Goods, as has
been aforeshewed, unless the Child be heir to his Father, or were advanced by
him in his lifetime; upon which exceptions hereafter follow several
observations. Lindwood in C. Stat. de Testament. li. 3. Provinc. Constit. Cant.
Brac. lib. 2. c. 26. F. M. B. de Rat. part honor. Swin. part 3. sect. 18.

152. As, if the Father should by his last Will and Testament forbid his Child
to have any portion of his Goods, such Will in such Cases is void, and the
Child may notwithstanding recover his filial part or portion: also, if the
Father should le^ve his Child but twenty pounds, when by the rate of the
Inventary his part comes to an hundred pounds; here he may refuse the Legacy,
and recover his full portion, notwithstanding the Will: or, if the Father
should impose any condition upon the said portion, as to be paid seven years
after his death, or the like; yet the Child may sue for it presently after his
Fathers death, and recover it before the seven years be out; for it is
presently due upon the Fathers death, notwithstanding his Fathers Will to the
contrary: and if the Father by his Will should bequeath the Portion after the
Child's death to any other person, in such case the Will is void, and the
Portion shall go to the Executors or Administrators of the Child after his
death: But I suppose it the Father leave the Child a far greater sum then by
the rate of the (...) Inventary the Childs part would come unto; in this case,
the Father may impose what condition he pleases upon it, and the Child must
either take it with the condition annexed, or otherwise he may refuse it, and
stand to his Child's part without condition annexed to it. Swin. part 3. sect.
18. number. 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.

153. Also, if a man have a Son or Daughter married in his lifetime, who has a
Child or Children, and then dies, and afterward the Grandfather dies; in this
case the Grandchildren shall recover such part of the Grandfathers Goods as
should have been due to their Father or Mother for their Childs Portion if
they had lived. Reformatio Legum Eccles. tit. Test. cap. 10.

154. If the Father leave a Legacy to his Child, being neither Heir, nor
advanced by him in his lifetime, and do not mention whether it shall be in
lieu and recompense of his filial portion or no; in such case, if it be as much
or more in quantity then the filial portion extends unto by the rate of the
Inventary, or if it want but a very little thereof, then it shall be presumed
to be given in lieu of his Portion; but if the Legacy be very small, then the
Child shall both recover the said Legacy, and his filial Portion too. Menoch.
de Praesumpt. li. 4. Praesumptio 109. number. 6, 26 and 110. Swin. part 3. sect.
18. number. 9.

155. Where the Child is Heir to his Father in Fee-simple or Fee-tail, though
the Lands be but of very small value in regard of the personal Estate of his
Father, yet he is thereby barred from having any filial Portion, by the custom
of the Province of York, and some other places: yea, although he be but Heir in
reversion, or hold Lands as Heir which are but Mortgaged with power of
Redemption upon payment of such a sum of money at a certain day; yet during
such holding, till the condition be performed, he is barred of his filial
portion; but if he have only copy hold-lands after his Fathers death, in such
case he is not barred from the recovery of his filial Portion. Dyer, fol. 124.
pl. 38. Swinbor. part 3. sect. 18. and the opinions of Sir Tho. H^^s^oth,
Doctor of the Civil Law, and Sir Jo. Savile, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, Judge of Assize at York 1604, cited by Mr. Swinborne in his Marginal
Notes.

156. If the Father bestow or give any thing to a man of Trade, to take his Son
an Apprentise, and to teach him his Trade; or bestow any thing upon a
Schoolmaster or Tutor in the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, for the
increase of his Child's knowledge in Learning; or buy an Advowson or
Ecclesiastical Benefice or Dignity, and afterward presents his Son to it; or
the Son being much indebted, the Father pays off his debts, or buys an Office
and bestows it upon his Son; or, if any other but the Father bestow a
preferment on his Son, though it be never so much; yet none of all these shall
be accounted such preferment or advancement, as to bar the Child from the
recovery of his filial Portion. Claudius Battandier, Tract. de Legitima. cap.
12. number. 19, 20, 21, 28, 22, 31. Swin. part 3. sect. 18.

157. But it is said by some, that if the Father bestow a Lease upon his Child,
or grant to him an Annuity for life, out of his Lands; and though the Child be
to reap no benefit by these, during, his Fathers life, but after his death; yet
it is held for a preferment, because it was assured to him in his Fathers
lifetime. Swin. part 3. sect. 18. number. 25.

158. And it is granted for certainty, that if the Father bestow a competent
portion with his Daughter in Marriage, upon him that should marry her; this is
such an advancement as shall bar her from the demand of a filial Portion: but
it is to be understood, that this competent Portion must be equal, or not far
inferior to that quantity which should fall to be due to such a Child after
the rate and proportion of the Fathers Estate at that very time when he
bestows it on his Child, and not according to such quantity as should fall due
at the time of the Fathers death afterward. Swin. part 3. sect. 18. number. 22,
26, 27.

159. But if such gift be not competent, but far under the rateable part of
that which would fall due to the Child, as 5 l. to put in his Purse, or spend
at his pleasure, when perhaps the filial Portion would amount to several
hundreds of pounds; this is not such an advancement as shall hinder such Child
from the recovery of a filial portion. Swin. part 3. sect. 18. number. 28.

160. Or if a man seized in Fee-simple of thirty Acres of Land, has Issue two
Daughters, and gives ten Acres with one of them in frankMarriage, and dies
seized of the other twenty Acres; in this case, she that is married may, if she
will, have part of those twenty Acres also, and put them in hotch-potch with
the other Land, and suffer the same to lie commixed and mingled together, and
so an equal division shall be made betwixt the two Sisters, and each of them
shall have fifteen Acres* whereas otherwise the Sister marrie^ would get but
ten Acres. Litt. 59. Fynches Law, page 124. Terms of the Law, verbum
hotch-potch. Swin. part 3. sect. 18. numb. 33.

161. Note, that by Portion is to be understood, not only a sum of money, or
part of the Fathers Goods and Chattels; but also Lands and Annuities bestowed
by the Father upon the Child. Swin. part 3. sect. ^8. number. 29.

CHAP. VII.
What things are deviseable by Will, and what not.
162. OF Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, some are deviseable by Custom, and
some by force of certain Statutes, as hereafter appears. Cowels Inst. page 138.
Swin part 3. sect. 2.

163. Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments holden in Gavel-kinde, by the custom
of Kent, though they be holden in Knights service, may be given, or devised by
Will, and that without license of the Lords, saving to the Lords the Rents and
services due out of the same Lands and Tenements. Terms of the Law, verb.
Gavel-kinde. Mich. 1655. in B. R. Hammond and Thornhills Ca. Syles Rep. fol.
476. Swin. part 3. sect. 3.

164. And so Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments lying in London* York, Oxford,
etc. and other place* where the same are held in BurgageTenure, may be devised
by Will, for to hold in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for life, for years, etc. and if
he who hold such Lands, etc. in Burgage-Tenure be a Citizen or Burgess of the
City or Borough, where such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments be holde^ in
Burgage-Tenure; then he man devise the same in Mortmain, which otherwise he
could not do, if he were not Citizen, Burgess, or Freeman o^ the same place:
and it is not necessary that the Will wherein BurgageLand is devised should be
in writing. But note, that the custom of the place must he observed, concerning
the Probate or Inrolment of such Wills, etc. F. N. B. Bre. ex Gravi quaerela in
pr. Bro. tit. devise 22, 43 and 51. Dr. and Stud. li. 1. cap. 7 and 10. Swin.
part 3. sect. 3. Perkins, Sec. 577, 578. page 49. E. 3. devise 8.

165. The Wife so long as she lives unmarried, shall have half of her Husbands
Lands holden in Gavelkinde. Co. on Litt. fol. 111. Old Terms of the Law, verb.
Gavelkinde.

166. And of Lands held in Borough English, by the custom of some places, the
Widow shall have the whole, and sometimes the half of her Husbands Estate, Dum
sola and casta vixerit. Co. on Litt. fol. 111. F. N. B. 150. Litt. li. 2. cap.
10.

167. By the Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 1. every one (except a woman Covert* an Insant
under the age of one and twenty years, or a person De non sane Memory) may be
their last Will and Testament in writing, or other Act lawfully executed in
their lifetime, give, dispose, Will or devise, all such Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, as they are solely seized of in Fee-simple, or as much as of
right in them is, of all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as they are
seized of in Fee-simple in Copercenary, or in Common in Fee-simple, to any
person or persons (except to Bodies politic and corporate) And two parts of
three of all such Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, as they hold in
Knights service. See now the 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. 32 H. 8. cap. 1, 34. and 35 H.
8. cap. 5. Fynch. Law, page 169, 170. Co. on Litt. fol. 111. b. Swin. part 3.
sect. 3 and 4. And Wingates Abr. of Stat. tit. Wills.

168. All manner of Goods and Chattels real and personal, moveable and
immovable, may be devised by Will or Testament, except in some certain cases
following. Perkins, sect. 511. Lind. in C. Stat. de Testament. li. 3. Provinc.
Constable. Cantibr. Swin. part 3. sect. 5. Cowels Inst. page 140.

169. As where two men are jointly possessed of Goods and Chattels real or
personal, one of them cannot make his Will, and bequeath his part to another;
for when he dies, his part goes to the survivor: and so it is in Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments also. Perkins, sect. 500, 526. Dr. and Stud. li.
1. cap. 6. Litt. li. 3. cap. 3. Cowels Inst. page 140. Clerk of Assize, page 63.

170. Nor can a Spiritual person, or Master of a College or Hospital, or Mayor
of a City, devise those things which belong to their Church, College,
Hospital, or City; nor can the Crown or Jewels of the Realm be devised by Will,
but they may be given by Letters Patent; and a Parson by Will may devise the
Corn growing on the Glebe-Land at the time of his death. Perkins, sect. 496 and
497, 498. Brac. 1. li. 1, 2. cap. 14. Dr. and Stud. li. 2. cap. 39. Cowels
Inst. page 125. F. N. B. devise 5. and Exer. 108. Swin. part 3. sect 6.

171. The Husband cannot devise such Goods as his Wife has, as being Executrix
to another* nor such things as are in Action, as debts due to her before
Marriage by Obligation or Contract, unless he and his Wife sue and recover the
same during Marriage, or that he renew the Bonds, and take them in his own
Name; otherwise after his death they remain to her. Co. on Litt. fol. 351. b. 9
H. 6, 52. and 21 H. 7. fol. 29. Kitchen, fol. 251. a. Finches Law, page 44 and
168. Bro. Testam. 11. Swin. part 2. sect 9. number. 13.

172. Also if the Husband be possessed of a Term or Lease for years in right
of his Wife, he cannot devise it by his Will, but he may grant it away, or
dispose of it in his lifetime* or, if he make no disposition thereof, yet if
he survive her, then it falls to him; and in such Case he may devise it by
Will. Dame Hales ca. Plo. com. fol. 260. Co. on Litt. fol. 251. a. Kitchen,
page 267. b. 7 H. 6, 1. Perkins, sect. 560. Dr. and Stud. li. 1. cap. 7.

173. An Administrator cannot devise those Goods by Will, which he has as
Administrator to another person dying intestate, but Administration thereof
shall be committed to the next of Kin to the first Intestate; neither can an
Executor devise those Goods by way of Legacy, which he has as Executor; but he
may make his Testament, and appoint another Executor, who shall have the
Administration of the same Goods, to the use of the first Testator. Fynches
Law, page 168. Bro. Adm. 7. F. N. Br. Adm. 3. 31 E. 3. cap. 11. Plo. com. fol.
525, 526. Swin. part 3. sect. 6.

174. Those things also which belong to the Heir after the Testators edath,
cannot be devised by Will, as Glass-windows, VVainscote, Tables dormant, and
Benches affixed thereunto, or mortifed in the Earth* Furnaces, Coppers, Leads,
Ovens, etc. set in Mortar or Stone; nor Trees, nor Grass growing, etc. Bro.
Exer. 65. Cowel Inst. page 140. Co. 4. Rep. fol. 62. Swin. part 3. sect. 6.
Noyes Max. page 106.

175. But Corn growing on the Land at the time of the Testators death may be
devised by Will, by those who are seized in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for life;
and also by Tenant in Dower, Tenant by the Courtesy, and Tenant in Mortgage,
and their Tenants; and he who is seized in right of his Wife, although their
Estates do determine before the said Corn be ripe and severed, except in some
special Cases. Perkins, sect. 512, 514 and 522. Dr. and Stud. li. 1. cap. 20.

176. If a woman Tenant in Dowe^ sow her Land, and afterward marry, and the
Husband dies before severance of the Corn; in this Case it remains to her, and
he cannot devise it: but if it had been sown after the Marriage, he might have
devised it. Clerk of Assize, page 57. Abr. Dr. and Stud. li. 1. cap. 20.

177. If Tenant for life have Hops growing, and dye a little before the
severance of them; in this Case the Executors or Administrators shall have
them, and not he in Reversion or Remainder; for the Hops are accounted as
Emblements, they growing by Manurance and Industry of the Owner, by the making
of Hills, and setting of Poles. Vide Mi^h. 11 Car. 1. B. R. Latham and Attwoods
Case, Cro. 1 part fol. 396.

178. As Goods and Chattels may be devised, as aforesaid; it is now further
observable what a quantity or proportion of Goods and Chattels the Testator may
devise by his Will: observe therefore, that if the Testator have neither Wife
nor Child at the time of his death, h^ he may then dispose and devise al^ the
clear residue of his Goods and Chattels, over and above the discharging
Funeral-expences and hi^ debts. Lindwood in C. Statut. d^ Testament. li. 3.
Pro. Constable. Cant. verbum defunct. Brac. li. 2. cap. 26. Swin. part 3. sect. 16.

179. But it is the custom of many places, especially within the Province of
York, that if the Testator have a Wife or Child at the time of hi^ death, that
then he can but dispose of half of such his clear Goods, and the other half is
to go to the Wife or Child; and if he have both a Wife and Child, or Children
at the time of his death, then the Goods are divided into three parts; whereo^
one part is to the Wife, another to the Child or Children, and the other
third part, called the death^ part, is left to his disposing; and it no
disposition be made thereof, it falls to the Executor: but note here, that if
the Child or Children were Heir to the Testator, or were advanced by the
Testator in his lifetime, then the Testator may devise one half of the clear
goods, and the other half shall go to his Wife. F. N. B. Bre. de Rat. part
bonor. Bro. eod. tit. N. 6. M. 7. E. 4. fol. 21. a. Brac. li. 2. cap. 26.
Fleta, li. 2. cap. 50. Glan. li. 2. cap. 20. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 33. Swin.
part 3. sect. 16. Refor. Legum Ecclesiast. tit. lest. cap. 10.

180. Note, where the Wife and Children ought to have a rateable part of the
Goods of the deceased, be it third part or half, as the case is, there also
they ought to have a like part of the debts due by the deceased, after they are
recovered by the Executor or Administrator; but of Leases they can have no
rateable part, where they use to have a rateable part of the moveable Goods and
Debts recovered, unless it be by special custom of the City, County, Deanery, or
place where the Testator dwelled, and had such Leases. Swi^. part 3. sect. 16.
F. N. B. Breve de Rationabl. part. bon.

181. This rateable part of the Goods to the Wife and Children, i^ saved to
them by the Statute of Magna Charta: but note, the Wife o^ Children cannot sue
the Executor o^ Administrator for their rateable parts, till all the Testators
Debts b^ paid; and then what remains is to be divided according to the Rule^
aforesaid, into two or three parts before any Legacies be paid; for they must
all be paid out of the deaths part after the division. Magna Charta, C. 18.
Regist. fol. 142. (...) F. N. B. 122. b. M. 7. E. 4. fol. 21. a^ Co. 2 part
Inst. fol. 33.

CHAP. VIII.
Several Cases concerning the bequeathing of Legacies, and also touching
Devises.
182. AS an Executor may be appointed diverse ways, as is ^newed before, chap.
5. so also a Legacy may be given after diverse ways, either simply or
conditionaly, etc. Swin. part 4. sect. 3. number. ^.

183. That Legacy is said to be pure and simple, which is given without a
condition annexed to it: and as in appointing an Executor, it matters not after
what form of words it be; so it is in the bequeathing of a Legacy, for it
skills not after what form the same be given, so that the Testators meaning do
but appear whether it be in Goods and Chattels, or Lands and Tenements. Swin.
part 4. sect. 4. number. 18.

184. Note, that a Legacy may be given from a certain time, or until a certain
time; albeit the Legatary dye in the mean time, before the day come, yet the
Executors or Administrators of the Legatary may recover the same when once the
day is past, as the Legatary himself might have done i^ he had lived so long;
unless the meaning of the Testator be to the contrary, or that it be such a
thing as cannot be transmitted to the Executor, as personal service: but if the
Legacy be given after an uncertai^ time, as where the Testator give thee an
hundred pounds when h^ Son shall dye, or the like; there (...) thou dye before
the time come, the Executors or Administrators ca^ then recover nothing. So
note the diversity. Mich. Grass. thesaur com. opin. sect. Legate. quaest. 43.
Mant^ ca de conject. ult. volunt. li. 11. tit. 2^ number. 8. Swin. part 4. sect.
17. Refor. Legum Eccles. tit. Testament. cap. 26.

185. If a man devise to his Daughter an hundred pounds when she shall be
married, or to his Son when he shall be of the Age of twenty one years; here if
they dye before the time appointed, their Executors shall not have it: But if
the devise were of an hundred pounds to the Daughter, to be paid her when she
shall be married; or to the Son, to be paid him when he shall attain the age of
twenty one years; in such case, if they dye before such time, then their
Executors may recover the Legacy. Tr. 1653. B. R. in Dumlowe and Shawes Ca.
Hughes grand Abridg. 1 part, page 664. cap. 14.

186. Note that a Legatary may not of his own Authority take the Legacy, and
serve himself, but must receive the same at the hands of the Executor; except
in some cases, as where the Legatary is possessed of his Legacy at the time of
the Testators deaths; for in such cases, he may retain and keep it, if there be
sufficient assets besides in the Executors hands to pay the Testators Debt; or,
if the Testators give license to the Legatary to enter to his Legacy, then he
may do it without the Executors consent; and if he be both Legatary and
Executor, then he may serve himself. Perkins, sect. 488. Hernes Law of Con.
page 88. Socin. Jun. Consil. 111. vol. 1. Swin. part sect. 4. number. 23. Perkins,
sect. 570, 572, 573.

187. But the Legatary has no remedy by the Common Law for any Legacy of
goods to him bequeathed, if the Executor will not deliver the same; but he must
in this case have a Citation for the Executor, to appear before the Ordinary,
or other competent Ecclesiastical Judge, to answer him in cause of his Legacy*
except in case where a particular thing is bequeathed, as the Testators Horse
or Signet, etc. and in such case, the Legatary may sue at Common Law for the
same. Bro. devise, number. 3, 6, 14, 27, 30. Terms of the Law, verbum Devise.
Swin. part 4. sect. 4. number. 23.

188. Also if the Testator will that his Executors shall sell his Land, and pay
such and such Legacies out of the Moneys; in this case the Legataries may sue
at Common Law, and not in the Spiritual Court for their Legacies. Mich. 5 P.
and M. Dyer, fol. 151, 152. Vide M. 29. and 30 Eliz. C. B. Germyes Case. Leon.
Rep. fol. 87. and Tr. 17 Jac. C. B. Rott. 895. Edwards and Graves Case. Hob.
Rep. fol. 265.

189. But if the Legacies he granted to be paid out of Leases, and not out of
Fee-simple-Lands; then the Legatary may sue in the Spiritual Court for such
Legacy. Brownlowes 1 part Rep. fol. 34.

190. Testamento cum duo inter se pugnantia reperiuntur, ultimum ra^um est: If
there be diverse devises of one thing in one Will, the last devise takes place
only. Co. on Litt. fol. 112. b.

191. If the Testator bequeath to A B all his Goods; in this case it is the
opinion of some, that A B shall have the Testators whole Estate actively and
passively, (only his Lands, Tenements, and Freehold excepted) being in effect,
his Executor or Heirs, as the Civil Law terms him, and is hereby chargeable
with the Testator debts, so far as the Goods will extend. Gloss. in L. his
verbis, sect. de Haered. Instit. Swin. part 7. sect. 10.

192. But others are of opinion, that if a man grant omnia bona, (that is, all
his Goods;) in this case, Leases for years, nor a Ward, no^ things in Action,
as debts upon Promise or Obligation, shall not pa^^ thereby; for these are
Chattels. 4. E. 6. Bro. tit. Grants 51. and Done 43. Kitchen, pa. 44. b.

193. But if the Testator do bequeath to A B all his Chattels; in such case he
shall have the Testators whole Estate, Leases and Wards too; for Cattalla
includes all but freehold, as well immovable as moveable. Standford. de
praero. Regis, cap. 16. Kitchen Court. Leet, page 45. a. and 46. a. Swin. part
7. sect. 10.

194. But note, that A B by such devise shall not have Glass of the Widows,
Wainscote, Tables dormant, Fats in the Brew House fixed to the Freehold; nor
Furnaces, nor the Box or Chest wherein the Testators Evidences are; nor Hawks,
nor Hounds, nor Doves in the Dovehouse, nor Fishes in the Pond, nor Deer in the
Park: for these things belong all to the Heir. Fynch. page 22. Noyes Max. page
101 and 107. Vide Hill. 43 Eliz. C. B. Gray and Trowes Ca. Goldesboro. Rep.
page 129. pl. 24. 18 E. 4. fol. 14. 4 H. 7, 10. And 21 H. 7, 26. Kitchen, page
45. b. 46. a.

195. Note also, that if A B dye before he have proved the deceased^ Will,
wherein he bequeaths to him all his Goods, or all his Chattels, as foresaid;
yet in such case Administration shall be committed to the next of Kin to the
said A B, and not to the next of Kin to the Testator. 23 Eliz. Dyer, fol. 371.
Swin. part 4. sect. 10.

196. But if the Testator, in either of the cases, make another man Executor;
then the Legatary shall not enter into the whole Estate of the deceased; but
the Executor proving the Will, is to enter, and may receive or sue for all the
debts due to the Testator, and stands also chargeable with the payment of the
Testators debts; and what remains is due to the Universal Legatary. Mich.
Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Inst. q. 14. number. 3. Swin. part 7. sect. 10.

197. If the Testator bequeath to A B all his moveable goods; here the Legatary
may recover all the Testators personal Goods and Cattle, both quick and dead,
which either move themselves (as Horses, Sheep, Ox^^^, Swine, etc.) or can be
moved by another, as Household Stuff, Plate, Plough-geer, Waynes, Carts, Corn in
the Barnes or Garners, and also Corn growing on the ground: And such Debts as
were due to the Testator, and did arise by reason of such moveable things, and
for recovery whereof, there lies an Action personal, do belong also to the
Legatary; but the Legatary cannot sue for the same in his own Name, if another
man be made Executor; but the Executor must sue for the same, and after
recovery, deliver the same to the Legatary. Paul. de Castrens. Consil. 132.
vol. 1. Socin. Jun. Consil. 60. vol. 1. Stamf. 45. Swin. part 7. sect. 10.
Noyes Max. page 99. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legate. quaest. 19.

198. But where the Testator does bequeath to A B all his Goods immovable;
here the Legatary has right only to the Leases for years, which did belong to
the Testator, and to such benefits as arise thereby, as Fruit on the Trees,
Grass growing on the Ground, Fishes in the Pond, and Pigeons in the Dove-coate,
as appurtenant to the Grounds demised, or as parcel of the Fruits of the
Tenements (which if they were out of Lease) did belong to the Heir: but as to
Corn growing on the Ground, or other Fruits industrial, as Hemp, Line, etc.
Turnips, Carrets, or other Roots; they are accounted amongst the moveable
Goods, and such Legatary shall not have them: but he shall have such Debts as
were due to the Testator by reason of something immovable, as Rents due out of
Leases, or Arrearages of Rents due out of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments;
but he cannot Commence Suit in his own Name, if another be made Executor, as is
showed before, number 197. Cowels Interp. verb. Chattels. Kelloway, Rep. fol.
118. Stamf. cap. 16. fol. 45. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legatum,
q. 19. number. 5. Swin. part. 7. sect. 10. Bro. Executor 49.

199. If the Testator bequeath to thee all his Household Stuff; in this case
thou shall have all his Tables, Forms, Stools, Chairs, Truncks, Chests,
Cupboards, Bedsteads, Curtains, Vallence, Rugs, Blankets, and all manner of
Bedding; and also Hangings, Carpets, and all manner of Linen, as Sheets,
Table-cloths, etc. Basins and Ewers, Candlesticks, Salts, Flaggons, Pottingers,
Sawcers, etc. Bowls, Barrels, and all manner of Vessels serving for meat or
Drink, whether they be of Earth, Wood, Glass, Pewter, Brass, or Silver, or
Gold, if they were used in the daily service of the House, and not kept for
Ornament only; and also, Pots, Pans, Spits, Racks, and the like: and lastly,
Coaches by some are held to pass by the name of household stuff. Menoch. de
praesumpt. li. 4. praesump. 160. number. 8, 16, 17 and 19. And Praesump. 122. number.
21. Panor. Consil. 88. vol. 2. number. 3. Swin. part 7. sect. 10.

200. But Apparel, Books, Weapons, Artificers Tools, Cattle, Victuals, Corn in
the Barn or Grana^y, Waynes, Carts, Ploughs, etc. and Vessels affixed to the
Freehold, do not pass by the name of Housholdstuff. Menoch. de Praesump. li.
4. Praesump. 160. number. 29 and 33. Labeo, and Gloss. de Supellectil. Swin. part
7. sect. 10.

201. If the Testator having store of young Colts, wills his Executor to give
to A B two Colts of the age of two years, and after the making of his Will
lives many years; in this case there is due to the Legatary two of the first
Colts, which were extant at the time of the Will making, and not of the last
Colts at the time of his death. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. volunt. li. 3.
tit. 11. Menoch. de Praesump. 127. number. 6. li. 4. Swin. part 7. sect. 11.

202. And if the Testator bequeath to A B all his Goods, which are in such a
place, and afterward he brings more Goods thither, and then dies; here the
Legatary shall have only those Goods which were there when the Will was made,
and not those Goods too which were brought thither afterward. Menoch de
Praesump. 127. number. 29. li. 4. Swin. part 7. sect. 11.

203. But if the Testator had said, I bequeath to A B all my Goods which shall
be in such a place, or all my Goods which may or can be found in such place;
here all the Goods in that place at the time of the Testators death, are due to
the Legatary, though they were brought thither by the Testator after the making
of his Will. Franc. Mantica de conject. ult. Volunt. li. 3. tit. 11. number. 12.
Menoch. de Praesump. 127. number. 87. li. 4. Swin. part 7. sect. 11.

204. If the Testator bequeath to A B his Heard of Cattle, and there is but one
left at the time of his death; in this case the Legatary can recover no more.
Swin. part 7. sect 11. Simo. de Praetis. de Interp. ult. Volunt. li. 4. fol.
179. Dubit. 9. number. 45.

205. Where the Testator does bequeath to A B the Corn in his Barn, and
afterward lays up more Corn in the Barn, and dies before the other be
thrashed; in this case the Legatary can but have only that Corn which was
there at the time of the Will making; but if that be all spent before the
Testators death, then he may recover as much of the new Corn, but no more.
Ful^. fol. 41. Plo. Co. fol. 341. Mas^ar. de Probat. Conclusio 1280. number. 32,
33. Swin. part 7. sect. 11. Cowels Inst. page 145.

206. So note, that it appears by these cases, that sometimes the Testators
death is to be taken notice of, and sometimes the making of the Will is to be
respected in the recovery of Legacies: but in these and all other cases, the
Testators meaning is chiefly to be inquired after. Franc. Mantic. de conject.
ult. volunt. li. 3. tit. 11. number. 22, 23, 24. tit. 19. number. 1, 2, 3, 4. Swin.
part 1. sect. 3. number. 19. and part 7. sect. 11.

207. If the Testator bequeath all his clear goods after Debts paid, etc. to
his Brother and his Children; in this case the Father shall have half of the
clear Goods, and the Children the other half: for it is a Rule, that where
diverse persons are comprehended under one Name collective with another third
person; then all they which be included under that one Name, do represent but
one only person, as in this case, and shall have but a Moiety amongst them;
unless it be proved that the Testators meaning was that the Goods should be
equally divided amongst them; or, that he expressed it so in his Will. Paul. de
Castr. sect. de Haered. Instit. Fra. Mantica de conject. ult. vol. li. 4. tit.
9. Swin. part 4. sect. 20.

208. If the Testator bequeath to the Child in the Mothers Womb an hundred
pounds, in this case, if the Mother bring forth two or three Children at that
time, the Legacy is to be divided amongst them. Franc. Mant. de Con. ult.
Volunt. li. 4. tit. 8. number. 4. Swin. part 4. sect. 20. Paul. de Castr. sect. in
li. Qui Filiabus.

209. But if the Testator say, If my Wife bring forth any Child, I give to the
same an hundred pounds; here if she bring forth two or three Children at that
time, then every Child shall have an hundred pounds, if the Testators Goods do
suffice to satisfy the same; unless it be sufficiently proved, that it was the
Testators meaning, that they should have no more but an hundred pounds amongst
them. Swin. part 4. sect. 20. number. 17. Text. in D. sect. 1.

210. If the Testator bequeath to the Child in the Mothers Womb, if it be a
Man-child, two parts of of his clear Goods; and if it be a Woman-childe, then
the Mother to have two parts of his clear Goods, and the Child but one, and
afterward the Mother brings forth two Children, both a Man-child and a
Woman-childe; in this case the Son shall have twice as much of the Testators
clear Goods as the Mother, and the Mother shall have twice as much as the
Daughter: as for Example, the clear Goods amount to sevenscore pounds; here the
Daughter shall have twenty pounds, the Mother forty pounds, and the Son
fourscore pounds; whereas, if she had brought fourth only a Son, then the Son
should have had fourscore and thirteen pounds six shillings and eight pence,
and the Mother six and forty pounds thirteen shillings and four pence: and if
she had brought forth only a Daughter, then the Mother should have had
fourscore and thirteen pounds six shillings and eight pence, and the Daughter
forty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. Franc. Mantica de conject.
ult. Volunt. li. 4. tit. 9. number. 12. Swin part 4. sect. 20.

211. But if the Testator bequeath to the Child in the Mothers Womb, if it be
a Man-Child, two parts of his Goods, as aforesaid, and the Mother one; and if a
Woman-Childe, then the Mother two parts, and the Child but one; and the Mother
brings forth an Hermaphrodite, who has both the parts of a man and a woman; in
this case the Hermaphrodite shall have only the Portion due to that Sex of
which the Hermaphrodite does most participate, and not the Portion due to both
Sexes: and if it be doubtful of which Sex it does most participate, then it
shall be presumed according to the more worthy kind. Swin. part 4. sect. 20.
number. 19. Co. on Litt. fol. 8. Phillipps pr. of Law, page 36.

212. If the Testator give an hundred pounds to the Children of A B, who has
four Children at that time of the Will making, and afterward before the
Testators death A B begets other four Children, so that he has eight
Children in all; yet in this case those four only which were born when the Will
was made, shall have the hundred pounds, and the other four shall have nothing
out of it. Simo. de Praetis. de Interp. ult. Volunt. li. 4. dub. 9. fol. 178.
Menoch. de Praesump. li. 4. Praesumptio 127. number. 18.

213. If the Testator bequeath an hundred pounds lying in such a Chest to A B,
and there is no Money in the Chest; here the Legacy is void, unless the Testator
say, I give to A B an hundred pounds, and I will that the same be paid out of
the Moneys which I have in such a Chest, or of the Money which such a man does
owe me; in such Case, although there be no Money in the Chest, nor any due by
the person named by the Testator, yet the Legacy is due, and ought to be paid
out of the Testators Goods. Swin. part 7. sect. 5. number. 15. Mich. Grass.
thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legate. quaestio 59. number. 3.

214. And where the Testator does bequeath ten pounds to A B remaining in such
a Chest, and at his death five pounds only is found in the same Chest; in this
case the Legacy is good for so much as is found in the Chest, and no more.
Swin. part 7. sect. 5. number. 15. Paul. de Castr. in D. sect. quinque number. 9.

215. If the Testator do imagine himself to be indebted to another person, and
does bequeath that debt to the same person, which he erroniously supposes he
owes him, not expressing any sum; in this case the Legacy is void: but if he
say, I do bequeath ten pounds to such a person, which I owe him, whereas the
Testator knows he owes him nothing; yet in this case the Legacy is due,
notwithstanding the false demonstration; and here the Testator is not presumed
to err, unless the Executor make proof of error. Paul. de Castr. in li. 2. C.
de falsa causa adject. Swin. part 7. sect. 5. number. 14.

216. If the Testator meaning to give but fifty pounds, does give an hundred
pounds; or meaning to give an hundred pounds, does give but fifty pound: in
these cases the Legatary may recover as much as the Testator did mean and
intend to give, be it more or less then the sum mentioned. Swin. part 7. sect.
5. number. 13.

217. If the Testator bequeath an hundred pounds to the Church, not mentioning
what Church, it shall then be understood of his ParishChurch; or if he name a
Church, and there be diverse there of the same name, and none of them his
ParishChurch; then the Executor, if he prove the Will; or the Ordinary, if he
refuses, may bestow the same on which Church he will: but if the Testators
Parish Church be of the same name, it ought then to be bestowed there. Mich.
Grass. thesaur. com. opin. sect. Legate. q. 64. Swin. part 7. sect. 8. Franc.
Manti^. de conject. ult. vol. li. 8. tit. 6.

218. Where the Testator does bequeath one half of his Goods to one person, and
makes another his Executor, willing and appointing that all his Goods shall be
divided betwixt them; in this case the Legatary shall have half before debts
paid, and the Executor the remainder after debts paid: as, where the Testator
has Goods to the value of an hundred pounds, and owes twenty pounds out of
the same; here the Legatary shall have fifty pounds, and the Executor shall pay
the twenty pounds debt out of his half. 5 Mariae* Dyer fol. 164. Goldesborough
Rep. page 149. Pl. 74. Hill. 43 El. C. B. Swin. part 7. sect. 10. Cowels Inst.
page 146.

219. If a man bequeath twenty pounds to A, and twenty pounds to B, and twenty
pounds to C, and makes his Executor, and dies, having Goods in all but to the
value of twenty pounds, of which Goods the Executor makes an Inventary; in this
case he may pay which of the three he pleases his whole Legacy, and the other
two are without remedy; or he may, if he please, pay every one of them a
rateable part: and if in case the Executor make no Inventa^^, yet he is
chargeable no further ^^en the value of the Goods; and so (...) every Legatary
in such case should (...) him, they must prove sufficiency of goods, or
otherwise they should ^et nothing. Plo. com. fol. 545. in Case ^ter Parham and
Yardly. Dr. and ^ud. li. 2. cap. 10.

220. If the Testator say, I will ^at A B shall have an Horse; here (...)
Election belongs to the Legatary: but if he had said, I will that my ^xecutor
give to A B an Horse, then the Election belongs to the Executor: and if the
words of Election be directed to neither of them, then the Legatary shall make
the Election, if there be any such thing extant amongst the Testators good as
is bequeathed; and if not, then the Executor is to make the Election: and in
case where the Legatary chooses, he must not take the very best, unless there
be no more but two of the things extant; for then he may choose the best, and so
he may do when the Testator grants him the Election; and as the Legatary may
not choose the best, neither may the Executor obtrude the worst of those things
extant; and where there is no such thing extant, then the Executor i^ to
provide a competent thing for the Legatary. Mich. Grass. thesaur. com* opin.
sect. Legate. q. 62. number. 2 and; Mins. in D. sect. si generaliter, number. (...)
Swin. part 7. sect. 10. Co. on Litt. fo. 144. b.

221. If the Testator bequeat two Horses to two Men, having (...) more, and one
of them is a great deal better then the other; in this case he that is first
named in the Testament shall have the Election. Co. on Litt. fol. 144. b. 2 H.
7, 23. Swin. part 7. sect. 10.

222. If the Testator give to A B twenty pounds if he will, in such case A B
must express his willingness by some means, or else the Legacy is not due; and
if he die before such expression, then the Legacy is lost, and shall not go to
his Executors or Administrators, which otherwise it would, if no such condition
had been expressed. Swin. part 4. Sect. 6. number. 7.

223. If an Executor have a Legacy left him by his Testator, and refuses to
stand to the Executorship, in such a Case he loses his Legacy. Gribald.
Thesaur. com. opin. verb. Tutor. Swin. part 6. sect. 2. in sine. Refor. Leg.
Eccles. Tit. Testament. C. 23, and 24.

224. But if the Executor be not duly admonished to take the Executorship upon
him, then if he be the Testators Kinsman, or such a person to whom the Testator
would have given the Legacy, though he did not perform the Will, and take the
Office upon him; in such case he shall not loose the Legacy then, by his
refusal of the Executorship; neither shall the Wife loose her thirds, nor the
Children their filial Portions, nor the Creditor his debt, if any of them be
made Executors, and refuse to take the Office upon them. Swin. part 6. sect. 3.
number. 15. Sichard. in lib. Si legatarius, cap. de legate.

225. If a man by his Will devise all his Lands and Tenements to A B* in this
case, not only all his Land and Tenements which the Testato^ has in possession
do pass, but also those which he has in reversion also* by virtue of the word
Tenements Terms of the Law, verb. Devise. Cowels Inst. pa. 144. Swin. part 4.
sect. 4* number. 19.

226. But if the Testator have both Lands in Fee, and Lands in Lease for years,
and devises all his Lands and Tenements; in such case the Lands in Fee only
pass, and not the Lands in Lease for years: but if he have none but lands for
years in Lease only, then those lands shall pass by virtue of such devise. Tr.
7 Jac. B. R. Rose and Bartlets Case. Cro. 1 part Rep. fol. 213. Noys Maxims
page 99.

227. If lands be devised to a man to have to him for evermore, or to have to
him and his Assigns; in both these cases a Fee-simple does pass to the Devisee:
but if such a Gift or Grant were made by Deed, it would carry an estate but for
life, without the word Heirs were in it. Perkins, sect. 557. M. 22 E. 3. Devise
20. Terms of Law, verbum Devise. Swin. part 4. sect. 4. number. 19.

228. Also if a man devise his lands to another, to give, or sell, or do
therewith at his pleasure; here he has a Fee-simple also: and if lands be
devised to one and his Heirs males, this shall amount to an Estate in tail; but
if such words be in a Feoffment, it shall be taken for a Fee-simple, because it
does not appear of what body the heirs Males shall be begotten. Terms of the
Law, verb. Devise. Co. on Lit. fol. 9. b. Swin. part 4. sect. 4. Cowels Inst.
page 144.

229. Also if one devise to an Infant in the Mothers womb, it is good; but such
a Feoffment, Gift, or Grant is void: and if one will that his So^ shall have
his land after the death of his Wife, in this case the Wife (by the favorable
interpretation of such Will) shall have the land for term of her life. Finches
Law, page 172. 13 H. 7. 13. Terms of the Law, verb. Devise. Cowels Inst. page
144. Swin. part 4. sect. 4. Noyes Maxims page 100.

230. If a man devise all his lands in A. to his two Daughters, and makes them
Executrixes; and afterward purchases more lands in A. and then dies without a
new publication of his Will, and expressing of this land newly bought therein;
in this case this land newly bought does not pass by the same Will. H. 43 El.
C. B. Beckford and Parncotes Ca. Goldsboroughs Rep. page 150. pl. 77.

231. A man having four Daughters A, B, C, and D, devises his lands to his Wife
for her life, and after her decease the same to be equally divided amongst his
Daughters or their Heirs; A one of the Daughters died before the Mother, and
after the Mothers death the heir of A sued for a fourth part, and adjudged for
the Heir by virtue of the disjunctive (or) but if it had been to have been
divided amongst his Daughters (and) their Heirs, this word had altered the
case, and would have given the Fee to the three surviving Sisters. Mich. 1 Car.
1. B. R. Rot. 189. Tailor and Hodgskies Case, Godbolts Rep. fol. 363.

232. If one devise his lands to another Man and his Heirs, and the Devisee
dies in the lifetime of the Devisor, and afterward the Devisor dies; in
this case the Heirs of the Devisee shall not have the land. Plo. Com. fol. 342.
in Brett and Rigdens Case.

233. If a man seized of lands in Fee, sow the same with Corn, and afterward
devises the land to A B, and dies before the Corn be severed; in this case
the Devisee shall have the Corn a swell as the land: but it is otherwise where
the lands descend to the Heir; for the Executors or Administrators shall have
the Corn sown at the Testators death. Mich. 20 Jac. C. B. Spencers Case.
Winches Rep. fol. 51.

234. A man devised his Message whereof he was seized in Soccage in Fee, by
these words: I devise my Message where I dwelt to my Cozen H and her Assigns
for eight years, and my Cozen H shall have all my Inheritances if the Law will;
and this was adjudged a good devise in Fee of the Message, and by the general
words of the Will all the Inheritances pass also. Mich. 11 Jac. C. B. Wedlock
and Hardings Case. Godbolts Rep. fol. 208.

235. If a man devise his Lands to the Heirs-Males of any of his Sons or next
of Kin, such a devise is void for the uncertainty thereof. Hill. 2 Car. 1. C. B.
Rott. 1288. in Hunt and Fishers Case; and Trin. 1649. B. R. Rott. 849. Beal and
Wymans Case. Styles Rep. fol. 240.

236. A man having Lands in Feesimple, and Goods to the value of five pounds
only, devises to his Wife all his whole Estate, paying his Debts and
Legacies, which amounted to forty pounds; in this case it was adjudged that all
the lands did pass by the devise, and that the Wife had a Fee-simple in the
lands, the word (paying) enforcing it; for they are to be paid presently, which
cannot be if the land pass not in Fee. Tr. 1651. B. R. Kirman and Johnsons
Case. Styles Rep. fol. 293. and see 29 H. 8. Bro. Testament. 18.

237. A seized of three Houses, and other Lands, Pastures and Meadows in W in
the County of H, and of Land in the County* of O, devised in this manner, viz.
I give my Capital Message in the Coun^y of O, and all other my Lands, and
Meadows* and Pastures in the Parish of W, to such an one; and adjudged here
that all the houses passed by the devise; for that lands comprehends houses
also. Ewer and Heydons Case. Abr. Mores Rep. page 103. pl. 468.

238. If a man devise the profits of his lands, it is a devise of the lands
themselves. Tr. 16 Jac. C. B. Rott. 465. Balder and Blackbornes Case Brownlo. 1
part 79. Owens Rep. 66 Tr. 23 Car. Styles 81.

239. A man by his Will devises his lands to his Wife; and if she have Issue
by the Devisor, that his Issue shall have it at his age of twenty one years;
and if the Issue die before that age, or before his wife, or if she has no
Issue, that then she shall choose two Attorneys; and sheto make a Bill of sale
of any lands to her best advantage: In this case it was resolved, that the wife
has those lands for life; and she having no Issue, has not any interest to
dispose, but has an authority to nominate two who shall dispose of the lands,
and they shall make sale of them. Mich. 5 Jac. B. R. Beal and Shepherds case.
Bro. 2 part Rep. fol. 199.

240. I might go on to show what words in a Devise make a Condition, and what a
Limitation; and where an estate shall pass by Implication; and what words make
an estate Tail, Fee-simple, or for Life; and where the Devisees shall be
Joyntenants, and were Tenants in Common, with several other things; but it not
being the intent of this Treatise, I refer the Reader to the learned Reports
now extant, where he may be satisfied: and so I return again to my purpose.

141. Devises and Legacies are to be sued for in the Ecclesiastical Court, but
the Ordinary cannot take Cognizance of Fees or Freehold devised; but a
Prohibition will lie, if any Judge of any Spiritual Court shall cite one before
him in case of such a devise as intrencheth upon the Common Law. Perkins, sect.
576, 579. and Dr. and Stud. li. 2. cap. 55* Cowels Inst. page 146.

242. Note, there may be much deceit used by a knavish Executor; and though the
Goods be of a great value after the Debts are paid which were truly owing and
due by the Testator, yet he may keep the Legacies, and never pay them perhaps,
but pretend that all the Debts are not paid; and thereupon may cause Strangers
to sue, and then allege that there are more Suits against them then the Goods
of the Testator are sufficient to satisfy; or they may confess the Actions
brought against them; and several other ways there are whereby they may defraud
the Legatees of their Legacies: Therefore it were good for Testators in their
life-times, either to secure the Legacies to the Legatees by some sure means,
or otherwise in their lifetime to deliver the same, that they see them
possessed thereof, and not leave it to the Will of the Executor. Perkins, sect.
571.

CHAP. IX.
Several Cases concerning the Duty of an Executor.
243. THere are three kinds of Executors, or persons which have to deal with
the Execution of dead men's Wills, and disposition of their Goods: The first
has his Authority from the Law, and that is the Bishop or Ordinary of every
Diocese, who has the execution thereof, when no Executor is appointed by the
Testator, or where the Executor does refuse to take the Office upon him. Jo. de
Canibus Tract. de Executoribus, ult. vol. part 1. q. 3. Swin. part 6. sect. 1.
number. 2.

244. The second has his Authority from the Bishop or Ordinary, and is he whom
we call an Administrator, and is put in where the Executor named refuses, or
cannot b^ Executor, or when no Executor i^ named in the Will; and if there b^ a
Will, then it must be annexed to the Letters of Administration: and such
Administrator is chargeable with the performance of the Will, a^ if he had been
appointed by the Testator. Bro. Testament 20. and Devis^ 35. 31 E. 3. cap. 21.
and 21 H. 8. cap. 5. Swin. part 6. sect. 1.

245. And lastly, the Executor who derives his power from the Testator, is he
that is named Executor in the Testament; to whom the Execution of the Testament
is committed by the dead man, and is called Executor testamentarius, and has
his Authority immediately from the Testator, and may without the Authorty of
the Ordinary enter to the Testators Goods and Chattels; and after Probation of
the Testament, may also Commence Suit against the Testators Debtors. Plo. com.
in Case inter Griesby and Fox. Bro. Executor 49. Swin. part 6 sect. number. 4.
Minsin. in tit. de Haered. Inst.

246. When the King is made Executor of the Testament of another person, he
does not take the office upon him, but appoints certain persons to take the
Execution of the Will upon them, (against whom such as have cause of Suit may
bring their Action) and others he appoints to take the accounts, as appears in
the Case of Catharine Queen-Dowager of England, Mother to H. 6. who constituted
King H. 6. her sole Executor; and he appointed certain persons to take the
charge of the Will upon them, and others to take their Accounts. Vide Rott.
Parliamen. 15 H. 6. number. 32. Co. 4 part Inst. fol. 335.

247. When a man makes several Executors, and they live in diverse Diocesses,
they shall all receive such benefit as accrews to them by the Testament, only
by the Authority of that Judge who confirmed the Testament to them; and the
same course is to be taken by the Administrators who live in several Diocesses.
Refor. Leg. Ecclesiast. tit. Testament. cap. 37.

248. Now the Office of an Executor Testamentary, does consist in two things;
that is, either in accepting or refusing the Executorship; upon both which
parts there are several Cases hereafter following in this Chapter, very
necessary for all Executors to know.

249. If he that is named Executor be cited to appear before the Ordinary, and
do refuse to accept the Executorship, or will not appear; then the Ordinary or
other Judge may commit the Administration of the Goods of the deceased, as if
he had dyed intestate: but if the Executor afterward be willing to undertake
the Executorship, then the Ordinary may revoke the Administration before
committed: but mean acts done by the Administrator, until the Executor
undertake* are good and effectual in Law. Bro. Exer. 49. and 101. and Admin. 32
and 33. 31 H. 8. cap. 5. Vide Griesbie and Foxes Case, ^low. com. fol. Swin.
part 6. sect. 2.

250. Note, that the Executor cannot be compelled to undertake the Office,
unless he have already meded with the Testators Goods as Executor; for then he
may be compeled to it: and if notwithstanding he do still refuse, and the
Ordinary do ^ommit the Administration to him; his refusal is void, and he shall
be ^harged as Executor. And when one shall be said to meddle with Goods as
Executor, and when not, is showed afterward in this Chapter. Fitz. Abr. tit.
Exec. number. 35. Olden de Exec. ult. Volunt. tit. 7. in fine. Swin. part 6. sect.
2. Noyes Maxims, page 102. Hernes Law Convey. page 87.

251. Where a term is devised to an Executor, who enters, and dies before
Probat; yet in such Case the entry is good Executorship, and his Administrator
shall have it. M. 2^ El. Dyer, fol. 367.

252. Note, that every one to whom the Testator was indebted, shall have an
Action against the Executor, so long as the Executor has Assets in his hands;
but a Debt due to the Testator shall not charge the Executor as Assets till he
have received it. Terms of the Law, verb* Executor. Br. Exec. number. 112. Swin.
part 6. sect. 3.

253. Where there be diverse Executors, the Actions Commenced by them ought to
be in all their names* and so must the Action that is Commenced against them,
name them all; except it be in Case where some of them refuse to take the
Office, and the others only prove the Will; for in such Case in Actions
brought against them, those only which prove the Will may be named, and the
other left out. Bro. Exec. 117. Co. 9. lib. Rep. fol. 40. Noyes Max. page 102.
Swin. part 6. sect. 20. Perkins, sect. 485.

254. If diverse be made Executors, and some of them refuse, yet he which
refuses may release any debt (before Judgment) which was due to the Testator;
and it is as good as if he had never refused, and so a sufficient discharge to
the Creditor; for every Executor has an entire interest: and therefore if two
as Executors have a term, and one of them grants all that to him appertains; in
this Case the entire Term shall pass. Co. 5. li. fol. 28. Bro. Exec. 38, 117.
Dyer, fol. 23 and 319. Swin. part 4. sect. 20. Noyes Maxims, page 101, 102.
Perkins, sect. 485.

255. But one Executors releasing of Debts, or selling of Goods, shall not
charge the other to pay so much of the Goods, if there be not enough to pay
Debts; but it shall charge the party himself that did so release or convey.
Hernes Law Convey. page 87.

256. Note, that the Executor which refuses, may join at any time when he will;
yea, though it be not till after the death of the other Executor, wh^ proved
the Will; contrary to the opinion of Broke; and so the Quere in Dye is well
resolved. 42 El. Henslowe* Ca. Co. 9. li. fo. 39. Perkins, sect. 485* Dyer,
fol. 360. number. 42. Bro. Exec. 92* 99 and 149. Swin. part 4. sect. 20* and part
6. sect. 3.

257. But if diverse be made Executors, and they all refuse before the Ordinary,
and he grants Administration to another; in such case they cannot then
afterward prove at any time: so note the diversity between one refusing, and
all refusing. 42 El. Henslowes Ca. Co. 9. li. fol. 39. 36 H. 6. Finches Law,
page 171. And Vide Bewacorne and Caters Case, Mores Rep. fol.

258. If two be appointed Executors, and one of them refuses, and the other
takes the Office upon him, and then dies, and makes his Testament, wherein he
names the Executor; in this case the Executor of the Executor cannot join with
the surviving Executor, neither in the execution of the first Testators Will,
nor in Suits or Actions: and if the Executor of the Executor have any Goods in
his hands of the first Testators, the surviving Executor may have an Action
against him for the same: and if the surviving Executor do afterward dye
intestate, yet cannot the Executor of the Executor meddle with the Goods of the
first Testator; but Administration thereof is to be committed to the next of
Kin to the Testator: and if the Executor of the Executor, or who dyed first,
meddle with the Goods, then he may be sued by the Creditors as Executor in his
own wrong. Bro. Exec. 92, 99, 149, 160. Swin. part 4. sect. 20.

259. If one make another his Executor, and dies; and the Executor before he
has proved the Will, makes another his Executor, and dies; in this Case
Administration of the first Testators Goods, with the Will annexed, shall be
committed to the next of Kin of the first Testator, and not to the Executor of
the Executor, unless the first Testator did bequeath his Goods (as his Debts,
Funeral-expences, and Legacies paid) to the Executor named in the Testament;
and then in such case the Administration of the first Testators Goods is to be
committed (with the Will annexed) to the Executor of the Executor. Dyer, fol.
372. number. 42. M. 23 El. Isteds Ca. Swin. part 6. sect. 3

260. Note, that if diverse be appointed Executors, and one of them does sell
some of the Testators Goods for a sum of money; then that Executor which sold
the Goods may sue alone for the money due for the same. Swin. part 4. sect. 20.
Bro. Exec. number. 65.

261. Where diverse persons are made Executors, and the Testator gives them
power to sell his Lands; in this case, though some of them dye, or do refuse
the Executorship, yet the others who take upon them the charge and burden of
the same Testament and Will, may sell the Lands, except in some Cases. Perkins,
sect. 545. Pasch. 46 E. 3. Devise 8. 21 H. 8. cap. 4. 39 (...) pl. 17. Co. on
Litt. fol. 113. Swin. part 6. sect. 3. Dyer, fol. 371. See Howel and Barnes
case, Mich. 10 Car. 1. Cro. 1 part.

262. As, where the Testator Devises, that after his death his Lands shall be
sold by his Executors, with the assent of A B; makes his Wife and a Stranger
his Executors, and dies, and then the Wife dies, and A B also; in this Case
the Authority of selling the Lands is extinct, and gone by the death of A B,
without whose consent it cannot be sold; and therefore if the surviving
Executor should sell, such sale is void. Brownlowes* part Rep. fol. 100. Mich.
5 Eliz. Dyer fol. 219. Fulb. fol. 41. Swin. part 6. sect. 3.

263. But if a man Devise by his Will that A B and C D, whom he makes his
Executors, shall sell his Land for payment of his Debts, and they refuse to be
Executors; yet notwithstanding they may sell the Lands, because they are named
by their proper names; or, if one of the Executors dies, and the other takes
upon him the Executorship, and afterward sells the Lands, such sale is good.
15 H. 7, 12. Perkins, sect. 548. 19 H. 8, 9. Swin. part 6. sect. 3.

264. But where a man by his Will makes A B C and D his Executors, Devises his
Lands to the said A B C and D by their special names, and to their Heirs, and
further devises that the Devisee shall sell his Lands for payment of his
Debts, and one of the Executor refuses to intermeddle; in this case it has
been held that this being a special and joint interest, the other three
Executors thereupon cannot sell without their Compa^ion. Mich. 29 Eliz. B. R.
Bonnisant and Sir Rich. Greenfields case. Godbolts Rep. fol. 77. And sec 26 El.
B. R. Vincent and Lees case. Co. on Litt. fol. 113.

265. My Lord Cooks advice is to such who devise by their Wills their Lands to
be sold, that they make it as certain as they can; as, that the sale be made by
his Executors, or the Survivor or Survivors of them, if his meaning be so; or
by such or so many of them as take upon them the Probat of the Will, etc. and
it is better to give them an Authority then an Estate: unless his meaning be
they should take the profits of the Lands in the mean time; and then it is
necessary that he devises that the mean profits be assets in their hands; for
otherwise they shall not be Assets. Co. on Li^t. fol. 113.

266. If a man devise his lands to be sold by his Executors, and to distribute
the profits to Pious uses, yet after the death of the Testator* the Inheritance
shall descend to the Heir, and shall remain in him until the Executors sell the
same; and the Heir ought to receive the profits thereof till the time of the
sale: but if the Testator devise his lands to his Executors, which he wills
to be sold, and the money to be distributed to Pious uses, here the Executors
after the Testators death shall receive the Profits, and not the Heir; for in
the first case the Executors have only an Authority to sell, and in the last
case they have the frank-Tenement. Brownl. 2 part. Rep. fol. 136. Noye^ Max.
page 100, 101. 38. Ass. Pl. 3. Perkins sect. 541, and 543. Swin. part 6. sect.
3. number. 7. Cowels Inst. page 139.

267. Note that the Executor of an Executor cannot sell the land of the first
Testator, who by his Testament gave power to his Executor to sell the same, but
it shall go to the Heir, unless the Will be otherwise. Bro. Tit. Executor 3.
Perkins sect. 507, 554. Swin. part 6. sect. 3. number. 11. in fin.

268. If a man wills that his Executors shall jointly sell his land, or that
his Executors and his Feoffees shall jointly sell his land; in such case, if
one Executor sell to one, and the other to another; or if the Executors sell to
one, and the Feoffees to another, and afterward they join in the sale to a
third person, in such case the last sale only is good, and the other void.
Perkins sect. 546 and 553.

269. If a man wills his lands shall be sold for the payment of his Debts,
and express not by whom it shall be sold, then the Executors shall sell it: but
if he wills his land to be sold, and express not by whom, nor for what; in
such case it has been held that such Devise is void, and the land shall not be
sold, but descend to the Heir. Perkins sect. 547. 15 H. 7. 12.

270. The Executors or Administrators of Tenants in Fee-simple, Fee-Tayl, and
Tenants for term of life, of Rent-services, Rent-charges, Rent-sects, and
Fee-farms, by the Stat. of 32 H. 8. may either distrain, or have an Action of
Debt against such Tenant as is behind and in Arrear to the Testator at the same
time of his Death, for such Arrearages of Rent as ought to have been paid to
the Testator in his lifetime; and if the Tenant who was in arrear be dead,
then they may have an Action of Debt against his Executors or Administrators
for such Arrearages. The Husband also who is seized in right of his Wife of any
Estate in Fee-simple, Fee-tayl, Fee-farm, where any such Rents are behind in
the Wives life (whether it be before or after Marriage) and unpaid at the time
of her death, may have the like remedy; and so may his Executors or
Administrators. Co. on Lit. fol. 351. b. 32 H. 8. cap. 37. Swin. part 6. sect.
3 number. 8. Pasc. 23 Eliz. Dyer fol. 375.

271. Actions of Account were given to Executors by the Stat. of Westmin. 2.
and Actions of Trespass done ^o their Testator, as for his goods and Chattels
carried away, were given by ^he 4 E. 3. 7. and by the 25 E. 3. Exe^utors of
Executors have Actions of Debt, Account, and of goods carried way of the first
Testators; and Excution of Statute-Merchants and Re^ognizances made to him, and
are ^lso liable to the Actions of those to whom the first Testator was
indebted, ^o far as the goods of the first Testa^or will extend; but the Goods
which ^id belong to the first Testator shall ^ot be put in Execution for the
Debt ^f the second Testator. Wingate Abr. Stat. Tit. Executors. Co. 2 part
Inst. fol. 404. Finch page 173. Noyes Max. page 102. Westminster. 2. c. 23. 25 E. 3.
c. 5. 4 E. 3. c. 7. Swin. part 6. sect. 3. Plo. Com. fol. 286, 287.

272. Note that one Executor cannot sue another for the possession of the
Testators goods; for the possession of one is as the possession of both, and
therefore one of them has no remedy against the other but in Chancery, unless
there be a Legacy lef^ unto one of them in particular, and then he may sue for
that. Swin. part 4. sect. 20. number. 14. Bro. Exec. 98* 104. F. N. B. Exec. 32.
Plo. Co. fol. 343. Swin. part 6. sect. 3. number. 20* Tothils Rep. page 8.

273. If an Infant be made Executor, Administration durante minor^aetate may be
committed to the Mother or other Friend of the Infant* which shall cease and be
void when the Infant comes to the age of seventeen years. 41, 42 El. C. B.
Prince case. Co. 5 lib. fol. 29. Noyes Max. page 105.

274. But this Administrator during such Minority, cannot sell or Alienate any
of the Goods of the deceased, unless it be upon necessity; as for the payment
of the deceaseds Debts, or that the goods would otherwise perish; for he has
his Office of Administrator, Pro bono and commodo Infantis, and not for his
prejudice; and cannot pay Legacies, unless there be assetts to pay debts;
neither can he let a Lease for a longer time then whilst the Executor shall be
under age. Noyes Max. page 106. Co. 5 li. Rep. fol. 29.

275. If a man make two Executors, one of seventeen years of age, and the other
under; in this Case Administration during the Minority of the other is void,
because he of seventeen years of age may execute the Will; and therefore if
such Administrator should bring any Action, the Executor of seventeen years of
age may well release the Debt. Piggot and Glascoignes ca. Brownl. 1 part Rep.
fol. 46.

276. And if a Woman under the age of seventeen years be made Executrix, and
the Adminstration is committed duranteminori aetate, and then she takes an
Husband of full age; in such case the Administration shall cease. Co. 5 li.
Rep. fol. 29.

277. An Infant-Executor upon payment or satisfaction to him of any of the
Testators Debts, may give a discharge for the same; and it is a good bar
against him afterward: but if he should give a release without payment or
satisfaction; in such Case he is not barred from the recovery thereof
afterward by such release. 28 El. B. R. Russels ca. Co. 5 li. fol. 27. Tr. 13
Car. 1. B. R. Kniverton and Lathams ca. Cro. 1 part Rep. fol. 352, 353. Noyes
Max. page 106.

278. If a woman during the Coverture be named Executrix, she alone can neither
sue nor be sued without her Husband; but she alone may do any extrajudicial
act, as the paying of Debts or Legacies, or the receiving or releasing of any
Debts due to the Testator; and so may her Husband alone without her, though she
alone be Executrix; which acts of his shall not only bind her during
Marriage, but after also, if she outlive him. Co. 5 li. fol. 27. F. N. B. Exec.
23, 30. Bro. eod. tit. number. 147, 151, 152, 178. Kellowayes Rep. fol. 127. number.
74. Swin. part 5. sect. 1. part 6. sect. 3. number. 17.

279. An Executor may release an Action before Probat, although that before
Probat of the Will he may not have an Action; but if B release, and after take
Administration, that shall not bar him; for the right of Action was not in him
at the time of the release, as it was in the Executor. 1 Jac. C. B. Middletons
case. Co. 5 li. fol. 28. Perkins, sect. 482. Tr. 7 H. 4. 8. Glan. li. 7. cap.
7. Fleta, li. 2. cap. 27. Co. on Litt. fol. 292. b. 18 H. 6, 23. Hernes Law of
Con. page 86. Cowels Inst. page 119.

280. If an Executor take in the Testators Bond from one of the Creditors, and
gives his own Bond for the Money; or, if the Testators Creditor be indebted to
the Executor in so much as the Testator was indebted, and the Executor releases
to him; in both these Cases it is a good Administration by the Executor, and
they shall not be charged as assets in his hands, although in the first Case he
get a longer day of payment. Pasc. 30 El. C. B. Stamp and Hutchings case.
Leonards Rep. 111, (...). See Briars and Goddards case. (...) Rep. fol. 250.
And Arlush and ^^^lisons case. Claytons Rep. pa. 88. (...) 48.

281. But if the Executor plead ^ully Administered, and give in evidence Bonds
cancelled and taken in, or Acquittances for Money; this will not serve, unless
there be proof of real payments made upon such Bonds and Acquittances, or of
new security given. Lent-Assize, 24 Car. 1. apud Ebor. Scotts case. Claytons
Rep. page 112 pl. 193.

282. If there be diverse Executors, and they are all sued, and one of them
only pleads, yet Judgment shall be against them all, but the costs shall be
against him which pleads, if the other do confess or suffer judgment to go by
default. Brownl (...) page 274. 17 E. 3, 45. b. And (...) Jac. C. Banc. Lawry
and Aldrod^ (...) Brownl. 2 part Rep. fol. 183, (...) 186, 187.

283. If an Executor (...) one of the Testators (...) he plead fully
Administered, (...) Jury finds assets in his hands, (...) they be but to a small
value, y^^ (...) shall be condemned in the whole debt because of his false
plea. M. 4 Jac. B. R. Mary Shiplyes ca. Co. 8 li. fol. 134. Clerk of the
Assize, page 65.

284. If the Executor promise to pay a Debt of the Testators, this shall bind
him, though he have not assets. Summer. Assize 16 Car. 1. ^pud Ebor. Smiths ca.
Claytons Rep. page 85. pl. 141.

285. An Executor is not chargeable with a collateral promise made by the
Testator, unless there were a breach of it in the Testators lifetime. M. 1649.
Christopher and Howes case. Styles Rep. fol. 141. And Pas^. 1650. B. R. Styles
Regest. Practicale, page 121.

286 If the Creditor make his Debtor his Executor, in this Case the Debtor
proving the Will, the Debt is thereby extinguished: or, if the Creditor make
his Debtor and another Executors, here though the Debtor dye before he
Administer as Executor, the other Executor who was not indebted surviving; yet
in this Case the surviving Executor shall not have an Action for the same Debt
against the Executor of his Co-executor; for that the Action was extinguished
by constituting him Executor; and, Actio semel extincta, nunquam reviviscit.
Quaere. Bro. Testam. 118. Plo. com. fol. 184. Cowels Inst. page 207. But see M.
31 Eliz. in B. R. Crosman and Reads case* to the contrary, Leonards Rep fol.
320.

287. Also if two be bound in a Bond to one in a certain sum of money, and the
Obligee makes one of the Obligors his Executor; this is said to be a Release in
Law of the Bond and Debt: for the Action is suspended, and a personal Action
once suspended is thereby extinct. Hill. 11 Jac. C. B. Friar and Gildridge ca.
Hob. Rep. fol. 10.

288. If a Debtor makes his Creditor and another Executors, the Creditor if he
not prove the Will nor administer, may have an Action against him that does
prove the Will for his Debt; and then afterward he may Administer and take the
Executorship upon him when he pleases: but if he take it upon him before he sue
for his Debt, his Action will be thereby extinguished.

289. If the Executor by the Will be to pay money, and no place is appointed,
the parties in this case to whom it is to be paid, must make Request to the
Executor to pay it, for the Executor in such case is not bound to seek the
parties all over England, as it is in the case of a Bond where no place of
payment is appointed. Brownl. 1 part Rep. fol. 46.

290. If one be bound in an Obligation with Condition to pay twenty pounds to
such person as the Oblige^ shall name and appoint by his last Will and
Testament, and the Obligee afterward makes his Will and nominates none to whom
the twenty pounds shall be paid; in this case the Executor named in the
Testament may sue and recover the money. M. 11 Jac. C. B. Rott. 945. Pease and
Stilman against Mead. Brownlo. 1 part Rep. fol. 77.

291. As to the payment of Debts by the Executor, he must have a care to pay
them according to these following rules; otherwise it may be he shall be forced
to pay some of the Testators Debts out of his own proper goods, if there be not
sufficient goods of the Testators to pay all the Debts; therefore observe what
follows.

292. First Funeral-expences, then Debts to the Kings Majesty, then Judgments
must be paid; after them Statutes-Merchant and Recognizances, then Obligations;
and if there be diverse Obligations, he may pay which of them he pleases first;
unless the day of payment in one Obligation be past, and the day of payment in
the other Obligation not come; for then that is to be paid first where the day
of payment is past; or unless one Obligation be put in suit, and the other not,
for then that in suit must be first paid: and if there be two Obligations put
in suit by two Creditors aagainst the Executor, then he which first gets
Judgment must first be paid; and in this case the Executor, if he will, may
suffer Judgment in that which was last put in suit, and so pay him off first:
then after these Obligations, simple Bills are to be paid; then Rents in arrear
by the Testator; then Servants and Head-Workmens Wages; then Merchants Books;
and lastly, Contracts by word, in which the Testator could not wage his Law,
upon which the Executor may be sued in an Action upon the Case, upon the
promise of the Testator. Bro. Exec. 172. Dr. and Stud. Li. 2. C. 10. Dyer fol.
32. Mag. Charta C. 18. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 32. Cowels Inst. page 150, 151.
Herns Law con. page 87. Noye^ Max. page 104. Co. 3 part. Inst. fol. 202. Swin.
part 6. sect. 16. See M. 3^ El. C. B. Pemberton and Barhams case, and 43 El. B.
R. Bearblock and Reads ca. vouched in the Sadlers case. Co. 4 lib. and
Harrisons case 40 El. C. B. Co. 5 lib. fol. 28. Terms of the Law ver. Executor.
Bro. Exer. 33, 87, 127, 163. Mich. 9 Jac. C B. Puncheon and Legatos case.
Brown. 2 part Rep. fol 137. and Co. 9. lib. fol. 86. the same case. M. 42. 43
El. B. R. Littleton and Hebbens Ca. Cro. 1 part. Rep. fol.

293. The Executor is not chargeable for a Trespass done by the Testator, nor
for his receipt for Rents, nor for occupation of Lands, as Bailiff or Guardian
in Soccage; for this is no duty certain. Noys Max. page 103.

294. If Executors or Administrators have not Assets in their hands to pay all
the Creditors, according to these former Rules; then they must pay in order as
far as the Goods and Chattels of the Testator will extend, and the rest are
without remedy: but if they pay Debts to others before Debts to the King, or
Bonds before Judgments, or Shop-Books before Bonds, etc. then they must pay the
same over again, if there be not sufficient left to pay them who ought to have
been paid according to the same order, and were omitted. Hernes Law Conv. page
87.

295. If the Testator were indebted to the Executor, he may allow his own Debt
before he pay other Creditors to whom the Testator was indebted in the like
manner as he was to the Executor, be it by Statute, Bond, or otherwise; in case
he have made an Inventary, and that he be not Executor of his own wrong; for
every Creditor by such means, when the Goods be not sufficient to pay all,
would strive to make himself Executor of his own wrong, to satisfy himself,
and bar others; an Administrator also may stop his own Debt. Plo. com. in
Woodward and Darcyes case. M. 40. 41 El. B. R. Coulters case. Co. 5 li. fol.
30. Ma. 6 Jac. C. B. Alexander and Lambs case. Brown. 1 part Rep. fol. 103.
Swin. part 6. sect. 16. Plo. com. fol. 184.

296. If the Testator be indebted to one in forty pounds, and the Executor pays
but twenty pounds, and gets an Acquittance for the whole forty pounds; yet this
Acquittance shall not prejudice any other Creditor but for twenty pounds only,
and the other twenty pounds shall be assets in the Executors hands still. 8
Jac. C. B. Turners ca. Co. 8 li. fol. 132. Bro. Exec. 6. Swin. part 6. sect. 16.

297. If a man Devise his Lands for three years to his Executors for the
payment of his Debts, this shall be assets in the Executors hands: but if a man
Devise his Lands to be sold for the payment of his Debts, it is no assets till
it be sold, unless he express it to be so in his Will. Pasc. 9 Jac. C. B.
Brownl. 1 part Rep. fol. 34. Hill. 10 Jac. C. B. Brownl. 2 part fol. 47.

298. If a man make a Lease for years of a House, etc. reserving Rent, and the
Executors after the Testators death receives the Rent, yet it is no assets in
their hands; for the whole Rent belongs to the Heir. 20 El* Dyer, fol. 362.
Plo. com. fol. 114 and 259.

299. If an Executor or Administrator make gain of the Testators Money, that
gain shall be assets in his hands. Brownlowes 1 part Rep. fol. 77.

300. If an Executor pay Funeralexpences, or Debts of the Testators with his
own Money; he may retain goods of the Testators to the same value, and they
shall not charge him as assets in his hands. Cleydon and Spencers ca. Mores
Rep. fol. pl. 3. Hernes Law Con. page 88. Noyes Max. page 104. Swin. part 6.
sect. 16. Dyer, fol. 2. and fol. 187.

301. Note, where it is said before pl. 284. that an Action lies against an
Executor, upon his promise to pay a Debt of the Testators; yet there ought to
be a good consideration to ground the Assumpsit upon, which must be either an
advantage to the Executor, or a damage to the Creditor (as forbearance till
such a time* etc.) or else the Action will not hold. M. 2 Jac. B. R. Fisher and
Richardsons case. Cr. 2 part Rep. fol. 47. and P. 10 Jac. B. R. Booth and
Crompton^ case. Cro. 2 part fol. 613. and H. 16. Jac. Bogge and Melins case.
Huttons Rep. fol. 27.

302. If Judgment be given against Executors, and upon a fieri facias the
Sheriff returns Nulla bona; in such case the plaintiff may have another special
Writ of fieri facias directed to the Sheriff, that he levy the Debt of the
Testators goods, and if it appear to him that the Executors have wasted the
goods; then that he levy the same of the Executors own proper goods. H. 45 El.
B. R^ Pettisers case. Co. 5 lib. Rep fol. 32. and Tr. 16 Car. 1. B. R. King and
Hiltons case. Cr. 1 part Rep. fol. 438.

303. A man was bound in an Obligation with condition for the performance of
Covenants, and dies; after whose death his Executors break Covenants, and the
Bond being sued, it was moved that Execution might be of the Executors own
goods, because the breach of the Condition was the Executors own Act. But the
Court denied it, and Judgment was entered debonis Testatoris. Tr. 17 Jac. C.
(...) Rott 1849. Castilion and Exec. of Smiths case. Hobarts Rep. fol. 283.

304. If an Executor or Administrator be sued for a Debt of the Testators, and
he knows of a Judgment, or other Debt upon Record against the Testator; if
the Executor have no more goods then will satisfy the same, then he may well
plead this special matter, and it shall bar the party that sues, for it shall
be taken for a pl^ne Administravit: and if the Executor should pay the party
that sues before the Judgment, it will be a Devastavit, and he will be forced
then to pay the Judgment out of his own proper goods, as is showed before, pl.
292. Hill. 7 Ed. 6. Dyer fol. 79. P. 12 Jac. C. B. Moon and Andrews ca. Hobart
Rep. fol. 133. Tr. 15 Jac. C. B. Rot. 2119. Kydd and Chynelyes case. Hobarts
Rep. fol. 218. Scarles case in Mores Abr. p. 191. pl. 877. and Barracloughs c.
Clayt. Rep. 65. pl. 112.

305. If an Executor be not minded to take upon him the Office of Executor,
then it behooves him not to meddle with any of the Testators Goods; for if he
once Administer of the Goods of the deceased, and make use of them, by selling
the Goods, or killing any of the Cattle; or, if he pay any of the Testators
Debts, or receive any Debts due to the Testator, and give Acquittances for the
same, with other like acts; in such Case he shall be said to Administer as
Executor, and may be compelled to stand to the Executorship. Hill. 8 Jac. C. B.
in Wickenden and Thomas case. Brownlowes 2 part Rep. fol. 58. Bro. Ex. 49.
Fitz. Exec. 38. Stokes and Porters ca. Mores Rep. fol. Noys Max. p. 102. Tr. 13
Eliz. C. B. Hawkins and Laws ca. Leon. Rep. fol. 155. Swin. part 6. sect. 22.
Porters case. Dyer, fol. 166.

306. If a Stranger who is neither Executor nor Administrator enter upon the
Goods, as aforesaid; this shall charge him as Executor of his own wrong, and he
may be sued by the Creditors of the person deceased: but after the Will is
proved, or Administration granted, and they have intermeddled with the Goods
then the Stranger cannot be sued, because there is another Executor of right,
against whom the Creditor may bring his Action, and is chargeable as far as
those Goods will extend which are come to his hands after he has assumed upon
him the charge of the Executorship: but notwithstanding all this, that there be
an Executor which does Administer, ye^ if the Stranger will still take the
Goods, and claim to be Executor, and pay Debts or Legacies, or receive Debts;
in such case it is said he may be charged as Executor in his own wrong,
although there be another Executor of right: Quia os suu^ contra se aperuit;
nam expressa nocent, quae tacita non nocent. 2 Ja^ C. B. Reads case. Co. 5 li.
fol. 33, 34. Swin. part 6. sect. 22. M. 3 Car. ^ Whitmore and Porters case.
Cro. 1 part Rep. fol. Vide ^r. 12 Jac. C. B. Rott. 4087. Keeble and Osbastons
case. Hobarts Rep. fol. 49. And Chandler and Thompsons case, 262. Bro. 2 part
Rep. fol. 185.

307. Note, that an Executor of his own wrong is chargeable no further then the
value of the Goods which come to his hands, and with which he has intermedled.
Brownlowes 2 part Rep. fol. 185. Mich. 23 Car. 1. B. R. Styles Repracticale,
page 120.

308. If a man do only perform deeds of Charity, as to feed the Cattle of the
deceased, lest they should perish, or take into his custody the Goods lest they
should be stolen, or dispose of the Goods about the Funeral of the Testator;
these acts do not charge a man as Executor of his own wrong. Frane. Mantica de
conject. ult. Volunt. li. 12. tit. 9. number. 18. Fitz. Exec. number. 38, 45. Bro.
Admin. number. 6, 28. Swin. part 6. sect. 22. Brownlowes Rep. 2 part fol. 184.
Hill. 1 El. C. B. Dyer, fol. 166. Noyes Max. page 102.

309. Where servants after the death of their Lords or Masters do imbezil their
Goods, after full infortion thereof made to the Lord Chancellor by the
Executors, or two of them, of such spoil made, the said Lord Chancellor by
advice of the two Chief Justices and Chief Baron, or two of them, shall have
power to make such Writs to be directed to such Sheriffs as to them shall seem
fit, to make Proclamation in such places within twelve days after the delivery
of the said Writs, as to the said Chancellor by advice aforesaid shall seem
reasonable, that the Offenders appear in the Kings Bench at the day limited in
the Writ; which Proclamation shall be made fifteen days before the day of
appearance, when if the Offender appear not, he shall be attainted of Felony;
and if he appear, the Justices shall commit him to prison, there to remain
until he have answered the Executors in their Actions, and the same Actions be
determined; provided that they be pursued with effect, and not slackly: but if
the Offenders procure two sufficient men to be bound with them in Recognizance
to the Executors in the same Court where they stand committed, to keep such day
as they shall have by the Court, then the Justices there may bail them; and if
the Jailer let them go at liberty without the Justices Order, he forfeits forty
pounds. Stat. 33 H. 6. cap. 1. Wingates Abr. Stat. tit. Executors.

310. If any person shall obtain any Goods or Debts of an Intestate, or
Releases or other discharge of any Debt or Duty, (which belonged to the
Intestate) by fraud, (as by procuring the Administration to be granted to a
Stranger of mean Estate, and not to be found, with in^ent thereby to obtain the
Intestates Estate) and not upon valuable consideration, or in satisfaction of
some just Debt, answerable to the value of the Goods so obtained; in such Case
such person shall be chargeable as Excutor of his own wrong, so far as the
value of the Goods or Debts so obtained shall amount unto: howbeit, he shall
also be allowed such reasonable deductions, as other Executors or
Administrators ought to have. 49 El. cap. 8. Winga. Abr. Stat. tit. Executors.

311. Note, that the time wherein he that is named Executor in the Testament is
to deliberate and determine whether he will accept or refuse the Executorship,
is left to the discretion of the Ordinary, who not only within the year
(allowed by the Civi^ Law) but within a Month or two may cite him to accept or
refuse the Office. Swin. part 6. sect. 4. Refor. L^gum Eccles. tit. de
Testamentis, cap. 34* page 143.

CHAP. X.
Of making of an Inventary, proving of the Will, with the Fees thereof, and
before whom it ought to be proved; and of passing an Account, and paying of
Mortuaries.
312. WHen an Executor intends to accept of the Office, it behooves him to make
an Inventary of the Testators Goods; for if he meddle with the Goods, and
refuse to make an Inventary, he may be punished by the Ordinary; but he may
meddle with the Goods as to the discharging of Funerals, or disposing of such
things as cannot be preserved and kept till the time of making the Inventary.
Swin. part 6. sect. 6 and 8. 21 H. 8. cap. 5.

313. And as for the time of making the Inventary, it is left to the discretion
of the Ordinary, who may appoint a longer or shorter time, according as the
distance of the place where the Goods remain, or other circumstances shall
minister occasion. Lyndwood in C. Stat. verb. Arbitrio. Swin. part 6. sect. 8.
number. 1.

314. And as for the form thereof, it ought to be made by two at the least, to
whom the Intestate was indebted, or left any Legacy; and upon their refusal or
absence, two or more other honest men may by the Executors appointment make the
Inventary of all the Goods and Chattels, Rights, Wares and Merchandises as well
moveable as not moveable whatsoever, that were of the person deceased; and the
same must be Indented, whereof one part is to remain with the Executor, and the
other with the Ordinary, where the Executor must swear that the same is true:
and the usual course in making of such Inventaries, is first to set down
moveable Goods, beginning with his Purse and Apparel; then Household Stuff as it
stands in every Room, beginning in the Hall, and so from Room to Room in order
throughout the House; then Corn in the Barnes or Garners, or ready sown in the
Fields; then Cattle, Husband-geer, as Ploughs, Carts, etc. then in moveable
Goods, as Leases of Lands or Tenements; and after that, the Debts due to the
Testator; and oftentimes, at the lower end of all, the Debts owing by the
Testator to other persons. 21 H. 8. C. 5. Franc. Porcel. Trac. de Inve. Swin
part 6. sect. 9. Refor. Legum Eccles. C. de Testamentis, sect. 20.

315. Note, that the Goods in the Inventary ought to be particularly prized and
valued according to reasonable prizes, and not hudled up together several
things in a gross sum: but those Goods which do belong to the Heir after the
Testators death, must not be put into the Inventary; neither may those Goods
called Bonae Peraphernalia, (which is the Wives convenient Apparel agreeable to
her Quality) be put into the Inventary: nay, such is the general custom within
the Province of York, that Widows are there not only tolerated to reserve to
their own use their convenient Apparel, and a convenient Bed and Furniture; but
also a Coffe^ or Box with diverse things therein, as Jewels, Chains, Borders,
and other things necessary for their own persons. Swin. part 6. sect. 9. number.
5. Johannes Garsi. Tract. de expensis, fol. 182. Perkins, sect. 526. Noyes Max.
page 107. Swin. part 6. sect. 7.

316. Certain Jewels to the value of 500 Marks, were allowed to a Viscountess,
as her Peraphernalia, and accounted but a reasonable allowance for one of her
degree. Viscountess Bindons case. Abr. Mores Rep. page 72. pl. 338.

317. But note, if the rest of the Goods will not suffice to pay the Husbands
Debts then are the Wives Jewels, Chains, Borders, and suchlike, (being things
of Decency or Ornament, and not of Necessity) to be put into the Inventary
amongst other Goods of the deceased, toward the payment of his Debts. Swin.
part 6. sect. 7. number. 5. in fin.

318. Note also, that the Husband may Devise such Chains and Jewels, etc.
though he leave sufficient Assets besides to pay his Debts; and in such case
the Wife shall not have them as her Peraphernalia* but if the Husband make no
Gift or Devise of them, and leave Assets besides to pay his Debts; then the
Wife in such case may keep them in despite of the Executors or Administrators.
Tr. 8 Car. 1. B. R. Lord Hastings and Sir Archibald Douglas ca. Cro. 1 part
Rep. fol. 251, 252, 253. And See Davenports ca. 5 Car. 1 in Chancery. Compl.
Attor. page 305.

319. If any Creditor or Legatary do affirm that more Goods came to the
Executors hands, then are named in the Inventary, he must prove it; for
otherwise Credit is to be given to the Inventary. Maschard. de probac.
Conclusio 939. Swin. part 6. sect. 10. Reforma. Legum Ecclesiast. tit. de
Testamentis, cap 21.

320. If there be several Executors, and one of them exhibits an Inventary;
this shall not charge the other in an Action brought against them; but the
party that sues must prove that such Executor has actually Administered, and
that Goods came to his hands, or else he shall not be charged. Lent Assizes
apud Ebor. 8 Car. 1. Irelands case. Claytons Rep. page 106. pl. 179.

321. After an Inventary made as before declared, then the Executor is to prove
the Testament before the Ordinary, or other Judge to whom the Probat thereof
belongs; and if the same be not in the Executors possession, but in some others
hand, then he may cite such person before the Ordinary, and force him to
exhibit the same. Perkins, sect. 486. Swin. part 6. sect. 12.

322. Note, that all Testaments ought to be proved before the Ordinary, except
in spiritual places, where the Lords have the Probat of their Tenants
Testaments before their Stewards or themselves, in their Temporal Courts.
Perkins, sect. 486.

323. If a Lord would have the Probat of a Testament made within the precinct
of his Manor, he cannot prove a Testament made without the said precinct. 2 R.
2. Testament. 4. 11 H. 7. fol. 12. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 231.

324. A Testament proved before the Commissary of the Bishop, or before any
Officer of the Ordinary deputed to the same, is sufficient; or if it be before
the Sequestrators of the Archdeacon of such a place, and his Seal put
thereunto, it is sufficient: for all Testaments cannot be proved before the
Ordinary himself; and properly the Probat of the Will does belong unto him to
whom the Sequestration does belong. 3 E. 3. Testamen. 5. 1 Hen. 6. 1. 11 H. 4.
64. Perkins Sect. 490, 491. Tr. 7 E. 4. fol. 14. a.

325. A Testament after it is proved, is of so great force, that a man shall
have no direct Travese against it, because it being to be tried by the
Certificate of the Ordinary, it is supposed that he will not certify contrary
to that which is showed unto the Court under his Seal: but if a man be sued by
an Executor after Probat, though he can have no Traverse to the Testament, yet
he may say that the Testator made not the Plaintiff Executor. 18 E. 2.
Testamen. 6. Perkins, sect. 493.

326. Note, that the proving of the Testament is done two manner of ways;
either by common form, or form of Law: the common form is, when the Executor
after the Testators death presents the Testament to the Judge, and produces
Witnesses to prove the same viva voce, without citing or calling of such as
have interest therein; and thereupon the Judge does annex his Seal to the
Testament. 21 H. 8. C. 5. de Castr. Consil. 99. vol. 1. Swin. part 6. sect. 14.

327. When it is proved in form of Law, then the Widow or next of Kin to the
deceased, to whom Administration should belong if the party had dyed Intestate,
are cited to be present, and the Will is exhibited, and the Witnesses examined
privately every one of them, as well to the Articles exhibited on the Executors
part, as to the Interrogatories Administered on the Widow or other adverse
parties behalf; and so according to the sufficiency of the proof, the Judge
does pronounce either for the validity of the Testament, or against it,
according to his discretion. Paul. de Castr. Con. 96. vol. 1. Swin. part 6.
sect. 14. number. 3.

328. When a Testament is proved after the common form, the parties interested
may force the Executor to prove it over again in due form of Law, which may
endanger the Testament if the Witnesses be dead in the mean time; unless it be
after ten years space, for then it shall be presumed, that necessary
solemnities have been observed: but on the contrary, if it be once proved in
form of Law, the Executor is not compellable to prove the same any more. Socin.
Jun. Consil. 89. vol. 1, Swin. part 6. sect. 14. Paul. de Cast. Consil. 96.
vol. 1. And Simo de Praetis. Interp. ult. Volunt. li 2. Dub. 2. Soluc. 3. sect.
207. number. 4 and 5.

329. Note, when any one intends to plead any thing against the validity of a
Testament, they ought to do it at the time of the proving it, or within a year
after, unless they were at such time Infants, or in Travel beyond the Seas, so
as they could hear nothing of it; and then they shall have six months after
their return from Travel to plead against it, and the Minors a year after they
come to full age: and if such parties exceed their limited times, then they
are excluded from any remedy, unless it be in case where the Testament was not
at first proved in form of Law, but after the common form; for then they may
cause the Testament to be proved over again at any time within ten years, and
allege what they can against it. Refor. Leg. Eccles. tit. de Testamentis, cap.
6.

330. If any shall exhibit a false Testament, or any ways pervert a true
Testament, by adding, diminishing, changing, or interlining the same, and is
openly convinced of such crime; they shall thereby be excluded from all benefit
accrewing to them by such Testament. Refor. Legum Eccles. tit. de Testamentis,
cap. 39.

331. If an Executor or Administrator be ancient, sickly, or live far distant
from the Court where he should have the Probat of the Will, or Letters of
Administration; then he may in such case have a Commission directed to two
Neighbour-Ministers to take his Oath, and upon return thereof have the Probat
under Seal.

332. As touching the Fees taken for Probat of Wills, etc. they vary according
to the custom of several places; but where the Inventary exceeds forty pounds,
the usual Fees are between five Nobles and forty shillings, if it be by
Commission; and if it be not by Commission, but that the Executor go himself to
the Ordinary, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, who has the granting of the same;
then it will not cost so much by 13 s. 4 d. or there abouts.

333. But if these Officers could be brought to walk by the Rules of the
Statute, the Fees would be far less; for by the Stat. of the 21 H. 8. cap. 5.
it is enacted, That if the goods of the Testator do not exceed five pounds,
that then there is only due to the Scribe for writing the Probat of the
Testament, six pence, but nothing to the Ordinary or his Official, etc. for the
Probat thereof and putting to his Seal: but then the Testament must be
exhibited to him in writing, with wax thereunto affixed ready to be sealed and
proved Communi forma; and in such case he is to dispatch the party without
delay: and no more is due then six pence for granting Administration, where the
Intestates goods do not exceed five pounds, as abovesaid. Wingates Abr. Stat.
tit. Prob. of Testam. number. 2. 21 H. 8. C. 5. Swin. part 6. sect. 15.

334. When the goods of the deceased exceeds five pounds, and are under forty
pounds; then there is due to the Ordinary for the Probat two shillings and six
pence, and to the Scribe for Registring the same one shilling; and where the
goods exceed forty pounds, then there is due to the Ordinary for the Probat two
shillings and six pence, as above said; and two shillings and six pence to the
Scribe for Regist^ing of the same; or the Register may refuse two shillings and
six pence, and take a penny for every ten lines of the Testament, each line
being to contain ten Inches in the length: but note, that in all these cases
the Will must be brought to the Ordinary ready Engrossed with wax at the same,
if you intend to tie him to the Fees above said. Swin. part 6. sect. 15. Refor.
Legum Ecc. tit. de Test. C. 17. Wingates Abr. Stat. tit. Prob. of Testaments,
number. 3. 21 H. 8. cap. 5.

335. The Fees either for the copy of the Will or Inventary, are the same as
are allowed for Registring the Will; or the Register may refuse the same, and
take a penny for every ten lines for the length as aforesaid. The Officer that
takes more then his just Fee, shall forfeit that excess to the party grieved,
and ten pounds besides, to be divided betwixt the King and the party that will
sue for the same in any of the Kings Courts.

336. Where by custom less has been taken in any of the cases aforesaid, there
less is to be taken still, notwithstanding the Act of the 21 H. 8. Wingates
Abr. Stat. tit. Probat of Test. number. 11. Swin. part 6. sect. 15. number. 4. 21 H.
8. cap. 5.

337. If a Testament be in Paper, and the Executor desires that the same shall
be transcribed and engrossed in Parchment; then he must agree with the Clerk
for transcribing the same as cheap as he can; and when both are brought to the
Ordinary, it is in his choice whether he will put his Seal and Probat to the
Original or Transcript* but there is nothing due to the Ordinary for the
Transcript, nor for examining the same with the Original; but only for
affixing his Seal and Probat, he shall take such Fees as is before declared. Co.
3 part Inst. fol. 149, 150. chap. Extortion.

338. And If any Ordinary or his Official, etc. exact greater Fees then these
above mentioned, it is Extortion, and so it was adjudged by the whole Court of
Common Bench, Mich. 6 Jac. upon an information against one Rowse Commissary of
the Archdeacon of Huntington, at the suit of one Neal, which was for taking a
Fee for engrossing the Probat upon the Transcript of the Testament, over and
above his lawful Fee due by the 21 H. 8. above mentioned: and if this president
were put into practice, the Probat of Testaments and granting Administrations
would not be so chargeable as in most places at this day they are. Mich. 6 Jac.
C. B. Rott. 1301. Neal and Rowse case. Co. 4. part Inst. fol. 336.

339. When a Will where Lands are devised comes to be proved in the
Prerogative-Court, they ought only to take a Copy thereof into their
Leiger-Book, and deliver the Original to the Legatee of the Lands to support
his Title by, if he be questioned for the same. Mich. 1649. B. R. Styles
Regest. Practicale, page 358.

340. If a man be long absent, and it be not known whether he be alive or dead;
if he have made a Will, it may be proved; especially if it be reported that he
is dead, and that the party absent were sickly, and a very old man when he went
away, or the like. Mischard, de probac. Conclusio 1074. number. 4. Swin. part 6.
sect. 13.

341. Note, that if the party dying have at the time of his death goods or good
debts in any other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar jurisdiction within that
Province, besides those goods in the place where he dies, amounting to the
value of five pounds at the least; then the Probat of such Will, or granting
Administration, belongs to the Archbishop or Metropolitan of that Province,
whether it be within the Province of Canterbury or York; this does not
prejudice those Diocesses where by composition or custom Bona Notabilia are
rated at a greater sum. Book of Canons, pub. 1 Jac. Anno Domin^ 1603. Can. 92
and 93. Perkins, sect. 489.

342. And if the Executor or Administrator cited or appearing voluntarily
before the Judge (appointed for Probat of Wills, etc. within such Diocese or
peculiar Jurisdiction where the party dyed) do upon his Oath affirm that the
party deceased had goods or good debts to the value of five pounds aforesaid,
in any other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar Jurisdiction within the said
Province; then is the Judge to dismiss him, and admonish him to prove the said
Will, or require Administration of the goods in the Prerogative Court of the
Archbishop of the Province, and afterward to exhibit the Probat or
Administration under Seal of the said PrerogativeCourt before him the said
Judge within forty days then next following: and the said Judge so dismissing
the party as aforesaid, shall not exact or take any charges of the said
parti^^^ more then such only as are due for the Citation, and other Process
had and used against such persons upon their contumacy: and if any Judge or
their Register shall offend herein, he is to be suspended from his Office ipso
facto, and not to be absolved till he have paid to the party all his expenses
laid out contrary to the Tenor of the premises. Book Can. 1 Jac. An. Dom. 1603.
Can. 92 and 93. Swin. part 6. sect. 11.

343. Note, that the probat of every Bishops Testament, or granting
Administration of his Goods (although he have no Goods but within his own
Jurisdiction where he was Bishop) does belong to the Archbishop within whose
Province the party deceased was Bishop. Co. 4 part. Inst. fol. 335.

344. If any Ordinary of a Diocese, or Commissary of a peculiar Jurisdiction
commit Administration of his Goods that has Bona Notabilia as aforesaid in
diverse Diocesses, it is utterly void to all intents and purposes, as well
concerning Goods in his own Diocese as elsewhere. But if the Metropolitan do
commit Administration, supposing the party deceased to have Bona Notabilia,
whereas he has but Goods only in one inferior Diocese; this Administration is
no^ v^yd, but only voydable by Sentence, for that the Metropolitan has
Jurisdiction over all the Diocesses within his Province. 22 El. ^. ^. Veer and
Jeffer^es Ca. vouched in Co. 5 li fo. 30. in Princes case, and Mores Rep. the
same case.

345. Note, that in former times (when Popery and Idolatry reigned in this
Kingdom) every Executor or Administrator was to pass his Account to the
Ordinary, how he had performed his Office; and if any thing remained in the
Executors hands after the payment of the Testators Debts, then the Ordinary
used to appoint the payment of such Residue to Pious uses: but this is now of
little use; for at this day the Ordinary cannot compel the Executor to make
such distribution; for if any thing remain, the Executor or Administrator may
keep the same, and convert it to their own use. Swin. part 6. sect. 20. number. 2.

246. Upon the passing an Account as aforesaid it was usual to call the
Creditors to whom the Testator was indebted, and also the Legataries, and all
others having interest, before the Ordinary to whom the Probation appertained;
and they were to hear the Account: and if it appeared to the Ordinary that the
Executor had faithfully executed his Office, and fully Administered; then he
might acquit the Executor, and give Letters of discharge from being any further
troubled, at least in the Ecclesiastical Court: but if the Account were made in
the Creditors absence, and they never called, such Account does not prejudice
them. Swin. part 6. sect. 20. Lindwood in C. Statut. sect. E^postquam verb.
Ordinariis.

347. And if any inferior Judge under the degree of a Bishop, should grant unto
any Executor Letters o^ Acquittance or final Discharge before a Lawful Account
made, that Judge is ipso facto suspended ab ingressu Ecclesiae by the space of
six Months, and the Executor does receive no benefit by such acquittance. Lind
wood in D. C. in sin. verb. Acquietantiarum. Swin. part. 6. sect. 21. number. 3.

348. As touching Mortuaries, it i^ enacted by Authority of Parliament, That no
Parson, Vicar, Curate, Parish Priest, nor any other Spiritual Parson, nor their
Farmers or Leassees, shall demand any Mortuary for any person dying, but in
such places only where Mortuaries have been used to be paid and given in those
places, according to the rates hereafter mentioned; and that no person pay in
more places then one, and that is in the place of their most dwelling or
habitation. 21 H. 8. C. 6. Swin. part 6. sect. 16. Wingate Abr. Stat. Tit.
Mortuaries.

349. If a Person at the time of his Death be not worth in Moveable Goods to
the value of ten Marks, no Mortuary is then due; if he be worth ^en Marks or
more, clearly above his Debts paid, and under thirty pounds or above, and under
forty pounds, ^hen a Noble is due; and if he be worth forty pounds or above,
to any sum whatsoever, then ten shillings is due: and if any of the Persons
before named take more then is here set down, ^hey forfeit forty shillings, and
so much more as they took more then their due: and in such places where ^^ss
has been accustomed to be paid, ^o person shall be compelled to pay more then
according to the custom ^n such place. Wingates Abr. Statut. ^it. Mortuaries*
21 H. 8. C. 6. Swin. part 6. sect. 16.

350. Note, that no Mortuary is (...) be paid for a Woman being Cover^ Baron,
nor for a Child, nor for any person not keeping house; and if (...) wayfaring
man dye, his Mortuary i^ to be paid in such a place where he had the most
habitation, if Mortuaries be accustomed to be paid in such place. Wingates Abr.
Stat. Mortuaries. 21 H. 8. C. 6. Swin. part 6. sect. 16.

351. The Bishops of Bangor, Landaff, St. David's, and St. Asaph, and the
Archdeacon of Chester, may take such Mortuaries of their Priests within their
Diocesses and Jurisdiction^ as heretofore has been accustomed* 21 H. 8. C. 6.
Swin. part 6. sect. 16. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Mortuaries.

352. Where Mortuaries are due they are to be paid out of the death* part only,
and not out of the whole before Division, where the Widow and Children are to
have their reasonable parts; and such Mortuary is to be paid before any other
Legacy whatsoever. Hostiens* in C. conquerente de Offic. Ordin. verb. Mortuar.
Swin. part 6. sect. 16. in fin.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Power of the Ordinary in granting Administrations, and some few Cases
touching Appeals, and also of the Office of an Administrator, and how far the
Ordinary is chargeable for the Intestates Debts.
353. ORdinary in the usual and common sense signifies a Bishop, and is
derived ab ordine; but generally by the Law Ordinarius is not only taken for a
Bishop, but every one that is in loco Episcopi, as Guardians of the
Spiritualities, and such as have peculiar and exempt jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, and be immediate Officers to the Kings Courts of Justice. Co.
on Litt. fol. 344. 18 El. Dyer, fol. 350. Regist. fol. 67. Co. 2 part Inst. fol
398.

354. If a Caveat be entered with the Bishop, that he should not admit any
without giving notice; yet notwithstanding he may admit one to the
Administration: but if it be one who has no right that is admitted, he is then
a disturber; otherwise the Caveat does nothing but only to make the Bishop
careful what person he admits. Brownlowes Rep. 2 part fol. 119.

355. The Ordinary is to commit Administration of the goods of one dying
Intestate to the goods or to the next of his blood, if they will accept it, or
to both: and where diverse are next of blood, and in equality of degree, and do
claim Administration; in such case he may grant it to which of them he
pleases: or, where one claims as next of blood to the Intestate, where in
truth diverse are in equality of Kindred; here the Ordinary shall be at his
choice to accept one or more making Request: and where but one or more, and not
all are in equality of Kindred, and do make Request, the Ordinary is at liberty
to admit the Widow, and him or those only making Request, or any one of them,
at his pleasure: and if the Ordinary do not observe these Rules, he forfeits
ten pounds, by the 21 H. 8. c. 5. 21 H. 8. c. 5. Fynch li. 2. c. 15. page 174,
175. Noyes Max. page 105. Styles Regest. practicale, page 22. Mich. 24 Car. 1.
B. R. Reformat. Legum Ecclesiast. tit. de Testamentis, c. 42.

356. One of the half-blood is in as equal degree of Kindred, to have the
Letters of Administration committed to him, as one of the whole blood is. Mich.
23 Car. 1. B. R. Styles Rep. fol. 74, 75. and Pasch. 24. c. 1. B. R. Hill and
Brides case. Styles fol. 102.

357. If the Ordinary take any Reward or Fee for preferring of any one person
before another to the Administration, it is Bribery, and punishable with Fine
and Imprisonment at the Kings pleasure, and frequently loss of their place. Co.
3 part Inst. fol. 148. cap. Bribery in fine.

358. When the Widow or next of ^in are cited and refuse the Administration,
then the Ordinary may grant it to some of the Creditors, or to some other such
as he thinks fit. Hernes Law of Conveyances, page 86.

359. Where diverse are made Administrators, they have but one joint Interest,
and therefore one of them cannot discharge a Debt by himself in prejudice of
the others, as one Excutor may do, as is showed before in the ninth Chapter;
but in such case all the Administrators must join. Herns Law Convey. page 88.

360. If Administration be unduly gra^^ed to such a person as ought not to have
the same; in such case the Ordinary may revoke the same afterward: but if it
be duly granted to those who of right ought to have the same, then he cannot
lawfully revoke it; and if there be a suit depending to that purpose in the
Spiritual Court, a Prohibition will be granted. Clerks ca. M. 20 Jac. B. R.
Rott. 2196. Vide Cro. 1 part, Fotherbies ca. and Pasc. 21 Car. 1. B. R.
Bettesworth and Bettesworths case. Styles Rep. fol. 10.

361. If Administration be unduly granted by the Ordinary of an inferior
Diocese, the party grieved cannot have a Prohibition at the Common Law, but he
must appeal to the Metropolitan or Archbishop of the Province, from thence to
the Court of Delegates; for the Stat. of 21 H. 8. does not say that the
Administration shall be committed to the next of blood, or else the
Administration to be void; but that it shall be granted on such a pain: and so
it does not take away the Cognizance of the Case from the Ecclesiastical Judge.
P. 1 Car. 1. B. R. Mayowes ca. Latches Rep. fo. 67. M. 24 Car. 1. B. R. Brown
and Poynes case. Styles Rep. fol. 147.

362. If one dye Intestate, and the Ordinary grants Administration to a
Stranger, and the next of Kin sues a Citation out of the Spiritual Court to
have the Administration revoked, and pending the Suit the Administrator sells
the goods to defeat the next of Kin, and then the Letters of Administration
granted to the Stranger are revoked and made Null by Sentence; yet in this case
the sale by the first Administrator is good: but if the next of Kin had
appealed to have the Administration revoked, and pending the appeal the first
Admiministrator sels his goods; then in such case the sale is void: and so note
the difference between a Suit by Citation to revoke a former Administration,
and an appeal; for an appeal does suspend the former Sentence. 37 El. B. R.
Packmans case. Co. 6 ii. fol. 28. Vide Harlings case. Claytons Rep. 25.

363. Where an appeal is made, and the first Administration is confirmed, then
the use is to send back the Cause to the Court from whence it came by appeal:
but when the first sentence is reversed, then the first Court is outed of its
jurisdiction, and the Court which reverses it shall commit the Administration
de novo. P. 1 Car. 1. B. R. Reeve and Dennyesca. Latch. 85.

364. Appeals in Cases Testamenry, Matrimony and Tithes, must be sued from the
Archdeacon or Official (if the matter be there commenced) to the Bishop of the
Diocese; and from the Bishop Diocesan, or his Commissary in such Case, (or when
the matter is there commenced) within fifteen days after sentence given, to the
Archbishop of the Province and no farther, but there to be definitively
adjudged. See number. 368. 24. H. 8 c. 12. Wing. Abr. Stat. tit. Appeals to Rome,
number. 5. Co. 4 part Inst. fol. 339.

365. When the Cause is commenced before the Archdeacon, or Commissary of the
Archbishop, the appeal may be made (within fifteen days after sentence given)
to the Court of Audience of the said Archbishop; and from thence within fifteen
days after sentence, there to the Archbishop himself, and no further: when the
Cause is commenced before the Archbishop himself, it was to be determined
there without further appeal, by the Stat. 24. H. 8. c. 12. 24 H. 8. c. 12.
Wing. Abr. Stat. tit. Appeals to Rome number. 6 and 7. Co. 4. part Inst. fol. 339.

366. But see the Stat. 25 H. 8. where it is added further, that appeals shall
be from the Archbishops Courts to the King in his Chancery, where a Commission
shall be awarded under the Great Seal to certain persons to be named by the
King, for the determination of the said appeals, and from thence no further;
and these Commissioners are called Delegates, because they are delegated by the
Kings Commission. Co. 4. part Inst. fol. 339, 340. 25 H. 8. c. 19. Wingates
Abr. Stat. tit. Appeals to Rome, number. 4.

367. When the Cause or Suit concerns the King, the party grieved may (within
15 days after sentence given) appeal from any of the said Courts Ecclesiastical
to the higher Convocation-house of that Province, and no further; and there to
be finally determined. 24 H. 8 c. 12. Co. 4 part Inst. fol. 323 and 339. in
fine.

368. Appeals from places exempt which were before to the Sea of Rome, shall be
into the Chancery ut supra, and not to the Archbishop; and shall be determined
by the Delegates. 25 H. 8. c. 19. Co. 4 part Inst. fol. 340.

369. But note, that where it is said in the case aforesaid, upon the Stat. of
the 24 and 25 H. 8. that the sentence shall be definitive upon certain appeals
there mentioned; yet notwithstanding, the King as Supreme Head, upon complaint
to him made, may grant a Commission of Review; for so the Pope used to do as
Supreme Head; and the same power which the Pope had formerly, does now of right
belong to the Crown, and is annexed thereunto by the 26 H. 8. c. 1. and 1 Eliz.
c. 1. And so it was resolved, Tr. 39 El. B. R. where the case was, that
sentence being in an Ecclesiastical cause in the Country, the party grieved
appealed to the ArchBishop where the first sentence was affirmed; from thence
he appealed to the Delegates, before whom both the former sentences were
repealed, and made void by definitive sentence: and thereupon the Queen as
Supreme Head granted a Commission of Review ad Revidendum the sentence of the
Delegates. Co. 4 part Inst. fol. 341. Tr. 39 tit. B. R. Hollingworths case.
Ras^al Rome 389.

370. If the Ordinary knowing that there is a Testament and an Executor named
therein, will notwithstanding grant Administration of the deceaseds Goods, not
having first called the Executor before him to prove the Will, or to accept or
refuse the Executorship; then in such case, when the Excutor shall prove the
Will, he may sue the Administrator in an Action of Trespass, notwithstanding
the Administration granted by the Ordinary. Swin. part 6. sect. ^.

371. If a man be Executor to one who was Administrator to another man, in this
case he shall not have administration of such Goods as his Testator had by
virtue of the Administration; but the Administration thereof shall be committed
to the next of Kin to him that dyed first. Vide H. 43. El. C. B. Thorns case.
Goldes. Rep. page 182. pl. 118. Hernes Law Convey. page 88. Fitz. Abr. Tit.
Admin. number. 3. Swin. part. 6. sect. 3. number. 12.

372. If an Executor in an Action brought by him recovereth, and afterward
dies Intestate, and then Administration of the Goods of the first Testator is
committed to J. S. in this case J. S. before the Stat. of the 17. Car. 2. could
not sue out Execution upon such Recovery, but was to begin a new; because he
comes in paramount to the Executor, and claims immediately from the first
Testator: but see now the late Act made at Oxford 17 Car. 2. for avoiding of
unnecessary suits and delays, it stands on continuance for five years, and from
thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament. Co. 5 lib. fol. 9. in
Brudenels ca. Cro. 2 part. Yare and Goughs ca. 1 Jac. B. R. and M. 4. Car. 1.
B. R. Snape and Norgate^ ca. Cro. 3 part, and Mores Rep. Levet and Lewkners
case: but see now the Statute at Oxford 17 Car. 2. for avoiding unnecessary
suits and delays.

373. If an Administrator during Minority of an Infant-Executor, recover in
Debt, and the Executor comes to age before Execution taken out; in such case he
may sue out a special Scire facias upon the Record, and so sue out Execution in
his own name. Vide 27 H. 8. fol. 7. a. Brownlows Rep. 2 part page 83, 84.

374. An Administrator is not liable to an Action for a Debt upon a Contract of
the Intestates. Mich. 30, 31 El. B. R. Hughsons and Webbs ca. Cro. 1 part.

375. But if the Administrator after the Intestates death promise to pay such a
Debt; if there be a consideration to ground the Action on, it is binding. As
thus: the Husband was indebted to another man upon a Contract for Beer, and
dyed Intestate; the wife took administration, and afterward assumed upon her
self to the Creditor, that if he would deliver her six Barrels of Beer, she
would not only pay for them, but her Husbands Debt also; in this case it was
adjudged that Judgment should be ^^^^ed de bonis propriis generally, for it is
become a Charge by her own act; and by her promise as Administratrix, ^he has
made it her own Debt. Tr. 37 El. B. R. in Wheeler and Colliers case. Cro. 1
part. Rep.

376. A Rent was granted to the Husband and Wife for their Lives; the Rent is
behind, and the Husband dies, and then another Rent becomes in arrear, and the
Wife dies Intesta^e; and the Administrator brought an account of debt for both
Rents in arrear, as well in the Husbands lifetime, as in the Wives, and
adjudged the Action did well lie. Mich. 42, 43 El. B. R. Temple and Temples
case. Cro. 1 part Rep. fol.

377. If Administration of the debtors goods be committed to the Creditor, it
does not extinguish the debt; but if the Creditor make the debtor his Executor,
it is a Release in Law of the debt: but if a VVoman-Executrix take the debtor
to Husband, this is no release of the debt; for if he dye, she may sue his
Executors; for the debt was but suspended during the Coverture. M. ^1 El. B. R.
Crosman and Reads case. Leonards Rep. fol. 320. Co. 8 li. fol. 135. in Sir Jo.
Needhams case, and Mich. 1652. B. R. Rott. 686. Ashby and Child's case. Styles
Rep. fol. 384.

378. Where an Infant is made Executor, and Administration is committed durante
minori aetate, and the Administrator has goods in his hands to a great value,
and the Infant at his full age releases to the Administrator all demands; this
release shall be charged as asse^s in the Infants ^ands, for so much as he
released ^o the Administrator. Mich. 15 El. ^wens Rep. fol. 3. and M. 37 El. C.
B. ^ittleyes case. ^odbolts Rep. fol. 29. and 30.

379. An Administrator may bring an Action of Trespass or Trover and
Conversion, for goods taken away before he obtained the Administration; for the
Letters of Administration shall relate to the time of the Intestates death, and
not to the time of granting them. M. 1652. B. R. ^^^ge and Hebbs case. Styles
Rep. fol. (...) M. 3 Car. 1. B. R. Hudson and Hudsons case. Latches Rep. 214.
36 H. (...) 7. Fynches Law, li. 1. ^. 5.

380. An Administrator may retain Money in his own hands to satisfy his own
Debt, in prejudice of other like Creditors of the Intestates, as well as an
Executor may do. M. 11 Jac. Bond and Greens case. Godbolts Rep. fol. 216. Tr.
13 Jac. Rot. 1906. C. B. Waynford and Wayners ca. Brownlows Rep. 1 part page 80.

381. An Administration may be granted upon Condition; and if the Condition be
not performed, it may be revoked or repealed: but then i^ the Administrator
before the Condition broken give away the goods, or sel^ them, such acts are
good. Co. 6 lib. fol. 19.

382. Note, If the Testators words be indifferent to make an Executor, or
universal Legatary; a Testament, or a Codicil; in such case it is usual to
commit the Administration to the Widow or next of Kin, deeming the party to
have dyed intestate. Franc. Manticade conject. ult. volunt. lib. 2. Tit. 3.
number. 12. Swin. part 4. sect. 4. number. 8.

383. Note, That the Ordinary may call the Administrator to account, but he
cannot force him to make disposition of the surplusage of the Intestates goods
after Debts paid, by the true meaning of the 21 H. 8. C. 5. but what remains
shall go to the Administrator, in case there be any more Debts to pay, which as
yet are not come to his knowledge: and if the Ordinary will meddle to cause a
disposition to be made, a Prohibition will be granted against him, if the
Administrator request it. M. 6 Car. 1. B. R. Levans case. Cro. 3 part. Rep.
fol. M. 15 Jac. C. B. Tooker and Loans Ca. Hobbarts Rep. fol. 190* Pasc. 24
Car. 1. B. R. Hill and Birds case. Styles Rep. fol. Brownlowes 1 part Rep. pa.
32. And Vide Slawneys case. Hob. barts Rep. fol. 83.

384. An Administrator accounted before the Ordinary, and proved payment by one
VVitness: and because the Ordinary would not allow of proof by one VVitness,
but did excommunicate the party for want of proof; a Prohibition was thereupon
granted, and the Book says there, that the jurisdiction of the Spiritual Court
is not taken away by the Prohibition, but their proceedings only, P. 2 Car. B.
R. Bellamy and Aldens ca. Latches Rep. fol. 117.

385. Now as touching the Interest of the Ordinary in the goods of the
Intestate that comes to his hands, note that it is only such an interest as an
Administrator durante minori aetate Executoris has, and therefore he cannot
give nor sell the Goods of the Intestate, or do any thing to his prejudice. M.
9 El. Dyer, fol. 256. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 398.

386. And so if the Ordinary make a Letter to one Ad colligendum bona Defuncti,
and ad vendendum ea quae peritura essent, and inde Compatum reddere: In this
case if the Grantee sell the Goods, he may be charged as Executor of his own
wrong; for the Ordinary himself having not power to sell, cannot give more
power then he has. Swin. part 4. sect. 16. in fine. M. 9 El. Dyer, fol. 256.

387. If no goods come to the hands of the Ordinary, he is not chargeable by
the Law; but if any come to his hands and possession, and he will neither
Administer and pay the Debts and Duties himself, nor commit Administration to
the Friends and Kin of the Intestate that would, then he is chargeable by the
Law, for so much as comes to his hands, and is liable to the same Actions as
other Administrators are: But the Ordinary cannot have an Action of Debt,
Covenant, nor any other Action which belonged to the Intestate; but he to whom
he commits Administration may: so that he is subject to the charge and trouble
of an Administrator, but is excluded from the privileges belonging to an
Administrator. 7 H. 4. fol. 18. F. N. B. 92. a. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 398.
West. 2. C. 19. Fynches Law, page 174.

388. If an Action of Debt be brought against the Ordinary for a Debt of the
Intestates, after notice given him of the same, he may not Administer to
others, if he have not sufficient to satisfy that debt. M. 7 El. Dyer, fol.
233.

389. If the Ordinary take goods of the Intestates into his hands, and after
commits Administration, and notwithstanding still retains the goods; in this
case he shall be charged still, as if he had not at all committed any
Administration. 11 R. 2. Admin. 21. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 398.

390. Where the Ordinary does take goods of the Intestates, being out of his
Diocese; here he shall not be charged as Ordinary, but as Executor in his own
wrong. 12 R. 2. Admin. 21. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 398.

391 If the goods of the Intestates come to the hands of the Ordinary, and he
dies, his Executors or Administrators shall be charged in an Action of Debt,
by the Stat. Westmin. 2. C. 19. Westmin. 2. c. 19. Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 398.
Regist. fol. 141. 11 E. 3. Exec. 177.

392. Having spoken before concerning a Codicil, I thought good here to insert
the usual form thereof, as follows, viz.

393. Be it known unto all men by these presents, That whereas I Henry Walker
of R. etc. have made and declared my last Will and Testament in writing,
bearing date, etc. I the said Henry Walker by this present Codicil do confirm
and rati^ie my said last Will and Testament, and do give and bequeath unto
Roger Myton of Lympton my best Suit of Clothes: and my Will and meaning is,
that this Codicil or Schedule be, and be adjudged to be part and parcel of my
said last Will and Testament; and that all things herein contained and
mentioned be faithfully and truly performed, and as fully and amply in every
respect, as if the same were so declared, and set down in my said last Will and
Testament. In Witness whereof, I the said Henry Walker have hereunto set my
Hand and Seal this 25th day of July, in the 19th year of the Reign of our most
gracious Soverain Lord King Charles the Second, and in the year of our Lord God
1667.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ADministration how and to whom it must be granted. Sect. 354, 355, 356, 357,
358, 359, 360, 370, 371, 382. What Actions ^ye for, or against an
Administrator. Sect. 374, 375, 376, 379. Administration during Minority of an
Executor, when it shall cease. Sect. 274, 276, 277. The Power and Authority of
such an Administrator. Sect. 275. What shall be Assets in the hands of an
Executor or Administrator, and what not. Sect. 252, 281, 282, 284, 285, 296,
297, 298, 299, 300, 378, 380. How and before whom the Executor or Administrator
is to pass his Account. Sect. 345, 346, 347, 383, 384. Appeals when, how, and
before whom to be made. Sect. 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369.
B.
BOna Notabilia what they are, and what to be done in such case. Sect. 341,
342, 344. Bona Peraphernalia, what is meant thereby. Sect. 315, 316.
C.
COdicil what it is. Sect. 22, 23, 24, 25, 50. The form thereof, Sect. 393.
Conditions, how many sorts thereof. Sect. 117. When they must be performed by
an Executor or Legatary, and when not. Sect. 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124,
125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140,
141, 142, 143.
D.
WHat things are deviseable by Will, and what not. Sect. 162, 163, 164, 165,
166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 318. What passes by a
Devise of Omnia bona. Sect. 191, 192. What passes by a Devise of Omnia
Cattalla. Sect. 193, 194, 195. What passes by a Devise of moveable Goods. Sect.
197. What passes by a Devise of immovable Goods. Sect. 198. What passes by a
Devise of all Household Stuff. Sect 199, 200. What passes by a Devise of all
Lands and Tenements. Sect. 225, 226, 230. What words in a Devise of Lands make
a Fee simple, what a Fee-tail, what an Estate for life, etc. Sect. 227, 228,
229, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239.
E
HOw many kinds of Executors. Sect. 243, 244, 245. What time the Executor is
to have to accept or refuse the Office. Sect. 311. In what things the Office of
an Executor does consist. Sect. 248, 312, 321. When an Executor shall be
compelled to stand to the Office, and when not. Sect. 249, 250, 256, 257, 305,
306. Where diverse are Executors, when the Action must ^e in all their names,
and when not. Sect. 253, 255, 260. Who may be an Executor, and who not. Sect.
87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104,
105, 106. The several ways of appointing an Executor. Sect. 112, 113, 114, 115,
116. An Executor conditionally appointed, when he must perform it before he can
be admitted to the Office, and when not. Sect. 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123,
124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139,
140, 141, 142, 143. What Actions lie for Executors, and what against them.
Sect. 271, 272, 273, 286, 293, 301. What Acts of an Infant-Executor do bind
him, and what not. Sect. 278. When Executors may refuse the Office, and
afterward accept of it, and when not. Sect. 254, 256, 257, 258, 259. What
Acts shall make a man Excutor in his own wrong. Sect. 308, 310. Executor in his
own wrong, how far he is chargeable. Sect. 307. After what order Executors are
to pay debts. Sect. 292, 294, 29^. When Execution shall be of the Executors
own Goods, and when not. Sect. 302, 303, 304. When a Debt shall be
extinguished, and when not. Sect. 286, 287, 288, 377.
F.
WHat Fees are legally due for Probat of Testaments, and granting
Administrations. Sect. 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338.
I.
WIthin what time the Inventary of the deceaseds goods, is to be exhibited.
Sect. 313. The form and manner of making an Inventary, Sect. 314. What goods
are put into the Inventary, and what not. Sect. 315, 317. The benefit of an
Inventary. Sect. 319.
L.
AFter how many several ways a Legacy may be given. Sect. 182, 183, 184, 185.
Where a Legacy must be sued for, Sect. 187, 188, 189, 241. A Legacy
conditionally given, in what cases the Legatary must perform the Condition
before he can obtain the Legacy, and in what Cases he need not. Sect. 118,
119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134,
135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143. When the Legatary may enter and
take his Legacy without leave of the Executor, and when not. Sect. 186, 196.
How and after what manner Legacies are to be paid; when the Legatary shall
recover the whole, and when but a part of the Legacy. Sect. 201, 202, 203,
204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219.
When the Legatary shall have the Election or choice of the Legacy, and when
the Executor shall have it. Sect. 220, 221, 222. In what Cases a Legatary
forfeits his Legacy, and what not. Sect. 223, 224. Lands left to be sold by
the Executors, in what cases they must join in the sale, and in what cases they
need not. Sect. 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270.
M.
MOrtuaries where du^, and what to be paid for the same. Sect. 348, 349, 350,
351, 352.
O.
ORdinary, who, and what he is. Sect. 353. What Interest he has in the
Intestates goods that come to his hands. Sect. 385, 386. What Actions lie for,
or against the Ordinary. Sect. 387, 388, 389, 390.
P.
THe custom of the Province of York, concerning Childrens Portions. Sect. 151,
152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 178, 179, 180, 181. What is meant
by the word Portion. Sect. 161. Probat of Testaments before whom they must be.
Sect. 321, 322, 323, 324, 342. How many ways Testaments may be proved. Sect.
325, 326, 327, 328, 339.
T.
TEstament, the derivation thereof. Sect. 1. Its difference from a last Will.
Sect. 2, 110, 111. The several kinds and forms of Testaments. Sect. 3, 4, 5, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Who may make a Testament or
Will, and who not. Sect. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69,
70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. Who may be
Tutor or Guardian, and who not. Sect. 144, 145. How and by whom a Tutor may be
appointed. Sect. 146, 147, 148, 150. Their Office. Sect. 149.
W.
WHat shall be a good Will, and what not. Sect. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39,
40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56. VVat shall be a
good Will to pass Lands and Tenements. Sect. 6, 37, 38, 52. The difference
between a Testament and a Will. Sect. 2. The definition of a last Will. Sect.
21. What number of VVitnesses required for proof of a last Will or Testament.
Sect. 26, 29. What VVitnesses may be excepted against in such a case, and what
not. Sect. 27, 28, 30.
FINIS.

