A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF Sr. ALEXANDER FRAISER OF DOORS, Knight
and Baronet, Principal Physician to the KING of Great Britain, etc.

Who died at Whitehall, April 28. 1681. In the seventieth and fifth year of his
Age.

And was Solemnly Interred amongst his Ancestors at DOORS the (...). of July
following.

By JOHN MENZIES, Professor of Divinity in Aberdene.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.

Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our heart
(...) wisdom.


It Is said of Xerxes, viewing, from the top of an hill, his vast Army,
consisting of no less then a Million of Men, he fell a weeping, that within the
space of an hundredth years, all these gallant persons would be snatched away by
death; and in a much shorter time it came to pass. All the use, that heathen
Prince could make of this inevitable fate and mortality of Mankind, was to weep
over it; But the holy Ghost in this Text, suggests a more profitable
improvement thereof. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Happy we, if by the work and exercise of this day, we be
excited to learn this heavenly and divine Art.

The Opinions of Interpreters have varied touching the Penman of this Psalm.
Holy Augustine in his Enarration upon it, will not grant it to be Penned by
Moses, though the Inscription carry his Name; A prayer of Moses the man of God.
But S. Hierom, epist. 139. Unto Cyprian a Presbyter, will not only have this
Psalm to be Composed by Moses, but also, all that follow until the hundred. In
ascribing so many to Moses, Hierom, without all peradventure (with reverence be
it spoken to (...) great a Name) was mistaken; for in Psalm. 99.6. Mention is
made of Samuel, who was much posterior to Moses; and the Psalm. 95. is expressly
attributed unto David, Heb. 4.7. Yet the desription of this Psasm giving it so
distinctly to Moses, I dare (...) bereave him of it. The occasion whereof, is
supposed to (...) heavy threatening, that all the men of War, who (...) Egypt,
from twenty years old and upwards, should (...) the Wilderness, two only
excepted, Joshuah and Caleb. Moses* therefore considering, that so many
thousands, yea, hundreds of thousands, should be cut of in the space of forty
years, Penned this Lecture of Mortality, to excite the People to Repentance for
their reprival, and to make a due improvement of the little time of reprival
given to them. In the first eleven Verses, he discourses of man's Mortality, and
the grand procuring cause thereof, namely Sin. From the twelfth Verse to the
end, he puts up fervent Supplications unto God. From which, as being the main
design of the whole Psalm, it has its Denomination, The Prayer of Moses, the
man of God.

To day, I have pitched on the first of these Petitions. Since it is so, that
man is such a poor mortal and frail Creature, So teach us, O Lord, to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. The Version of this Verse,
as it runs in the Vulgar Latin, is so widely distant from the Hebrew, and so
hard to be reduced to any tolerable sense, that I judge it not worth the while,
to trouble you therewith.

In the Words, as they are reduced by our Translators from the Original (with
whom Pagnin, and Arrias Montanus, learned Romanists, leaving their vulgar
Version, do agree) two things do chiefly offer themselves to us; one is, the
Psalmists Petition, So teach us to number our days; the other is, the scope of
his Petition, or the benefit that should accrue, by the obtaining of the mercy
prayed for, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: Or as it is varied on the
Margin, that we (...) cause our hearts come unto wisdom. Pagnin thus, and
adducemus cor in sapientiant.

The Petition at first view, may seem somewhat strange, he had said, Verse. 10.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength, they be fourscore years, now there needs no great Art to reckon up
seventy or eighty. Surely therefore, something more must be meant then the bare
Arithmetical Calculation of the number of our years. And the rather, if the
quality of the person be considered, who breathed forth the Petition, a man
Learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22. and so not meanly Versed
in the Mathematics, these Sciences greatly flourishing in that Country, at
that time. The mysteriousness of the great Art, wherein the Psalmist pleads to
be instructed, seems to be insinuated, in the qualifying Particle, SO, So teach
us to number our days. The Hebrew Word, (...) Chen, is elsewhere rendered,
right or well, Numb. 27.7. 2 Kings 7.9. So that the Scope of the Words of the
Text is, Teach us to number our days, aright, or well, or so as we should.
It Is not every kind of numbering the Psalmist prays to be instructed in, but
to number So; and this numbering, he holds forth to be a duty, wherein all are
concerned, in that he prays not for himself alone individually, but together
with others, So teach us. And, which is yet more, he speaks of it as a duty,
wherein, when holy men have done their outmost, they will still find themselves
defective. Moses who was faithful in all the House of God, doubtless made
Conscience of numbering his days, yet while he prays, So teach us to number
our days, he implicitly confesses himself to be defective in this matter, but
withal, he sees so much advantage in the pursuance of the duty, that he prays
for Grace to be helped, to go about it with more vigor; as knowing this would
make him more and more to increase in Spiritual Wisdom. And that is the other
thing I said was in the Words, namely, the Scope of Moses in his Petition, or
the benefit that will accrue by the right performance of the duty here spoken
of; had we once learned aright to number our days, then, (and never till then)
will we become wise to Salvation. So teach us to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom.

The only Head, to which I would speak a little from the Words, shall be this.
The right numbering of our days is a great and necessary duty, in order to the
right performance whereof, we have need to be serious in imploring the Divine
Assistance, and the rather, seeing it is a duty would make us wise unto
Salvation. In pursuance of this, I would speak a little to these three things.
And first, I would more particularly open the nature of this duty, So to number
our days, by which the greatness and necessity of the work will appear.
Secondly, I will demonstrate the great need we have to implore the grace of God
for the right performance of this duty. And Thirdly, I would give a touch of
the benefit accrewing by it. It makes wise unto Salvation. Then I would make
some Improvement of all, by way of Application.

As to the first, the nature of the duty, So to number our days, take this
Negative. This is not curiously to be enquiring into the period of our life, or
manner of our death, making use of Genethliack Arts, or casting Horoscops. Some
have been too curious that way, consulting with Sorcerers, yea, with the Devil,
and using unlawful methods; and it is an observe concerning these, not more
common then true, that ordinarily they make unhappy ends, as did Julian the
Apostate. This is not the numbering of our days, for which the Man of God here
prays. He did not pry into Secrets, which God thought not fit to reveal, it is
enough for us that our times are in Gods hand, and that all the days of our
appointed time, we wait till our change come. To open therefore, Positively a
little of this Mystery, I will endeavor to branch it forth into a few
particulars.

First then, when the Psalmist prays that God would teach him so to number his
days, he prays to be helped, to a due and serious consideration of the
frailty of his Nature, Psalm. 39.4. Lord make me to know mine end, and the
measure of my days, what it is, that I may know how frail I am. O what a poor
frail Creature is Man? The contexture of man's body, indeed is curious, Andacis
naturae miraculum, as one termed it, the Master-peice of bold Nature, or rather
of Divine Providence, yet the Vessels are so many, and the matter so thin and
tender, the conveyances so subtle, that they are easily obstructed by a little
Sand, a little humor; Yea, sometimes the whole Machine has been disordered by a
little vapor. Neither is it so only with them, who have the more weak and
creasie bodies; experience having often made it appear, that bodies which
seemed more robust, as if they had been made of Cedar and Iron, yet have been
very quickly shattered and blasted; so true is that of the Prophet, Isaiah
40.6, 7. All flesh is as grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the flower of
the field, the grass withers, the flower fades: because the Spirit of the
Lord has blown upon it; surely the people is grass. O how small a thing will
take away the life of man? a Gnat, a drop of a Gargarism, yea, an Hair, and
which may seem strange, a Thought, an Apprehension, if it can but raise a
violent Passion of Grief, Anger, yea of Joy. O how would the serious
consideration of this humble us, so as we should neither be proud of Beauty,
nor presume of Strength.

Secondly, When he prays to be taught, so to number his days, he prays to be
helped to a due consideration of the shortness of his time, Psalm. 89.47.
Remember how short my time is, and Psalm. 39.5. Behold thou have made my days
as an hand breadth, mine age is as nothing before thee. An hand breadth is a
small measure. But as if that had been too little to shadow forth the ^^^tness
of our time, its added, our age is as nothing before God, not so much as a drop
to the Ocean, or a point to the circumference of the vastest Circle. In this
Psalm, the ordinary age of old men is reckoned to be seventy or eighty years;
but what is that to infinite, immense eternity? It is said, ver. 4. A thousand
years in thy sight, are as yesterday when it is past; and what is a day when it
is past, but as nothing? In ver. 5. and 6. the shortness of our time is
compared to the stream of a flood when it is gone, to a sleep when it is past,
and to the grass of the field, which in the morning grows up and flourishes,
and in the evening is cut down and withers. How little distance of time is
betwixt its greenness and withering, its growing up and cutting down? What poor
creatures are we? we grow up in the morning of our Childhood, we seem to
flourish in the high noontide of our Adult-age, but then suddenly e're we be a
ware, comes the declensions of old age, wherein one infirmity overtakes us
after another, until the sickle of death cut us down root and branch. O what
manner of persons would we be in all holy conversation and godliness, were this
duly considered?

But thirdly, when he prays to be taught to number his days, he prays that
he may be helped duly to consider the uncertainty of his time here on earth:
although it be said, in ver. 10. of this Psalm, that the years of a man's age
are seventy or eighty, the meaning is not, that every one shall arrive to that
age; nay, for one who comes that length, many hundreds die within that
measure. Yea, the little time that we have, we have no (...) certainty thereof;
hence it is, Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, thou know not what
a day may bring forth. And Jam 4.13, 14. Go to now, ye that say to day or to
morrow we will go to such a city, and abide there for a year, and buy and sell,
and make gain, whereas thou knows not what shall be to morrow. For what is your
life? it is even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away. We cannot make sure reckoning of one day, one hour, one minute, more of
our lives, what unexpected contingencies have men in greatest health and
security been surprised with? You may have heard how a Roman Consul was brained
by the fall of a Tile, as he rode in triumph; how Aeschylus the Philosoph was
knocked in the head to death, by the fall of a Tortoise from the claw of an
Eagle; or how Anacreon the Poet was choked by the kernel of a Raisine, entering
into the wrong passage of his throat. Does not our Savior bring in a man
making such a foolish reckoning with himself, Luke 12.19, 20. Soul, take thy
case, thou have much goods laid up for thee for many years. Whereas, God said
to him, thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, and then
whose shall those things be? Were the uncertainty of our time thought upon
seriously, we would not delay repentance and preparation for death, nor make
such bold adventures upon sin.

Fourthly, when he prays to be taught so to number his days, he prays to be
helped duly to consider the certainty of death. Our time is uncertain, but
death is most certain; there is a stature of heaven upon it, Heb. 9.27. Its
appointed unto men once to die. Hence in ver. 3. of this Psalm, it is said,
thou turnest man to destruction, and say, return ye children of men. Yea,
Ps. 89.48. the Psalmist is peremptory, What man is he that lives and shall not
see death? I shall not here stand to debate, what shall become of those who
shall be alive at the last day, whether the sentence of death shall be executed
upon them. I know it is in reference to them the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.51.
We shall not all die, but we shall all be changed. And yet there be great
Divines, both ancient and modern, among whom is the great Augustine, who hold
that the Statute of death shall be executed on them also. And whereas it is
said, 1 Cor. 15. they shall not die, The meaning (say these Authors) only is,
they shall not so die, as to remain under the power of death as others do,
being presently to be restored to life again. However, all agree that a change
is to pass on them equivalent to death. Hence S. Augustine, on Psalm. 38. to us
the 39. Quid hic certum, nisi mors? what is certain in this world, but only
death? Speras pecuniam? incertum est an proveniat: Expects thou to be rich? its
uncertain if it shall be so. Speras filios? incertum an nascantur: Hopes thou
for children? its uncertain if thou shall have any. Nascuntur? incertum an
vivant, an proficiant. Has thou children born? its uncertain whether they shall
live; or if they live, whether they shall prove dutiful and towardly: and so he
concludes, turn to what hand thou will, all is uncertain, only it is most
certain we must die. But alas! how few do practically believe this great truth,
of the necessity and certainty of death? how sew serious thoughts are spent
upon it? It is said of Caesar Bergia, base Son to Pope Alexander the sixth, who
designed to make himself Lord of Italy; in order to the obtaining which
ambitious design, neither Father nor Son refrained from any villainy; but while
one night they designed the poisoning of others, the stroke, through the
mistake of the cup bearer, falling on themselves, of which the old man died
instantly, the young man by strong antidotes and the vigor of youth did live,
yet was sore sickned, graviter decumbens, says Guicciardin, lib. 6. In which
sickness, he confessed to some about him, he had foreseen all the difficulties
which stood in the way of his designs, and had considered how to remove them,
yea and what to do in case of his Fathers death, whom he knew to be an old man;
but upon his own death or sickness, he had not so much as once reflected. How
many do split on the same rock? Hence is that unlucky Proverb in the mouths of
many. I thought no more on such a thing, then on the day of my death, A
sufficient evidence many meditate little on death, on the certainty thereof,
and uncertainty of the time of it.

Fifthly, when the Psalmist prays to be taught to number his days, he prays
to be taught duly to consider the work he has to do in his days, that his work
may not be undone, when his days are done; or that the work may not be then to
do (which would have required his outmost solicitude all his days) when his
days are drawing toward an end. And surely, great is the work which is
committed to every one of us to do, faithfully to serve God in our Generation.
To mortisie all our corrupt lusts to cleanse our selves from all filthiness
both of the stesh and spirit, to be just and dutiful in all our relations, to
work out our own salvation in fear and trembling, and to promove the salvation
of others, so far as lies in our power, and to improve all our time, and all
opportunity for the honor of God. May it not be said, as one did in another
case, Ars longa, vita brevis. How few alas! be there who seriously mind the
work which God requires of them? Else time would not be lavished in idle and
unaccountable work, much less in that which is manifestly the work of the
Flesh, and the Devil.

But Sixthly and lastly, not to add more, when he prays that God would teach
him so to number his days, he prays that he may be helped to consider, how
much depends on the right or ill improvement of his time; Namely his blessed or
miserable estate to all eternity. As it is appointed once to die, so after
death to come to judgment, Heb: 9: 27: And then to receive according to what
we have done in the body, whether good or bad, 2 Cor: 5: 10: They who obtain
mercy to numbeer their days aright, how comfortable will it be to them, that
they have done so, when they shall hear the Angel swear by him that lives for
ever, that time shall be no more? But desperate then will the state of them be,
who made no due improvement of their time. It Is said of Saul, though otherwise
a valiant man, when he heard, that on the morrow he should die, he was quite
dispirited, 1 Samuel 28.20. He fell straight all along upon the ground, and was
afraid; and no wonder, for the wrath of almighty God, and that to the outmost,
will be the portion of ungodly sinners to all eternity. Now as is said in Verse
11: of this Psalm, Who knows the power of his Wrath? as is his fear so is his
wrath. We cannot have so deep apprehensions of it as it is.

The branching forth of these few particulars, wherein the right numbering of
our days does consist, may sufficiently discover that the duty is both great
and necessary. Surely a greater work, then that of Pambo, which he was so many
years in learning how to do according to the Word, Psalm: 39: 1: I said I will
take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. That was but one
branch of many, comprehended under this of numbering our days. As the Lord
commanded Moses to number all the stations of the people of Israel in the
Wilderness, Numb. 33: 2: as they are accordingly written down in that Chap. So
the Lord would have us to number all the periods of our lives, duly to consider
our time past and to come, and what improvement has been or ought to be made
thereof; and so much of the first thing proposed, the nature and necessity of
this duty.

The second thing proposed was that we have need to be serious in imploring the
Divine assistance, that we may be helped to the right performance of this great
duty, so did Moses here; So teach us to number our days. So did David, Psalm:
39: 4: O Lord teach me to know mine end and the number of my days, the need of
this might be made appear upon many accounts; As first, this is a great work,
and therefore we have need of great assistance for it. A man may be able to
number, how many hours, yea minutes, has been since the Creation of the World,
how many miles the circumference of the Earth does contain, how many degrees
the Pole is elevated above our Horizon, what is the position and distance of
Stars, and a thousand such like curiosities, and yet not know how to number his
days aright, this is Divine Work; and therefore we have need to seek grace
from above, to do it. As David in a like case, Psalm: 143: 10: Teach me to do
thy will, for thou art my God. Secondly, This is a work from which we are
exceedingly averse; people love not to think of death and of the end of their
days, they will rather spend their thoughts upon any subject then that, yea
some Princes have prohibited any to speak of death within their Courts. But
that could not stave off the approach of the King of Terrors. It only makes men
more unfit to die. We have need therefore to implore the Divine assistance,
that this aversion of our hearts from, and unfitness for, this work, may be
done away. Thirdly, we have many diversions from it, people are so taken up
with fitting their Affairs, in numbering their Money, in fitting their
accounts, in making their bargains, in doing their worldly business, that they
hardly find time to number their days. There is need therefore of grace to
help them to overcome these difficulties. Fourthly, this is a duty wherein the
most eminent Saints ought still to be making a progress. Have we come David's or
Moses's length in the work, there is yet a greater perfection to be endeavored
in this Divine Arithmetic, therefore there is still need with this holy man in
my Text, to be praying, So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

Now only remains the third and last particular propounded in the Doctrine.
That the right numbering of our days would be a choice mean to make us wise
unto Salvation, so much the Text clearly holds forth, So teach us to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. And in another Book of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32: 29: O that they were wise, that they would remember their latter end,
the neglect whereof gave occasion to that grievous lamentation, Lam: 1: 9: She
remembered not her latter end, therefore she came down wonderfully. This briefly
may appear in these things. First, The right numbering of our days would make
us frugal of our time, and take heed how we bestowed it, and believe me, that
is an high point of wisdom, Ephesians. 5: 15, 16: Walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise, how so? Redeeming the time. They who are careful to redeem time;
show themselves endowed with the wisdom which is from above. But secondly, they
who rightly number their days, will surely mind the interest of their precious
Souls. And that is wisdom indeed, For what is a man profited, Math. 16: 26: if
he gain the whole world, if he lose his Soul? will not such a man be found a
fool at the latter end? Thirdly, they who rightly number their days, will be
serious in the study of holiness, and that is truly wisdom, Deuteronomy: 4: 6. Keep my
Commandments and do them, for this is your wisdom in the fight of the Nations.
And Fourthly, they who rightly number their days, will see so clearly, both
the shortness and uncertainty of time; and consequently the vanity of all the
things thereof, that their great work will be to take hold of eternal life,
which is to be wise for the time to come. And thus I have spoken a little to
the three particulars propounded for opening of the Doctrine.

I would now only (lest I prove tedious) make two words of Improvement: And the
first shall be of regrate; May there not because to fear, that few among us
have learned so to numberour days. Men may seem to be very perfect in other
things, and yet very defective in this great point. Men may be very skilled
Arithmeticians, in the most abstruse operations of Algebra, and yet have no
skill so to number their days: A man may be a skilled Astronomer, may
understand the Theory of the Planets, and be able to calculate Eclipses
exactly, and yet alas! not have skill so to number his days. A man may be a
skilled Merchant, perfect in book-holding, and the measures he ought to keep in
Trading, and yet be a dunce in this Art of numbering his days. A man may be a
^^illed N^^igator, and able to reckon his Tides, and the declinations of the
Magnet from the Pole, and yet have no skill to number his days. A man may be
an able Statesman, and know how to take his measures as to politic Affairs,
and yet alas! be wholly unacquainted with this mystery of numbering his days
aright. A man may be an understanding Countryman, and know how to observe his
seasons, and yet not know how to number his days as he should: But I must use
this freedom, learn what we will, if we learn not to number our days, we are
undone for ever. Yet that few have learned this Divine Art, might be made
appear by many sad instances. As first, be there not many, who never once
thought of numbering their days, never once considered what this matter
imported, or how defective they were therein. Must not such be great strangers
to this mystery. Secondly, many make little account, how they lavish their time
in Carding, Dicing, Whoring, Debauching. O but the man that numbers his days,
how precious will time be to him, remembering the strict account he must give of
every minut of it? A third instance may be, the little time people reserve for
Spiritual Duties, some bestow more time in looking on a Glass then on a Bible,
some take more pleasure in hunting a Partridge or an Hare, then in bowing their
knees in Prayer, or in taking the Kingdom of Heaven by violence. Fourthly,
there is little serious mourning for ill bestowing of our time; and that
appears by our being so ready to repeat old sins and turn back to folly,
whereas they who are serious in numbering their days, will so bewail from
their hearts the loss of time, that they will carefully watch against the
evils, by which they formerly, abused their time. The fifth and last instance
shall be, the little proficiency we make in growing in grace and holiness. This
is the end why the Christian numbers his days, that forgetting the things that
are behind, he may reach forth to these that are before, and press toward the
mark, the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. These few things,
alas! may convincingly demonstrate, that many professing Christianity, have not
learned this great art of numbering their days aright.

The second word of improvement shall be, by way of exhortation. Let us all be
exhorted more seriously to mind this great duty, of numbering our days: And to
quicken us hereunto let me point at a few things; as first, the faithful
performance of this duty is a good and solid Character of a serious and real
Christian; and on the contrary, the habitual neglect of it is an undoubted
evidence of an ungodly soul. The Philosoph made this a difference betwixt a man
and a brute, that a man can number, and a brute cannot. Whatever be as to that,
yet a sound Believer hereby is solidly differenced, from a brutish formal
Professor; the true Believer has learned to number his days, not so the
brutish hypocritical Professors; The serious Christian is held forth in
scripture, as one that redeems his time, and how can this be without making
right account, and numbering of our days? Secondly, if we number not our days,
they will be numbered to our hands, and that in wrath: I remember to this
purpose, what the finger which appeared to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.5. wrote on the
wall, ver. 25, 26. Mean mean, that is, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and
finished it. Will not we number our days, and redeem them; God will number
them, and finish them in his wrath. Thirdly, if now we will not number our
days, we shall be made to number them to our sorrow. O! how do we think do
damned reprobats in hell reflect upon their days here in a world? O! what
days had I on earth (will the soul say) to seek God and to serve him? how many
an opportunity had I both of receiving good from others, and doing good to
others? But alas! I improved not these days of my visitation, and therefore am
I now thrown to this place, and state of torment for ever. Fourthly, if you
will not number your (...) will get a harder sum to number, and that to your
everlasting horror, to number the ages of Eternity; how long shall this flame
devour? how long shall this worm gnaw? how many ages, yea millions, and
millions of millions, of ages? and when the soul considers, these torments
shall endure to eternity, shall ever be beginning, without any nearer approach
to an end, this cannot but swallow up the wretch into horror and desperation.
Fifthly, Unspeakable are the advantages may be had in being faithful in this
great duty of numbering our days: I will only, for brevities sake, hint at two;
And first, this would be a powerful mean to wean our hearts from things of a
present world, 1 Cor. 7.29. This I say brethren, that the time is short: It
remains therefore, that they who have wives be as if they had none; they who
weep, as if they weeped not; and they who rejoice, as if they rejoiced not; and
they who use the world, as not abusing it. O the blessed effect of numbering
our days, which makes weeping as no weeping, and moderates our affections in
all things, yea and engages the soul to the serious and universal study of
mortification: Hence is that other word of that same Apostle, Romans 13.11.
Knowing the time, that the night is far spent, it is therefore high time for to
awake out of our sleep, to cast off the works of darkness, and to put on the
armor of light. And then subjoins; Let us walk honestly as in the day time,
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife
and envying: But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. When a sentence of death is
past upon a most dissolute man, he will not then readily debauch and whore;
much more the man who by serious numbering of his days, is daily looking death
in the face, cannot but mind mortifying works. And this (...) the other
advantage flowing from this duty, It would put the soul upon a constant
preparation for death, considering that it knows not, but that every hour may
be its last hour; and therefore, would make it walk by S. Bernards rule, Si
mor^urus esses, illud faceres? O my soul, were thou presently by death, to take
thy farewell from the body, would thou do such or such a thing, and this
would make an abundant and comfortable entrance unto our Lord his everlasting
Kingdom: The soul that is much in minding death and preparing for it, may say
on better grounds then he did, the bitterness of death is past; whereas, they
who neglect this great duty are often overwhelmed at the approach of death; one
crying out, O that I might live, though it were in a dungeon! another, Had I a
world of wealth, I would give all for one inch of time; and another, Inducias
Domine usque mane, Spare, Lord, but one morning more. Might not these
considerations quicken us to seriousness in this great duty. What shall I add
more? All the dispensations of divine Providence, call aloud upon us to number
our days; the revolutions of day and night, weeks, months and years; the
birth of some, the death of others, our mercies, our rods, the voice of all is,
that we should so number our days, as to apply our hearts unto wisdom. God
has numbered the hairs of our heads by his Providence, and we ought to number
our days for his service. O that this Exhortation may be written, as with a
pen of Iron and with the point of a Diamond, upon all our hearts!

If then it be demanded, how we may be helped faithfully to perform this great
duty of numbering our days; I only tender a few advices, and so shut up what I
have to say on the Text.

First then, we would consider the absolute necessity of this duty; time and
our days are a great Talent, for which a severe account must be given.
Secondly, we would reflect, with all possible seriousness, upon our failure in
this matter, how much precious time we have lost, how little of our work is
done, though so much of our time be gone? The moral Heathen, when he had not
improven a day to advantage, would say, Ah! perdidi diem; Alas! I have lost a
day: what cause have we to lament the loss of so many days? Thirdly, consider
we, as this work is necessary, so also it is above our strength; and therefore
let us be fervent and frequent in prayer, for the quickening and strengthening
supplies of grace; So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Fourthly, let us support our selves, that though the work
be great and difficult, yet blessed be God, not impossible, Phil. 4.13. I can
do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Though we often come short in
this duty, yet upon unfeigned repentance, there is forgiveness with our Lord;
the penitent thief misspent many days, yet repenting sincerely, found mercy. I
speak not this to encourage any in sin, God forbid; but to encourage the worst
of sinners unto repentance; if we repent as sincerely as he did, we shall as
assuredly find mercy. Though he lived a very little time after his conversion,
yet he did much in it: So as to him, some way might be applied, S. Hieroms word
concerning Nebridius, Epist. 9. ad Salvinam, In brevi aetate multa complevit
tempora; In a short time he did the work of a long life. Fifthly, let us beware
of these things that hinder the right performance of this duty; particularly
let us watch against the leting out of the heart inordinately after the things
of the world; that surely will divert from numbering of our days. Do not
presume, as that great man, who is said to have taken for his Symbol a double
headed Eagle, the one looking upward toward Heaven, the other looking downward
toward the Earth; under which he wrote this Motto, Vtrumque; as if he could set
his eye and heart upon both. But we would remember as is well observed, we have
neither two heads nor two hearts, and though we have two eyes, yet I believe it
is hard to look up and down with them at once. Sure I am, the Apostle puts
these two in opposition, Col: 3: 2: The setting of our affections on things
above, and not on things on earth. He who would number his days aright, would
let but overly and mortified glances to the things of the world, the strength
of the heart must be set on things above. Sixthly and lastly, we would
sequestrate a considerable portion of time daily for this work, to meditate on
the brevity and uncertainty of our Life, and of the great work God requires of
us therein, and we would charge our hearts without delay to set about it. I
have read how a godly Person gave a Prodigal a Gold-ring with a Deaths-head
upon it, on condition, that he should daily, for the space of seven days, look
one hour thereupon, which proved the mean of his Conversion. Had the doing of
this for seven days such success, how much more by the Lords blessing, were
time sequestrate daily through the whole course of our lives for numbering of
our days, might we hope for a blessed proficiency in this Heavenly Art? So
much have we spoken concerning this Text, as we judged your patience would bear
at such a time.

YOu expect, I know, before I close, that something bespoken of the Honorable
Person, whose Funerals we now Celebrate. And here I confess were a large
Field, were I fitted or disposed for a Panegyric: Nor is there want of great
precedents in such cases from Nazianzen, Ambrose, and many others, both ancient
and modern. Nor can it be denied, but that the doing justice to the memory of
deserving persons, may excite the living to trace the footsteps of the virtues
of the dead. Yet, I not being accustomed to such Discourses, and having a
through aversion of what may savor of flattery, I hope therefore I shall be
the more easily excused, if I be the more sparing on this head.

Though this worthy Gentleman did live much of his time abroad, out of his
Native Country, yet the fame both of his Honor and Merit, did overspread these
three Kingdoms, yea, and did reach to other Nations also. The antiquity of his
Honorable Family of Doors is beyond dispute. The Stock whereof was, an
immediate Son of the Great Thane of Cowy and Doors, (for so I understand he was
designed) upwards of three hundred years ago, at the same time that another Son
of the same Great Thane, married the noble Heretrix of Philorth. The Estate
possessed by the Thane was very vast about these Grampian Mountains: and of him,
and of the great Lord Fraiser in the South, two Families of the same name, of
so great Antiquity, that it is hard to account, which did come of the other;
yet of these two, many noble Families of this Kingdom acknowledge themselves to
be descended, and therefore have the Fraisers Arms quartered with their own.
But I confess, I am not Herald enough to dilate upon this Subject.

Should any say to me with him in the Poet, Et Genus, and Proavus, and quae non
fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco --


Though none, I hope, will deny a due esteem to an Honorable Descent, unless
he be of a levelling Principle: Yea, the holy Scripture speaks honorably of
the sons of Nobles, Eccles, 10.17. Yet, I have this to add, that besides this
Gentleman's honorable descent, he was a man of eminent personal worth and
merit: whereof take this one instance among many, that when this family of
Doors had lately suffered an eclipse, as ancient Houses have their
vicissitudes, he by his virtue and industry recovered it from a collapsed
condition. He might, without all peradventure, have made comfortable Purchases
in the pleasant places of England; yet, such was his love to his native
Country, and to this ancient Seat of his Ancestors, that he choosed rather to
make an Atchievment here. And now, having provided his other worthy and
well-deserving Children of riper years, has transmitted this old Heretage of
his Progenitors, with all its Dignities, to his hopeful Son here present, who
by the Mother (a Lady of great Virtue) is descended of the honorable Name of
Caries in England; a Family which bears as noble marks of Honor and ancient
Pedigree, as most of the Noblest Families in that Kingdom. This his youngest
Son, he sent hither to be educated, and who, I trust, by the mercy of God,
shall inherit many of the Virtues of his Predecessors. So that he had both the
Dignity of an honorable Descent, and likewise (which in conjunction with the
former, I believe will be highly esteemed by all) of a just and virtuous
Acquisition.

This may seem much; yet I see an Ocean before me, on which I dare hardly
adventure: But one thing I cannot let pass, his unstained Loyalty to his
Sovereign, in times of great trouble and temptation. He was forty years and
upwards a Courtier, in the Reign of two Kings, and beheld with sorrowful eyes,
the most dismal convulsions which ever these Kingdoms did suffer; yet was he
never stained with a blot of disloyalty.

He was educated a Scholar at Aberdeen, the time when his Family fell low: And
after he had spent some years in his youth over Seas, in pursuance of his
Studies, and had been Graduated Doctor of Medicine at Piemont, he was so much
noticed in the Court of England at his return, for his Learning and Skill in
that excellent Faculty which he did profess, that in the year, 1639. he was
chosen Physician in ordinary to King Charles the first of glorious Memory, and
served his Majesty faithfully in Peace and War, both in his Profession and
other eminent Services, until the evils of the time increasing, he was by
special order from his Majesty, sent to attend the Prince then in Flanders,
with whom he continued doing many considerable services, until our Dread
Sovereign who now reigns, and whom Almighty God long preserve, came to Scotland
in the year, 1650.

And his Majesty again departing beyond Seas, the confusions of the Times still
prevailing, he was among the first who repaired to his Majesty, leaving Family
and Employment (which he might have had very considerable) esteemed it his
greatest Honor and Advantage to suffer hardships in serving his Prince. In
consideration of this constant Fidelity and Loyalty, and exposing of himself to
many hazards in his Princes Service, It pleased his Gracious Majesty, at his
happy Restoration, to settle him as Principal Physician, to have the care and
inspection of his Royal Person. In this great Trust he continued until his
death; and so great was the confidence his Majesty had, both of his Skill and
Faithfulness, that he would not readily take Physic without him. Amongst the
many marks of his Princes favor, the Honor of Baronet was conferred upon him,
besides the Places and Preferments settled on his Lady and Children: Nay, so
gracious a Prince did he serve, that his favor did not expire with the life of
his faithful Servant; And therefore gave order to transmit his Remains in one
of his Royal Ships unto Scotland, to be buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

It would take a Volume to recount all the Offices of kindness he did to his
Countrymen by his friendship, by his skill in Medicine, and when occasion did
require, by his Purse also. A man he was of great Generosity, Integrity, and a
most faithful and fast Friend. These things could not but purchase to him
admirable repute. Hence it was, that when within these few years, he made a
visit to his Native Country, and lived some Months here at Doors, a great
confluence of persons of eminent quality resorted hither to pay their respects
to him, all whom he entertained nobly; And yet disdained not to give his most
Judicious Consultations to multitudes of Diseased Persons, who also flocked to
him from all quarters, for Cure of obstinate Maladies, which had given defiance
to the skill of other Physicians, all which he did Gratis; Nor did his
Countrymen more rejoice in his Converse among them, in that little interval,
then he was longed for again at Court, as was manifest by many Letters he
received at the time, from great Persons at Court, and by his gracious
Reception from his Sovereign at his return.

Had any of the Divines who attended him in his Sickness, been performing this
last Office to him, I doubt not, but they could have given an account of his
Religious Deportment at Death; all who knew him here will witness, to his
Temperance and Sobriety, his constant adherence to the Protestant Religion, was
manifest to all. It was by his Charity and Supply, with the concurrence of his
Servants, through his direction, and the influence, assistance and considerable
expense of a most deserving Friend and Relation of his, that the Pious Work of
the Bridge of Die (toward which a sum of Money was Mortified by a Reverend
Minister, though that without the assistance foresaid could never have done it)
was promoved and brought to the finishing Cubit. And it is by his means that
this old Place and Church (where his Fathers did Worship God) is now repaired,
or rather re-builded. There is one instance more of his Piety, which if I
should forget, I should be unjust to his memory: He was pleased to favor me
with some Letters, in reference to his beloved Son; and I must declare, that so
far as I remember, he never did omit in any of them, to request, that his Son
might be religiously educated in the fear of the Lord, solemnly protesting, He
would rather have him good than great, These were his own expressions, whereof
I found my self often obliged to put his hopeful Son in rememberance.

(...)
