Immorality, Debauchery, and Profaneness, Exposed

To the Reproof of Scripture, and the Censure of the Law.

Containing a Compendium of the Penal Laws now in Force against Idleness,
Profaneness, and Drunkenness; Houses of unlawful Games; profane Swearing and
Cursing; speaking or acting in contempt of the Holy Sacrament; disturbing of
Ministers; profane jesting with the Name of God; absenting from the Church;
profanation of the Lord's Day; Debauched Incontinency, and Bastard-getting.

With several Texts of Scripture prohibiting such Vices.

Also a brief Collection of several signal Judgments of God against Offenders
in the said Vices and Debaucheries.

Published for the Advancement of Reformation of Manners, so happily begun and
carried on by several Societies.

By G. MERITON, Gent.

Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to any People, Prove.
14. 34. God will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such a
one as goes on still in his Wickedness. Psalm. 68. 21. LONDON, Printed for John
Harris and Andrew Bell, at the Harrow in Little Britain, and at the Cross-keys
and Bible in Cornhil. School.

To the Honorable PAUL FOLEY, Esquire SPEAKER OF THE Honorable House of Commons,
And to the rest of the Honorable and Worthy Members of that High Council of
the Realm now assembled in Parliament, This COMPENDIUM is humbly dedicated by

G. MERITON.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
OUR Gracious Sovereign, King William, having observed the spreading growth of
profane, vicious and profligate Debauchery and Immorality within this Realm;
out of his devout and pious Zeal for the Honor of God, the advancement of true
Religion, and the Credit and Welfare of this his Kingdom of England, in his
most gracious Speech to both the Houses of Parliament, at the opening of this
present Session, tells them, That he esteems it one of the greatest Advantages
of Peace, that he shall now have leisure to rectify such Corruptions or Abuses,
as may have crept into any part of the Administration during the War, and
effectually to discourage Profaneness and Immorality.

And to that purpose his Majesty has not only issued out his Proclamation for
the discouraging of all Debauchery, Profaneness and Immorality; and commanded
the same to be read in every Church, and public Chapel, four times in the
year; but has also required all his Judges, Justices of the Peace, and other
Magistrates and Officers, within their several Limits and Jurisdictions,
according to their several Powers and Authorities, to put the Laws made against
Profaneness and Immorality, effectually in execution. And has likewise
recommended the further Care of the more effectual suppressing Debauchery,
Profaneness and Immorality, to the Consideration of the Parliament, who have
prepared a Bill for that purpose.

And every good Christian ought devoutly to join with the Church in that Prayer
appointed by her Liturgy, to be read for the Parliament when sitting; That God
would be pleased to direct and prosper all their Consultations, to the
advancement of his Glory, the good of his Church, the Safety, Honor, and
Welfare of our Sovereign and his Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered
and settled by their Endeavors, upon the best and surest Foundations, that
Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety, may be established
among us for all Generations. And as every one ought thus to pray; so also
every individual Person within this Realm, ought (as a Reverend and Grave
Divine lately declared in his Pulpit) according to his Capacity, and the Post
he is placed in, to contribute his Help and Assistance toward the carrying on
this great and pious work of Reformation. In compliance wherewith, and to
manifest my good Will by contributing toward the carrying on this great and
good Work, I have compiled this Essay as a Compendium of the Laws now in force
against Idleness, Profaneness, Drunkenness, Swearing, etc. and for the more
effectual enforcing the Observation of the same. I have after the said Laws,
set down several Texts of Scripture against such Sins: and after them (lest
some by their long continued wicked Courses be so hardened in their Sins, that
neither Law nor Gospel will restrain them) I have given an Account of several
exemplary Judgments of God, upon such as have accustomed themselves in the
practice of such profane Vices; in hopes that upon the perusal thereof, such as
walk and tread in the same Steps, may be brought to a sight and sense of their
Sins, repent of their Wickedness, and resolve to lead a new Course of Life.

There are some other Laws against suspicious Persons that walk by Night, and
sleep by Day, keep lewd Company, and frequent lewd Houses. 39 Eliz. Chapter 4. 43
Eliz. Chapter 2. 7 Jac. 1. Chapter 4. and against wandering Rogues, 1 Jac. 1. Chapter 7. But
the other Vices aforementioned, being the customary and provoking Sins of the
Nation, and these others last mentioned, not so common; and the Laws made
against them not so properly falling under the Title of this Compendium, I have
therefore purposely omitted the inserting of them. And such Readers as are
desirous to inform themselves herein, may have recourse to the several Statutes
as they are here cited. But I shall proceed no further, only desire that this
small Treatise may in some measure effect its intended purpose, and prove
serviceable to the Public; which is the hearty prayer of

G. Meriton.

A Catalogue of the Authors Names out of whose Works the signal Examples of
God's severe Justice, mentioned in this ensuing Treatise, are excerpted.
ABbot. Anton. de Torquenda. Augustinus. Baxter. Beadle. Batman. Baker. Beard.
Bernard. Beza. Bolton. Burton. Clark, Camden. Discipulus de Tempore. Eusebius.
Fauconer. Fox. Gregory Tomonensis. German History. Heylin. Heywood. Johan.
Wierus. Johan. Fincelius. Lonicerus. Luther. Laertius. Maginus. Platina.
Perkins. Quintus Curtius. Socrates. Spotswood. Speed. Stanley. Stow. Teate.
Theatr. Historiarum. Turner. Twisden. Ward.
THE Laws against Profaneness.
CHAP. I.
A summary Account of the Laws made against profuse, idle, customary and
expensive Tippling; and against sinful, customary and profane Drunkenness; and
against keeping Places or Houses of unlawful Games.

SOme of our Chronologers tell us, that the Danes were the first and principal
Introducers and Promoters of the immoderate, profuse and sinful Vice of
excessive Carousing, Quaffing and Drinking, which by their Example did so
influence the People of this Kingdom, that in a small time it arrived to that
height of Vanity, that Edgar the seventeenth King of the West Saxons, and first
sole Saxon Monarch of England, in order to the restraining and curbing the
growth of the said debauched Vanity and sinful Vice, did ordain certain Cups or
Pots, with Gages, Pins or Marks in them, and appointed a Penalty to be
inflicted upon every one that should presume to drink beyond the limited Gage;
which Ordinance of his possibly might in some measure abate the exorbitant
Practice of this growing Wickedness; yet the Practice thereof was never wholly
laid aside, especially in the times of Peace and Tranquillity.

And upon the Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, by the Accession
of King James the First to the Crown of this Realm, the Minds and Hearts of the
People were so elevated with the prospect and great assurances they propounded
to themselves of the future Tranquillity, Peace, Plenty, Happiness and great
Prosperity that in all probability was thereby likely to ensue, that they
thereupon became less industrious and laborious in their several Callings,
Trades, Arts, Mysteries, Professions, and ways of getting their Livelihoods,
and did much indulge themselves in the pleasant enjoyment of frequent and
frolic Society, by them called Good-fellowship, which oft-times happened to be
with such expense of Time and Money too, that many of their Families became
much impoverished thereby: And the ancient, true and principal use of Inns,
Alehouses, and Victualing-houses being for the Receipt, Relief and Lodging of
such People as are not able by greater quantities to make their Provision of
Victuals, became common Tippling Houses, and places of Entertainment, and
Harbor of lewd and idle People, to spend and consume their Money and their
Time in lewd and drunken manner, contrary to the true meaning of the principal
intended Purposes of such Houses; as the Parliament the first Year of King
James the First observes.

It is therefore enacted by the said Parliament, 1 Jac. 1. chap. 9. That if any
Innkeeper, Victualer or Alehouse-keeper within the Realm of England, or
Dominion of Wales, do permit or suffer any Person or Persons inhabiting or
dwelling in any City, Town Corporate, Village or Hamlet within the said Realm,
or Dominions, where any such Inn, Alehouse or Victualing-house is or shall be,
to remain and continue drinking or tippling in the same, other than such as
shall be invited by any Traveller, and shall accompany him only during his
necessary Abode there, and other than laboring and Handicrafts-men in Cities
and Towns Corporate, and Market Towns, upon the usual working days, for one
hour at Dinnertime, to take their Diet in an Alehouse; and other than
Laborers and Workmen which for the following of their Work by the day, or by
the great, in any City, Town Corporate, Market Town, or Village, shall for the
time of their said continuing in work there, sojourn, lodge, or victual in any
Inn, Alehouse, or Victualing-house, other than for urgent and necessary
occasions to be allowed by two Justices of the Peace: That then every such
Innkeeper, Victualer, and Alehouse-keeper, shall for every such Offense forfeit
and lose the Sum of Ten Shillings of current Money of England, to the use of
the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed; the same Offense
being viewed and seen by any Mayor, Bailiff, or Justice of Peace within their
several Limits, or proved by the Oaths of two Witnesses to be taken before any
Mayor, Bailiff, or any other head Officer, or any one or more Justice or
Justices of the Peace, who are authorized to administer the same within the
Limits of their Commission.

The said Penalties to be levied by the Constable or Churchwardens of the
Parish or Parishes where the Offense or Offenses shall be committed, by way of
Distress, to be taken and detained for the said Forfeiture; and for default of
Satisfaction within six days next ensuing, the same then to be presently
apprized and sold, and the Surplusage or Remainder over and above, to be
delivered to the Party distrained: and for want of sufficient Distress, the
Offenders to be by the Mayor, Bailiff, or other head Officer, or Justice or
Justices of the Peace aforesaid, committed to the common Goal, there to remain
until the same Penalty be truly paid.

If the Constable or Churchwardens neglect their Duty in levying, or in
default of Distress, do neglect to certify the default of Distress, by the
space of twenty days then next ensuing, to the Magistrates aforesaid, within
whose Jurisdiction the Offense is committed; then every Person so offending,
shall forfeit for every such default, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to the use of
the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed, to be levied by
Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, by Warrant from any such Magistrate
within the Limits of their Jurisdictions respectively, under his Hand and Seal,
if Payment be not made within six days next ensuing the taking of the said
Distress; and the Surplusage (if any be) to be delivered to the Party
distrained; and for want of sufficient, the Constable or Churchwardens so
offending, to be by such Magistrate committed to the common Goal, there to
remain until the said Penalty or Penalties be truly paid.

Notwithstanding the Restraint put upon Innkeepers, Victualers and
Alehouse-keepers by the Act of Parliament aforementioned, and the Penalty to be
incurred by them, for suffering Tippling in their Houses, the People did still
continue their Bowsing, Tippling, and Carousing, which by little and little
arrived to that height of Excess, that it usually ended (and does so still) in
downright Drunkenness, and grew so habitual and practicable, that it was (and
still is) even in a manner become an Epidemical Vice through the whole Realm:
for Punishing and Suppressing of which odious Sin, in the fourth year of King
James the First, an Act of Parliament was made, inflicting a Penalty upon
Drunkards, and such as continue drinking in Alehouses. In the preamble of
which Act, the Parliament takes notice of several Sins occasioned by, and
proceeding from Drunkenness, as appears by what follows.

Stat. 4 Jac. 1. Chapter 5.

Whereas the loathsome and odious Sin of Drunkenness is of late years grown into
common use within this Realm, being the Root and Foundation of many other
enormous Sins, as Bloodshed, Stabbing, Murder, Swearing, Fornication, Adultery,
and such like, to the great dishonor of God, and of the Nation; the overthrow
of many good Arts, and manual Trades; the disabling of diverse Workmen, and the
general impoverishing of many good Subjects, abusively wasting the good
Creatures of God:

It is therefore Enacted, That all and every Person and Persons that shall be
drunken, and of the same Offense of Drunkenness shall be lawfully Convicted,
shall for every such Offense forfeit and lose five Shillings, to be paid within
one Week next after Conviction, to the hands of the Churchwarden of that Parish
where the Offense shall be committed, who shall be accountable for it to the
use of the said Poor: and if the Persons convicted refuse or neglect to pay,
then the same to be levied of their Goods, by Warrant or Precept from the same
Court, Judge, or Justices before whom the said Conviction shall be: And if the
Offenders be not able to pay the Penalty, then to be committed to the Stocks
for every Offense, there to remain by the space of six Hours.

And if any Officer of the Place where the Offense shall be committed, upon a
Precept sent to him, shall neglect his Duty in correcting the Offenders, or in
due Levying the Penalties where Distress may be had, then the Officer so
offending shall forfeit ten Shillings to the use of the Poor there, to be
levied by Distress by any Person or Persons having Warrant from the Magistrate
or Court where any Conviction shall be; and to be paid to the Churchwardens as
before limited, who are to account for the same as aforesaid.

And if any Person or Persons within this Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, shall remain or continue Drinking, or Tippling, in any Inn,
Victualing-house, or Alehouse, being in the same City, Town, Village, or
Hamlet, wherein they dwell or inhabit at the time of such Drinking and Tippling,
and the same being viewed or seen by any Mayor, or other head Officer, Justice
or Justices of the Peace within their several Limits, or duly proved in such
manner and form as is limited in, and by the Act of Parliament, 1 Jac. 1. Chapter
9. aforementioned, except it be in such Case or Cases as be tolerated or
excepted in the said Act; That then every Person or Persons so offending shall
forfeit for every such Offense, three Shillings and four Pence to the use of
the Poor of the Parish where the Offense shall be committed, to be levied by
Distress in such manner and form as is before appointed by this Act, for the
levying the Penalty of five Shillings for being Drunk; and the Offender being
unable to pay, and being lawfully Convicted, then any of the Magistrates
aforesaid, or Court where any such Conviction shall be, may punish the Offender
or Offenders, by setting them in the Stocks for every such Offense, by the
space of four Hours.

The Offenses in this and the former mentioned Act, shall be inquired of, and
presented before the Justices of Assize in their Circuits, Justices of Peace in
their ordinary Sessions, and before the Mayor, Bailiffs, or other Head Officers
of every City, or Town Corporate, who have Power to enquire of Trespasses,
Riots, Routs, and such like Offenses, and in every Court Leet; and such
Proceedings to be had thereupon against such Offenders for their Conviction, as
in such like Cases is used by the Laws of the Realm, or Custom of the City,
Town, or Place, where such Presentment or Indictment shall be enquired of and
found.

And if any Person or Persons being once lawfully Convicted of the said Offense
of Drunkenness, shall after that be again lawfully Convicted of the like
Offense of Drunkenness; Then for such second Offense, they shall be bound with
two Sureties to the King's Majesty in one Recognizance, or Obligation of ten
Pounds, with Condition to be from thenceforth of the good Behavior.

All Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tything-men, Ale-Conners, and
Sidemen, shall in their several Oaths incident to their Offices, be charged to
present the Offenses contrary to this Act.

This Act is not to restrain the Ecclesiastical Power or Jurisdiction, nor the
Liberty of either of the Universities, but that they enjoy their Jurisdictions,
Rights, and Privileges.

And if any Offender against the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, or any
Branch thereof, has been once punished or corrected for his or her Offense, by
any the Ways or Means before limited, he shall not be punished or corrected for
the said Offense by any other Ways or Means.

And none shall be punished or molested for any Offense mentioned in this
Statute, unless he shall be Indicted, Presented, or Convicted for the same
within six Months after such Offense committed.

Then by another Act of Parliament, 7 Jac. 1. Chapter 10. It is Enacted That if any
Person being an Alehouse-keeper, shall be lawfully Convicted for any Offense or
Offenses committed against any of the Branches of the two before mentioned Acts
of Parliament, that then every Person or Persons so Convicted, shall for the
space of three Years next ensuing the said Conviction, be utterly disabled to
keep any such Alehouse.

The two Statutes first mentioned in this Chapter, made against Tippling and
Drunkenness, requiring proof to be made by two Witnesses, for the more easy
Conviction of such Offenders:

It is by the Statute 21 Jac. 1. Chapter 7. Enacted, That proof by one Witness
shall be allowed and taken for sufficient in that behalf; and the voluntary
Confession (before any such Persons as by the said Acts are authorized to
minister the Oath) of any Person offending either of the said Statutes, shall
suffice to convict the Person so offending; and after such Confession, the Oath
of the party so offending, shall and may be taken, and be a sufficient proof
against any other offending at the same time.

And it is further Enacted,

That if any Person or Persons wheresoever his or their Habitation or abiding
be, shall at any time be found upon view, or his own Confession, or proof of
one Witness, to be Tippling in any Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house, such
Person or Persons shall be within the meaning of the said Statutes, as if such
Person had inhabited and dwelt in the same place, where the said Inn,
Alehouse, or Victualling-house is or shall be, where he or they shall be found
Tippling, and shall incur the like Penalty; and the same to be levied and
disposed as in the said Act is expressed, concerning such as there inhabit; and
the voluntary Confession of the Offenders (before such as by the said Statutes
are authorized to minister the Oath) shall suffice to convince themselves. And
after such Confession, the Oath of such Person or Persons so confessing; shall
and may be taken by such as by the said Act have Authority to minister the said
Oath, and shall be a sufficient proof against any other offending at the same
time.

And any Justice of Peace in any County, and any Justice of Peace or other Head
Officer in any City or Town Corporate within their Limits respectively, shall
have Power and Authority upon his own View, Confession of the party, or proof
of one Witness upon Oath before him, to convince any Person of the offense of
Drunkenness, whereby such Person so convict, shall incur the forfeiture of five
Shillings for every such Offense; and the same to be levied, or the Offender
otherwise punished, as in the Statute is appointed; and for the second Offense
shall become bound to the good Behavior, as if he had been convicted in open
Sessions, any thing in the said former Act, 4 Jac. 1. Chapter 5. to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And if any Person being an Alehouse-keeper, shall at any time be lawfully
convicted for any Offense against any the Branches of either of the two former
mentioned Statutes, according to the Alterations and Additions herein
contained, against the true meaning of this Statute; then every Person so
convict, shall for the space of three years next ensuing such Conviction, be
utterly disabled to keep any such Alehouse.

And Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tything-men, Ale-conners, and
Sidemen, are to be charged in their Offices and Oaths to present all the
Offenses made in the Statute, 1 Jac. 1. against inordinate Haunting and Tippling
in Inns, Alehouses, and other Victualling-houses, according to the Alterations
and Additions of the same in this Act contained.

There being no Penalty inflicted by the aforementioned Act upon the
Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper or Victualler that suffers Foreigners to Tipple in
their Houses:

It is therefore 1 Car. 1. Chapter 4. Enacted, That every Innkeeper,
Alehouse-keeper, or Victualler that shall permit or suffer any Person or
Persons, not inhabiting in the City, Town Corporate, Market Town, Village, or
Hamlet, where such Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house is, to Tipple in the
said Inn, Alehouse or Victualling-house, contrary to the true intent of any or
either of the aforesaid Statutes; the said Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, and
Victualler so offending, shall incur the same Penalty; and in such manner to be
proved, levied, and disposed as in the former Statute, 1 Jac. 1. Chapter 9. is
appointed for permitting such to tipple as dwell in the same City, Town
Corporate, Market Town, Village, or Hamlet.

And it is also Enacted, That the keepers of Taverns, and such as do sell Wine
in their Houses, and do also keep Inns or Victualling-houses, shall be taken to
be within the said two former Statutes, and also within this Statute.

If these Laws against inordinate and customary Tippling and Drunkenness, were
duly and effectually put in Execution, it would not only be greatly to the
Honor of God, but tend much to the Honor and Credit of this Realm: And might
also prove very instrumental in the preventing many Families from Ruin, and
becoming burdensome and chargeable to the Places where they live and are
settled; for many ingenious Handicraft-men, and other laborious and working
Persons, are so bewitched and charmed with the love of strong Drink, that what
they earn with hard Labor all the day, having neither regard to their own
Credit, nor any Charity, Love or Kindness for their poor Wives and Families,
they embezle and spend at Night, in profuse, idle, and insatiable Tippling and
Drunkenness, amongst their debauched Comrades, when at the same time perhaps
their poor Families at home are ready to starve for want of Bread.

I shall therefore in the next Chapter acquaint these obstinate, presumptuous,
and vicious Persons, with some Texts of Scripture against these their sinful
Courses, in hopes that the perusal and serious Consideration of them, may bring
them to a sight and sense of their Wickedness, and work some Reformation in
them.

But before I proceed to the next Chapter, I think it will not be amiss if we
give a brief Account here, of the Laws made against Keepers of Play Houses and
unlawful Games; of which Offenses many Innkeepers, Alehouse-keepers and
Victuallers' are guilty. By the Statute 33 H. 8. Chapter 9. it is Enacted,

That none shall keep or maintain any House or Place of unlawful Games, on pain
of forty Shillings every day. And none shall use or haunt such places, on pain
of six Shillings and eight Pence every time.

And it shall be lawful for every Justice of the Peace in every County, and for
head Officers in Corporations, as well within the Liberties as without, to
enter and resort into all such Houses and Places, where such unlawful Games are
suspected to be used; and as well the Keepers thereof, as the Resorters
thereto, to arrest and imprison until they shall severally give good Security
at the discretion of the said Justices, or Officers, not to keep such Games any
more.

Every Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiff, Constable, and other head Officer within every
City, Borough or Town, shall make due Search as aforesaid, once every Month at
least, on pain to forfeit 40 s. for every such Default.

No Artificer or Journey-man, nor Husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer, Servant at
Husbandry, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or Serving-man, shall play at Tables,
Tenis, Dice, Cards, Bowls, Clash, Goyting, Logating, or any other unlawful
Game, out of Christmas, or then out of his Master's House, or Presence, on
pain of twenty Shillings; and none shall play at Bowls in open Places, out of
his Garden or Orchard, on pain of six Shillings and eight Pence.

All Informations or Suits upon this Statute shall be prosecuted within one
year, and the Forfeitures thereof, which happen within a Leet or Liberty, shall
be divided between the King and the Lord thereof; and in all other Places
betwixt the King and the Prosecutor.

Proclamation of this Act shall be made quarterly in every Market Town, as also
at every Goaldelivery, Assize and Sessions

Then lastly there is a Proviso, that this Act shall not restrain a Servant (by
his Master's License) to play at Cards, Dice, or Tables, with the Master
himself, or other Gentlemen resorting to his Master's House: and if the Master
have Freehold of an hundred Pounds per Annum, he may also license his Servant
to play at Bowls or Tenis.

By the Statute 2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. Chapter 9. All Licenses to keep Houses or
Places of unlawful Games shall be void. Before this Statute several Persons
used to obtain Placards, or Licenses to keep common Gaming; so that by this
Statute all such Licenses are made void.

CHAP. II.
An Account of some Texts of Scripture, showing the sad Consequences and
Effects that attend the customary, sinful and profane practice of profuse
Quaffing and Drunkenness.

SUCH Persons as neither the fear of the Law, respect to their own Credit, nor
love to their Families, will reclaim or deter from their obstinate and
presumptuous, sinful Progress in their profane Courses of customary, expensive,
and profuse excessive Tippling, and inordinate Drinking, upon the perusal of
these several Scripture-sentences following, may I hope be thereby induced and
excited to follow a more frugal, virtuous and godly course of Living, and to
abandon the charming Delilahof their beloved sinful Vice.

And they shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn and
rebellions, he will not obey our Voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And all
the men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die; so shall thou put
evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21.

Wine is a Mocker, strong drink is raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby is
not wise. Prove. 20. 1.

Be not among Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of Flesh. For the Drunkard
and the Glutton shall come to Poverty, and drowsiness shall clothe a man with
Rags. Prove. 23. 20, 21.

Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has bablings? who
has wounds without cause? who has redness of Eyes? They that tarry long at
the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine. Look not thou upon the Wine when it
is red, when it gives his color in the Cup, when it moves it self aright. At
the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Prove. 23. 29,
30, 31, 32.

Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow strong
Drink, that continue until Night, till Wine inflame them. And the Harp and the
Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts: but they regard not
the Work of the Lord, neither consider the Operation of his Hands. Isa. 5. 11,
12.

Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to mingle
strong Drink. Isa. 5. 22.

Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious Beauty
is a fading Flower, which are on the Head of the fat Valleys of them that are
overcome with Wine. Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong One, which as a
Tempest of Hail, and a destroying Storm, as a flood of mighty Waters
overflowing, shall cast down to the Earth with the Hand. The Crown of Pride,
the Drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet. Isa. 28. 1, 2, 3.

Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
Drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Isa. 56. 12.

Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, love a Woman (beloved of her friend, yet
an Adulteress) according to the Love of the Lord toward the Children of Israel,
who look to other Gods, and love Flagons of Wine. Hosea 3. 1.

Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the Heart. Hosea 4. 11.

Awake, ye Drunkards, and weep and howl all ye drinkers of Wine, because of the
new Wine, for it is cut off from your Mouth. Joel 1. 5.

Woe to them that are at ease in Zion; that chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and
invent to themselves Instruments of Music, like David: That drink Wine in
Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments; but they are not grieved
for the Affliction of Joseph. Amos 6. 1, 5, 6.

For while they be folden together as Thorns, and while they are drunken as
Drunkards, they shall be devoured as Stubble fully dry. Nahum 1. 10.

Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink, and put thy Bottle to him,
and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their Nakedness. Habakkuk
2. 15.

How exceeding strong is Wine! it causes all Men to err that drink it: And
when they are in their Cups, they forget their Love both to Friends and
Brethren, and a little after draw out Swords. 1 Es^r. 3. 18, 22.

Do that to no Man which thou hate: Drink not Wine to make thee drunken:
neither let Drunkenness go with thee in thy Journey. Tob. 4. 15.

A drunken Woman and a gadder abroad, causes great Anger, and she will not
cover her own shame. Ecclus. 26. 8.

Show not thy Valiantness in Wine, for Wine has destroyed many. Wine drunken
with excess, makes bitterness of Mind, with brawling and quarrelling.
Drunkenness increases the Rage of a Fool, till he offend; it diminishes
Strength, and makes Wounds. Ecclus. 31. 25, 29, 30.

Therefore thou shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel, Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more, because
of the Sword which I will send among you. Jer. 25. 27.

But and if that evil Servant shall say in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his
coming, and shall begin to smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with
the drunken: The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looks not
for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of: And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth. Mat. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. Luke 12. 45, 46.

And take heed to your selves, left at any time your Hearts be overcharged
with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. Luke 21. 34.

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying: But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.
Romans 13. 13, 14.

But now I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any Man that is
called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or
a Drunkard, or an Extortioner; with such an one, no not to eat. 1 Cor. 5. 11.

Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10.

Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I
have also told you in time past, that they which do such things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.

And be not drunken with Wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the
Spirit. Ephesians. 5. 18.

Therefore let us not sleep as do others: but let us watch and be sober. For
they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in
the night. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6, 7.

It seems in the times of the Apostles, that Drunkards were possessed with some
kind of Dread and Fear that attended the Guilt of their profligate and vicious
Lives, or else they were ashamed that their sinful Debaucheries should be
publicly known, or apparently seen: For St. Paul tells the Thessalonians, They
that be drunken, are drunken in the Night. But it appears otherwise now in our
days and time. For,

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.
Both Times and Men are changed, and altered quite.
Drunkards are drunk by Day as well as Night.
For these Champions of Bacchus are neither possessed with Fear, nor are they
ashamed even at Noonday to expose themselves publicly and openly to the view
of all People, in their debauched, profane, loathsome, abominable, sinful
Disguises.

Lest therefore neither Law nor Gospel can stop such habituated and desperate
Drunkards in the career of their profuse and sinful drunken Caresses, I shall
in the next Chapter acquaint them with several signal and exemplary Judgments
of God's severe Justice inflicted upon obstinate, desperate, presumptuous,
daring, customary, profane, sinful Drunkards, in hopes that their serious
Perusal and Consideration thereof may have some influence upon them, and prove
a means to season them with some considerable measures of Religion and Piety.

And I hope they will take notice of that excellent saying of the Orator, Lege
historiam (says he) ne sias historia; That they will read the following
Histories with such deliberation, and apply them so effectually, that they may
thereby avert the displeasure of the Almighty, and prevent the like Judgments
from falling upon their Heads; lest they become a History to after Ages
themselves.

CHAP. III.
Of several exemplary Judgments, both Ancient and Modern, Foreign and
Domestic, of God's severe Justice inflicted upon customary, presumptuous, and
profane sinful Drunkards.

DRunkenness is a Vice not fit to be named (says a learned Divine) much less to
be practiced amongst Christians; nay, we are forbid not so much as to look upon
the Wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the Cup; or to rise up early in
the Morning to follow drink that is strong, as appears by the places of
Scripture beforecited in the last preceding Chapter.

And we read that Pitticus the Mitelenian Philosopher, and one of the seven
wise men of Greece, made a Law, that whosoever committed a Crime when he was
drunk, should be punished double, both for the Offense committed, and also for
being drunk. And Solon another of the seven wise men of Greece, and the famous
Lawgiver to the Athenians, ordained, that if any Prince were taken drunk, he
should be put to death.

Noah that Holy Patriarch drinking too much Wine, not only discovered his own
shame, but also was the occasion of the cruel Curse which the Lord sent upon
the Posterity of Cham, which even to this day lies hard upon them.

And Lot though he hated the Sin of Sodom, and escaped the Punishment thereof;
yet being overcome with the Wine of the Mountains, he committed Incest with his
own Daughters, and made a new Sodom of his own Family.

Balthazar rioting and revelling amongst his Whores, had the end of his Life
and Kingdom denounced against him by a bodiless Hand, writing upon the Wall the
Lord's Decree.

And whilst Holofernes besotted his senses with excess of Wine, and good Cheer,
Judith found means to cut off his Head.

Alexander the Great, having invited many of his Favorites and Captains to a
Supper, propounded a Crown in reward to him that should drink most; so one in
the Company swallowed up four Steans of Wine, being in value worth six hundred
Crowns, and so won the Prize, but lost a greater Prize, (viz. his Life) for he
survived not three days after; and one and forty of the rest that did strive
with him for Conquest, dyed also to bear him Company at his Death, as they had
done in the Frolic.

Alexander also himself was so addicted to the excess of drinking Wine, and was
oft-times so distempered therewith, that sometimes he killed his Friends at the
Table in his drunken fits, whom in sobriety he loved dearest.

Cyrillus a Citizen of Hippon, had a drunken Son, who in the midst of his
Drunkenness, killed his own Mother great with Child, and his Father also that
endeavored to restrain his drunken Fury; and would have ravished his Sister,
had she not strugled sore and made her escape, not without many wounds.

Three not far from Huntington, to my own knowledge (says my Author) being
overcharged with Drink, perished by Drowning; when being not able to rule their
Horses, they were carried by them into the main Stream, from whence they never
came out again alive, but left behind them visible marks of God's Justice, for
the Terror and Example of others.

Upon the Coasts of Bohemia, Anno 1551. five drunken men quaffing together,
with horrible Blasphemies, profaned the Name of God; and the Picture of the
Devil being painted on the Wall, they caroused Healths to him, to which the
Devil answered immediately: and the next Morning all five were found dead,
their Necks being broken, and squeezed to pieces as though a Wheel had gone
over them, Blood running out of their Mouths, Nostrils, and Ears, to the great
Astonishment of the Beholders.

An Alewife in Kesgrave near Ipswich, who would needs force three Serving-men
(that had been drinking in her House, and were taking their leaves) to stay and
drink the three Outs before they went, that is, Wit out of the Head, Money out
of the Purse, and Ale out of the Barrel; as she was coming toward them, with
the Pot in her hand, was suddenly taken speechless, and sick, and her Tongue
swollen in her Head, and never recovered her Speech, but di^d the third day after.

Two Servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for the Rump of a Turkey, and
struggling in their Drink for it, fell into a scalding Caldron backwards,
whereof one died presently, and the other lingringly and painfully, since my
coming (says Mr. Ward) to Ipswich.

A Man coming home drunk, would needs go and swim in the Mill-pond; his Wife
and Servants knowing he could not swim, persuaded him, and once got him out of
the Water, but he going in again, was drowned in the Pond.

In Barnwel near Cambridg, a lusty young man living at the sign of the Plough,
with two of his Neighbors, and one Woman in their Company, agreed to drink up
a Barrel of strong Beer; and drinking up the same, three of them died within
four and twenty Hours, and the fourth hardly escaped after great Sickness.

A Butcher in Haslingfield, hearing the Minister inveigh against Drunkenness,
being at his Cups in the Alehouse, fell a scoffing at the Minister and his
Sermons; and as he was drinking, the Drink, or something in the Cup, got into
his Throat and stuck so there, that he could neither get it up nor down, but
was choked therewith presently.

At Tillingham in Dengy Hundred in Essex, Three young men meeting to drink
strong Waters, fell by degrees to half Pints, and one of them fell down dead in
the Room; and the other two prevented by Company coming in, escaped not without
much Sickness.

At Bungy in Norfolk, three coming out of an Alehouse in a dark Evening, swore
they thought it was not darker in Hell it self: one of them fell off the Bridge
into the Water and was drowned, the second fell off his Horse, and the third
sleeping on the Ground by the River side was frozen to Death.

A Bailiff of Hedley, being drunk upon the Lord's Day at Melford, would needs
get upon his Mare to ride through the Street, affirming (as the report goes,
says my Author) that his Mare would carry him to the Devil; and his Mare
casting him off broke his neck.

Company drinking in an Alehouse at Harwich in the Night, over against one Mr.
Russels Mayor of the Town, was by him once or twice desired to depart; and at
length coming down, he took one of them, making as if he would carry him to
Prison; who drawing his Knife, fled from him, and was three days after taken
out of the Sea with the Knife in his hand.

At Tenby in Pembrokshire, a Drunkard being excessive drunk, broke himself all
to pieces, from an high and steep Rock, in a most fearful manner; and yet the
occasion and Circumstances of his fall so ridiculous, as I (says my Author)
think not fit to relate, lest in so serious a Judgment, I should move laughter
to the Reader.

A Glasier in Chancery Lane in London, fell to a common course of Drinking, and
being admonished by his Wife, and many of his Friends, to leave off his sinful
Course; yet he presuming much of God's Mercy, continued in his sinful practice,
till upon a time having overcharged his Stomach with Drink, he fell a vomiting,
broke a Vein, lay two days in extreme pain of Body, and sorrow of Mind, till in
the end recovering a little Comfort, he died.

Four sundry instances of Drunkards, wallowing and tumbling in their Drink, and
slain by Carts, I (says my Author) forbear to mention, because such Examples
are so common and ordinary.

A Yeoman's Son in Northamtonshire, being drunk at Wellingborough on a Market
day, would needs ride his Horse in bravery over the Ploughed Lands, so fell
from his Horse and broke his Neck.

A Knight notoriously given to drink, carrying some Pales of Drink into the
open Fields to make People drunk withal, being upon a time drinking with
Company, a Woman comes in, delivering him a Ring with this Posy in it, Drink
and Die, saying to him, this is for you, which he took and wore, and within a
Week after came to his end by drinking.

One of Aylesham in Norfolk, a notorious Drunkard, was drowned in a shallow
Brook of Water, with his Horse. And one to my own knowledge in Yorkshire being
drunk, as he was going home, fell down upon his Face into a very small running
Water, and was drowned there, though the back side of his Head was all dry, and
not covered with the Water.

Two examples (says Mr. Ward) have I known of Children that murdered their own
Mothers in drink, and one notorious Drunkard that attempted to kill his Father;
of which being prevented, he fired his Barn, and was afterward executed.

A young Fellow of North-Allerton in Yorkshire being Drunk, and having some
reproof given him by his Mother, he murdered her in her own House, upon a
Good Friday; she having received the Sacrament that day, and being but come
from the Church a little before.

At a Tavern in Breadstreet in London, certain Gentlemen drinking Healths to
their Lords, on whom they had Dependence, one desperate Wretch steps to the
Tables end, lays hold of a Pottle Pot of Canary Sack; swears a deep Oath, What!
will none drink a Health to my noble Lord and Master? and so setting the Pottle
Pot to his head, drank it off to the Bottom, but was not able to rise up, or to
speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoaring Sleep; and being removed,
laid aside, and covered by one of the Servants in the House attending the time
of his waking, was within the space of two hours irrecoverably dead.

A man in Suffolk overtaken with Wine, (tho never in all his Life before, as he
himself said a little before his Death, and others that knew him said the same)
vet going down a pair of Stairs, against the persuasion of a Woman (sitting by
him in his Chamber) he fell, and was so dangerously hurt, that he died soon
after, not being able to speak from the time of his Fall to his Death. I
forbear, says my Author, to name the parties thus punished for their Kindreds
sakes, yet living, says he.

In Dengy Hundred near Maldon, there fell out an extraordinary Judgment upon
five or six that plotted a solemn Drinking at one of their Houses, laid in Beer
for the purpose; drunk Healths in a strange manner, and all died thereof within
a few Weeks after, some sooner, and some later.

In August 1618, one Thomas Alred of Godmanchester in Huntingdonshire, Butcher,
an accustomed Drunkard, being entreated by a Neighbor to unpitch a load of
Hay; and being at that very time in drink, leting his Pitchfork slip out of his
hand, and stooping to take it up again, slipped from the Cart with his head
downwards; his Fork standing upright with the Tines, he fell directly upon
them, which at once run him into the Breast, and struck his Heart so, that he
died suddenly.

And in July 1628. one John Vintner of Godmanchester Gardener, a known
Drunkard, and one that would profanely (especially in his drink) scoff at
Religion, and abuse good men, fell from the top of a Pear Tree, and brake his
Neck, and so died.

Manlius in his common Places, gives a Relation of three abominable Drunkards,
who drank so long till one of them fell down stark dead; and yet the other two
nothing terrified with such a dreadful example of divine Vengeance, proceeded
on still in their vain presumptuous drinking, and poured the dead man's part
into him, as he lay by them: So that the Text in the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 5.
ver. 12. might well be applied to them; They regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the operation of his Hands.

St. Ambrose tells of one Theotimus, that being told by his Physicians, that
much Quaffing would make him blind; Vale Lumen Amicum, said he: Farewell dear
Eyes, if ye can bear no Wine,
Then ye no Eyes shall henceforth be of mine.
So that he would rather lose his Sight than his Sin, his Soul than his Lust.
And St. Austin brings in a Drunkard saying, Malle se vitam quam vinum eripi, he
had rather lose his Life than his Wine.

We are told by a credible Author, That about eight Persons that were Citizens,
and Citizens Sons, in the Country of Swaben, meeting together at a Tavern on a
Sabbath Day morning, proceeded to that height, that they drank themselves
drunk, and then began to blaspheme God, and scoff at the Vintner, who advised
them to leave drinking, and go to Church, and hear the Word of God preached; at
which advice they did not only continue to mock, but continued on their
drinking; but on a sudden the Devil coming in among them, in a Gentleman's
Habit, and drinking to them, set their Mouths in such a Fire, that these
Drunkards not only became amazed thereat, but also after a miserable manner
were all strangled to death.

A Soldier in Salisbury, in the midst of his Health-drinking and Carousing in a
Tavern, drank a Health to the Devil, saying, that if the Devil would not come
and pledge him, he would not believe that there was either God or Devil;
whereupon his Companions being stricken with Horror, hasted out of the Room:
and presently after hearing an hideous noise, and smelling a stinking Savor,
the Vintner went up into the Chamber, and coming in, he missed his Guest, and
found the Window broken, the Iron Bar in it bowed, and all Blood, but the man
was never heard of afterward.

A Vintner that accustomed himself to Swearing and Drunkenness, as he was upon
a Lord's Day standing at his Door, with a Pot in his Hand, to invite in Guests,
there carne suddenly such a violent Whirlwind, as carried him up into the Air,
after which he was never more seen.

Zeno the Emperor was such a Drunkard, that he would often lie as one dead for
many hours; so that he grew not only odious to all People, but even to his own
Wife, who upon a time finding him in that case, caused him to be laid in a Tomb
with a great Stone upon the top of it, whereby he was miserably pined to death.

Maginus reports, of Fliolmus King of Goths, that he was by his drunken
Servants thrown headlong into a Vessel of Ale, and therein was drowned.

In Glocestershire, an horrid Patricide was committed by an ungracious Son
being drunk, upon his Father whom he desperately slew.

The like unnatural Villainy was committed by one Purchase an Essex Monster, upon
the Body of his Mother, whom he likewise slew.

In the Parish of Castle-Terra, in the County of Cavan in Ireland, a Gentleman
when he met with jovial Company, used to drink Healths, and throw the Glasses
against the Walls; he delighted also to contradict what Ministers delivered in
their Sermons; and having heard one preach of the Benefits and Trial of a
justifying Faith, after Sermon he demanded of the Preacher, whether he could
remove Mountains; if I could see you do that, then (said he) I would believe
you had Faith, otherwise not; for does not the Gospel say, If a Man have Faith
but as a Grain of Mustard seed, he shall say to Mountains, be removed hence,
and it shall be done? But at length this Gentleman was stricken with the
Smallpox, which got into his Throat in such manner, that he could not swallow
nor let down a little Beer, to cool his excessive internal Heat; wherewith
being sore tormented, he broke out into these Expressions to an honest man that
stood by, O Thomas, would I could now receive one of those Glass-fulls of
Drink, which formerly I have thrown against the Wall in a Frolic: and
afterward when he saw there was no Remedy, but die he must, he said again, O
that I now had Faith like a Grain of Mustard Seed: and a little after he
deceased in the fifty seventh year of his Age.

We read of a Drunkard (says Mr. Clark) who in the midst of his Cups, sold his
Soul to the Devil for a Tankard of Wine, and the Devil forthwith had his
Bargain.

A certain young man that had devoted himself to a pious and retired course of
Life, was much assaulted by the Devil by sundry Temptations, and pressed to
make choice of one of these three Sins, once to be drunk, or to lie with his
Neighbors Wife, or to kill his Neighbor; and the Temptation so far prevailed,
that at last he chose the first, viz. once to be drunk, as deeming it the least
Sin; but when the Devil had drawn him to that, at the same time both the other
Sins were committed by him: For as St. Bernard observes, Ad universa vel
crudelitatis vel turpitudinis facinora perpetranda facilis invenitur via, cui
nulla sobriae mentis ratio, sed ebrietas dominatur. When Drunkenness gets rule
and dominion over a man, he is then easily drawn to commit any sort of Villainy:
so when the young man was gotten drunk, he then did not scruple to lie with his
Neighbor's Wife, and to kill his Neighbor too.

A certain Drunkard whom I (says a godly Minister) knew very well, when he was
in drink, quarrelled with his Fellow Servants, and after a few words knocked him
down with his Flail, and killed him at one blow; yet when he came to his Trial,
by the help of his Friends he made a shift to escape the Halter, and came home
again, and there he used to swear and curse, and drink at as high a rate as
ever; but at last when he was in the same Yard, where he committed the
aforesaid Murder, he fell down dead in a moment: and I was (says the same
Minister) one of the first that saw him.

Mr. Baxter tells us a Story for a certain Truth: There is in London (says he)
an understanding sober pious man, often one of my Hearers, who has an elder
Brother, a Gentleman of considerable Rank, who having formerly seemed pious, of
late years does often fall into the Sin of Drunkenness; he often lodges long
together here, in this his Brothers House, and whenever he is drunk, and has
slept himself sober, something knocks at his Bedhead, as if one knocked on the
Wainscot; when they remove the Bed, it follows him; besides loud noises in
other parts where he is, that all the House hears. They have often watched, and
kept his Hands, lest he should do it himself; and his Brother has often told
me, and brought his Wife (a discreet Woman) to attest it, who averreth moreover
that she watching him, has seen his Shoes under the Bed taken up, and nothing
touch them; they brought to me the man himself, and when we asked him how he
dared to sin after such a warning, he had no excuse: but being a person of
Quality, for some special reason, I (says Mr. Baxter) must not name him.

Nathaniel Butler was first addicted to Drunkenness, Gaming, Purloining, and
Fornication, before he committed that murder upon his Friend John Knight in
Milk-street, London, 1657. for which he was afterward condemned to the Gallows
and executed.

Mr. William Rogers an Apothecary in Crane-brook in Kent, exceedingly much
given to Drinking, and Sabbath-breaking, tho a young man of a pleasing sweet
Temper, was often admonished and persuaded by Mr. Robert Abbot Minister of the
place to come to Church, but had often promised and failed. But one Lord's Day
in the morning, when he said he was ready to come, he was taken sick and betook
him to his Bed, but it proving only an Ague, next morning he betook him to his
old course again; next Week after the Messenger of Death came in earnest, Mr.
Abbot addressed himself to him in his Chamber, with these words; O how often
have you deceived God, your own Soul, and me, and what is now to be done? I
fear you will die, and then what will become of you! his Sickness prevailed,
and there was too great a Fire kindled in his Breast to be smothered, it burned
in his own Soul, and it lightened from his Heart and Lips into the Ears and
Hearts of those about him: one while he cries out of his Sins, saying, I have
been a fearful Drunkard, pouring in one draught after another, till one draught
could not keep down another, I now would be glad if I could take the least of
God's Creatures which I have abused; and have neglected my Patients which have
put their Lives into my hands; and how many Souls have I thus murdered? I have
wilfully neglected God's House, Service and Worship; and tho I purposed to go,
God strikes me thus before the day of my promise comes, because I am unworthy
to come amongst God's People. Again, another while he falls to wishing, O that
I might burn a long time in that Fire, (pointing to the Fire before him) so I
might not burn in Hell; O that God would grant me but one year, or a month,
that the World might see with what an Heart I have promised to God amendment! O
that God would try me a little, but I am unworthy. Another while to his
Companions -- Beware by me to forsake your wicked ways, lest you go to Hell as
I must do; calls his young Servant, tells him that he had been a wicked Master
to him, But be warned by me, says he, you have a Friend that has an Iron
Furnace which burns hot and long; but if you give your self to my Sins, you
shall be burned in the furnace of Hell, an hotter Furnace, millions of millions
of Ages. The Minister propounding the Gospel-promises of the largest size, he
cried, it is too late, I must be burned in Hell: he pressed him with Tears not
to cast away his Soul, for Christ died, etc. he answered, he cast off Christ,
and therefore must go to Hell; in short, at last in idleness of thoughts and
talk he ended his miserable Life.

Anno 1576. Tir-Owen, the Irish Rebel in Queen Elizabeth's time, was such a
Drunkard, that when his Body was immoderately inflamed with drinking strong
Drink and Usquebath, he used many times (as Mr. Camden reports) to be set in
the Earth up to the Chin to cool himself.

A Gentleman whom I knew, having been at a Fair at North-Allerton in Yorkshire
(a Town famous for strong Ale) and there having overcharged himself with that
Liquor; as he was riding homewards, putting his Horse into a galloping posture,
the Horse being in great heart and very mettl'd, and he not in a condition to
guide him, having gotten about a mile from the Town, the Horse threw the
Gentleman in the open Highway, and killed him with the Fall; for he died
presently.

Another Person with whom I had been long acquainted, (he being Barliff to the
Lords of a Market Town, where I kept their Courts several years) being full of
strong Drink, and not able to govern his Horse, was in like manner slain with a
fall from his Horse.

And one who lived in the same Town where I lived, having gotten too large a
quantity of strong Drink, and riding his Horse into a River to pass over it,
the Water at that time being very high, and scarce passable, and he not keeping
the Horses head up against the current of the Water, when he came into the main
Stream, being driven down the River, after a little while he parted from his
Horse and was drowned.

And another of my Acquaintance, being invited by a Gentleman to the Tavern,
and there drinking too freely; at his going homewards from the Tavern, on the
backside of the Town, coming to enter into his own Yard, he fell from off a
little Bridge at the end of the Yard, with his Head downwards into a Ditch; and
tho the Ditch were dry without any Water in it, and that he was missed, and
found in a very short time, yet he was found dead, for the weight of his Body
had choked him.

A man being riding in the same Company that I was in, and being very full of
strong Liquor, and clapping his Spurs to the Horses sides, the Horse run into a
Ditch or Gutter with the man on his back; and riding along in the Gutter, a
Tree in the Hedge over hanging the same, the Horse run the man's Head against
the Tree, and beat out his Brains, and he fell down dead and never spoke one
word; of this sad Accident I was an Eyewitness, and see the man's Brains lying
on the Ground.

And one who was a customary, prosane Swearer, and a great Drinker, being
gotten drunk at North-Allerton aforesaid, and desiring one of his Neighbors to
let him ride home behind him; when they came near the Town where the Drunkard
dwelt, he desired to alight from behind his Neighbor to ease himself; and so
getting down, his Neighbor rid along the Street; and some Company coming not
long after, found the man dead, lying in the Street with his Breeches about his
Feet, in an unseemly and nasty manner.

A Mason who loved strong Drink too well, and was frequently drunk, one time
lying down upon the ground to sober himself when he was drunk, he fell into a
long Sleep, for he never awaked again, but was there found dead.

A Farmer who lived in Cleaveland in Yorkshire, in the same Constablery where I
have a small Estate, going with other of his Neighbors to pay his Tithe Rent
to the Impropriator, who being a jovial boon, free man, was very liberal, and
bestowed great store of strong Ale on them. And this man having drunk too
freely, had it seems got more than he was able to bear; for when he was got
very near his own House, at his coming home, when he alighted from his Horse,
it being in the Night, and dark, and he not able to guide himself, he stagge^ed
into a Pond close by the House, and not able to get out of it, was in the
Morning found standing in the Pond, with his Back against the bank of the Pond,
and up to the Knees in Water, and there starved to death. All these eight last
mentioned exemplary Judgments have fallen within the compass of my own certain
knowledge.

Drunkenness is a flattering Evil, a sweet Poison, a cunning Circe that besots
the Soul, and destroys the Body; Dolores gignit in capite, in stomacho, in toto
corpore acerrimos.

Dolours and grievous Pains, by Drunkenness,
The Head, the Stomach, and whole man possess.
At last (as Solomon observes) it bites like a Serpent, and stings like an
Adder.

CHAP. IV.
A Compendium of the Laws made against profane, idle, customary Swearing and
Cursing.

Tippling and excessive Drinking having obtained a kind and favorable
Reception, and in a manner a general approbation within this Realm, as appears
by the several Acts of Parliament (mentioned before in the first Chapter
hereof) made for the restraining this exorbitant sinful Vice; the People in
their Frolicks, and extravagant Cups, were apt and prone to fly out (one
profaneness ushering in another) into sinful profane, desperate Swearing and
Cursing, which by little and little began to be so very common and practicable,
that the Parliament of 21 Jac. 1. taking notice thereof, and knowing that
profane Swearing and Cursing is forbidden by the Word of God, they thereupon
made an Act for the restraining the growth of this catching Sin.

For by the Statute of 21 Jac. 1. Chapter 20. it is Enacted,

That no Person or Persons shall prosanely Swear or Curse; and that if any
Person or Persons shall offend herein, either in the hearing of any Justice of
the Peace of the County, or any Mayor, Justice of the Peace, Bailiff, or Head
Officer of any City, or Town Corporate, where such offense is or shall be
committed, or shall be convicted by the Oaths of two Witnesses, or by
Confession of the party, before any such Justice of the Peace of the County, or
Head Officer, or Justice of the Peace in the City, or Town-Corporate, where
such offense is or shall be committed, (which Oath they have power to
administer) That then every such Offender shall for every time so offending,
forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish, where the offense is or
shall be committed, the sum of twelve Pence, to be levied by the Constable,
Churchwardens, and overseers of the Poor of that Parish, by Warrant from such
Justice of the Peace, or head Officer, by Distress, and sale of the Offenders
Goods, rendering to the party the Overplus: and in default of such Distress, the
Offender, if he or she be above the age of twelve Years, shall by Warrant from
such Justice of the Peace, or Head Officer, be set in the Stocks three hours;
but if the Offender be under that Age, and shall not forthwith pay the same sum
of twelve Pence, then he or she by such Warrant as aforesaid, shall be whipped
by the Constable, or by the Parent or Master in his presence.

And if such Offender shall commence any Suit at Law, against any Officer, or
other, for such distraining, sale of Goods, whipping, or setting in the Stocks,
the Defendant, or Defendants, may plead the general Issue, and give the special
matter in evidence to the Jury at the Trial; and if it be found against the
Plaintiff, or Plaintiffs, or they are Nonsuited, then the Defendant, or
Defendants shall be allowed good Costs to be taxed by the Court.

The Offense shall be complained of, and proved as abovesaid, within twenty
days after the Offense committed.

And it is Enacted, That this Act shall be read in every Parish Church by the
Minister thereof, upon the Sunday after Evening-Prayer, twice in the Year.

There being no Penalty inflicted upon Ministers by this Statute of the 21 Jac.
1. for the not reading thereof, it was therefore in most Churches very seldom,
and in some Churches never read; and it being a long time since the making of
this Law, and the Penalty appointed thereby to be paid by the Offenders very
small, and proof by two witnesses troublesome, it was therefore very seldom put
in execution. So for the more effectual discouragement, and restraining of this
spreading and catching, profane Vice, another Act of Parliament has been made
in the sixth and seventh years of his present Majesty's reign, King William the
third, something more severe, as appears by the Tenure thereof, hereafter
following.

By the Statute of the 6 and 7 Gul. 3. Chapter 2. it is Enacted,

That if any Person or Persons shall profanely Swear or Curse in the presence
and hearing of any Justice of Peace of the County, Riding, or Division, or of
the Mayor or other Head Officer, or Justice of Peace for any City, or
Town-Corporate, or by the Confession of the party offending before any such
Magistrate where the said Offense shall be committed; that then for every such
Offense, the party so offending, if a Servant, Day-labourer, common Soldier, or
common Seaman, shall forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish
where such offense is committed one Shilling, and every other Person two
Shillings; and in case any of the Persons aforesaid, shall after Conviction
offend a second time, such Person shall forfeit and pay double; and if a third
time, treble the sum respectively by him or her to be paid for the first
Offense.

And upon neglect, or refusal of payment of the said Forfeiture, any Justice of
Peace of the County, Riding, or Division, or Mayor, or other Head Officer, or
Justice of Peace, for any City, or Town-Corporate, where the Offense is
committed, shall have Authority, and are required to send his Warrant to the
Constable, Tything-man, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor of the Parish
where the Offense is committed, or where the Offender shall inhabit, thereby
commanding them, or some or one of them, to levy by Distress, and sale of the
Goods of the Offender, or Offenders, the sum so forfeited for the use of the
Poor of the Parish as aforesaid: and for want of Distress, then every such
Offender being above the age of sixteen Years, shall by such Warrant as
aforesaid, be publicly set in the Stocks for the space of one Hour for every
single Offense; and for any number of Offenses, whereof he shall be Convicted
at one and the same time, then two Hours: and if the party offending be under
the age of sixteen years, and shall not forthwith pay the said Forfeiture, then
he or she shall by Warrant as aforesaid, be whipped by the Constable, or by the
Parent, Guardian, or Master of such Offender in the presence of the Constable.

And if any Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate shall wilfully, or wittingly
omit the performance of his Duty, in the execution of this Act, he shall
forfeit the sum of five Pounds, one moiety to the use of the Informer, to be
recovered by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plaint, in any of his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Protection, etc. shall be allowed, nor any more
than one Imparlance.

And if any Action or Suit shall be commenced, or brought against any Justice
of Peace, Constable, or other Officer, for any thing done in the pursuance of
this Act concerning the said Offenses, the Defendant in such Action may plead
the general Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; and upon a Verdict
for the Defendant, or Nonsuit of the Plaintiff, or Discontinuance, then the
Defendant shall have treble Costs.

No Person to be prosecuted or troubled for any Offense against this Statute,
unless the same be proved and prosecuted within ten days next after the Offense
committed.

This Act shall be publicly read four several times in the Year, in all Parish
Churches, and public Chapels, by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the
respective Parishes or Chapels, immediately after Morning-Prayer, on four
several Sundays; that is to say, the Sunday next after the four and twentieth
day of June, the nine and twentieth day of September, the five and twentieth
day of December, and the five and twentieth day of March; under the pain of
twenty Shillings for every such Omission or Neglect.

And the Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other Head Officer, shall register in a
Book, to be kept for that purpose, all the Convictions made before him upon
this Act, and the time of making thereof, and for what Offense; and shall
certify the same to the next general Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the said
County or Place, where the Offenses are committed, to be there kept upon Record
by the respective Clerks of the Peace, to be seen without Fee or Reward.

Although some Persons accustomed to profane Swearing and Cursing in their
ordinary discourse and communication, may possibly evade the Punishments
ordained and appointed by the aforementioned Laws, for such abominable
wickedness: yet such daring presumptuous Sinners may be assured they cannot
(without serious and unfeigned Repentance, and an absolute and total renouncing
and forsaking of their Wickedness) escape the punishments threatened by Almighty
God against such provoking Sins; and that they may not be ignorant thereof, I
shall in the next Chapter set down several proofs of Scripture to that purpose,
in hopes that upon the perusal and serious Consideration thereof, their
Consciences may be touched with the guilt of their profane debauched Wickedness.

CHAP. V.
Some Texts of Scripture, showing the odiousness and danger of profane,
customary Swearing and Cursing.

THOU shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. Exodus 20. 7. Deuteronomy. 5. 11.

He that Curses his Father or Mother, shall surely be put to death. Exodus 21.
17.

Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People. Exodus 22.
28.

Thou shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of
thy God, I am the Lord. Levit. 19. 12.

Thou shall not curse the Deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the Blind, but
shall fear thy God: I am the Lord. Levit. 19. 14.

He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death.
Levit. 24. 16.

Every one that curses his Father or his Mother, shall be surely put to death;
he has cursed his Father or his Mother, his Blood shall be upon him. Lev. 20.
9.

Cursed be he that curses his Father or his Mother. Deuteronomy. 27. 16.

The Ungodly is so proud that he cares not for God, neither is God in all his
Thoughts. His Mouth is full of Cursing, Deceit, and Fraud; under his Tongue is
Ungodliness and Vanity. Psalm. 10. 4, 7.

For the sin of their Mouth, and for the words of their Lips, they shall be
taken in their Pride, and why? Their Preaching is of Cursing and Lies. Psalm.
59. 12.

Their device is only how to put him out whom God will exalt; their delight is
in Lies; they give good words with their Mouth, but curse with their Heart.
Psalm. 62. 4.

His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him; he loved not
blessing, therefore shall it be far from him. He clothed himself with Cursing,
like as with a Raiment; and it shall come into his Bowels like Water, and like
Oil into his Bones. Psalm. 119. 16, 17.

The wicked is snared by the Transgression of his Lips; but the just shall come
out of Trouble. Prove. 12. 13.

A wholesome Tongue is a Tree of Life, but perverseness therein is a breach in
Spirit. Prove. 15. 4.

A man's Belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his Mouth, and with the
increase of his Lips shall he be filled. Death and Life are in the power of the
Tongue, and they that love it shall eat the Fruit thereof. Prove. 18. 20, 21.

Whosoever Curses his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obscure
Darkness. Prove. 20. 20.

Whosoever keeps his Mouth and his Tongue, keeps his Soul from Trouble. Prove.
21. 23.

As the Bird by wandering, as the Swallow by flying, so the Curse causeless
shall not come. Prove. 26. 2.

There is a Generation that curses their Father, and does not bless their
Mother. Prove. 30. 11.

Suffer not thy Mouth to cause thy Flesh to sin. Eccles. 5. 6.

Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought; and curse not the rich in thy Bed
chamber: For a Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice, and that which has Wings
shall tell the matter. Eccles. 10. 20.

For the Land is full of Adulterers; for because of swearing the Land mourns;
the pleasant places of the Wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil,
and their force is not right. Wherefore their way shall be unto them as
slippery ways in the Darkness, they shall be driven on and fall therein: for I
will bring evil upon them, even the year of their Visitation, says the Lord.
Jer. 23. 10, 12.

By swearing and lying, and killing and stealing, and committing Adultery, they
break out, and Blood touches Blood. Hosea 4. 2.

For Wisdom is a loving Spirit, and will not acquit a Blasphemer of his words;
for God is witness of his Reins, and a true beholder of his Heart, and a hearer
of his Tongue. Therefore he that speaks unrighteous things cannot be hid,
neither shall Vengeance when it punishes pass by him. For inquisition shall be
made into the counsels of the Ungodly, and the sound of his words shall come
unto the Lord, for the manifestation of his wicked Deeds. Wisd. 1. 6, 8, 9.

The Blessing of the Father establishes the Houses of Children, but the Curse
of the Mother rooteth out Foundations. Ecclus. 3. 9.

Then said he unto me, This is the Curse that goes forth over the face of the
whole Earth: for every one that steals shall be cut off as on this side
according to it: and every one that swears shall be cut off on that side
according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall
enter into the House of the Thief, and into the house of him that swears
falsely by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and shall
consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. Zech. 5. 3, 4.

Accustom not thy Mouth to swearing, neither use thy self to the naming of the
Holy One. A man that uses much Swearing, shall be filled with Iniquity, and
the plague shall never depart from his House; if he shall offend, his Sin shall
be upon him; and if he acknowledge not his Sin, he makes a double Offense; and
if he swear in vain, he shall not be Innocent, but his House shall be full of
Calamities. Ecclus. 23. 9. 11.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is God's
Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for
it is the City of the great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because
thou can not make one Hair white or black. But let your Communication be,
yea, yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil. Matthew.
5. 34, 35, 36, 37.

For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: and he that
Curses Father or Mother, let him die the Death. Mat. 15. 4.

Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues they have used Deceit,
the poison of Asps it under their Lips. Whose Mouth is full of Cursing and
Bitterness. Destruction and Misery are in their ways. There is no fear of God
before their Eyes. Romans 3. 13, 14, 16, 18.

Let bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put
away from you, with all malice. Ephesians. 4. 31.

The Tongue is a Fire, a world of Iniquity; it defiles the whole Body, and
sets on fire the course of Nature, and it is set on fire of Hell. It is an
unruly Evil, full of deadly Poison. Therewith bless we God, and therewith curse
we Men, which are made after the similitude of God. Out of the same Mouth
proceeds Blessing and Cursing: my Brethren these things ought not so to be.
James 3. 6, 8, 9, 10.

But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by
the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay
nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. James 5. 12.

If any idle, debauched Swearers and Cursers be so emboldned in their profane
customary Wickedness, as that after the reading or hearing of these
beforementioned places of Scripture, they shall still dare to proceed and run
on in their wilful wicked sinful Courses; I shall for their further Caution, in
this next following Chapter, give them a brief relation of several signal
Instances of God's severe wrath and displeasure against such Wickedness,
manifested by the fearful, terrible, and amazing Judgments which he has
several times signally inflicted upon such profane sinful wretches.

And I hope upon the perusal and consideration of the following exemplary
Punishments inflicted by God upon others, that all customary, common Swearers
and Cursers will lay it to heart, and that we may find that of the Prophet
Isaiah manifested in them; When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the inhabitants
of the World (says the Prophet) will learn Righteousness. Isa. 26. 9.

It was an excellent saying of the Poet, Exemplo alterius qui sapit, iile
sapit; He is a wise man indeed that learns Wisdom by the Example of others: and
the saying is often found true, Magis intuentur quid fecerit Jupiter, quam quid
decuit Plato.

More by Example often reclaimed be,
Than are by Precept, and smooth Oratry.
CHAP. VI.
Of several signal, fearful, and amazing Judgments of God's severe Justice,
inflicted upon customary profane and presumptuous Swearers and Cursers.

EARL Godwin justifying himself before King Edward the Confessor, about King
Alfred's Death, prayed to God that if he were any way guilty of it, he might
never swallow down one morsel of Bread; and thereupon by the just judgment of
God, he was choked by the first Morsel he offered to eat.

We find mention made by a good Author, of a wicked wretch in France, among the
People called Averin, that forswearing himself in an unjust cause, had his
Tongue so tied immediately upon it, that he could not speak, but roar; and so
continued till by earnest Prayers and Repentance, the Lord restored to him the
use again of that unruly and sinful Member.

Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, a man famous for his Virtues, and sharpness in
reproving and correcting Vice, was accused falsely and maliciously of
Unchastity, by three Sons of Belial; The first profanely said, If I lie, I pray
God I may perish by Fire. The second, If I speak ought but Truth, I pray God I
may be consumed by some filthy and cruel Disease. The third, If I accuse him
falsely, I pray God I may be deprived of my sight, and become Blind. Thus tho
the Honesty and Chastity of Narcissus was so well known to all the Faithful,
that they believed not what the Va^lets attested; yet the good Bishop moved
with grief of his Accusation, and partly with the desire of quietness from
worldly Affairs, forsook his Bishopric, and lived in a Desert for many Years.
But these wicked Wretches by their deaths, witnessed his Innocence, which by
their words they had so much impugned; for the first had his House set on Fire
so suddenly, and in such a violent and extraordinary manner, that he perished
in the Flames, with all his Family and Progeny. The second languished away with
a tedious infections Disease, that spread his Body all over. The third seeing
the woeful ends of his Companions, confessed all their Villainy; and sadly
lamenting his woeful Case, and wicked Crime, persisted so long in a continued
course of Weeping, till both his Eyes were out. And thus God in his Judgment
sent upon each of them their wishes, and thereby manifested the innocence of
the good Bishop, and cleared him from Shame and Opprobity.

A Fellow hearing profane Cursing and Swearing condemned in the Pulpit by a
learned Preacher, and that it never escaped Punishment, said in a bravery, I
have often forsworn my self, and yet my Right Hand is not a whit shorter than my
Left; which words he had scarce uttered, when presently such an Inflammation
arose in his Hand, that he was constrained to go to a Surgeon and get it cut
off, lest it should infect his whole Body; and so his Right Hand became shorter
than his Left, in recompense of his Perjury which he so lightly esteemed of.

In the Town of Rutlinquen, a certain Passenger coming into an Inn, gave a
Budget with a good sum of Money therein, to his Host to lay by: but when he
demanded it again at his going away, the Host denied it, and gave him bad
Language, with many Mocks and Taunts; so the Traveller called him before a
Judge, but having no Witnesses, desired to have him sworn, which he without
scruple offered to do, and wished he might go to the Devil, if ever he received
or concealed such a Budget. But the Passenger as he was going out, meets two
men, and being informed by him of the matter, offer him their Assistance, and
returned back again to the Judge: these two unknown Persons justified that the
Budget was delivered to the Host, and that he had hid it in such a place, at
which the Host became astonished, and by his countenance and gesture discovered
his Guiltiness; whereupon the Judge resolved to send him to Prison, but the two
unknown Witnesses (who were indeed Fiends of Hell) began to say, you shall not
need, for we are sent to punish his Wickedness; and having so said, they
hoisted him up into the Air, where he vanished with them, and was never after
found.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in the City of London, one Ann
Averyes a Widow, who forswore her self for a little Money that she was to pay
for six pound of Tow, at a Shop in Woodstreet; and being suddenly surprised
with the Justice of God for this Wickedness, she immediately fell down
speechless, and cast up at her Mouth in great abundance, and with an horrible
stink, that matter which by Nature should have bin voided downwards, and so
died.

There was a profane wretch in Germany, that almost at every word he spoke, the
Devil was at one end of it; if walking he chanced to tread awry and stumble,
presently the Devil was in his Mouth: and notwithstanding the many Reproofs he
had from his Neighbors, with serious advice to correct and amend so detestable
a Vice, yet all was in vain; for continuing this his presumptuous Wickedness,
and damnable custom, as he was passing over a Bridge, he fell down, and in his
fall uttered these words, Hoist up with an hundred Devils; which he had no
sooner spoken, but the Devil whom he called for so often, was at his Elbow to
strangle him.

In the year 1551. at Megalapale near Voildstat, at the Feast of Pentecost, the
People being set on Drinking and Carousing, a Woman in the Company, commonly
named the Devil in her Oaths, till at length he being so often called on, came
on a sudden and carried her through the Gate aloft in the Air, before them all,
who ran out astonished, to see whither he would transport her; and seeing her
hanging in the Air for a while without the Town, at length she fell down dead
to the Ground.

About the same time there lived one that was both a monstrous Swearer, and
also otherwise very vicious, who tho he was frequently admonished to forsake
his customary Swearing, and to amend his Life, yet it was all but lost labor,
for he would not at all listen thereunto. And the Pestilence being on a time in
the City, he became infected therewith, and thereupon he withdrew himself
apart, with his Wife and a Kinswoman into a Garden he had; and the Ministers
coming to admonish him, and exhort him to Repentance, he was so far from being
touched in Conscience, or any ways moved with their godly Admonitions, that he
strove rather to harden himself more and more in his Wickedness. And being one
day swearing and denying God, and giving himself to the Devil, and calling for
him with vehemence, the Devil came and snatched him up presently, and heaved
him up into the Air, his Wife and Kinswoman looking on, and seeing him fly over
their Heads, he was never afterward seen any more.

A Popish Priest on a time thundering out bitter Curses in the Pulpit against
Luther, wished if Luther's Doctrine was true, that a Thunderbolt might strike
him to death; three days after a mighty tempest of Thunder and Lightning
arising, the Priest ran to the Altar into the Church, and fell to his Prayers;
but the Vengeance of God found him out and his Hypocrisy, so that he was
stricken in a manner dead with the Lightning; but coming to Life again, as they
led him homewards through the Churchyard, another flash so scorched him, that
he was burnt from the crown of his Head, to the sole of the Foot, as black as a
Shoo, so that he died with the manifest mark of God's Vengeance upon him.

Beza reports, that he knew a man in France of good parts, well instructed in
Religion, and a Master of a Family, who in his anger Cursing, and bidding the
Devil take one of his Children, had presently his wish, for the Child was
possessed immediately with a Spirit; from which tho by the frequent and
continual Prayers of the Church, he was at length released, yet before he came
to his perfect Health he died.

The like happened to a Woman whom her Husband in anger devoted to the Devil with
bitter Curses; whereupon Satan assaulted her presently, and deprived her of her
Wits, so that she could never be recovered.

Another example, says the same Author, happened to a Perjurer that wittingly
and wilfully forswore himself, to the end to prejudice and deceive another: but
he had no sooner made an end of his false and wicked Oath, but a grievous
Apoplex seized him, so that without speaking any one word afterward he died
within a few days.

A decrepit Romish Priest being by the help of others heaved and lift up into
the Pulpit, and choosing the Text out of 1 Cor. 11. concerning the Lord's
Supper, and taking occasion to defend the Papistical errors of the Mass, he
used these or the like blasphemous Speeches, O. Paul, Paul, if this Doctrine
touching the receiving the Sacrament in both kinds be true, and if it be a
wicked thing to receive it otherwise, then I wish the Devil would come to take
me: and then (turning himself to the People) if the Pope's Doctrine concerning
this point be not true, then I am the Devil's bond-slave; neither do I fear to
pawn my Soul upon it. These and many other blasphemous words he used, till the
Devil came indeed, in the likeness of a tall man, black and terrible, sending
before him such a fearful noise and such a wind, that the People fearing the
Church falling on their Heads were greatly amazed; but he not able to hurt the
rest, took away the old lame Priest, being his devoted Bond-slave, and carried
him so far, that he was never after heard of.

In the year 1556. at St. Gallus in Helvetia, a certain man that earned his
living by making clean rough foul Linen against the Sun, entering a Tavern,
tasted so plentifully of the juice of the Grape, that he vomited out terrible
Curses against himself and others; amongst the rest he wished if ever he went
into the Fields to his old Occupation, that then the Devil might come and break
his Neck; yet notwithstanding his late words, and this his profane and wicked
Execration, after sleep had conquered his drink, and sobriety restored his
Senses, he went again to his Trade; remembering his late words, but little
regarding them: but however the Devil attended him at his appointed hour, in
the likeness of a big swarthy man, and asked him if he remembered his promise,
the Vow which he made the day before, and if it were not lawful for him to
break his Neck; and so struck the poor trembling man over the Shoulders, that
his Feet and his Hands presently dried up, and there he lay not able to stir,
till by help of men he was carried home, the Lord not giving the Devil so much
power as he wished himself, but yet permitting him to plague him on this sort,
for his Amendment, and our Example.

Henry Earl of Schwartburgh, through a corrupt custom, used commonly to wish
that he might be drowned in a Privy; and as he wished, so it happened unto him,
for he was so served, and murdered at St. Peter's Monastery in Erford, in the
year of our Lord 1148.

The like befell a young Courtier at Mansfield, whose custom was in any earnest
Asseveration to say, the Devil take me if it be not so; so the Devil took him
indeed, whilst he slept, and threw him out at a high Window; where tho by the
goodness of God, he caught no great harm, yet he learnt by experience to bridle
his Tongue from all such cursed Speeches, this being but a taste of God's Wrath
that is to fall upon such wretches.

A Woman giving her self to the Devil, both Body and Soul, did use most
horrible Cursing and Oaths, both to her self and others usually at all times,
and in a more effectual manner at a certain Wedding: and the People exhotting
her to leave off her sinful course of Life; yet she not regarding their advice,
continued in her profane wicked progress, till all the People were set at
Dinner, and very merry, and then the Devil came in Person and transported her
into the Air before them all, with most horrible outcries and roarings, and in
that manner carried her round about the Town, so that the Inhabitants were very
terribly afraid; and then he tore her in four pieces, leaving in several
Highways a quarter, that all that came by, might be witnesses of the
Punishment, and then returning to the Marriage, threw her Bowels on the Table
before the Mayor of the Town, with these words, Behold these dishes of Meat
belong to thee, whom the like destruction awaiteth, if thou do not amend thy
wicked Life.

There is mention made in Luther's Conferences, that diverse Noblemen being
striving together at an Horse-race, in their Course, cried The Devil take the
last; and the last being a Horse that broke loose, the Devil hoisted him up
into the Air, and took him clean away.

We read of a certain man that provided a sumptuous Supper, and none of his
invited Guests coming to it, he in a great Passion and Heat said, If none of
them will come, then let all the Devils in Hell come; and presently came a
number of those hellish Fiends, whom he not discerning from men, coming to
welcome and entertain them, when he took them by the Hands, he perceiving Claws
instead of Fingers, he was most terribly amazed, and ran out of Doors with his
Wife, and lest none in the House but a young Infant and a Fool sitting by the
Fire, whom the Devils had no power to hurt, neither any Body else, but devoured
up the Victuals, and so departed.

One Hacket of Oundle in Northamptonshire, used in his earnest talk, to curse
himself in this manner, If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come
upon me, which afterward happened to him; for falling into abominable Errors,
he called himself Christ and Judge of the World, for which he was hanged in the
33d year of Queen Elizabeth in Cheapside, London.

At Wit^berg, before Martin Luther, and diverse Learned men, a Woman whose
Daughter was possessed by a Spirit, confessed that by her curse, that plague
was fallen upon her Child; for being angry at a time, she bid the Devil take her;
and no sooner spoken the words, but the Devil did take her indeed, and
possessed her in a most strange manner.

And a Woman of Neuburg in Germany, cursing her Son in her angry Passion,
prayed to God she might never see him again return alive, which came to pass
that very day; for he bathing himself in the Water was drowned, and never
returned to his Mother alive, according to her ungodly wish.

Also another Woman in Astorga, in her rage cursed one of her Sons with
detestable Maledictions, giving him to the Devils of Hell, and wishing they
would fetch him out of her presence, with many other horrible Execrations: this
being about ten of the Clock at Night, and the night being very dark, the Boy
growing fearful hearing his Mother curse so, went out into a little Court
behind the House, from which place he was presently hoised up into the Air, by
men in show of grim Countenance, great Stature, and loathsome and horrible
Gesture, but indeed cruel Fiends of Hell, and that with such swiftness (as the
Boy confessed) that it was not possible as he thought for any Bird to fly so
fast; and lighting down amongst certain Mountains amongst Bushes and Briers,
was trailed through the thickest of them, and so torn and rent not only in his
Clothes, but also in his Hands and Face, and almost all his whole Body; at last
the Boy remembering God, and beseeching his merciful Favor and Assistance, the
cruel Fiends brought him back again through the Air, and put him in at a little
Window into a Chamber in his Father's House, where after much search and grief
for him, he was found in this miserable Condition, and almost distracted; and
thus tho they had no power to deprive him of his Life, yet the Lord suffered
them to afflict the Parents in the Son, for the good of both if they belonged
to God.

But above all, (says my Author) this is most strange which happned in a Town
of Mesina, Anno 1552. when a diolerick Father seeing his Son slack about his
Business, wished he might never stir from that place; which was no sooner said,
but it was done, and his Son stuck fast in the place, and could not by any
means possible be removed, no not so much as to move or bend his Body, till by
the prayers of the Faithful his pains were somewhat mitigated, tho not
remitted; three years he continued standing with a Post at his back for his
case, and four years sitting, at the end whereof he died: nothing weakened all
this while in his Understanding, but professing the Faith, and not doubting of
his Salvation in Christ Jesus. When any asked him at any time how he did? his
usual answer was, that he was fastened of God, and that it was not in man's
Power, but God's Mercy to release him.

Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, makes mention of a certain young Gallant
that was a monstrous Swearer, who riding in the Company of diverse Gentlemen,
began to swear and most horribly blaspheme the Name of God; and one in the
Company telling him that he must one day answer for it, he in a great huff
said, Why take thou thought for me? take thought for thy Winding Sheet. Well
says the other, amend, for death gives no warning, and as soon comes a
Lambsskin to the Market as an old Sheeps. Gods wounds (said he) care not thou
for me, raging still on this manner worse and worse, till at length as they
past on their Journey, they came riding over a great Bridge; upon which the
Gentleman Swearer spurred his Horse, so that he leapt clear over the Battlement
with the man on his Back, who as he was going, cried, Horse and Man and all to
the Devil.

In August 1629. one Thomas Wilson Labourer, a known and common Swearer and
Blasphemer of God's Name by Oaths and Curses, and much given to drink to
excess, upon a slight occasion moved to displeasure against his Wife, and not
daring to do much violence to her, turned it upon himself, and with his Knife
stabbed himself and so died, many of his Friends and Neighbors being present.

Sir Jervasa^ Elwayes Lieutenant of the Tower of London, when he was hanged on
Tower Hill, for being Accessory in the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury his
Prisoner, confessed, that at his playing at Cards and Dice, he had often wished
that he might be hanged if it were not so and so, and therefore (says he) this
shameful death is justly come upon me.

Anno 1603. A man that dwelt in Wimble Stafford in Cheshire, seeing two godly
Persons going in the Highway near to him, said to one that was with him, I will
dance, and swear, and swagger, to anger yonder Puritans; and so he did to their
great Grief, but presently the revenging hand of God fell upon him; so that
immediately he was stricken with Sickness, was carried home in a Cart, and
three days after he died in a most fearful manner.

About the beginning of April 1661. a Woman in Darbyshire, having cozened a Boy
of some Money, was charged with it, but she stiffly denied it; and being further
urged to confess the Truth, she (in a fearful manner) prayed God that the Earth
might open and swallow her up quick if she had it, and immediately the Earth
under her opened, and she sunk down into it; and being afterward dug for,
they found her nine Foot deep within the Earth, and that very Money was found
in her Pocket: this was attested by credible Witnesses.

John Peter, Son-in-law to Alexander Keeper of Newgate, in Queen Mary's time,
an horrible Blasphemer, upon every idle occasion used to say, if it be not
true, I pray God I may rot before I die, and accordingly God made him
exemplary; for as he wished, so it happened to him, for his Body rotted away by
piecemeal till he died.

And a certain Maid having stolen and pilfred many things out of her Mistresses
House, and being examined about it, forswore them, and wished that she might
rot, if ever she touched them or knew of them; and being carried to Prison
about them, she began there to rot and stink so, that they were forced to
thrust her out of Prison into an Hospital, where she in great Misery repented
of her foul Sin.

Also one John Duncalf of Kings Swinford, in January 1677. coming to the House
of one Humfry Baby at Grangewell about three miles from Woolverhampton, he
begged of the Woman there Victuals and Drink; who formerly knowing him, and
compassionating his Condition, freely gave him some; but while she was stooping
to draw him some drink, he stole her Bible, and sold it afterward: fort three
Shillings to a Maid not far off, whereby the Woman came to hear-of it, and
paying her the Money, received it again, but could not hear what was become of
the man. But a while after John Duncalf hearing it discoursed that he stole a
Bible, grew very angry, and gave out threatening words against a young man that
reported it; but being severely charged with it, he did not only deny it with
some fierceness, but execrated and cursed himself, wishing his Hands might rot
off if it were true; which words he had no sooner uttered, but by his own
Confession to diverse that came to see him in his miserable Condition, he said
that immediately thereupon he had an inward Horror and Trembling upon him, a
dread and fear of the Divine Vengeance of God, and the Justice of him from whom
no secrets are hid; and that within a few days after his Cursing himself, his
Flesh began to look black at the wrists of his Hands; and he continued diverse
Weeks with Faintness; and fearing an Ague, was going for his Acquaintance; but
not being able to go further, he laid himself down in a Barn, and there
continued two days and nights before he was found, from whence he was removed
to another Barn near Woolverhampton, and had a Keeper appointed him: his Flesh
began first to rise in great knobs at his Wrists and Knees, and to break and
run with putrid Matter, the Flesh shrunk from the Bones, his pain was
exquisite, the smell very offensive, Worms bred in the putrid Flesh, and his
Hands and Legs fell off. And thus continued he begging the Prayers of those
Divines that came to visit him, and acknowledging the just Judgment of God for
his Stealing, Lying, and Cursing, etc. for some Weeks a dreadful spectacle of
the Divine Vengeance.

Anno 1677. At Atherbury in Oxfordshire, a Woman that kept a petty Alehouse
having much addicted her self to Oaths and Curses, and one Morning a
neighboring Woman coming thither for some strong Drink she had occasion for,
and offering a piece of Money, she would have two pence or three pence more for
a former Debt, which the other resolutely denied. The Hostess began to swear,
and use several profane and abominable wishes and imprecations; as, God damn
me, and the Devil burn me, if it be not so; which last words she often
repeated, thrusting the other Woman violently out of her House, shutting the
Door, and locking it against her. Her Husband not long after coming home,
wondered to find the Door fast, but at last with one or two of his Neighbors,
he forced it open, and to his great surprizal finds in the midst of the Floor
the Relics of his Wife, one side of her Body and the Clothes on it, from the
sole of her Foot to the crown of her Head, burnt to ashes, and nothing left but
the Skeleton, or part of the Bones; whereas the other side remained whole, and
the Clothes not so much as touched or singed, tho it was observed that the
Flesh and Skin was all turned black.

Much the like Story (as Reverend Mr. Turner tells us) was published not many
years ago concerning a Maid in Dublin.

A dissolute young man (Servant to a Gentleman) who was much given to beastly
Drunkenness, meeting with some of his Companions at Sangall in Switzerland to
be merry, when they had drunk freely and extravagantly, he began to rail at and
quarrel with his Companions, and using many blasphemies against God, he added
this execration also; If I serve my Master any longer, I give my Body and Soul
to the Devil; and staying there all night, in the morning he began to think of
what he had said the night before, yet having no other means of subsistence, he
resolved to return to his Master's Service; but at his return when he was not
far from his Masters House, a man met him clad in black and fearful to behold,
who said to him, Come fellow, I am now ready to take that which is my right,
and which thou gave me yesterday; and so taking him by the Hand (to his great
Horror and Amazement) the Devil threw him to the ground, and so vanished: and
not long after this miserable young man being found by some of his Neighbors,
his Hands and Feet were drawn together; and being brought to a Lodging, he had
the use of all his Limbs taken from him, and so continued till he died
miserably.

A Serving-man in Lincolnshire, for every trifle used to swear by God's blood,
and would not be warned by his Friends, till at length falling into a grievous
Sickness, he was again much persuaded by his Friends to repent, which counsel
he still rejected, and hearing the Bell toll, in the very pains of Death, he
started up, God's wounds the Bell tolls for me, but he shall not have me yet;
whereupon the Blood issued out in a most fearful manner from all the joints of
his Body, from Mouth, Nose, Wrists, Knees, Heels, and Toes, and other parts of
his Body; and so he died, as Mr. Perkins relates.

Another example of like Punishment befell one Mr. Barrington a great Swearer,
who going forth a Hunting or Hawking on the Lord's Day or a Festival, and not
finding game and speeding to his mind, he went to an Alehouse at Puckeridg
five miles from Ware, in the way to Cambridg, and called for drink, beginning
to swear after his unhappy Custom, saying, By God's blood this is an unlucky
day: and presently after he bled at the Nose, which so vexed him that he began
to rail and blaspheme the Name of God, swearing Passion, Wounds, Nails, Flesh,
Blood, etc. till at last he proceeded further to bleed at the Ears, Eyes,
Wrists, joints of his Hands, and of all his Body, at the Navil and Fundament,
in a wonderful great quantity, and streams of Blood, blaring out his Tongue in
a fearful manner as black as Pitch, so that no Person durst come near him: this
continued till the Devil and Death made an end of him; next day (says the
Publisher hereof) the Body was laid in a Cart, carried to Standon, and buried
in the Highway.

Michael a Jewish Rabbin, as he was swearing and blaspheming the Name of Jesus,
fell down and broke his Neck.

Three Soldiers passing through a Wood in the Country of Samurta, there arose a
tempest of Thunder and Lightning, and one of them to show his contempt of God
and his Judgments, burst forth into swearing and blasphemy; but the Tempest
tearing up a Tree, it fell upon him, and crushed him to pieces.

One who for twelve or sixteen years together used to swear by God's Arms, in
the end his own Arm being hurt with a Knife, could not be healed by any means,
but rankled and festered from day to day, at length so rotted, that it fell
away piecemeal, and he himself through the anguish and pain thereof died.

I my self (faith a godly Divine that wrote lately) knew two most notorious
Swearers that brake their Necks, the one with a fall down a pair of Stairs, and
the other from his Horse.

At a Village called Benevides in Spain, two young men being together in the
Fields, there suddenly arose a terrible Tempest, and withal so violent a
Whirlwind, that it amazed the beholders: the two young men seeing the fury of
it coming toward them, run as fast as possible they might, but yet it overtook
them; and they fearing to be hoisted up into the Air by it, fell down flat upon
the Earth, where the Whirlwind whisked round about them for a pretty while, and
then passed forwards, and the one of them rose in such an Agony, that he was
scarce able to stand, and the other lying still and not stirring, some other
that stood under a Hedge a far off, went to see how he did, and found him stark
dead, with his Bones so crushed that the joints of his Arms and Legs turned
every way, as tho his Body had bin made of Moss; his Tongue also was pulled out
of his Mouth by the Roots, and could never be found, which was the more
remarkable, because he was noted to be an outrageous swearer and blasphemer of
God's Name.

At Tubing in Germany (as the History tells us) a Boy used to invent such new
Oaths as were not common; but the Lord sent a Canker or some worse Disease that
did eat out his Tongue, the instrument wherewith he blasphemed God.

A certain man (says Mr. Bolton) who in his Lifetime was given exceedingly to
the fearful sin of Swearing, had his Heart on his deathbed so exceedingly
filled with enraged greediness after it, that he desperately desired the
standers by to help him with Oaths, and to swear for him, tho himself in the
mean time swore as fast and furiously as he could.

Anno 1649. about the end of June, there was a Soldier at Ware, going with some
others to wash themselves in the River; and this Soldier finding the Water
shallow, he asked if there were no deeper a place for him to swim in, and some
told him that there was not far off a deep pit, but that it was very dangerous,
and therefore advised him to take heed how he went into it: to whom he
answered, God damn me, if it be as deep as Hell I will go into it, which
accordingly he did, but immediately sunk to the Bottom, never rising again, but
was there drowned.

November 1626. a Serving-man being at a Tavern in Essex, threatened to swear
the Constable out of the Town if he came there; but in a drunken fit as he was
running after one to make him pledge him a pint of Sack at a draught, he fell
down the Stairs and died immediately.

A Fisherman whom I knew (says Mr. Beadle in his Diary) bringing Mackarel to a
Port-town in Suffolk, where the People (because they were the first that came
that year) pressing eagerly to buy them, some against his Will being entered
into the Boat, he took up a Stone and swore by the Name of God he would make
them stand farther off, whereupon he sunk down instantly, and soon after died.

I of my own certain knowledge knew a Man in Yorkshire, a customary profane
desperate Swearer, who going out on a time, with some Neighbors on foot a
Hunting, it happened that he espied an Hare upon her Seat in his Range, so he
swore a great Oath or two, she is here, and putting up the Hare he ran over two
or three Lands and fell down, the rest of the Company following their Game
being got three or four Closes from him; and having lost the Hare, and not
seeing this man coming, they went back to see what was the cause of his not
coming, and finding him in the same place where he fell, they turned him up,
and he was stark dead.

There is no surer sign of a wicked Person than common and customary Swearing,
such should be served as Lewis the 9th of France served a Citizen of Paris,
that seared his Lips for swearing with an hot Iron; and when some said that it
was too great Cruelty, he answered, I would to God that with fearing mine own
Lips with an hot Iron, I could banish out of my Realm all abuse of Oaths.

Rashness is a fault in any human Action, but in no Cases more dangerous than
in the imprecation of Divine Judgments: men had need to deliberate and be well
advised before they appeal to Heaven for Vengeance; for ofttimes the prayers of
these rash People are heard by God, and answered beyond their expectation, to
their great Terror and Amazement, as plainly appears by several of the before
mentioned Examples.

And infinite more Examples might be produced, demonstrating the displeasure of
Almighty God against the provoking sin of profane Swearing and Cursing, and the
severity of his Justice in the signal punishments inflicted by him upon the
presumptuous customary practisers thereof. But I hope the perusal and serious
Consideration of these already set down, may be sufficient motives not only to
bring all rational Persons guilty of such wickedness to a sight of their
profaneness, but also to a sense of the great danger they are in, and be
thereby moved and incited to a firm purpose, and steadfast resolution of
Amendment, and a total forsaking of this their accustomed abominable Sin.

But if neither Law, Scripture, nor Example will prevail with them, then may
that of the holy Psalmist be fitly applied to them; Ye imagine mischief in your
heart upon the Earth, and your hands deal with wickedness. The Ungodly are
froward even from their Mothers Womb. They are as venom^^^ as the poison of a
Serpents, even like the deaf Adder that stops her Ears: Which refuses to
hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. Psalm. 58. 2, 3, 4, 5.

However let such profligate presumptuous profane, provoking Sinners assuredly
know, That the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.
Exodus 20. 7. He that dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord
shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his Wrath, and
vex them in his sore Displeasure. Psalm. 2. 4, 5. For tho God sometimes have
leaden Feet, yet the wicked find that he has iron Hands; For God shall wound
the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on still
in his Wickedness. Psalm. 68. 21.

CHAP. VII.
An Abstract of the Laws made against the profanation of the Lord's Day,
commonly called Sunday.

I Conceive it will not be altogether improper (before I proceed to give an
account of the Laws made for the observation of the Lords day) to set down an
Abstract here of the Statute of E. 6. about the Sacrament, and of that of Q. M.
about disturbing Ministers; likewise the Statute Jac. 1. about profane speaking
or jesting with the Name of God, etc. and then to proceed to the other Laws.

By the Statute 1 E. 6. Chapter 1. it is Enacted,

That none shall speak or do any thing in contempt of the most Holy Sacrament,
in pain of Imprisonment, and to make Fine and Ransom at the King's Will.

Three Justices of the Peace (Quor. unus) have power to take Information by the
Oaths of two lawful Persons (at least) concerning the Offense aforesaid, and to
bind over by Recognizances every Accuser and Witness in five Pound apiece to
appear at the next Sessions to give Evidence against the Offenders, who are
there to be enquired of before three Justices or more, by the Oaths of twelve
men, and also indicted if the matter alleged against them be found true; the
Offense to be prosecuted within three Months.

By the Statute 1 M. Sess. 2. Chapter 3. it is Enacted,

That if any shall disturb a Preacher lawfully Licensed, in his open Sermon or
Collation, he shall be by the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish,
brought before a Justice of the Peace, who upon due Accusation shall commit him
to safe Custody, and within six days after, together with another Justice,
shall diligently examine the Fact; who if they find cause, shall commit him to
the common Goal, there to remain for three Months, and from thence to the next
Quarter Sessions; at Which upon the parties Reconciliation, and entering into
Bond for good Behavior for one whole Year (at discretion of the Justices in
Sessions) he shall be released; but if he persist still in his Obstinacy, he
shall remain in Prison without Bail, until he shall reconcile, and be penitent
for his Offense.

He that rescues an Offender in this kind, shall suffer like Imprisonment as
aforesaid, and besides shall forfeit five Pounds to the King.

The Inhabitants of a Town that suffer such an Offender to escape, shall
forfeit five Pounds, being presented before the Justices of Peace in Sessions
within the County or Corporation where the escape was made.

Justices of Peace, Assize, and Oyer and Terminer, and Mayors, and head
Officers of Corporations, have power to hear and determine these Offenses, and
to impose the Fines aforesaid.

This Act shall not restrain the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Laws,
howbeit none shall be punished here for one Offense.

By the Statute 3 Jac. 1. Chapter 21. None shall in any Stage Play, Show, May game
or Pageant, profanely use the Name of God, Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost, or
Trinity, on pain of ten Pounds, to be divided between the King and Prosecutor.

It Is said that Constantine the Great made Laws for the strict observation of
the Lord's Day, commanding that through all the Roman Empire all servile
Employments should cease on those days: he prescribed also a form for the
Legions of Soldiers to be used both on the Sabbath Days and other days; and
himself used to show much Reverence and Attention to the Word of God, so that
many times he would stand up all the Sermon time: and when some of his
Courtiers told him that it would tend to his disparagement, he answered that it
was in the Service of the great God, who was no respecter of Persons.

By the Statute 1 Eliz. Chapter 2. Every Person is to resort to their Parish
Church, or (upon let thereof) to some other, every Sunday and Holy Day, upon
pain to be punished by Censures of the Church, and also to forfeit twelve pence
for every Default, to be levied by the Churchwardens there for the use of the
Poor, upon the Offendor's Goods by way of Distress, and for want of Distress,
to be committed to some Prison until the same be paid.

And by the Statute 23 El. Chapter 1. Every Person not repairing to Church,
(according to the Statute aforesaid) shall forfeit twenty Pounds for every
Month they so make Default; and if the Offender is not able to pay, and do not
pay within three Months after Judgment, then to be committed to Prison, and
there to remain until he have satisfied the same, or shall conform himself and
go to the Church.

By the Statute 3 Jac. 1. Chapter 4.

The King may refuse the twenty Pounds a Month for absenting from the Church,
and take in lieu thereof two third parts of the absenters Lands and Leases; but
here he shall not include the Recusants Mansion House, nor demise the two third
parts to a Recusant, or to any other for a Recusants use.

The Churchwardens and Constables of every Parish, or one of them, or (if
there be none such) then the High-Constable of the Hundred there shall present
once every year at the general Sessions of the Peace, the monthly absence from
Church of every Popish Recusant, and then Children being above the Age of nine
years, and their Servants, together with the Age of their Children, as near as
they can know them, on pain to forfeit respectively for every such default
twenty Shillings; which Presentment the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk shall
record without Fee, on pain of forty Shillings.

If upon such Presentment (being the first) the Recusant be convicted, the
Officer that presents him shall have forty Shillings reward, to be levied by
Warrant upon the Recusants Goods and Estate, as the more part of the Justices
of Peace shall think fit.

But Note, that his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the Church
of England, and qualified according to the late Statute of Indulgence, are
exempted from the Penalties of these Statutes.

The command of the Sabbath has a special memento prefixed to it, which may
not only note to us, that we are by this Memento, Remember thou keep Holy the
Sabbath Day, to observe the Lord's zeal for the observance thereof, but we are
thereby put in mind, timely to lay aside our worldly Business, and get our
Hearts into readiness for the entertainment of God into the same. And although
nothing is more acceptable to God than the true and sincere Worship and Service
of him according to his Holy Will, and that the Holy keeping of the Lord's Day
is a principal part of the true Worship and Service of God: Yet the People of
this Kingdom having enjoyed a long continued series of Peace, Plenty, and
Prosperity, instead of rendering thanks to Almighty God for this great Blessing,
and of serving him in Holiness and Righteousness of Life and Conversation; they
on the contrary, like the idolatrous Jews upon the making of their Golden-Calf,
they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, Exodus 32. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 7.
Nay the people of this Realm were so entirely devoted to Games and Pastimes,
that they could not, or would not forbear them upon the Lord's Day, but spent
that day in the service of Satan, which Almighty God has hallowed and
commanded to be set apart for the Service and Worship of himself.

For this Day in many Places of the Realm being profaned and neglected by a
disorderly sort of People, in exercising and frequenting Bear-baiting,
Bull-baiting, Enterludes, Common Plays, and other unlawful Exercises and
Pastimes thereon. And for that many Quarrels, Bloodsheds and other great
Inconveniences did grow by the Resort and Concourse of People going out of
their own Parishes, to such disorderly and unlawful Exercises, and Pastimes,
neglecting Divine Service both in their own Parishes and elsewhere.

Therefore by the Statute 1 Car. 1. Chapter 1. it is enacted, That there shall be
no Meetings, Assemblies, or Concourse of People out of their own Parishes on
the Lord's Day, within this Realm of England, or any the Dominions thereof, for
any Sports or Pastimes whatsoever, nor any Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting,
Enterludes, Common Plays, or other unlawful Exercises or Pastimes used by any
Person or Persons within their own Parishes, and that every Person and Persons
offending in any the Premises, shall forfeit for every Offense three Shillings
and four Pence, to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the Offense shall be
committed. And if any one Justice of the Peace of the County, or the Chief
Officer or Officers of any City, Borough or Town-corporate, where such Offense
shall be committed, upon his or their view, or Confession of the Party, or
Proof of any one or more Witness by Oath, which such Magistrate has power to
administer, shall find any Person offending in the Premises, the said
Magistrate shall give Warrant under his or their Hand and Seals to the
Constable or Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where such Offense shall
be committed, to levy the said Penalties so to be assessed by way of Distress
and Sale of the Goods of every such Offender, rendering the said Offenders the
overplus; and in Default of such Distress, that the Party offending be set
publicly in the Stocks by the space of three Hours. And if any Man be sued or
impeached for the Execution of this Law, he may plead the general Issue, and
give the matter of Justification in evidence; and no Man to be impeached by
this Act, except he be called in question within one Month next after the
Offense committed. The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction not to beabridged by this
Act, but that the Ecclesiastical Court may punish the same Offense, as if this
Act had not been made.

This Statute 1 Car. 1. Chapter 1. only prohibiting unlawful Sports, Games and
Pastimes, on the Lord's Day; Carriers, Waggoners, Wayr-men, Carmen, and
Drovers, being out of the Statute, having no Veneration for the Lord's Day,
kindness for themselves, nor pity for their Beasts, did make a Common practice
of Traveling upon this Day; and Butchers did usually kill and fell Victuals on
the Lord's Day. So in the 3 Car. 1. An Act was made, prohibiting Carriers,
Drovers, etc. to travel on this Day, on pain of twenty Shillings every Offense;
and Butchers for killing and selling Victuals thereon, on pain of six Shillings
and eight Pence for every Offense. But this Statute standing but upon
contiunance, and expiring after the end of the first Session of Parliament then
next following: Several of these Persons returned again (like the Dog to his
Vomit) to their former accustomed Profaneness.

And tho this Statute 3 Car. 1. Chapter 2. was by the Statute 17 Car. 1. Chapter 4.
continued and made perpetual, yet the unnatural uncivil Civil War between the
King and Parliament breaking out shortly after, this Statute was much neglected
and seldom put in Execution; two Witnesses being required for the conviction of
the Offender, which was troublesome.

So by the Statute 29 Car. 2. Chapter 7. it is enacted,

That all Persons whatsoever shall on the Lord's Day apply themselves to the
observation of the same, by exercising themselves thereon in the Duties of
Piety and true Religion, publicly and privately. And no Tradesman, Artificer,
Workman, Labourer, or other Person whatsoever, shall do or exercise any worldly
Labors, Business or Work of their ordinary Callings, upon the Lord's Day:
(Works of Necessity and Charity only excepted) And every Person being of the
Age of Fourteen Years or upwards offending in the Premises, shall for every
such Offense forfeit the Sum of five Shillings; and no Person or Persons
whatsoever shall publicly cry, show forth or expose to Sale, any Wares,
Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, Goods or Chattels whatsoever upon the Lord's Day,
or any part thereof, upon pain of forfeiting the same Goods so cried, or showed
forth, or exposed to Sale.

And no Drover, Horse-courser, Waggoner, Butcher or Higler, their or any of
their Servants shall travel, or come into his or their Inn, or Lodging upon the
Lord's Day, or any part thereof, upon pain of twenty Shillings for every such
Offense; and none shall use, employ, or travel upon the Lord's Day, with any
Boat, Wherry, Lighter or Barge, except it be upon extraordinary occasion, to be
allowed by a Justice of the P^ace of the County, or Head Officer, or Justice of
the Peace of the City, Borough, or Town-Corporate, where the Fact shall be
committed, on pain of five Shillings for every such Offense; and if any Person
so offending in any of the Premises shall be thereof convicted before any
Justice of the Peace of the County, or chief Officer or Justice of the Peace of
the City, etc. where the Offense shall be committed, upon his or their view, or
confession of the Party, or proof of any one or more Witnesses (which Oath the
said Magistrates are empowered to administer) then the said Justice, or chief
Officer or Officers, shall give Warrant under his or their Hand, to the
Constable or Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where the Offense shall
be committed, to seize the said Goods so showed forth, or put to sale, as
aforesaid, and to fell the same: And to levy the said other Forfeitures or
Penalties by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods of every such Offender
distrained, rendering them the overplus of the Money raised thereby; and in
Default of such Distress, or in case of Insufficiency or Inability to pay, the
Party offending to be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of two Hours.
And all Forfeitures to be employed to the use of the Poor of the Parish where
the said Offense shall be committed: Save that any such Justice, Mayor, etc.
may out of the said Forfeitures reward the informer according to their
Discretions, so as such Reward exceed not a third part of the Forefeitures.

But this Act is not to extend to the prohibiting of dressing of Meat in
Families, or dressing or selling of Meat in Inns, Cooks-shops or
Victualling-houses, for such as otherwise cannot be provided, nor to the crying
or selling of Milk before nine of the Clock in the Morning, and after-four in
the Afternoon.

No Person to be impeached, prosecuted, or molested for any Offense before
mentioned, unless it be within ten Days after the Offense committed.

And if any Person shall travel upon the Lord's Day, and be robbed, the
Inhabitants of the Hundred shall not answer for the Robbery, but upon notice of
such Robbery to them or some of them given, or Hue and Cry for the same to be
made, they shall make or cause to be made fresh pursuit after the said
Offenders with Horsemen and Footmen, according to the Statute 27 Eliz. upon
pain to forfeit as much Money to the King's Majesty as might have been
recovered against them by the Party robbed.

And no Person or Persons whatsoever upon the Lord's Day shall serve or execute
any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree (except in Cases of
Treason, Felony or Breach of the Peace) but that the Service thereof shall be
utterly void, and the Person or Persons so serving or executing the same, shall
be as liable to the Suit of the Party grieved, and to answer Damages to him for
doing thereof, as if he or they had done the same without any Writ, Process,
Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree at all.

Having showed what Provision the Law makes for the Observation of the Lord's
Day. I shall proceed in the next Chapter to give an Account what some Texts of
Holy Writ command in such Case to be observed.

Note that by the Statute 1 Jac. 1. Chapter 22. No Shoemaker shall put his Wares
to sale upon Sundays, on pain of three Shillings and four Pence, and also to
forfeit the full value of the Wares sold.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the several Texts or Places of Scripture relating to the due Observation
and Sanctifying of the Sabbath.

REmember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy: Six Days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of thy Lord thy God: in it
thou shall not do any work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Man
Servant, nor thy Maid Servant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is within
thy Gates. For in Six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and (...)
that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day, and hallowed it, Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Six days thou shall do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shall rest: that
thine Ox and thine Ass may rest, and the Son of thy Handmaid, and the Stranger
may be refreshed, Exodus 23. 12.

Speak thou also unto the Children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths ye
shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you, throughout your Generations,
that ye may know that I am the Lord, that does sanctify you: Ye shall keep the
Sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you. Every one that defiles it, shall
surely be put to death: for whosoever does any work therein, that Soul shall be
cut off from amongst the People. Six days may work be done, but in the seventh
is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever does any work in the
Sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death, Exodus 31. 13, 14, 15.

Six days thou shall work, but on the seventh day thou shall rest, in
Earing-time, and in Harvest thou shall rest, Exodus 34. 21.

Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord, Levit.
19. 30. 26. 2.

And while the Children of Israel were in the Wilderness they found a Man that
gathered Sticks upon the Sabbath Day, and they that found him gathering Sticks,
brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the Congregation. And they put
him in Ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him. And the
Lord said unto Moses, the Man shall surely be put to death: all the
Congregation shall stone him with Stones; and all the Congregation brought him
without the Gamp, and stoned him with Stones, and he died; as the Lord
commanded Moses. Number. 15. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.

Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has commanded thee;
six days thou shall labor and do all thy Work; but the seventh Day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any Work, thou, nor thy
Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Man servant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thine Ox,
nor thine Ass, nor any of thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is within thy
Gates; that thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant may rest as well as thou.
Deuteronomy. 5. 12, 13, 14.

Six days shall Work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an
Holy day, a Sabbath of Rest to the Lord; whosoever does work therein shall be
put to death. Exodus 35. 2.

Blessed is the Man that does this, and the Son of Man that lays hold on it:
that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his hand from doing any
Evil. Isa. 56. 2.

If thou turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy Pleasure on my
Holy day, and call the Sabbath a Delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasures,
nor speaking thine own words. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and
I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with
the Heritage of Jacob thy Father: for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
Isa. 58. 13, 14.

And on the seventh day, ye shall have an holy Convocation, ye shall do no
servile Work, Number. 38. 25.

Thus says the Lord, Take heed to your selves, and hear no Burden on the
Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the Gates of Jerusalem. Neither carry forth a
Burden out of your Houses on the Sabbath Day, neither do ye any work, but
hallow the Sabbath Day; as I commanded your Fathers. But if you will not
hearken to me to hallow the Sabbath Day, and not to bear a Burden, even entering
in at the Gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day: Then will I kindle a Fire in
the Gates thereof, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall
not be quenched. Jer. 17. 21, 22, and 27.

Thou have despised mine Holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths. Ezekiel. 22.
8.

Moreover, this they have done unto me, they have defiled my Sanctuary in the
same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths. Ezekiel. 23. 38.

And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments and
my Laws? See for that the Lord has given you the Sabbath, therefore he gives
you on the sixth day the Bread of two days; abide ye every Man in his place,
let no Man go out of his place on the seventh day. So the People rested on the
seventh day. Exodus 16. 28, 29, 30.

Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that
they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. But the House of Israel
rebelled against me in the Wilderness: they walked not in my Statutes, and they
despised my Judgments, which if a Man keep he shall even live in them. And my
Sabbaths they greatly polluted: then I said I would pour out my Fury upon them
in the Wilderness to consume them. Ezekiel. 20. 12, 13.

In those days I saw in Judah some treading Winepresses on the Sabbath, and
bringing in Sheaves, and lading Asses; also Wine, Grapes, and Figs, and all
manner of Burdens which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day, and I
testified against them in the day wherein they sold Victuals. There dwelt Men
of Tire also therein, which brought Fish, and all manner of Wares; and sold on
the Sabbath unto the Children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. Then I contended with
the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what Evil thing is that ye do and
profane the Sabbath day? Did not your Fathers thus, and did not God bring all
this Evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet ye bring more Wrath upon Israel, by
profaning the Sabbath. Nehem. 13. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Several other Places of Scripture might be here inserted to this purpose; but
it being plain and obvious that many Persons are so emboldned by their
customary and continued Practice in the Profanation of the Lord's Day, that
(to the great grief of every good Christian) they contemn the Law, neglect
God's House, and despise his Holy Ordinances, ridicule all good Counsel and
Advice, and stop their Ears to all Godly Persuasions.

I shall therefore (for the Terror of such obstinate Sinners) in this next
Chapter, set down several Examples of God's Indignation and Wrath poured down
upon the Heads of customary and presumptuous Profaners of the Lord's Day; in
hopes that thereby they may be brought to take notice of that Saying of the
Poet,

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
An happy Man is he, that can beware
Of others harms, and of himself take care.
And so entitle themselves to that promise of God: When the wicked man turns
away from his Wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is lawful
and right, he shall save his Soul alive. Ezekiel. 18. 27.

And by turning to the Lord, and forsaking their wicked Courses, prevent the
like Judgments from falling upon their own Heads. For to the Lord our God
belong Mercies, and Forgivenesses, tho we have rebelled against him: Neither
have we obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his Laws which be set
before us. Dan. 9. 9, 10.

CHAP. IX.
An Account of several Instances of God's severe Justice, and Punishments that
have befaln presumptuous, customary Profaners of the Lord's Day, commonly
called Sunday.

IT has been observed, and still taken notice of, that most of those Criminals
that make their Ignominious Exit at the Gallows, who come to a sight and sense
of their Sins, and make Confession of their Wickedness, and beg pardon at God's
Hands for their sinful course of Life; do bewail their neglect of the due
Observation of the Lord's Day, and warn others by their Example, to forsake
such Wickedness, and of the sad Consequences that attend those that make a
practice of profaning the Lord's Day.

This is the Market Day of the Soul, wherein the Lord in a more special manner
uses to meet his People, to dispense his Blessings and Graces in and by his
holy Ordinances, to those that humbly and reverently attend upon him therein:
The careful Sanctification of it, keeps up the Power of Godliness in our Hearts
and Lives, and the Prophaners thereof have often been punished with signal
Judgments of God's severe Justice, as may partly appear by the following
Examples.

In Bedfordshire, a Match at Football being made and appointed on the
Sabbath Day in the Afternoon, whilst two were in the Belfry toling of the Bell
to call the Company together, there was suddenly heard a Clap of Thunder, and a
Flash of Lightning was seen by some that sat in the Church Porch, coming
through a dark Lane, and flashing in their Faces, which much terrified them,
and passing through the Porch into the Belfry, it tripp'd up his Heels that was
toling the Bell, and struck him stark dead; and the other that was with him,
was so sorely blasted therewith, that shortly after he died also.

At a place called Tidworth, on the Sabbath Day many being met together to play
at Football in the Churchyard, one of them had his Leg broken, which
presently gangreenizing, he forthwith died thereof.

At Alecester in Warwickshire, a lusty young Women went to a Green not far off,
where she said she would dance as long as she could stand, but while she was
dancing (it being upon the Sabbath day) God struck her with a violent Disease,
whereof within two days after she died.

Also in the same Place not long after, a young Man presently after the Evening
Service was ended, brought a pair of Cudgels into the Street, near to the
Minister's House, calling upon diverse to play with him, but they all refusing,
at length came one who took them up; saying, tho I never played in my Life, yet
I will play one Bout now; but shortly after he was jesting with a young Maid,
he took up a Birding Piece, which was charged, saying, Have at thee; and the
Piece going off, shot her in the Face, whereof she immediately died, for which
Act, he forfeited all his Goods and Chattels, and underwent the Law.

At Wooton in the same County, a Miller going forth on the Sabbath Day to a
Wake, when he came Home at Night, found his House, Mill, and all he had burnt
down to the Ground.

And at Woolston in the same County, many loose Persons kept a Whitson-Ale, and
had a Maurice-dancing on the Sabbath Day, in a Smith's Barn, to the great Grief
of the Godly Minister there, who used his utmost endeavor to restrain them
from such Profaneness, but in vain; so as it pleased God shortly after a Fire
kindled in that Smith's Shop, which burnt it down, with his House and Barn; and
raging furiously, going sometimes with the Wind, and sometimes against it, it
burnt down many others Houses, most of which were those of the prime Actors in
that Profanation of the Lord's Day.

Anno 1634, On a Lord's Day, in the time of a great Frost, Fourteen young Men
while they were playing at Football upon the Ice on the River Trent, near to
Gain^borough, meeting all together in a scuffle, the Ice suddenly broke, and
they were all drowned.

In the Edg of Essex near Brinckly, two Fellows working in a Chalk-Pit, the one
was boasting to his Companion how he had angered his Mistress with staying so
late at their Sports the last Sunday Night, but he said he would anger her
worse the next Sunday Night; but he had no sooner said this, but suddenly the
Earth fell down upon him, and killed him outright, with the Fall whereof his
Fellow's Limbs was broken, who had been also Partner with him in his Jollity on
the Lord's Day.

In the County of Devon, one Edward Ameridith a Gentleman, being pained in his
Feet a long time, and being somewhat recovered, one said to him he was glad to
see him so nimble, Mr. Ameridith replied, he doubted not but to dance about the
May Pole the next Lord's Day, but before he moved out of that place he was
smitten with such a Feebleness of Heart, and Dissiness in his Head, that
desiring help to carry him to a House, he died before the next Lord's Day came.

At Walton in Surrey upon the Thames, there in a great Frost, Anno 1634, Three
young Men on the Lord's Day, after they had been at the Church in the Forenoon,
where the Minister pressing the words of his Text, out of 2 Cor. 5. 10. That we
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc. They the while
whispered as they sat: And in the Afternoon they went together over the Thames
upon the Ice, unto a disorderly House of Gameing, etc. where they spent the
remainder of the Lord's Day, and part of the Night also in Revelling; one of
them in a Tavern merrily discoursing the next Day of his Sabbath Deeds, and of
his Voyage over the Ice; but on the Tusday after these three returning
homewards, and attempting to pass over the Ice again, they all sunk down to the
bottom like Stones; whereof one only was miraculously preserved, but the other
two were drowned.

Anno 1598, the Town of Teverton in Devo^shire, was often warned and advised,
and told by the Godly Pastor thereof, that God would bring some heavy Judgment
upon the Inhabitants of that place, for their horrible Profanation of the
Lord's Day, occasioned chiefly by reason of their Market Day being on the
Monday, and accordingly not long after their Minister's death, in the said
Year, God sent a terrible Fire, which in less then half an Hour consumed the
whole Town; except the Church, the Courthouse, Almes-houses, and a few poor
People's Dwellings, and above 50 Persons were consumed and perished in the
Flames. Also Anno 1612, it was again wholly burnt down, except a few poor
Houses; they not being warned by the former Judgment, but continuing in the
same Sin.

In the Year 1635, A Profane Company of young Men went (as Mr. Faucnor relates)
on the Lord's Day early in the Morning to Clarendon-Park, to cut down a
May Pole, and having laden the Cart with it, at Miln^rs-Barn entering into
Salisbury, one of the Cart Wheels falling into a Rutt, made the young Tree in
the Cart (which they had stolen for a Pole) to give a great shugg on one side,
which struck one of the Company such a blow on the Head, that it beat out his
Brains, so that he presently died in the place, and there lay a fearful
Spectacle of God's Wrath, both against that idle Sport, and wilful prosaning of
the Sabbath, whilst he makes the very thing they had chosen for their Sport and
Pastime, to be the Instrument of executing his Fury. And Dr. Teate gives a
second Example of this Nature, in the Year 1626.

We read that Mr. Abberley a Godly Minister in Burton upon Trent, did often
take occasion to reprove and threaten Sabbath Breakers, especially such as sold
and bought Meat upon the Sabbath Day Mornings, a Practice too common it seems
in that place; nevertheless there was a Tailor in the Town, a very nimble
active Fellow, dwelling at the upper end of the Town, who would go through the
long Street (as it were in Bravado) to the other end of the Town, and fetch
home Meat on the Lord's Day before Morning-Prayer: But as he came back with
both his Hands full, in the midst of the Street he fell down stark dead, which
as it pleased God, says the Doctor, did work some Reformation, both amongst the
Butchers and others. When I was in Cheshire (says my Author) there was one Sir
T. S. a Papist, and at that time in favor at the Court, who coming into his
Country was much feasted and followed by the Gentry, and upon a Sabbath day was
entertained and feasted at a Knight's House, where many others were present;
toward Evening they went to Dancing, and in the midst of their Sports there
was one Sir J. D. that had a great Blow given him on his Leg, by an invisible
Hand, which made him lame for a long time after.

Thomas Savage (a young Man who was Executed at Ratcliff, October. 28. 1668, for
Murdering his Fellow Servants) whilst he was in Newgate, cried out thus to some
that came to see him, O Wretch (said he) that I was (...) studied how I might
spend the Lord's Day in the Devil's Work, I thought I could never dishonor God
enough, and that time I should have served God in, I did most for Satan in it;
on the Sabbaths I used to play my Prancks, I sometimes went into the Church
indeed, but (I may speak it to my Shame and deep Sorrow) I never heard one
whole Sermon all the while I was with my Master, and indeed I laughed at those
that spent the Sabbath in Hearing and Praying, and looked upon them as the
veriest Fools in the World; I was glad when the Sabbath came, that I might have
time to run to my Vile Comrades, I rejoiced that then I could go to satisfy my
cursed Lusts with Wherish Women. O tell young Men from me, that the breaking of
the Sabbath is a dangerous and costly Sin.

Also while he, was in Newgate, one Sabbath day his Fellow Prisoners being at
Cards, asked him to join with them, O (said he) you and I have something else
to do with our Time, than to play at Cards; is it now a time for us to be
sporting away the Sabbath, when we have but one poor Sand left us to work for
Eternity?

A Minister on a time preaching and pressing the Sanctification of the Sabbath,
had occasion in his Sermon to make mention of that Man, that by the special
Command of God was stoned to death for gathering Sticks upon the Sabbath day.
Whereupon one in the Congregation stood up and laughed, and made all the haste
that he could out of the Church, and went to gathering of Sticks, the he had no
need of them, but when the People came out from Sermon they found this Man
stark dead, with the bundle of Sticks in his Arms, lying in the Church Porch.

Gregory Tomonensis reports, that an Husbandman, who upon the Lord's Day went
to plow his Field, as he cleansed his Plow-share with an Iron, the Iron stuck
so fast into his Hand, that for two Years he could not be delivered from it,
but carried it about continually to his exceeding great Pain and Shame.

Another Profane Fellow without any regard to God or his Service, made no
Conscience to lead his Corn out of the Field on the Lord's Day in Sermon time;
but he was well rewarded for his ungodly Covetousness, for that Corn which with
so much care he gathered together, was consumed with Fire from Heaven, with the
Barn, and all the Grain that was in it.

And a certain Nobleman every Lord's Day using to go a Hunting in the Sermon
time, the Lord punished his Impiety with this Judgment, he caused his Lady to
bring forth a Child with a Head like a Dog, that seeing he preserred his Dogs
before the Service of God, he might have one of his own getting, to make much
of.

At Kimstat a Town in France, in the Year 1559, there lived a certain covetous
Women that was so greedy of Gain, that she would neither frequent the Church
her self to hear the Word of God, not suffer any of her Family to go, but
continually stayed laboring and toyling about drying and pilling Flax, and
doing other domestic Businesses, and could not be reclaimed by her Neighbors,
and one Sabbath day Fire seemed to run among the Flax without doing any harm,
the next Sabbath day it took Fire indeed, but was quickly extinct; all this
would give her no warning, but she continued obstinate in her Profaneness, the
third Sabbath day the Flax again taking Fire could not be quenched, till it
burnt her, and two of her Children to death; for tho they were taken out alive,
yet the next day they all three died, and that which was most to be wondered at
(says the Reporter) a young Infant in the Cradle was taken out of the midst of
the Flames without any hurt: thus God uses to exercise his Judgments upon the
Contemners of his Commandments.

In the Year 1583, at London, at the Bear-Garden, a great number of People
being gathered together on a Sabbath day to see the Sport, the Lord that he
might chasten them in some sort, and show his dislike of the profaning the
Sabbath. caused the Scaffolds suddenly to break; the Beholders to tumble down
headlong, so that eight Persons Men and Women were slain, besides many others
were sore hurt and bruifed, to the shorthing of their Lives.

The like Judgment happened at a Town in Bedfordshire called Risley, in the
Year 1607, where the Floor of a Chamber, wherein a great number were gathered
together to see a Play on the Sabbath day, fell down, and many by the Fall
thereof sore hurt, and some killed.

In May 1629, one John Bow of Ely (Coachman to one Mr. Batnum of Beenham) a
Fellow very vicious, and exceeding in these two Evils of Profane Swearing and
Drunkenness, on the Sabbath day in the Sermon time drank himself drunk, so that
when he was to sit in the Coach-box to drive the Coach, he fell from it under
the Horses Feet, and was trodden to death, or so hurt at least that he died
shortly after.

In November 1621, one Richard Burn Servant to Jasper Burch, Gardener of Ely,
accustomed to travel on the Lord's Day, and making no reckoning of the Sabbath,
seldom or never coming to the Church on that day but went onwards to St. Ives
Market, and so spent the day; and being drunk, was at length overtaken by the
just Judgment of God, for going up the Stream in his Boat, which he had laden
with Marketable Wares, he fell into the River and was drowned.

Mr. Hugh Clark, preaching about Oundle in Northamptonshire, where the People
were generally very ignorant, and much addicted to the Profanation of the
Lord's Day, by Whitson-Ales, Maurice-Dances, etc. which he much set himself
against, endeavoring to evince their, and to draw them from the Evil and
Danger o^ the Sin, denouncing God's Judgments in case of their obstinate
Perseverance: but they being trained up in those Courses, and hardened by
custom, persisted still in their Wickedness. At last on a Lord's Day the Leader
of the Dance, a Lusty young Man, in the midst of their Profane Pastimes, fell
down suddenly and died; but they soon shaking off their Fear, returned to their
Vomit again; the Lord's Day following Mr. Clark took occasion from this sad
dispensation to quote that Text, Jer. 17. 27. If thou will not hearken to me,
to hallow the Sabbath day, etc. then will I kindle a Fire in the Gates thereof,
etc. The People still kicked against these Admonitions, and the Eve following
returned to their Sports again, among whom was a Smith that was a chief
Ringleader, but it pleased God the very next day, two Husbandmen coming to
sharpen their Plow-shares at his Shop, a spark from the red hot Iron as he was
beating it upon the Anvil, flew into the Thatch, which both the Smith and the
Neighbors saw, but had no power to move toward it, which presently burnt down
the Shop, House, and all the Smith had. This Mr. Clark pressed upon their
Consciences, but nothing would prevail till at last upon a Sabbath day at
Night, when they were returned to their several Homes, there was heard a great
noise and rattling of Chains up and down the Town, which was accompanied with
such a smell and stink of Fire and Brimstone, that many of their guilty
Consciences suggested to them that the Devil was come to fetch them away quick
into Hell, and now and not till now they began to think in good earnest of a
Reformation.

Edmond Kirk Vintner, executed July 11. 1684, for murdering his Wife, in his
Confession acknowledged himself frequently guilty of profaning the Lord's Day,
upon which Holy Day (says he) I committed the heinous Sin of murdering my
Wife. Thus Sin was punished with Sin, a less with a greater, and the greater
with the Gallows, and that greater committed near the same Gallows, and himself
confessed that he had (to his Wife asking whilst she passed by what place that
was) told her, it was Tyburn, where John Gower was lately hanged for killing
his Wife. O Lord how dear to me thy Counsels are, but how just and terrible thy
Judgments.

Mr. Smythies Curate of St. Giles's Cripple-gate, in the Confession and
Discovery of a condemned Prisoner executed for Theft, May 25, 1687, says (as
Mr. Burton reports) that it was his earnest desire that all young Men should
take care not to mispend the Lord's Day. And I do not know (says Mr. Smythies)
that ever I observed any Repentance in a condemned Malefactor, who did not
bitterly lament his neglect of his duty to God on that day.

In a Convocation of the Clergy at Perth in Scotland, Anno 1188, for the better
Sanctification of the Sabbath day; it was ordained (as Archbishop Spotswood
tells us) that every Saturday from twelve of the Clock should be set apart for
preparation thereunto, and that all People at the sound of the Bell should
address themselves to hear Prayers, and abstain from worldly Labors till
Monday Morning.

If nothing that is here showed can prevail, or any ways induce the
presumptuous obstinate Prosaners of the Lord's Day to forsake their sinful and
provoking Wickedness, then let him that is young observe what Solomon says,
Rejoice O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of
thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes.
But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment,
Eccles. 11. 9. And he that is old, let him know that death is at his Heels,
ready to trip them up, and gives no warning of his coming; let not such an one
therefore procrastinate and put off Repentance, but let him watch, for he knows
neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man comes. For he shall come
in an hour that he is not aware of, and if he find him in the daring provoking
pursuit of his unrepented of Prafaness, shall cut him in sunder, and appoint
him his Portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth. Math. 24. 50, 51. and 25. 13. Luke. 12. 46.

CHAP. X.
A brief Account of the Laws made against vicious and debauched Men, and lewd
Women, about getting Bastards.

NOte that before the Reign of K. H. 7. there were eighteen infamous Stews or
Brothel-houses, and H. 7. for a time forbad them; but afterward twelve only
were permitted, and had Signs painted on their Walls, as a Boars-Head, the
Cross-Keys, the Gun, the Castle, the Cardinals-Hat, the Bell, the Swan, etc.
But afterward H. 8. in the 37 th Year of his Reign, by Proclamation under the
great Seal, dated 30 March, Anno 37. aforesaid, suppressed all the Stews and
Brothel-houses on the Bank-side in Southwark, for that they were against the
Law of God, and the Law of the Land: And those Infamous, Women were not buried
in Christian Burial, when they were dead, nor permitted to receive the Rites of
the Church whilst they lived.

And the Keeper, He or She, of such Houses, is punishable by Indictment at the
Common Law, by Fine and Imprisonment; for although Adultery and Fornication be
punishable by the Ecclesiastical Law, yet the keeping of Bawdy, or Stews, or
Brothel-houses, being as it were a Common Nuisance, is punishable by the Common
Law, and is the cause of-many Mischiefs, not only to the overthrowing of their
Bodies, but to the indangering of their Souls.

By the Custom of London, as appears by the 1 H. 7. Fol. 6. etc. If a
Constable, etc. has Notice that a Woman is in Adultery with a Man, that a Man
or Woman of Evil Fame, is gone to a suspected House, he may take help with him
and enter the House, and if he find them so, he may arrest them, and carry them
to Prison, or to a Justice of the Peace, to be bound over and prosecuted.

Bastards begotten and born out of lawful Matrimony, being an Offense against
God's Law, and Man's Law.

It is by the Statute 18 Eliz. Chap. 3. Enacted, That two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, in or next to the Limits where the
Parish Church is, within which Parish a Bastard shall be born, that may be
chargeable to the Parish (upon Examination of the Cause and Circumstances)
shall by their discretion take order, as well for the punishment of the Mother
and reputed Father, of such Bastard Child, as also for the relief of every such
Parish in part, or in all; and for the keeping of every such Bastard Child; by
charging such Mother or reputed Father, with the Payment of Money weekly, or
other Sustentation for the relief of such Child in such wise as they shall
think meet and convenient. And if after the same Order by them subscribed under
their Hands, the Mother or reputed Father upon notice thereof, shall not
observe and perform the same, that then every such Party so making Default in
the nonperformance thereof, to be committed to the Common Goal without Bail,
except they give sufficient Surety to perform the same, or to appear Personally
at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the same County,
where such Order shall be taken, and also to abide such Order, as the Justices
there, or the more part of them, shall take in that Behalf (if they take any)
and if they take none at the Sessions, then to abide and perform the Order
before made as is abovesaid.

And by the Statute 7 Jas. 1. Chapter 4. It is Enacted, That every lewd Woman which
shall have any Bastard Child, which may be chargeable to the Parish, the
Justice of Peace shall commit such lewd Woman to the House of Correction, there
to be punished, and set on work during the term of one whole Year; and if
afterward she offend again, then to be committed to the House of Correction as
aforesaid, and to remain there, until she can put in good Sureties for her good
Behavior, not to offend so again.

And by the Statute 3 Car. 1. Chapter 4. It is Enacted, That all Justices of the
Peace, within their several Limits and Precincts, and in their several
Sessions, may do and execute all things concerning that part of the Statute 18
Eliz. Chapter 3. aforementioned, that by Justices of the Peace in the several
Counties are by the said Statute limited to be done.

The Punishment appointed by these Statutes being gentle and easy, we see by
every days Experience that Bastards are very frequently begotten; I shall
therefore inform such vicious profane and sinful Persons in the next Chapter,
what Punishments the Scripture has appointed for such Persons of such
profligate and debauched Lives, that they may not be ignorant of the great
Anger and Displeasure conceived by Almighty God against such profane sinful
Courses, and of the great Hazard and Danger they involve their precious Souls
in, if they forsake not their vicious way of living, and by hearty Repentance
cleanse their Souls, putting away the Filth of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 2. 3. 21. And
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1. For he that sows to the
Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit neap Life everlasting. Gal. 6. 8.

CHAP. XI.
Of the several Places of Scripture threatening Judgments, or forbidding
Adultery, Fornication, Incontinency, Lasoiviousness and Whoredom, and showing
God's Anger and Displeasure against such profane Wickedness.

THou shall not commit Adultery. Exodus 20. 14. Deuteronomy. 5. 18.

Do not prostitute thy Daughter, to cause her to be a VV^^re; lest the Land
fall to Whoredom, and the Land become full of Wickedness. Lev. 19. 29.

(...) the Man that commits Adultery with another Man's Wife, even he that
commits Adultery with his Neighbors Wife, the and the Adulteress shall
surely put to death, Lev. 20. 10.

And the Daughter of any Priest, if she profane her self by playing the Whore,
she profaneth her Father, she shall be hurnt with Fire. Levit. 21. 9.

If a Man be found lying with a Woman married to an Husband, then they shall
both of them die, both the Man that lay with the Woman, and the Woman: So
shall thou put away Evil from Israel. Deuteronomy. 22. 22.

The Eye also of the Adulterer waits for the ^^ilight, saying, No Eye shall
see me, and disg^iseth his Face. Job 24. 15.

When thou saw a Thief thou consented'st unto him, and have been Partaker
with the Adulterers. Psalm. 50. 18.

By the means of a VVhorish Woman, a Man is brought to a piece of Bread, and
the Adulteress will hunt for the precious Life. Prove. 6. 26.

Who so commits Adultery with a Woman, lacks Understanding: He that does
it, destroys his own Soul. Prove. 6. 32. A VVound and Dishonor shall he get,
and his Reproach shall not be wiped away. ver. 33.

The Lips of a strange Woman drop as an Honeycomb, and her Mouth is smoother
than Oil. But her and is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword, her
Feet go down to death, her Steps take hold ^n Hell. Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5. and 2.
18. and 7. 27.

A Whore is a deep Ditch; and a strange Women (...)a narrow Pit. Prove. 23.27.
and 22. ^4. Such i^ the way of an Adulterous Woman; she eats and wipeth her
Mouth, and says, I have done (...) Wickedness. Prove. 30. 20.

O that I had in the Wilderness ^ Lodging Pla^ Wayfaring Men, that I might
leave my People, and go from them; for they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of
Tr^acherous Men. Jer. 9. 2.

Will ye steal, murder, commit Adultery, and swear falsely, and burn In^ence
unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not. Therefore I will cast
you out of my sight. Jer. 7. 9, 15.

I have seen thine Adulteries, and thy Neighings, the lewdness of thy Whoredom,
and thine Abominations on the Fields; We unto thee, O Jerusalem! will thou not
be made clean; when shall it once be? Jer. 13. 27.

Because they have committed Villainy in Israel, and have committed Adultery
with their Neighbors Wives, and have spoken lying words in my Name, which I
have not commanded them, even I know, and am a Witness says the Lord. Jer. 29.
23.

For the Land is full of Adulteries, for because of swearing the Land mourns:
The pleasant Places of the Wilderness are dried up, and their Course is Evil,
and their Force is not Right. Jer. 23. 10.

In thee have they discovered their Fathers Nakedness; in thee have they
humbled her that was set apart for Pollution. And one has committed
Abomination with his Neighbors Wife, and another has lewdly defiled his
Daughter in Law, and another in thee has humbled his Sister, his Father's
Daughter. Ezekiel. 22. 10, 11.

By Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery,
they broke out, and Blood to^cheth Blood. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and
every one that dwells therein shall languish. Hos. 4. 2.

Whoredom and Wine, and New Wine take away the Heart. Hos. 4. 11.

I will not punish your Daughters when they commit Whoredom, nor your Spouses
when they commit Adultery: for themselves are separated with Whores, and they
sacrifice with Harlots; therefore the People that does not understand, shall
fall. Hos. 4. 14.

I will come near unto you, to Judgment, and I will be a swift Witness against
the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers. Mal. 3. 5.

A Fornicator in the Body of his Flesh, will never cease till he has kindled a
Fire. All Bread is sweet to a Whoremonger, he will not leave off till he die. A
Man that breaks Wedlock, saying thus in his Heart, Who sees me? I am
compassed about with darkness, the Walls cover me, and no Body sees me, what
need I to fear, the most High will not remember my Sins? Such a Man only
fears the Eyes of Men, and knows not that the Eyes of the Lord are ten
thousand times brighter than the Sun, beholding all the ways of Men, and
considering the most secret parts. Ecclus. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Thus shall it go with the Wife that leaves her Husband and brings in an
Heir by another. She shall leave her Memory to be cursed, and her Reproach
shall not be blotted out. Ecclus. 23. 22, 26.

Three sorts of Men my Soul hates, and I am greatly offended at their Life; a
Poor Man that is proud, a Rich Man that is a Liar, and an Old Adulterer that
doteth. Ecclus. 25. 2.

The Whoredom of a Woman may be known in her haughty Looks and Eyelids.
Ecclus. 26. 9.

Be ashamed of Whoredom before Father and Mother, and of a Lie before a Prince
and a mighty Man. Ecclus. 41. 18.

But I say unto you, whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. Math. 5. 28.

Out of the Heart proceed Evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications,
Thefts, false Witness, Blasphemies. Math. 15. 19. Mark. 7. 21.

But that we write unto them, that they abstain from Pollutions of Idols, and
from Fornication, and from things strangled, and from Blood. Acts 15. 20.

God gave them over to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things which are not
convenient: Being filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness,
Covetousness, Maliciousness; full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity,
Wisperers. Romans 1. 28, 29.

I wrote to you in an Epistle, not to company with Fornicators. 1 Cor. 5. 9.

Know ye not, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10.

Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall distroy both it
and them. Now the Body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord
for the Body. 1 Cor. 6. 13.

Neither let us commit Fornication, as some of them did, and fell in one day
three and twenty thousand. 1 Cor. 10. 8.

Having therefore these Promises (dearly Beloved) let us cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Now the works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, etc. Of the which I tell you before,
as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. 19, 21.

Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to
work all Uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. 4. 19.

But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it not be once
named amongst you, as becomes Saints: Neither Filthiness, etc. For this ye
know, that no Whoremonger, unclean Person, nor coverous Man who is an Idolater,
has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Ephesians. 5. 3, 5.

Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which
is Idolatry. For which things sake the Wrath of God comes on the Children of
Disobedience. Col. 3. 5, 6.

For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye should abstain
from Fornication; that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel
in Sanctification and Honor, not in the Lust of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles
which knew not God. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, 5.

Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous Man, but for
Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with Mankind, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 9,
10.

Lest there be any Fornicator, or profane Person, (...) Esau, who for one
morsel of Meat sold his Birthright. Heb. 12. 16.

Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13. 4.

Wherefore lay aside all Filthiness, and supersluity of Naughtiness, and
receive with Meekness the engrafied Word, which is able to save your Souls.
Jam. 1. 21.

Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of the World,
is Enmity with God? Jam. 4. 4.

Having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling
unstable Souls. 2 Pet. 2. 14.

For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but of the World. 1 John 2. 16.

Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, in like manner giving
themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange Flesh, are set forth
for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. Jude ver. 7.

But the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and Muderers, and
Wboremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone: which is the second
Death. Rev. 21. 8.

More Places of Scripture might be cited to this purpose, but I suppose these
may be sufficient to convince any sober rational Christian of the Dangers that
attend the sinful Wickedness of incontinency and Whoring. I shall therefore
proceed to the next Chapter, and acquaint the Reader with some few signal Marks
of God's Justice in the punishment of Persons guilty of such profane
Wickedness, and so shall conclude this Treatise.

CHAP. XII.
An Account of some Persons signally punished by Almighty God for the Profane
and Wicked Vice of Whoring, and Lustful Incontinency.

WE read in Scripture that the Sons of Ely were Sons of Belial, they knew not
the Lord. And when their Father heard all that his Sons did unto all Israel,
and how they lay with the Women that assembled at the Door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation; Their Father Ely reproved them, saying, ye make the Lord's
People to transgress. If one Man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him;
but if a Man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Notwithstanding
they hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay
them. Which accordingly came to pass: For the Philistines fighting against
Israel, made a great Slaughter of them, for there fell of Israel thirty
thousand Footmen. And the Ark of God was taken, and the two Sons of Eli, Hophni
and Phineas were slain. 1 Samuel 2. 12, 22, 24, 25. and 4. 10, 11.

And David having committed Adultery with Bathsheba the Wife of Vriah, and
caused her Husband to be slain: The Lord thereupon caused Absalom David's own
Son, to rebel against him, so that he was forced to fly from Jerusalem for
foar of his Son, and had his Head covered, and went barefoot, and wept when he
went up by the Ascent of Mount Olivet: As appears by the Story, in the 2 Samuel
Chapter 11. and 15.

In Germany a Gentleman of Note, finding his Wife in Bed with another Man, slew
first the Adulterer, and then his own Wife.

A Nobleman in Thuringia being taken in Adultery, the Husband of the Adulteress
bound him Hand and Foot, cast him into Prison, kept him fasting, only causing
daily hot Dishes of Meat to be set before him, to tantalize him with the smell:
in this Torture the Letcher continued till he gnawed off the Flesh from his own
Shoulders, and on the eleventh day he died.

Mary of Arragon, Wife to the Emperor Otho the 3d, carried a young Fornicatour
along with her in Woman's Habit: But he being discovered was burnt to death.
Afterward soliciting the Count of Mutina, and not able to draw him to her
Lure, she accused him to the Emperor, of attempting a Rape upon her, for which
he was Beheaded: But the Emperor at last finding out his Wife's Wickedness,
caused her to be burnt at a Stake.

Luther tells us of a great Man in his Country, so besotted with the Sin of
Whoredom, that he was not ashamed to say, that if he might live for ever here,
and be carried from one Whore-house to another, there to satisfy his Lusts, he
would never desire any other Heaven; this Vile Fellow afterward breathed out
his wretched Soul betwixt two notorious Harlots.

Joan Queen of Naples was insatiable for her Lust, which caused her to hang her
first Husband (which was Andrew, second Son to the King of Hungary) at her
Window, for insufficiency. Her second Husband was Lewis of Tarentum who died
with the over-straining himself to satisfy her Lustful Appetite. Her third
Husband James of Tarracon, a gallant Gentleman, she Beheaded, for lying with
another Woman. Her fourth Husband was Otho Duke of Brunswick, in whose time the
King of Hungary drew her out of her Kingdom, and having taken her, hung her out
of the same Window, where she had hanged her first Husband.

An ancient Gentleman of good Account, marrying a beautiful young Gentlewoman,
but having no Issue, he took into his House a young Gentleman, a Neighbors
Son, and completely qualified, purposing to make him a sharer in his Estate.
This Gentleman grows familiar with his Wife, which gave so much occasion of
Suspicion, and caused such a Rumor in the Country, that his Father requires
him to return home again: He does so, but at parting, promises Marriage to the
Gentlewoman, in case of her Old Husbands decease, and she to him, both with
Oaths. The Old Gentleman's Maid meeting with this young Gallant over a Glass of
Wine, tells him in private, how much his Company was missed at her Master's
House, and his Return desired. But withal, tho she knew the Familiarities
between him and her Mistress, yet it was all feigned, for another enjoyed both
her Heart and Body (naming the Person); the Gentleman is startled, but
incredulous. And after some time the Old Gentleman sends for him again; he goes
in the Night, but very privily (having before by Letter desired that the Garden
Door might be left open for him) and tells the Old Gentleman the reason of his
absence: But before he went back, he goes softly to the Gentlewoman's
Bedchamber Door (who often lay by her self) and hears the Whispers of two
distinct Voices. Upon which in a sudden Passion, he resolves to break in upon
them, and run them through with a Sword; but relenting with tenderness, he
departs softly to his own home, grows melancholy and distempered; but
recovering, he resolved to travel. The Old Gentleman sends for him to take an
unwilling Farewell: At the importunity of his Father he goes. After Dinner the
Gentlewoman singles him out for a Farewell, weeping in his Bosom, and beseeching
him to have care of his Safety, but especially of his Vow and Promise. Instead
of a Reply, he gave her a Letter, which he desired her to peruse in his
Absence. She opens the Letter, and reads there all the Story of her Lust laid
open, particularly and pathetically. This struck her to the Heart. She falling
presently into Frenzy and Despairing, soon after died: Which News came to the
Gentleman before he reached Gravesend. The Old Man afterward enriched him with
a great part of his Land, which he enjoys (says my Author) to this day.

Thomas Savage frequenting the House of Hannah Blan, a noted Bawdy House,
spending upon her such Money as he could get, to satisfy his own Lust and her
craving Appetite, is tempted first to stealing and purloining from his Master,
and at length to the murdering of a Maid, his Fellow Servants; for which he was
afterward brought to the Gallows and hanged.

Mr. Robert Foulks of Stanton Lacy, first an Adulterer, and then a Murderer of
his Bastard Child, ended his Days very Ignominiously at Tyburn, tho Penitently.

John Allerion Bishop of Waterford in Ireland, for unnatural Concupiscence,
came to a very disgraceful end, being arraigned and executed at Dublin for the
same.

Venery was the Destruction of Alexander the Great, of Otho the Emperor (called
for his good parts otherwise, Miraculum mundi) of Pope Sixtus 4. who died of a
Wicked Waste; of Paul the 4th, of whom it passed for a Proverb, Enim per eandem
partem animam profudisse, per quam acceperat.

It Is notoriously known, how far this Sin prevailed in England, amongst the
lazy Monks and Nuns, what Skulls of Infants were found near their Religious
Houses, before the dissolution of them in K. H. 8. days: And much about the
same time, viz. at the beginning of the Reformation (as I have read in a Letter
writ by the Popes Notary to a Gentleman of Germany, says my Author) there was a
Nunnery visited in the Outer Skirts of Italy, and thirteen of the Nuns found
with Child at the same time, all by the Confessor, for which cause by order of
the Pope it was put down.

The Minister of Staunton Lacy, Mr. Foulk aforementioned, who was executed at
Tyburn, Jan. 31. 1678, for murdering his Bastard-Child: being at the place of
Execution, he admonished the People to consider the Mischief of Uncleanness;
and what a Sin it was, for a Member of Christ to make himself the Member of an
Harlot; that it was a Sin that seldom goes alone, but is the Mother-Sin to a
number more; warning all to avoid the Snares of a Whorish Woman, and to keep
the Marriage Bed undefiled, and to remember his Ignominious Exit, occasioned by
his sinful defiling of the same.

Nathaniel Butler, executed in Cheapside, 1657, for killing his
Fellow-Prentice; being at the place of Execution, he warned the People to
beware of the Beginning of Sin, saying, When I was first enticed into Evil, I
was tender and fearful of it; but not diligently harkening to the Word of God,
nor the Voice and Checks of Conscience, I went on so, that by degrees I was
emboldned in Sin, and at last it became as familiar to me as my daily Food.
Therefore as you love your Souls, take heed of the beginnings of Sin: If I had
so done, I had escaped this Punishment and Shameful end. O that I could prevail
(cried he) with every young Person to cast away Sin betimes, and check it in
the first beginning; and that I had taken the Counsel which I have now given,
etc. Loathing my Beloved and Darling-Sin Uncleanness: And admonishing all young
People to watch and pray against it. Hoping if he were to live as many Years,
as he had then but Moments to live, he should (through the Grace of God) never
commit it any more.

John Marketman, executed in Essex for murdering his Wife, April 17. 1680,
confessed he had departed from his God in his Youth; that he had neglected the
Church and the public Worship of God, and choosing rather to spend his time in
an Alehouse: It brought me (says he) to Evil Company, and so to Drunkenness;
which getting an habit made me a professed Enemy to God, and to give my self
over to Swearing and Cursing, Lying, Whoring, and so from one Sin to another,
till I arrived at the height of all Impiety, etc. That formerly he loved to
commit Sin, but now hated the very thoughts of it, and would not commit a Sin
for a Kingdom; exhorting the People to take heed of the beginnings of Sin,
telling them you will find if once you habituate your selves to the committing
of Sin, it will be very hard to root it out: it must cost you many a Tear, and
much Bitterness in crucifying your Darling-Sins: which Trouble and Expense
might be saved, if you would be careful to resist the first Temptation.
Bewailing his Drunkenness and Uncleanness.

Henry Parker Executed at Tyburn 1689, for Counterfeiting Guineas, lamented
much the mispending of his Time, saying, O the precious Time I have squandered
away upon Trifles and Vanities, upon my Lusts and Pleasures, which I now want
to make my Peace with God, and purchase Eternal Life! That it was not so easy
to repent as he supposed.

It were endless to enumerate all the sad Examples of Divine Judgments that
might be brought under this Head, but I shall not multiply Examples, but
recommend these already set down, to the perusal and serious Consideration of
all profane, lascivious, incontinent, debauched Persons, and shall conclude and
shut up all in St. Paul's Advise to them, Romans 13. 13, 14. Let us walk honestly
as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make no Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS.
Page CHAP. I. A Summary Account of the Laws made against profuse, idle,
customary and expensive Tippling; and against sinful, customary and profane
Drunkenness; and against keeping Places or Houses of unlawful Games. 9 CHAP.
II. An Account of some Texts of Scripture, showing the sad Consequences and
Effects that attend the customary, sinful and profane practice of profuse
Quaffing and Drunkenness. 22 CHAP. III. Of several exemplary Judgments, both
Ancient and Modern, Foreign and Domestic, of God's severe Justice inflicted
upon customary, presumptuous, and profane sinful Drunkards. 28 CHAP. IV. A
Compendium of the Laws made against profane, idle, customary Swearing and
Cursing. 44 CHAP. V. Some Texts of Scripture, showing the Odiousness and Danger
of profane, customary Swearing and Cursing. 50 CHAP. VI. Of several signal,
fearful and amasing Judgments of God's severe Justice, inflicted upon
customary, profane and presumptuous Swearers and Cursers. 55 CHAP. VII. An
Abstract of the Laws made against the Profanation of the Lord's Day, commonly
called Sunday, about the Sacrament, disturbing Ministers, absenting from the
Church, etc. 76 CHAP. VIII. Of the several Places or Texts of Scripture
relating to the due Observation and Sanctifying of the Sabbath. 86 CHAP. IX. An
Account of several Instances of God's severe Justice, and Punishments that have
befaln presumptuous, customary Profaners of the Lord's Day, commonly called
Sunday. 91 CHAP. X. A brief Account of the Laws made against vicious and
debauched Men, and lewd Women, about getting Bastards. 103 CHAP. XI. Of the
several Places of Scripture threatening Judgments, or forbidding Adultery,
Fornication, Incontinency, Lasciviousness and Whoredom, and showing God's Anger
and Displeasure against such profane Wickedness. 106 CHAP. XII. An Account of
some Persons signally punished by Almighty God, for the profane and wicked Vice
of Whoring, and lustful Incontinency. 113

BOOKS Lately printed for and sold by John Harris at the Harrow in
Little-Britain.
THE Secret History of White Hall, from the Restoration of K. Charles II. down
to the Abdication of the late K. James. Writ at the Request of a Noble Lord,
and conveyed to him in Letters by -- late Secretary Interpreter to the Marquess
of Louvois, who by that means had the perusal of all the Private Minutes
between England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of Secret
Memoirs, which have hitherto lain concealed, as not being discoverable by any
other hand. Published from the Original Papers. By D. Jones, Gent. Price 5 s.

A Continuation of the Secret History of White Hall, from the Abdication of the
late King James, in 1688. to the Year 1697. Together with the Tragical History
of the Stuarts, from the first Rise of that Family, in the Year 1068, down to
the death of her late Majesty Queen Mary of Blessed Memory. By D. Jones, Gent.
Price 5 s.

God's Judgment against Whoring. Being an Essay toward a General History of
it, from the Creation of the World, to the Reign of Augustus, (which, according
to common Computation, is 5190 Years) and from thence down to the present Year
1697. Being a Collection of the most Remarkable Instances of Uncleanness, that
are to be found in Sacred or Profane History during that time. With
Observations thereon, Price 3 s. 6 d.

Concubinage and Poligamy disproved: Or, the Divine Institution of Marriage
betwixt one Man and one Woman only, asserted. In answer to a Book, writ by John
Butler, B. D. called his Case, lately presented by the Grand Jury of London;
wherein he mentions it is lawful to keep a Concubine, etc. Price 1 s.

The Political Mischiefs of Popery: Or, Arguments demonstrating. (1.) That the
Romish Religion ruins all those Countries where it is established. (2.) That it
occasions the loss of above 200 Millions of Livres, or 16 Millions Sterlin per
Annum to France in particular. (3.) That if Popery were abolished in France,
that Kingdom would become incomparably more Rich and Populous; and the King's
Revenues would advance above 600 Millions of Livres per Annum. (4.) That it is
impossible that France should ever be Reestablish'd, while Popery is their
National Religion. By a Person of Quality, a native of France; Author of the
Desolation of France demonstrated; Dedicated to the Honorable House of
Commons, Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Revelation Vnveiled: Or, an Essay toward the discovering, I. When many
Scripture Prophecies had their Accomplishment, and turned into History. II.
What are now fulfilling. III. What rest still to be fulfilled. With an
Appendix, proving that Pagan Rome was not Babylon, Rev. 17. and that the Jews
shall be converted. By Samuel Petto, Minister of the Gospel at Sudbary in
Suffolk. Price 1 s. 6. d.

A Collection of Modern Relations of Matter of Fact concerning Witches, and
Witchcraft upon the Persons of People. To which is prefixed a Meditation
concerning the Mercy of God, in preserving us from the Malice and Power of Evil
Angels: Written by the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, upon occasion of a Trial
of several Witches before him. Price 1 s.

Some General Considerations offered, relating to our present Trade: and
intended for its Help and Improvement. By T. T. Merchant. Price 6 d.

Mathematical Divinity: Or, a Plain Demonstration from the Holy Scriptures,
that the Times of this World were foreappointed by the Covenant made with
Abraham: And determined to be according to the Measure of the Age and Fullness
of Christ. Kept Secret since the World began, but is now made plain upon XII.
Tables, in a Solar Calendar, as familiar to the Understanding as any common
Almanac. With full proof that this is the last Generation, which shall not
pass away till all things be fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be
opened. Being the Result of many Years Study. By Elias Palmer.

An Apology for Congregational Divines: Against the charge of, 1. Crispianism,
or Antinomianism. 2. Countenancing Incompetent Tradesmen, as Preachers. 3.
Causeless Separation from Public Worship. Under which Head are Published
Amicable Letters between the Author and a Conf^rmist (a Man of Renown, known
every where to be such) about Liturgies and Ceremonies. By a Presbyterian. Also
a Speech delivered at Turners-Hall, April 29. where Mr. Keith, a Reformed
Quaker, with the leave of the Lord Mayor and Bishop, required Mr. P^nn, Mr.
Elwood, etc. to appear to answer his Charge against them. By Trepidantium
Malleus. With an Account of his being knocked down, and a Stone flung at his
Head till the Blood run down his Clothes, after a threat about ten days before,
from Friend J. F. openly in the Coffee house, That a Church Friend of theirs,
vowed he would do it.

The Description and Uses of a new contrived Eliptical and Double Dial; as also
of the Universal and Aequinoxial Dial. Which serve to find the Latitude, Hour
of the Day, the true Meridian, the Altitude, Azimuth, and Declination of the
Sun; his Place in the Ecliptic, the Time of his Rising and Setting, Length of
Day and Night, etc. With a Scheme of each Dial Curiously Engraven. Very useful
for all Seamen and Travelers, and our Curious Gentry to Set, Examine, and
Adjust their Pendulums. Whereunto is added a Correct Table of the Latitude of
the most Eminent Cities and Towns in Europe; as also a Table of Equation. By
Tho. Tuttell, Mathematical Instrument maker, at the King's-Arms and Globe at
Charing Cross.

BOOKS Lately printed for and sold by A. Bell at the Cross-Keys and Bible in
Cornhil, near Stocks-Market.
THE General History of England both Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the
earliest Accounts of Time to the Reign of his present Majesty King William III.
Taken from the most Ancient Records, Manuscripts and Historians. Containing the
Lives of the Kings, and Memorials of the most Eminent Persons both in Church
and State. Vol. I. By James Tyrrel Esquire Fol. Price 1 l.

A Detection of the Court and State of England during the 4 last Reigns, and
the Interregnum; consisting of private Memoirs etc. Wherein are many Secrets
never before made public; as also a more impartial Account of the Civil Wars
in England than has yet been given. By Rog. Coke Esquire The 3d Edition. Price 7 s.

An Abridgment of Sir Walter Ral^igh's History of the World, in 5 Books. 1.
From the Creation to Abraham. 2. From Abraham to the Destruction of the Temple
of Solomon. 3. From the Destruction of Jerusalem to Philip of Macedon. 4. From
Philip of Macedon to the Race of Antigonus. 5. From the establishment of
Alexander until the Conquest of Asia and Macedon by the Romans. To which is
added his Premonition to Princes. Price 5 s.

A complete History of Europe: Or, a View of the Affairs thereof, Civil and
Military, from the beginning of the Treaty of Nimeguen, 1676, to the Conclusion
of the Peace at Reswick, 1697. Including the Articles of the former, and the
several Infringements of them; The Turkish Wars; The forming of the Grand
Confederacy; The Revolution in England, etc. With a particular Account of all
the Actions by Sea and Land on both sides, and the Secret Steps toward a
Peace, both before, as well as during the last Negotiation. The whole
intermixed with Original Letters, Papers and Memoirs, never before published.
Among others are several Letters between the Emperor, Duke of Lorain, K. of
Poland, Count Staremburg, Grand Vizier, etc. relating to the Turkish Wars: The
Speeches of the Lord Russel, Col. Sidney, etc. Monmouth's and Argile's
Declarations. The Bill of Exclusion; the Prince of Orange's Declarations: The
Claim of Rights for England and Scotland. The Negotiations at Reswick, with the
Articles of Peace at large. Written by a Gentleman, who kept an Exact Journal
of all Transactions for above these 20 Years. Price 6 s.

An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, and the Rights of Mankind in
Matters of Religion. With some Reasons in particular for the Dissenters not
being obliged to take the Sacramental Test but in their own Churches, and for a
General ^turalization. Together with a Postscript in answer to the Letter to a
Convocation-man. Price 2 s.

Joannis Clerici Ars Critica, in qua ad Studia Linguarum Latinae, Graecae, and
Hebraicae via munitur; Veterumque emendandorum, and Spuriorum Scriptorum a
Genuinis dignoscendorum ratio traditur. In 2 Vol. Price 5 s.

A Rational and Speedy Method of attaining to the Latin Tongue. In 2 parts. The
first containing such Precepts as are common to all Languages. The second what
is more peculiar to the Latin Tongue. The whole being fitted to the meanest
Capacities, not only those of riper Years, but any Child that can read English,
may by this Method in a little time arrive at a greater degree of Knowledge than
is usually attained after several years Drudgery in the common Road. Most
Logical Terms being in this Treatise also explained, the Art of Reasoning may
be perfectly learned without much farther trouble. By A. Lane M. A. Price 1 s.

The Art of Memory: A Treatise useful for all, especially such as are to speak
in public. By Marius D' Assigny, B. D. Price 1 s.

Scotland's Sovereignty asserted. Being a Dispute concerning Homage, against
those who maintain that Scotland is a Fee Liege of England, and that the King
of Scots owes Homage to the King of England. By Sir Tho. Craig. Price 5 s.

Shorthand yet shorter; or the Art of Short-writing advanced in a more swist,
easy, regular, and natural Method than hitherto. By G. Ridpath. The 2d Edition.
Price 1 s.

Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that famous Romance. In 10 Books. By Mons. de
Scudery. Englished by F. G. Adorned with various Sculptures. Price 25 s.

Chamberlain's Midwisery, the third Edition. Price 4 s. Bound in Calf. Useful
for Chirurgions and Midwives.

Rutherford's Letters. Price 3 s.

The Fulfilling of the Scriptures for confirming Believers, and convincing
Atheists, with rare Histories of the Works of eminent Persons in the Church of
God. The 3d Edition. By Robert Fleming. Price 2 s.

The Present State of England as to Coin and public Charges. In 3 parts.
Treating of the Necessity of more Money, and of Ways and Means to procure it;
of raising its value, against which the opposite Prejudices, as injurious to
King, Parliament and People, with Mr. Lock's chief Positions, are refuted by
demonstrable Reason and Matter of Fact. By J. Hodges. Price 3 s. 6 d.

A Help to Prayer: or a Direction how to perform that holy Duty, that it may be
well-pleasing to God. With Prayers for Morning and Evening. Price 1 s. By T.
Knaggs, M. A.

The Providence of God toward this Nation in introducing the True Religion.
The 2d Edition. By the late Slingsby B^thil Esquire Price 1 s.

An Essay concerning a Vacuum; wherein is endeavored to be demonstrated, that
a Vacuum Interspersum runs through the World, and is more or less in all
Bodies. By a Lover of the Corpuscular Philosophy. Price 6 d.

Gauging and Measuring made Easy: being a brief Compendium of measuring of
Surfaces and Solids after a more concise and intelligible Manner than commonly
practiced. Containing, First, The most Material Propositions of Geometry,
relating to Mensuration. 2dly. The way of Measuring Surfaces. 3dly. The way of
Measuring Solids, whether it be Timber, Stone, or Liquids, etc. after a most
exact Method. Very useful for all Lovers of Art; such as G^ugers, Measurers,
Painters, Carpenters, Joyners, Masons, Bricklayers, and Glaziers. Price ^ d.

Ars Chirurgiea, a Compendium of the Theory and Practice of Surgery. In
Seven Books. By William Salmon, M. D. In 2 Vol. Price 10 s.

The Militia Reformed; or an easy Scheme of Furnishing England with a constant
Land Force, capable to prevent or to subdue any Foreign Power; and to maintain
perpetual Quiet at Home, without endangering the Public Liberty. Price 1 s.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament, showing that a restraint on the Press is
absolutely in consistent with the Protestant Religion, and dangerous to the
Liberties of the Nation.


