THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES, OF Fernand Mendez Pinto, A Portugal: During his
TRAVELS for the space of one and twenty years in The Kingdoms of Ethiopia,
China, Tartaria, Cauchinchina, Calaminham, Siam, Pegu, Japan, and a great part
of the East-Indiaes. With a Relation and Description of most of the Places
thereof; their Religion, Laws, Riches, Customs, and Government in time of Peace
and War. Where he five times suffered Shipwreck, was sixteen times sold, and
thirteen times made a Slave.

Written Originally by himself in the Portugal Tongue, and Dedicated to the
Majesty of Philip King of Spain. Done into English by H. C. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to
be sold at their shop in Popes head Alley near Lumbar-street. 1653.

TO THE Right Noble Lord, and worthy of all Honor, William, Earl of Strafford,
Vicount Wentworth, Baron Wentworth of Wentworth, Woodhouse, Newmarsh, Oversley,
and Raby.
My Lord,
PVrchas, a Writer of good credit here in England, gives this testimony of my
Author, that no man before him, to his knowledge, has spoken so much, and so
truly, of those Oriental parts of the World, which are so little known to us,
as he has done: And that too, not upon hearsay, and report, but for the most
part as an ocular Witness, and personal Actor, of, and in, all that he has
related, which is so full of Variety, and strange Occurrences, that, as another
Writer affirms, the like will hardly be met withal elsewhere: So that the most
curious Wits, which delight in reading of rare Books, will, I believe, find all
the satisfaction they can desire in this same of his; where, without so much as
stirring out of their Studies, or running the danger of Shipwreck, they may
traverse the Seas, view the goodliest Provinces of the World, entertain
themselves with stupendous and unheard^of things, consider in the manner of
those peoples living, whom we term Barbarians, their Laws, their Riches, their
Government in time of Peace and War; and, in a word, represent unto themselves,
as in a picture, all that is most exquisite, and of greatest marvel, in the
extent of Europe, Africa, and Asia. These, together with many other remarkable
matters, are contained in this Work, which I have taken the presumption to
present unto your Honor, being invited thereunto by the example of two
Translators of it into the Spanish and French Tongues, whereof the one
dedicated it to the Archbishop of Toledo in Spain, and the other to the
Cardinal Richelieu of France, both of them, the most eminent persons, of their
time, in those Kingdoms: And with whom your Honor may justly be ranked,
especially in respect of the Nobility of your Birth, as well as for the great
Hope, which your many present Virtues, and Abilities, do give unto the World,
of your future Worth, and Estimation. Be pleased then, my Lord, to receive it
favorably, as a tender of the great desire I have to appear in all occasions,

Your Honors most humble, and devoted Servant, HENRY COGAN.

AN Apologetical Defense OF FERNAND MENDEZ PINTO HIS HISTORY.
IF it be true that Authors do render themselves commendable by their Works,
there is no doubt, but that Fernand Mendez Pinto has by this same of his
justly acquired such reputation, as will make him be esteemed for ever. He was
a man of a strong wit, and sound judgment, and endued with a most rare, and
extraordinary memory, as appears in the Relation of his Voyages and Adventures,
which sufficiently testify how far he excelled therein, retaining in his
remembrance an infinity of such strange and wonderful things, (whereof to his
cost he was for the most part an eye witness) as many great Personages of Asia
and Europe took no little delight in hearing him recount them; especially
Philip the second King of Spain, who at several times spent many hours in
discoursing with him there about, which questionless he would never have done,
being a Prince, in the opinion of all the world, of a most exact and profound
judgment, had he not been verily persuaded that what he delivered was true.
Nevertheless since there may be some who in regard of the stupendous things
which he delivers, will seem to give no credit thereunto; I have held it very
necessary to cite here many several authentic Authors, that in their writings
have confirmed the verity of his Narrations, as follows.

Of the Riches and Grandeurs of these Oriental Countries, and perticularly of
the Kingdom of China, Nicholas Trigault, the Jesuit treates diffusedly in his
book entitled, De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas, in the first part
thereof, principally in the 6th Chapter. Gasper de la Cruz, in his book of
China, the third, fourth, fifth, and nineteen Chapters. John de Lucena, in the
life of Francis Xavier the Jesuit, in the tenth Book, from the seventeenth to
the twenty fourth Chapter. Anthony Galuan in his Treatise of the Discovery of
those Parts, fol. 39. and in his History of Florida. Mendoza, in his History of
China, the second Chapter of the third Book. Trigault, in his first Book, the
seventh Chapter, Palatii Regis. Doctor Babia, in the third part of his
Pontifical History, the 18 Chapter, in the life of Sixtus Quintus. Boterus, in
his Relations. John de Sanctis, in his Oriental Ethiopian History, Chap. 8.
and in the Ecclesiastical History of Rebullosa. Ribadeneyra, Matthew, and Jews
Gusman, in diverse Chapters of the Oriental Histories. Josephus de Acosta,
Peter of Leon, Zarate, Michael Vazquez de Padilla, Peter Martyr, Cefas Bishop
of Chiapa, Francesco Lopez de Gomorra, Hierosme du Pre, Ferdinand de Cordoua,
Hierosme Romain, Illescas, Antonio de Herrera, Pineda, Prudentius de Sandobal,
and Garcilasso in diverse places of his Royal Commentaries, and in the 20th
Chapter of his third Book.

Touching that which Fernand Mendez writes of the Governors of those Kingdoms,
of the strict observation of Justice, of the Names of the Judges, Vice-Royes,
Magistrates, Captains, Governors, and Ministers of the State, Boterus, in his
universal Relations, says the same. Trigault, in diverse places, particularly
in the sixth Chapter of the first book, de Senensis Reipublicae
administratione. Gaspar de la Cruz, in the 16.17.18. and 19. Chapters. Babia,
in the third page of his Ponticall book, in the life of Sixtus Quintus. Lucena,
in the life of Francis Xavier, the tenth book. Mendoza, in the ninth and tenth
chapters of his third Book, and in many other Chapters of his new world.
Mafeus, in his Oriental History; and in the Letters of China, written by
Guerrier the Jesuit. Concerning the great number of prisons, and other
particularities, the same may be seen at large in the History of China.
Mendoza, in the twelfth Chapter of his first book. Gaspar de la Cruz, Chapter
ninth and twenty second. Trigault, in diverse places of his History. Lucena, in
the twenty first Chapter of his tenth book. and Alexander Valignario, in his
Letters missive.

That which he speaks of the great multitudes of people that are in those
Countries, read in Lucena, the nineteenth Chapter of his tenth Book. Trigault,
in sundry places, chiefly in the second Chapter, de nomine, situ, et
magnitudine Regni Sinarum.

Fernand Mendez in the eighty ninth Chapter writes of a Temple built upon a
great company of pillars; Read de la Cruz, the seventh Chapter. Mendoza, the
third Chapter of his first Book. Mafeus; Anthony de St Romain; and George
Bruno, in his book of the City of the World.

In this History are set forth huge Statues of Brass and Iron. See the first,
third, fourth, fifth, Chapters of the first book of Gasper de la Cruz. Mendoza,
the ninth and tenth Chapters of his first Book. The second Book of Boterus, in
his relation of Siam. Rebullosa, in his Ecclesiastical History, fol. 117. and
118. John de Sanctis, in his Ethiopian History, the seventh, and twelfth
Chapters. Lucena, in the 1.6.8. and 9. Chapters of his seventh book. Trigault,
in the ninth and eighteenth Chapters of his first Book. Mafeus, and S. Romain,
in the 90th Chapter. Mendoza, in the seventh Chapter of his first Book, and in
the fourteenth Chapter of his second Part, as also in diverse places of his
Itinerary. Lucena, in the nineteenth Chapter of his nineteenth Book; and many
other Authors.

Touching the manner of breeding and keeping of wild Ducks in Rivers,
mentioned in the 97. Chapter. See De la Cruz, the 7. and 8. Chapters. Mendoza,
the 21. Chapter. Trigault, the second chapter of his first Book; and diverse
others.

As for that which he writes of the Towns that are made on Rivers and the Sea,
with an infinite company of ships in the 98. Chap. read Lucena, in the 19.
chapter of his 10. Book. Mendoza, in his Itineraries the 17. chap. De la Cruz,
in the 8. and 12. Chapters. Trigault, in the third Chapter of his first Book,
Navium Capia. Lucena, in his first Book the 19. Chapter.

For so much as is spoken of the Wall which separates Tartaria from China: See
Lucena, in the 21. Chapter of his tenth Book. Gasper de la Cruz, the second and
fourth Chapters. Trigault, in the second Chapter of his first Book, and in the
12. Chapter of his fifth Book. Galvan, in his Commentaries fol. 70. Mendoza,
the first part, in the fifth chapter of his first book, and in the seventeenth
chapter of the second part. Babia, in the second part of his Pontifical
History, chap. 18. and generally all that write of those parts of China.

Concerning that which Fernand says of the Treasure of the Dead, read Lucean,
in the eighth chapter of the seventh Book. De la Cruz, and Mendoza. Paulus
Jovius, in his History of the Turks. But that which Passavinus delivers in the
Description of the Persians, and Belorus, in his Chronology of the Kings of
Persia, is yet a greater mervel. The like do Celius and Augustinus Corion write
of the War of the Cimbrians, wherein such an infinite number of Saracens were
slain, near to Marseilles, as they made up the fences of their fields with the
bones of them. Anthony Boussin in his Decades of Hungary.

Our Author imploys many Chapters in the description of the stately edifices of
those Eastern Countries; The same may be seen in all the other Writers, that
entreat of those parts of Asia, who set them forth strangely rich and great.
Lucena, in the fifth Book of the life of Frances Xavier. Father Lewis in his
Letters. The same Lucena, in the eighth Chapter.

For the innumerable company of Religious men and women (as they term them)
which serve for the worship of their false Gods, it shall suffice to read De la
Cruz, in his first Chapter.

And for a full clearing thereof read Damien De Gois, in the History of King
Don Emanuel. Mafeus, in his eleventh and fou^teenth Books. St Romain, and
Trigault. As also for the removing of all doubt in the reading of those things,
as incridible, look on the sixteenth Chapter of the Book of Prester John,
written by Francesco Alvarez. John de Sanctis, in his Ethiopian History, the
17th Chapter. Levis de Parama, de Origin Inquisitionis, the nineteenth Chapter
of his second Book, entitled In sexta aetate Mundi Razis, in his Chronicle
Sancti Dominice, folio 299. Galvan, in his Discoveries, folio 70. Lucena, in
diverse places of his Book. Mendoza, in the eighteenth, nineteenth, twentieth,
and twenty third Chapters, and throughout his first and second Books. Gaspar de
la Cruz, the fifth, seventh, and nineth Chapters. Boterus, in his Relations of
China, Narsingua, Japon, and Siam. Rebullosa, fol 141. Leonard Abel in his
Relations. Paul Maria, in his Journey into Egypt; and many others.

Concerning the setting forth, sumptuousness, and magnificence of those peoples
Banquets; their Comedies, Feasts, Dances, Music, and diversity of Instruments;
see Lucena, in the thirteenth Chapter of his tenth Book. Mendoza, in the twenty
fourth and twenty eighth Chapters of his first Book; as also in the fourteenth
and eighteenth Chapters of his third Book. Trigault, in the seventh Chapter of
his first Book, Conrinia. Touching their Feasts read Mafeus, in the sixth Book
of his History, St Romain in his, and generally Trigault, de expeditione apud
Chinas.

For the manner of their sacrificing, see de Sanctis, in the eighth Chapter of
his Ethiophia. Damen de Gois, in the History of King Emanuel. Mendoza, in the
twenty sixth Chapter of his Itenerary. Trigault, throughout the whole tenth
Chapter of his first Book. Lucena, in several places of his seventh Book. De la
Cruz, the thirteenth Chapter. Boterus, in his Relations. The Maps of Japon, and
China. Matthew Ricio, St Romain, and Mafeus.

In the 116. and 117. Chapters of the present Book, the Author treats of the
Castle of Nixiancoo, for which peruse Trigault, de Christiana expeditione, the
eleventh Chapter of his fourth Book. Polenus, in his Book of Stratagems.
Vegetius, de re militari; Vanitius, and Vasionzelos.

Touching that which Fernand speaks of the Chinese, their penances and
mortifications in the Temple of Tinagoogoo; as also of their processions, and
the sacrificing of themselves there, read John de Sanctis, in the eighth
Chapter of his Ethiopian History. Mendoza, in the twenty eighth Chapter of his
Itinerary. Trigault, in the tenth Chapter of his first Book; and in the second
part of the History of China. Galvan, in his discoveries, fol. 56. Mafeus, St.
Romain, Boterus, and Anthony de Govea, in the Archbishop of Goa his Voyage.

Of that which is said concerning the great number of Idols and Statues,
Mendoza speaks amply, in the ninth Chapter of his first Book, in the seventh
Chapter of his second Book, and in many other places; de sanctis, in the second
part of his Ethiopian History, the seventh Chapter. Lucena, throughout his
whole seventh Book. Trigault, in the tenth Chapter of his first Book,. Idolorum
multitudo. Rebullosa; from folio 116. to folio 120. De la Cruz, in many places
of his Book. Damien de Gois; Boterus, in his relations of Pegu: Babia, in the
third part of his Pontifall History, the eighteenth Chapter, In vita Sexti
Quinti.

Fernand makes a narration of certain men, whom he calls Caloges, and Fingaos,
which have their feet r^und, like unto those of Cows, and hands all over hairy;
for the clearing of the truth whereof read Galvan, in his discoveries, folio
32. and 72. Gaspar de la Cruz, the s^venth Chapter.

Touching the tryumphant Arches, which they have in their streets, together
with their manner of accommo^ating, and enriching them, when as they solemnised
certain Feasts, read de la Cruz, the seventh chapter.

Of the Universities, which they have in China, see Trigault, in the third and
fifth Chapters of his first Book, De Artibus apud Sinas liberalibus, ac
Scientiis, etc. And in another, entitled, De Artibus apud Sinas mechanicis.

For a Confirmation of that which our Author says of the strange Ceremonies and
Complements, used by them at their saluting one another, when they meet
together by chance in the streets, and in their visits, read Mafeus, in the
sixth Book of his Indian History, folio 134. beginning with these words,
Salutandi ritus miter plebeios, etc. And Mendoza, in diverse places of his Book
declares the same. Trigault, in the seventh Chapter of his first Book, at the
title, De Sinarum ritibus non nullis, describes their manner of Salutations.
Babia, in the third Part of his Pontifical History, in the life of Gregory the
thirteenth.

The History of the King of Bramaa, together with his Victories and Conquests,
may be found in the Relations of Boterus. De la Cruz, in the second and fourth
Chapters. Mafeus, and St Romain.

Of the entrance of the Tartars into China, and their besieging of Pequin:
Boterus in his Relations; De la Cruz, the fourth Chapter; Paulus Jovius,
Antonius Armenius, and Mathias de Micuy, discourse at large.

That which is written of the subversion of the Provinces of Cuy, and Sansii,
and of the d^leful and dreadful events ensuing thereupon, Gaspar de la Cruz
has spoken of sufficiently in the 29th Chapter of his Book.

As for that which Fernand says of their Gods, Fatoquis, Amida, Xaca, Gizon,
and Canom; as also of the fooleries, dreams, and leasings, which they recount
of them; and of their original, and the respests and reverences they bear unto
them; it may be all seen in the twelfth Book of Mafeus his Indian History; and
in the first and fourth Chapters of his Epistles. Trigault, in his first and
second Book. Boterus, in his Rela^ions. St Romain, and many others.

By all this now is my Author thoroughly vindicated from all aspersions of
falsehood, that may be cast upon this his Work, which, were it otherwise, and
merely devised, yet is it so full of variety, and of such strange, both Comic
and Tragic Events, as cannot choose but delight far more then any Romance, or
other of that kind. But being accompanied with the truth, as I have
sufficiently proved, it will no doubt give all the satisfaction and content,
that can be desired of the Reader.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. IN what manner I past my youth in the Kingdom of Portugal, until my
going to the Indiaes. Fol. 1. CHAP. II. My Departure from Portugal for the
East-Idiaes; and my imbarquing there for the Straight of Mecqua. 3 CHAP. III.
Our traveling from Mazua by Land to the Mother of Prester John; as also our
re-imbarquing at the Port of Arquico; and that which befell us by the encounter
of three Turkish Vessels. 5 CHAP. IV. A Mutiny happening in the Town of Mocaa;
the occasion thereof; that which befell thereupon, and by what means I was
carried to Ormuz; as also my sailing from thence to Goa; and what success I had
in that Voyage. 8. CHAP. V. Goncalo vas Co^inhoes Treaty with the Queen of
Onor; his assaulting of a Turkish (...); and that which happened unto us as we
were upon our return to Goa. 11 CHAP. VI. What passed till such time as Pedro
de Faria arrived at Malaca; his receiving an Ambassador from the King of Batas,
with his sending me to that King, and that which arrived unto me in that
Voyage. 14 CHAP. VII. What happened to me at Panaiu, with the King of Batas
expedition against the Tyrant of Achem, and what he did after his Victory over
him. 18 CHAP. VIII. That which past between the King of Batas and me, until
such time as I imbarqued for Malaca; my arrival in the Kingdom of Queda, and my
return from thence to Malaca. 21 CHAP. IX. The arrival of an Ambassador at the
Fortress of Malaca, from the King of Aaru to the Captain thereof; his sending
me to the said King, my coming to Aaru, and that which happened unto me after
my departure from thence. 26 CHAP. X. By what means I was carried to the Town
of Siaca, and that which befell me there; my going to Malaca with a Mohammedan
Merchant; and the Tyrant of Achems Army marching against the King of Aaru.
CHAP. XI. The death of the King of Aaru, and the cruel justice that was
executed on him by his Enemies; the going of his Queen to Malaca, and her
reception there. 33 CHAP. XII. The Queen of Aaru's departure from Malaca* her
going to the King of Jantana, his summoning the Tyrant of Achem to restore the
Kingdom of Aaru; and that which past between them thereupon. 36 CHAP. XIII. My
departure to go to Pan; that which fortuned after my arrival there, with the
murder of the King of Pan, and the cause thereof. 39 CHAP. XIV. The misfortune
that befell us at our entry into the River of Lugor; our hiding our selves in a
Wood, with that which happened unto us afterward; and our return unto Malaca.
42 CHAP. XV. Antonio de Faria his setting forth for the Isle of Anyan, his
arrival at the River of Tinacoreu; and that which befell us in this Voyage. 46
CHAP. XVI. Antonio de Faria's arrival at the Bay of Camoy, where was the
fishing of Pearls for the King of China; the relation made to him of the Isle
of Aynan; with that which happened to him by the means of a renegado Pirate,
and other ways. 52 CHAP. XVII. The information that Antonio de Faria had of the
Country; some passages betwixt him and the Nautarel of the Town; his going to
the River of Madel, with his encountering a Pirate there, and that which passed
between them. 58 CHAP. XVIII. What Antonio de Faria did with the Captain of the
Pirates Iunck; that which past between him and the people of the Country, with
our casting away upon the Island of Thieves. 61 CHAP. XIX. In what sort we
escaped miraculously out of this Island; our passage from thence to the River
of Xingrau; our encountering with a Chinese Pirate, and the agreement we made
with him. 65 CHAP. XX. Our encounter at Sea with eight Portugals very sorely
hurt, and Antonio de Faria's meeting and fighting with Coia Acem the Pirate. 69
CHAP. XXI. What Antonio de Faria did after his Victory; his departure from the
River of Tinlau, with his ill success thereupon, and the succor we met withal.
73 CHAP. XXII. Antonio de Faria has news of the five Portugals that were made
Captives; his Letter to the Mandarin of Nouday about them, and his assaulting
the said Town. 76 CHAP. XXIII. Antonio de Faria's Navigation till he came to
the Port of Liampoo; his arrival, and gallant reception there by the Portugals.
81 CHAP. XXIV. Antonio de Faria departs from Liampoo for to go and seek out the
Island of Calempluy; the strange things that we saw, and the hazard we ran in
our Voyage thither. 87 CHAP. XXV. Our arrival at the Island of Calempluy, with
the description thereof; what happened to Antonio de Faria in one of the
Hermitages there, and how we were discovered. 92 CHAP. XXVI. Our casting away
in the gulf of Nanquin, with all that befell us after this lamentable
shipwreck. 97 CHAP. XXVII. Our arrival at the Town of Taypor, where we were
made Prisoners, and so sent to the City of Nanquin. 103 CHAP. XXVIII. The
Marvels of the City of Nanquin; our departure from thence toward Pequin, and
that which happened unto us till we arrived at the Town of Sempitay. 107 CHAP.
XXIX. Our arrival at Sempitay, our encounter there with a Christian woman;
together with the original and foundation of the Empire of China, and who they
were that first peopled it. 112 CHAP. XXX. The foundation of the four chief
Cities of China; together with which of the Kings of China it was that built
the wall betwixt China and Tartaria; and many things that we saw as we past
along. 116 CHAP. XXXI. The order which is observed in the moving Towns, that
are made upon the Rivers; and that which further befell us. 122 CHAP. XXXII.
Our arrival at the City of Pequin; with our imprisonment, and that which
moreover happened unto us there; as also the great Majesty of the Officers of
their Court of Justice. 125 CHAP. XXXIII. What past between us and the
Tanigores of Mercy, with the great favor they did us; and a brief relation of
the City of Pequin, where the King of China keeps his Court. 131 CHAP. XXXIV.
The order which is observed in the Feasts that are made in certain Inns, and
the state which the Chaems of the two and thirty Universities keeps, with
certain remarkable things in the City of Pequin. 134 CHAP. XXXV. The Prison of
Ximanguibaleu, wherein those are kept which have been condemned to serve at the
reparations of the wall of Tartaria; and another Enclosure, called the Treasure
of the dead, with the revenues whereof this Prison is maintained. 137 CHAP.
XXXVI. Of an Edifice situated in the midst of the River, wherein were the
hundred and thirteen Chapels of the Kings of China, and the public Granaries
established for the relief of the poor. 142 CHAP. XXXVII. The great number of
Officers and other people, which are in the King of China's Palace; with our
going to Quincay to accomplish the time of our Exile, and what befell us there.
144 CHAP. XXXVIII. A Tartar Commander enters with his Army into the Town of
Quincay, and that which followed thereupon; with the Nauticors besieging the
Castle of Nixiamcoo, and the taking of it by the means of some of us Portugals.
149 CHAP. XXXIX. The Mitaquer departs from the Castle of Nixiamcoo, and goes to
the King of Tartaria's Camp before Pequin; with that which we saw till we
arrived there; and the Mitaquers presenting us unto the King. 154 CHAP. XL. The
King of Tartaria's raising his siege from before Pequin for to return into his
Country; and that which passed until his arrival there. 158 CHAP. XLI. In what
manner we were brought again before the King of Tartaria, with our departure
from that Kingdom; and all that we saw and befell us in our Voyage, till our
arrival at the Court of the King of Chauchinchina. 160 CHAP. XLII. The
reception of the Tartarian Ambassador by the King of Chauchinchina, with the
said Kings going to the City of Uzanguea, and his triumphal entry thereinto.
167 CHAP. XLIII. Our departure from the City of Uzanguea, and our adventures
till our arrival at the Isle of Tanixumaa, with our going a shore there. 170
CHAP. XLIV. The great Honor, which the Nautaquin, Lord of the Isle, did to one
of us for having seen him shoot with an Harquebuse; and his sending me to the
King of Bungo, with that which passed till my arrival at this Court. 172 CHAP.
XLV. The great mishap which befell the King of Bungo's son, with the extreme
danger that I was in for the same, and what followed thereupon. 176 CHAP. XLVI.
My curing the young Prince of Bungo; with my return to Tanixumaa, and
imbarquing there for Liampoo; and also that which happened to us on land after
the shipwreck we suffered by the way thither. 178 CHAP. XLVII. The carrying of
us to the Town of Pungor, and presenting us to the Broquen, Governor of the
Kingdom, with that which ensued upon it. 181 CHAP. XLVIII. The King of Lequios
sending a cruel sentence against us to the Broquen of the Town where we were
Prisoners, to the end he should put it in execution; and that which further
happened unto us till our arrival at Liampoo. 184 CHAP. XLIX. My sailing from
Liampoo to Malaca, with the sending me by the Captain of the Fortress there to
the Chaubainhaa at Martibano; and all that befell us in our Voyage thither. 189
CHAP. L. The Continuance of our Voyage to the Bar of Martibano, and certain
memorable particularities happening there. 195 CHAP. LI. In what manner the
Chaubinhaa rendered himself to the King of Bramaa; and the cruel pr^ceeding
against the Queen of Martabano, and the Ladies her attendants. 201 CHAP. LII.
In what manner the sentence of death was executed on the person of the
Chaubinhaa, King of Martabano, Nhay Canatoo his wife, and an hundred and forty
women; with that which the King of Bramaa did after his return to Pegu. 205
CHAP. LIII. That which passed between the Queen of Prom and the King of Bramaa,
together with the first assault that was given to the City, and the success
thereof. 209 CHAP. LIVE. The King of Bramaa his besieging the Fortress of
Meleytay, with his going from thence to Avaa, and that which passed there. 282
CHAP. LV. Our going with the King of Bramaa's Ambassador to the Calaminham;
with the course which we held until we arrived at the Temple, or Pagode of
Tinagoogoo; and a description thereof. 215 CHAP. LVI. The great and sumptuous
Procession made in this Pagode; together with their Sacrifices, and other
particularities. 218 CHAP. LVII. What we saw in the continuing of our Voyage,
until we arrived at the City of Timplan. 223 CHAP. LVIII. The Magnificent
Reception of the King of Bramaa his Ambassador, at the City of Timplan; and
that which passed betwixt the Calaminham, and him. 226 CHAP. LIX. An ample
Relation of the Empire of Calaminham, and of the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Bramaa;
with the continuance of our Voyage, and what we saw during the same. 241 CHAP.
LX. Our arrival at Pegu, with the death of the Roolim of Mounay. 245 CHAP. LXI.
The Election of the new Roolim of Mounay, the grand Talagrepo of these Gentiles
of the Kingdom of Pegu. 248 CHAP. LXII. In what manner the Roolim of Mounay was
conducted to the Isle of Mounay, and put into possession of his Dignity. 252
CHAP. LXIII. A continuation of the success which we had in this Voyage; with my
departure from Goa to Zunda, and what passed during my abode there. 255 CHAP.
LXIV. The expedition of the Pangueyram, Emperor of Jao^, and King of Demaa,
against the King of Passervan; and all that which passed in this War. 258 CHAP.
LXV. The death of the King of Demaa by a very strange accident, and that which
arrived thereupon. 263 CHAP. LXVI. That which befell us until our departure
toward the Port of Zunda, from whence we set sail for China, and what
afterward happened unto us. 266 CHAP. LXVII. My passing from Zunda to Siam,
where in the company of Portugals I went to the War of Chyamay; and that which
the King of Siam did until he returned into his Kingdom, where his Queen
poisoned him. 269 CHAP. LXVIII. The lamentable death of the King of Siam; with
certain illustrious and memorable things done by him during his life; and many
other accidents, which arrived in that Kingdom. 273 CHAP. LXIX. The King of
Bramaa's enterprise against the Kingdom of Siam, and that which past until his
arrival at the City of Odi^^, with his besieging of it, and all that insued
thereupon. 278 CHAP. LXX. The King of Bramaa's raising his siege from before
the City of Odia^, with a description of the Kingdom of Siam, and the fertility
thereof. 283 CHAP. LXXI. A continuation of that which happened in the Kingdom
of Pegu, as well during the life, as after the death of the King of Bramaa. 286
CHAP. LXXII. That which arrived in the time of Xemin de Satan, and an
abominable case that happened to Diego Suarez, together with the Xemindooes
expedition against Xemin de Satan, and that which insued thereupon. 289 CHAP.
LXXIII. That which the Xemindoo did, after he was crowned King of Pegu; with
the Chaumigre^s, the King of Bramaa's Foster-brothers marching against him with
a great Army* and diverse other memorable things. 295 CHAP. LXXIV. The finding
of the Xemindoo, and bringing him to the King of Bramaa; with the manner of his
execution and death; and other particularities concerning the same. 301 CHAP.
LXXV. My imbarquing in the Kingdom of Pegu to go to Malaca, and from thence to
Japon; with a strange accident which arrived there. 305 CHAP. LXXVI. Our
passing from the Town of Fucheo to the Port of Hiamangoo, and that which befell
us there, together with my departure from Malaca, and arrival at Goa. 310 CHAP.
LXXVII. Father Belquiors and my departure from the Indiaes to go to Japon; and
that which befell us till my arrival at the Island of Champeiloo. 312 CHAP.
LXXVIII. Our departure from the Island of Champeiloo, and our arrival at that
of Lampacau; with a relation of two great disasters, which happened in China
unto two Portugal Colonies; and of a strange accident besides that fell out in
the Country. 314 CHAP. LXXIX Our arrival in the Kingdom of Bungo, and that
which past thereupon. 318 CHAP. LXXX. My reception by the King of Bungo, as
Ambassador from the Viceroy of the Indiaes. 321 CHAP. LXXXI. What past after
our departure from Zequa, till my arrival in the Indiaes, and from thence into
the Kingdom of Portugal. 323
THE Travels, Voyages and Adventures OF Ferdinand Mendez Pinto.
CHAP. I. After what manner I past my Youth in the Kingdom of Portugal, until
my going to the Indiaes.
SO often as I represent unto my self the great and continual Travels that have
accompanied me from my birth,. 1.
and amidst the which I have spen^ my first years, I find that I have a great
deal of reason to complain of Fortune, for that she seems to have taken a
particular care to persecute me, and to make me feel that which is most
insupportable in her, as if her glory had no other foundation then her cruelty.
For not content to have made me be born, and to live miserably in my Country
during my youth, she conducted me, notwithstanding the fear I had of the
dangers that menaced me, to the East Indiaes, where in stead of the relief
which I went thither to seek, she made me find an increase of my pains,
according to the increase of my age. Since then it has pleased God to deliver
me from so many dangers, and to protect me from the fury of that adverse
Fortune, for to bring me into a Port of safety and assurance, I see that I have
not so much cause to complain of my Travels past, as I have to render him
thanks for the benefits which until now I have received of him, seeing that by
his divine bounty he has preserved my life, to the end I might have means to
leave this rude and unpolished Discourse unto my children for a memorial and an
inheritance. For my intention is no other but to write it for them, that they
may behold what strange fortunes I have run for the space of one and twenty
years, during the which I was thirteen times a captive, and seventeen times
sold in the Indiaes, in Aethiopia, in Arabia, in China, in Tartaria, in
Madagascar, in Sumatra, and in diverse other Kingdoms and Provinces of that
Oriental Archipalage upon the Confines of Asia, which the Chinese, Siames,
Gu^os, and Lecquios name, and that with reason in their Geography, the eyelids
of the World, whereof I hope to entreat more particularly and largely
hereafter. Whereby men, for the time to come, may take example, and a
resolution not to be discouraged for any crosses that may arrive unto them in
the course of their lives. For no disgrace of Fortune ought to esloign us never
so little from the duty which we are bound to render unto God, because there is
no adversity, how great soever, but the nature of man may well undergo it,
being favored with the assistance of Heaven. Now that others may help me to
praise the Lord Almighty for the infinite mercy he has showed me, without any
regard to my sins, which I confess were the cause and original of all my
misfortunes, and that from the same divine Power I received strength and
courage to resist them, escaping out of so many dangers with my life saved, I
take for the beginning of my Voyage the time which I spent in this Kingdom of
Portugal, and say, That after I had lived there till I was about eleven or
twelve years old in the misery and poverty of my fathers house within the Town
of Monte-mor Ovelho, an Uncle of mine, desirous to advance me to a better
fortune then that whereunto I was reduced at that time, and to take me from the
caresses and cockering of my Mother, brought me to this City of Lisbon, where
he put me into the service of a very honorable Lady: To the which he was
carried out of the hope he had, that by the favor of her self and her friends
he might attain to his desire for my advancement, and this was in the same
year, that the funeral pomp of the deceased King Emanuel of happy memory was
celebrated at Lisbon, namely Saint Luces day, the thirteenth of December, 1521.
which is the furthe^^ thing I can remember. In the mean time my Uncles des^g^
had a succes^ (...) contrary to that which he had promised to himself in favor
of me; For having been in the service of this Lady about a year and an half, an
accident befell me, that cast me into manifest peril of my life, so that to
save my self I was constrained to abandon her house with all the speed that
possibly I could. Flying away then in very great fear, I arrived before I was
aware at the Ford of Pedra, which is a small Port so called; There I found a
Carvel of Alfama, that was laden with the horses and stuff of a Lord, who was
going to Setuval, where at that instant King Ioana the Third kept his Court by
reason of a great plague that reigned in diverse parts of the Kingdom.

Perceiving then that this Carvel was ready to put to Sea, I imbarqued my self
in her, and departed the next day. But alas! a little after we had set sail,
having gotten to a place named Cezmibra, we were set upon by a French Pirate,
who having boarded us, caused fifteen or sixteen of his men to leap into our
Vessel, who finding no resistance made themselves Masters of her: Now after
they had pillaged every one of us, they emptied all the Merchandise
wherewithal ours was laden, which amounted to above six thousand ducats, into
their ship, and then sunk her; so that of seventeen of us that remained alive,
not so much as one could escape slavery, for they clapped us up all bound hand
and foot under hatches, with an intent to go and sell us at La Rache in
Barbary, whither also, as we found by being amongst them, they carried Arms to
the Mahometans in way of Trade; for this purpose they kept us thirteen days
together, continually whipping us; but at the end thereof it fortuned that
about Sun set they discovered a ship, unto which they gave chase all the night,
following her close, like old Pirates long used to such Theeveries; Having
fetched her up by break of day, they gave her a volley of thre^ p^eces of
Ordnance, and presently invested her with a great deal of courage; Now though
at first they found some resistance, yet they quickly rendered themselves
M^sters of her, killing six Portugals, and ten or eleven slaves. This was a
goodly Vessel, and belonged to a Portugal Merchant of the Town of Conde, named
Silvestre Godinho, which diverse other Merchants of Lisbon had laden at Saint
Tome with great store of Sugar and Slaves; In such sort that those poor people
seeing themselves thus* taken and robbed fell to lament their loss, which they
estim^ted to be forty thousand Ducats. Whereupon these Pirates, having gotten
so rich a booty, changed their design for going to la Rache, and bent their
course for the Goast of France, carrying with them such of ours for slaves, as
they judged fit for the service of their Navigation. The remainder of us they
left at night in the Road, at a place called Melides, where we were landed
miserably naked, our bodies covered with nothing but with the stripes of the
lashes which so cruelly we had received the days before. In this pitiful case
we arrived the next morning at Saint Iago de Cacen, where we were relieved by
the inhabitants of the place, especially by a Lady, that was there at that
time, named Donna Beatrix, daughter to the Earl of Villanova, and wife to
Alonso Perez Pantoia, Commander and grand Provost of the Town. Now after the
sick and wounded were recovered, each of us departed, and got him where he
hoped to find best assistance; for my self, poor wretch, I went with six or
seven that accompanied me in my misery to Setuval: Thither I was no sooner
come, but my good fortune placed me in the service of Francisco de Faria, a
Gentleman belonging to the great Commander of Saint Iago, who in recompense of
four years service, that I did him, put me to the said Commander to wait on him
in his chamber, which I performed for an year and an half after. But in regard
the entertainment, which was given at that time in Noble-mens houses, was so
small as I was not able to live on it, necessity constrained me to quit my
Master, with a design to imbarque my self by his favor to go to the Indiaes;
for that I thought was the best way I could take to free me of my poverty. So
albeit I were but meanly accommodated I imbarqued my self notwithstanding,
submitting my self to whatsoever fortune should arrive unto me in those far
Countries, either good or bad.

CHAP. II. My departure from Portugal for the Indiaes, and my imbarquing there
for the Straight of Mecqua.
IT was in the year 1537. and the eleventh of March, that I parted from this
Kingdom in a Fleet of five Ships, whereof there was no General;. 1.
for each of those Vessels was commanded by a particular Captain: For example,
in the ship named the Queen, commanded Don Pedro de Silva, surnamed the Cock,
son to the Admiral Don Vasco de Gama; In the ship, called St Rock, commanded
Don Fernando de Lima, son to Diego Lopez de Lima, grand Provost of the Town of
Guimaranes, who dyed valiantly in defense of the Fortress of Ormuz, whereof he
was Captain the year following, 1538. In the S. Barba, commanded Don Fernando
de Lima, who was to be Governor of the Town of Chaul; Of that, which was called
the Flower of the Sea, Lope Vaz Vagado was Captain; And in the fifth and last
ship, named Galega, commanded Martimde Freitas, born in the Isle of Madera, who
the same year was slain at Damao, together with five and thirty men that
followed him. These Vessels, sailing different ways, arrived at length at a
good Port called Mozambique; There we met with the S. Michel, that wintered
there, and was commanded by Duart Tristao, who parted thence richly laden for
to return into Portugal; Howbeit I believe she was taken, or suffered
shipwreck, as it happens but too often in this Voyage to the Indiaes, for he
was never heard of since. After our five Vessels were equipped with all that
was necessary for them, and ready to set sail from Mozambique, the Lieutenant
of the Fortress, called Vincent Pegado, showed the Captains of the said five
ships a Mandate from the Governor, named Nunho de Cunha, whereby he expressly
commanded that all Portugal ships, which did arrive in that Port this year,
should go to Diu, and leave their men there for the guard of the Fortress,
because of the fear they were in of the Turkish Army, which was every hour
expected in the Indiaes, by reason of the death of Sultan Bandur King of
Cambaya, whom the said Governor had put to death the Summer before. In regard
this affair was of great importance, it was the cause that all the Captains
assembled together to deliberate thereupon; At length to meet with the present
necessity they concluded, that three of those five ships, appertaining to the
King, should go to Diu, conformable to the contents of the said Mandate, and
that the other two, which belonged to particular Merchants, should pursue their
course to Goa: The Kings three ships sailing to Diu, and the other two
Merchants toward Goa, it pleased God to conduct them safe thither. Now as soon
as the Kings three ships came to the mouth of the River of the Port of Diu,
which fell on the fifth of September the same year, 1538. Antonio de Silv^ra,
the Brother of Louys Silvera, Earl of Sortelha, who was Captain there at that
time, gave them all the testimony that possibly he could of the joy he took at
this their arrival; For proof whereof he bestowed liberally on every one,
keeping a set table for above seven hundred persons which they brought along
with them, besides his secret rewards, and extraordinary gifts, whereby he
supplied the necessities they had suffered during their Voyage. Whereupon the
Soldiers considering how this Captain entreated them very royally, that he
paid them beforehand, distributed their pay and munition unto them with his
own hands, caused the sick to be carefully tended, and showed himself most
ready to assist every one, it so wrought upon them, that of their own accord
they offered to stay there for to serve him, being no way constrained
thereunto, as they use to be in those Countries in all the Fortresses which
expect a siege. This done, as soon as the three ships had sold the Merchandise
they had brought, they set sail for Goa, carrying none with them but the
Officers of the Vessels, and some Sea^men to conduct them; where they abode
till such time as the Governor had given them dispatches for to go to Cochin,
where being arrived they took in their lading, and return^d all five safe into
Portugal.

Seventeen days after we were arrived at the Fortress of Diu,. 2.
where at that time two Foists were ready prepared to go to the Straight of
Mecqua, for to discover, and find out the design of the Turkish Army, whose
coming was greatly feared in the Indiaes, because one of those Foists was
commanded by a Captain that was a great friend of mine, who gave me good hope
of the Voyage he was bound for, I imbarqued my self with him; Relying then on
the promises which the Captain made me, that by his favor and means I should
quickly be rich, the only thing in the world that I most desired, and suffering
my self to be deceived by my hopes, I imagined that I was already Master of
great wealth, never considering how vain and uncertain the promises of men are,
and that I could not reap much benefit by the Voyage I was going to undertake,
by reason it was dangerous, and unseasonable for Navigation in that Country.
Now being departed from Diu, we sailed in a time full of storms, because it was
about the end of Winter, which seemed to begin anew, so impetuous were the
winds, and so great was the rain: Nevertheless, how violent soever the Tempest
was, and dark the weather, we let not to discover the Isles of Curia, Muria,
and Avedalcuria, at the sight whereof we thought our selves quite lost, and
without hope of life. Whereupon to decline the danger we turned the prow of our
Vessel to the South-east, knowing no other mean then that to avoid shipwreck;
But by good fortune for us, it pleased God, that we let fall an anchor at the
point of the Island of Socotora; there we presently anchored, a league below
the place, where Don Francisco d' Almeyda caused a Fortress to be built in the
year 1507. when he came from Portugal, as the first Victory that ever was in
the Indiaes. In the said place we took in fresh water, and some provision of
Victuals, that we bought of the Christians of the Country, which are the
descendants of those, whom the Apostle S. Thomas converted in those parts.
Being refreshed thus, we parted from thence with a purpose to enter the
Straight, so that after we had sailed nine days with a favorable wind we found
our selves right against Mazua; There about Sun set we descryed a sail at Sea,
whereunto we gave so hard chase, that before the first watch of the night we
came up close to her, and then to satisfy the desire we had for to learn
something of the Captain by gentleness touching the Turkish Army, we demanded
of him whether it was parted from Sues, or whether he had not met with it in
any place; and that we might be the better informed we spoke aloud to all those
that were in the ship. But in stead of answer, without speaking a word, and in
contempt of us, they gave us a dozen pieces of Ordnance, whereof, five were
small, and the other seven, field Pieces, together with good store of Musket
shot; And withal, in a kind of jollity, and as it were believing that we were
already theirs, they made all the air about resound again with their confused
cries; After this, to brave and terrify us the more, they flourished a many
flags and streamers up and down, and from the top of their poop they brandished
a number of naked Scymitars, commanding us with great threatening to come
aboard and yield our selves unto them. At the first view of so many
Rhodomontades and bravings we were in some doubt and amaze, which caused the
Captains of our Foists to call the Soldiers to Council for to know what they
should do, and the conclusion was to continue shooting at them till the next
morning, that so by daylight they might be the better fought withal and
invested, it being agreed upon of all sides that they were not to be let go
unpunished for their presumption: Which accordingly was performed, and all the
rest of the night we gave them chase, plying them with our Ordnance. So morning
come, their ship being shot through and through in many places, and cruelly
battered all over, they rendered themselves into our hands. In the encounter
there were threescore and four of their men killed, and of fourscore that
remained, the most part, seeing themselves reduced to extremity, cast
themselves into the Sea, choosing rather there to be drowned, then to be burnt
in their ship with the artificial fires that we had hurled into her, so that of
all the fourscore there escaped but five very sore hurt, whereof one was the
Captain. This same, by force of torture, whereunto he was exposed by the
Command of our two Captains, confessed that he came from Iudaa, and that the
Turkish Army was already departed from Sues, with a design to take in Ad^m, and
then to build a Fortress there before they attempted any thing in the Indiaes,
according to an express charge sent by the great Turk from Constantinople to
the Bassa of grand Cair^, who was going to be General of the Army: Besides
this, he confessed many other things conformable to our desire, amongst the
which he said, that he was a renegado Christian, a Maliorquin by Nation, born
at Cerdenha, and son to one named Paul Andrez, a Merchant of that Island, and
that about four years before growing enamored of a very ^air Greekish
Mahumetan, that was then his wife, for the love of her he had abjured
Christianity, and embraced the Law of Mahomet. Our Captains much amazed hereat,
gently persuaded him to acquit this abominable belief, and become a Christian
again, whereunto the wicked Caytiff made answer with a brutish obstinacy, that
at no hand he would yield to forsake his Law, showing himself so hardened in
the resolution to continue therein, as if he had been born in it, and never had
professed any other. By these speeches of his, the Captains, perceiving there was
no hope of recalling him from his damnable error, caused him to be bound hand
and foot, and so with a great stone tied about his neck to be cast alive into
the Sea, sending him to participate with the torments of his Mahomet, and to be
his companion in the other world, as he had been his confident in this. This
Infidel being executed in this sort, we put the other prisoners into one of our
Foists, and then sunk their Vessel with all the goods that were in her, which
consisted most in packs of stained Cloths, whereof we had no use, and a few
pieces of Chamlet that the Soldiers got to make them apparel.

CHAP. III. Our traveling from Mazua by land to the Mother of Prester John; as
also our reimbarquing at the Port of Arquic^, and that which befell us by the
encounter of three Turkish Vessels.
WE departed from this place with an intent to go to Arquico,. 1.
the Territory of Prester John, Emperor of Aethiopia, for we had a Letter to
deliver, which Antonio de Sylvera sent to a Factor of his, named Anrique
Barbosa, who had been three years resident in that Country by the Commandment
of the Governor Nuno de Cunha. When we were arrived at Gottor, a league lower
then the Port of Mazua, we were all received there very courteously, as well by
the Inhabitants, as by a Portugal, called Vasco Martins de Seixas, born in the
Town of Obidos, who was come thither by Henrico Barbosa's order, and had been
there a month attending the arrival of some Portugal ship. The cause of that
his abode was to deliver a Letter from the said Henrico, as accordingly he did
to the Captains of our Foi^ts; By this Letter he certified the estate of the
Turkish Army, and besought them at any hand to send him some Portugals, to
induce them whereunto, he remonstrated unto them how it much imported the
service both of God and the King, and that for his own part he could not come
unto them, because he was employed with forty other Portugals in the Fort of
Gileytor for the guard of the person of the Princess of Tigremahon, Mother to
Prester John. The two Captains, having perused this Letter, communicated it to
the chiefest of the Soldiers, and sat in Council upon it, where it was
determined that four of them should go along with Vasco Martins to Barbosa, and
that they should carry the Letter which Antonio de Sylvera had sent him: This
was no sooner resolved then executed, for the next day three other Portugals,
and my self, departed accordingly, and we went by Land mounted upon good Mules,
which the Ciquaxy, Captain of the Town, sent us by the Command of the Princess,
the Emperors Mother, together with six Abissins to accompany us. The first
night we lay at a very fair Monastery, called Satilgaon; The next day before
the Sun rose we traveled along by a River, and by that time we had rode five
leagues we arrived at a place, named Bitonte, where we spent that night in a
Convent of religious persons, dedicated to S. Michael; there we were very well
entertained both by the Prior, and the Friars: A little after our arrival, the
son of Bernagais, Governor of that Empire of Aethiopia, a very proper and
courteous Gentleman, about seventeen years old, came to see us, accompanied
with thirty men, all mounted upon Mules, and himself on a horse furnished after
the Portugal manner; the furniture was of Purple Velvet trimmed with Gold
fringe, which two years before the Governor Nuno de Cunha sent him from the
Indiaes, by one Lopez Chanoca, who was afterward made a slave at Gran Cario,
whereof this young Prince being advertised, he presently dispatched away a
Jewish Merchant of Azabiba to redeem him, but as ill fortune would he dyed
before the Jew could get thither, which so grieved this Prince when he
understood of it, as the s^id Vasco Martins assured us that in the said
Monastery of S. Michael he caused the most honorable funerals to be celebrated
for him that ever he saw, wherein assisted above four thousand Priests, besides
a greater number of Novices, which in their language are called Santilcos: No^
was this all, for this Prince hearing that the deceased had been married at
Goa, and likewise that he had left three daughters there behind him, which were
very young and poor, he bestowed on them three hundred O qu^^^ of Gold, that
are worth twelve Crusadoes of our money a piece, ^ liberality truly royal, and
which I relate here, as well to amplify the nobleness of this Prince, as that
it may serve for an example to others, and render them more charitable upon
like occasions.

The next morning we continued our journey, making all the hast^ that possibly
we could, to which end we got upon good Horses, that were given us by this
Prince, and withal he appointed four of his servants to accompany us, who
during our Voyage entertained us every where very sumptuously. That day our
lodging was at a goodly place, called Betenigus, which signifies a royal house,
and in truth it was not without reason so named, for on whatsoever part one
cast an eye it was environed with gallant high Trees for three leagues about,
nor is it to be credited how pleasing this Wood was, for that it was composed
all of Cedars, Cypres, Palm, Date Trees, and Cocos, like to those in the
Indiaes; Here we past the night with all kind of contentment; In the morning we
proceeded on our journey, and traveling after five leagues a day we past over
a great Plain, all full of goodly Corn; Then we arrived at a Mountain, named
Vangaleu, inhabited by Jews, which were very white and handsome; Two days and an
half after we came to a good Town, called Fumbau, not above two leagues distant
from the Fort of Gileytor, there we found Barbosa, and the forty Portugals
aforesaid, who received us with great demonstrations of joy, but not without
shedding of some tears, for though they lived there at their ease, and were
absolute Masters of all the Country, as they said, yet the consideration how
they were as men banished from their Country into this place, did very much
trouble them.

Now because it was night when we arrived, and that we had all need of rest,
Barbosa was of the opinion that we should not see the Emperors Mother till the
next morning, which was a Sunday, the fourth of October; that come, and we well
refreshed, we went, accompanied with Barbosa and his forty Portugals, to the
Princesses Palace, where we found her at Mass in her Chapel: A while after
being advertised of our arrival, she caused us to be admitted into her
presence; Whereupon we fell on our knees before her, and with all kind of
humility kissed the Ventilow that she held in her hand; To these submissions we
adjoined many other Ceremonies according to their fashion, conformable to the
instructions we had taken from the Portugals that conducted us thither. She
received us with a smiling countenance, and to testify how much she was
pleased with our coming; Verily, said she, you cannot imagine how glad I am to
see you, that are right Christians, for it has been a thing which I have
always as much desired, as a fair garden enameled with flowers does the
mornings dew, wherefore you are most welcome come, and may your entrance into
my house be as propitious, as that of the virtuous Queen Helena 's was into
blessed Jerusalem. Herewith she made us to sit down upon ma^^, not above five
or six paces distant from her; Then showing her self exceedingly contented, she
questioned us about certain matters, of which, she assured us, that she very
much longed to be satisfied: First she asked us the name of our holy Father the
Pope, also how many Kings there were in Christendom, and whether any of us had
ever been in the holy Land; whereupon she much condemned the Christian Princes,
for their neglect and want of care in seeking to ruin the power of the Turk,
who, she said, was the common Enemy of them all. Likewise she would know of us
whether the King of Portugal was great in the Indiaes, what Forts he had there,
in what places they were seated, and how defended. She made us many other like
demands, to the which we answered the best we could for to content her;
whereupon she dismissed us, and we returning to our lodging, continued there
nine days, which we spent in waiting on this Princess, with whom we had much
discourse on several subjects: That Term expired, we went to take our leaves of
her, and in kissing of her hands she seemed to be somewhat troubled at our
departure. Truly, said she, it grieves me that you will be gone so soon, but
since there is no remedy, I wish your Voyage may be so prosperous, that at your
arrival in the Indiaes you may be as well received by yours, as the Queen of
Sheba was heretofore by King Solomon in the admirable Palace of his greatness.
Now before we departed she bestowed on us twenty four Oquea^ of Gold, which
make two hundred forty Ducats of our money; She caused us also to be conducted
by a Naiqu^, and twenty Abissins, as well to serve us for Guides, and guard us
from Robbers, whereof that Country was full, as to furnish us with Victuals and
Horses until such time as we got to Arquico, where our Foists attended for us.
This Princess also sent a rich present of diverse Jewels of Gold and Stones by
Vasco Martins de S^ixas unto the Governor of the Indiaes, which by ill fortune
was lost in this Voyage, as shall be declared hereafter.

. 2.
After we were returned to the Port of Arquico, where we found our companions
caulking of our Foists, and furnishing them with all that was necessary for our
Voyage, we fell to work with them for the space of nine days. At length all
things being ready, we set sail, and parted from thence on Tuesday, the sixth
of November, 1538. We carried with us both Vasco Martins de Seixas, that had
the Present and a Letter from the Princess to the Governor of the Indiaes, as
also an Abissin Bishop, who was bound for Portugal, with an intent to go from
thence to Galicia, Rome, and Venice, and afterward to travel to Jerusalem,
which especially he desired to see in regard of the holiness of the place. An
hour before day we left the Port, and sail^d along the Coast before the wind,
until such time as about noon we reached the point of the Cape of Cocam, and
before we arrived at the Island of Rocks, we disc^^ned three Vessels on the
other side, that seemed to us to be Gelvas or Terrades, which are the names of
the Vessels of that Country; Whereupon we gave them chase, and with the
strength of our oars, because the wind was then somewhat down, we pursued them
in such sort, that in less then two hours, having gotten up to them, we might
easily perceive them to be Turkish Galleys, whereof we were no sooner assured,
but that we presently betook our selves to flight, and made toward the Land
with all the haste that might be, so if it were possible to escape the danger
that inevitably threatened us: But whether the Turks suspected our design, or
knew it, in less then a quarter of an hour they hoisted up all their sails, and
having the wind favorable they followed us very hard, so as in a little while
getting within a small faulcon shot of us, they discharged all their Ordnance
upon us, wherewith they not only killed nine of our men, and hur^ six and
twenty, but so b^ttered our Foists, that we were fain to cast a great part of
our goods into the Sea; Mean while the Turks lost no time, but joined us so
close, that from their poop they hurt us easily with their pikes: Now there
were four and forty good Soldiers remaining yet unhurt in our Foists, who
knowing that upon their valor, and the force of their arms, depended the lives
both of themselves, and all the rest, they determined to fight it out; With
this resolution they set courageously upon the Admiral of the three Galleys,
wherein was Solomon Dragu^, General of the Fleet; Their onset was so furious,
as they invested her from poop to prow, and killed seven and twenty Ianizaries,
nevertheless she being instantly succored with fresh men by the other two
Galleys, which had stayed a little behind, we were so wearied and oppressed
with numbers, that we were not able to make any further resistance, for of four
and fifty that we were at first, there was but eleven left alive, whereof two
also dyed the next day, whom the Turks caused to be cut in quarters, which they
hung at the end of their main yards for a sign of their Victory, and in that
manner carried them to the Town of Mocaa, whereof the Father-in-law of the said
Solomon Dragu^, that had taken us, was Governor; who with all the Inhabitants
waited the coming of his Son-in-law at the entry into the Port, to receive and
welcome him for his Victory. In his Company he had a certain Cacis, who was
Moulana, the chiefest Sacerdotal dignity, and because he had been a little
before in pilgrimage at the Temple of their Prophet Mahomet in Mecca, he was
held by all the people for a very holy man: This Impostet rode up and down the
Town in a triumphant Charret, covered all over with Silk Tapestry, and with a
deal of Ceremony blessed the people as he went along, exhorting them to render
all possible thanks unto their Prophet for the Victory, which Solomon Dragu^
had obtained over us. As soon as they arrived at this place, we nine that
remained alive were set on shore, tied altogether with a great chain, and
amongst us was the Abissin Bishop, so pitifully wounded that he dyed the next
day, and in his end showed the repentance of a true Christian, which very much
encouraged and comforted us. In the mean time all the Inhabitants, that were
assembled about us, hearing that we were the Christians which were taken
Captives, being exceedingly transported with choler, fell to beating of us in
that cruel manner, as for my own part I never thought to have escaped alive out
of their hands, whereunto they were especially incited by the wicked Cacis, who
made them believe that they should obtain the more favor and mercy from their
Mahomet, the worse they entreated us. Thus chained all together, and persecuted
by every one, we were led in triumph over all the Town, where nothing was heard
but acclamations and shouts, intermingled with a world of music, as well of
instruments, as voices. Moreover, there was not a woman, were she never so
retired, that came not forth then to see us, and to do us some outrage; for
from the very least children to the oldest men, all that beheld us pass by cast
out of the windows and balcons upon us pots of piss, and other filth, in
contempt and derision of a name of a Christian, wherein every one strived to be
most forward, in regard their cursed Priest continued still preaching unto
them, that they should gain remission of their sins by abusing us. Having been
tormented in this sort until the evening, they went and laid us bound as we
were in a dark Dungeon, where we remained seventeen days, exposed to all kind
of misery, having no other victual all that time, but a little oatmeal, which
was distributed to us every morning to serve us all the day: Sometimes they
gave us the same measure in dry Peason a little soaked in water, and this was
all the meat we had.

CHAP. IV. A Mutiny happening in the Town of Moca^, the occasion thereof, that
which befell thereupon, and by what means I was carried to Ormuz; as also my
sailing from thence to Goa, and what success I had in that Voyage.
. 1.
THe next day, in regard that we had been so miserably moiled, and our hurts,
that were great, but ill looked unto, of us nine there dyed two, whereof one
was named Nuno Delgado, and the other Andre Borges, both of them men of
courage, and of good families. The Jailer, which in their language is called
Mocadan, repairing in the morning to us, and finding our two companions dead,
goes away in all haste therewith to acquaint the Gauzil, which is as the Judge
with us, who came in person to the prison, attended by a great many of
Officers, and other people; Where having caused their irons to be stricken off,
and their feet to be tied together with a rope, he commanded them so to be
dragged from thence clean through the Town, where the whole multitude, to the
very children, pursued and palted them with staves and stones, until such time
as being wearied with harrying those poor bodies in such fashion, they cast
them all battered to pieces into the Sea. At last we seven, that were left
alive, were chained all together, and brought forth into the public place of
the Town, to be sold to them that would give most: There all the people being
met together, I was the first that was put to sale; whereupon, just as the
Crier was offering to deliver me unto whomsoever would buy me, in comes that
very Cacis Moulana, whom they held for a Saint, with ten or eleven other Cacis
his Inferiors, all Priests like himself of their wicked Sect, and addressing
his speech to Heredrin Sofo, the Governor of the Town, who sat as President of
the Portsale, he required him to send us, as an alms, unto the Temple of
Mecqua, saying, that he was upon returning thither, and having resolved to make
that pilgrimage in the name of all the people, it were not fit to go thither
without carrying some offering to the Prophet Noby, (so they termed their
Mahomet,) a thing, said he, that would utterly displease Razaadat Moulana, the
Chief Priest of Medina Talnab, who without that would grant no kind of grace or
pardon to the Inhabitants of this Town, which by reason of their great offenses
stood in extreme need of the favor of God, and of his Prophet.

The Governor having heard the Cacis speak thus, declared unto him that for his
particular he had no power to dispose with any part of the booty, and that
therefore he should apply himself to Solomon Dragut his Son-in-law, who had
made us slaves, so that in right it appertained only unto him to do with us as
he pleased; and I do not think, added he, that he will contradict so holy an
intention as this is. Thou have reason for it, answered the Cacis, but withal
thou must know, that the things of God, and the alms that are done in his name,
lose their value and force, when they are sifted through so many hands, and
turmoiled with such humane opinions, for which very cause seldom does any
divine resolution follow thereupon, especially in a subject such as this is,
which thou may absolutely dispose of, as thou art sovereign Commander of this
people: Moreover, as there is no body can be displeased therewith, so I do not
see how it can bring thee any discontent. For besides that, this demand is very
just, it is also most agreeable to our Prophet Noby, who is the absolute Lord
of this prize, in regard the Victory came solely from his holy hand, though
with as much falsehood as malice thou go about to attribute the glory of it
to the valor of thy Son-in law, and the courage of his Soldiers. At this
instant a Ianizary was present, Captain of one of the three Galleys that took
us, a man that for his exceeding valor was in great esteem amongst them, called
Copa Geynal, who netled with that which he heard the Cacis speak, so much in
contempt both of himself, and the rest of the Soldiers, that had carried
themselves very valiantly in the fight with us, returned him this answer.
Certainly you might do better for the Salvation of your Soul, to distribute
some part of the excessive riches you possess amongst these poor Soldiers, then
seek with feigned speeches, full of hypocrisy and deceit, to rob them of these
slaves, which have cost the lives of so many brave men, their fellows in arms,
and have been dearly bought by us that survive, even with our dearest blood, as
the wounds we have upon us can but two well witness; so can it not be said of
your Cabayage (a Sacerdotal Robe after their fashion,) which for all it sits so
trim and neat upon you, covers a pernicious habit you have of purloyning other
men's estates from them: Wherefore I would wish you to desist from the damnable
plot you have laid against the absolute Masters of this Prize, whereof you
shall not have so much as a token, and seek out some other Present for the
Cacis of Mecqua, to the end he may conceal your theeveties, and impiety,
provided it be not done with the expense of our lives and blood, but rather
with the goods you have so lewdly gotten by your wicked and cunning devices.

This Cacis Moulana having received so bold an answer from this Captain, found
it very rude, and hard of digestion, which made him in bitter terms, and void
of all respects, exceedingly to blame the Captain, and the Soldiers that were
there present, who, as well Turks as Saracens, being much offended with his ill
language, combined together and mutined against him, and the rest of the
people, in whose favor he had spoken so insolently; nor could this mutiny be
appeased by any kind of means, though the Governor of the Town, Father-in-law
to the said Solomon Dragut, together with the Officers of Justice, did all that
possibly they could. In a word, that I may not stand longer upon the
particulars of this affair, I say, that from this small mutiny did arise so
cruel and enraged a contention, as it ended not but with the death of six
hundred persons, of the one and the other side: But at length the Soldiers
party prevailing, they pillaged the most part of the Town, especially the said
Cacis Moulana's house, killing seven wives and nine children that he had, whose
bodies together with his own were dismembered, and cast into the Sea with a
great deal of cruelty. In the same manner they entreated all that belonged unto
him, not so much as giving life to one that was known to be his. As for us
seven Portugals, which were exposed to sale in the public place, we could
find out no better expedient to save our lives, then to return into the same
hole, from whence we came, and that too without any Officer of Justice to carry
us thither; neither did we take it for a small favor that the Jailer would
receive us into the prison. Now this Mutiny had not ceased but by the authority
of Solomon Dragut, General of the Galleys aforesaid* For this man with very
gentle words gave an end to the sedition of the people, and pacified the
Mutiners, which shows of what power courtesy is, even with such as are
altogether ignorant of it. In the mean time Heredrin Sopho, Governor of the
Town, came off but ill from this hurly burly, by reason that in the very first
encounter he had one of his arms almost cut off. Three days after this disorder
was quieted we were led all seven again to the Market place, there to be sold
with the rest of the booty, which consisted of our Stuff, and Ordnance, that
they had taken in our Foists, and were sold at a very easy rate: For my self,
miserable that I was, and the most wretched of them all, Fortune, my sworn
enemy, made me fall into the hands of a Greek renegado, whom I shall detest as
long as I have a day to live, because that in the space of three Months I was
with him, he used me so cruelly, that becoming even desparate, for that I was
not able to endure the evil he did me, I was seven or eight times upon the
point to have poisoned my self, which questionless I had done, if God of his
infinite mercy and goodness had not diverted me from it, whereunto I was the
rather induced to make him lose the money he paid for me, because he was the
most covetous man in the world, and the most inhumane, and cruellest enemy to
the name of a Christian. But at the end of three Months it pleased the Almighty
to deliver me out of the hands of this Tyrant, who for fear of losing the money
I cost him, if I should chance to make my self away, as one of his neighbors
persuaded him I would, telling him that he had discovered so much by my
countenance, and manner of behavior, wherefore in pity of me he counseled him
to sell me away, as he did ^ot long after unto a Jew, named Abraham Muca,
Natif^ of a Town, called in those quarters Toro, not above a league and an half
distan^ from Mount Sinay: This man gave for me (...) value of three hundred
Reals in Dates, which was the Merchandise that this Jew did ordinarily trade in
with my late Master, and so I parted with him in the company of diverse
Merchants for to go from Babylon to Cayxem, whence he carried me to Ormuz, and
there presented me to Don Fernand de Lima, who was at that time Captain of the
Fort, and to Doctor Pedro Fernandez, Commissary General of the Indiaes, that
was then resid^ng at Ormuz for the service of the King by order from the
Governor Nunho de Cunha. These two, namely Fernandez and de Lima gave the Jew
in recompense for me two hundred Pardaos, which are worth three shillings and
nine pence a piece of our coin, whereof part was their own money, and the rest
was raised of the alms which they caused to be gathered for me in the Town, so
we both remained contented, the Jew for the satisfaction he had received from
them, and I to find my self at full liberty as before.

Seeing my self by Gods mercy delivered from the miseries I had endured;. 2.
after I had been seventeen days at Ormuz, I imba^qued my self for the Indiaes
in a ship that belonged to one Iorge Fernandez Taborda, who was to carry Horses
to Goa. In the course that we held we sailed with so prosperous a gale, that in
seventeen days we arrived in view of the Fort of Diu; There, by the advice of
the Captains, coasting along by the Land for to learn some news, we descryed a
great number of fires all that night, also at times we heard diverse Pieces of
Ordnance discharged, which very much troubled us, by reason we could not
imagine what those fires, o^ that shooting in the night should mean, in so much
that we were divided into several opinions. During this incertainty our best
advice was, to sail the rest of the night with as little cloth as might be,
until that on the next morning by the favor of day light we perceived a great
many sails, which environed the Fort on all sides. Some affirmed that it was
the Governor newly come from Goa to make peace for the death of Sultan Bandur,
King of Cambaya, that was slain a little before. Others said that it was the
Infant, Brother to the King Dom Iovan, lately arrived there from Portugal,
because he was every day expected in the Indiaes. Some thought that it was the
Pat^marcaa, with the King of Cabicuts hundred Foists of Camorin. And the last
assured us, how they could justify with good and sufficient reasons that they
were the Turks. As we were in this diversity of minds, and terrified with that
which we discerned before our eyes, five very great Galleys came forth of the
midst of this Fleet, with a many of banners, flags, and streamers, which we saw
on the tops of their Masts, and the ends of their sailyards, whereof some were
so long that they touched even the very water. These Galleys, being come forth
in this sort, turned their prows toward us in such a courageous and confident
manner, that by their sailing we presently judged them to be Turks; Which we no
sooner knew to be so indeed, but we clapped on all our cloth, for to avoid them,
and to get into the main Sea, not without exceeding fear, le^t for our sins we
should fall into the like estate, from whence I was so lately escaped. These
five Galleys having observed our flight, took a resolution to pursue us, and
chased us till night, at which time it pleased God that they tacked about, and
returned to the Army from whence they came. Seeing our selves freed from so
great a danger we went joyfully on, and two days after arrived at the Town of
Chaul, where our Captain and the Merchants only landed for to visit the Captain
of the Fort, named Simon Guedez, unto whom they reported that which had
befallen them. Assuredly, said he, you are very much bound to give God thanks
for delivering you from one of the greatest perils that ever you were in, for
without his assistance it had been impossible for you ever to have declined it,
or to tell me of it with such joy as now you do: Thereupon he declared unto
them* that the Army they had incountred was the very same, which had held
Antonio de Silveyra twenty days together besieged, being composed of a great
number of Turks, whereof Solomon the Bassa, Viceroy of Caire, was General, and
that those Sails they had seen, were eight and fifty Galleys great and small,
each of which carried five Pieces of Ordnance in her prow, and some of them
were Pieces of Battery, besides eight other great Vessels, full of Turks, that
were kept in reserve to succor the Army, and supply the places of such as
should be killed; Moreover he added, that they had great abundance of victuals,
amongst the which there was twelve Basilisks. This news having much amazed us,
we rendered infinite praise to the Lord for showing us such grace, as to
deliver us from so imminent a danger.

. 3.
We stayed at Chaul but one day, and then we set sail for Goa; Being advanced as
far as to the River of Carapatan, we met with Fernand de Morais, Captain of
three Foists, who by the command of the Viceroy, Dom Garcia de Noronha, was
going to Dabul, to the end he might see whether he could take or burn a Turkish
Vessel, which was in the Port, laden with Victuals by order from the Bassa.
This Fernand de Morais had no sooner gotten acquaintance of our ship, but he
desired our Captain to lend him fifteen men, of twenty that he had, for to
supply the great necessity he was in that way, by reason of the V^c^-roys
hastening him away upon the sudden, which, said he, would much advance the
service both of God, and his Highness. After many contestations of either part
upon this occasion, and which, to make shor^, I will pass under silence, at
length they were agreed, that our Captain should let Fernand de Morais have
twelve, of fifteen men, that he requested, wherewithal he was very well
satisfied: Of this number I was one, as being always of the least respected.
The ship departing for Goa, Fernand de Morais with his three Foists continued
his Voyage toward the Port of Dabul, where we arrived the next day about nine
of the clock in the morning, and presently took a Patach of Malabar, which
laden with Cotton Wool and Pepper, rode at anchor in the midst of the Port.
Having taken it we put the Captain and Pilot to torture, who instantly
confessed that a few days before a ship came into that Port expressly from the
Bassa to lade Victuals, and that there was in her an Ambassador, who had
brought Hidalcan a very rich Cabaya, that is a garment worn by the Gentlemen of
that Country, which he would not accept of, for that thereby he would not
acknowledge himself subject to the Turk, it being a custom among the Mahumetans,
for the Lord to do that honor to his Vassal; and further, that this refusal had
so much v^xed the Ambassador, as he returned without taking any kind of
provision of Victuals, and that Hidalcan had answered, he made much more esteem
of the King of Portugals amity, then of his, which was nothing but deceit, as
having usurped the Town of Goa upon him, after he had offered to aid him with
his favor and forces to regain it. Moreover they said, that it was not above
two days since the ship, they spoke of, parted from the Port, and that the
Captain of her, named Cide Ale, had denounced War against Hidalcan, vowing that
as soon as the Fort of Diu was taken, which could not hold out above eight
days, according to the estate wherein h^ had left it, Hidalcan should lose his
Kingdom, or life, and that then he should to his cost know how little the
Portugals, in whom he put his confidence, could avail him. With these news
Captain Morais returned toward Goa, where he arrived two days after, and gave
account to the Viceroy of that which had past. There we found Goncallo vaz
Coutinho, who was going with five Foists to Onor, to demand of the Queen
thereof one of the Galleys of Solymans Army, which by a contrary wind had been
driven into her Ports: Now one of the Captains of those Foists my special
friend, seeing me poor and necessitous, persuaded me to accompany him in this
Voyage, and to that end got me five ducats pay, which I very gladly accepted
of, out of the hope I had that God would thereby open me a way to a better
fortune. Being imbarqued then, the Captain and Soldiers pitying the case I was
in, bestowed such spare clothes as they had upon me, by which means being
reasonably well pieced up again, we parted the next morning from the Road of
Bardees, and the Monday following we cast anchor in the Port of Onor; where,
that the inhabitants of the place might know how little account we made of that
mighty Army, we gave them a great peal of Ordnance, putting forth all our
fights, beating our D^ums, and sounding our Trumpets, to the end that by these
exterior demonstrations they might conclude we regarded not the Turks awhit.

CHAP. V. Goncallo vaz Coutinho's Treaty with the Queen of Onor; his assaulting
of a Turkish Galley, and that which happened unto us as we were upon our return
to Goa.
OU^ Fleet making a stand upon the discharging of our peal of Ordnance,. 1.
the General Goncallo vaz Coutinho sent Bento Castanho, a very discreet and
eloquent man, to the Queen of Onor, to present her with a Letter from the
Viceroy, and to tell her that he was come to complain of her, for that she had
sworn a peace and amity with the King of Portugal, and yet suffered the Turks,
mortal enemies to the Portugals, to abide in her Ports. Hereunto she returned
this answer; That both himself and his company were very welcome, that she
greatly esteemed of them, because they were Vassals to the King of Portugal,
and as touching that he said of the peace which she had with the King, and his
Governors, it was most true, and that she desired to maintain it as long as she
lived: For that which he said of the Turks, she took her God to witness how
much against her will she had received and suffered them in her Ports, but that
finding her self too weak for to resist such powerful enemies, she was
constrained to dissemble, which she would never have done had she been
furnished with sufficient forces; furthermore, to clear her self the better
unto them, she offered both her power and people for to r^p^l them out of her
Ports, and whereas he had brought men enough to chase them thence, she
requested him to do it, wherein she would assist him all that possibly she
could, which she confirmed with oaths, swearing by the golden Sandals of the
Sovereign God whom she adored: To this speech she added, that she should be as
well pleased if God would give him the victory over them, as if the King of
Narsingu^, whose slave she was, should set her at the table with his wife.
Goncallo vaz Coutinho having received this Embassage, and other complements
from the Qu^en, though he had little hope of any performance on her part, yet
did he wisely dissemble it. Afterward being fully informed by the people of
the Country of the Turks intention, of the place where they were, and what they
did at that instant, he called a Council thereupon, and having thoroughly
debated and considered all things, it was unanimously concluded, that both for
the King of Portugal their Masters honor, and his own, it was expedient to set
upon this Galley, either for to take, or fire it, wherein it was hoped that
God, for whose glory we ^ought, would be assisting to us against those enemies
of his holy Faith. This resolution being made, and signed by us all, he entered
some two faulcons shot within the River, where he had s^^rc^ anchored, when as
a little Boat, which they call an Almadia, came aboard us, with a Brachman that
spoke very good Portugu^ze: This man delivered a message from the Queen unto
our Captain, whereby she earnestly desired him, that for the Viceroys sake he
would desi^^ from the enterprise he had undertaken, and not to assault the
Turks any manner of way, which, said she, could not be done without great
disadvantage, for that she had been advertised by her Spies, that they had
fortified themselves with a good Trench, which they had cast up near the place
where they had moored their Galley, in regard whereof it seemed to her almost
impossible for him with no more Forces then he had to be able to prevail in so
great an attempt: wherefore she took her God to witness how much she was
troubled with the fear she was in lest some misfortune should betide him.
Hereunto our Captain returned an answer full of wisdom and cour^^sie, saying,
that he kissed her Highness hands for the extraordinary favor she did him in
giving him so good advice: but as for his Combat with the Turks he could not
follow her counsel, and therefore would proceed in his determination, it being
always the custom of the Portugals not to enquire whether their Enemies were
few, or many, since the more they were, the more should be their loss, and the
greater his profit and honor. Thus was the Brachman dismissed, our Captain
bestowing on him a piece of green Chamlet, and an Hat li^ed with red Satin,
wherewith he returned very well contented.

. 2.
The Brachman dismissed, Goncallo vaz Coutinho resolved to fight with the Turks,
but before h^ proceeded any further he was advertised by Spies what stratagems
the Enemy would use against us, and that the precedent night by the favor of
the Queen they had moored up the Galley, and by it raised up a platform,
whereupon they had flanked five and twenty Pieces of Ordnance, but all that
stayed him not from advancing toward the Enemy; Seeing himself then within a
Cannon shot of them, he went out of his Foist, and with fourscore men only
landed, the rest which he had brought with him from Goa for this enterprise,
being but an hundred more, he left for the guard of the Foists. So after he had
set his men in Battle array, he marched courageously against his adversaries,
who perceiving us making toward them valiantly resolved to defend themselves,
to which end they sallied some five and twenty or thirty paces out of their
Trenches, where the fight began on either side with such fury, that in less
then a quarter of an hour five and forty lay dead in the place, amongst the
which there was not above eight of ours; Hereupon our General, not contented
with this first charge, gave them a second, by means whereof i^ pleased God to
make them turn their backs, in such sort that they retired pell-^ell, as men
routed and in fear of death: Mean while we pursued them to their very Tren^hes,
where they turned upon us, and m^de head anew, in the heat hereof we were so
far engaged and entangled together, that we knocked one another with the
pummels of our swords; Mean while our Foists arrived, which were come along by
the shore to succor us, and accordingly they discharged all their Ordnance upon
our Enemies, to such good purpose, as they killed eleven or twelve of the
valiantest Ianizaries, which wore green Turbants, as a mark of their Nobility.
The death of these so terrified the rest, that they presently forsook the
field, by means whereof we had leisure to set the Galley on fire upon the
express command of our General Goncallo, so that having cast into her five pots
of powder, the fire took hold on her with such violence, as it was apparent it
could not be long before she were utterly consumed, for the mast and sail yards
were all of a flame, had not the Turks, knowing the danger she was in, most
courageously quenched the fire; but we labo^ed all that possibly we could to
hinder them from it, and to make good that we had so bravely begun, which the
enemies perceiving, as their last refuge they gave fire to a great Piece of
Ordnance, which charged with stones, and other shot, killed six of ours,
whereof the principal was Diego vas Coutinho, the Generals son, besides a dozen
others were hurt, that put us quite in disorder; Whereupon the Enemies finding
how they had spoiled us, fell to shouting in sign of Victory, and to rendering
of thanks to their Mahomet; at the naming of this their false Prophet, whom
they invoked, our General the better to encourage his Soldiers, Fellows in
arms, said he, seeing these Dogs call upon the Devil to aid them, let us pray
unto our Savior Jesus Christ to assist us. This said, we once more assaulted
the Trench, which the Enemies no sooner perceived, but they craft^y turned
their backs, and took their flight toward the Galley, but they were instantly
followed by some of ours, who within a while made themselves Masters of all
their Trenches, in the mean time the Infidel^ gave fire to a secret mine, which
they had made a little within their Trenches, and blew up six of our Portugals,
and eight Slaves, maiming many others besides; Now the smoke was such and so
thick, as we could hardly discern one another, in regard whereof our General,
fearing least some greater loss then the former should befall him, retreated to
the water side, carrying along with him both the dead bodies, and all the hurt
men, and so went where his Foists lay, into the which every one being
imbarqued, we returned with strength of rowing to the place from whence we
came, where with extreme sorrow he caused the slain to be interred, and all
that were hurt to be dressed, which were a very great number.

The same day that was so fatal to us, a list being taken of all the surviving
Soldiers,. 3.
that so it might be known how many had been lost in the l^st fight upon
assaulting of the Trench, we found that of fourscore which we were, there was
fifteen slain, fifty four hurt, and nine quite maimed for ever: The rest of the
day, and the night following, we kept very good watch to avoid all surprises of
the Enemy. As soon as the next morning appeared, there came an Ambassador from
the Queen of Onor to the General Goncallo, with a Present of Hens, Chickens,
and new laid Eggs for the relief of our sick men; Now though we had great need
of those things, yet in stead of receiving our General utterly refused them,
and showing himself very much displeased with the Queen he could not forbear
lashing out some words, that were a little more harsher then was requisite;
saying, that the Viceroy should ere long be advertised of the bad Offices she
had rendered the King of Portugal, and how much he was obliged to pay her that
debt, when occasion should serve: Further he bid him tell her, that for an
assurance of that which he said, he had left his son dead and buried in her
Land, together with the other Portugals, who had been miserably slaughtered
through her practices, by assisting the Turks against them: and in a word, that
he would thank her more fully another time for the Present she had sent, the
better to dissemble what she had executed against him, for which he would one
day return her a recompense according to her merit.

The Ambassador, very much terrified with this speech, departed; and being come
to the Queen his Mistress, he so thoroughly represented Goncallo's answer unto
her, as she greatly doubted that this Galley would be an occasion of the loss
of her Kingdom; wherefore to decline so great a mischief she thought it
necessary to seek by all means possible to maintain the League with our
General, to which end she assembled her Council, by whose advice she dispatched
another Ambassador unto him, who was a Brachman, a grave and reverent
personage, and her nearest kinsman. At his arrival where our Foists lay, our
General gave him very good entertainment, and after the ordinary ceremonies and
complements the Brachman having demanded permission to deliver his Embassage;
Signior, said he to our Governor, if you will give me audience, I will declare
the cause of my coming hither from the Queen of Onor my Mistress. Hereunto
Goncallo replied, That Ambassadors had always assurance for their persons, and
permission freely to deliver the particulars of their Embassy, so that he might
boldly say what he would. The Brachman having thanked him, Verily, continued
he, I am not able to express unto you, how sensible the Queen my Mistress is of
the death of your son, and of those other Portugals, that were yesterday slain
in the fight; And without lying I swear unto you by her life, and by this
string of a Brachman that I wear, the mark of my Priestly dignity, and only
proper to those which are of that profession, wherein I have been exercised
from my youth, that she was so exceedingly afflicted at the notice of your
disaster, and the unluckie success of your conflict, as she could not have been
more vexed if she had been made to eat Cows flesh (which is the greatest sin
committed amongst us) at the principal gate of the Temple, where her father is
interred: Whereby you may judge, Signior, what a share she bears of your sorrow.
But since there is no remedy for things done, she desires, and very instantly
beseeches you to confirm the Peace unto her anew which other Governers have
always granted her heretofore; Whereunto she the rather entreats you, because
she knows of what power you are with the Viceroy: Now that confirmed unto her,
she assures you, and faithfully promises, within four days to burn the Galley,
that has put you to so much pain, and turn the Turks out of the limits of her
Kingdom, which is all that she can do, and which you may be most confident she
will not fail to execute accordingly.

Our General knowing of what importance this affair was,. 4.
presently accepted of the Brachmans offer, and told him that he was contented
that the League should be renewed betwixt them, according whereunto it was
instantly published on either part with all the ceremonies accustomed in such
cases; Thereupon the Brachman returned to the Queen, who afterward labored all
she could to make good her word; But because Goncallo could not stay the four
days, which she had demanded, in regard of the extreme danger he should thereby
have exposed our hurt men unto, he resolved to be gone, and so the same day
after dinner we departed; Howbeit he first left one, nam^d Georgio Neogueyra,
there, with express order exactly to observe all that was done concerning that
affair, and thereof to give certain intelligence to the Viceroy, as the Queen
her self had requested.

CHAP. VI. What passed till such time as Pedro de Faria arrived at Malaca; his
receiving an Ambassador from the King of Batas; with his sending me to that
King, and that which arrived to me in that Voyage.
. 1.
THe next day our General Goncallo vaz Coutinho arrived at Goa, with so many of
us as remained alive; There he was exceedingly welcomed by the Viceroy, unto
whom he rendered an account of his Voyage, as also of that which he had
concluded with the Queen of Onor, who had promised to burn the Galley within
four days, and to chase the Turks out of all the Confines of her Kingdom,
wherewith the Viceroy was very well satisfied. In the mean time after I had
remained three and twenty days in the said Town of Goa, where I was cured of
two hurts which I had received in fight at the Turks Trenches, the necessity
whereunto I saw my self reduced, and the counsel of a Friar, my Friend,
persuaded me to offer my service unto a Gentleman, named Pedro de Faria, that
was then newly preferred to the Charge of Captain of Malaca, who upon the first
motion was very willing to entertain me for a Soldier, and promised me withal
to give me something over and above the rest of his Company during the Voyage
which he was going to make with the Viceroy. For it was at that very time when
as the Viceroy Dom Garcia de Noronha was preparing to go to the succor of the
Fortress of Diu, which he certainly knew was besieged, and in great danger to
be taken, by reason of the great Forces wherewithal it was invested by the
Turk, and to relieve it the Viceroy had assembled a mighty Fleet at Goa,
consisting of about two hundred and twenty five Vessels, whereof fourscore and
three were great ones, namely Ships, Gallions, Carvels, and the rest
Brigantins, Foists, and Galleys, wherein it was said there were ten thousand
Land-men, and thirty thousand Mariners, besides a great number of Slaves. The
time of setting sail being come, and the Foists provided of all things
necessary, the Viceroy imbarqued himself on Saturday the fourteenth of
November, 1538. Howbeit five days past away before he put out of the Haven, in
regard he stayed for his men that were not all ready to imbarque, the mean
while a Catur arrived from the Town of Diu with a Letter from Antonio de
Silveyra, Captain of the Fortress, whereby he advertised the Viceroy, that the
Turks had raised the siege, and were retired. Now though these were good news,
yet was the whole Fleet grieved thereat for the great desire every one had to
fight with the Enemies of our Faith. Hereupon the Viceroy abode there five
days longer, during the which he took order for all things necessary to the
conservation of his Government of the Indiaes, and then commanding to hoist
sail he departed from Goa on a Thursday morning the sixteenth of December: The
four^eenth of his Navigation he went and cast anchor at Chaul, where he
remained three days, during the which he entered into conference with
Inezamuluco, a Mohammedan Prince, and took order for certain affairs very much
importing the surety of the Fortress: After that he cau^ed some of the Vessels
of the Fleet to be rigged, which he furnished with Soldiers and Victuals, and
then d^parted for to go to Diu; But it was his ill fortune, as he was crossing
the Gulf, to be suddenly overtaken by such a furious Tempest, that it not only
separated his Fleet, but was the loss of many Vessels, chiefly of the Bastard
Galley, which was cast away at the mouth of the River Dabul, whereof Dom Alvaro
de Noronha, the Viceroys son, and General of the Sea-forces, was Captain; In
the same Gulf also perished the Galley named Espinheyro, commanded by Iovan de
Sousa, howbeit the most part of their men were saved by Christophilo de Gama,
who came most opportunely to their succor. During this Tempest there were seven
other ships likewise cast away, the names of which I have forgotten, in so much
that it was a month before the Viceroy could recover himself of the loss he
had sustained, and re-assemble his Fleet again which this storm had scattered
in diverse places: At length the sixteenth of January, 1539. he arrived at the
Town of Diu, where he caused the Fortress to be rebuilt, the greater part
whereof had been demolished by the Turks, so as it seemed that it had been
defended by the besieged, rather by miracle, then force: Now to effect it the
better he made proclamation, that all the Captains with their Soldiers should
each of them take in charge to re-build that quarter, which should be allotted
them; and because never a Commander there had more then Pedro de Faria, he
thought fit to appoint him the Bulwark, which looked to the Sea, for his
quarter, together with the out-wall that was on the Lands side; wherein he
bestowed such care and diligence, that in six and twenty days space, both the
one and the other were restored to a better state then before, by the means of
three hundred Soldiers that were employed about it. This done, for that it was
the fourteenth of March, and a fit time for Navigation to Malaca, Pedro de
Faria set sail for Goa, where by virtue of a Pattent granted him by the
Viceroy he furnished himself with all things necessary for his Voyage;
Departing then from Goa on the thirteenth of April with a Fleet of eight Ships,
four Foists, and one Galley, wherein there were five hundred men, he had so
favorable a wind, that he arrived at Malaca the fifth day of June in the same
year, 1539.

Pedro de Faria succeeding Dons Estevano de Gama in the Charge of Captain of
Malaca,. 2.
arrived there safely with his Fleet, nothing happening in his Voyage worthy of
writing. Now because at his arrival, Estevan de Gama had not yet ended the time
of his Commission, he was not put into the possession of that Government until
the day that he was to enter upon his Charge. Howbeit, in regard Pedro de Faria
was ere long to be Governor of the Fortress, the neighboring Kings sent their
Ambassadors to congratulate with him, and to make a tender of their amity, and
of a mutual conservation of Peace with the King of Portugal. Amongst these
Ambassadors there was one from the King of Batas, who reigned in the Isle of
Samatra, where it is held for a surety that the Island of Gold is, which the
King of Portugal, Dom Ioana the Third, had resolved should have been discovered
by the advice of certain Captains of the Country. This Ambassador, that was
Brother-in-law to the King of Batas, named Aquarem Dabolay, brought him a rich
Present of Wood of Aloes, Calambaa, and five quintals of Benjamon in flowers,
with a Letter written on the bark of a Palm tree, where these words were
inserted.

More ambitious then all men of the service of the crowned Lion, seated in the
dreadful Throne of the Sea, the rich and mighty Prince of Portugal, thy Master
and mine, to whom, in thee Pedro de Faria, I do now render obedience with a
sincere and true amity, to the end I may become his Subject with all the purity
and affection which a Vassal is obliged to carry unto his Master; I Angeessiry
Timorraia, King of Batas, desiring to insinuate my self into thy friendship,
that thy Subjects may be enriched with the fruits of this my Country, I do
offer by a new Treaty to replenish the Magazins of thy King, who is also mine,
with Gold, Pepper, Camfire, Benjamon, and Aloes, upon condition that with an
entire confidence thou shall send me a safe conduct, written and assigned with
thine own hand, by means whereof all my Lanchares and Jurupanges may navigate
in safety. Furthermore, in favor of this new amity, I do again beseech thee to
succor me with some Powder and great Shot, whereof thou have but too much in
thy Storehouses, and therefore may well spare them; for I had never so great
need of all kind of warlike munitions as at this present. This granted, I shall
be much indebted to thee if by thy means I may once chastise those perjured
Achems, the mortal and eminent Enemies of thy Malaca, with whom, I swear to
thee, I will never have peace as long as I live, until such time as I have had
satisfaction for the blood of my three children, which call upon me for
vengeance, and that therewith I may assuage the sorrow of their noble Mother,
who having given them suck, and brought them up, has seen them since miserably
butchered by that cruel Tyrant of Achem in the Towns of Jacur and Lingua, as
thou shall be more particularly informed by Aquarem Dabolay, the Brother of
those childrens desolate Mother, whom I have sent unto thee for a confirmation
of our new amity, to the end, Signior, that he may treat with thee about such
things as shall seem good unto thee, as well for the service of God, as for the
good of thy people. From Paniau the fifth day of the eighth Moon.

This Ambassador received from Pedro de Faria all the honor that he could do
him after their manner, and as soon as he had delivered him the Letter it was
translated into the Portugal out of the Malayan Tongue wherein it was written.
Whereupon the Ambassador by his Interpreter declared the occasion of the
discord, which was between the Tyrant of Achem, and the King of Batas,
proceeding from this, that the Tyrant had not long before propounded unto this
King of Batas, who was a Gentile, the embracing of Mahomet^ Law, conditionally
that he would wed him to a Sister of his, for which purpose he should quit his
wife, that was also a Gentile, and married to him six and twenty years; Now
because the King of Batas would by no means condescend thereunto, the Tyrant,
incited by a Cacis of his, immediately denounced War against him: So each of
them having raised a mighty Army, they fought a most bloody Battle, that
continued three hours, and better, during the which the Tyrant perceiving the
advantage the Bataes had of him, after he had lost a great number of his
people, he made his retreat into a Mountain, called Cagerrendan, where the
Bataes held him besieged by the space of three and twenty days, but because in
that time many of the Kings men fell sick, and that also the Tyrants Camp began
to want Victuals, they concluded a Peace, upon condition that the Tyrant should
give the King five bars of Gold (which are in value two hundred thousand crowns
of our money) for to pay his Soldiers, and that the King should marry his eldest
son to that sister of the Tyrant, who had been the cause of making that War.
This accord being signed by either part, the King returned into his Country,
where he was no sooner arrived, but relying on this Treaty of Peace he dismissed
his Army, and discharged all his Forces. The tranquillity of this Peace lasted
not above two months and an half, in which time there came to the Tyrant three
hundred Turks, whom he had long expected from the Straight of Mecqua, and for
them had sent four Vessels laden with Pepper, wherein also were brought a great
many Cases full of Muskets and Hargebusezes, together with diverse Pieces both
of Brass and Iron Ordnance. Whereupon the first thing the Tyrant did was to
join those three hundred Turks to some Forces he had still afoot, then making
as though he would go to Pacem for to take in a Captain that was revolted
against him, he cunningly fell upon two places, named Iacur and Lingua, that
app^rtained to the King of Batas, which he suddenly surprised when they within
them least thought of it, for the Peace newly made between them took away all
the mistrust of such an attempt, so as by that means it was easy for the
Tyrant to render himself Master of those Fortresses. Having taken them he put
three of the Kings sons to death, and seven hundred Ouroballones, so are the
noblest and the valiant^st of the Kingdom called. This while the King of Batas,
much resenting, and that with good cause, so great a Treachery, swear by the
head of his god Quiay Hocombinor, the principal Idol of the Gentiles sect, who
hold him for their god of Justice, never to eat either fruit, salt, or any
other thing, that might bring the least gust to his palate, before he had
revenged the death of his children, and drawn reason from the Tyrant for this
loss; protesting further, that he was resolved to dye in the maintenance of so
just a War. To which end, and the better to bring it to pass, the King of Batas
straightway assembled an Army of fifteen thousand men, as well natives, as
strangers, wherewithal he was assisted by some Princes his friends: and to the
same effect he emplored the Forces of us Christians, which was the reason why
he sought to contract that new amity, we have spoken of before, with Pedro de
Faria, who was very well contented with it, in regard he knew that it greatly
imported, both the service of the King of Portugal, and the conservation of the
Fortress, besides that by this means he hoped very much to augment the Revenue
of the Customs, together with his own particular, and all the rest of the
Portugals profit, in regard of the great Trade they had in those Countries of
the South.

. 3.
After that the King of Batas Ambassador had been seventeen days with us, Pedro
de Faria dismissed him, having first granted whatsoever the King his Master had
demanded, and something over and above, as fire-pots, darts, and murdering
Pieces, wherewith the Ambassador departed from the Fortress so contented, that
he shed tears for joy, nay, it was observed, that passing by the great door of
the Church, he turned himself toward it, with his hands and eyes lift up to
Heaven, and then as it were praying to God; Almighty Lord, said he openly, that
in rest and great joy live there above seated on the Treasure of thy Riches,
which are the spirits formed by thy Will, here I promise thee, if it may be thy
good pleasure to give us the victory against this Tyrant of Achem, and to
permit us to regain that from him, which with such notable treachery he has
taken from us in those places of Jacur and Lingua, we will always most
faithfully and sincerely acknowledge thee according to the Law of the Portugals,
and according to that holy Verity, wherein consists the Salvation of all that
are born in the world: Furthermore, in our Country we will build fair Temples
unto thee, perfumed with sweet odours, where all living Souls shall on their
bended knees adore thee, as it has been always used to be done unto this
present in the Land of Portugal. And hear what besides I promise, and swear
unto thee with all the assuredness of a good and faithful servant, that the
King my Master shall never acknowledge any other King then the great Portugal,
who is now Lord of Malaca.

Having made this protestation, he presently imbarqued himself in the same
Lanchara, wherein he came thither, being accompanied with eleven or twelve
Balons, which are small Barques, and so went to the Isle of Vpa, distant not
above half a league from the Port. There the Bandara of Malaca (who is as it
were chief Justicer amongst the Mahometans) was present in person by the
express commandment of Pedro de Faria for to entertain him; And accordingly he
made him a great Feast, which was celebrated with Hoboys, Drums, Trumpets, and
Cymbals, together with an excellent consort of voices framed to the tune of
Harps, Lutes, and Viols after the Portugal manner. Whereat this Ambassador did
so wonder, that he would often put his finger on his mouth, an usual action
with those of that Country when they marvel at any thing. About twenty days
after the d^parture of this Ambassador, Pedro de Faria being informed, that if
he would send some Commodities from the Indiaes to the Kingdom of Batas, he
might make great profit thereof, and much more of those which should be
returned from thence, he to that effect set forth a Iurupango, of the bigness
of a small Carvel, wherein he ventured a matter of some ten thousand ducats;
In this Vessel he sent, as his Factor, a certain Mohammedan, born at Malaca, and
was desirous to have me to accompany him, telling me that thereby I should not
only much oblige him, but that also under pretext of being sent as Ambassador
thither, I might both see the King of Batas, and going along with him in his
journey against the Tyrant of Achem, which some way or other would questionless
redound to my benefit. Now to the end that upon my return out of those
Countries I might make him a true relation of all that I had seen, he prayed me
carefully to observe whatsoever should pass there, and especially to learn
whether the Isle of Gold, so much talked of, was in those parts, for that he
was minded, if any discovery of it should be made, to write unto the King of
Portugal about it. To speak the truth, I would fain have excused my self from
this Voyage, by reason those Countries were unknown to me, and for that the
inhabitants were by every one accounted faithless and treacherous, having small
hope besides to make any gain by it, in regard that all my stock amounted not
to above an hundred ducats; But because I durst not oppose the Captains desire
I imbarqued my self, though very unwillingly, with that Infidel who had the
charge of the Merchandise. Our Pilot steered his course from Malaca to the Port
of Sorotilau, which is in the Kingdom of Aaru, always coasting the Isle of
Samatra toward the Mediterranean Sea, till at length we arrived at a certain
River, called Hicandure; After we had continued five days sailing in this
manner we came to an Harbor, named Minhatoley, distant some ten leagues from
the Kingdom of Peedir. In the end finding our selves on the other side of the
Ocean we sailed on four days together, and then cast anchor in a little river,
called Gaateamgim, that was not above seven fathom deep, up the which we past
some seven or eight leagues. Now all the while we sailed in this River with a
fair wind, we saw athwart a Wood, which grew on the bank of it, such a many
Adders, and other crawling creatures, no less prodigious for their length, then
for the strangeness of their forms, that I shall not marvel if they that read
this History will not believe my report of them; especially such as have not
traveled, for they that have seen little believe not much, whereas they that
have seen much believe the more. All along this River, that was not very broad,
there were a number of Lizards, which might more properly be called Serpents,
because some of them were as big as an Almadia, with scales upon their backs,
and mouths two foot wide. Those of the Country assured us, that these creatures
are so hardy, as there be of them that sometimes will set upon an Almadia,
chiefly when they perceive there is not above four or five persons in her, and
overturn it with their tails, swallowing up the men whole, without dismembering
of them. In this place also we saw strange kind of creatures, which they call
Caquesseitan; They are of the bigness of a great Goose, very black, and scaly
on their backs, with a row of sharp pricks on their chins, as long as a writing
pen: Moreover, they have wings like unto those of Bats, long necks, and a
little bone growing on their heads resembling a Cocks spur, with a very long
tail spotted black and green, like unto the Lizards of that Country; These
creatures hop and fly together, like Grasshoppers, and in that manner they hunt
Apes, and such other beasts, whom they pursue even to the tops of the highest
Trees. Also we saw Adders, that were copped on the crowns of their heads, as
big as a man's thigh, and so venomous, as the Negroes of the Country informed
us, that if any living thing came within the reach of their breath, it dyed
presently, there being no remedy nor antidote against it. We likewise saw
others, that were not copped on the crowns, nor so venomous as the former, but
far greater and longer, with an head as big as a Calves. We were told that they
hunt their prey in this manner: They get up into a tree, and winding their
tails about some branch of it, let their bodies hang down to the foot of the
tree, and then laying one of their ears close to the ground, they harken
whether they can hear any thing stir during the stillness of the night, so that
if an Ox, a Boar, or any other beast does chance to pass by, they presently
seize on it, and so carries it up into the tree where he devours it. In like
sort we descryed a number of Baboons, both gray and black, as big as a great
Mastiff, of whom the Negroes of the Country are more afraid, then of all the
other beasts, because they will set upon them with that hardiness, as they have
much ado to resist them.

CHAP. VII. What happened to me at Penaiu with the King of Batas expedition
against the Tyrant of Achem; and what he did after his Victory over him.
. 1.
BY that time we had sailed seven or eight leagues up the River, at the end we
arrived at a little Town, named Botterrendan, not above a quarter of a mile
distant from Panaiu, where the King of Batas was at that time making
preparation for the War he had undertaken against the Tyrant of Achem. This
King understanding that I had brought him a Letter and a Present from the
Captain of Malaca, caused me to be entertained by the Xabandar, who is he that
with absolute power governs all the affairs of the Army: This General,
accompanied with five Lanchares, and twelve Ballons, came to me to the Port
where I rode at anchor; Then with a great noise of Drums, Bells, and popular
acclamations, he brought me to a certain Key of the Town, called Campalator;
There the Bendara, Governor of the Kingdom, stayed for me in great solemnity,
attended by many Our^balons and Amborraias, which are the noblest persons of
his Court, the most part of whom, for all that, were but poor and base, both in
their habit, and manner of living, whereby I knew that the Country was not so
rich as it was thought to be in Malaca. When I was come to the Kings Palace,
and had past through the first Court, at the entrance of the second I found an
old woman, accompanied with other persons far nobler, and better apparelled
then those that marched before me, who beckoning m^ with her hand, as if she
had commanded me to enter:

Man of Malaca, said she unto me, Thy arrival in the King my Masters Land, is
as agreeable unto him, as a s^owre of rain is to a crop of Rice in dry and hot
weather; Wherefore enter boldly, and be afraid of nothing, for the people,
which by the goodness of God thou see here, are no other then those of thine
own Country, since the hope which we have in the same God makes us believe that
he will maintain us all together unto the end of the world. Having said so, she
carried me where the King was, unto whom I did obeisance according to the
man-of the Country, then I delivered him the Letter and the Present I had
brought him, which he graciously accepted of, and asked me what occasion drew
me thither. Whereunto I answered, as I had in commission, that I was come to
serve his Highness in the Wars, where I hoped to (...) the honor to attend on
him, and not to leave him till such time as he returned Conqueror of his
Enemies: Hereunto I likewise added, that I desired to see the City of Achem, as
also the situation and fortifications of it, and what depth the River was of,
whereby I might know whether it would bear great Vessels and Gallions, because
the Captain of Malaca had a design to come and succor his Higness, as soon as
his men were returned from the Indiaes, and to d^liver his mortal Enemy, the
Tyrant of Achem, into his hands. This poor King presently believed all that I
said to be true, and so much the rather, for that it was conformable to his
desire, in such sort, that rising out of his Th^one where he was set, I saw him
go and fall on his knees before the carcass of a Cows head, set up against the
wall, whose horns were guilt, and crowned with flowers; Then lifting up his
hands and eyes, O thou, said he, that not constrained by any material love,
where^nto Nature has obliged thee, do continually make glad all those that
desire thy milk, as the own mother does him whom she has brought into the
world, without participating either of the miseries, or pains, which ordinarily
she suffers from whom we take our Being, be favorable unto the prayer which now
with all my heart I offer up unto thee: and it is no other but this, that in
the meadows of the Sun, where with the payment and recompense which thou
receivest, thou art contented with the good that thou do here below, thou will be pleased to conserve me in the new amity of this good Captain, to the
end he may put in execution all that this man here has told me. At these words
all the Courtiers, which were likewise on their knees, said three times as it
were in answer, How happy were he that could see that, and then dye
incontinently? Whereupon the King arose, and wiping his eyes, which were all
beblubbered with the tears that proceeded from the zeal of the prayer he had
made, he questioned me about many particular things of the Indiaes, and Malaca.
Having spent some time therein, he very courteously dismissed me, with a
promise to cause the Merchandise, which the Mohammedan had brought in the
Captain of Mala^a's name, to be well and profitably put off, which indeed was
the thing I most desired. Now for as much as the King at my arrival was making
his preparations for to march against the Tyrant of Achem, and had taken order
for all things necessary for that his Voyage, after I had remained nine days in
Panaiu, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Batas, he departed with some Troops
toward a place, named Turban, some five leagues of, where he arrived an hour
before Sunset, without any manner of reception, or show of joy, in regard of
the grief he was in for the death of his children, which was such as he never
appeared in public, but with great demonstrations of sorrow.

The next morning the King of Batas marched from Turban toward the Kingdom of
Achem,. 2.
being eighteen leagues thither: He carried with him fifteen thousand men of
War, whereof eight thousand were Bataes, and the rest Menancabes, Lusons,
Andraguires, Iambes, and Bournees, whom the Princes his neighbors had assisted
him with, as also forty Elephants, and twelve Carts with small Ordnance,
namely, Faulcons, Bases, and other field Pieces, amongst the which there were
three that had the Arms of France, and were taken in the year 1526. at such
time as Lopo Vaz d^ Sampayo governed the State of the Indiaes. Now the King of
Batas marching five leagues a day came to a River, called Quilem; There by some
of the Tyrants Spies, which he had taken, he learnt that his Enemy waited for
him at Tondacur, two leagues from Achem, with a purpose to fight with him, and
that he had great store of strangers in his Army, namely Turks, Cambayans, and
Malabars: Whereupon the King of Batas assembling his Council of War, and
falling into consultation of this affair, it was concluded as most expedient to
set upon the Enemy before he grew more strong. With this resolution having quit
the River he marched somewhat faster then ordinary, and arrived about ten of
the clock in the night at the foot of a Mountain, half a league from the
Enemies Camp, where, after he had reposed himself a matter of three hours, he
marched on in very good order, for which effect having divided his Army into
four Squadrons, and passing along by a little hill, when he came to the end
thereof he discovered a great Plain sowed with Rice, where the Enemy stood
ranged in two Battalions. As soon as the two Armies descryed one another, and
that at the sound of their Trumpets, Drums, and Bells the Soldiers had set up a
terrible cry, they encountered very valiantly together, and after the discharge
of their shot on both sides, they came to fight hand to hand with such courage,
that I trembled with fear to behold their fury. The Battle continued in this
manner above an hour, and yet could it not possibly be discerned which party
had the better. At last the Tyrant foreseeing, that if he persisted in the
fight, he should lose the day, because he perceived his men to grow faint and
weary, he retreated to a rising ground, that lay South of the Bataes, and about
a Faulcons shot distant from them. There his intention was to fortify himself
in certain Trenches which before he had caused to be cast up against a Rock in
form of a garden, or tilth of Rice; But a brother to the King of Andraguire
interrupted his design, for stepping before him with two thousand men, he cut
off his way, and stopped him from passing further, in so much that the medly grew
to be the same it was before, and the fight was renewed between them with such
fury, as cruelly wounding one another, they testified sufficiently how they
came but little short of other Nations in courage. By this means the Tyrant,
before he could recover his Trenches, lost fifteen hundred of his men, of which
number were the hundred and threescore Turks, that a little before were come to
him from the Straight of Mecqua, with two hundred Sarrazins, Malabars, and some
Abissins, which were the best men he had; Now because it was about midday, and
therefore very hot, the King of Batas retired toward the Mountain, where he
spent the rest of the day in causing those that were wounded to be looked unto,
and the dead to be buried. Hereupon, not being well resolved what to do, in
regard he was altogether ignorant of the Enemies design, he took care to have
good watch kept all that night in every part. The next morning no sooner began
the Sun to appear but he perceived the Valley, wherein the Achems had been the
day before, to be quite abandoned, and not one of them to be seen there, which
made him think the Enemy was defeated: In this opinion, the better to pursue
the first point of his Victory, he dismissed all the hurt men, as being unfit
for service, and followed the Tyrant to the City, where arriving two hours
before Sunset, to show that he had strength and courage enough to combat his
Enemies, he resolved to give them proof of it by some remarkable action before
he would encamp himself; To which effect he fired two of the Suburbs of the
Town, as also four Ships, and two Gallions, which were drawn on Land, and were
those that had brought the Turks from the Straight of Mecqua: And indeed the
fire took with such violence on those six Vessels, as they were quite consumed
in a very little time, the Enemy not daring to issue forth for to quench it.
After this, the King of Batas seeing himself favored by Fortune, to lose no
opportunity began to assault a Fort, called Penacao, which with twelve Pieces
of Ordnance defended the entry of the River, to the Scalado of this he went in
person, his whole Army looking on, and having caused some seventy or eighty
ladders to be planted, he behaved himself so well, that with the loss only of
seven and thirty men he entered the place, and put all to the sword that he
found in it, to the number of seven hundred persons, without sparing so much as
one of them. Thus did he on the day of his arrival perform three memorable
things, whereby his Soldiers were so heartned, as they would fain have
assaulted the City the very same night if he would have permitted them, but in
regard it was very dark, and his men weary, he gave thanks to God, and
contented himself with that which he had done.

. 3.
The King of Batas held the City besieged by the space of three and twenty days,
during the which two sallies were made, wherein nothing past of any reckoning,
for there were but ten men slain on either part; Now as victories and good
success in War do ordinarily encourage the victorious, so oftentimes it happens
that the weak become strong, and cowards so hardy, as laying aside all fear
they dare undertake most difficile and dangerous things* whence also it as
often falls out, that the one prospers, and the other is ruined, which appeared
but too evidently in that which I observed of these two Princes; For the King
of Batas, seeing that the Tyrant had shut himself up in his City, thereby as it
were confessing that he was vanquished, grew to such an height of confidence,
that both he and his people believing it was impossible for them to be
resisted, and trusting in this vain opinion, that blinded them, were twice in
hazard to be lost by the rash and inconsiderate actions which they entered into.
In the third sally, made by the inhabitants, the King of Batas people
encountered them very lustily in two places, which those of Achem perceiving*
they made as though they were the weaker, and so retreated to the same Fort,
that was taken from them by the Bataes the first day of their arrival, being
closely followed by one of the Kings Captains, who taking hold of the
opportunity, entered pell-mell with the Achems, being persuaded that the Victory
was sure his own; But when they were all together in the Trenches the Achems
turned about, and making head afresh defended themselves very courageously* At
length in the heat of their medley, the one side endeavoring to go on, and the
other to withstand them, those of Achem gave fire to a Mine they had made,
which wrought so effectually, as it blew up the Captain of the Bataes, and
above three hundred of his Soldiers, with so great a noise, and so thick a
smoke, as the place seemed to be the very portraiture of Hell: In the mean time
the Enemies giving a great shout, the Tyrant sallied forth in person,
accompanied with five thousand resolute men, and charged the Bataes very
furiously; Now for that neither of them could see one another by reason of the
smoke proceeding from the Mine, there was a most confused and cruel conflict
between them, but to speak the truth I am not able to deliver the manner of it,
suffices it that in a quarter of an hours space, the time this fight endured,
four thousand were slain in the place on both sides, whereof the King of Batas
lost the better part, which made him retire with the remainder of his Army to a
Rock, called Minacaleu, where causing his hurt men to be dressed, he found them
to be two thousand in number, besides those that were killed, which because
they could not be so suddenly buried were thrown into the current of the River.
Hereupon the two Kings continued quiet for four days after, at the end whereof
one morning, when nothing was less thought of, there appeared in the midst of
the River on Penaticans side a Fleet of fourscore and six Sails, with a great
noise of music, and acclamations of joy: At first this object much amazed the
Bataes, because they knew not what it was, howbeit the night before their
scouts had taken five fishermen, who put to torture confessed, that this was
the Army which the Tyrant had sent some two months before to Tevassery, in
regard he had War with the Sornau, King of Siam, and it was said that this Army
was composed of five thousand Lussons and Sornes, all choice men, having to
their General a Turk* named Hametecam, Nephew to the Bassa of Cairo. Whereupon
the King of Batas making use of these fishermens confession, resolved to retire
himself in any sort whatsoever, well considering that the time would not permit
him to make an hours stay, as well because his Enemies Forces were far greater
then his, as for that every minute they expected succors from Pedir and Pazen,
whence, as it was reported for certain, there were twelve ships full of
strangers coming. No sooner was the King fortified in this resolution, but the
night ensuing he departed very sad, and ill contented for the bad su^cess of
his enterprise, wherein he had lost above three thousand and five hundred men,
not comprising the wounded, which were more in number, nor those that were
burnt with the fire of the Myn^. Five days after his departure he arrived at
Panaiu, where he dismissed all his Forces, both his own subjects and strangers;
That done, he imbarqued himself in a small Lanchara, and went up the River
without any other company then two or three of his Favorites: With this small
retinue he betook himself to a place, called Pachissaru, where he shu^ himself
up for fourteen days, by way of penance, in a Pagod of an Idol, named
Gi^nasser^d, which signifies the God of Sadness. At his return to Panaiu he
sent for me, and the Mohammedan that brought Pedro de Faria's Merchandise; The
first thing that he did was to enquire particularly of him whether he made a
good sale of it, adding withal, that if any thing were still owing to him he
would command it to be presently satisfied; Hereunto the Mohammedan and I
answered, that through his Highness favor all our business had received a very
good dispatch, and that we were well paid for that we had sold, in regard
whereof the Captain of Malaca would not fail to acknowledge that courtesy, by
sending him succor for to be revenged on his Enemy the Tyrant of Achem, whom he
would enforce to restore all the places, which he had unjustly usurped upon
him. The King hearing me speak in this manner stood a while musing with
himself, and then in answer to my speech, A^ Portugal, said he, since thou
constrainest me to tell thee freely what I think, believe me not hereafter to
be so ignorant, as that thou may be able to persuade me, or that I can be
capable to imagine, that he, which in thirty years space could not revenge
himself, is of power to succor me at this present in so short a time; or if yet
thou think I deceive my self, tell me I pre thee now whence comes it that
thy King and his Governors could not hinder this cruel King of Achem from
gaining from you the Fort of Pazem, and the Galley which went to the
Molu^quaes, as also three Ships in Queda, and the Gallion of Malaca, at such
time as Garcia was Captain there, besides the four Foists that were taken since
at Salengor, with the two Ships that came from Bengal^, or Lop^ Chanoc^ 's
Iounk and Ship, as likewise many other Vessels, which I cannot now remember,
(...) the which, as I have been assured, this Inhumane h^th put to death above
a thousand Portugals, and gotten an extreme rich bo^ty. Wherefore if this
Tyrant should happen to come once more against me, how can thou have me rely
upon their word which have been so often overcome? I must of necessity then
continue as I am with three of my children murdered, and the greatest part of
my Kingdom destroyed, seeing you your selves are not much more assured in your
Fortress of Malaca. I must needs confess that this answer, made with so much
resentment, rendered me so ashamed, knowing he spoke nothing but truth, that I
durst not talk to him afterward of any succor, nor for our honor reiterate the
promises which I had formerly made him.

CHAP. VIII. What past between the King of Batas and me, until such time as I
imbarqued for Malaca; my Arrival in the Kingdom of Queda, and my return from
thence to Malaca.
THe Mohammedan and I returning to our lodging, departed not in four days
after,. 1.
employing that time in shipping an hundred Bars of Tin, and thirty of
Benjamin, which were still on Land. Then being fully satisfied by our
Merchants, and ready to go, I went to wait upon the King at his Passeiran,
which was a great place before the Palace, where those of the Country kept
their most solemn Fairs; There I gave him to understand, that now we had
nothing more to do but to depart if it would please his Majesty to permit us:
The entertainment that he gave me then was very gracious, and for answer he
said to me, I am very glad for that Hermon Xabandar (who was chief General of
the Wars) assured me yesterday that your Captains commodities were well sold,
but it may be that that which he told me was not so, and that he delivered not
the truth for to please me, and to accommodate himself to the desire he knew I
had to have it so, wherefore, continued he, I pre-thee declare unto me freely
whether he dealt truly with me, and whether the Mohammedan that brought them be
fully satisfied, for I would not that to my dishonor those of Malaca should
have cause to complain of the Merchants of Panaiu, saying, that they are not
men of their word, and that there is not a King there who can constrain them to
pay their debts; and I swear to thee by the faith of Pagan, that this affront
would be no less insupportable to my condition, then if I should chance to make
peace with that Tyrant, and perjured Enemy of mine, the King of Achem.
Whereunto having replied, that we had dispatched all our affairs, and that
there was nothing due to us in his Country; Verily, said he, I am very well
pleased to hear that it is so, wherefore since thou have nothing else to do
here, I hold it requisite, that without any further delay thou should go, for
the ^^me is now fit to set sail, and to avoid the great heats that ordinarily
are endured in passing the Gulf, which is the cause that ships are many times
cast upon Pazem by foul weather at Sea, from which I pray God deliver thee, for
I assure thee that if thy ill fortune should carry thee thither, the men of
Achem would eat thee alive, and the Tyrant himself would have the first bite at
thee, there being nothing in the world these Inhumanes so much vaunt of, as to
car^y on the crest of their Arms the device of Drinkers of the troubled blood
of miserable Ca^sers, who they say are come from the end of the world, calling
them Tyrannical men, and Usurpers in a sovereign degree of other men's Kingdoms
in the Indiaes, and Isles of the Sea. This is the title wherein they glory
most, and which they attribute particularly to themselves, as being sent them
from Mecqua in recompense of the golden Lamps, which they offered to the
Alcoran of their Mahomet, as they use to do every year. Furthermore, although
heretofore I (...) often advised thy Captain of Malaca to take careful heed of
this Tyrant of Achem, yet do not thou omit to advertise him of it once more
from me; for know that he never had, nor shall have other thoughts then to
labor by all means to expel him out of the Indiaes, and make the Turk Master of
them, who to that end promises to send him great succors; but I hope that God
will so order it, as all the malice and cunning of this disloyal wretch shall
have a contrary success to his intentions. After he had used this language to
me, he gave me a Letter in answer to my Embassage, together with a present,
which he desired me to deliver from him to Captain de Faria; this was six small
Javelins headed with Gold, twelve Cates of Calambuca Wood, every one of them
weighing twenty ounces, and a box of exceeding value, made of a Tortoise shall,
beautified with Gold, and full of great seed pearl, amongst the which there
were sixteen fair pearls of rich account: For my self, he gave me two Cates of
Gold, and a little Courtel^^^ garnished with the same. Then he dismissed me
with as much demonstration of honor as he had always used to me before,
protesting to me in particular, that the amity which he had contracted with our
Nation should ever continue inviolable on his part. Thus I imbarqued my self
with Aquarem Dab^lay, his Brother-in-law, who was the same he had sent
Ambassador to Malaca, as I have related before. Being departed from the Port of
Panaiu, we arrived about two hours in the ^ight at a little Island, called
Apofingua, distant some league and an half from the mouth of the River, and
inhabited by poor people, who lived by the fishing of Shad^.

. 2.
The next morning, leaving that Island of Apofingua, we ran along by the coast
of the Ocean Sea for the space of five and twenty leagues, until such time as
at length we entered into the Straight of Minhagaruu, by which we came; then
passing by the contrary coast of this other Mediterranean Sea, we continued our
course along by it, and at last arrived near to Pullo Bugay: There we crossed
over to the firm Land, and passing by the Port of Iuncalan, we sailed two days
and an half with a favorable wind, by means whereof we got to the River of
Parles in the Kingdom of Queda, there we rode five days at anchor in
expectation of a fit wind to carry us on. During that time, the Mohammedan and
my self, by the counsel of certain Merchants of the Country, went to visit the
King with an Odiaa, or Present of diverse things, that we thought were
convenient for our design, which was received with much demonstration of being
very well pleased therewith. When we came to his Court we found, that with a
great deal of pomp, excellent music, dancing, and largess to the poor, he was
solemnizing the funerals of his Father, whom he himself had poynarded, of
purpose for to marry his own mother, after he had gotten her with child:
Wherewithal not being contented, to decline the murmur, which so wicked and
horrible an act might provoke unto, he had made proclamation, that on pain of a
most rigorous death no person whatsoever should be so daring, as to speak a
word of that which had past, and it was told us there, how for that cause he
had most tyrannically put the principal Personages of his Kingdom, and a number
of Merchants already to death, whose goods he had confiscated to his own use,
and thereby enriched his Coffers with two millions of Gold; So that upon our
arrival we perceived such a general fear to be amongst the people, as not the
most hardy of them all durst so much as make the least mention in the world of
it. Now in regard the Mohammedan, my companion, named Coia Ale, was a man
liberal of his tongue, and that would say any thing which came into his head,
he persuaded himself, in regard he was a stranger, and the Captain of Malaca's
Factor, that he might with more liberty then those of the Country talk what he
listed, and the King not punish him for it, as he did his Subjects; But he
found himself far short of his account, and this presumption cost him his life:
For being invited to a feast by another Mohammedan like himself, a Merchant
stranger, born at Patana, when as they were both of them high with wine and
meat, as I learned since, they began to talk boldly, and without any respect of
the Kings Brutality and Parracide, whereof the King, being incontinently
advertised by Spies, which he had in every corner for that purpose, he caused
the house to be presently invested, and all the guests to be apprehended, to
the number of seventeen persons; These poor wretches were no sooner brought
bound before him, but immediately, without observing any form of Justice, or
hearing what they could say for themselves either good or bad, he commanded
them to be put to a most cruel kind of death, called by them Gregoge, which is,
to saw off the feet, hands, and heads of them that are condemned to it, as I
beheld afterward my self. This execution done, the King, fea^ing lest the
Captain of Malaca should be offended for that he had executed his Factor thus
with the rest, and therefore might arrest some goods that he had at Malaca,
sent the night following for me to the Iurupango, where I was sleeping, and
altogether ignorant of that which had past: understanding the Kings pleasure
away I went, and coming about midnight to the Palace I perceived in the outward
Court a great many men in arms; the sight whereof I must confess put me into a
mighty amazement and mistrust, because I could not imagine what should be the
cause of it, and doubting lest it might be some such Treason as at other times
they had practiced against us, I would fain have returned, but they that
accompanied me, judging that my fear proceeded from the Soldiers which I beheld
there, bid me be afraid of nothing, for these men were only going forth to
apprehend an offender by the Kings commandment; Having said thus with an intent
to confirm me, I could not for all that be satisfied, but was seized with so
terrible a fear, as I was not able to utter a word, howbeit at length
recollecting my self a little, I signified to them the best I could, how if
they would permit me to return to my Skiff for to fetch a thing which I had
forgotten, I would give them forty Crowns in Gold; whereunto they answered,
that if I would give them all the Silver in Malaca they would not let me go,
for if they should, they were sure to lose their heads: This speech of theirs
redoubled my fear, which yet increased when I saw my self invironned with
twenty more of those armed men, who guarded me all that night. The next morning
the King being advertised that I was there, commanded me to be brought unto
him, into the next Court, where I found him mounted on an Elephant, and
accompanied with an hundred persons besides those of his guard, which were far
more in number; When he saw me coming toward him, much troubled, and indeed
more dead then alive, he said twice to me, Be not afraid, but come nearer to
me, and thou shall know the cause why I sent for thee. Thereupon having made a
sign to me with his hand that I should look that way he pointed me to, I turned
me about and beheld a great many bodies extended on the place, and weltring in
their own blood, amongst the which I presently knew the Mohammedan, Coia Ale,
with whom I came, which I no sooner perceived, but like a man distraught of his
wits I cast my self at the feet of the Elephant whereupon the King rode, and
with tears in my eyes cried out, O Sir, have pity on me, and take me for thy
slave, rather then cause me to end my days with the torments which have taken
those out of the world whom I see here; I swear unto thee by the faith of a
Christian, that I have not deserved death, as having no way offended thee;
Consider likewise, I beseech thee, that I am Nephew to the Captain of Malaca,
who will give thee any ransom for me thou will desire, as also that thou have
the Iurupango, wherein I came, in thy Port, full of goods, all which thou may
take it if thou please. Hearing me speak in this sort, God forbid, said he,
that ever I should do any such thing, no, no, be not afraid, but stand up, and
recollect thy self, for I see well thou art much troubled, and when thou art in
better case to hear me I will tell thee wherefore I caused the Moor, that came
with thee, to be executed; and in good faith if he had been either a Portugal,
or a Christian, I would not have put him to death, no, though he had killed
mine own son. Howbeit perceiving, that all which he could say would not rid me
of my fear, he commanded a pot of fresh water to be brought me, whereof I drunk
a pretty quantity, and withal made one of his followers to fan me with a
ventilow for to refresh me: A quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, was spent in
this action, at the end thereof finding that I was so well recovered, as I was
able with good sense to answer unto the questions he should ask me; Portugal,
said he unto me, I know that thou have bern told, since thy coming hither, how
I killed my Father, as indeed I did, because I was sure he would have killed
me, incited thereunto by the false reports of some of his slaves, would have
made him believe that I had gotten my mother with child, whereof I had never so
much as the least thought, whereby thou may see what ill tongues can do.
Indeed it is true, that being most assured he had without all reason given such
credit to those slanderous reports, as he was fully resolved to have taken away
my life, to decline that imminent peril I prevented him, and caught him in the
same snare he had laid for me; But God knows how much against my mind this fell
out, and how I always made it my chiefest glory to render him the dutiful
offices of a most obedient son, as it may well appear now at this present: for
to keep my mother from being a sad and desolate widow, as many others are,
seeing my self to be the cause of her misery, and obliged to comfort her, I
have taken her to wife; judge then whether I have been wrongfully blamed, or no,
since that for her I have refused many great parties, that have been propounded
unto me from Patacia, Berdio, Tanaucarin, Siaca, Iamba, and Andragia, who were
no less then Sisters and Daughters of Kings, and offered unto me with very rich
dowries. Now being informed that such false reports had been dispersed abroad
of me, for to arrest the tongues of Detractors, which are so audacious as to
talk of any thing comes in their heads, I caused it to be proclaimed, that none
should dare to speak of that affair; But for as much as without any regard at
all of this my Injunction, this fellow of thine, which lies there in the
company of those other Dogs, like unto himself, spoke yesterday of me most
reproachfully in public, saying, I was an Hog, or worse then a very Hog, and
my mother a salt Bitch; as well to punish his slanders, as to preserve my
honor, I was constrained to put him to death, together with these other Dogs,
who were no less slanderous then he: Wherefore I am to desire thee, that as my
friend thou will not think this procedure of mine any way strange. Now if thou
should happen to think, that I have done it on purpose to seize upon the
Captain of Malaca's goods, be confident that I never meant it, and thou may
truly certify him so much; For I swear unto thee by my Law, that I have ever
been a great friend to the Portugals, and so will continue all my life.
Hereupon being somewhat recovered from the fear I was in a little before, I
answered him, How his Highness had much obliged his very good friend, and
brother, the Captain of Malaca, by the execution of that Mohammedan, who had
imbezelled away a great part of the goods committed to his charge, and
understanding that I had discovered his knavery he had twice gone about to
poison me; whereunto also I added, how this Dog when he was drunk would bark at
every one, and speak his pleasure at large. This answer made upon the sudden,
and not knowing well what I said, very much pleased the King, who commanding me
to come nearer to him, Verily, continued he, by this speech of thine I perceive
thou art an honest man, and my friend, and being so I doubt not but thou will
give a good interpretation to my actions, contrary to those mastiff Dogs that
lie there weltring in their own blood. Having said so, he took a purse from his
girdle trimmed with gold, and gave it me, as also a Letter directed to Pedro de
Faria, whereupon I took my leave of him, with a promise that I would stay there
a week longer; howbeit getting speedily aboard my Iurupango, I made not a
minutes stay, but instantly caused the Mariners to hoist sail, and away, still
imagining that some were following to apprehend me, by reason of the extreme
fear I was in, having so lately escaped, as I thought, the danger of a most
cruel death.

. 3.
Being departed from the River of Parles on a Saturday about Sunset, I made all
the speed that possibly I could, and continued my course until the Tuesday
following, when it pleased God that I reached to the Isles of Pullo Sambalin,
the first Land on the Coast of Mallayo. There by good fortune I met with three
Portugal ships (whereof two came from Bengala, and the other from Pegu)
commanded by Tristan de Gaa, who had sometimes been Governor of the person of
Don Lorenzo, son to the Viceroy Don Francesco d' Almeda, that was afterward
put to death by Miroocem in Chaul Road, as is at large delivered in the
History of the Discovery of the Indiaes. This same Tristan furnished me with
many things that I had great need of, as tackle, and Mariners, together with
two Soldiers, and a Pilot; moreover, both himself and the other to ships had
always a care of me until our arrival at Malaca* where dis-imbarquing my self,
the first thing I did was to go to the Fortress for to salute the Captain, and
to render him an account of the whole success of my Voyage, where I discoursed
unto him at large what Rivers, Ports, and Havens I had newly discovered in the
Isle of Samatra, as well on the Mediterranean, as on the Ocean Seas side, as
also what commerce the inhabitants of the Country used; Then I declared unto
him the manner of all that Coast, of all those Ports, and of all those Rivers;
whereunto I added the scituations, the heights, the degrees, the names, and the
depths of the Ports, according to the direction he had given me at my
departure. Therewithal I made him a description of the Rode wherein Rosado,
the Captain of a French ship, was lost, and another, named Matelote de Brigas,
as also the Commander of another ship, who by a storm at Sea was cast into the
Port of Diu in the year 1529. during the reign of Sultan Bandur, King of
Cambaya. This Prince having taken them all, made fourscore and two of them
abjure their ^aith, who served him in his Wars against the great Mogor, and
were every one of them miserably slain in that expedition. Moreover I brought
him the description of a place fit for anchorage in Pullo Botum Road, where
the Bisquayn Ship suffered shipwreck, which was said to be the very same,
wherein Mag^llan compassed the World, and was called the Vittoria, which
traversing the Isle of Iooa was cast a way at the mouth of the River of Sonda.
I made him a recital likewise of many different Nations, which inhabit all
along this Ocean, and the River of Lampon, from whence the Gold of Menancabo is
transported to the Kingdom of Campar, upon the waters of Iambes and Broteo. For
the inhabitants affirm out of their Chronicles, how in this very Town of Lampon
there was anciently a Factory of Merchants, established by the Queen of Sheba,
whereof one, named Nausem, sent her a great quantity of Gold, which she carried
to the Temple of Jerusalem, at such time as she went to visit the wise King
Solomon; From whence, some say, she returned with child of a son, that
afterward succeeded to the Empire of Aethiopia, whom now we call Prester-Iohn,
of whose race the Abissins vaunt they are descended. Further, I told him what
course was usually held for the fishing of seed pearl betwixt Pullo Tiquos and
Pullo Quenim, which in times past were carried by the Bataes to Pazem and
Pedir, and exchanged with the Turks of the Straight of Mecqua, and the Ships of
Iud^a, for such Merchandise as they brought from Grand Cairo, and the Ports of
Arabia Foelix. Diverse other things I recounted unto him, having learnt them of
the King of Batas, and of the Merchants of Pan^i^: And for conclusion, I gave
him an information in writing, as he had formerly desi^ed me, concerning the
Island of Gold: I told him, how this Island is beyond the River of Calandor
five degrees to the Southward, environed with many shelfs of sand, and currents
of water, as also that it was distant some hundred and threescore leagues from
the point of the Isle of Samatra. With all which reports Pedro de Faria
remained so well satisfied, that he made present relation thereof to the King
Don Iovan the Third of happy memory, who the year after ordained Francesco d'
Almeida for Captain to discover the Isle of Gold, a Gentleman of merit, and
very capable of that charge, who indeed had long before petitioned the King for
it in recompense of the services by him performed in the Islands of Banda, of
the Molucques, of Ternate, and Geilolo: But by ill fortune this Francesco d'
Almeida, being gone from the India^s to discover that place, dyed of a fever
in the Isles of Nicubar; Whereof the King of Portugal being advertised, he
honored one Diego Cabral, born at the Maderaes, with that Command, but the
Court of Justice deprived him of it by express order from Martinez Alphonso de
Sousa, who was at that time Governor, which partly proceeded, according to
report, for that he had murmured against him; Whereupon he gave it to Ieronimo
Figuereydo, a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of Braganca, who in the year
1542. departed from Goa with two Foists, and one Carvel, wherein there were
fourscore men, as well Soldiers, as Mariners; But it is said, that his Voyage
was without effect, for that, according to the apparances that he gave of it
afterward, it seemed that he desired to enrich himself too suddenly: To which
end he passed to the Coast of Tanassery, where he took certain Ships, that came
from Mecqua, Adem, Alcosser, Iudaa, and other places upon the Coast of Persia.
And verily this booty was the occasion of his undoing, for upon an unequal
partition thereof falling at difference with his Soldiers, they mutined in such
fort against him, as after many affronts done him they bound him hand and foot,
and so carried him to the Isle of Ceilan, where they set him on Land; and the
Carvel, with the two Foists, they returned to the Governor Don Ioano de Castra,
who in regard of the necessity of the time pardoned them the fault, and took
them along with him in the Army, which he led to Diu for the succor of Don
Ioana Mascarenhas, that was then straightly besieged by the King of Cambaya's
Forces. Since that time there has been no talk of the discovery of this Island
of Gold, although it seems very much to import the common good of our Kingdom
of Portugal, if it would please God it might be brought to pass.

CHAP. IX. The Arrival of an Ambassador at Malaca from the King of Aaru to the
Captain thereof; his sending me to the said King, my coming to Aaru, and that
which happend to me after my departing from thence.
. 1.
FIve and twenty days after my coming to Malaca, Dom Stephano de Gama being
still Captain of the Fortress, an Ambassador arrived there from the King of
Aaru, for to demand succor of men from him, and some munitions of War, as
Powder, and Bullets, for to defend himself from a great Fleet that the King of
Achem was setting forth against him, with an intention to deprive him of his
Kingdom, and so be a nearer neighbor unto us, to the end that having gained
that passage, he might afterward send his forces the more easily against our
Fortress of Malaca: whereof Pedro de Faria was no sooner advertised, but
representing unto himself how important this affair was for the service of the
King, and preservation of the Fortress, he acquainted Dom Stephano de Gama with
it, in regard his Command of the place was to continue yet six weeks longer;
howbeit he excused himself from giving the succor, which was required, saying,
that the time of his Government was now expiring, and that his being shortly to
come in the duty of his charge did oblige him to take care of this business,
and to think of the danger that menaced him. Hereunto Pedro de Faria made
answer, that if he would relinquish his Government for the time he had yet to
come in it, or give him full power to dispose of the public Magazins, he
would provide for the succor that he thought was necessary. In a word, and not
to stand long on that which past betwixt them, it shall suffice to say, that
this Ambassador was utterly denied his demand by these two Captains, whereof
the one alleged for excuse, that he was not yet entered upon his Charge, and
the other that he was upon the finishing of his: whereupon he returned very ill
satisfied with this refusal, and so far resented injustice, which he thought
was done unto his King, as the very morning wherein he imbarqued himself,
having met by chance with the two Captains at the gate of the Fortress, he said
aloud before them publicly with the tears in his eyes; O God! that with a
sovereign Power and Majesty raignest in the highest of the Heavens, even with
deep sighs fetched from the bottom of my heart, I take thee for Judge of my
cause, and for witness of the just occasion I have to make this request to
these Captains here, and that in the name of my King, the faithful Vassal of
the great King of Portugal, upon homage sworn by his Ancestors to the famous
Albuque^que, who promised us, that if the Kings of our Kingdom did always
continue true and loyal Subjects to his Master, that then both he and his
successors would oblige themselves to defend them against all their enemies, as
belonged to their sovereign Lord to do; wherefore since we have continued still
loyal to this day, what reason have you, my Masters, not to accomplish this
obligation, wherein your King and you are so deeply engaged, especially seeing
you know that only in respect of you this perfidious Tyrant of Achem takes our
Country from us; For there is nothing he so much reproacheth us withal, as
that my King is as good a Portugal, and Christian, as if he had been born in
Portugal; and yet now that he desires you to succor him in his need, as allies
and true friends ought to do, you excuse your selves with reasons that are of
no validity. The succor we require of you for to secure us, and to keep this
faithless wretch from seizing on our Kingdom, is a very small matter, namely,
forty or fifty Portugals, that may instruct us in the military art, together
with four barrels of Powder, and two hundred Bullets for field Pieces; a poor
thing in comparison of that you have. Now if you can yet be persuaded to grant
us this little aid, you shall thereby so much oblige our King, as he will ever
remain a faithful slave to the mighty Prince of Portugal, your Master and ours,
in whose name I beseech you, once, twice, nay an hundred times, that you will
perform that appertains unto your duty to do, for this which I thus publicly
demand of you is of so great importance, that therein consists, not so much the
preservation of the Kingdom of Aaru, as the safety of this your Fortress of
Malaca, which that Tyrant of Achem our enemy so extremely desires to possess,
and to that purpose he has gotten the assistance of diverse strange Nations;
but because he finds that our Kingdom is a let to the execution of his design,
he endeavors to usurp it upon us, and then he intends to guard this Straight in
such sort, as he will quite exclude you from all Commerce with the Spices of
Banda and the Molucques, and from all the Trade and Navigation of the Seas of
China, Sunda, Borneo, Timor, and Jappon, and this his own people stick not to
boast of even already, being also further manifested by the accord, which he
has lately made with the Turk, through the interpos^ure of the Bassa of grand
Cairo, who in consideration thereof has promised to ay^ him with great Forces:
Wherefore at length give ear unto the request which I have made unto you in the
name of my King, and that so much concerns the service of yours, for since you
may yet give a remedy to the mischief, which you see is ready to fall, I desire
you to do it speedily; And let not one of you excuse himself by alleging that
the time of his Government is almost at an end, nor the other, that he is not
as yet entered upon his Charge, for it is sufficient that you know you are both
of you equally obliged thereunto.

Having finished this speech in form of a request, which availed him nothing,
he stooped down to the ground, from whence taking up two stones, he knocked
with them upon a Piece of Ordnance, and then the tears standing in his eyes he
said, The Lord, who has created us, will defend us if he please, and so
imbarquing himself he departed greatly discontented for the bad answer he
carried back. Five days after his departure Pedro de Faria was told how all the
Town murmured at the small respect, that both he and Dom Stephano had carried
to that poor King, who had ever been a friend both to them, and the whole
Portugal Nation, and continually done very good offices to the Fort, for which
cause his Kingdom was now like to be taken from him: This advice causing him to
see his fault, and to be ashamed of his proceeding, he labored to have
palliated it with certain excuses, but at last he sent this King by way of
succor fifteen quintals of fine Powder, an hundred pots of Wildfire, an
hundred and fifty Bullets for great Ordnance, twelve Harquebuzes, forty sacks
of stones, threescore Headpieces, and a Coat of guilt Mail, lined with Crimson
Satin for his own person, together with many other garments of diverse sorts,
as also twenty pieces of Caracas, which are stained linen, or Cotton Tapestry,
that come from the Indiaes, and cloth of Malaya, wherewith they usually apparel
themselves in that Country, as well for his wife, as his daughters. All these
things being laden aboard a Lanchara with oars, he desired me to conduct and
present them from him to the King of Aaru, adding withal, that this business
greatly concerned the King of Portugals service, and that at my return, besides
the recompense I should receive from him, he would give me an extraordinary
pay, and upon all occasions employ me in such Voyages, as might redound to my
profit; whereupon I undertook it, in an ill hour as I may say, and for a
punishment of my sins, in regard of what arrived unto me thereupon, as shall be
seen hereafter. So then I imbarqued my self on Tuesday morning, the fifth of
October, 1539. and used such speed, that on Sunday following I arrived at the
River of Panetican, upon which the City of Aaru is situated.

I no sooner got to the River of Panetican, but presently landing I went
directly to a Trench,. 2.
which the King in person was causing to be made at the mouth of the River for
to impeach the Enemies dis-imbarquing; Presenting my self unto him, he received
me with great demonstration of joy, whereupon I delivered him Pedro de Faria's
Letter, which gave him some hope of his coming in person to succor him, if need
required, with many other complements, that cost little the saying, wherewith
the King was wonderfully contented, because he already imagined that the effect
thereof would infallibly ensue; But after he saw the Present I brought him,
consisting of Powder, and Ammunitions, he was so glad, that taking me in his
arms, My good friend, said be unto me, I assure thee that the last night I
dreamt how all these things, which I behold here before me, came unto me from
the King of Portugal, my Masters Fortress, by m^ans whereof, with Gods
assistance, I hope to defend my Kingdom, and to serve him, in the manner I have
always hitherto done, that is, most faithfully, as all the Captains can very
well testify, which have heretofore commanded in Malaca. Hereupon questioning
me about certain matters, that he desired to know, as well concerning the
Indiaes, as the Kingdom of Portugal, he recommended the finishing of the Trench
to his people, who wrought very earnestly and cheerfully in it, and taking me
by the hand, on foot as he was, attended only by five or six Gentlemen, ^e led
me directly to the City, that was about some quarter of a league from the
Trench, where in his Palace he entertained me most magnificently, yea and made
me to salute his wife, a matter very rarely practiced in that Country, and held
for a special honor, which when I had done with abundance of tears he said unto
me, Portugal, here is the cause that makes me so much to redoubt the coming of
mine Enemies, for were I not withheld by my wife I swear unto thee by the Law
of a good and true Moor, that I would prevent them in their designs without any
other aid then of my own Subjects; for it is not now that I begin to know what
manner of man the per^idious Achem is, or how far his power extends; Alas! it
is the great store of Gold, which he possesses, that covers his weakness, and
by means whereof he wageth such forces of strangers, wherewith he is
continually served: But now that thou may on the other side understand how
vile and odious poverty is, and how hurtful to a poor King, such as I may be,
come thee along with me, and by that little which I will presently let thee see
thou shall perceive, whether it be not too true, that Fortune has been
exceeding niggardly to me of her goods; Saying so, he carried me to his
Orsenal, which was covered with thatch, and showed me all that he had within
it, whereof he might say with reason, that it was nothing in comparison of what
he needed for to withstand the attempts of two hundred and thirty Vessels,
replenished with such warlike people, as the Achems and Mulabar Turks were;
Moreover, with a sad countenance, and as one that desired to discharge his mind
of the grief he was in for the danger was threatened him, he recounted unto me,
that he had in all but six thousand men Aaruns, without any other foreign
succor, forty Pieces of small Ordnance, as Falconets, and Bases, and one cast
Piece, which he had formerly bought of a Portugal, named Antonio de Garcia,
sometimes Receiver of the Toll and Customs of the Ports of the Fortress of
Pacem, whom Georgio ^' Albuqurque caused since to be hanged and quartered at
Malaca, for that he treated by Letters with the King of Bintham about a plot of
Treason, which they had contrived together; He told me besides, that he had
also forty Muskets, six and twenty Elephants, fifty Horsemen for the guard of
the place, eleven or twelve thousand staves hardened in the fire, called
Salignes, whose points were poisoned, and for the defense of the Trench fifty
Lances, good store of Targets, a thousand pots of unslack'd Lime made into
Powder, and to be used in stead of pots of Wildfire, and three or four Barques
full laden with great flints; In a word, by the view of these, and such other
of his miseries, I easily perceived he was so unprovided of things necessary
for his defense, that I presently concluded the Enemy would have no great ado
to seize on this Kingdom: Nevertheless he having demanded of me what I thought
of all this Ammunition in his Magazin, and whether there were not enough to
receive the guests he expected, I answered him, that it would serve to
entertain them; but he understanding my meaning stood musing a pretty while,
and then shaking his head, Verily, said he unto me, if your King of Portugal
did but know what a loss it would be to him, that the Tyrant of Achem should
take my Kingdom from me, doubtless he would chastise the little care of his
Captains, who, blinded as they are, and wallowing in their avarice, have
suffered my Enemy to grow so strong, that I am much afraid they shall not be
able to restrain him when they would, or if they could, that then it must be
with an infinite expense. I labored to answer this which he had said unto me
with such resentment, but he confuted all my reasons with so much truth, as I
had not the heart to make any farther reply; withal he represented diverse foul
and enormous actions unto me, wherewithal he charged some particulars amongst
us, which I am contented to pass by in silence, both in regard they are nothing
pertinent to my discourse, and that I desire not to discover other men's faults;
For a conclusion of his speech, he related unto me the little punishment which
was ordained for such as were culpable of these matters, and the great rewards
that he had seen conferred on those which had not deserved them; whereunto he
added, that if the King desired thoroughly to perform the duty of his Charge,
and by Arms to conquer people so far distant from his Kingdom, and to preserve
them, it was as necessary for him to punish the wicked, as to recompense the
good. This said, he sent me to lodge in a Merchants house, who for five days
together, that I remained there, entertained me bravely, though to speak truth
I had rather have been at that time in some other place with any poor victuals,
for here I was always in fear, by reason of the Enemies continual alarms, and
the certain news that came to the King the next day after my arrival, how the
Achems were already marching toward Aaru, and would be there within eight days
at the farthest, which made him in all haste to give directions for such things
as he had not taken order for before, and to send the women, and all that were
unfit for War, out of the City five or six leagues into the Wood, amongst the
which the Queen her self made one, mounted on an Elephant. Five days after my
arrival, the King sent for me, and asked me when I would be gone, whereunto I
replied, at such time as it would please his Greatness to command me, though I
should be glad it might be with the soonest, for that I was to be employed by
my Captain with his Merchandise to China: Thou have reason, answered he; then
taking two Bracelets of massy Gold off from his wrists, worth some thirty
Crowns, I pre-thee now, said he, giving them to me, do not impute it to
miserableness that I bestow so little on thee, for thou may be assured, that
it has been always my desire for to have much for to give much; withal I must
desire thee to present this Letter, and this Diamond from me to thy Captain, to
whom thou shall say, that whatsoever I am further engaged to him in for the
pleasure he has done me by succoring me with those Ammunitions he has sent me
by thee, I will bring it to him my self hereafter, when I shall be at more
liberty then now I am.

Having taken leave of the King of Aaru, I presently imbarqued my self,. 3.
and departed about Sunset, rowing down the River to an Hamlet, that is at the
entrance thereof, composed of ten or eleven houses covered with ^traw: This
place is inhabited with very poor people, that get their living by killing of
Lezards, of whose livers they make a poison, wherewith they anoint the heads of
their arrows; For the poison of this place, chiefly that, which is called
Pocausilim, is held by them the best of those Countries, because there is no
remedy for him that is hurt with it. The next day, having left this small
Village, we sailed along the coast with a land wind until evening, that we
doubled the Islands of Anchepisan, then the day and part of the night following
we put forth somewhat farther to Sea: But about the first watch the wind
changed to the North-east, for such winds are ordinary about the Isle of
Samatra, and grew to be so tempestuous, that it blew our mast over board, tore
our sails in pieces, and so shattered our Vessel, that the water came in that
abundance into her at two several places, as she sunk incontinently to the
bottom, so that of eight and twenty persons, which were in her, three and
twenty were drowned in less then a quarter of an hour. For as five that escaped
by the mercy of God, we passed the rest of the night upon a Rock, where the
waves of the Sea had cast us. There all that we could do was with tears to
lament our sad fortune, not knowing what counsel or course to take, by reason
the Country was so moorish, and invironned with so thick a Wood, that a bird,
were she never so little, could hardly make way through the branches of it, for
that the trees grew so close together; We sat crouching for the space of three
whole days upon this Rock, where for all our sustenance we had nothing but
Snails, and such filth, as the ^oam of the Sea produced there. After this time,
which we spent in great misery and pain, we walked a whole day along by the
Isle of Samatra, in the owze up to the girdle-stead, and about Sunset we came
to the mouth of a little River, some Crossbow-shot broad, which we durst not
undertake to swim over, for that it was deep, and we very weak and weary; so
that we were forced to pass all that night, standing up to the chin in the
water. To this misery was there adjoined the great affliction which the Flies
and Gnats brought us, that coming out of the neighboring Woods, bit and stung
us in such sort, as not one of us but was gore blood. The next morning as soon
as we perceived day, which we much desired to see, though we had little hope of
life, I demanded of my four companions, all Mariners, whether they knew the
Country, or whether there was any habitation thereabout; Whereupon the eldest
of them, who had a wife at Malaca, not able to contain his tears, Alas!
answered he, the place that now is most proper for you, and me, is the house of
death, where ere it be long we must give an account of our sins, it therefore
behooves us to prepare our selves for it without any further delay, and
patiently to attend that which is sent us from the hand of God: For my part,
let me entreat thee to be of a good courage whatsoever thou see, and not be
terrified with the fear of dying, since, every thing well considered, it
matters not whether it be to day, or to morrow. This spoken, he embraced me,
and with tears in his eyes desired me to make him a Christian, because he
believed, as he said, that to be so was sufficient to save his Soul, which
could not otherwise be done in the cursed sect of Mahomet, wherein he had lived
till then, and for which he craved pardon of God. Having finished these last
words, he remained dead in mine arms, for he was so weak, as he was not able to
subsist any longer, as well for that he had not eaten ought in three or four
days before, as in regard of a great wound the wrack of the Lanchara had given
him in his head, through which one might see his brains all putrefied and
corrupted, occasioned both for want of looking unto, as by salt water and flies
that were gotten into it. Verily this accident grieved me very much, but for my
self I was in little better case, for I was likewise so weak, that every step I
made in the water I was ready to swoon, by reason of certain hurts on my head
and body, out of which I had lost a great deal of blood. Having buried him in
the owze the best we could, the other three Mariners and my self resolved to
cross the River, for to go and sleep on certain great Trees, that we saw on the
other side, for fear of the Tigers and Crocodiles, whereof that Country is
full, besides many other venomous creatures, as an infinite of those copped
Adders I have spoken of before in the sixth Chapter, and diverse sorts of
Serpents with black and green scales, whose venom is so contagious, as they
kill men with their very breath. This resolution being thus taken by us, I
desired two of them to swim over first, and the other to stay with me for to
hold me up in the water, for that in regard of my great weakness I could hardly
stand upon my legs: whereupon they two cast themselves presently into the
water, exhorting us to follow them, and not be afraid; But alas! they were
scarce in the midst of this River, when as we saw them caught by two great
L^zards, that before our faces, and in an instant tearing them in pieces,
dragged them to the bottom, leaving the water all bloody, which was so dreadful
a spectacle to us, as we had not the power to cry out; and for my self, I knew
not who drew me out of the water, nor how I escaped thence, for I was gone
before into the River as deep as my waste, with that other Mariner which h^ld
me by the hand.

CHAP. X. By what means I was carried to the Town of Ciaca, and that which
befell me there; my going to Malaca with a Mohammedan Merchant; and the Tyrant
of Achems Army marching against the King of Aaru.
FInding my self reduced to that extremity I have spoken of, I was above three
hours so besides my self,. 1.
as I could neither speak, nor weep; At length the other Mariner and I went
into the Sea again, where we continued the rest of that day. The next morning
having discovered a Ba^que, that was seeking the mouth of the River, as soon as
it was near we got out of the water, and falling on our knees with our hands
lift up we desired them to come and take us up; whereupon they gave over
rowing, and considering the miserable state we were in they judged immediately
that we had suffered shipwreck, so that coming somewhat nearer they asked us
what we desired of them; we answered, that we were Christians, dwelling at
Malaca, and that in our return from Aaru we were cast away by a storm about
nine days before, and therefore prayed them for Gods sake to take us away with
them whithersoever they pleased. Thereupon one amongst them, whom we guessed to
be the chiefest of them, spoke to us thus, By that which I see, you are not in
case to do us any service, and gain your meat, if we should receive you into
our Barque, wherefore if you have any money hidden, you shall do well to give it
us aforehand, and then we will use toward you that charity you require of us,
for otherwise it is in vain for you to hope for any help from us: Saying so,
they made show as though they would be gone; whereupon we besought them again
weeping, that they would take us for slaves, and go sell us where they pleased;
hereunto I added, how they might have any ransom for me they would require, as
having the honor to appertain very nearly unto the Captain of Malaca. Well,
answered he then, we are contented to accept of thy offer, upon condition, that
if that which thou say be not true, we will cast thee, bound hand and foot,
alive into the Sea. Having replied, that they might do so if they found it
otherwise, four of them got presently to us, and carried us into their Barque,
for we were so weak at that time, as we were not able to stir of our selves.
When they had us aboard, imagining that by whipping they might make us confess
where we had hid our money, for still they were persuaded that we had some, they
tied us both to the foot of the Mast, and then with two double coards they
whipped us till we were nothing but blood all over. Now because that with this
beating I was almost dead, they gave not to me, as they did to my companion, a
certain drink, made of a kind of Lime, ^^eep^d in Urine, which he having taken
it, made him fall into such a furious vomiting, as he cast up both his lungs
and his liver, so as he dyed within an hour after. And for that they found no
gold come up in his vomit, as they hoped, it pleased God that that was the
cause why they deal^ not so with me, but only they washed the stripes they had
given me with the said liquor, to keep them from festering, which
notwithstanding put me to such pain, as I was even at the point of death. Being
departed from this River, which was called Arissumhea, we went the next day
after dinner ashore at a place, where the houses were covered with straw, named
Ciaca, in the Kingdom of Iambes, there they kept me seven and twenty days, in
which time by the assistance of Heaven I got my self thoroughly cured of all my
hurts. Then they that had a share in my person, who were seven in number,
seeing me unfit for their Trade, which was fishing, exposed me to sale three
several times, and yet could meet with no body that would buy me; whereupon
being out of hope of selling me, they turned me out of doors, because they
would not be at the charge of feeding me. I had been six and thirty days thus
abandoned by these Inhumanes, and put a grasing like a cast Horse, having no
other means to live but what I got by begging from door to door, which God
knows was very little, in regard those of the Country were extreme poor, when
as one day, as I was lying in the Sun upon the sand by the Sea side, and
lamenting my ill fortune with my self, it pleased God that a Mohammedan, born in
the Isle of Palimban, came accidentally by: This man, having been sometimes at
Malaca in the company of Portugals, beholding me lie naked on the ground, asked
me if I were not a Portugal, and willed me to tell him the truth; whereunto I
answered, that indeed I was one, and descended of very rich parents, who would
give him for my ransom whatsoever he would demand, if he would carry me to
Malaca, where I was Nephew to the Captain of the Fortress, as being the son of
his sister. The Mohammedan hearing me say thus, If it be true, replied he, that
thou art such as thou deliverest thy self to be, what so great sin have thou
committed that could reduce thee to this miserable estate wherein I now see
thee? Then I recounted to him from point to point how I was cast away, and in
what sort the fishermen had first brought me thither in their Barque, and
afterward had turned me out to the wide world, because they could not find any
body that would buy me. Hereat he seemed to be much astonished, so that musing
a pretty while by himself, Know stranger, said he unto me, that I am but a poor
Merchant, all whose wealth amounts not to above an hundred Pardains (which are
worth two shillings a piece of our money) with which I trade for the rows of
Shads, thereby hoping to get my living; Now I am assured that I might gain
something at Malaca, if so be the Captain, and the Officers of the Custom-house
there, would not do me the wrong, which I have heard say they do to many
Merchants that come thither to traffic; wherefore if thou think that for
thy sake I should be well used there, I could be contented to redeem thee from
the fishermen, and go thither with thee. Thereunto I answered him, with tears
in mine eyes, that considering the state I was in at the present, it was not
likely he could give credit to any thing I said, because it was probable that
to free my self out of my miserable captivity I would prize my person at a far
higher value then it would be esteemed for at Malaca; howbeit if he would lend
any belief to my oaths, since I had no other assurance to give him, I would
swear to him, and also set it under my hand, that if he would carry me to
Malaca, the Captain should do him a great deal of honor for my sake, and
besides the exempting of his Merchandise from paying of custom, he should
receive ten times as much as he should disburse for me. Well, replied the
Mohammedan, I am contented to redeem, and reconduct thee to Malaca, but thou
must take heed that thou speak not a word of that we have concluded on, for
fear thy Masters hold thee at so dear a rate, as I shall not be able to draw
thee out of their hands though I would never so fain; whereupon I gave him my
faith to do nothing but what he would have me do, especially in that
particular, which I held to be most necessary for the better effecting of our
desire.

Four days after this agreement, the Mohammedan Merchant,. 2.
that he might the more easily redeem me, used the interposure of a man born in
the Country, who under hand went to the fishermen, and carried the business so
cunningly with them, as they quickly consented to my redemption, for they were
already very weary of me, as well in regard that I was sickly, as for that I
could no way stand them in any stead, and therefore, as I delivered before,
they had turned me out of doors, where I had continued a month and better; so
by the means of this third person, whom the Mohammedan had employed, the
fishermen sold me to the Merchant for the sum of seven mazes of gold, which
amounts in our money to seventeen shillings and six pence. The Mohammedan as soon
as he had redeemed me, brought me to his house, where I was five days out of
the tyranny of these fishermen, and in a far better captivity then the former;
At the end whereof my new Master went five leagues off to a place, named
Sorobaya, where he got his Merchandise aboard, which, as I said before, was
nothing but the rows of Shads; For there is such great abundance of them in
that River, as the Inhabitants do therewith every year lade above two thousand
Vessels, which carry at least an hundred and fifty, or two hundred Barrels,
whereof each one contains a thousand rows, the rest of the fish not yielding
them a penny. After that the Mohammedan had laden a Lanchara with this commodity,
he presently set sail for Malaca, where within a while he safely arrived, and
carrying me to the Fortress presented me to the Captain, relating unto him what
agreement we had made together. Pedro de Faria was so amazed to see me in such
a lamentable plight, as the tears stood in his eyes, whereupon he bade me speak
out aloud, that he might know whether it was I that he beheld, for that I did
not seem to be my self, in regard of the strange deformity of my face. Now
because that in three months space there had been no news of me, and that every
one thought me to be dead, there came so manyfolks to see me, as the Fortress
could scarce hold them: Here being demanded the occasion of my misfortune, and
who had brought me into that miserable case, I recounted the adventures of my
Voyage, just in the same manner as I have already delivered them, whereat the
whole company were so astonished, that I saw some go away without speaking a
word, and others shrink up their shoulders, and bless themselves in admiration
of that which they had heard from me; but in conclusion their compassion
toward me was such, that with the very alms they bestowed on me I became far
richer then I was before I undertook that unlucky Voyage. As for Pedro de
Faria, he caused threescore ducats to be given to the Mohammedan Merchant that
brought me, besides two pieces of good China Damask; moreover he freed him of
all the duties he was to pay for the custom of his Merchandise, which amounted
to very near a like sum, so as he remained exceeding well satisfied of the
bargain he had made with me. After this, to the end I might be the better used
and looked unto, the Captain commanded me to be lodged in the Registers house
of the Kings Customs, where for that he was married there he thought I might be
better accommodated then in any other place, as indeed I was very well
entreated by him and his wife, so that having kept my bed about the space of a
month, it pleased God to restore me unto my perfect health.

. 3.
When I had recovered my health, Pedro de Faria sent for me to the Fortress,
where he questioned me about that which had past betwixt me and the King of
Aaru, as also how and in what place I was cast away, whereupon I made him an
ample relation thereof. But before I proceed any further, it is requisite I
should here report what was the success of the War between the Kings of Aaru
and Achem, to the end, that the desolation, which I have so often foretold, of
our Fortress of Malaca, may the more evidently appear, it being a matter of too
much importance for to be so neglected as it is by those, who ought to have
more care of it. For this is certain, that either the power of the King of
Achem is utterly to be ruined, or by it we shall be miserably expelled out of
all the Countries we have conquered all along the Southern Coast, as Malaca,
Banda, Maluco, Sunda, Borneo, and Timor, and Northwards, China, Iapan, and the
L^qmos, as also many other parts and Ports, where the Portugals are very much
interessed by reason of the Traffic which they daily use there, and where
they reap more profit then in any other place, that is yet discovered, beyond
the Cape of good hope, the extent thereof being so great, that it contains
along the Coast above three thousand leagues, as may easily be seen by the
cards and globes of the world, if so be their graduation be true. Besides, if
this loss should happen, which God of his infinite mercy forbid, though we have
but two much deserved it for our carelessness and sins, we are in danger in
like manner to lose the Customs of Mandorim of the City of Goa, which is the
best thing the King of Portugal has in the Indiaes, for they are Ports and
Islands, mentioned heretofore, whereon depends the greatest part of his
Revenue, not comprehending the Spices, namely, the Nutmegs, Cloves, and Maces,
which are brought into this Kingdom from those Countries. Now to return to my
discourse, I say, that the Tyrant of Achem was advised by his Council how there
was no way in the world to take Malaca, if he would assail it by Sea, as he had
done diverse times before, when as Dom Stephano de Gama and his Predecessors
were Captains of the Fortress, but first to make himself Master of the Kingdom
of Aaru, to the end he might afterward fortify himself on the River of
Panetican, where his Forces might more commodiously and nearly maintain the War
he intended to make: For then he might have means with less charge to shut up
the Straights of Cincapura, and Sabaon, and so stop our Ships from passing to
the Seas of China, Sunda, Banda, and the Molucques, whereby he might have the
profit of all the Drugs which came from that great Archipelague; And verily
this counsel was so approved by the Tyrant, that he prepared a Navy of an
hundred and threescore Sails, whereof the most part were Lanchares with oars,
Galiots, Calabuzes of Iaoa, and fifteen Ships high built, furnished with
Munition and Victual. In these Vessels he imbarqued seventeen thousand men,
namely twelve thousand Soldiers, the rest Sailers and Pioners. Amongst these
were four thousand Strangers, Turks, Abissins, Malabares, Gusurates, and Lusons
of the Isle of Borneo. Their General was one, named Heredin Mahomet,
Brother-in-law to the Tyrant, by marriage with a Sister of his, and Governor of
the Kingdom of Baarros. This Fleet arrived safely at the River of Panetican,
where the King of Aaru attended them with six thousand of his own natural
Subjects, and not a forraigner amongst them, both in regard he wanted money for
to entertain Soldiers, and that also he had a Country unprovided of victual to
feed them. At their arrival the Enemies found them fortifying of the Trench,
whereof I spoke heretofore; Whereupon without any further delay they began to
play with their Ordnance, and to batter the Town on the Sea side with great
fury, which lasted six whole days together. In the mean time the besieged
defended themselves very valiantly, so as there was much blood spilt on either
side: The General of the Achems, perceiving he advanced but little, caused his
Forces to Land, and mounting twelve great Pieces he renewed the battery three
several times with such impetuosity, that it demolished one of the two Forts
that commanded the River, by means whereof, and under the shelter of certain
packs of Cotton which the Achems carried before them, they one morning
assaulted the principal Fortress: In this assault an Abissin commanded, called
Mamedecan, who a month, or thereabout, before was come from Judah, to confirm
the new League made by the Bassa of Caire on the behalf of the grand Signior
with the Tyrant of Achem, whereby he granted him a Custom-house in the Port of
Pazem. This Abissin rendered himself Master of the Bulwark, with threescore
Turks, forty Ianizaries, and some Malabar Moo^s, who instantly planted five
Ensigns on the walls; In the mean time the King of Aaru, encouraging his people
with promises, and such words as the time required, wrought so effectually,
that with a valorous resolution they set upon the Enemy, and recovered the
Bulwark which they had so lately lost, so as the Abissin Captain was slain on
the place, and all those that were there with him. The King following his good
fortune, at the same instant caused the gates of the Trench to be opened, and
sallying out with a good part of his Forces, he combated his Enemies so
valiantly, as he quite routed them; In like manner he took eight of their
twelve Pieces of Ordnance, and so retreating in safety he fortified himself the
best he could for to sustain his Enemies future assaults.

CHAP. XI. The Death of the King of Aaru, and the cruel Justice that was
executed on him by his Enemies; the going of his Queen to Malaca, and her
reception there.
THe General of Achem, seeing the bad success which he received in this
encounter,. 1.
was more grieved for the death of the Abissin Captain, and the loss of those
eight Pieces of Ordnance, then for all them that were slain besides; whereupon
he assembled his Council of War, who were all of opinion that the commenced
siege was to be continued, and the Trench assailed on every side, which was so
speed^ly put in execution, that in seventeen days it was assaulted nine several
times, in so much as by diverse sorts of fireworks, continually invented by a
Turkish Engineer, that was in their Camp, they demolished the greater part of
the Trench; Moreover they overthrew two of the principal Forts on the South
side, together with a great Platform, which in the manner of a false-bray
defended the entry of the River, notwithstanding all the resistance the King of
Aaru could make with his people, though they behaved themselves so valiantly,
as the Achems lost above two thousand and five hundred men, besides those that
were hurt, which were far more then the slain, whereof the most part dyed
shortly after for want of looking to. As for the King of Aaru, he lost not
above four hundred men, howbeit for that his people were but few, and his
Enemies many, as also better ordered, and better armed, in the last assault,
that was given on the thirteenth day of the Moon, the business ended
unfortunately by the utter defeat of the King of Aaru's Forces; For it was his
ill hap, that having made a salley forth by the advice of a Cacis of his, whom
he greatly trusted, it fell out that this Traitor suffering himself to be
corrupted with a bar of gold, weighing about forty thousand ducats, which the
Achem gave him, whereof the King of Aaru being ignorant, set courageously on
his Enemies, and fought a bloody battle with them, wherein the advantage
remained on his side in all men's judgment, but that Dog, the perfidious Cacis,
whom he had left Commander of the Trench, sallied forth with five hundred men,
under color of seconding the King in his pursuit of so prosperous a beginning,
and left the Trench without any manner of defense, which perceived by one of
the Enemies Captains, a Mohammedan Malabar, named Cutiale Marcaa, he presently
with six hundred Gusarates and Malabars, whom he had led thither for that
purpose, made himself Master of the Trench, which the traytrous Cacis for the
bar of gold he had received had left unguarded, and forthwith put all the sick
and hurt men that he found there to the sword, amounting to the number of about
fifteen hundred, whereof he would not spare so much as one. In the mean time
the unhappy King of Aaru, who thought of nothing less then the treachery of his
Cacis, seeing his Trench taken, ran to the succoring of it, being a matter that
most imported him: But finding himself the weaker, he was constrained to quit
the place, so that as he was making his retreat to the Town ditch, it was his
ill fortune to be killed by a shot of an Ha^quebuse from a Turk his enemy. Upon
this death of his ensued the loss of all the rest, by reason of the great
disorder it brought amongst them. Whereat the Enemies exceedingly rejoicing,
took up the Corpse of that wretched King, which they found amongst the other
dead bodies, and having imbowelled and salted him they put him up in a Case,
and so sent him as a Present to the Tyrant, who, after many ceremonies of
Justice, caused him to be publicly sawed into sundry pieces, and then boiled
in a great Cauldron full of Oil and Pitch, with a dreadful Publication, the
tenor whereof was this:

See here the Justice, which Sultan Laradin, King of the Land of the two Seas,
has caused to be executed, whose will and pleasure it is, that as the body of
this miserable Mohammedan has been sawed in sunder, and boiled here on Earth,
so his Soul shall suffer worse torments in Hell, and that most worthily, for
his transgressing of the Law of Mahomet, and of the perfect belief of the
Musselmans of the House of M^^qua: For this execution is very just, and
conformable to the holy Doctrine of the Book of Flowers, in regard this
Miscreant has showed himself in all his works to be so far without the fear of
God, as he has incessantly from time to time betrayed the most secret and
important affairs of this Kingdom to those accursed Dogs of the other end of
the world, who for our sins, and through our negligence, have with notorious
Tyranny made themselves Lords of Malaca. This Publication ended, a fearful
noise arose amongst the people, who cried out, This punishment is but too
little for so execrable a crime. Behold truly the manner of this passage, and
how the loss of the Kingdom of Aaru was joined with the death of that poor
King, who lived in such good correspondence with us, and that in my opinion
might have been succored by us with very small charge and pains, if at the
beginning of the War he had been assisted with that little he demanded by his
Ambassador; Now who was in the fault hereof, I will leave to the judgment of
them which most it concerns to know it.

. 2.
After that this unfortunate King of Aaru had miserably ended his days, as I
have before related, and that his whole Army was utterly defeated, both the
Town and the rest of the Kingdom were easily and quickly taken in. Thereupon
the General of the Achems repaired the Trenches, and fortified them in such
manner as he thought requisite for the conservation and security of all that he
had gained: which done, he left there a Garrison of eight hundred of the most
courageous men of his Army, who were commanded by a certain Lusan Mohammedan,
named Sapetu de Raia, and incontinently after departed with the rest of his
Forces. The common report was that he went to the Tyrant of Achem, who received
him with very much honor for the good success of this enterprise; For, as I
have already delivered, being before but Governor and Mandara of the Kingdom of
Baarros, he gave him the title of King, so that ever after he was called Sultan
of Baarros, which is the proper denomination of such as are Kings amongst the
Mahometans. Now whilst things passed in this sort, the desolate Queen remained
some seven leagues from Aaru, where being advertised and assured of the death
of the King her husband, and of the lamentable issue of the War, she presently
resolved to cast her self into the fire, for so she had promised her husband in
his life time, confirming it with many and great oaths; But her friends and
servants, to divert her from putting so desperate a design in execution, used
many reasons unto her, so that at length, overcome by their persuasions,
Verily, said she unto them, although I yield to your request, yet I would have
you know, that neither the considerations you have propounded, nor the zeal you
seem to show of good and faithful Subjects, were of power to turn me from so
generous a determination, as that is which I promised to my King, my Husband,
and my Master, if God had not inspired me with this thought, that living I may
better revenge his death, as by his dear blood I vow unto you to labor as long
as I live to do, and to that end I will undergo any extremi^y whatsoever, nay
if need be turn Christian a thousand times over, if by that means I may be able
to compass this my desire. Saying so, she immediately got up on an Elephant,
and accompanied with a matter of seven hundred men, she marched toward the
Town with a purpose to set it on fire, where incountring some four hundred
Achems, that were busy about pillaging of such goods as were yet remaining,
she so encouraged her people with her words and tears, that they cut them all
presently in pieces; This execution done, knowing her self too weak for to hold
the Town, she returned into the Wood, where she sojourned twenty days, during
which time she made War upon the Townsmen, surprising and pillaging them as
often as they issued forth to get water, wood, or other necessaries, so as they
durst not stir out of the Town to provide themselves such things as they
needed, in which regard if she could possibly have continued this War other
twenty days longer, she had so famished them, as they would have been
constrained to render the Town: But because at that time it rained continually
by reason of the Climate, and that the place was boggy and full of bushes, as
also the fruits, wherewithal they nourished themselves in the Wood, were all
rotten, so that the most part of her people fell sick, and no means there to
relieve them, the Queen was constrained to depart to a River, named
Minhacumbaa, some five leagues from thence, where she imbarqued her self in
sixteen Vessels, such as she could get, which were fishermens Paroos, and in
them she went to Malaca, with a belief that at her Arrival there she should not
be denied any thing she would ask.

Pedro de Faria, being advertised of the Queens coming, sent Alvaro de Faria,
his son,. 3.
and General of the Sea-forces, to receive her with a Galley, five Foists, two
Catures, twenty Balons, and three hundred men, besides diverse persons of the
Country. So she was brought to the Fortress, where she was saluted with an
honorable peal of Ordnance, which lasted the space of a good hour. Being
landed, and having seen certain things, which Pedro de Faria desired to show
her, as the Custom-house, the River, the Army, the Manufactures, stores of
Powder, and other particulars, prepared before for that purpose, she was lodged
in a fair house, and her people, to the number of six hundred, in a field,
called Ilher, in Tents and Cabbins, where they were accommodated the best that
might be. During all the time of her abode, which was about a matter of five
months, she continued soliciting for succor, and means to revenge the death of
her husband. But at length perceiving the small assistance she was likely to
have from us, and that all we did was but a mere entertainment of good words,
she determined to speak freely unto Pedro de Faria, that so she might know how
far she might trust to his prom ses; To which end, attending him one Sunday at
the gate of the Fortress, at such time as the place was full of people, and
that he was going forth to hear Mass, she went to him, and after some
complements between them, she said unto him; Noble and valiant Captain, I
bese^ch you by the generosity of your race, to give me the hearing in a few
things I have to represent unto you. Consider, I pray you, that albeit I am a
Mohammedan, and that for the greatness of my sins I am altogether ignorant in
the knowledge of your holy Law, yet in regard I am a woman, and have been a
Queen, you ought to carry some respect to me, and to behold my misery with the
eyes of a Christian. Hereunto at first Pedro de Faria knew not what to answer,
in the end putting off his cap, he made her a low reverence, and after they had
both continued a good while without speaking, the Queen bowed to the Church
gate, that was just before them, and then spoke again to Pedro de Faria. Truly,
said she, the desire I have always had to revenge the death of my husband, has
been, and still is, so great, that I have resolved to seek out all the means
that possibly I may to effect it, since by reason of the weakness of my sex
Fortune will not permit me to bear arms; Being persuaded then that this here,
which is the first I have tried, was the most assured, and that I more relied
upon then any other, as trusting in the ancient amity which has always been
betwixt us and you Portugals, and the obligation wherein this Fortress is
engaged to us, passing by many other considerations well known to you, I am now
to desire you with tears in mine eyes, that for the honor of the high and
mighty King of Portugal, my sovereign Lord, and unto whom my husband was ever a
loyal Subject and Vassal, you will aid and succor me in this my great
adversity, which in the presence of many noble Personages you have promised me
to do; howbeit now I see that in stead of performing the promises which you
have so often made me, you alledg for an excuse that you have written unto the
Viceroy about it, whereas I have no need of such great Forces as you speak of,
for that with an hundred men only, and such of my own people as are flying up
and down in hope and expectation of my return, I should be able enough, though
I be but a woman, in a short space to recover my Country, and revenge the death
of my husband, through the help of Almighty God, in whose Name I beseech and
require you, that for the service of the King of Portugal, my Master, and the
only refuge of my widowhood, you will, since you can, assist me speedily,
because expedition is that which in this affair imports the most, and so doing
you shall prevent the plot which the wicked enemy has upon this Fortress, as
too well you may perceive by the means he has used to effect it. If you will
be pleased to give me the succor I demand of you, say so; if not, deal clearly
with me, for that you will prejudice me as much in making me lose time, as if
you refused me that which so earnestly I desire, and which as a Christian you
are obliged to grant me, as the Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth does well
know* whom I take to witness of this my request.

CHAP. XII. The Queen of Aaru's departure from Malaca; her going to the King of
Jantana; his summoning the Tyrant of Achem to restore the Kingdom of A^ru, and
that which past between them thereupon.
PEdro de Faria, having heard what this desolate Queen said openly unto him,
convinced by his own conscience, 1.
and even ashamed of having delayed her in that fashion, answered her, that in
truth, and by the faith of a Christian, he had recommended this affair unto the
Viceroy, and that doubtless there would some succor come for her ere it were
long, if so be there were no trouble in the Indiaes that might hinder it,
wherefore he advised and prayed her to stay still in Malaca, and that shortly
she should see the verity of his speeches. Thereunto this Princess having
replied upon the uncertainty of such succor, Pedro de Faria grew into choler,
because he thought she did not believe him, so that in the heat of his passion
he lashed out some words that were more rude then was fit. Whereupon the
desolate Queen, with tears in her eyes, and beholding the Church gate, which
was just against her, and sobbing in such manner as she could scarcely speak;
The clear Fountain, said she, is the God which is adored in that house, out of
whose mouth proceeds all truth, but the men of the Earth are sinks of troubled
water, wherein change and faults are by nature continually remaining, wherefore
accursed is he that trusts to the opening of their lips; For I assure you,
Captain, that ^ver since I knew my self to this present I have neither heard,
nor seen ought, but that the more such unhappy wretches, as my late husband
was, and my self now am, do for you Portugals, the less you regard them, and
the more you are obliged, the less you acknowledge, whence I may well conclude
that the recompense of the Portugal Nation consists more in favor, then in the
merits of persons; And would to God, my deceased husband had nine and twenty
years ago but known what now for my sins I perceive too well, for then he had
not been so deceived by you as he was: But since it is so, I have this only
left to comfort me in my misery, that I see many others scandalized with your
amity as well as my self; For if you had neither the power nor the will to
succor me, why would you so far engage your self to me, a poor desolate widow,
concerning that which I hoped to obtain from you, and so beguile me with your
large promises? Having spoken thus, she turned her back to the Captain, and
without harkening to what he might say she instantly returned to her lodging,
then caused her Vess^ls, wherein she came thither, to be made ready, and the
next day set sail for Bi^tan, where the King of Iantana was at that time, who,
according to the report was made of it to us afterward, received her with great
honor at her arrival. To him she recounted all that had past betwixt her and
Pedro de Faria, and how she had lost all hope of our friendship; Unto whom, it
is said, the King made this answer, That he did not marvel at the little faith
she had found in us, for that we had showed it but too much upon sundry
occasions unto all the world. Now the better to confirm his saying, he recited
some particular examples of matters, which he said had befallen us, conformable
to his purpose; and like a Mohammedan, and our Enemy, he made them appear more
enormous then they were: So after he had recounted many things of us very ill
done, amongst the which he interlaced diverse Treacheries, Robberies, and
Tyrannies, at length he told her, that as a good King, and a good Mohammedan, he
would promise her, that ere it were long she should see her self by his means
restored again to every foot of her Kingdom; and to the end she might be the
more assured of his promise, he told her that he was content to take her for
his wife, if so she pleased, for that thereby he should have the greater cause
to become the King of Achems Enemy, upon whom for her sake he should be
constrained to make War, if he would not by fair means be persuaded to abandon
that which he had unjustly taken from her. Whereunto she made answer, that
albeit the honor he did her was very great, yet she would never accept of it,
unless he would first promise, as in way of a dowry, to revenge the death of
her former husband, saying, it was a thing she so much desired, as without it
she would not accept of the Sovereignty of the whole world. The King
condescended to her request, and by a solemn Oath taken on a Book of their Sect
confirmed the promise which to that effect he made her.

. 2.
After that the King of Iantana had taken that Oath before a great Cacis of his,
called Raia Moulana, upon a festival day when as they solemnized their Ramadan,
he went to the Isle of Compar, where immediately upon the celebration of their
Nuptials he called a Council for to advise of the course he was to hold for the
performance of that whereunto he had engaged himself, for he knew it was a
matter of great difficulty, and wherein he should be forced to hazard much of
his Estate. The resolution that he took hereupon was before he enterprized any
thing to send to summon the Tyrant of Achem to surrender the Kingdom of Aaru,
which in the right of his new wife belonged now unto him* and then according to
the answer he should receive to govern himself. This Council seemed so good to
the King, that he presently dispatched an Ambassador to the Tyrant, with a rich
Present of Jewels, and Silks, together with a Letter containing these words.
Sibri Laya quendou, pracama de Raia, lawful King by a long succession of
Malaca, which by strong hand, and the injustice of the faithless Kings of
Jantana and Bintan has been usurped from me, To thee Siry Sultan Aaradin, King
of Achem, and of all the Land of the two Seas, my true Brother by the ancient
Amity of our forefathers. I, thine Ally in flesh and in blood, do give thee to
understand by my Ambassador, that about the seventh Moon of this present year
the noble Widow Anchesiny, Queen of Aaru, came to me full of grief and tears,
and prostrating her self on the ground before me, she told me that thy Captains
had taken her Kingdom from her, as also the two Rivers of Lava and Panetican,
and slain Aliboncar her husband, together with five thousand Amborraias and
Ouroballons, all men of mark, that were with him, and made three thousand
children slaves, which had never offended, tying their hands behind them, and
scourging them continually without pity, as if they had been the sons of
unbelieving mothers. Wherefore being moved with compassion I have received her
under the protection of my faith, to the end that I might with more certainty
inform my self of the reason and right thou had so to do, and perceiving by
her oaths that thou had none, I have taken her to my wife, that I might the
more freely before God demand that which is hers. I desire thee then, as being
thy true Brother, that thou will render that thou have taken from her, and
thereof make her a good and full restitution; And touching the proceeding that
is to be held in this restitution which I demand of thee, it is to be done
according to the manner that Syribican my Ambassador will show thee. And not
doing thus conformable to what in justice I require of thee, I declare my self
thine Enemy in the behalf of this Lady, unto whom I am obliged by a solemn Oath
to defend her in her affliction. This Ambassador being come to Ache^, the
Tyrant received him very honorably, and took his Letter; But after he had
opened it, and read the contents, he would presently have put him to death, had
he not been diverted by his Council, who told him, that in so doing he would
incur great infamy: Whereupon he instantly dismissed the Ambassador with his
Present, which in contempt of him he would not accept of, and in answer of that
he brought him he returned him a Letter, wherein it was thus written. I Sultan
Aaradin, King of Achem, Baarros, Pedir, Paacem, and of the Signories of Dayaa,
and Batas, Prince of all the Land of the two Seas, both Mediterranean and
Ocean, and of the Mines of Menencabo, and of the Kingdom of Aaru newly
conquered upon just cause, To thee King, replenished with joy, and desirous of
a doubtful heritage: I have seen thy Letter, written at the table of thy
Nuptials, and by the inconsiderate words thereof have discerned the drunkenness
of thy Counselors and Secretaries, whereunto I would not have vouchsafed an
answer, had it not been for the humble prayers of my servants. As touching the
Kingdom of Aaru, do not thou dare to speak of it if thou desire to live,
suffices it that I have caused it to be taken in, and that it is mine, as
thine also shall be ere long, if thou have married Anchesiny with a purpose
upon that occasion to make claim to a Kingdom, that now is none of hers;
wherefore live with her as other husbands do with their wives, that tilling the
ground are contented with the labor of their hands. Recover first thy Malaca,
since it was once thine, and then thou may think of that which never belonged
to thee. I will favor thee as a Vassal, and not as a Brother, as thou
qualifiest thy self. From my great and Royal House of rich Achem, the very day
of this thy Ambassadors arrival, whom I have presently sent away without
further seeing or hearing of him, as he may tell thee upon his return to thy
presence.

The King of Iantana's Ambassador,. ^.
being dismissed with this Answer the very same day that he arrived, which
amongst them they hold for a mighty affront, carried back the Present, which
the Tyrant would not accept of in the greater contempt both of him that sent,
and he that brought it, and arrived at Compar, where the King of Iantana was at
that instant, who upon the understanding of all that had past grew by report so
sad and vexed, that his servants have vowed they have diverse times seen him weep
for very grief that the Tyrant should make so little reckoning of him; Howbeit
he held a Council there upon the second time, where it was concluded, that at
any hand he should make War upon him, as on his mortal Enemy, and that the
first thing he should undertake, should be the recovery of the Kingdom of Aaru,
and the Fort of Panetican, before it was further fortified* The King
accordingly set forth a Fleet of two hundred Sails, whereof the most part were
Lanchares, Calaluses, and fifteen tall Juncks, furnished with Munition
necessary for the enterprise; And of this Navy he made General the great Laque
Xemena, his Admiral, of whose valor the History of the Indiaes has spoken in
diverse places. To him he gave two thousand Soldiers, as also four thousand
Mariners and gally slaves, all choice and trained men. This General departed
immediately with his Fleet, and arrived at the River of Panetican close by the
Enemies Fort, which he assaulted five several times, both with scaling ladders,
and diverse artificial fires, but perceiving he could not prevail that way, he
began to batter it with four hundred great Pieces of Ordnance* which shot
continually for the space of seven whole days together, at the end whereof the
most part of the Fort was ruined, and overthrown to the ground, whereupon he
presently caused his men to give an assault to it, who performed it so
valiantly, that they entered it, and slew fourteen hundred Achems, the most of
which came thither but the day before the Fleet arrived under the conduct of a
Turkish Captain, Nephew to the Bassa of Caire, named Mora do Arraiz, who was
also sl^i^^ there with four hundred Turks he had brought along with him,
whereof Laque Xemena would not spare so much as one. After this he used such
diligence in repairing that which was fallen, wherein most of the Soldiers
labored, that in twelve days the Fort was rebuilt, and made as strong as
before, with the augmentation of two Bulwarks. The news of this Fleet, which
the King of Iantana prepared in the Ports of Bintan and Compar, came to the
Tyrants ears, who fearing to lose that which he had gotten, put instantly to
Sea another Fleet of fourteen hundred and twenty Sails, Foists, Lanchares,
Galiots, and fifteen Galleys of five and twenty banks of oa^s a piece, wherein
he caused fifteen thousand men to be imbarqued, namely, twelve thousand
Soldiers, and the rest Mariners, and such as were for the service of the Sea;
Of this Army he made the same Heredin Mahomet General, who had before (as I
have already declared) conquered the Kingdom of Aaru, in regard he knew him to
be a man of a great spirit, and fortunate in War, who departing with this Army
arrived at a place, called Aapessumhee, within four leagues of the River of
Panetican, where he learnt of certain fishermen, whom he took and put to
torture, all that had past concerning the Fort and the Kingdom, and how Laque
Xemena had made himself Master both of the Land and Sea in expectation of him.
At this news, it is said, that Heredin Mahomet was much perplexed, because
intruth he did not b^lieve the Enemy could do so much in so little time; By
reason whereof he assembled his Council, where it was concluded, that since
both the Fort and Kingdom were regained, and all the men he had left there cut
in pieces, as likewise for that the Enemy was very strong, both at Sea and
Land, and the season very unfit for their design, therefore they were to return
back: Neverth^less Heredin Mahomet was of a contrary opinion, saying, that he
would rather dye like a man of courage, then live in dishonor, and that seeing
the King had made choice of him for that purpose, by the help of God he would
not lose one jot of the reputation he had gotten; wherefore he vowed and swore
by the bones of Mahomet, and all the Lamps that perpetually burn in his
Chapel, to put all those to death as Traitors that should go about to oppose
this intent of his, and that they should be boiled alive in a Cauldron of
Pitch, in such manner as he meant to deal with Laque Xemena himself; and with
this boiling resolution he parted from the place where he rode at anchor, with
great cries, and noise of Drums, and Bells, as they are accustomed to do upon
like occasions. In this sort by force of oars and sails they got into the entry
of the River, and coming in sight of Laque Xemena's Navy, who was ready waiting
for him, and well reinforced with a great number of Soldiers, that were newly
come to him from P^ra, Bintan, Siaca* and many other places thereabout, he made
toward him, and after the discharging of their O^dnance afar off, they joined
together with as much violence as might be. The fight was such, that during the
space of an hour and an half there could no advantage be discerned on either
part, until such time as Heredin Mahomet, General of the Achems, was slain with
a great shot, that hit him just in the breast, and battered him to pieces. The
death of this Chieftain discouraged his people in such manner, as laboring to
return unto a Point, named Baroquirin, with a purpose there to unite and
fortify themselves until night, and then by the favor thereof to fly away,
they could not execute their design, in regard of the great current of the
water, which separated and dispersed them sundry ways, by which means the
Tyrants Army ^ell into the power of Laque Xemena, who defeated it, so that but
fourteen Sails of them escaped, and the other hundred threescore and six were
taken, and in them were thirteen thousand and five hundred men killed, besides
the fourteen hundred that were slain in the Trench. These fourteen Sails that
so escaped returned to Achem, where they gave the Tyrant to understand how all
had past, at which, it is reported, he took such grief, as he shut up himself
for twenty days without seeing any body, at the end whereof he struck off the
heads of all the Captains of the fourteen Sails, and commanded all the Soldiers
beards that were in them to be shaved off, enjoining them expressly upon pain of
being sawed asunder alive, to go ever after attired in women's apparel, playing
upon Timbrels in all places where they went, and that whenever they made any
protestation, it should be in saying, So may God bring me back my husband
again, as this is true, or, So may I have joy of the children I have brought
into the world. Most of these men seeing themselves enforced to undergo a
chastisement so scandalous to them, fled their Country, and many made
themselves away, some with poison, some with halters, and some with the sword.
A relation altogether true, without any addition of mine. Thus was the Kingdom
of Aaru recovered from the Tyrant of Achem, and remained in the hands of the
King of Iantana until the year 1574. At which time the said Tyrant with a Fleet
of two hundred Sails, feigning as though he would go to take in Patava, fell
cunningly one night on Iantana, where the King was at that time, whom, together
with his wife, children, and many others, he took prisoners, and carried into
his Country, where he put them all to most cruel deaths, and for the King
himself he caused his brains to be beaten out of his head with a great club.
After these bloody executions he possessed the Kingdom of Aaru, whereof he
presently made his eldest son King, the same that was afterward slain at
Malaca, coming to besiege it in the time of Don Lionis P^reyra, son to the Earl
of Feyra, Captain of the Fortress, who defended it so valiantly, that it seemed
to be rather a miracle then any natural work, by reason the power of that Enemy
was so great, and ours so little in comparison of theirs, as it may be truly
spoken how they were two hundred Mahometans against one Christian.

CHAP. XIII. My departure from Malaca to go to Pan; that which fortuned after
my arrival there; with the murder of the King of Pan, and the cause thereof.
TO return unto the Discourse where I left, I say,. 1.
that when I was recovered of the sickness which I got in my Captivity at
Siaca, Pedro de Faria, desiring to find out some occasion to advance and
benefit me, sent me in a Lanchara to the Kingdom of Pan with goods of his, to
the value of ten thousand ducats, for to consign them into the hands of a
Factor of his, that recided there, named Tome Lobo, and from thence to go to
Patava, which is an hundred leagues beyond that. To that purpose he gave me a
Letter and a Present for the King, and an ample Commission to treat with him
about the redemption of five Portugals, who in the Kingdom of Siam were Slaves
to Monteo de Bancha his Brother-in-law. I parted then from Malaca upon this
employment, and the seventh day of our Voyage, just as we were opposite to the
Island of Pullo Timano, which may be distant from Malaca some ninety leagues,
and ten or twelve from the mouth of the River of Pan, a little before day we
heard at two several times great lamentations at Sea, and being not able in
regard of the darkness of the night to know what it was, we were all suspended
into diverse opinions, for that we could not imagine what it should be, in so
much that to learn the certainty thereof I caused them to hoist up sail, and
row toward that part where we heard the lamentation, every one looking down
round about close to the water, the better to discern and hear that of which we
were in such doubt. After we had continued a pretty while in this manner, we
perceived far from us a black thing that floated on the Sea, and unable at
first to discover what it was, we advised together about it. Now there being
but four Portugals of us in the Lanchara, we were all of different minds, so
that I was told how I was to go directly to the place whither Pedro de Faria
had sent me, that losing but an hours time I might endanger the Voyage, and
hazard the goods, and so for want of performing the duty of my charge I might
very much wrong him. Whereunto I answered, that happen what might, I would not
leave off laboring to know what it was, and that if in so doing I committed any
fault, the Lanchara appertained to none but Pedro de Faria, unto whom my self
was to render an account of the goods in it, and not they, that had nothing
else in the Vessel but their persons, which were in no more danger then mine:
During this debate it pleased God that the day appeared, by the light whereof
we perceived people that were cast away, who floated pell-mell together upon
planks, and other pieces of wood: Whereupon without further fear we turned our
prow toward them, and with force of sails and oars we made to them, hearing
them cry six or seven times, without using any other speech, Lord have mercy
upon us. At the sight of this strange and pitiful spectacle we remained so
amazed, that we were almost besides our selves, and causing some of the
Mariners to get with all speed into the Cock-boat, they fetched three and twenty
persons of them into the Lanchara, namely fourteen Portugals, and nine Slaves,
which were all so dis-figured in the face, as they made us afraid to look on
them, and so weak as they could neither speak nor stand. After they had been
thus taken up by us, and entreated in the best manner we could, we demanded of
them the cause of their misfortune, whereunto one of the company we^ping
answered, My Masters, I am named Fernand Gil Porcal^o, and the eye, which you
behold I want, was stricken out by the Achems at the siege of Malaca, when as
the second time they came to surprise Dom Est^vano de Gama, who desiring to do
something for me, because he saw me poor, as I was at that time, gave me leave
to go to the Molucques, where would to God I had never been, since my Voyage
was to have so bad a success: for after I departed from the Port of Talagame,
which is the Road of our Fort at Ternate, having sailed three and twenty days
with a favorable gale in a Junck that carried a thousand bars of Cloves, worth
above an hundred thousand ducats, my ill fortune would, that at the point of
Surabaya in the Isle of Iaoa, there arose so impetuous a North Wind, that our
Junck brake in the prow, which constrained us to lighten the hatches; So we
passed that night by the shore, without bearing so much as a rag of sail, by
reason the Sea was exceedingly moved, and the waves most insupportable. The
next day we perceived that our Junk sank, so that of an hundred forty and seven
persons that were in her there were saved but six and twenty, and now it is
fourtain days that we have been upon these planks, having during all that time
eaten nothing but a slave of mine that dyed, with whom we have sustained our
selves eight days, and the very last night two Portugals more dyed, on whom we
would not feed, although we were very much pressed to it by our hunger, because
we hoped that this or the next day would give an end both to our lives and
misery.

. 2.
The relation, which this man made us, having rendered us all very pensive, and
full of amazement to see him and his companions reduced to so deplorable an
estate, we greatly wondered at the means, whereby God had so miraculously
delivered them, wherefore we gave him most humble thanks for it, and comforted
our new guests, in representing unto them all those things which the duty of
true Christians and our poor captivity obliged us to tell them. After that we
bestowed part of our clothes on them, and laid them in our ordinary beds, then
we applied those remedies to them, which we thought necessary for their
recovery; for not having slept of a long time, they were so exceeding dizzy in
the head, that they would fall down stunn^d in such sort, as they continued
without any knowledge for an hour together. This done, we went to seek out the
Port of Pan, where we arrived near about midnight, casting anchor in the Road,
just against a little inhabited place, called Campalaru. The next morning by
break of day we rowed up the River about some league to the Town, where we
found Tome Lobo, who, as I have already declared, resided there, as Factor for
the Captain of Malaca, into whose hands I consigned all the Merchandise that I
brought along with me. The same day three of the fourteen Portugals, which we
took up at Sea, dyed, whereof the aforementioned Fernando Gil Porcalho was one, as
also five young men that were Christians, whom we cast all into the Sea, with
great stones tied to their feet and about their necks for to make them sink to
the bottom, in regard we could not be permitted to bury them in the Town,
although Tome Lobo offered them forty ducats for that purpose, the reason they
alleged was, that if they should suffer it, their Country would remain
accursed, and incapable of nourishing any thing, because the deceased were not
purged from the Hogs flesh they had eaten, it being the most detestable and
enormous sin of all others; As for those which rested alive, Tome Lobo gave
them very good entertainment, and furnished them with all things that they
wanted, until such time as they recovered and returned to Malaca. Not long
after, preparing my self for my Voyage to Patana, Tome Lobo very earnestly
desired me not to go thither, and told me that he held not himself safe in that
Town, by reason he was advertised that one Taan N^rrafa, a man of reputation,
and of the chiefest of the Town, had sworn to burn him in his house, with all
the goods that were in it, saying, that at Malaca the Captains Factor had taken
from him the value of five thousand ducats in Benjamin, Silk, and wood of
Aloes, at a far lower rate then it was worth, and that he had paid him at his
own pleasure, and therewith not contented had in part of payment given him
rotten stuffs, which he could make nothing of; moreover, that for all his five
thousand ducats worth of Commodities, that in Malaca would have yielded him
ten thousand, and by exchange of vendible wares, he might easily have returned,
would have made him ten thousand more, he never could get above seven hundred
ducats; and therefore to be revenged of this wrong, he had picked quarrels of
purpose to tole him forth to kill him, in regard whereof he instantly desired
me to stay, and not abandon him and the Captains stock to such apparent danger:
Whereupon having used all the reasons I could to facilitate my voyage, he would
by no means approve of them, but contradicted me in all my propositions. For
conclusion, I remonstrated unto him, that if it were his ill fortune, as he
said he feared, to be killed for that which he had, I should be in no better
case, and therefore I marvelled why he would let those eleven Portugals go,
with whom rather he should have imbarqued himself for Malaca. Hereunto after a
little pause he made answer, that he was very sorry he had not done so, but
since it was now too late, he entreated me not to forsake him in this
extremity, and that for the Captains sake, who he knew would not take it well I
should leave him so alone with his goods, which were no less worth then thirty
thousand ducats, besides those belonging to himself, that amounted to almost
as much more. This request of his made to me with such instance on the one
side, somewhat perplexed me, and on the other considering the extreme hazard I
ran if I stayed, I knew not what to resolve; At length after I had well thought
of the matter, I was constrained to come to this accord with him, that in case
he did not within fifteen days imbarque himself with me in my Lanchara for
Patana, with all his Commodities reduced into gold, or stones, whereof there
was great plenty in the Town, that then I might go where I pleased without him;
an offer that he was forced to accept of, and so we remained agreed.

The fear Tome Lobo was in, left that wherewithal he was threatened should
befall him,. 3.
made him use such diligence in selling away of his commodities, that by means
of the good peny-worths he afforded them at, in less then eight days he cleared
his Warehouse, and the other places wherein they lay; so that utterly refusing
Pepper; Cloves, and such other Drugs, which took up too much room, he trucked
all away for gold of Menencabo, for Diamonds of Lavo and Taucampura, and Pearls
of Borneo. Now having made a full dispatch of all, and that we were resolved to
imbarque the next day, by ill fortune a most terrible accident happened the
night ensuing, which was, that one, named Coin Geinal, the King of Borneo's
Ambassador, who had been three or four years resident in the King of Pan's
Court, and a marvelous rich man, killed the King upon finding him in bed with
his wife, which caused such a commotion in the Town, that it seemed to be a
Tumult of Hell rather then any humane business; Whereupon certain rogues and
vagabonds, that wished for nothing more then such like occasions, to the end
they might do what before for fear of the King they durst not enterprise, made
a Troop of five or six hundred, which separated into three bands, went directly
to the house, where Tome Lobo dwelt. Having assaulted it in six or seven
places, they entered by force, notwithstanding all the resistance we could make,
and that in defending it we lost eleven men, whereof the Portugals, which came
with me from Malaca, were three. During this violence, all that Tome Lobo could
do was to escape away with six great blows of a sword, one of the which had cut
his right cheek almost away, so as he was like to dye of that hurt. We were
both of us then constrained to abandon the house to them, together with all the
goods that were in it, and retire to the Lanchara, where we remained with five
Boys and eight Mariners, not having so much as the worth of a penny left of all
our merchandise, which amounted to fifty thousand crowns in gold and stone
only. In this Lanchara we past away all the night very much afflicted, and
still harkening what might be the end of this mutiny, which was risen among the
people, as I have before related. At length perceiving the matters grew worse
and worse, and that there was no hope for us to recover any part of our goods,
we thought it a far safer course to go away to Patana, then by staying to run a
hazard of being killed, as above four thousand persons were. With this
resolution we parted from this place, and in six days arrived at Patana, where
we were very well received by the Portugals which were in that Country, unto
whom we recounted all that had past at Pan* and the pitious estate wherein we
had left that miserable Town. This accident very much afflicted them, so that
desiring to give some remedy thereunto, with a true affection of charitable
Christians they went all to the Palace of the King, and complained to him of
the wrong that had been done to the Captain of Malaca, beseeching him thereupon
they might be permitted to recover, if it were possible, the loss they had
sustained, and have leave granted to right themselves upon any merchants goods
belonging to the Kingdom of Pan, to the value of the sum they had been
despoyled of. The King having heard their complaint, and presently granting
what they demanded; It is reasonable, said he, that you should do as you have
been done unto, and that you should spoil them that first have spoiled you,
especially in a matter that concerns the Captain of Malaca, unto whom all of
you are so much obliged. The Portugals, having rendered him very humble thanks
for this grace, returned to their houses, where they concluded to seize upon
all the goods they could meet with belonging to the Kingdom of Pan, until such
time as they had fully recovered their loss. It happened then about nine days
after they being advertised, that some ten leagues off, in the river of
Calantan, were three Junks of China, very rich, and appertaining to Mohammedan
Merchants, Natives of the Kingdom of Pan, that by foul weather at Sea were
constrained to put in there, our people resolved to fall upon them: To which
effect, out of three hundred Portugals, that were then in the Country, we chose
out fourscore, with whom we imbarqued our selves in two Foysts, and one round
ship, well provided of all things we thought to be necessary for this
enterprise. So we departed three days after with all speed, for fear lest the
Mahometans of the Country, having discovered our design, should advertise them
of it whom we went to seek; Of these three vessels one Ioano Fernandez Dabrea,
born in the Isle of Madera, was General, who with forty Soldiers went in the
round ship, and the other two Foysts were commanded by Laurenco de Goes, and
Vasco Sermento, both of them of the City of Braganea in Portugal, and very well
experienced in Sea-service. The next day we arrived at the river of Calentan,
where as soon as we decryed the three Junks riding at anchor, which we had been
told of, we set very valiantly upon them, and albeit those that were in them
did at first do their best endevor to defend themselves, yet at length all
their resistance was in vain, for in less then an hour we reduced them all
under our power, so as seventy and four of theirs were slain, and but three of
ours, though we had many men hurt. I will not hold you here with any particular
discourse of what was done on either side, let it suffice, that after the three
Junks had rendered themselves, we presently set sail, and carried them away with
us in all haste, because the whole Country thereabout was in an uproar,
directing our course toward Patana, where by the favor of a fair wind we
arrived the next day in the afternoon: Having then cast anchor, we saluted the
Town with a peal of Ordnance in sign of joy, which put the Mahometans of the
Country out of all patience; for though we stood in the terms of good friends
with them, yet they left not to use all possible means, both of Presents which
they gave to the Governors and the Kings Favorites, and otherwise, for to make
our prizes void, and that the King would expel us out of his dominions,
whereunto he would at no hand consent, saying, that he would not for any thing
in the world break the peace, which his Ancestors had made with the Christians
of Malaca, and that all that he could do therein was to become a third betwixt
them: Whereupon he de^^^ed us, that the three Necodas of the Junks, so are the
Commanders of them called in that Country, restoring unto us what had been
taken from the Captain of Malaca, we would likewise render unto them as well
their vessels free, as the overplus, a matter which Ioano Fernandez Dabrea, and
the rest of the Portugals very willingly agreed unto, to testify the desire
they had to content him; As indeed he was exceedingly well pleased with them
for it, which he expressed both in courteous language, and many promises of his
future favor. Thus were the fifty thousand ducats recovered, that Pedro de
Faria and Tome Lobo had lost, and the Portugals were in great esteem over all
that Country, so that their valor rendered them very formidable to the
Mahometans. A little after the Soldiers assured us, that in the three Junks we
had taken, there was only in lingo^s of silver, besides the other merchandise
wherewithal they were laden, to the value of two hundred Taieis, which in our
money amounts to an hundred thousand ducats.

CHAP. XIV. The Misfortune that befell us at the entry into the River of Lugor;
our hiding our selves in a Wood, with that which happened unto us afterward;
and our return unto Malaca.
. 1.
HAving sojourned six and twenty days at Patana for to sell away some few
commodities of China that I had, there arrived a Foyst from Malaca, commanded
by one Antonio de Faria, who came thither by the express commandment of Pedro
de Faria to treat with the King about some accord, as also to confirm the
ancient league anew which he had with Malaca, and withal to give him thanks
for the good entertainment he gave in his Kingdom to those of the Portugal
Nation. This business was carried with a fair show of an Embassy, accompanied
with a Letter and a Present of Jewels, sent in the name of the King of Portugal
our Master, and taken out o^ his Coffers, as all the Captains of that place
used to do. Now for as much as the said Antonio de Faria had brought along with
him some ten or twelve thousand crowns worth of Indian woolen and linen cloth,
which he had taken up on his credit at Malaca, and that he saw there was so
little utterance of that commodity, as he could not meet with any Merchant that
would deal for it, he was fain to resolve for to spend the winter there until
such time as he might meet with some opportunity to put it off; Howbeit he was
advised by some of the best experienced of the Country to send it unto Lugor,
which is a great Town in the Kingdom of Siam, an hundred leagues lower toward
the North, for they alleged that this Port was very rich, and of great vent,
by reason of a world of Junks that arrived there daily from the Isle of Iaoa,
from Lava, Taniampura, Iapara, Demaa, Panaruca Sydayo, Passarvan, Solor, and
Borneo, whose Merchants were used to give a good rate for such like
commodities, in exchange of gold, or stone. This advice was well approved of by
Antonio de Faria, who instantly went about to put it in execution; To which end
he took order for the providing of a vessel, by reason the Foyst wherein he
came was altogether unfit for a further voyage: Matters thus disposed of, he
deputed one, named Christovano Borhalho, for his Factor, a man exceeding well
versed in business of Traffic, with whom there imbarqued some sixteen men, as
well Soldiers as Merchants, with a hope that one crown would yield them six or
seven, what in the commodities they should carry, as in those they should
return. Hereupon* wretched I being one of the sixteen, we parted from the Port
on a Saturday, and sailed with a favorable wind along the coast till Thursday
next in the morning, that we arrived at Lugor Road, and anchored at the mouth
of the River; There it was thought fit to pass the rest of the day, to the end
we might inform our selves of what was behoveful for us to do, as well for the
sale of our commodities, as for the safety of our persons: And to say truth, we
learnt such good news, that we were confident of gaining above six times
double, and to be sure of freedom and liberty during all the month of
September, according to the Ordinance of the King of Siam, because it was the
month of the Kings Sumbayas. Now the better to clear this, you must know, that
all along this coast of Malaya, and within the Land, a great King commands, who
for a more famous and recommendable Title above all other Kings, causes
himself to be called Prechau Saleu, Emperor of all Sornau, which is a Country
wherein there are thirteen Kingdoms, by us commonly called Siam, to the which
fourteen petty Kings are subject, and yield homage, that were anciently obliged
to make their personal repair unto Odiaa, the Capital City of this Empire, as
well to bring their Tribute thither, as to do the Sumbaya to their Emperor,
which was indeed to kiss the Courtelas that he ware by his side; Now because
this City was seated fifty leagues within the Land, and the Currents of the
Rivers so strong, as these Kings were oftentimes forced to abide the whole
winter there to their great charge, they petitioned the Prechau, King of Siam,
that the place of doing this their homage might be altered, whereupon he was
pleased to ordain, that for the future there should be a Viceroy resident in
the Town of Lugor, which in their language is called Poyho, unto whom every
three years those fourteen Kings should render that duty and obedience they
were accustomed to do unto himself, and that during that time they spent there
in performing the same, being the whole month of September, both their own
merchandise, and that of all others, as well natives as strangers, that either
came in, or went out of the Country, should be free from all manner of imposts
whatsoever: So that we arriving in the time of this freedom, there was such a
multitude of Merchants that flocked thither from all parts, as we were assured
there was no less then fifteen hundred Vessels in the Port, all laden with an
infinity of Commodities of very great value: And this was the good news we
learnt at such time as we arrived at the mouth of the River; wherewith we were
so well pleased, that we presently resolved to put in as soon as the wind would
permit us. But alas! we were so unfortunate, that we could never come to see
what we so much desired; for about ten of the clock, just as we had dined, and
were preparing to set sail, we saw a great Junk coming upon us, which
perceiving us to be Portugals, few in number, and our Vessel small fell close
with our prow on the larboard side, and then those that were in her threw into
us great Cramp-irons, fastened unto two long chains, wherewithal they grappled
us fast unto them, which they had no sooner done, but straightway some seventy
or eighty Mahometans came flying out from under their hatches, that till then
had lien lurking there, who with a mighty cry cast so many stones, darts, and
lances, which ^ell as thick as hail upon us, that of us sixteen Portugals
twelve rested dead in the place, together with six and thirty others, as well
Boys as Mariners. Now for us four remaining Portugals, after we had escaped so
dreadful ^n encounter, we leapt all of us into the Sea, where one was drowned,
and we three that were left getting to land as well as we could, being
dangerously hurt, and wading up to the wast in mud, went and hid our selves in
the next adjoining wood. In the mean time the Mahometans of the Junk, entering
into our Frigot, not contented with the slaughter they had made of our men,
like mad dogs they killed six or seven Boys outright, whom they found wounded
on the D^ck, not sparing so much as one of them: That done, they imbarqued all
the goods of our Vessel into their Junk, then made a great hole in her, and so
sunk her: Immediately whereupon, leaving their anchor in the Sea, and the
Cramp-irons wherewithal they had grappled us unto them, they set sail, and
made away as fast as ever they could for fear of being discovered.

. 2.
After this our escape, seeing our selves all sore hurt, and without any hope of
help, we did nothing but weep and complain, for in this disaster we knew not
what to resolve on, so much were we amazed with that which had befaln us within
the space of half an hour. In this desolation we spent the rest of that sad
day, but considering with our selves, that the place was moorish, and full of
Adders and Lizards, we thought it our safest course to continue there all the
night too, as accordingly we did, standing up to the middle in the Owze: The
next morning as soon as it was day we went along by the Rivers side, until we
came unto a little channel, which we durst not pass, as well for that it was
very deep, as for fear of a great number of Lizards that we saw in it, so that
in great pain we stayed not only that night there, but five days after, being
not able either to go forward, or turn aside, by reason of the bogs round about
us, all covered over with rushes: In the mean time one of our companions dyed,
whose name was Bastian Anriques, a rich man, and that had lost eight thousand
crown^ in the Lanchara, in so much that of all the company we were before there
remained none but Christovano Borralho and my self, that with tears sat
lamenting over the poor dead man's body, which we had covered with a little
earth as well as we could, for we were then so weak, that we could hardly stir,
or almost speak, so as we had set up our rest to make an end of those few hours
we hoped to live in that place. The next day, being the seventh of our
disaster, about Sunset we espied a great Barque coming rowing up the River,
whereupon as soon as it was near us, we prostrated our selves on the ground,
beseeching those that were aboard her to take us in; They wondering at us,
presently made a stand, seeming much amazed to see us so on our knees, and our
hands lift up to Heaven, as though we were at our prayers; nevertheless without
speaking at all to us, they made as if they would go on, which constrained us
afresh to cry aloud to them with tears that they would not suffer us for want
of succor to dye miserably there. Upon thos^ our cries and lamentations an
ancient woman came forth from under the hatches, whose grave countenance
represented her to be such as afterward we found her to be; she seeing us in
so pitiful a plight, moved with our misfortune, and our wounds that we showed
her, she took up a stick, and therewith struck three or four of the Mariners
because they would not take us in, whereupon approaching to the bank, five or
six of them leapt on shore, and by her commandment took us upon their
shoulders, and carried us into the Barque. This honorable woman, much grieved
to behold us so hurt, and our shirts and linen drawers all bloody and mired,
caused them straightway to be washed, and having given each of us, a linen
cloth to cover us withal, she would needs have us to sit down by her, where
commanding meat to be brought us, she her self presenting it to us with her own
hand, Eat, eat, said she, poor strangers, and be not afflicted to see your
selves reduced unto the estate you are in; for I, whom now you look upon, and
that am but a woman, not having as yet attained to the age of fifty years, have
seen my self a slave, and despoyled of above an hundred thousand ducats worth
of goods: Nor is that all, for to this misfortune was the death of three of my
sons adjoined, and that of my husband, whom I held far more dearer then these
eyes of mine, these eyes, alas! wherewith I beheld both the father and the
sons torn in pieces by the King of Siams Elephants, together with two brothers,
and a son-in-law I had; Ever since I have had a languishing life, and to all
these miseries have many others far greater succeeded, for so implacable has
fortune been unto me, that I have seen three daughters of mine ready to be
married, as also my father, mother, and two and thirty of my kinsmen, nephews,
and cousins, thrown into burning furnaces, where their cries and lamentations
could not choose but reach unto Heaven, for God to succor them in the violence
of that insupportable torment; but alas! the enormity of my sins no doubt so
stopped the ears of the clemency of the Lord of Lords, that he would not hea^
our request, which seemed very just to me; nevertheless I deceived my self,
since nothing is just but what it pleases his divine Majesty to ordain.
Hereunto we answered, that the sins which we also had committed against him
were the cause of our calamities. Seeing it is so, replied she, mingling her
tears with ours, it is always good in your adversities to acknowledge, that the
touches of the hand of God are evermore righteous, for both in that, as also in
a confession of the mouth, in a sorrow for having offended, and in a firm
resolution to do so no more, consists all the remedy of your sufferings and
mine. Having entertained us thus with the discourse of her misfortune, she
enquired of us the occasion of ours, and by what means we came to be in that
miserable estate, whereupon we recounted unto her all that had past, and that
we neither knew who it was that had so ill entreated us, nor wherefore he did
it; Her people, hearing us, said, that the great Junk, whereof we spoke,
belonged to a Mohammedan, a Guzarat by Nation, named Coia Acem, who the same
morning went out of the River laden with Brazil, and was bound for the Isle of
Ainan: Hereat the good woman smote her breast, and seeming to be much moved, Let
me not live, said she, if it be not so, for I have heard that Mohammedan, of
whom you speak, vaunt publicly before all that would give ear unto him, that
he had s^ain a great number of the race of those of Malaca, and that he hated
them in such sort, as he had promised to his Mahomet to kill more of them in
time. Being amazed hereat, we desired her to declare unto us who that man was,
and why he was so much our enemy, whereunto she answered, that she knew no
other reason, but for that a great Captain of our Nation, named Hector de
Sylv^ira, had killed his father and two of his brothers in a ship, which he
took from them in the straight of M^cqua, that was going from Judas to Dabul.
Thus much did this good Matron tell us, and many other things afterward
concerning the great hatred this Mohammedan bore us, as also what lies he
devised to render us infamous.

This honorable woman, departing from the place where she found us,. 3.
went some two leagues up the River, till she came to a little Village, where
she lay that night; The next morning parting from thence, she made directly to
the Town of Lugor, which was above five leagues further. Arriving there about
noon, she landed, and went to her house, whither she carried us with her, and
kept us there three and twenty days, during which time we were very well looked
unto, and plentifully accommodated with all that was necessary for us* This
woman was a widow, and of an honorable family, as afterward we learnt, and
that had been married to the Captain General, which they call Xabandar of
Prevedim, whom the Pata of Lasapara King of Quaijuan had put to death in the
Isle of Iaoa the year 1538. At the time she met with us, as I have related, she
came from a Junk of hers, that lay at the Road laden with Salt; and because it
was great, and could not pass up by reason of the shelves, she caused it to be
unladen by little and little with tha^ Barque. By that time the three and
twenty days, I spoke of, were expired, it pleased God to restore us to our
perfect health, so that this virtuous D^me seeing us able to travel,
recommended us to a Merchant, her kinsman, that was bound for Patana, with
whom, after we had taken our leave of that noble Matron, unto whom we were so
much obliged, we imbarqued our selves in a Cataluz with Oars, and sailing on a
River, called Sumh^chitano, we arrived seven days after at Patana. Now for as
much as Antonio de Faria looked every day for our return, with a hope of good
success in his business, as soon as he saw us, and understood what had past, he
remained so sad and discontented, that he continued above an hour without
speaking a word; in the mean time such a number of Portugals came in, as the
house was scarce able to contain them, by reason the greatest part of them had
ventu^ed goods in the Lanchara, whose lading in that regard amounted to seventy
thousand ducats and better, the most of it being in silver coin, of purpose
with it to return gold. Antonio de Faria seeing himself stripped of the twelve
thousand ducats he had borrowed at Malaca, resolved not to return thither,
because he had no means to pay his Creditors, but rather thought it fitter to
pursue those that had robbed him of his goods; so that he took a solemn Oath
upon the holy Evangelists to part incontinently from that place for to go in
quest of those Pirates, for to revenge upon them the death of those fourteen
Portugals, and thirty six Christians, Boys and Mariners, killed by them as
aforesaid; Adding withal, that if such a course were not taken, they should
every day be used so, ^ay far worse. All the Assistants very much commended him
valorous resolution, and for the execution thereof there were many young
Soldiers amongst them that offered to accompany him in that voyage; some
likewise presented him with money, and others furnished him with diverse
necessaries: Having accepted these offers and presents of his friends, he used
such diligence, that within eighteen days he made all his preparations, and got
together five and fifty Soldiers, amongst whom poor unfortunate I was fain to
be one; for I saw my self in that case, as I had not so much as a single token,
nor knew any one that would either give or lend me one, being indebted besides
at Malaca above five hundred ducats, that I had borrowed there of some of my
friends, which, with as much more, that dog had ^obbed me of amongst others, as
I have related before, having been able to save nothing but my miserable
carcass, wounded in three places with a Javelin, and my skull cracked with a
stone, whereby I was three or four times at the point of death; But my
companion Christovan Borralho was yet ^ar worse entreated then my self, and
that with more hurts, which he received in satisfaction of five and twenty
hundred ducats that he was robbed of as the rest.

CHAP. XV. Antonio de Faria's setting forth for the Isle of Ainan, his arrival
at the River of Tinacoren; and that which befell us in this Voyage.
. 1.
AS soon as Antonio de Faria was ready, he departed from Patana on a Saturday
the ninth of May, 1540. and steered North North-west, toward the Kingdom of
Champaa, with an intent to discover the Ports and Havens thereof, as also by
the means of some good booty to furnish himself with such things as he wanted;
for his haste to part from Patana was such, as he had not time to furnish
himself with that which was necessary for him, no not with victual and warlike
ammunition enough. After we had sailed three days we had sight of an Island,
called Pullo Condor, at the height of eight degrees and three quarters, on the
North Coast, and almost North-west toward the mouth of the River of Camboia,
so that having rounded all the Coast, we discovered a good Haven Eastward,
where in the Island of Camboia, distant some six leagues from the firm Land, we
met with a Junk of Lequios, that was going to the Kingdom of Siam with an
Ambassador from the Nautauquim of Lindau, who was Prince of the Island of Tosa,
and that had no sooner discovered us but he sent a message by a Chinese Pilot
to Antonio de Faria, full of complements, whereunto was added these words from
them all: That the time would come when as they should communicate with us in
the true love of the Law of God, and of his in^inite clemency, who by his death
had given life to all men, and a perpetual inheritance in the house of the
good, and that they believed this should be so, after the half of the half time
was past. With this complement they sent him a Courtelas of great value, whose
handle and scabbard was of gold, as also six and twenty Pearls in a little Box
likewise of gold, made after the fashion of a Salt-seller, whereat Antonio de
Faria was very much grieved, by reason he was not able to render the like unto
this Prince, as he was obliged to do, for when the Chinese arrived with this
message they were distant above a league at Sea from us. Hereupon we went
ashore, where we spent three days in taking in fresh water, and fishing. Then
we put to Sea again, laboring to get to the firm Land, there to seek out a
River, named Pullo Cambim, which divides the State of Camboia from the Kingdom
of Champaa, in the height of nine degrees, where arriving on a Sunday the last
of May, we went up three leagues in this River, and anchored just against a
great Town, called Catimparu, there we remained twelve days in peace, during
the which we made our provision of all things necessary. Now because Antonio de
Faria was naturally curious, he endeavored to understand from the people of the
Country what Nation inhabited beyond them, and whence that mighty River took
its sou^ce; whereunto he was answered, that it was derived from a lake, named
Pinator, d^stant from them Eastward two hundred and sixty leagues in the
Kingdom of Quitirvan, and that it was environed with high mountains, at the
foot whereof, upon the brink of the water, were eight and thirty villages, of
which thirteen were very great, and the rest small, and that only in one of the
great on^s, called Xincaleu, there was such a huge mine of gold, as by the
rep^^t of those that lived thereabout, there was every day a bar and a half
drawn out of it, which, according to the value of our money, makes two and
twenty millions in a year, and that four Lords had share in it, who continually
were in war together, each one striving to make himself master of it; I, and
that one of them, named Raiahitau, had in an inner yard of his house, in pots
under ground, that were full to the very brims, above six hundred bars of gold
in powder, like to that of Mexancabo of the Island of Samatra; And th^^ if
three hundred Harquebusiers of our Nation should go and assault it, without
doubt they would carry it: Moreover that in another of those Villages, called
Buaquirim, there was a quarry, where out of an old Rock they dug a great
quantity of Diamonds, that were very fine, and of greater value then those of
Lava and Taniampura in the Isle of Iaoa. Whereupon Antonio de Faria having
questioned them about many other particularities, they made him a relation of
the fertility of the Country, which was further up this River, no less fit to
be desired, then easy to be conquered, and that with little charge.

Being departed from this River of Pullo Cambim,. 2.
we sailed along the Coast of the Kingdom of Champaa, till we came to an Haven,
called Saleyzacau, seventeen leagues farther on toward the North, whereinto we
entered. Now because there was nothing to be gotten there, we went out of this
place about sunsetting, and the next morning we came to a River, named
Toobasoy, without the which Antonio de Faria cast anchor, because the Pilot
would not venture to enter into it, for that he had never been there before,
and therefore knew not the depth of it. As we were contesting hereabout, some
for to enter, and others gainsaying it, we discerned a great sail making
toward this Port from the main Sea. Hereupon, without stirring from the place
where we were, we prepared to receive them in a peaceable manner, so that as
soon as they came near us, we saluted them, and hung up the flag of the
Country, called Charachina, which is a sign of friendship, used among them in
such like occasions. They of the ship, in stead of answering us in the same
manner, as in reason it seemed they should have done, and knowing that we were
Portugals, to whom they wished not well, gave us very vile and base words, and
from the top of their poup made a capher slave hold up his arse bare to us with
a mighty noise and din of Trumpets, Drums, and Bells, by way of scorn and
derision of us. Whereat Antonio de Faria was so offended, that he gave them a
whole broad side, to see if that would make them more courteous; To this sho^
of ours they returned us an answer of five pieces of Ordnance, namely three
Faulcons, and two little fieldpieces; whereupon consulting together what we
should do, we resolved to abide where we were, for we held it not fit to
undertake so doubtful an enterprise, until such time as the next days light
might discover the forces of this Vessel unto us, that so we might afterward
either set upon her with the more security, or let her pass by: This counsel
was approved both by Antonio de Faria, and us all, so that keeping good watch,
and giving order for all that was necssary, we continued in that place
expecting day; now about two of the clock in the morning we perceived three
black things close to the water coming toward us, which we could not well
discern, whereupon we wakened Antonio de Faria, who was then asleep on the
hatches, and showed him what we had discovered, being by that time not far from
us; He fearing, as we did, lest they were Enemies, cried out presently, Arm,
Arm, Arm, wherein he was straightway obeyed; for now plainly perceiving that
they were Vessels rowing toward us, we betook us to our Arms, and were
bestowed by our Captain in places most necessary to defend our selves. We
conceived by their silent approaching to us, that they were the Enemies we had
seen over night, so that Antonio de Faria said unto us, My masters, this is
some Pyrat coming to set upon us, who thinks we are not above six or seven at
the most, as the manner is in such kind of Vessels; wherefore let every man
stoop down, so as they may not see any of us, and then we shall soon know their
design; in the mean time let the pots of powder be made ready, with which, and
our swo^ds, I hope we shall give a good end to this adventure: Let every one
also hide his match in such sort, as they may not be discovered, whereby they
may be persuaded that we are asleep: all which, as he had prudently ordained,
was incontinently executed. These three Vessels, being come within a ^light
shoot of our^, went round about her, and after they had viewed her well, they
joined all close together, as if they had entered into some new consultation,
continuing so about a quarter of an hour; that done, they separated themselves
into two parts, namely the two lesser went together to our poup, and the third,
that was greater, and better armed, made to the starboard of us; Hereupon they
entered our Lorch where most conveniently they could, so that in less then half
a quarter of an hour above forty men were gotten in, which seen by Antonio de
Faria, he issued out from under the hatches with some forty Soldiers, and
invoking Saint James our Patron, he fell so courageously upon them, that in a
short time he killed them almost all; Then with aid of the pots of powder, that
he caused to be cast in amongst those that were remaining in the three Vessels
which he presently took, he made an end of defeating them, the most of them
being constrained to leap into the Sea, where they were all drowned but five,
whom we took up alive, whereof one was the capher slave that showed us his
tail, and the other four were one Turk, two A^hems, and the Captain of the
Junk, named Similau, a notorious Pyrat, and our mortal Enemy. Antonio de Faria
commanded them instantly to be put to torture, for to draw out of them who they
were, from whence they came, and what they would have had of us, whereunto the
two Achems answered most brutishly; and when as we were going about to torment
the slave in like manner, he began with tears to beseech us to spare him, for
that he was a Christian as we were, and that without torture he would answer
truly to all our demands; whereupon Antonio de Faria caused him to be unbound,
and setting him by him, gave him a piece of Biscuit, and a glass of wine, then
with fair words he persuaded him to declare the truth of every thing to him,
since he was a Christian, as he affirmed; To which he replied in this sort, If
I do not speak the truth unto you* then take me not for such as I am; my name
is Sebastian, and I was slave to Gaspar de Mello, whom this dog Simila^, here
present, slew about two years ago in Liampao, with five and twenty other
Portugals that were in his ship. Antonio de Faria hearing this, cried out, like
a man amazed, and said, Nay now I care not for knowing any more; is this then
that dog Similau, that slew thy master? Yes, answered he, it is he, and that
meant likewise to have done as much to you, thinking that ye were not above six
or seven, for which effect he came away in haste with a purpose, as he said, to
take you alive, for to make your brains fly out of your heads with a frontal of
cord, as he did to my Master, but God I hope will pay him for all the mischief
he has committed. Antonio de Faria being also advertised by this slave, that
this dog Similau had brought all his men of war along with him, and left none
in his Junk but some Chinese Mariners, he resolved to make use of this good
fortune, after he had put Similau and his companions to death, by making their
brains fly out of their heads with a cord, as Similau had done to Gaspar de
Mello, and the other Portugals in Liampao: Wherefore he presently imbarqued
himself with thirty Soldiers in his Boat, and the three Machna^, wherein the
Enemies came, and by means of the blood and a favorable wind, he arrived
withless then an hour, where the Junk rode at anchor within the River about a
league from us, whereupon he presently boarded her, and made himself master of
the poup, from whence, with only four pots of powder, which he cast in among
the Rascals that were asleep upon the hatches, he made them all leap into the
Sea, where nine or ten of them were drowned, the rest crying out for help were
taken up and saved, because we stood in need of them for the navigation of the
Junk, that was a great tall Vessel. Thus you see how it pleased God out of his
divine justice to make the arrogant confidence of this cursed dog a means to
chastise him for his cruelties, and to give him by the hands of Portugals a
just punishment for that which he had done unto them. The next morning, taking
an inventory of this prize, we found six and thirty thousand Ta^is in silver of
Iapan, which amounts in our money to fifty four thousand ducats, besides diverse
other good commodities, that were not then praised for want of time, because
the Country was all in an uproar, and fires every where kindled, whereby they
use to give warning one to another upon any alarm or doubt of Enemies, which
constrained us to make away with all speed.

. 3.
Antonio de Faria parted from this River of Toobasoy on a Wednesday morning,
being Corpus Christi Eve, in the year 1540. and sailed along by the Coast of
the Kingdom of Champaa, fearing to abandon it, the wind being Easterly, which
in that place is oftentimes very impetuous, especially in the conjunction of
the new and full Moons. The Friday following we found our selves just against a
River, called by the inhabitants of the Country Tinacoreu, and by us Varella,
whereinto we thought fit to enter, as well to be informed of certain things
Antonio de Faria desired to know, as also to see whether he could learn any
news of Coia Acem whom he sought for, in regard that all the Junks of Siam, and
of all the Coast of Malaya, that sail to China, use to trade in this River,
where many times they sell their commodities well in exchange of gold,
Calembouc wood, and Ivory, whereof there is abundance in that Kingdom; and
having cast anchor a little within the mouth of the River, over against a
Village, named Taquilleu, there came a number of Paroos, and many other small
Boats with fishermen, full of refreshments, who having never seen men made like
unto us, said one to another; Lo, this is a strange novelty wherewithal God
does visit us, let us beseech him he will be pleased, that these bearded men
may not be such as for their particular profit do spy Countries like Merchants,
and afterward rob them like Thieves. Let us get to the woods for fear lest the
sparks of these firebrands do not burn up our houses, and reduce the fields of
our labors into ashes, as they use to do unto the Lands of other men. Whereunto
some of them made answer, God forbid it should be so; but if by misfortune they
should come amongst us, let us carry our selves in such sort, as they may not
perceive we fear them as Enemies, for so they would set upon us with the more
confidence; wherefore the best course for us will be, in a fair way, and with
gentle words, to endevor to learn of them what they would have of us, that upon
knowledge thereof we may certify it unto Hoyaa Paquir, who is now at Congrau.
Antonio de Faria, making as though he did not understand them, although all
that they said was delivered to him by an Interpreter, received them very
courteously, and bought the refreshments, which they brought, of them at their
own price, wherewithal they were very well satisfied; And they demanding of
him from whence he came, and what he would have, he answered them, that he was
of the Kingdom of Siam, and as a Merchant was going to traffic in the Isle of
Lequios, being come into that place only to learn some news of a friend of his
named Coia Acem, that was also bound thither: whereupon he enquired of them
whether he were past by, or no; howsoever he intended to depart thence
suddenly, both for to lose no time, as for that he knew he could not sell his
commodities there. To which they replied, You say true, for in this village of
ours there is nothing but nets and fisher Boats, wherewith we get our living,
and that poorly enough God knows. Howbeit, added they, if thou will go up the
River to the Town of Pilaucacem, where the King is, thou will sell not only the
commodities which are in thy ships, be they never so rich, but likewise more
then ten such ships as thine could carry, by reason that there are Merchants in
that place so wealthy, and that drive so great a trade, as they go with whole
Troops of Elephants, Oxen, and Camels, whom they send laden with goods to the
Lands of the Lauhos, Pafuaas, and Gueos, which are inhabited by very rich
people. Antonio de Faria seeing a good occasion offered to inform himself of
that he desired to know, questioned them at large concerning many things,
whereunto some of them, that seemed to be of more authority then the rest,
answered very aptly, how the River, where we rode at anchor, was called
Tinacoreu, and that it extended to Moncalor, a mountain dist^nt from thence
some fourscore leagues, and that further upwards it was far broader, but not so
deep, where in many places there was great shelves of sand, and a world of land
overflown with water, in the which were such a multitude of fowls, as they
covered all the Country thereabout; And how beyond that it was all mountainous
and rocky, and so full of Elephants, Rhinoceroses, Lions, wild Boars, Buffles,
and such other wild bea^ts, as men could not possibly live there for them; And
moreover, how in the midst of that continent there was a great Lake, which the
inhabitants thereof called Cunebetea, and others Chiammay, from whence this
River took its beginning, as also three others, that watered a good part of
this Country; And that the said Lake, according to the report of those who have
written of it, was threescore Jaos about, each Jao containing three Leagues,
all along the which there were many Mines of Silver, Copper, Tin, and Lead,
from whence great quantities thereof were continually drawn, which the
Merchants carried away with Troops of Elephants and Rhinoceroses, for to
transport it into the Kingdoms of Sornau, by us called Siam, Passiloco, Sarady,
Tangu, Prom, Calamniham, and other Provinces, that are very far within land,
and distant from these Coasts two or three months journey. Further, they told
us, that these Countries were divided into Kingdoms, and Regions inhabited with
people, that were white, tawny, and others somewhat blacker; and that in
exchange of those commodities they returned Gold, Diamonds, and Rubies. Having
thereupon demanded of them whether those people had Arms, they answered none,
but staves hardened in the fire, and daggers with blades two spans long; They
also assured us that from hence one could not go thither by the River in less
then half two months, or two months and an half, by reason of the impetuosity
of the waters descending with a great and ^trong current the most part of the
year, and that one might return in eight or ten days at the most. After these
demands Antonio de Faria made them diverse others, wherein they also gave him
good satisfaction* and reported many other particulars unto him, whereby it may
be gathered, that if the Country could be taken, it would, without so much
labor and loss of blood, be of greater profit, and less charge, then the
Indiaes.

The Friday following we left this River of Tinacoreu,. 4.
and by our Pilots advice we went to find out Pullo Champeiloo, which is an
inhabited Island, situate in the entrance to the Bay of Cauchenchina in forty
degrees and a third to the Northward; Being come to it, we cast anchor in an
Haven, where there was good and safe riding, and there we remained three days,
accommodating our artillery in the best manner we could; That done, we set sail
toward the Isle of Ainan, hoping to meet with the Pyrat Coia Acem there whom
we sought for, and arriving at Pullo Capas, which was the first land that we
saw of it, we sailed close to the shore, the better to discover the Ports and
Rivers on that side, and the entries into them. Now because the Lorch, wherein
Antonio de Faria came from Pa^ana, leaked very much, ^e commanded all his
Soldiers to pass into another better Vessel, which was immediately performed,
and arriving at a River, that about evening we found toward the East, he cast
anchor a league out at Sea, by reason his Junk was great, and drew much water,
so that fearing the sands, which he had often met withal in this Voyage, he
sent Christovano B^rralho with fourteen Soldiers in the Lorch up the River to
discover what fires those might be that he saw. Being gone then about a league
in the River, he incountred a Fleet of forty very great Junks, whereupon
fearing le^t it was the Mandarims Army, whereof we had heard much talk, he kept
aloof off from them, and anchored close by the shore; now about midnight the
tide began to come in, which B^rralho no sooner perceived, but he presently
without noise weighed ^nchor, and declining the Junks he went on to that part
where he had seen the fires, that by this time were almost all out, there being
not above two or three that gave any light, and which served to guide him. So
continuing his course very discreetly, he came to a place where he beheld a
mighty company of great and small Ships, to the number as he guessed of
thousand Sails, passing through the which very stilly he arrived at a Town of
above ten thousand households, enclosed with a strong wall of Brick, with Towers
and Bulwarks after our manner, and with Curtains full of water. Here five of
the fourteen Soldiers, that were in the Lorch, went on shore with two of those
Chinese^es, that were saved out of Similaus Junk, who had left their wives as
hostages with us for their return; These having spent three hours in viewing
and surveying the Town on the outside, reimbarqued themselves without any
notice taken of them at all, and so went back very quietly as they came to the
mouth of the River, where they found a Junk riding at anchor, that was come
thither since their departure in the evening. Being returned to Antonio de
Faria, they related unto him what they had seen, particularly the great Army
that lay up in the River, as also the Junk, which they had left rid^^g at
anchor at the entrance into it, telling him that it might well be the Dog Coia
Acem whom he sought for. These news so rejoiced him, that instantly he weighed
anchor, and set sail, saying, his mind gave him that it was undoubtedly he; and
if it proved so, he assured us all that he was contented to lose his life in
fighting with him, for to be revenged of such a Rogue as had done him so much
wrong. Approaching within sight of the Junk, he commanded the Lorch to pass
unto the other side of her, to the end they might board her both together at
once, and charged that not a Piece should be shot off, for fear they should be
heard of the Army that lay up in the River, who might thereupon come to
discover them. As soon as we were come to the Junk, she was presently invested
by us, and twenty of our Soldiers leaping in made themselves Masters of her
without any resistance, for the most of her men threw themselves into the Sea,
the rest that were more courageous valiantly made head against our people; but
Antonio de Faria presently getting in with twenty Soldiers more made an end of
defeating them, killing above thirty of theirs, so as there remained none alive
but those which voluntarily cast themselves into the Sea, whom he caused to be
drawn up to serve for the Navigation of his Vessels, and for to learn who they
were, and from whence they came, to which purpose he commanded four of them to
be put to torture, whereof two chose rather to dye so then to confe^^ any
thing; and as they were about to do the like to a little boy, an old man, his
father, that was laid on the deck, cried out with tears in his eyes for to give
him the hearing before they did any hurt to the child; Antonio de Faria made
the Executioner stay, and bade the old man say what he would, provided he spoke
truth, for otherwise he vowed, that both he and the boy should be thrown alive
into the Sea, whereas on the contrary, if he dealt truly, he promised to set
them both at liberty on shore, and restore unto him whatsoever he would take
his oath did appertain unto him: Whereunto the old Mohammedan answered, I accept
of the promise which thou make me, and I very much thank thee for sparing the
life of this child, for as for mine, as a thing unprofitable, I make no
reckoning of it, and I will rely on thy word, although the course thou h^ldest
may well divert me from it, in regard it is no way conformable to the Christian
Law, which thou have professed in thy Baptism* An answer, that rendered Antonio de
Faria so confounded and amazed, as he knew not wha^ ^o reply; Howbeit he caused
him to come ne^rer to him, and questioned him gently without any further
threat^ning.

. 5.
This old man then sat him down by Antonio de Faria, who seeing him white like
unto us, asked him whether he were a Turk, or a Persian? whereunto he answered,
that he was neither, but that he was a Christian, born at Mount Sinai. Antonio
de Faria thereupon replied, how he wondered much, being a Christian, as he said,
that he lived not amongst Christians. To which the old man answered, that he
was a Merchant of a good family, named Tome Mostanguo, and that riding one day
at anchor in a Ship of his in the Port of Iudaa, in the year one thousand five
hundred thirty and eight, Soliman the Bassa, Viceroy of Cairo, took his, and
sev^n others Ships, to carry Victual and Munition for his Army of threescore
Galleys, wherewith he went by the Command of the grand Signior to restore
Sultan Bandur to his Kingdom of Cambaya, which the great Mogul had deprived him
of; And that at the end of the Voyage going to demand the freight which they
had promised him, the Turks, that were ever cruel and faithless, took his wife,
and a young daughter he had; and forced them before his face, and because his
son wept at the sight of this injury they threw him bound hand and foot into
the Sea; as for himself, they laid him in Irons, and continually scourging him
they stripped him of all his goods, to the value of six thousand ducats and
better, saying, that it was not lawful for any to enjoy the blessings of God,
but the holy and just Mouss^limans, such as they were: And that his wife and
daughter dying not long after, he found means one night to cast himself into
the Sea with that little boy, which was his son, at the mouth of the River of
Diu, from whence he went by Land to Surrat, and so to Malaca in a ship of
Garcia de Saas, Captain of Bacaim; then how by the commandment of Estevano de
Gama, going to China with Christovano Sardinha, which had been Factor at the
Molucques, one night as they rode at anchor in Cincaapura, Quiay Taijano,
Master of the Junk, surprised them, and killed the said Sardinha, together with
six and twenty Portugals more; as for him, because he was a Gunner they saved
his life. At this report Antonio de Faria striking himself on the breast, as a
man amazed at this discourse, Lord, Lord, said he, this seems to be a dream
that I hear; then turning himself to his Soldiers that stood about him, he
related the life of this Quiay unto them, and further affirmed, that he had
slain at times in strayed Vessels above an hundred Portugals, and despoyled
them of an hundred thousand ducats at least; And though his name was such, as
this Armenian delivered, to wit, Quiay Taijano, yet after he had killed
Christovano Sardinha in Cincaapura, in a vainglory of that which he had done
he caused himself to be called Captain Sardinha. Whereupon having demanded of
the Armenian where he was, he told us, that he was very sore hurt, and hidden
in the hold of the Junk amongst the Cables with five or six others. Hereat
Antonio de Faria arose, and went directly to the place where this Dog was
hidden, followed by the greatest part of his Soldiers, which opened the scuttle
where the Cables lay to see whether the Armenian spoke true or no; in the mean
time the Dog, and the six others that were with him, got out at another
scuttle, and most desperately fell upon our men, who were above thirty in
number, besides fourteen boys. Then began there so furious and bloody a fight,
that in less then a quarter of an hour we made a clean dispatch of them all,
but in the mean while two Portugals, and seven boys were slain, besides I know
not how many hurt, whereof Antonio de Faria received two downright blows on his
head, and one on his arm, which put him to very much pain. After this defeat,
and that the wounded men were dressed, he set sail, for fear of the forty Junks
that were in the River: So getting far from Land, about evening we went and
anchored on the other side of Cauchenchina, where Antonio de Faria causing an
Inventory to be taken of all that was in this Pirates Junk, there was found in
her five hundred Bars of Pepper, after fifty quintals to the Bar, forty of
Nutmegs and Mace, fourscore of Tin, thirty of Ivory, twelve of Wax, and five of
Wood of fine Aloes, which might be worth according to the rate of the Country
seventy thousand ducats; besides a little field Piece, four Faulcons, and
thirty Bases of Brass, the greatest part of which Artillery had been ours, for
this Mohammedan had taken them in the ships of Sardinha, Oliveyra, and
Bartolemeu de Matos: There were also found three Coffers covered with Leather,
full of Silk quilts, and the apparel of Portugals, with a great Basin and Ewer
silver and guilt, and a Salt-seller of the same, two and twenty Spoons, three
Candlesticks, five guilt Cups, eight and fifty Harquebuzes, twelve hundred
twenty and two pieces of Bengala Cloth, all which were Portugals goods,
eighteen quintals of Powder, and nine Children about seven or eight years of
age, chained together by the hands and the feet, most lamentable to behold, for
that they were so weak and lean, that one might easily through their skins have
counted all the bones in their bodies.

CHAP. XVI. Antonio de Faria's Arrival at the Bay of Camoy, where was the
fishing of Pearls for the King of China; the Relation made to him of the Isle
of Ainan; with that which happened to him by the means of a renegado Pyrat, and
otherwise.
. 1.
THe next day after noon, Antonio de Faria parted from the place where he rode
at anchor, and returned toward the Coast of Ainan, by the which he kept all
the rest of that day, and the next night with five and twenty or thirty fathom
water. In the morning he came to a Bay, where there were many great Boats
fishing for Pearls, and being unresolved what course to take, he bestowed all
the forenoon in counsel with his company thereabout, whereof some were of the
opinion that he should seize upon the Boats that were fishing for Pearls, and
others opposed it, saying, it was a safer way to treat with them as Merchants,
for that in exchange of the great store of Pearls, which were in that place,
they might easily put off the most part of their Commodities. This appearing to
be the best and safest advice, Antonio de Faria caused the Flag of Trade to be
hung out, according to the Custom of China, so that instantly there came two
Lanteaas from Land to us, which are Vessels like to Foists, with great
abundance of refreshments, and those that were in them, having saluted us after
their manner, went aboard the great Junk wherein Antonio de Faria was; but when
they beheld men, such as we were, having never seen the like before, they were
much amazed, and demanded what people we were, and wherefore we came into their
Country. Whereunto we answered by an Interpreter, that we were Merchants born
in the Kingdom of Siam, and were come thither to sell or barter our Commodities
with them, if so be they would permit us. To this, an old man, much respected
of all the rest, replied, that here was no Traffic used, but in another place
^urther forward, called Guamboy, where all strangers that came from Cantan,
Chincheo, Lamau, Comhay, Sumbor, Liampau, and other Seacoast Towns, did
ordinarily trade: Wherefore he counseled him to get him suddenly from thence,
in regard this was a place destined only to the fishing of Pearls for the
Treasure of the house of the son of the Sun, to the which, by the Ordinance of
the Tutan of Comhay, who was the sovereign Governor of all the Country of
Cauchenchina, no Vessel was permitted to come, but only such as were appointed
for that service, and that all other ships, which were found there, were by the
Law to be burnt, and all that were in them; but since he, as a stranger, and
ignorant of the Laws of the Country, had transgressed the same, not out of
contempt, but want of knowledge, he thought fit to advertise him of it, to the
end he might be gone from thence before the arrival of the Mandarim of the
Army, which we call General, to whom the Government of that fishing
appertained, and that would be within three or four days at the most, being
gone not above six or seven leagues from thence to a Village, named Buhaquirim,
for to take in Victual. Antonio de Faria thanking him for his good advice,
asked him how many Sails, and what Forces the Mandarim had with him: Whereunto
the old man answered, that he was accompanied with forty great Junks, and
twenty five Vancans with oars, wherein there were seven thousand men, namely,
five thousand Soldiers, and the rest Slaves and Mariners; and that he was there
every year six Months, during the which time was the fishing for Pearls, that
is to say, from the first of March to the last of August. Our Captain desiring
to know what duties were paid out of this fishing, and what revenue it yielded
in those six Months, the old man told him, that of Pearls which weighed above
five Carats they gave two thirds, of the worser sort h^lf less, and of seed
Pearl the third part; and that this Revenue was not always alike, because the
fishing was sometimes better in one year, then in another, but that one with
another he thought it might yield annually four hundred thousand Ta^is. Antonio
de Faria made very much of the old man, and gave him two cakes of Wax, a bag of
Pepper, and a tooth of Ivory, wherewith both he and the rest were exceedingly
well pleased. He also demanded of them, of what bigness this Isle of Ainan
might be, whereof so many wonders were spoken. Tell us first, replied they, who
you are, and wherefore you are come hither, then will we satisfy you in that
you desire of us; for we vow unto you, that in all our lives we never saw so
many young fellows together in any Merchants ships, as we now see in this of
yours, nor so spruce and ne^t; and it seems that in their Country China Silks
are so cheap as they are of no esteem, or else that they have had them at so
easy a rate, as they have given nothing near the worth for them, for we see
them play away a piece of Damask at one cast at Dice, as those that come
lightly by them: A speech that made Antonio de Faria secretly to smile, for
that thereby he well perceived how these fishermen had a shrewd guess that the
same were stolen, which made him tell them, that they did this like young men,
who were the sons of very rich Merchants, and in that regard valued things far
under that they were worth, and had cost their fathers; dissembling then what
they thought, they answered in this manner, It may very well be as you say.
Whereupon Antonio de Faria gave a sign to the Soldiers to leave off their play,
and to hide the pieces of Silk that they were playing for, to the end they
might not be suspected for Robbers by these folks, which immediately they did,
and the better to assure these Chinese that we were honest men, and Merchants,
our Captain commanded the scuttles of the Junk to be opened, that we had taken
the night before from Captain Sardinha, which was laden with Pepper, whereby
they were somewhat restored to a better opinion then they had of us before,
saying one to another, Since now we find that they are Merchants indeed, let us
freely answer to their demand, so as they may not think, though we be rude,
that we know nothing but how to catch fish and Oysters.

The old man desiring to satisfy Antonio de Faria's demand, Sir, said he,. 2.
since now I know what you are, and that only out of curiosity you fairly
require to learn this particular of me, I will clearly tell you all that I know
thereof, and what I have heard others deliver concerning it, that have been
elder then my self, and which have a long time governed this Archipelague; They
said then, that this Island was an absolute State under a very rich and mighty
King, who, for an higher and more transcendent title then other Monarchs his
Contemporaries carried, caused himself to be styled Prechau Gam^u; He dying
without heirs, so great a discord arose amongst the people about the succession
to the Crown, as increasing by little and little it caused such effusion of
blood, that the Chronicles of those times affirm, how only in four years and an
half sixteen Lacazaas of men were slain, every Lacazaa containing an hundred
thousand, by means wheroof the Country remained so deserted of people, that
unable to defend it self the King of Cauchin conquered it, only with seven
thousand Mogores, which the King of Tartarie sent him from the City of
Tuymican, that then was Metrapolitan of all his Empires. This Island of Ainan
being conquered, the King of Cauchin returned into his Country, and for
Governor thereof left behind him a Commander of his, named Hoyha Paguarol, who
revolted from him for certain just causes, as he pretended, that invited him
thereunto. Now to have the assistance and support of the King of China, he
became his Tributary for four hundred thousand Taeis by the year, which amount
to six hundred thousand ducats, in consideration whereof the King of China
obliged himself to defend him against all his enemies, whenever he should
have need: This accord continued be^ween them the space of thirteen years,
during the which the King of Cauchin was five several times defeated in open
Battle; At length this Hoyha Paguarol coming to dye without issue, in regard of
the good offices that in his life time he had received from the King of China,
he by his testament declared him for his Successor and lawful Heir, so that
ever since, being now two hundred thirty and five years ago, to this present,
this Isle of Ainan has remained annexed to the Scepter of the great Chinese.
And touching that you have further demanded of me concerning the Treasures, and
Revenue of this Island, I am able to say no more then what I have learnt of
some ancient Personages, who, as I have related before, have governed it in
quality of Teutons, and Chaems, and I remember they said, that all the Revenues
thereof, as well in Mines of Silver, Customs, and otherways, amounted unto two
Millions and an half Taeis yearly; And perceiving that our Captain was amazed
to hear him speak of so mighty a riches, continuing his discourse, Truly, my
Masters, said he laughing, if you make such a matter of that little I have
spoken of, what would you do if you saw the great City of Pequin, where the son
of the Sun (the name they give to their King) with his Court is always
resident, and where the Revenues of two and thirty Kingdoms, that depend on
this Monarchy, are received, of which out of fourscore and six Mines of Gold
and Silver only is annually drawn above fifteen thousand Picos, which according
to our weight comes to twenty thousand quintals? After Antonio de Faria had
given him many thanks for satisfying him so fully in his demands, he d^sired
him to tell him in what Port he would advise him to go and sell his
Commodities, seeing the season was not proper to set sail for Liampoo.
Whereunto he answered, that we were not to go into any Port of that Country,
nor to put trust in any Chinese whatsoever; for I assure you, said he, there is
not one of them will speak truth in any thing he says to you, and believe me,
for I am rich, and will not lie to you like a poor man; besides, I would wish
you to go in this Straight always with the plummet in your hand for to sound
your way, because there are very many dangerous shelvs all along till you come
to a River called Tanauquir, and there is a Port where is very good anchoring,
and where you may be as safe as you can desire, as also you may there, in less
then two days, put off all your commodities, and much more if you had them.
Nevertheless I will not counsel you to disimbarque your goods on land, but to
sell them in your Vessels, in regard that many times the sight causes desire,
and desire disorder amongst peaceable persons, much more with them that are
mutinous and of an evil conscience, whose wicked inclination carries them
rather to take away another man's goods from him, then give of their own to the
needy for Gods sake. This said, both he that spoke, and those that accompanied
him, took leave of our Captain, and us, with many complements and promises,
whereof they are not ordinarily very sparing in those parts, bestowing on
Antonio de Faria, in return of that he had given them, a little Box made of a
Tortoise shell, full of seed-pearl, and twelve pearls of a pretty bigness,
craving his pardon for that they durst not traffic with him in this place,
for fear lest if they should do so, to be all put to death, conformably to the
Law of the rigorous justice of the Country; and they again entreated him to
make haste away before the Mandarims arrival with his Army, for if he found him
there, he would burn both his Vessel, and him and all his company. Antonio de
Faria unwilling to neglect the counsel of this man, lest that which he told him
should prove true, he set sail immediately, and passed to the other side
toward the South, and in two days with a Westerly wind he arrived at the River
of Tanauquir, where just over against a little village, called Neytor, he cast
anchor.

. 3.
We remained all that day, and the next night, at the mouth of the River of
Tanauquir, intending the next morning to sail up to the Town, which was some
five leagues from thence in the River, to see if by any means we might put off
our commodities there, for our Vessels were so heavy laden with them, as there
was scarce a day wherein we ran not twice or thrice on some shelve or other,
which in diverse places were four or five leagues long, wherefore it was
concluded that before we did any thing else we were to sell away our
commodities, so that we labored with all our might to get into the River, whose
current was so strong, that though we had all our sails up, yet could we
prevail but very little against it; As we were in this pain we perceived two
great Junks in warlike manner come out of the River upon us, which chaining
themselves together for the more strength, attaqued us so lively, as we had
scarce the leisure to defend our selves, so that we were constrained to throw
into the Sea all that stood in our way to make room for our artillery, being
that we had then most need of: The first salutation we had from them was a peal
of six and twenty pieces of Ordnance, whereof nine were Falconets, and
fieldpieces: Antonio de Faria, as a man verst in such affairs, seeing them
chained one to another, perceived their drift, and therefore made as though he
fled, as well to win time to prepare himself, as to make them believe that they
were no Christians; whereupon they, like cunning thieves, desi^ing that the
prey, which they held to be surely their own, should not escape out of their
hands, loosed themselves the one from the other the better to set upon us, and
approaching very near to us, they shot so many arrows and darts into our Junk,
as no man was able to appear upon the deck: Antonio de Faria, to avoid this
storm, retired under the half deck, with five and twenty Soldiers, and some ten
or twelve others, Slaves and Mariners; there he entertained the Enemy with
Harquebuse shot the space of half an hour, in which time, having used all their
munitions of war, some forty of them, that seemed to be more valiant then the
rest, longing to finish their enterprise, leaped into our Junk, with a purpose
to make themselves master of the prow; but to hinder them from it, our Captain
was constrained to go and receive them, so that there began a most bloody
fight, wherein it pleased God within an hour to give us the upper hand by the
sl^ughter of four and twenty of their forty in the place: Thereupon twenty of
ours, pursuing this good success, boarded the Enemies Junk, where finding but
small resistance, by reason the principals were already slain, all that were in
her quickly rendered themselves unto us. That done, Antonio de Faria went with
all speed to succor Christovano Borral^o, who was boarded by the other Junk,
and very doubtful of the victory, in regard the greatest part of his men were
hurt, but at our approach the Enemies threw themselves all into the Sea, where
most of them were drowned, and so both the Junks remained in our power. After
this we took a survey of our company, the b^tter to understand what this
victory had cost us, and we found there was one Portugal, five Boys, and nine
Mariners killed, besides those that were hurt: and on the Enemies part
fourscore were slain, and almost as many taken. Having given order then for the
dressing and accommodating of our wounded men in the best manner that could be,
Antonio de Faria caused as many Mariners to be taken up as could be saved, and
commanding them to be brought into the great Junk where he was, he demanded of
them what those Junks were, how the Captain of them was named, and whether he
were alive or dead, whereunto not one of them would make any answer, but chose
rather to dye in torments like mad dogs, when as Christovano Borralho cried out
from the Junk where he was, Signior, Signior, come hither quickly, for we have
more to do then we think of; whereat Antonio de Faria, accompanied with fifteen
or sixteen of his men, leapt into his Junk, asking what the matter was? I hear
a many talking together, said he, toward the prow, which I doubt are hidden
there; hereupon opening the scuttle, they heard diverse cry out, Lord Jesus have
mercy upon us; and that in such a woeful manner, as struck u^ all with pity:
Antonio de Faria approaching to the scuttle, and looking down, could perceive
some persons there shut up, but not able to discern what they might be* he made
two of his boys to go down, who a little after brought up seventeen Christians,
namely two Portugals, five small children, two girls, and eight boys, which
were in such a lamentable case, as would have grieved any heart to have beheld
them; The first thing he did was to cause their Irons to be stricken off, and
then he enquired of one of the Portugals (for the other was like a man dead)
unto whom those children appertained, and how they fell into the hands of this
Pyrat, as also what his name was. Whereunto he answered, that the Pyrat had two
names, the one Christian, the other Pagan, and that his Pagan name, wherewith
he used to be called of late, was Necoda Nicaulem, and his Christian name
Francisco d^ Saa, being Christened at Malaca, at such time as Garcia de Saa was
Captain of the Fortress, and for that he was his godfather, and had caused him
to be baptized, he gave him that name, and married him to an orphan maid, a
very handsome wench, the daughter of an honorable Portugal, to oblige him the
more to our Religion and Country; but in the year 1534. setting sail for China
in a great Junk of his, wherein there accompanied him twenty of the wealthiest
Portugals of Malaca, as also his wife, and arriving at the Island of Pullo
Cat^n, they stayed two days to take in fresh water, during which time he and his
Company, who were all Chinese like himself, and no better Christians,
conspired the death of the poor Portugals for to despoyl them of their goods,
so that one night whilst the Portugals were asleep, and little dreamed of such
Treason, they killed them all with their little hatchets, and their servants
likewise, not sparing the life of any one that bore the name of a Christian;
after which, he persuaded, with his wife, to turn Pagan, and adore an Idol,
that Tucan, Captain of the Junk, had concealed in his chest, and that then
being free from the Christian Religion he would marry her to Tucan, who in
exchang^ would give him a sister of hi^to wife, that was a Chinese, and there
with him. But in regard she would neither adore the Idol, nor consent to the
rest, the dog struck her over the head with his hatchet till her brains fl^w
out, and then departing from thence went to the Port of Liampoo, where the same
year before he had traded; and not daring to go to Patana, for fear of the
Portugals that resided there, he wintered at Siam, and the year following he
returned to the Port of Chincheo, where he took a little Junk that came from
Su^da, with ten Portugals in her, all which he slew; And because the wickedness
that he had done us was known over all the Country, doubting to encounter some
Portugal forces, he had retired himself into this straight of Cauche^china,
where as a Merchant he traded, and as a Pyrat robbed those he met withal that
were weaker then himself. It being now three years since he had taken this
River for a refuge of his Robberies, thinking himself secure here from us
Portugals, by reason we have not used to traffic in the Ports of this
straight, and Island of Ainan. Antonio de Faria asked of him whether those
children belonged to the Portugals he had mentioned before; whereunto he
answered, that they did not, but that both they, and the boys and girls, were
the children of Nuno Preto, Gian de Diaz, and of Pero B^rges, whom he had
killed at Mompollacota, near the mouth of the River of Siam in Ioano Oliveyra's
Junk, where he also put sixteen Portugals more to death, only he saved their
two lives, because one was a shipwright, and the other a Caulker, and had
carried them along with him in this manner, continually whipping, and almost
famishing of them; further he said, that when he set upon us, he did not think
we had been Portugal^, but some Chinese Merchant, like such as he had
accustomed to rob when he found them at advantage, as he thought to have found
us. Antonio de Faria demanded of him, whether he could know the Pyrat amongst
those other dead bodies? Having replied that he could, the Captain presently
arose, and taking him by the hand, went with him into the other Junk, that was
fastened to his, and having made him view all that lay dead upon the hatches, he
said that it was none of them. Whereupon he commanded a Manchuas, which is a
little boat, to be made ready, wherein he and this man went and sought for him
amongst the other dead bodies that floated on the water, where they found him
with a great cut over his head, and a thrust quite through the body; so causing
him to be taken up, and laid upon the hatches, he demanded of that man again,
if he were sure that this was he, who answered, how without doubt it was he.
Whereunto Antonio de Faria gave the more credit, by reason of a great chain of
gold he had about his neck, to which was fastened an Idol of gold with two
heads, made in the form of a Lizard, having the tail and paws enammelled with
green and black, and commanding him to be drawn toward the prow, he caused his
head to be chopped off, and the rest of the body to be cut in pieces, which were
cast into the Sea.

. 4.
Having obtained this victory in the manner I have before declared, caused our
hurt men to be dressed, and provided for the guard of our Captains, we took an
Inventory of the goods that were in these two Junks, and found that our prize
was worth forty thousand Taeis, which was immediately committed to the charge
of Antonio Borges, who was Factor for the Prizes. Both the Junks were great and
good, yet were we constrained to burn one of them for want of Mariners to man
it: There was in them besides seventeen pieces of brass Ordnance, namely four
Faulconets, and thirteen small pieces, the most part whereof had the Royal Arms
of Portugal upon them, for the Pyrat had taken them in the three ships where he
killed the forty Portugals. The next day Antonio de Faria went about once more
to get into the River, but he was advised by fishermen, which he took a little
before, that he should beware of going to the Town, because they were advised
there of all that had passed betwixt him and the renegado Pyrat, for whose
death the people were in an uproar, in so much that if he would let them have
his commodities for nothing, yet would they not take them, in regard that
Chileu, the Governor of that Province, had contracted with him, to give him the
third part of all the prizes he took, in lieu whereof he would render him a
safe retreat in his Country; so that his loss now being great by the death of
the Pyrat, he should be but badly welcomed by him, and to that purpose had
already commanded two great Rafts, covered with dry wood, barrels of pitch, and
other combustible stuff, to be placed at the entering into the Port, that were
to be kindled and sent down upon us, as soon as we had cast anchor, for to fire
us, besides two hundred Paraos, full of shot, and men of war were also in
readiness to assault us. These news made Antonio de Faria conclude to make away
unto another Port, named Mutipinan, distant from thence above ^orty leagues
toward the East, for that there were many rich Merchants, as well Natives as
Strangers, which came in great Troops from the Countries of Laubos, Pafuaas,
and Gu^os, with great sums of money. So we set sail with the three Junks, and
the Lor^h, wherein we came from Patana, coasting the Land from one side to the
other, by reason of a contrary wind, until we arrived at a place called
Tilaumera, where we anchored, for that the current of the water ran very strong
against us. After we had continued so three days together, with a contrary
wind, and in great want of victual, our good fortune about Evening brought four
Lanteaas unto us, that are like unto Foysts, in one of the which was a Bride,
that was going to a Village, named Pandurea: Now because they were all in
jollity, they had so many Drums beating aboard them, as it was almost
impossible to hear one another for the noise they made. Whereupon we were in
great doubt what this might be, and wherefore there was such triumphing; some
thought that they were spies sent from the Captain of Tanauquir's Army, who
insulting, for that we were already in their power, gave this testimony
thereof. Antonio de Faria left his anchors in the Sea, and preparing himself to
sustain all that might happen unto him, he displayed all his Banners and Flags,
and with demonstration of joy attended the arrival of these Lanteaas, who when
they perceived us to be all together, imagining it was the Bridegroom that
stayed to receive them, they came joyfully toward us. So after we had saluted
one another after the manner of the Country, they went and anchored by the
shore. And because we could not comprehend the mystery of this affair, all our
Captains concluded that they were spies from the Enemies Army, which forbore
assaulting us in expectation of some other Vessels that were also to come; In
this suspicion we spent the little remainder of that Evening, and almost two
hours of the night: But then the Bride, seeing that her Spouse sent not to
visit her, as was his part to do, to show the love she bore him she sent her
Uncle in one of the Lanteaas with a Letter to him, containing these words. If
the feeble sex of a woman would permit me to go from the place where I am for
to see thy face, without reproach to mine honor, assure thy self that to kiss
thy tardy feet my body would fly as does the hungry Faulcon after the fearful
Heron; But since I am parted from my fathers house, for to seek thee out here,
come thy self hither to me, where indeed I am not, for I cannot see my self,
but in seeing thee; Now if thou do not come to see me in the obscurity of
this night, making it bright for me, I fear that to morrow morning when thou
arrivest here, thou shall not find me living. My Uncle Licorpinau will more
particularly acquaint thee with what I keep concealed in my heart, for I am not
able to say any more, such is my grief to be so long deprived of thy so much
desired sight; Wherefore I pray thee come unto me, or permit me to come unto
thee, as the greatness of my love to thee does deserve, and as thou art obliged
to do unto her, whom now thou art to possess in marriage until death, from
which Almighty God of his infinite goodness keep thee as many years, as the Sun
and Moon have made turns about the World since the beginning of their birth.
This Lanteaa being arrived with the Brides Uncle and Letter, Antonio de Faria
caused all the Portugals to hide themselves, suffering none to appear but our
Chinese Mariners, to the end they might not be afraid of us; To our Junk then
they approached with confidence, and three of them coming aboard us, asked
where the Bridegroom was? All the answer we made them was to lay hold of them,
and clap them presently under hatches; now because the most part of them were
drunk, those that were in the Lanteaa never heard our bustling with them, nor
if they had, could they have had time to escape, for suddenly from the top of
our poup we fastened a cable to their mast, whereby they were so arrested, as it
was impossible for them to get loose of us; whereupon casting in some pots of
powder amongst them, the most of them leapt into the Sea, by which time six or
seven of our Soldiers, and as many Mariners, got into the Lanteaa, and straight
rendered themselves masters of her, where the next thing they did was to take up
the poor wretches, who cried out that they drowned: Having made them sure,
Antonio de Faria went toward the other three Lanteaas, that anchored some
quarter of a league from thence, and coming to the first, wherein was the
Bride, he entered her without any resistance, in regard there were none other in
her but a few Mariners, and six or seven men, that seemed to be of good
reckoning, all of kin to the Bride, being there only to accompany her, together
with two little boys her brothers, that were very white, and certain ancient
women, of such as in China are hired for money to dance, sing, and play of
instruments upon like festival occasions. The other two Lanteaas beholding this
sad success, left their anchors in the Sea, and fled in such haste, as if the
Devil had been in them, but for all that we took one of them, so that we had
three of the four: This done, we returned aboard our Junk, and by reason it was
now midnight, we did nothing for the present but take our prisoners, and shut
them up under the hatches, where they remained until day, that Antonio de Faria
came to view them, and seeing they were most of them aged, full of sorrow, and
fit for nothing, he caused them to be set a shore, retaining only the Bride,
and her two brothers, because they were young, white, and well-favored, and
some twenty Mariners, which afterward were of great use to us for the
navigation of our Junks. This Bride, as since we learned, was daughter to the
A^chary of Colem (which signifies Governor) and betrothed to a youth, the son
of the Chifuu, Captain of Pandurea, who had written unto her that he would
attend her in this place with three or four Junks of his fathers, who was very
rich, but alas! we shamefully cozened him. After dinner, being departed from
thence, the Bridegroom arrived, seeking for his Bride with five sail full of
Flags, Streamers, and Banners; Passing by us, he saluted us with great store of
music, and shows of gladness, ignorant of his misfortune, and that we carried
away his wife. In this jollity he doubled the Cape of Tila^mera, where the day
before we took this prize, and there anchored attending his Bride, according as
he had written to her, whilst we sailing on arrived three days after at the
Port of Muti^iman, which was the place we aimed at, in regard of the advice
that Antonio de Faria had, that there he might sell off his commodities.

CHAP. XVII. Antonio de Faria's Arrival at the Port: The Information that
Antonio de Faria had of the Country; some passages between him and the Nautarel
of the Town; his going to the River of Madel; with his incountring a Pyrat
there, and that which passed betwixt them.
^. 1.
BEing arrived at this Port we anchored in a Rode, which the Land makes near to
a little Island on the South side of the mouth of the River, at the entry
whereinto we remained without saluting the Port, or making any noise, intending
as soon as it was night to send for to sound the River, and to be informed of
that we desired to know. Upon the appearing of the Moon, which was about eleven
of the clock, Antonio de Faria sent away one of his Lanteaas, well furnished,
and twelve Soldiers in her, besides the Captain, named Valentino Martins
Dalpoem, a discreet man, and of great courage, that at other times had given
good proof of himself in like occasions, who departing went always sounding the
depth of the River, until he arrived where diverse Vessels rode at anchor; There
he took two men that were sleeping in a Barque laden with earthen ware, and
returning aboard undiscovered he rendered Antonio de Faria an account of what he
had found touching the greatness of the place, and the fewness of the Ships
that were in the Port, wherefore his opinion was, that he might boldly enter
into it, and if it happened he could not trade there as he desired, no body
could hinder him from issuing forth whenever he pleased, by reason the River
was very large, clean, and without any shelves, sands, or other things that
might endanger him. Having consulted then with his company, he concluded by
their advice, not to put the two Mahometans, that were taken, to torture, as
was before ordained, because there was no need of it; Day being come, Antonio
de Faria desiring, before he stirred, to be informed from those two Mahometans
of some particulars he would fain know, and thinking he might sooner prevail
with them by fair mean^, then by menaces and torment, he made very much of
them, and then declared his mind: Whereupon both of them with one accord said,
that touching the entrance of the River there was nothing to be feared, in
regard it was one of the best in all that Bay, and that ordinarily far greater
Vessels then his went in and out there, for that the shallowest place was
fifteen fathom at the least, and as for the people of the Country he was not to
stand in any doubt of them, by reason they were naturally weak, and without
arms; And that the strangers, which were at that instant there, arrived some
nine days before from the Kingdom of Benan in two Companies of fifty Oxen a
piece, laden with store of Silver, Wood of Aloes, Cloth, Silk, Linen, Ivory,
Wax, Lacre, Benjamin, Camphire, and Gold in Powder, like to that of the Isl^nd
of Samatra, who were come with th^^ Merchandise to buy Pepper, Drugs, and
Pearls of the Isle of Ainan. Being demanded whether there was any Army in those
parts, they answered No, because most of the Wars, which the Prechau, that is,
the Emperor of the Ca^chins, made, or were made against him, were by Land; and
that when any was made upon the Rivers it was always with little Vessels, and
not with such great Ships as his, for that they were not deep enough for them:
Further being asked, whether the Prechau was near to that place, they replied,
that he was twelve days journey from thence, at the City of Quangepaar^, where
most commonly he with his Court resided, governing his Kingdom in Peace and
Justice, and that the Mines, reserved for his Crown, rendered him in yearly ^ent
fifteen thousand Pic^s of Silver, every Pico weighing five quintals, the moy^^y
whereof by the divine Law, inviolably observed in his Countries, was for the
poor Laborers, that tilled the ground, to sustain their families withal, but
that all his people by a general consent h^d freely relinquished that right
unto him, upon condition, that from thence-forward he should not constrain them
to pay tribute, or any other thing that might concern them, and that the
ancient Prechaus had protested to accomplish it as long as the Sun should give
light to the Earth. Antonio de Faria further demanded of them, what belief they
were of, whereunto they answered, that they hold the very verity of all
verities, and that they believed there was but one God Almighty, who as he had
created all, so he preserved all; howbeit if at any time our understandings
were entangled with the disorder and discord of our desires, that no way
proceeded from the sovereign Creator, in whom was no imperfection, but only
from the sinner himself, that out of his impatience judged according to the
wicked inclination of his heart. Moreover asking of them, whether in their Law
they believed, that the great God, which governs this All, came at any time
into the world, clothed with a humane form, they said No, because there could
be nothing that might oblige him to so great an extremity, in regard he was
through the excellency of the divine Nature delivered from our miseries, and
far esloigned from the Treasures of the Earth, all things being more then base
in the presence of his splendour. By these answers of theirs, we perceived that
these people had never attained to any knowledge of our truth, more then their
eyes made them to see in the picture of Heaven, and in the beauty of the day,
for continually in their Combayes, which are their prayers, lifting up their
hands they say, By thy works, Lord, we confess thy greatness. After this
Antonio de Faria set them at liberty, and having given them certain presents,
wherewith they were very well pleased, he caused them to be conveyed to Land;
that done, the wind beginning a little to rise he set sail, having all his
Vessels ado^ned with diverse colored Silks, their Banners, Flags and Streamers
displayed, and a Standart of Trade hung out after the manner of the Country, to
the end they might be taken for Merchants, and not for Pirates, and so an hour
after he anchored just against the Key of the Town, which he saluted with a
little peal of Ordnance, whereupon ten or eleven Almadiaes came presently to us
with good store of refreshments; Howbeit finding us to be strangers, and
discerning by our habits that we were neither Siams, Iaos, nor Malayos, nor yet
of any other Nation that ever they had seen, they said one to another, Please
Heaven, that the dew of the fresh morning may be as profitable to us all, as
this evening seems fair with the presence of these whom our eyes behold. Having
said thus, one of the Almadiaes asked leave to come aboard us, which they were
told they might do, because we were all their brothers, so that three of nine,
which were in that Almadia, entered into our Junk, whom Antonio de Faria
received very kindly, and causing them to sit down upon a Turkey Carpet by him,
he told them, that he was a Merchant of the Kingdom of Siam, and going with his
goods toward the Isle of Ainan he had been advertised, that he might better
and more securely sell off his Commodities in this Town, then in any other
place, because the Merchants thereof were juster and truer of their word, then
the Chinese of the Coast of Ainan; Whereunto they thus answered, Thou art not
deceived in that which thou say, for if thou be a Merchant, as thou
affirmest, believe it, that in every thing and every where thou shall be
honored in this place, wherefore thou may sleep without fear.

Antonio de Faria mistrusting some intelligence might come over Land concerning
that which he had done to the Pyrat upon the River of Tanauquir,. 2.
and so might work him some prejudice, would not dis-imbarque his goods, as the
Officers of the Custom-house would have had him, which was the cause of much
displeasure and vexation to him afterward, so that his business was twice
interrupted by that means, wherefore perceiving that good words would not serve
to make them consent to his Propositions, he sent them word by a Merchant, who
dealt between them, that he knew well enough they had a great deal of reason to
require the landing of his goods, because it was the usual course for every one
so to do; But he assured them, that he could not possibly do it, in regard the
season was almost past, and therefore he was of necessity to hasten his
departure as soon as might be, the rather too for the accommodating of the Junk
wherein he came, for as much as she took in so much water, that threescore
Mariners were always laboring at three pumps to clear her, whereby he ran a
great hazard of losing all his goods; And that touching the Kings Customs he
was contented to pay them, not after thirty in the hundred, as they demanded,
but after ten, as they did in other Kingdoms, and so much he would pay
presently and willingly. To this offer they rendered no answer, but detained him
that carried the message prisoner; Antonio de Faria, seeing that his messenger
returned not, set s^il immediately, hanging forth a number of flags, as one
that cared not whether he sold or no; Whereupon the Merchants strangers, that
were come thither to trade, perceiving the Commodities, of which they hoped to
make some profit, to be going out of the Port, through the perverseness and
obstinacy of the Nautarel of the Town, they went all to him, and desired him to
recall Antonio de Faria, otherwise they protested to complain to the King of
the injustice he did them, in being the cause of hindering their Traffic. The
Nautarel, that is the Governor, with all the Officers of the Custom-house,
fearing left they might upon this occasion be turned out of their places,
condescended to their request, upon condition, since we would pay but ten in
the hundred, that they should pay five more, whereunto they agreed, and
instantly sent away the Merchant, whom they had detained prisoner, with a
Letter full of complements, wherein they declared the agreement they had made.
Antonio de Faria answered them, that since he was out of the Port, he would not
re-enter it upon any terms, by reason he had not leisure to make any stay,
howbeit if they would buy his Commodities in gross, bringing lingots of silver
with them for that purpose, he would sell them to them, and in no other manner
would deal, for he was much distasted with the little respect the Nautarel of
the Town had carried toward him, by despising his messages; and if they were
contented to accept thereof, that then they should let him know so much within
an hour at the farthest, otherwise he would sail away to Ainan, where he might
put off his Commodities far better then there. They finding him so resolved,
and doubting to lose so fair an occasion, as this was, for them to return into
their Country, embarked themselves in five great Lighters with forty chests
full of lingots of silver, and a many sacks to bring away the Pepper, and
arriving at Antonio de Faria's Junk, they were very well received by him, unto
whom they represented anew the agreement they had made with the Nautarel of the
Town, greatly complaining of his ill Government, and of some wrongs, which
without all reason he had done them; but since they had pacified him by
consenting to give him fifteen in the hundred, whereof they would pay five,
they desired him to pay the ten, as he had promised, for otherways they could
not buy his Commodities. Whereunto Antonio de Faria answered, that he was
contented so to do, more for the love of them, then for any profit he hoped to
reap thereby, for which they gave him many thanks, and so being on all sides
agreed they used such diligence in discharging the goods, as in three days the
most of it was weighed and consigned into the hands of the owners thereof;
whereupon the accounts were made up, and the lingots of silver received,
amounting in all to an hundred and thirty thousand Taeis, after the rate of
seven shillings and six pence the Taei, as I have said elsewhere. And though
all possible speed was used herein, yet before all was finished, news came of
that which we had done to the Pyrat in the River of Tananquir, in so much that
not one of the inhabitants would come near us afterward, by reason whereof
Antonio de Faria was constrained to set sail in all haste.

. 3.
After we had quit the River of Mutepinan, directing our course Northward,
Antonio de Faria thought good to make to the Coast of the Island of Ainan, for
to seek out a River, named Madel, with a purpose there to accommodate the great
Junk, wherein he was, because it took in much water, or provide himself of a
better in exchange upon any terms whatsoever; So having sailed for the space of
twelve days with a contrary wind, at length he arrived at the Cape of Pullo
Hinhor, which is the Island of Cocos; There hearing no news of the Pyrat he
sought for, he returned toward the South Coast, where he took certain Prizes,
which were of good value, and well gotten as we thought. For it was the main
intention of this Captain to deal with the Pyrat, which frequented this Coast
of Ainan, as they before had done with diverse Christians in depriving them of
their lives and goods; For as God does ordinarily draw good out of evil, so it
pleased him out of his divine Justice to permit, that Antonio de Faria in
revenge of the Robbery, committed by Coia Acem upon us in the Port of Lugor,
should in the pursuit of him chastise other Thieves, that deserved to be
punished by the hands of the Portugals. Now having for certain days together
with much labor continued our Navigation within this Bay of Cauchenchina, as we
were newly entered into a Port, called Madel, upon the day of the nativity of
our Lady, being the eight of September, for the fear that we were in of the new
Moon, during the which there oftentimes happens in this Climate such a terrible
storm of wind and rain, as it is not possible for ships to withstand it, which
by the Chinese is named Tufan, and that the Sky charged full with Clouds had
four days together threatened that which we feared, it pleased God amongst many
other Junks that fled into this Port for shelter, there came in one belonging
to a notorious Chinese Pyrat, named Hinimilau, who of a Gentile, that he had
been, was not long before become a Mohammedan, induced thereunto (as it was
said) by a Cacis of that accursed Sect, who had made him such an Enemy to the
Christian name, as he vaunted publicly, that God did owe Heaven unto him for
the great service he had done him upon Earth, in depopulating it by little and
little of the Portugal Nation, who from their mothers wombs delighted in their
offenses, as the very Inhabitants of the smoaky House, a name which they give
to Hell; And thus did he with such sayings, and other like blasphemies, speak
as villanously and abominably of us as could be imagined. This Pyrat, entering
into the River in a very great and tall Junk, came up to us where we rode at
anchor, and saluted us after the custom of the Country, whereunto we returned
the like, as it is the manner there to do at the entry into any of the Ports,
they neither knowing us to be Portugals, nor we what they were; for we thought
they had been Chinese, and that they came into the Port to shrewd themselves
from the storm as others did, whereupon, behold, five young men, that were
Christians, whom this Robber held as Slaves in his Junk, guessing us to be
Portugals, fell a crying out three or four times together, Lord, have mercy
upon us. At these words we all stood up to see who they were, and perceiving
them to be Christians, we called aloud to the Mariners for to stay their
course, which they would not do, but contrarily beating up a Drum, as it were
in contempt of us, they gave three great shouts, and withal brandished their
naked Scymitars in the air in a way of threatening us, and then cast anchor
some quarter of a league beyond us. Antonio de Faria desiring to learn the
reason hereof, sent a Balon to them, which no sooner arrived near them, but the
barbarous Rogues pelted them with so many stones, that the Vessel was almost
overwhelmed, so that they were glad to return, both Mariners and Soldiers being
very sore hurt; Antonio de Faria seeing them come back all bloody, demanded the
cause of it: Sir, answered they, we are not able to tell you, only you behold
in what plight we are; saying so, and showing him the hurts on their heads,
they declared unto him in what manner they had been entertained. At first this
accident much troubled Antonio de Faria, so that he stood musing a good while
upon it, but at length turning himself to them that were present, Let every one
here, said he, prepare himself, for I cannot be persuaded but this is that Dog
Coia Acem, who I hope this day shall pay for all the wrong he has done us.
Whereupon he commanded presently to weigh anchor, and with all the speed that
might be he set sail with the three Junks and Lanteas. Being come within a
Musket shot of them, he saluted them with six and thirty Pieces of Ordnance,
whereof twelve were Faulconets, and other Fieldpieces, amongst the which was
one of Battery, that carried cast Bullets, wherewith the Enemies were so
amated, as all the resolution they could take for the instant was to leave
their anchors in the Sea, not having leisure to weigh them, and to make to the
shore, wherein also they failed of their desire; for Antonio de Faria
perceiving their design got before them, and boarded their Junk with all the
Forces of his Vessels; hereupon began a most furious Combat both with Pikes,
Darts, and pots full of Powder thrown from either side, so that for half an
hour it could not be discerned who had the better: But at length it pleased God
to favor us so much, that the Enemies, finding themselves weary, wounded, and
hurt, threw themselves into the Sea. Antonio de Faria, seeing these wretches
ready to sink by reason of the impetuousness and strength of the current, he
imbarqued himself with some Soldiers in two Balons, and with much ado saved
sixteen men, whereunto he was induced by the great need he stood in of them for
the maning of his Lanteas, because he had lost a great many of his people in
the former fights.

CHAP. XVIII. What Antonio de Faria did with the Captain of the Pirates Iunk;
that which past between him and the people of the Country; with our casting
away upon the Island of Thieves.
ANtonio de Faria having obtained this Victory in the manner I have related,. 1.
the first thing he did was to see his hurt men dressed, as that which chiefly
imported him; then being given to understand that the Pyrat Hinimilau, the
Captain of the Junk he had taken, was one of the sixteen he had saved, he
commanded him to be brought before him, and after he had caused him to be dressed
of two wounds that he had received, he demanded of him what was become of the
young Portugals which he held as Slaves? Whereunto the Pyrat, being mad with
rage, having answered that he could not tell, upon the second demand that was
made him with menaces, he said, that if first they would give him a little
water, in regard he was so dry as he was not able to speak, that then he would
consider what answer to make. Thereupon having water brought him, which he
drunk so greedily as he spilt the most part of it without quenching his thirst,
he desired to have some more given him, protesting, that if they would let him
drink his fill, he would oblige himself by the Law of Mahomets Alcoran
voluntarily to confess all that they desired to know of him. Antonio de Faria,
having given him as much as he would drink, questioned him again about the
young Christians, whereto he replied, that he should find them in the chamber
of the prow; thereupon he commanded three Soldiers to go thither and fetch
them, who had no sooner opened the scuttle to bid them come up, but they saw
them lie dead in the place with their throats cut, which made them cry out,
Jesus, Jesus, come hither we beseech you, Sir, and behold a most lamentable
spectacle; hereat Antonio de Faria, and those that were with him, ran thither,
and beholding those youths lying so o^e upon another, he could not forbear
shedding of tears; having caused them then to be brought upon the deck,
together with a woman and two pretty children, about seven or eight years old,
that had their throats also cut, he demanded of the Pyrat why he had used such
cruelty to those poor innocents: Whereunto he answered, that it was because
they were Traitors, in discovering themselves to those, which were such great
Enemies to him as the Portugals were, and also for that having heard them call
upon their Christ for help, he desired to see whether he would deliver them; as
for the two infants, there was cause enough to kill them, for that they were
the childr^n of Portugals, whom he ever hated: with the like extravagancy he
answered to many other questions, which were propounded to him, and that with
so much obstinacy as if he had been a very Devil. Afterward being asked
whether* he were a Christian, he answered, no, but that he had been one at such
time as Don Paulo de Gama was Captain of Malaca. Whereupon Antonio de Faria
demanded of him, what moved him, since he had been a Christian, to forsake the
Law of Jesus Christ, wherein he was assured of his salvation, for to embrace
that of the false Prophet Mahomet, from whence he could hope for nothing but
the loss of his Soul. Thereunto he answered, that he was induced so to do, for
that so long as he was a Christian, the Portugals had always contemned him,
whereas before when he was a Gentile they called him Quiay Necoda, that is to
say, Signior Captain, but that respect immediately upon his Baptism forsook
him, which he verily believed did arrive to him by Mahomets express permission,
to the end it should open his eyes to turn Mohammedan, as after he did at
Bintan, where the King of Iantana was in person present at the ceremony, and
that ever since he had much honored him, and that all the Mandarins called him
brother, in regard of the vow he had made upon the holy Book of Flowers, that
as long as he lived he would be a sworn Enemy to the Portugals, and of all
others that professed the Name of Christ, for which both the King and the Cacis
Moulana had exceedingly commended him, promising that his Soul should be most
blessed if he performed that vow. Being likewise demanded how long ago it was
since he revolted, what Portugal Vessels he had taken, how many men he had put
to death, and what Merchandise he had despoyled them of? He answered, that it
was seven years since he became a Mohammedan; that the first Vessel he took was
Luiso de Pavia's Junk, which he surprised in the River of Liamp^o with four
hundred Bars of Pepper only, and no other spice, whereof having made himself
master, that he had put to death eighteen Portugals, besides their slaves, of
whom he made no reckoning, because they were not such as could satisfy the
Oath he had made; That after this prize he had taken four ships, and in them
put to death above an hundred persons, amongst whom there was some threescore
and ten Portugals, and that he thought the Merchandise in them amounted to
fifteen or sixteen hundred Bars of Pepper, whereof the King of Pan had the
better moity for to give him a safe retrait in his Ports, and to secure him
from the Portugals, giving him to that purpose an hundred men, with commandment
to obey him as their King. Being further demanded, whether he had not killed
any Portugals, or lent an hand for the doing thereof, he said no, but that some
two years before, being in the River of Choaboquec on the Coast of China, a
great Junk arrived there with a great many Portugals in her, whereof an
intimate friend of his, named Ruy Lobo, was Captain, whom Don Estevan de Gama,
then Governor of the Fortress of Malaca, had sent thither in the way of
commerce, and that upon the sale of his commodities going out of the Port, his
Junk about five days after took so great a leak, as not being able to clear
her, he was constrained to return toward the same Port from whence he parted,
but that by ill fortune clapping on all his sails to get the sooner to Land,
she was overset by the violence of the wind, so as all were cast away saving
Ruy Lobo, seventeen Portugals, and some slaves, who in their skiff made for the
Island of Laman, without sail, without water, or any manner of victual; That in
this extremity Ruy Lobo, relying on the ancient friendship that was between
them, came with tears in his eyes, and prayed him on his knees to receive him
and his into his Junk, which was then ready to set sail for Patana, whereunto
he agreed upon condition that therefore he should give him two thousand
ducats, for the performance whereof he bound himself by his Oath of a
Christian. But that after he had taken them in, he was counseled by the
Mahometans not to trust unto the friendship of Christians, lest he might
endanger his own life, for when they had recovered strength, they would without
doubt seize upon his Junk, and all the goods that were in her, it being their
usual custom so to do in all places where they found themselves the strongest:
wherefore fearing lest that which the Mahometans suggested should befall him,
he slew them all on a night as they slept, for the which notwithstanding he was
sorry afterward. This declaration so much incensed Antonio de Faria, and all
that were about him, as indeed the enormity of so wicked a fact did require,
that presently, without questioning or hearing of him further, he commanded him
to be put to death with four more of his company, and so they were all thrown
into the Sea.

This justice being executed on the Pyrat and his four companions,. 2.
Antonio de Faria caused an Inventory to be taken of all that was in the Junk,
which was adjudged to amount unto forty thousand Taeis ^o raw and twisted Silk,
pieces of Satin, Damask, Musk, fine Pourcelains, and other less valuable
commodities, which with the Junk we were constrained to burn, because we wanted
Mariners for our navigation. With these valorous exploits the Chinese were so
amazed, as they stood in dread of the very mention of the name of the
Portugals, in so much that the Necodae^, or Masters, of the Junks, that were in
the Port, fearing the like might be done to them, assembled all together in
council; and there making Election of two of the principal amongst them, whom
they held most capable of performing their charge, they sent them as
Ambassadors unto Antonio de Faria, desiring him, that as King of the Sea he
would protect them upon the assurance of his word, so as they might pass safely
out of the pl^ce where they were, for to make their voyage whilst the season
served; in consideration whereof, as his Tributar^es, subjects, and slaves,
they would give him twenty thousand Taeis in Ingots of Silver, whereof payment
should be made out of hand by way of acknowledging him to be their Lord.
Antonio de Faria received them very courteously, and granting their request,
protested and swear to perform the same, and upon his word to protect them for
the future from having any of their goods taken from them by any Pyrat.
Whereupon one of the Ambassadors remained as surety for the twenty thousand
Taeis, and the other went to fetch the Ingots, which he brought an hour after,
together with a rich present of many several things sent him over and above by
the Necodaes. This done, Antonio de Faria desiring to advance a servant of his,
named Cost^* made him Clark of the Patents that were to be granted to the
Necodaes, whereof he presently set a rate, namely five Taeis for a Junk, and
two Ta^is for a Vaneo, Lanta^, and small Barq^e, which proved so beneficial to
him, that in the space of thirteen days, wherein these Patents were dispatched,
he got (according the report of those that envyed him) above four thousand
Taeis in silver, besides many good gratuities that were given him for
expedition: The form of these Patents was thus, I give assurance upon my word
to Necoda such a one, that he shall sail safely all about the Coast of China
without any disturbance of any that belongs to me, upon condition that
wheresoever he meets with any Portugals he shall ^^^reat them as brethren; and
underneath he signed, Antonio de Faria: All which Pa^ents were most exactly
observed, and by that means he was so redoubted all along this Coast, as the
Ch^^m himself of the Island of Ainan, who is the Viceroy thereof, upon the
report which he heard of him, sent to visit him by his Ambassador, with a rich
present of Pearls and Jewels, as also a Letter, whereby he desired him to take
entertainment from the son of the Sun, a name which they give to the Emperor of
this Monarchy, for to serve him as Commander General of all the Coast from
Lamau to Liampoo, with ten thousand Taeis Pension yearly, and that if he
carried himself well, according to the renown went of him, he assured him that
upon the expiration of his three years charge he should be advanced into the
rank of the Chaems of the State, and that such men as he, if they were
faithful, might attain to be one of the twelve Futoens of the Empire, whom the
sovereign son of the Sun, being the Lion crowned on the Throne of the World,
admitted to his bed and board, as members united to his person by means of the
honor, power, and command that he gave them, with an annual Pension of an
hundred thousand Taeis. Antonio de Faria gave him many thanks for this offer,
and excused himself with complements after their manner; saying, that he was
not capable of so great f^vor as he would honor him withal, but that without
any regard at all of money he would be ready to serve him as often as the
Tutoens of Pequin would be pleased to command him. After this going out of the
Port of Mad^l, where he had been fourteen days, he ran all along the Coast of
that Country for to find out Coia Acem, it being the main design of all his
voyage, as I have declared before: Imagining then that he might meet with him
in some of these places, he stayed there above six months, with much pain and
h^zard of his person; At length he arrived at a very fair Town, named
Quangiparu, wherein were goodly buildings and Temples: In this Port he abode
all that day and the night following, under color of being a Merchant,
peaceably buying that which was brought him aboard; And because it was a Town
of fifteen hundred fires, as we guessed, the next morning by break of day we
set sail without any great notice taken of us. So returning to Sea, although it
were with a contrary wind, in twelve days with a troublesome navigation he
visited the shores both of the South and North Coasts, without incountring any
thing worthy the observation, although they were replenished with a many of
little Villages, whereof diverse were enclosed with walls of brick, but not
strong enough to withstand the force of thirty good Soldiers, the people of
themselves being very weak, and having no other Arms but staves hardened in the
fire; howsoever the situation of this Country was under one of the best and
fertilest Climates on the Earth, abounding with great store of cattle, and many
goodly large fields, sowed with Wheat, Rice, Barley, Millet, and sundry other
kinds of grain; as also replenished with many great groves of Pine, and
Angeline trees, as in the Indiaes, able to furnish a world of shiping:
Moreover, by the relation of certain Merchants, Antonio de Faria was informed,
that in this Land there were many Mines of Copper, Silver, Tin, Saltpeter,
Sulphur, and an infinite deal of untilled, but excellently good ground,
altogether neglected by this weak Nation, which were it in our power, we might
in all probability be more advanced in the Indiaes, then now we are through the
unhappiness of our sins.

. 3.
After we had been seven months and an half in this Country, sometimes on the
one side, sometimes on the other, from River to River, and on both Coasts,
North and South, as also in the Isle of Ainan, without hearing any news of Coia
Acem, the Soldiers, weary of so long and tedious travel, assembled all
together, and desired Antonio de Faria to make a partition of that which had
been gotten, according to a promise before made to them by a note under his
hand, saying that thereupon they would return unto the Indiaes, or where else
they thought good, whereby a great deal of stir arose amongst us; At length it
was agreed, that we should go and winter in Siam, where all the goods which
were in the Junk should be sold, and being reduced into gold, division should
be made of it, as was desired. With this accord, sworn and signed by all, we
went and anchored in an Island, called the Island of Thieves, in regard it was
the outermost Island of all that Bay, to the end that from thence we might make
our voyage with the first fair wind that should blow. So having continued there
twelve days with an earnest desire to effect the agreement we had made
together, it fortuned, that by the conjunction of the new Moon in October,
which we had always feared, there arose such a tempest of rain and wind, as
seemed to be no natural thing, in so much that lying open to the South wind, as
we traverst the Coast, the waves went so high, that though we used all means
possible to save our selves, cutting down our Masts, and all the dead works
from poop to prow, as also casting into the Sea even the most part of our
merchandise, reducing our great Ordnance into their places again, out of which
they had been tossed, and strengthening our Cables, that were half rotten, with
ropes; But all this was not able to preserve us, for the night was so dark, the
weather so cold, the sea so rough, the wind so high, and the storm so horrible,
that in these extremities nothing could deliver us but the mere mercy of God,
whom with continual cries and tears we called upon for help: But for as much as
in regard of our sins we did not deserve to receive this grace at his hands,
his divine justice ordained, that about two hours after midnight there came
such a fearful gust of wind, as drove our four vessels foul one of another upon
the shore, where they were all broken to pieces, so that four hundred and
fourscore men were drowned, amongst which were eight Portugals, and it pleased
God that the remainder, being fifty three persons, were saved, whereof three
and twenty were Portugals, the rest slaves and Mariners. After this lamentable
shipwreck we got half naked, and most of us hurt, into a Marish hard by, where
we stayed till the next morning, and as soon as it was day we returned to the
Sea side, which we found all strewed with dead bodies, a spectacle of that
dread and horror as scarce any one of us could forbear swooning to behold it;
over them we stood lamenting a great while, till such time an Antonio de Faria,
who by the mercy of God was one of those that remained alive, whereof we were
all very glad, concealing the grief which we could not dissemble, came where we
were, having on a scarlet coat, that he had taken from one of the dead, and
with a joyful countenance, his eyes dry and void of tears, he made a short
speech unto us, wherein he remonstrated how variable and uncertain the things
of this world were, and therefore he desired us as Brethren, that we would
endevor to forget them, seeing the remembrance of them was but a means to
grieve us; for considering the time and ^i^erable estate whereunto we were
reduced, we saw how necessary his counsel was: And ^ow he hoped that God would
in this desolate place present us with some good opportunity to ^ame our
selves, and how we might be assured that he never permitted any evil but for a
greater good; moreover how he firmly believed, that though we had now lost five
hundred thousand crowns, we should ere it were long get above six hundred
thousand for them. This brief exhortation was heard by us all with tears and
discomfort enough, so we spent two days and an half there in burying the dead,
during which time we recovered some wet victuals and provisions to sustain us
withal, but they lasted not above five days of fifteen that we stayed there,
for by reason of their wetness they corrupted presently, and did us little
good. After these fifteen days it pleased God, who never forsakes them that
truly put their trust in him, miraculously to send us a remedy, whereby we
escaped out of that misery we were in, as I will declare hereafter.

CHAP. XIX. In what sort we escaped miraculously out of this Island; our
passage from thence to the River of Xingrau; our incountring with a Chinese
Pyrat, and the agreement we made with him.
BEing escaped from this miserable shipwreck,. 1.
it was a lamentable thing to see how we walked up and down almost naked,
enduring such cruel cold and hunger, that many of us talking one to another
fell down suddenly dead with very weakness, which proceeded not so much from
want of victuals, as from the eating of such things as were hurtful to us, by
reason they were all rotten, and stunk so vilely, that no man could endure the
taste of them in his mouth; But as our God is an infinite good, there is no
place so remote, or desert, where the misery of sinners can be hid from the
assistance of his infinite mercy, which I speak, in regard that on the day when
as the feast of S. Michael is celebrated, as we were drowned in tears, and
without hope of any humane help, according as it seemed to the weakness of our
little faith, a Kite came unexpectedly flying over our heads from behind a
point, which the Island made toward the South, and by chance let fall a fish,
called a Mullet, about a foot long. This fish falling close by Antonio de
Faria, it somewhat amazed him till he perceived what it was, so that having
considered a little he fell on his knees, and with tears pronounced these words
from the bottom of his heart. O Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, I
humbly beseech thee by the sorrows of thy sacred Passion, that thou will not
suffer us to be overwhelmed with the unbelief, whereinto the misery of our
weakness has cast us; for I hope, and am almost assured, that the same succor
which thou did send unto Daniel in the Lions den by the hand of thy Prophet
Abacuc, thou will grant us at this present out of thy infinite goodness, and
not only here, but in every other place, where a sinner shall invoke thy aid
with a firm and true faith; Wherefore, my Lord, and my God, I pray thee, not
for mine, but thine own sake, that thou will not cast thine eyes on that we
have merited from thee, but on that thou have merited for us, to the end it ^ay
please thee to accord us the succor which we hope to receive from thee, and out
of thy blessed mercy to send us the means whereby we may get from hence into
some Christian Country, where still persevering in the holy Worship of thee, we
may for ever continue thy faithful servants. This said, he took the Mullet and
caused it to be broiled upon coals, and given to such of the sick as had most
need of it; Then looking toward the point of the Island from whence the Kite
came, we perceived diverse others, that in their flying made many stoopings,
whence we concluded that there was some kind of prey there whereon these fowls
fed; now all of us being most desirous of relief, we went thither in all haste,
and coming to the top of the higher ground we discovered a low valley full of
diverse fruit trees, and in the middle a river of fresh water, whereupon by good
fortune before we went down we saw a Stag newly killed, and a Tiger beginning
to eat him, therewith we made a great cry, which frighted him away into the
Wood, leaving us the Stag as he was; Then descended we to the River, and by the
bank of it stayed all that night, making a feast, as well with the Stag, as with
diverse Mullets that we took there, for there were a great number of Kites, that
from the water catched a many of those fishes, and oftentimes let them fall
being scared with our cries: Thus continued we by this River till Saturday
following, when about the break of day we discerned a Sail making as we thought
toward the Island where we were, the better to be assured whereof we returned
to the shore where we were wracked, and there staying about half an hour, we
found it to be so indeed, in which regard we got us presently into the Wood to
decline discovery from those in the V^ssel, which arriving in the Port we
perceived it to be a Lantea, and that those that were in her fastened her to
the shore with two cables, at the beak and the stern, the better to accommodate
a plank for to pass in and out of her. Being all dis-imbarqued out of her to
about the number of thirty persons, more or less, they went presently some to
making provision of water and wood, some to washing of their linen, and
dressing of meat, and others to wrestling, and such like pastimes, little
thinking to find any body in that place which could any way annoy them. Antonio
de Faria seeing them altogether without fear and order, and that there was none
remaining in the Vessel able to resist us; My Masters, said he unto us, you
behold the wretched estate whereinto our misfortune has reduced us, whereof I
confess my sins are the cause, but the mercy of God is so infinite, as I am
verily persuaded he will not suffer us to perish thus miserably here, and
therefore has as it were miraculously sent this Vessel hither, by seizing
whereupon we may escape from hence, which before to humane reason seemed almost
impossible; wherefore I exhort you all to join with me in making our selves
Masters suddenly of her ere ever we be heard or seen, and having so done, let
our only care be to possess our selves of the Arms we shall find in her, that
therewith we may defend our selves, and make good our possession, upon which,
next under God, our safety depends; and as soon as you shall hear me say three
times, Jesus, do as you shall see me do: Whereunto we answered, that we would
diligently perform what he had enjoined us; so that we standing all prepared to
execute his design, Antonio de Faria gave the signal which he had spoken of,
and withal ran as fast as over he could, and we along with him, till he
arrived at the Lantea, whereinto we suddenly entered without any contradiction;
then unloosing the two cables with which she was fastened, we put out to Sea
about a Crossbow shot from Land. The Chinese surprised in this manner, ran all
to the Sea side upon the noise that they heard, and seeing their Vessel taken,
were much amazed, but knew not how to help it, for we shot at them with an Iron
Base that was in the Lantea, which made them fly into the Wood, where no doubt
they passed the rest of that day in lamenting the sad success of their ill
fortune, as we had done ours before.

. 2.
After we were gotten into the Lantea, and that we were sure the deceived
Chinese could no way hurt us, we sat us down to eat that at leisure which they
had caused to be made ready for their dinner by an old man, that we found
there, and it was a great Skillet full of Rice with hached Lard, whereunto we
fell with good stomachs, as being not a little hungry: Dinner done, and thanks
rendered to God for his gracious mercy to us, an Inventory was taken of the
goods that were in the Lantea, which was raw Silks, Damasks, Sattins, together
with three great pots of Musk, amounting in all to the value of four thousand
Crowns, besides good store of Rice, Sugar, Gammons of Bacon, and two Coups full
of Poultry, whereof we had more need then of all the rest for the recovery of
our sick men, which were not a few amongst us. Hereupon we all began without
fear to cut out pieces of Silk, therewith to accommodate every one with
clothes. Antonio de Faria, having found a pretty boy in the Lantea, about some
twelve or thirteen years old, demanded of him from whence she came, and what
she did in this place, as also to whom she belonged, and whither she was bound.
Alas! answered the boy, she not long since belonged to my unfortunate Father,
whose ill hap it is to have that taken from him by you in less then an hour,
which he has been above thirty years in getting: He came from a place, called
Quoaman, where in exchange of lingots of Silver he bought all th^se
Commodities, that you have, with a purpose to have gone and sold them to the
Iunks of Siam, which are in the Port of Comhay; And wanting fresh water, it was
his ill hap to come hither for to take in some, where you have robbed him of
all that he has without any fear at all of the divine Justice. Whereupon
Antonio de Faria bade him leave weeping, and making much of him promised to use
him as his own son, and that he would always account him so; Here^^ smiling as
it were in disdain, he answered, Think not though I am but a child, that I am
so foolish to believe, that having robbed my Father, thou can ever use me
like thy son: But if thou will do as thou say, I beseech thee for the love of
thy God suffer me to swim unto that sad Land where he remains that begot me,
who indeed is my true father, with whom I had rather dye where I see him
lamenting, then live with such wicked people as you are. Then some of them that
were present reprehending and telling him that it was not well spoken; Would
you know, replied he, why I said so? it was because I saw you after you had
filled your bellies praise God with lifted up hands, and yet for all that like
hypocrites never care for making restitution of that you have stolen; but he
assured, that after death you shall feel the rigorous chastisement of the Lord
Almighty for so unjustly taking men's goods from them. Antonio de Faria
admiring the child's speech, asked him whether he would become a Christian?
Whereunto, earnestly beholding him, he answered, I understand not what you say,
nor that you propound; declare it first unto me, and then you shall know my
mind further. Then Antonio de Faria began to instruct him therein after the
best manner he could, but the boy would not answer him a word, only lifting up
his hands and eyes to Heaven he said weeping, Blessed be thy Power, O Lord,
that permits such people to live on the Earth* that speak so well of thee, and
yet so ill observe thy Law, as these blinded Miscreants do, who think that
robbing and preaching are things that can be acceptable to thee. Having said
so, he got him into a corner, and there remained weeping for three days
together without eating any thing that was presented unto him. Hereupon falling
to consult whether were the best course for us to hold from this place, either
Northward, or Southward, much dispute arose thereabout, at length it was
concluded that we should go to Liampoo, a Port distant from thence Northwards
two hundred and threescore leagues, for we hoped that along this Coast we might
happen to encounter and seize on some other greater and more commodious Vessel
then that we had, which was too little for so long a Voyage, in regard of the
dangerous storms that are ordinarily caused by the new Moons on the Coast of
China, where daily many Ships are cast away. With this design we put to Sea
about Sunset, and so went on this night with a South-west wind, and before day
we discovered a little Island, named Quintoo, where we surprised a fisher-boat
full of fresh fish, of which we took as much as we had need of, as also eight
of twelve men that were in her for the service of our Lantea, by reason our own
were so feeble as they were not able to hold out any longer. These eight
fishermen, being demanded what Ports there were on this Coast to Chincheo,
where we thought we might meet with some Ship of Malaca, answered, that about
eighteen leagues from thence there was a good River and a good Rode, called
Xingrau, much frequented with Junks, where we might be easily and thoroughly
accommodated with all that we stood in need of; that at the entering into it,
there was a little Village, named Xamoy, inhabited with poor fishermen, and
three leagues beyond that the Town, where there was great store of Silks, Musk,
Pourcelains, and many other sorts of Commodities, which were transported into
diverse parts. Upon this advice we steered our course toward that River, where
we arrived the next day immediately after dinner, and cast anchor just against
it about a league in the Sea, for fear lest our ill fortune should run us into
the same mischief we were in before. The night following we took a Paroo of
fishermen, of whom we demanded what Junks there were in this River, and how
they were manned, with diverse other questions proper for our design. Whereunto
they answered, that at the Town up the River there was not above two hundred
Junks, by reason the greatest part were already gone to Ainan, Sumb^r, Lailo^,
and other Ports of Cauchenchina; moreover, that we might ride in safety at
Xamoy, and that there we might buy any thing we wanted; Whereupon we entered
into the River, and anchored close to the Village, where we continued the space
of half an hour, being much about midnight. But Antonio de Faria seeing that
the Lantea wherein we sailed could not carry us to Liampoo, where we purposed
to lie all the Winter, he concluded by the advice of his company to furnish
himself with a better Vessel, and although we were not then in case to
enterprise any thing, yet necessity constrained us to undertake more then our
Forces would permit; Now there being at that instant a little Junk riding at
anchor fast by us alone, and no other near her, having but few men in her, and
those asleep, Antonio de Faria thought he had a good opportunity to effect his
purpose, wherefore leaving his anchor in the Sea, he got up close to this Junk,
and with seven and twenty Soldiers and eight Boys boarded her on a sudden
unespyed, where finding seven or eight Chinese Mariners fast asleep, he caused
them to be taken, and bound hand and foot, threatening if they cried out never
so little to kill them all, which put them in such a fear as they durst not so
much as quetch. Then cutting her cables, he got him straight out of the River,
and sailing away with all the speed he could; The next day we arrived at an
Island, named Pullo Quirim* distant from Xamoy not above nine leagues, there
meeting with a little favorable gale within three days we went and anchored at
another Island, called Luxitay, where, in regard the air was wholesome, and the
water good, we thought fit to stay some fifteen days for the recovery of our
sick men: In this place we visited the Junk, but found no other commodity in
her then Rice, the greatest part whereof we cast into the Sea, to make her the
lighter and securer for our Voyage; Then we unladed all her furniture into the
Lantea, and set her on ground for to caulk her, so that in doing thereof, and
making our provision of water, we spent (as I said before) fifteen days in this
Island, by which time our sick men fully recovered their health; whereupon we
departed for Liampoo, being given to understand, that many Portugals were come
thither from Malaca, Sunda, Siam, and Patana, as they used ordinarily to do
about that time for to winter there.

. 3.
We had sailed two days together along the Coast of Lama^ with a favorable wind,
when it pleased God to make us encounter with a Junk of Patana, that came from
Lequio, which was commanded by a Chinese Pyrat, named Quiay Panian, a great
friend of the Portugal N^t^on, and much addicted to our fashions and manner of
life, with him there were thirty Portugals, choice and proper men, whom he kept
in pay, and advantaged more then the rest with gifts and presents, so that they
were all very rich. This Pyrat had no sooner discovered us but he resolved to
attaque us, thinking nothing less then that we were Portugals, so that
endeavoring to invest us, like an old Soldier as he was, and ver^t in the trade
of Pyrat, he got the wind of us; that done, falling down within a Musket shot
of us, he saluted us with fifteen Pieces of Ordnance, wherewith we were much
affrighted, because the most of them were Faulcone^s; but Antonio de Faria
encouraging his men, like a valiant Captain, and a good Christian, disposed
them on the hatches in places most convenient, as well in the prow as the poop,
reserving some to be afterward fitted as need should require. Being thus
resolved to see the end of that which Fortune should present us, it pleased God
that we descryed a Cross in our Enemies Flag, and on the foredeck a number of
red Caps, which our men were wont to wear at Sea in those times, whereby we
were persuaded that they might be Portugals, that were going from Liampoo to
Malaca; Whereupon we made them a sign for to make our selves known to them, who
no sooner perceived that we were Portugals, but in token of joy they gave a
great shout, and withal vailing their two top sails in show of obedience, they
sent their long boat, called a B^lon, with two Portugals in her, for to learn
what we were, and from whence we came: At length having well observed and
considered us, they approached with some more confidence to our Junk, and
having saluted us, and we them, they came aboard her, where Antonio de Faria
received them very courteously; And for that they were known to some of our
Soldier^, they continued there a good while, during the which they recounted
diverse particulars unto us necessary for our design. That done, Antonio de
Faria sent Christovano Borralho to accompany them back, and to visit Quiay
Panian from him, as also to deliver him a Letter, full of complements, and many
other offers of friendship, wherewith this Pyrat Panian was so contented and
proud, that he seemed not to be himself, such was his vanity, and passing close
by our Junk he took in all his sails; then accompanied with twenty Portugals,
he came and visited Antonio de Faria with a goodly rich Present, worth above
two thousand ducats, as well in Ambergreece and Pearls, as Jewels of Gold and
Silver. Antonio de Faria, and the rest of us, received him with great
demonstrations of love and honor: After that he and all his company were set,
Antonio de Faria fell to discourse with them of diverse things according to the
time and occasion, and then recited unto them his unhappy Voyage, and the loss
he had sustained, acquainting them with his determination to go unto Liampoo,
for to reinforce himself with men, and make provision of Vessels with oars, to
the end he might return again, to pass once more into the Straight of
Cauchenchina, and so get to the Mines of Quoaniaparu, where he had been told
there were ^ix large houses full of lingots of Silver, besides a far greater
quantity that was continually melted all along the River, and that without any
peril one might be wonderfully enriched. Whereunto the Pyrat Panian made this
answer, For mine own part, Signior Captain, I am not so rich as many think,
though it is true I have been so heretofore, but having been beaten with the
same misfortune, which thou say has befallen thee, my riches have been taken
from me; Now to return to Patana, where I have a wife and children, I dare not,
by reason I am assured that the King will despoil me of all that I should bring
thither,, because I departed from thence without his permission, which he would
make a most heinous crime, to the end he might seize upon my estate, as he has
done to others f^r far lesser occasions then that wherewith he may charge me.
Wherefore if thou can be contented that I shall accompany thee in the Voyage
thou meanest to undertaken, with an hundred men that I have in my Iunk, fifteen
Pieces of Ordnance, thirty Muskets, and forty Harquebuses, which these
Signiors, the Portugals that are with me, do carry, I shall most willingly do
it, upon condition that thou will impart unto me a third part of that which
shall be gotten, and to that effect I desire thee to give me an assurance under
thy hand, as also to swear unto me by thy Law to perform it accordingly.
Antonio de Faria accepted of this offer very gladly, and after he had rendered
him many thanks for it, he swore unto him upon the holy Evangelists fully and
without all fail to accomplish what he required, and thereof likewise made him
a promise under his hand, to which diverse of their company subscribed their
names as witnesses. This accord past between them, they went both together into
a River, called Anay, some five leagues from thence, where they furnished
themselves with all that they stood in need of, by means of a Present of an
hundred ducats, which they gave to the Mandarin, Captain of the Town.

CHAP. XX. Our Encounter at Sea with a little Fisher-boat, wherein were eight
Portugals very sore hurt; and Antonio de Faria's meeting and fighting with Coia
Acem the Pyrat.
BEing parted from this River of Anay,. 1.
and well provided of all things necessary for the Voyage we had undertaken,
Antonio de Faria resolv^d by the advice and counsel of Quiay Panian, whom he
much respected, to go and anchor in the Port of Chincheo, there to be informed
by such Portugals as were come from Sunda, Malaca, Timor, and Patana, of
certain matters requisite for his design, and whether they had any news from
Liampoo, in regard the report went in the Country, that the King of China had
sent thither a Fleet of four hundred Junks, wherein there were an hundred
thousand men, for to take the Portugals that re^ided there, and to burn their
houses, for that he would not endure them to be any longer in his dominions,
because he had been lately advertised, that they were not a people so faithful
and peaceable as he had been formerly given to understand. Arriving then in the
Port of Chincheo, we found five Portugal ships that were come thither about a
month before from the places above mentioned. These ships received us with
great joy, and after they had given us intelligence of the Country, Traffic,
and Tranquillity of the Ports, they told us they had no other news from
Liampoo, but that it was said a great number of Portugals were come thither
from many parts to winter there; and how that great Army, which we so much
feared, was not thereabout; but that it was suspected to be gone for the
Islands of Go^o, to the succor of Sucan de Pontir, from whom the brute went a
Brother-in-law of his had taken his Kingdom, and that in regard Sucan had
lately made himself subject to the King of China, and his Tributary for an
hundred thousand Taeis by the year, he had in contemplation thereof given him
this great Army of four hundred Junks, with the forces aforesaid, for to
restore him to his Crown and Signiories, whereof he had been despoyled. Being
very glad of this news, after we had remained in this Port of Chincheo the
space of nine days, we departed from thence for Liampoo, taking along with us
five and thirty Soldiers more out of the five ships we found there, to whom
Antonio de Faria gave very good pay; and after we had sailed five days with a
contrary wind, coasting from one side to another, without advancing any whit at
all, it happened that one night about the first watch we met with a little
Fisher-boat, or Paroo, wherein there were eight Portugals, very sore hurt, two
of the which were named M^m Taborda, and Antonio A^riques, men of honor, and
very much renowned in those quarters, the cause why in particular I name them;
These and the other six were in such a pitiful estate, and so hideous to see
to, as they moved every one to compassion. This Paroo coming close to Antonio
de Faria, he caused them to be taken up into his Junk, where they presently
cast themselves at his feet, from whence he raised them up, weeping for pity to
behold them so naked, and all bathed in their own blood with the wounds they
had received, and then demanded of them the occasion of their misfortune:
Whereunto one of the two made answer, that about seventeen days before they set
sail from Liampoo for Malaca, and that being advanced as far as the Isle of
Sumbor they had been set upon by a Pyrat, a Guzarat by Nation, called Coia
Acem, who had three Junks, and four Lanteaas, wherein were fifteen hundred men,
namely an hundred and fifty Mahometans, the rest Luzzons, Iaoas, and Champaas,
people of the other side of Malaya, and that after they had fought with them
from one to four in the afternon, they had been taken with the death of
fourscore and two men, whereof eighteen were Portugals, and as many made
slaves; And that in their Junk, what of his and of others, there was lost in
merchandise above an hundred thousand Taeis. Antonio de Faria remaining a good
while pensive at that which these men related unto him, at length said unto
them, I pray tell me how was it possible for you to escape more then the rest,
the fight passing as you deliver? After we had been fought withal about an
hour and an half, ^he three great Iunks boarded us five times, and with the
force of their s^ot they so tore the Prow of our Vessel, that we were ready to
sink; wherefore to keep out the water, and lighten our ship, we were
constrained to cast the most part of our goods into the Sea, and whilst our
men were laboring to do so, our Enemies laid so close at us, as every one was
fain to leave that he was about for to defend himself on the hatches: But
whilst we were thus troubled, most of our company being hurt, and many slain,
it pleased God that one of the Enemies Iunks came to be so furiously fired, as
it caught hold likewise of another that was fastened unto it, which made the
Pirates Soldiers leave the fight for to go and save their Vessels, yet that they
could not do so speedily, but that one of them was burnt down even to the very
water, so that they of the Iunk were compelled to leap into the Sea to save
themselves from burning, where most of them were drowned: In the m^an time we
made shift to get our Iunk close to a stock of Piles, which Fishermen had
plant^d there against a rock, hard by the mouth of the river, where at this
present is the Temple of the Siams, but the dog Coia Acem was instantly with
us, and having fast grappled us, h^ leapt into our Vessel, being followed by a
great number of Mahometans, all armed with Coats of Mail, and Buff Ierkins, who
straightway killed above an hundred and fifty of ours, whereof eighteen were
Portugals; which we no sooner perceived, but all wounded as we were, and
spoiled with the fire, as you see, we sought for some way to save our selves,
and to that end we sped us into a Manchu^, that was fastened to the stern of
our Iunk, wherein it pleased God that fifteen of us escaped, whereof two dyed
yesterday, and of the thirteen, that remain yet miraculously alive, there are
eight Portugals, and five servants. In this sort we got us with all speed
between this Pallisade and the land amongst the rocks, the better to preserve
us from being boarded by their Iunk, but they were otherwise employed in
seeking to save the men of their burnt Vessel; and afterward they entered all
into our Iunk, where they were so carried away with covetousness of the booty,
as they never thought of pursuing us; so that the Sun being almost set, and
they wonderful glad of their victory over us, they retired into the River with
great acclamations. Antonio de Faria, very joyful at this news, though he was
as sad again on the other side for the bad success of those that had made him
this relation* rendered thanks unto God for that he had found his Enemy, it
being a matter so much desired of him and his: Certainly, said he unto them
then, by your report they must needs be now in great disorder, and much spoiled
in the River where they are, for I am persuaded, that neither your Junk, nor
that of theirs, which was fastened to the burnt one, can do them any longer
service, and that in the great Junk, which assaulted you, it is not possible
but that you have hurt and killed a good many. Whereunto they answered, that
without doubt they had killed and hurt a great number. Then Antonio de Faria,
putting off his cap, fell down on his knees, and with his hands and eyes lifted
up to Heaven he said weeping, O Lord Jesus Christ, my God and Savior, even as
thou art the true hope of those that put their trust in thee, I, that am the
greatest sinner of all men, do most humbly beseech thee in the name of thy
servants, that are here present, whose Souls thou have bought with thy precious
blood, that thou will give us strength and victory against this cruel Enemy,
the murderer of so many Portugals, whom with thy favor and aid, and for the
honor of thy holy Name I have resolved to seek out, as hitherto I have done, to
the end he may pay to thy Soldiers and faithful servants what he has so long
owed them. Whereunto all that were by answered with one cry, To them, to them,
in the Name of Jesus Christ, that this dog may now render us that, which for so
long together he has taken, as well from us, as from our poor miserable
companions. Hereupon with marvelous ardor and great acclamations we set sail
for the Port of Lailoo, which we had left eight leagues behind us, whither by
the advice of some of his company Antonio de Faria went to furnish himself with
all that was necessary for the fight he hoped to make with the Pyrat, in the
quest of whom (as I have already delivered) he had spent so much time, and yet
could never till then hear any news of him in all the Ports and places where he
had been.

. 2.
The next morning we arrived at the Port of Lailoo, where Quiay Panian had much
kindred, and many friends, so that he wanted no credit in that place; wherefore
he entreated the Mandarin (who is the Captain of the Town) to permit us to buy
for our money such things as we stood in need of, which he instantly granted, as
well for fear lest some displeasure might be done him, as for the sum of a
thousand ducats, presented unto him by Antonio de Faria, wherewith he rested
very well satisfied. Hereupon some of our Company went ashore, who with all
diligence bought whatsoever we wanted, as Saltpeter and Sulphur to make powder,
Lead, Bullets, Victual, Cordage, Oil, Pitch, Rosin, Ockam, Timber, Planks,
Arms, Darts, Staves hardened in the fire, Masts, Sails, Sail-yards, Targets,
Flints, Pullies, and Anchors; that done, we took in fresh water, and furnished
our Vessels with Mariners. Now although that this place contained not above
three or four hundred houses, yet was there both there, and in the villages
adjoining, such a quantity of the aforesaid things, that in truth it were hard
to express it; for China i^ excellent in this, that it may vaunt to be the
Country in the world most abounding in all things that may be desired. Besides
for that Antonio de Faria was exceeding liberal, in regard he spent out of the
general booty, before the partitions were made, he paid for all that he bought
at the price the sellers would set, by means whereof he had more brought him by
far then he had use for, so that within thirteen days he went out of this Port
wonderfully well accommodated, with two other new great Junks, which he had
exchanged for two little ones that he had, and two Lanteaas with Oars, as also
an hundred and sixty Mariners, both for rowing, and for governing the sails.
After all these preparations were made, and we ready to weigh anchor, a general
muster was taken of all that were in our Army, which in number was found to be
five hundred persons, as well for fight, as for the service and navigation of
our Vessels, amongst whom were fourscore and fifteen Portugals, young and
resolute, the rest were Boys, and Mariners, and men of the other Coast, which
Quiay Panian kept in pay, and were well practiced in Sea Fight, as they that
had been five years Pirates. Moreover we had an hundred and sixty Harquebuses,
forty pieces of brass Ordnance, whereof twenty were fieldpieces, that carried
stone-bullets, threescore quintals of powder, namely fifty four for the great
Ordnance, and six for the Harquebuses, besides what the Harquebusiers had
already delivered to them, nine hundred pots of artificial fire, whereof four
hundred were of powder, and five hundred of uns^aked Lime after the Chinese
manner, a great number of stones, Arrows, Half-pikes, four thousand small
Javelings, store of Hatchets to serve at boarding, six Boats full of Flints,
wherewith the Sailers fought, twelve Cramp-irons with their hooks fastened to
great Iron chains for to grapple Vessels together, and many sorts of
fireworks, which an Engineer of the Levant made for us. With all this equipage
we departed from this Port of Lail^^, and within three days after it pleased
God that we arrived at the fishing place, where Coia Acem took the Portugals
Junk: There as soon as it was night Antonio de Faria sent spies into the River,
for to l^^rn whereabout he was, who took a Paroo, with six Fishermen in her,
that gave us to understand how this Pyrat was some two leagues from thence in a
River, called Tinlau, and that he was accommodating the Junk he had taken from
the Portugals, for to go in her, with two others that he had, unto Siam, where
he was born, and that he was to depart within two days. Upon this news Antonio
de Faria called some of his company to council, where it was concluded, that
first of all the places and forces of our Enemy was to be visited and seen,
because in a matter of so much hazard, it was not safe to run as it were
blindfold unto it, but to advise on it well beforehand, and that upon the
certainty of that which should be known, such resolution might afterward be
taken, as should seem good to all; Then drawing the fishermen out of the Paroo,
he put some of Quiay Panians Mariners into her, and sending her away only with
two of those fishermen, keeping the rest as hostages, he committed the charge
of her to a valiant Soldier, named Vincentio Morosa, attired after the Chinese
fashion, for fear of discovery; who arriving at the place where the Enemy rode,
made show of fishing as others did, and by that means espied all that he came
for, whereupon re^ur^ing, he gave an account of what he had seen, and assured
us that the Enemies were so weak, ^s upon ^oarding of them they might easily be
taken. Antonio de Faria caused the most experienced men of his company to be
assembled, to advise thereon, and that in Quiay Panians Junk, to honor him the
more, as also to maintain his friendship, which he much esteemed: At this
meeting it was resolved, that as soon as it was night they should go and anchor
at the mouth of the River, where the Enemy lay, for to set upon him the next
morning before day. This agreed unto by all, Antonio de F^ria set down what
order and course should be held at the entering into the River, and how the
Enemy should be assaulted: Then dividing his men, he placed thirty Portugals in
Quiay Panians Junk, such as he pleased to choose, because he would be sure to
give him no distaste; Likewise he disposed six Portugals into each of the
Lant^^as, and into Christovano Borralho's Junk twenty; the rest of the
Portugals, being three and thirty, he retained with himself, besides slaves and
diverse Christians, all valiant and trusty men. Thus accommodated and ordered
for the execution of his enterprise, he set sail toward the River of Tinlau,
where he arrived about Sunset, and there keeping good watch he past the night
till three of the clock in the morning, at which time he made to the Enemy, who
rode some half a league up in the River.

. 3.
It pleased God that the Sea was calm, and the wind so favorable, as our Fleet,
sailing up the River, arrived in less then an hour close to the Enemy,
unperceived of any; But because they were Thieves, and feared the people of the
Country, in regard of the great mischiefs and robberies which they daily
committed, they stood so upon their guard, and kept so good watch, that as soon
as they discerned us, in all haste they rung an alarm with a Bell, the sound
whereof caused such a rumor and disorder, as well amongst them that were
ashore, as those aboard, that one could hardly hear one another, by reason of
the great noise they made. Whereupon Antonio de Faria, seeing we were
discovered, cried out to his company, To them, my Masters, to them in the name
of God before they be succored by their Lorches, wherewith discharging all his
Ordnance, it pleased Heaven, that the shot lighted to such purpose, as it
overthrew and tore in pieces the most part of the valiantest, that then were
mounted and appeared on the deck, even right as we could have wished: In the
neck hereof our Harquebusiers, which might be some hundred and threescore,
failed not to shoot upon the signal, that had formerly been ordained for it, so
that the hatches of the Junk were cleared of all those that were upon them, and
that with such a slaughter as not an Enemy durst appear there afterward; At
which very instant our two Junks boarded their two in the case they were in,
where the fight grew so hot on either side, as I confess I am not able to
relate in particular what passed therein, though I was present at it, for when
it began it was scarce day. Now that which rendered the conflict betwixt us and
our Enemies most dreadful was the noise of Drums, Basins, and Bells,
accompanied with the report of the great Ordnance, wherewith the valleys and
rocks thereabouts resounded again. This fight continuing in this manner some
quarter of an hour, their Lorches and Lanteaas came from the shore to assist
them with fresh men, which one, named Diego Meyrelez, in Quiay Panians Junk,
perceiving, and that a Gunner employed not his shot to any purpose, in regard
he was so beside himself with fear, that he knew not what he did, as he was
ready to give fire to a Piece, he thrust him away so rudely, as he threw him
down into the scuttle, saying to him, Away villain, thou can do nothing, this
business belongs to men, such as I am, not to thee: whereupon pointing the Gun
with its wedges of level, as he knew very well how to do, he gave fire to the
Piece, which was charged with bullets and stones, and hitting the Lorch that
came foremost, carried away all the upper part of her from Poup to Prow, so
that she presently sank, and all that were in her, not a man saved: The shot
then having past so through the first Lorch, fell on the hatches of another
Lorch, that came a little behind, and killed the Captain of her, with six or
seven more that were by him, wherewith the two other Lorches were so terrified,
that going about to fly back to Land, they fell foul one of another, so as they
could not clear themselves, but remained entangled together, and not able to go
forward or backward, which perceived by the Captains of our two Lorches, called
Gasparo d' Oliveyra, and Vincentio Morosa, they presently set upon them,
casting a great many artificial pots into them, wherewith they were so fired,
that they burnt down to the very water, which made the most of those that were
in them to leap into the Sea, where our men killed them all with their Pikes,
so that in those three Lorches alone there dyed above two hundred persons; and
in the other, whereof the Captain was slain, there was not one escaped, for
Quiay Panian pursued them in a Champana, which was the Boat of his Junk, and
dispatched most of them as they were getting to Land, the rest were all
battered against the rocks that were by the shore: which the Enemies in the
Junks perceiving, being some hundred and fifty Mahometans, Luzzons, Borneos,
and Iaos, they began to be so discouraged, that many of them threw themselves
into the Sea; whereupon the dog Coia Acem, who yet was not known, ran to this
disorder, for to animate his men. He had on a Coat of Mail lined with Crimson
Satin, edged with gold fringe, that had formerly belonged to some Portugal,
and crying out with a loud voice, that every one might hear him, he said three
times, Lah hilah, hilah la Mahumed, rocol halah, Massulmens, and true Believers
in the holy Law of Mahomet, will you suffer your selves to be vanquished by
such feeble slaves, as these Christian Dogs, who have no more heart then white
Pullets, or bearded women? To them, to them, for we are assured by the Book of
Flowers, wherein the Prophet Noby does promise eternal delights to the Daroezes
of the House of Mecqua, that he will keep his word both with you and me,
provided that we bathe our selves in the blood of these dogs without Law: With
these cursed words the Devil so encouraged them, that rallying all into one
body, they reinforced the fight, and so valiantly made head against us, as it
was a dreadful thing to see how desperately they ran amongst our weapons. In
the mean time Antonio de Faria thus exhorted his men: Courage valiant
Christians, and whilst those wicked Miscreants fortify themselves in their
devilish Sect, let us trust in our Lord Jesus Christ, nailed on the Cross for
us, who will never forsake us, how great sinners soever we be, for after all we
are his, which these Dogs here are not. With this ferver and zeal of faith
flying upon Coia Acem, to whom he had most spleen, he discharged so great a
blow on his head with a two-handed sword, that cutting through a Cap of Mail he
wore, he laid him at his feet, then redoubling with another reverse stroke he
lamed him of both his legs, so as he could not rise, which his followers
beholding they gave a mighty cry, and assaulted Antonio de Faria with such fury
and hardiness, as they made no reckoning of a many of Portugals, by whom they
were invironned, but gave him diverse blows that had almost overthrown him to
the ground; Our men seeing this ran presently to his aid, and behave^
themselves so well, that in half a quarter of an hour forty eight of our
enemies lay slaughtered on the dead body of Coia Acem, and but fourteen of
ours, whereof there were not above five Portugals, the rest were servants and
slaves, good and faithful Christians. The remainder of them, beginning to
faint, retired in disorder toward the foredeck, with an intent to fortify
themselves there, for prevention whereof twenty Soldiers, of thirty that were
in Quiay Panians Junk, ran instantly and got before them, so that ere they
could render themselves Masters of what they pretended unto, they were enforced
to leap into the Sea, where they fell one upon another, and were by our men
qu^te made an end of, so that of all their number there remained but only five,
whom they took alive, and cast into the Hold bound hand and foot, to the end
they might afterward be forced by torments to confess certain matters that
should be demanded of them, but they fairly tore out one another throats with
their teeth, for fear of the death they expected, which yet could not keep them
from being dismembered by our servants, and after thrown into the Se^, in the
company of the Dog Coia Acem their Captain, great Cacis of the King of Bintan,
the Shedder and Drinker of the blood of Portugals, Titles which he ordinarily
gave himself in his Letters, and which he published openly to all Mahometans,
by reason whereof, and for the superstition of his cursed Sect, he was greatly
honored by them.

CHAP. XXI. What Antonio de Faria did after his Victory; his departure from the
River of Tinlau, with his ill success thereupon, and the succor we met withal.
THis bloody Battle finished with the honor of the Victory, beforementioned,.
1.
in the description whereof I have not used many words; for if I should
undertake to recount the particularies of it, and set forth all that was
performed by ours, as also the valor wherewith the Enemies defended themselves,
besides that I am unable to do it, I should then be forced to make a far larger
discourse, and more ample History then this is: but it being my intention to
declare things ^n passant, I have labored to speak succinctly in diverse places,
where possibly better wits then mine would amplify matters in a more
accomplished manner, and this is the reason that I have now delivered nothing
but what was needful to be written. Returning then to my former discourse, I
say, that the first thing Antonio de Faria did after this Victory was to see
his hurt men looked unto, whereof there were about fourscore and twelve, the
most part Portugals, our servants being included; As for the number of the
dead, there were on our side forty two, amongst which eight were Portugals, the
loss of whom afflicted Antonio de Faria more then all the rest, and of the
Enemies three hundred and eighty, whereof an hundred and fifty fell by fire and
sword, the remainder were drowned. Now albeit this Victory brought a great deal
of content to us all, yet were there many tears shed both in general and
particular for the slaughter of our companions, the most part of whose heads
were cleft asunder with the Enemies hatchets. After this Antonio de Faria,
notwithstanding he was hurt in two or three places, went presently ashore with
those that were in case to accompany him, where the first thing he did was to
give order for the burial of the dead; thereupon he surrounded the Island for
to see what he could discover: Compassing of it then in this sort he lighted
upon a very pleasant Valley, wherein were many gardens, replenished with sundry
kinds of fruits; there also was a Village of about forty or fifty very low
houses, which the infamous Coia Acem had sacked, and in them slain many of the
inhabitants, that had not the means to escape his hands. Further, in the said
Valley, and by a delicate River of fresh water, wherein were a number of
Mullets and Trouts, he met with a very fair house, which seemed to be the Pagod
of the Village, that was full of sick and hurt persons, whom Coia Acem had put
there to be cured; amongst these were diverse Mahometans of his kindred, and
others of his best Soldiers, to the number of ninety six, who as soon as they
perceived Antonio de Faria afar off cried out to him for mercy and forgiveness,
but he would by no means harken unto them, alleging that he could not spare
those that had killed so many Christians; Saying so, he caused the house to be
fired in six or seven places, which in regard it was of wood, bepitched; and
covered with dry Palm tree leaves, burned in such ^ort as it was dreadful to
behold; In the mean time it would have moved any man to pity to hear the
lamentable cries made by these wretches within, and to see them cast themselves
headlong out of the windows, where ou^ men, provoked with a desire of ^evenge,
received them upon their Pikes and H^lberds. This cruelty performed, Antonio de
Faria returned to the Sea side, where the Junk lay, that Coia Acem had taken a
month before from the Portugals of Liampoo, and caused it to be lanched into
the Sea, having been forme^ly repaired and caulked, which being done, and he
aboard again, he restored it to Mem Taborda, and Antonio Anriques, to whom it
belonged, as I have already declared; But first, causing them to lay their
hands on the Book of Prayers, Worthy Friends, said he unto them, for all those
my companions sakes, as well living as dead, who for your Iunk here have lost
so much blood, and so many lives, I present you with her, and all the goods
that were in her, as a free gift, to the end that thereby our Lord may receive
us into his everlasting Kingdom; and besides, be pleased to grant us an
abolition of all our sins in this world, and in the other everlasting life, as
I trust he has given to our brethren, that this day dyed like good Christians
for the holy Catholic Faith; Howbeit, I pray and expressly enjoin you, nay I
conjure you by the oath you are now to make, that you take no other goods but
such only as appertain unto you, and that you brought from Liampoo, both for
your selves, and those other Merchants that were Venturers with you: For more I
do not give you, nor were i^ reasonable I should, in regard it would be much
against the duty of either of our consciences, for me to give, and you to
receive it. Having spoken in this manner, Mem Taborda and Antonio Anriques, who
little looked for any such favor, fell down at his feet, and with tears of joy
rendered him a world of thanks, and then presently went ashore for to seek out
their goods, taking with them about fifty or threescore servants, whom their
Masters had lent them for to help gather up the Silks that were wet, and hanged
up by the Enemies on Trees a drying, besides two great rooms full of such as
had never been wet, all which amounted, as it was said, to an hundred thousand
Taeis, wherein above an hundred Merchants had a share, as well of them that
dwelt at Liampoo, as at Malaca, to whom they were consigned; The rest of their
Commodities, being a third part thereof, were lost, and could never be heard
of. The next morning, as soon as it was light, he went to the great Junk that
he had taken, which was full of the bodies of them that were slain in her the
day before, whom without further ado he caused to be thrown into the Sea;
howbeit for Coia Acems, in regard he was of a more eminent condition then the
rest, and consequently deserving a greater honor in his funerals, he commanded
him clothed and armed as he was to be cut into four quarters, and so cast also
into the Sea, where for the merit of his works his body was intombed in the
bellies of the hungry Lizards, whereof there was a great company all about our
Junk, that showed themselves above water, allured by the appast of those
formerly thrown overboard; and in precipitating him so dismembered into the
Sea, Antonio de Faria in stead of a prayer, Go wicked wretch, said he, to the
bottom of Hell, where thy damned Soul does now enjoy the promised delights of
thy Mahomet, as thou did yesterday publish to these other Dogs such as thy
self. Thereupon he commanded all the Slaves and Captives of his company,
together with their Masters, before him, unto whom he made a speech like a true
Christian, as indeed he was, whereby he prayed them in the Name of God to
manumit these Slaves, according to the promise he had made them before the
fight, engaging himself to satisfy them for it out of his own Estate:
Whereunto they answered all with one consent, that since it was his desire they
were well contented, and that they did even then set them at full liberty,
whereof he caused a writing to be presently made with all their hands unto it,
being as much as could be done for the instant, but afterward each of them had
in particular Letters of manumission granted unto them. This done, an Inventory
was taken of such Commodities as were found to be good and merchantable, over
and above those which were given to the Portugals, and all was praised at an
hundred and thirty thousand Taeis in Silver Lingots of Iapan, consisting of
Satin, Damask, raw Silk, Taffety, Musk, and very fine Porcelain, for as
touching the rest they were not put in writing; And all these Robberies the
Pirates had committed on the Coasts between Sumbor and Fucheo, where for above a
year together they had coursed up and down.

After that Antonio de Faria had remained four and twenty days in this River of
Tinlau,. 2.
during which time all his hurt men were cured, he set sail directly for
Liampoo, where he purposed to pass the Winter, to the end that with the
beginning of the Spring he might set forth on his Voyage to the Mines of
Quoaniaparu, as he had resolved with Quiay Panian, the Chinese Pyrat that was
in his company, but being advanced even to the point of Micuy, which is at the
height of six and twenty degrees, so great a Tempest arose toward the
North-west, that we were fain to strike our topsails, for fear we should be
forced back again from our course; but after dinner it increased with such a
terrible storm of rain, and the Sea went so high, that the two Lanteas were not
able to brook it, so that about evening they made to Land, with an intent to
recover the River of Xilendau, which was about a league and an half from
thence, whereupon Antonio de Faria doubting some misfortune, carried as little
sail as possibly he could, as well for that he would not outgo the Lanteas, as
in regard of the violence of the wind, which was such, as they durst not carry
more: Now by reason the night was so dark, and the billows so great, they could
not discern a shelf of sand, that lay betwixt an Island and the point of a
Rock, so that passing over it our Junk struck her self so rudely on it, as her
upper keel cleft in two or three places, and her under keel a little, whereupon
the Gunner would have given fire to a Falconet, for to have warned the other
Junks to come in to succor us in this extremity, but Antonio de Faria would by
no means permit him, saying, that since it pleased God he should be cast away
in that place, there was no reason that others should be lost there also for
his cause; But he desired every one to assist him, both with manual labor, and
secret prayers unto God to pardon their sins: Having said so, he caused the
main Mast to be cut down, whereby the Junk came to be in somewhat a better case
then she was before; but alas! the fall of it cost three Mariners and one of
our servants their lives, who chancing to be under it when it fell were
battered all to pieces; In like manner he made all the other Masts from poop to
prow to be hewed down, together with all the dead works, as the cabins and
galleries without, so that all was taken away close to the hatches. And though
all this was done with incredible diligence, yet it stood us in little stead,
for that the weather was so foul, the sea so swollen, the night so dark, the
waves so furious, the rain so great, and the violence of the storm so
intolerable, that no man was able to withstand it: In the mean time the other
four Junks made a sign to us, as if they also were cast away; Whereupon Antonio
de Faria lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, Lord, said he before them
all, as through thy infinite mercy thou wast fastened upon the Cross for the
Redemption of sinners, so I beseech thee, who art all mercy, that for the
satisfaction of thy Justice I alone may suffer for the offenses which these men
have committed, since I am the principal cause of their trespassing against thy
divine goodness; permit not then, O Lord, that in this woeful night they may
fall into that danger wherein I see my self as this present by reason of my
sins; but with a repentant Soul I most humbly beseech thee, and that in the
name of all the rest, though I am most unworthy to be heard, that in stead of
having regard to our sins, thou will behold us with the eyes of that pity and
infinite clemency wherewith thou art replenished. Upon these words we all fell
a crying out so lamentably, Lord have mercy upon us, that it would have grieved
any heart in the world to have heard us; And as all men, that find themselves
in the like extremity, are naturally carried to the preservation of their
lives, without any regard at all of ought else, there was not one amongst us
that sought not the means to safe his, so that all of us together employed our
selves in discharging our Vessel, by casting our goods into the Sea; To which
effect about an hundred men of us, as well Portugals, as Slaves and Mariners,
leapt down into the Ship, and in less then an hour heaved all overboard,
without any respect in so eminent a danger of that which we did, for amongst
the rest we threw twelve great chests full of lingots of Silver into the Sea,
which in the last encounter we had taken from Coia Acem, besides many other
things of great value, whereby our Junk was somewhat lightened.

Having past the night in that miserable state we were in, at length,. 3.
as the day began to break, it pleased God that the wind also began to slack,
whereby our Junk remained a little more at rest, though she was still in great
peril, by reason of the water she had taken in, it being almost four yards deep
in her, so that to avoid the eminent danger we were threatened with, we all of
us got forth, and catching hold by the tackle we hung on the outside of the
Junk, because the waves beat with such violence against her, that we feared to
be drowned, or cast against the Rocks, which had already happened to eleven or
twelve of our company for want of taking heed: Now when the day began perfectly
to appear, it pleased God that Mem Taborda's and Antonio Anriquez Junks
discovered us, and presently coming up close to us, they that were in her threw
us a great many staves tied to cords, to the end we might fasten our selves to
them, as we presently did, and therein an hour was spent with much ado, by
reason of the extreme disorder amongst us, every man desiring and striving to
be first saved, by which occasion twenty men were drowned, whereof five were
Portugals, for whom Antonio de Faria was more grieved, then for the loss of the
Junk, and all the goods that were in her, although the value thereof was not so
small, but that it amounted to above an hundred thousand Ta^is, and that in
Silver alone; for the greatest part of the booty, taken from Coia Acem, had
been put into Antonio de Faria's Junk, as that which was held to be freer from
danger then all the rest: Thus after we had with much peril and pain gotten
into Taborda's Junk, we past all that day in continual lamentation for our ill
success without hearing any news of our consorts; Nevertheless it pleased God,
that about evening we discovered two Sails, which made so many short turnings
from one side to another, as one might well guess they did it of purpose to
spend time, whereby we were persuaded that they were of our company. Now
because it was almost night, we thought it not fit to go to them for some
reasons given thereupon, but having made them a sign they answered us presently
with the like according to our desire, and about the end of the last watch they
approached so near unto us, that after they had sadly saluted us they demanded
how the Captain General and the rest did; whereunto we replied, that as soon as
it was day we would tell them, and that in the mean time they should retire
from thence till the next morning that it was light, for that the waves then
went so high, as some disaster might otherwise ensue thereupon. The next day as
soon as the Sun began to appeared two Portugals came to us from Quiay Panians
Junk, who seeing Antonio de Faria in the case he was in aboard Mem Taborda's
Junk, and understanding the bad success of his fortune, they recounted theirs
unto us, which seemed to be little better then ours; for they declared that a
gust of wind had caught up and thrown three of their men a stones cast from the
Vessel into the Sea, a thing never seen nor heard of before: Withal they
delivered, how the little Junk was cast away, with fifty men in her, almost all
Christians, amongst the which were seven Portugals, and the Captain, named Nuno
Preto, an honorable man, and of great courage and wisdom, whereof he had given
good proof in the former adversities: A^ this relation Antonio de Faria was
very much grieved, but much more when a little after one of the two Lanteas, of
whom no news had been heard of till then, arriving, told us what dangers they
had ran, and that the other having broken their cables, and left their anchors
in the Sea, was in their sight battered all to pieces on the Sea shore, all
that were in her being drowned, saving thirteen persons, whereof there were
five Portugals, and three servants Christians, whom those of the Country had
made Slaves, and carried to a place, called Nouday; so that by this unlucky
Tempest two Junks, and one Lantea, or Lorch, were cast away, wherein above an
hundred men were lost, besides Slaves, Apparel, Commodities, Silver, Jewels,
Ordnance, Arms, Victual, and Munition, worth in all above two hundred thousand
Ducats, in so much tha^ both our General, and every one of us Soldiers, found
our selves destitute of all manner of relief, having nothing left us but what
was upon our backs. We learnt afterward, that suchlike fortunes at Sea do
ordinarily happen on this Coast of China, more then in any other part, so that
it is impossible to sail there a whole year together without shipwreck, unless
upon the Conjunction of the new Moons one fly into the Ports for shelter, which
are there so many, and so good, that without fear of any thing one may enter
them easily, because they are all very clear, except those of Lamau and Sumbor,
which have certain Rocks lying some half a league Southward from the mouth of
the River.

CHAP. XXII. Antonio de Faria has news of the five Portugals that were made
Captives; his Letter to the Mandarin of Nouday about them; and his assaulting
the said Town.
. 1.
AFter this furious Tempest was wholly assuaged, Antonio de Faria incontinently
imbarqued himself in the other great Junk, that he had taken from Coia Acem,
whereof Pedro de Silva was Captain, and setting sail he departed with the rest
of his Company, which consisted of three Junks, and one Lorch, or Lantea, as
the Chinese term them. The first thing he did then was to go and anchor in the
Haven of Nouday, to the end he might learn some news of the thirteen Captives,
that were carried thither; being arrived there about night he sent two small
Barques, called Baloes, well manned, to spy the Port, and sound the depth of the
River, as also to observe the situation of the Country, and to learn by some
means what Ships were riding there, together with diverse other matters
answerable to his design; For which effect he commanded the Mariners to
endeavor all they could for to surprise some of the Inhabitants of the Town,
that by them he might be truly informed what was become of the Portugals, by
reason he was afraid they were already carried further up into the Country.
These Baloes went away about two hours after midnight, and arrived at a little
Village seated at the mouth of the River on a little stream of water, called
Nipaphau; There it pleased God that they behaved themselves so well, as they
returned before day aboard our Junk, bringing along with them a Barque laden
with earthen vessel, and Sugar canes, which they had found lying at anchor in
the midst of the River: In this Barque there were eight men, and two women,
together with a little child some six or seven years old, who seeing themselves
thus in our power, became so transported with the fear of death, that they were
in a manner besides themselves, which Antonio de Faria perceiving labored all
he could to comfort them, and began to speak them very fair, but to all his
questions, he could draw no other answer from them then these words following,
Do not kill us without cause, for God will require an account of our blood from
you, because we are poor folks; and saying thus, they wept and trembled in such
sort, as they could scarce pronounce a word; Whereupon Antonio de Faria,
pitying their misery and simplicity, would importune them no further: Howbeit,
the better to compass his intent, he entreated a Chinese woman, that was a
Christian, and came along with the Pilot, to make much of them, and to assure
them they should have no hurt, to the end, that being more confirmed by this
means, they might answer to that should be demanded of them; Wherein the
Chinese so well acquitted her self, and made them so tractable, as about an
hour after they told her, that if the Captain would let them freely return in
their boat to the place from whence they were taken, they would willingly
confess all that either they had heard or seen. Antonio de Faria having
promised them to do so, and that with many words and protestations one amongst
them, that was ancienter, and that seemed to be of more authority then the
rest, addressing himself to him: Truly, said he, I do not rely much on thy
words, because that by amplifying of them in such manner thou make me afeard,
that the affect will not be conformable to thy steech; Wherefore I beseech thee
to swear unto me by this Element that bears thee, that thou will not fail to
perform that which thou have promised unto me: for otherwise perjuring thy
self, be assured that the Lord, whose hand is Almighty, will be incensed
against thee with such indignat^^n, as the winds from above, and the Seas from
below, will never cease to oppose thy desires during thy Voyages; for I vow
unto thee by the beauty of these Stars, that lying is no less odious and
abominable in the sight of that Sovereign Lord, then the pride of those Judges
on Earth, that with scorn and contempt do answer those which demand Justice of
them. Antonio de Faria obliging himself by oath, as the old man required, to
perform his word, the Chinese said he was satisfied, and then he continued in
this sort: About two days since I saw those men, whom thou inquire after,
laid in prison at Nouday with great irons on their legs, because it was
believed they were notorious Thieves, that made a trade of robbing such as they
met upon the Seas. This relation very much enraged and disquieted Antonio de
Faria, who was persuaded that it might well be as the old man delivered, so
that desiring to take some course for their deliverance as soon as might be, he
sent them a Letter by one of the Chinese, retaining all the rest in hostage
for him, who departed the next morning by break of day, and because it much
imported the Chinese to be delivered out of captivity, he that carried the
Letter, and that was husband to one of the two women, which had been taken in
the boat of earthen vessel, and were now aboard in our Junk, made such speed,
that he returned about noon with an answer, endorsed on the Letter we sent, and
signed by all the five Portugals; Thereby they gave Antonio de Faria to
understand, that they were cruelly detained in prison, out of which they did
not think they should ever get, unless it were to go to execution, and
therefore they besought him for the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would not suffer them to perish there for want of succor, according as he had
promised them at their setting forth in that Voyage, and the rather in regard
it was only for his sake that they were reduced to that miserable estate;
Hereunto they added many other very pitiful entreaties, as might well come from
such poor wretches, that were Captives under the Tyranny of such fell and cruel
people, as the Chinese were. Antonio de Faria, having receiv^d this Letter,
read it in the presence of all his Company, of whom he asked counsel thereupon;
but as they were many, so were their opinions many and different, which was the
occasion of much contention amongst them; whereby perceiving that nothing would
be concluded concerning this affair, he said to them as it were in choler; My
Masters and Friends, I promised to God by a solemn oath that I have taken,
never to part from hence, till by some means or other I have recovered these
poor Soldiers, my companions, though I should therefore venture my life a
thousand times, yea and all my estate, which I make little reckoning of in
regard of them; wherefore, my Masters, I earnestly desire you, that no man go
about to oppose this resolution of mine, upon the execution whereof mine honor
wholly depends, for whosoever shall contrary me therein I must take him for
mine enemy, as one that would seek the prejudice of my Soul. To this speech all
made answer, that he was in the right, and that for the discharge of his
conscience nothing should stay him from performing the same; adding moreover,
that all of them would stand to him in that behalf to the death. The Captain
hereupon giving them many thanks, and with tears in his eyes and his hat in his
hand embracing them, protested that he would when time should serve acknowledge
this good will of theirs in such real manner as it deserved, wherewith they all
remained very well satisfied.

. 2.
This resolution being taken, they fell to council concerning the carriage of
this affair, whereupon they concluded to treat with the Mandarin in a gentle
manner, and for that end to send unto him to demand these Prisoners, with
promise to give him for their ransom whatsoever should be thought reasonable,
and that according to his answer such further course should be taken therein as
should seem requisite: A Petition then was presently drawn answerable to the
form, that was usually presented to the Judges, which Antonio de Faria sent to
the Mandarin by two of the chiefest of the Chinese he had taken, who also
carried him a present worth two hundred ducats, whereby he hoped to induce him
to restore the poor prisoners; but it fell out far otherwise then he expected:
For as soon as the Chinese had delivered the Petition and the Present, they
returned the next day with an answer written on the back of the Petition, the
tenor whereof was this: Let thy mouth come and present it self at my feet, and
after I have heard thee I will do thee justice. Antonio de Faria seeing what
high words the Mandarin gave was exceedingly troubled, because he well
perceived by this beginning, that he should have much ado to deliver his
companions, wherefore having communicated this affair in particular to some
few, whom for that end he had called unto him, they were of several opinions;
nevertheless after good deliberation it was at length concluded to send another
Messenger, that should more effectually demand the Prisoners of him, and for
their ransom offer the sum of two thousand Tacis in lingots of Silver and
Commodities, declaring unto him, that he would not part from that place till he
had returned them; for he made account that it might be this resolution would
oblige him to do that which he had refused him another way, or that he would be
carried to it by the consideration of his own gain and interest. So the two
Chinese went again the second time with a Letter sealed up, as from one person
to another, without any kind of ceremony or complement, which these Gentiles so
much use amongst themselves; And this Antonio de Faria did of purpose, to the
end that by the sharpness of this Letter the Mandarin might know he was
displeased, and resolved to execute what he had written. But before I proceed
any further I will only relate the two main points of the contents of the
Letter, which were the cause of the utter ruin of this business. The first
was, where Antonio de Faria said, that he was a Merchant stranger, a Portugal
by Nation, that was going by way of Traffic toward the Port of Liampoo,
where there were also many other Merchants strangers like himself, who duly
paid the usual Customs, without committing any manner of ill or injustice. The
second point was, where he said, that the King of Portugal his Master was
allied in a brotherly amity with the King of China, by reason whereof they
traded in his Country, as the Chinese used to do at Malaca, where they were
entertained with all favor and justice duly ministered unto them. Now though
both these points were distastful to the Mandarin, yet the last, wherein he
mentioned the King of Portugal to be brother to the King of China, was that
which put him so out of patience, that without any regard at all he commanded
them that brought the Letter, not only to be cruelly scourged, but to have
their noses cut off, and in that pickle he sent them back to Antonio de Faria
with an answer written on a scurvy piece of torn p^p^r, where these words were
written: Stinking carrion, begotten of vile flies in the filthiest sink that
^ver was in any dungeon of a lothsom prison, what has made thy baseness so
bold, as that thou dare undertake to meddle with heavenly things? Having
caused thy Petition to be read, whereby like a Lord, as I am, thou prayest me
to have pity on thee, which art but a poor wr^tch, my greatness, out of its
generosity, was even deigning to accept of that little thou presentedst me
withal, and was also inclining to grant thy request, when as my ears were
touched with the horrible blasphemy of thy arrogance, which made thee t^rm thy
King Brother to the son of the Sun, the Lion crowned by an incredible Power in
the Throne of the World, under whose feet all the Diad^ms of those that govern
the Universe are subjected, nay all Scepters do ^^rve but as latches to his
most rich sandals, as the Writers of the golden Temple do certify under the
Law of their Verities, and that through the whole habitable Earth: Know then,
that for the great Heresy thou have uttered, I have caused thy Paper to be
burnt, thereby representing the vile effigies of thy person, which I desire to
use in like manner for the enormous ^rime thou have committed; wherefore I
command thee to be speedily packing, that the River which bears thee may not be
accursed. So soon as the Interpreter had read the Letter, and expounded the
contents thereof, all that heard it were much vexed therewith, but no man was
so sensible of it as Antonio de Faria, who was exceedingly grieved to see
himself thus wholly deprived of all hope of recovering his Prisoners, wherefore
after they had well considered the insolent words of the Mandarins Letter, and
his great discourtesie, they in the end concluded to go ashore, and attaque the
Town, in hope that God would assist them, seeing their intentions were good;
For this effect they instantly prepared Vessels to land with, which were the
^our fishermens great Barques they had taken the night before: Whereupon taking
a muster of the Forces he could make for this enterprise, he found the number
to be three hundred, whereof forty were Portugals, the rest were Slaves and
Mariners, besides Quiay Panians men, amongst whom were an hundred and
threescore Harquebusiers, the others were armed with Pikes and Lance^; he had
also some Pieces of Ordnance, and other things necessary for his design.

The next morning a little before day Antonio de Faria sailed up the River with
three Junks,. 3.
the Lorches, and the four Barques he had taken, and so went and anchored at
six fathom and an half of water close by the walls of the Town; Then causing
the sails to be taken down without any noise, or discharge of Ordnance, he
displayed the Banner of Trade according to the fashion of China, to the end
that by this demonstration of peace no complement should rest unperformed,
although he was persuaded that nothing would prevail with the Mandarin:
Hereupon he sent another Messenger unto him, never making show that he had
received any ill usage from him, by whom with a great deal of complement he
demanded the Prisoners, and offered him a round sum of money for their ransom,
with a promise of perpetual correspondence and amity; But so far was this Dog
the Mandarin from harkening thereunto, that contrariwise he made the poor
Chinese, that carried the Letter, to be hewed in pieces, and so showed him from
the top of the wall to the whole Fleet, the more to despite us. This tragical
act wholly deprived Antonio de Faria of that little hope, which some had given
him for the deliverance of the Prisoners; hereupon the Soldiers, being more
incensed then before, said unto him, that since he had resolved to land, he
should no longer defer it, because further delay would but give his Enemies
leisure to gather more strength: This counsel seeming good to him, he presently
imbarqued with them he had chosen for the action, having first given order to
his Junks to shoot continually at the Town, and the Enemy, wheresoever they
perceived any ^tore of people assembled, howbeit with this caution, to forbear
till they saw them together by the ears with them. Having landed then about a
Faulcon shot below the Rode, he marched without any le^ along the shoars side
directly to the Town: In the mean time a number of people appeared upon the
walls, with diverse ensigns of different colors, where these Barbarous made a
mighty nois^ Fifes, Drums, and Bells, and withal hooting at us, made us signs
with their caps to approach, thereby intimating the little reckoning they made
of us: Now by that time we were come within a Musket shot of the walls, we
discerned some thousand, or twelve hundred men, as we guessed, sally out at two
several gates, of which some sixscore were mounted on horses, or to say better,
on lean carrion Tits that were nothing but skin and bone, wherewith they began
to course up and down the field in a skirmishing manner, wherein they showed
themselves so untoward, as they often ran one upon another, and tumbled down
together; which when Antonio de Faria saw he was exceeding glad, and
encouraging his men to the fight he stood firm attending the Enemy, who
continued still wheeling about us, being persuaded, it seems, that that would
suffice to skare us, and make us retire to our vessels; But when they perceived
us remain unmoved, without turning our backs as they believed, and as it may
be, they desired we would do, they closed themselves into one body, and so in
very ill order they made a stand without advancing on. But then our Captain,
seeing them in this posture, caused all his Musketeers to discharge at one
instant, who till that time had not stirred, which succeeded with such effect,
as it pleased God that he most part of this goodly Cavalry fell to the ground
with fear; we taking this for a good presage ran and lustily pursued them,
invoking to our aid the name of Jesus, whose good pleasure it was though his
divine mercy, to make our enemies slye before us so amazed, and in such
disorder, as they tumbled pell mell one upon another, in which manner arriving
at a bridge that crossed the town ditch, they were so pestered together, as they
could neither go forward nor backward; in the mean time our forces coming up to
them discharged their shot to such purpose amongst them, that we laid three
hundred of them on the earth, which in truth was a pitiful sight to behold,
because there was not one of them that had the heart so much as to draw a
sword: whereupon hotly pursuing the first point of this victory, we ran to the
g^te, where we found the Mandarin in the front of six hundred men, mounted upon
a good Horse, having on ^ cuirasse lined with purple Velvet, which had
belonged, as we knew afterward, to a Portugal, named Tome Perez, whom King Don
Emanoel of glorious memory had sent as Ambassador to China, in Fernando Perez
his ship, at such time as Lopo Suarez d' Albergaria governed the Indies. At the
entrance into the gate the Mandarin and his people made head against us, so
that there was a shrewd bickering between us, this enemy showing another manner
of courage then we had met with on the bridge; but by good hap it fortuned that
one of our servant hit the Mandarin just in the breast with an Harquebusse
shot, and overthrew him dead from his Horse, wherewith all the Chinesses were
so terrified, as they presently turned their backs, and in great disorder
retired within the gate, not one of them having the wit to shut it after them,
so that we chased them before us with our Lances, as if they had been a drove
of cattle: In this sort they fled pell mell together quite through a great
street, and issued out at another gate, which was on the lands from whence they
got all away, not so much as one remaining behind. Thereupon Antonio de Faria,
assembling his men into one body, for fear of some disorder, marched with them
directly to the prison, where our companions lay, who seeing us coming, gave a
great cry, saying, Lord have mercy upon us, straightway the doors and iron
grates were broken up, and our poor fellows irons knocked off their legs, which
being done, and they set at liberty, all our company had leave to make what
purchase they could, to the end that without speaking afterward of partition,
every one might be Master of what he had gotten. Howbeit Antonio de Faria
desired them to perform it suddenly, and therefore he gave them but half an
hours time for it, whereunto they all condescended very willingly, and so ^ell
to ransacking the houses. In the mean space Antonio de Faria went to that of
the Mandarin, which he took for his part, where he met with eight thousand
Taeis in silver, together with eight great vessels full of Musk, and that he
caused to be reserved for himself; the rest he left to the servants that were
with him, who moreover found there a great deal of raw Silk, Satin, Damask,
and fine Pourcellain, whereof every one took as much as he could carry, so as
the four Barques, and the three Champanaes, that brought our men on shore, were
four several times laden and unladen aboard the Juncks, insomuch that the
meanest Mariner amongst us spoke not of this booty but by whole cases, besides
what each one concealed in his particular.

But when Antonio de Faria perceived that an hour and half had been spent in
pillaging, he commanded a surcease thereof, but his company were so hot upon
the spoil, that by no means they would be drawn from it, wherein the persons of
quality were most saulty, in which regard our Captain fearing least some
disaster might happen by reason the night approached, he caused the Town to be
set on fire in eleven or twelve places; Now for that most of it was built of
Firr, and other wood, it was in such a flame within a quarter of an hour, as to
see it burn so, one would have taken it for a pourtraiture of Hell. This done,
and all our company retired, Antonio de Faria embarked without any impediment,
every man being well satisfied and contented, only it was great pity to
behold a number of handsome maids lead away, tied four and four and five and
five together with the matches of their Muskets, weeping and lamenting, whilst
our people did nothing but laugh and sing.

CHAP. XXIII. Antonio de Faria's Navigation till he came to the Port of
Liampoo; his arrival and gallant reception there by the Portugals.
AFter that Antonio de Faria had embarked his men, the first thing he did was
^o give order for the dressing of those that were hurt,. 1.
which were in number fifty, whereof eight of them were Portugals, and the
rest slaves and Mariners: He also took care for the burial of the dead, that
were not above nine, of which only one was a Portugal. All that night we kept
good watch, and placed Sentinels in sundry parts, for fear of the Junks that
were upon the River; The next morning as soon as it was day, our Captain went
to a little Town that was on the other side of the water, where he met not with
any Inhabitant, they being all fled, howbeit he found a great deal of
Merchandise in their houses, together with good store of Victuals, wherewith he
had laded the Junks, fearing lea^t that which he had done in this place, should
be the occasion of barring him from being furnished with any in the Ports where
he should happen to arrive. Furthermore, by the advice of his company, he
resolved to go and winter, during the three months he had yet to make his
voyage in, at a certain desert Island, distant some fifteen leagues from the
Sea of Liampoo, called Pullo Hinhor, where there was a good road, and good
water; whereunto he was chiefly induced, because he thought that going directly
to Liampoo, his voyage thither might bring some prejudice to the traffic of
the Portugals, who wintered there peaceably with their goods: And indeed this
advice was so approved of every one, as it was generally applauded. Being
departed then from Nouday* after we had sailed five days between the Isles of
Comolem, and the continent, we were set upon on Saturday about noon by a
Pirate, named Premata Gundel, a sworn enemy to the Portugals, unto whom he had
oftentimes done much damage, as well at Patana, as at Sunda, Siam, and many
other places, when he found himself the stronger. This Rover believing that we
were Chinese came and assailed us with two great Juncks, wherein there were
two hundred fighting men, besides Mariners; One of them being grappled to Mem
Taborda's Junk had almost made her self Master of it, which Quiay Panian
perceiving, who was a little before, he turned upon her, and with full sails
running her on the Sta^board side gave her so terrible a shock, that they sank
both together, whereby Mem Taborda was delivered from the danger he was in,
howbeit Quia Panian was instantly, and so opportunely succored by three
Lorches, which Antonio de Faria had taken a little before at Nouday, that all
his men in a manner were saved, but every one of the enemies were drowned: In
the mean time the Pyrate Premata Gundel, setting upon the great Junk, wherein
Antonio de Faria was, the first thing he did was to grapple her poop to prow
with two great cramp-irons, fastened to long chains, whereupon began such a
fight betwixt them, as deserved to be seen, which for half an hour was so
courageously maintained by the Enemy, that Antonio de Faria and most of his
men were hurt, and himself besides in danger twice to have been taken;
nevertheless it was his good hap to be relieved in time by three Lorches, and
a small Junck, commanded by Pedro de Sylva, by which means it pleased God that
ours not only recovered what they had lo^t, but pressed the Enemy in such
sort, as the fight ended with the death of fourscore and six Mahometans, which
were in Antonio de Faria's Junk, and had held him up so strait, that our men
had nothing left them but the fore-deck in her: After this we entered into the
Pirates Junck, and put all those to the edge of the Sword that we found there,
not sparing so much as one, all the Mariners having cast themselves before into
the Sea. Howbeit we got not this victory so cheap, but that it cost seventeen
men's lives, whereof five were Portugals, and of the best Soldiers we had,
besides three and forty were hurt* Antonio de Faria being one of them, who had
one wound with a dart, and two with a sword. The fight being ended in this
sort, an Inventorie was taken of all that was in the enemies Junck, and this
prize was estimated at fourscore thousand Ta^is, the better part whereof
consisted in Lingots of silver of Iapan, which the Pirate had taken in three
Merchants Ships, that from Firando were bound for Chincheo, so that the Pirate
had in this only vessel to the value of sixscore thousand crowns, and it was
thought that the other Junck which was sunk was worth ^s much, to the extreme
grief of all our company. With this prize Antonio de Faria retired to a little
Island, called Buncalou, which was three or four Leagues Westward from thence,
and much commended for good water, and safe riding: Having landed in this
place, we spent eighteen days there, lodging in Cabbins, that were made for
the accommodation of our hurt men. From this Island we sailed toward that
part, whither we had resolved before to go, namely, Antonio de Faria in the
great Junk, Mem Taborda, and Antonio Anriquez in theirs, Pedro de Sylva in the
little Junk, that was taken at Nouday, and Quiay Panian with all his followers
in the Pirates, last taken, which was given him in recompense of his that he had
lost, together with twenty thousand Taeis out of the general booty, wherewith
he rested very well contented, being done with the consent of the whole company
at the request of Antonio de Faria. Sailing in this manner we arrived six days
after at the Ports of Liampoo, which are two Islands, one just against another,
distant three Leagues from the place, where at that time the Portugals used
their commerce; There they had built above a thousand houses, that were
governed by Sheriffs, Auditors, Consuls, Judges, and six or seven other kind
of Officers, where the Notaries underneath the public Acts, which they made,
wrote thus, I* such a one, public Notarie of this Town of Liampoo for the
King our Sovereign Lord. And this they did with as much confidence and
assurance, as if this place had been situated between Santarem and Lisbon; so
that there were houses there which cost three or four thousand Ducats the
building, but both they and all the rest were afterward demolished for our
sins by the Chinese, as I hope to relate more amply hereafter: Whereby one may
see how uncertain our ^ffairs are in China, whereof the Portugals* discourse
with so much curiosity, and abused by apparances make such account, never
considering what hazard they hourly run, and how they are exposed to infinite
disasters.

. 2.
Between these two Islands, which the Inhabitants of the Country, and they that
sail in those Seas, call the Ports of Liampoo, there is a channel, some two
Harquebuse shot over, and five and twenty fathom deep, where in certain places
is very good anchoring, as also a pleasant River of fresh water, which takes
his beginning from the top of a mountain, and passes by thick woods of Cedar,
Oak, and Firr trees, whereof many Ships make their provision for Sail-yards,
Masts and Planks, never costing them a penny. At these Islands Antonio de Faria
cast anchor on Wednesday morning, and there Mem Taborda, and Antonio Anriquez
desired him to give them leave to go and advertise the Town of his Arrival, as
likewise to understand the news of the Country, and whether there was any
speech of that which he had done at Nouday; For in case his coming should prove
never so little prejudicial to them, he was resolved (as I have formerly
related) to winter in the Isle of Pullo Hinhor, concerning the which they
promised with all diligence to advertize him so much as they could learn: To
this request of theirs, Antonio de Faria condescended very willingly, and
withal sent certain Letters by them, directed to the Principal Governors of
the Town, whereby he made them a brief Recital of the success of his Voyage,
and instantly desired them to advise him what they would have him to do, being
ready to obey them accordingly, with many other complements of kindness, from
whence oftentimes much profit arises, without any charge at all. Antonio
Anriquez and Mem Taborda departed about evening, and within two hours of night,
they arrived at the Town, where as soon as the Inhabitants heard the effect of
their Message, they presently assembled upon the ringing of a Bell, at the
Church of the conception of our Lady, being the Cathedral of six or seven
others in the Town, there they deliberated upon the Letters which Antonio
Anrqiuez and Mem Taborda had delivered, and in the end having considered the
great liberality that Antonio de Faria had used, as well to them as to all the
rest that had part in the Junk, they concluded to acknowledge it unto him by
all demonstrations of affection; For which purpose they returned him a Letter,
signed by them all, as the Resolution of a General Assembly, and sent it him
together with two Lantea^^ full of diverse refreshments, and that by an ancient
Gentleman, named Ieronimo de Rego, a Personage of great wisdom and authority
amongst them: In this Letter they g^ve him thanks in very courteous terms,
both for the exceeding favor he had done them by rescuing their goods out of
the enemies hands, and for the noble T^stimonie he had given them of his
affection by his extraordinary liberality toward them, for which they hoped
that God would thoroughly requite him: As for the fear he was in touching his
wintering there, by reason of what had past at Nouday, he might be confident
that way, because the Country was so full of trouble, by occasion of a mighty
uprore that was then amongst the people thereof, as if he had razed the very
City of Canton it self, they would not much regard it, wherefore he might well
think they would care much less for that which he had done at Nouday, which
in China, compared with many others, was no greater then Oeyras in Portugal is,
being equally with Lisbon: And concerning the good news he had sent them of his
arrival in their Port, they earnestly desired him to continue still at anchor
there six days longer, that they might in the mean while make some fit
preparation for his entertaiment, seeing that thereby only they should be able
to testify their good will unto him, having not the power other ways to
acquit so many obligations, wherein they stood engaged unto him. These words of
kindness were accompanied with many other complements, whereunto Antonio de
Faria returned them a most courteous Answer, and condescending to their desire,
he sent all his sick men on shore in the two Lanteaas, which brought the
refreshments, whom those of Liampoo received with great show of affection and
charity, for presently they were lodged in the richest houses of the Town, and
plentifully accommodated with all things necessary for them, wanting nothing.
Now during the six days Antonio de Faria remained in that place, there was not
a man of any quality in all the Town, but came and visited him with many
presents, and diverse sorts of provisions, refreshments, and fruits, and that in
such abundance, that we were amazed to behold them, the more too for the good
order and magnificence wherewith every thing was accompanied.

During the six days,. 3.
that Antonio de Faria continued in the Port according to his promise to them
of Liampoo, he never budgd from his Ships* At length on Sunday morning before
day, which was the time limited for our going to the Town, an excellent consort
of Music was heard, both of Instruments and Voices, the harmony whereof was
wonderfully pleasing, and after that a Triumph of Drums and Trumpets together,
according to the manner of our own country: Then some two hours before
Sunrising, the night being very quiet, and the Moon exceeding bright, Antonio
de Faria set sail with his whole Fleet, having all his Ships decked with Silken
Flaggs, and streamers of sundry Colors, and every scuttle both of the greater
and lesser masts hung round about with cloth of Silver, and many brave
Standards of the same: After these Vessels followed a number of row-Barges,
wherein were a great many of Trumpets, Hoboyes, Flutes, Fifes, Drums, and other
such Instruments, each one of a several Invention.

When it was broad day the wind began to calm, as we were within half a League
of the Town, whereupon there came presently to us some twenty Lanteaas, very
well set forth, and full of Musicians, that played on diverse Instruments; So in
less then an hour we arrived at the Road, but first there came aboard Antonio
de Faria about threescore Boats and Manchaas, adorned with Pavilions and
Banners of Silk, as also with Turkey Carpets of great value; In these Boats
were about three hundred men, all richly apparrelled, with chains of Gold, and
guilt Swords, hanging in Belts after the fashion of Afric, every thing so
well accommodated, that we which beheld this Equipage, were no less contented
then astonished therewith. With this train Antonio de Faria came to the Town,
where there stood ranged in excellent order twenty six ships, and fourscore
Junks, besides a great sort of Vancons and Barcasses, all in File one after
another, so making as it were a fair long street, every where beautified with
Pines, Laurels, and green Canes, with many Triumphal Arches, beset with
Cherries, Pears, Lemons, Oranges, and sundry odoriferous green Herbs, wherewith
the Masts and Cordage were covered all over. As soon as Antonio de Faria came
near the place, which was prepared for his landing, he saluted the Town with a
great pe^l of Ordnance, which was instantly answered with the like by all the
Ships, Junks and Barques before mentioned, in order, a matter very pleasing,
and wherewith the Chinese Merchants were so taken, as they demanded of us,
Whether this man, unto whom we did so much honor, was either the brother or
kinsman of our King? whereunto certain chief me^ of the Town answered, That his
Father shod the Horses, whereon the King of Portugal rode, and that in that
regard all this honor was done him; adding withal, That they thought
themselves scarce worthy to be his slaves, much less his servants; The
Chinese believing all this to be true, said one to another, as it were in
admiration; Verily, there be great Kings in the world, whereof our ancient
Historians for want of knowledge of them have made no mention in their
Writings, and it seems that above them all, the King of these Portugals is to
be most esteemed, for by that which is delivered to us of his greatness, he
must needs be richer, more mighty, and greater then either the Tartar, or the
Cauchin, as is most apparent, since be that shoes his horses, which is but an
ordinary and contemptible trade in every Country, is so respected by those of
his Nation; Whereupon another that heard his Companion say thus, Certainly,
said he, this Prince is so great, that if it were not a blasphemy, one might
almost compare him to the Son of the Sun; The rest that were about him added,
It well appears to be so by the great riches which this bearded Nation get in
every place where they come by the power of their arms, wherewith they affront
all the People of the world. This salutation being ended on either part, a
Lanteaa came aboard Antonio de Faria's Junk, gallantly equipped, and covered
all over with boughs of Chestnut trees, full of their bristled ^ruit just as
they grew, and intermingled with delicate small green trees, which those of the
Country call Lechias, stuck every where with most fragrant Roses and Violets,
all plashed so close together, that we could not see the Rowers; now upon the
upper end of the Deck of this Vessel, there was a kind of State set up, made
of Tynsell, under the which stood a silver chair, and about it six girls of
about some ten or eleven years of age a piece, wonderful beautiful, and that
very harmoniously accorded their voices, to certain Instruments of Music
whereon they played: In this Lanteaa then Antonio de Faria embarked himself,
and so arrived at the Key with a great noise of Hoyboys, Trumpets, Drums,
Fifes, and other such like, after the manner of the Chinese, Malayoes,
Champaas, Siamites, Borneos, Lequios, and other people, that were then in the
Haven under the protection of the Portugals, for fear of the Pi^ates, which in
great numbers overran all that Sea. Being landed he found a chair of State
provided for him, like unto one of those wherein the principal Cha^ms of the
Empire are usually carried; In this, but with much refusal first on his side,
was he placed, and it being supported by eight silver pillars, it was taken up
by eight of the chiefest persons amongst them, apparrelled in gowns of cloth of
Gold richly imbroidered, and so was he carried on their shoulders into the
Town, environed with threescore Halberdeers, bravely set forth, and their
Halberds Damasked with ^old and Silver, before him also marched eight Sergeants
at Arms, carrying great guilt Maces, clothed in Hongarlines of Crimson-Velvet
embroidered with Gold; In the head of them rode eight Knights mounted on
gallant white Steeds, and attired in Satin of the same color, with white
Damask Ensigns, and brave plumes of white Feathers, and foremost of all were
eight other men likewise on Horseback, wearing Crimson, and green Velvet Caps,
which ever and anon cried out after the manner of China for people to make way.
In this sort was Antonio de Faria carried along till alighting out of his chair
he went to visit the Governors of the Town, who in way of complement
prostrated themselves at his feet, wherein some small time being spent, two
ancient Gentlemen, who had lived long in that place, the one named Tristan de
Gaa, and the other Ieronimo de Rego, made an eloquent Oration in the
commendation of him: That done, he was led from thence to the Church through a
long street, adorned on both sides with Laurel and Firr Trees, below strewed
with Rushes, and above hung with Satin and Damask, amongst the which diverse
court-cupboards were placed, whereon stood very curious perfuming pans of
Silver, from whence most pleasing and delicious odours breathed forth: Near to
the end of this street was a Tower of Deal Boards erected, painted all over, as
if it had been stone, on the top whereof, under a Banner of white Damask, the
Royal Arms of Portugal were limned in Gold; and in a window of the same Tower,
certain little Boys were drawn, attired after the Portugal fashion, as al^o an
old Woman, that seemed to weep, and hold a man lying dis-membred at her feet,
whom some eleven or twelve armed Castillians were a killing, having their
Halberds and Partisans dyed with his blood; All which Figures were done so to
the life, that one would have thought them to have been the very persons they
represented. Now this was to signify how Nimo Goncalles de Faria, chief of
that Noble Family, gave for his arms his own body, at such time as he was
slain in the Wars, that had been anciently between Castile and Portugal.
Presently hereupon as soon as a clock, that was on the top of the said Tower,
had struck thrice, and that the people upon this signal were all silent, there
came a venerable old man out of the principal gate, apparrelled in a robe of
Crimson Damask, accompanied with four Beadles, which carried silver Maces
before him: Having made a lovv reverence to Antonio de Faria, he told him in
terms full of respect, how much all the Inhabitants were obliged unto him, as
well for the great liberality he had used toward them, as for the favor he
had done them, by having been the only cause of the recovery of their goods,
in acknowledgement whereof they all offered themselves to be his Vassals for
the time to come, and to do him the Homage of Tributaries as long as he lived:
And further, if he pleased to cast his eye upon that Table before him, he
should behold there as in a clear Mirror, with how much fidelity his Ancestors
had gained the honorable name of his Family, as it was manifest to all the
people of Spain, whereby he might well perceive how much it was for his honor
that he had performed such generous actions, in regard whereof he most
earnestly besought him, and that in the Name of them all, that for a beginning
of the Tribute, which they offered to give him by way of Vassallage, he would
be pleased to accept of a small Present, they now had brought him, only for to
defray the charge of Match for his Soldiers, and that for the rest wherein
they stood so far engaged to him, they promised to dis-oblige themselves in
time and place convenient; whereupon they presented him with five C^ses full of
Lingots of Silver, to the value of ten thousand Taeis. Antonio de Faria having
very courteously thanked the good old man for this many Honors had hitherto
been done him, as also for the present they now offered unto him, excused
himself from receiving of it, though he were very much importuned thereunto.

Antonio de Faria setting forward then to go to the Church, whither he was to
have been conducted under a rich Canopie,. 4.
which six of the chiefest and honourablest Inhabitants of Liampoo were there
ready with for him, he would by no means accept of it, telling them that he
was not born to have so much honor as they would do him, and so he proceeded
on without other pomp then ordinary, being ac^mpanied with a world of people,
as well Portugals as others of diverse Nations, who for commerce sake wete come
to that Port, as the best and richest that was then in that Country. In the
mean space wheresoever he cast his eye he saw nothing but public rejoycings,
which consisted in daunces, Masks, and Plays of several kinds, invented by
those of the Country that lived amongst us; all which became more splendidious
by the Trumpets, Cornets, Hoboys, Flutes, Harps, Vials, Fifes, and Drums, that
were heard in every corner, and confounded together in a Labyrinth of Voices
after the manner of China, which so amazed the sense, that one knew not whether
it were a dream or no, so extraordinary it seemed: Being arrived at the Church
door, eight Priests came forth to receive him covered with Copes all
embroidered with Gold and Silver, who going in Procession began to sing Te
Deum, whereunto many excellent voices tuned to the Organs answered, which made
up as harmonious Music as could be heard in the Chapel of any great Prince:
In this sort he was carried up to the High Altar, where there was a State of
White Damask, and under it a Chair of Carnation Velvet, and at the foot of it a
Cushion of the same; In this Chair he sat him down and heard Mass, which was
celebrated with a great deal of Ceremony, and a mavelous consort both of
Voices and Instruments. Mass being ended, the Sermon followed, that was made
by Estevano Nogueyra, an ancient man, and Curate of the place, who, to speak
the truth through discontinuance of preaching, was but little verst in Pulpit
matters, and illiterate vvithall, howbeit desiring to show himself that day a
learned man in so remarkable a solemnity, he labored to make demonstration of
his best Rhetoric; To which effect he grounded all his Sermon on the Praises
of Antonio de Faria, and that in words so ill placed, and so far from his Text,
as our Captain was much ashamed at it, wherefore some of his friends plucked him
three or four times by the Surplis for to make him give over, wherewith being
ne^led, he turned him about to those that would have had him leave off, I will
not, said he unto them, but will rather say more, for I speak nothing but that
which is as true as Gospel, in regard whereof, let me alone I pray you, for I
have made a vow to God never to desist from commending this noble Captain, as
he more then deserves at my hands, for saving me seven thousand Ducats
venture, that Mem Taborda had of mine in his Iunk, and was taken from him by
that dog Coia Acem, for which let the soul of so cursed a rogue and wicked
Devil be tormented in Hell for ever and ever, whereunto say all with me, Amen.
This Conclusion provoked all the Assembly so to laugh, that we could not hear
one another in the Church for the noise that was made there. This tumult over,
there came out of the Vestry six little Boys, attired like Angels, with
Instruments of Music in their hands guilt all over, and then the same Priest
falling on his knees before the Altar of our Lady, and lifting up his hands,
began to sing aloud these words, Virgin, you are a Rose, wh^reunto the little
Boys answered very melodiously with their Instruments, all being performed
with such harmony and devotion, as it drew tears from most of the Assistants.

5.
Mass being finished, the four principal Governors of the Town, namely, Mateus
de Brito, Lancarote Pereyra, Ieronimo de Rego, and Tristan de Gaa, came unto
Antonio de Faria, and b^ing accompanied with all the Portugals, which were
above a thousand in number, they conducted him into a great place before the
Town Hall, that was compassed about with a small thick wood of Chestnut Trees,
all full of Fruit just as they grew, adorned above with Standards and Banners
of Silk, and strewed below with Flower de luces, and Red and White Roses,
whereof there is great abundance in China. In this Wood were three long Tables
set, under a goodly spacious Arbor, that was covered over with Myrtle, and
round about were diverse Conduits of Water, which ran from one to the other by
certain Inventions of the Chinese, that were so subtle, as one could not
possibly discern the secret; For by the means of a kind of Bellows like unto
that of an Organ, that was joined to the principal Conduit, the water
rebounded up so high, that when it came to descend again it fell as small as
dew, so that with one only pot full of water, they could gently moisten that
great place; before these three Tables were three Court-cup-boards placed, upon
the which was a great deal of very fine Pourcelain, and six huge Vessels of
Gold, that the Chinese Merchants had borrowed of the Mandarins of the Town of
Liampoo; For in that Country Persons of quality are served all in Gold, Silver
being for those of meaner condition: They brought likewise diverse other pieces
all of Gold, as great Basins, Saltsellers and Cups. After they were dismissed
which were not for the Banquet, there only remained those that were invited,
being fourscore in number, besides fifty of Antonio de Faria's Soldiers:
These being set at Table were served by young Wenches, very beautiful, and
finely apparrelled, according to the manner of the Mandarins; At every course
that was served up they sung very melodiously to the tune of certain
Instruments vvhereon some of their companions played: As for Antonio de Faria
he was served by eight Maidens, the Daughters of worthy Merchants, exceeding
fair and comely, whom their Fathers had brought thither for that purpose at the
request of Mateus de Brito, and Tristan de Gaa; They were attired like
Mermaids, and carried the meat to the Table, dancing to the sound of diverse
Instruments, a mavelous thing to behold, and vvherewithal the Portugals were
so mightily taken, as they could not sufficiently commend the excellent Order
and Gentilenesse of these Magnificencies, by which their eyes and ears were so
charmed; Remarkable it was also, that at every health, the Trumpets, Hoboys,
and Drums played their parts. In this sort the Banquet continued two hours,
during which there was alvvayes one device or other after the Portugal or
Chinese fashion. I will not stand here to recount the delicacy or abundance of
the meats, that were served up in it, for it would be a matter not only
superfluous, but even infinite to recite every thing in particular. After they
were risen from Table, they went all to another great place, that was
environed with Scaffolds, all hung with Silk, and full of People, where ten
Bulls and five vvild Horses were baited, being accompanied with the sound of
Trumpets, Fifes, and Drums; in sequel whereof, diverse Mumme^ies of several
Inventions were represented. Now because it was late Antonio de Faria would
have imbarqued himself again for to have returned unto his Ships, but they of
the Town would by no means suffer him, for they had prepared the Houses of
Tristan de Gaa, and Mateus de Brito for his lodging, having caused a Gallerie
to be built from the one to the other for that purpose; There was he lodged
very commodiously during the space of five Months that he abode in that place,
always entertained with new sports and delights of Fishing, Hunting, Hawking,
Comedies, and Masks, as also with sumptuous Feasts, as well on Sundays and
Holidays, as other Days of the Week, so that we passed these five Months in
such pleasure, as at our departure we did not think we had been there five
days. This term expired Antonio de Faria made preparation of Vessels and Men,
for his Voyage to the Mines of Quoaniapar^, for in regard the season was then
proper for it, he resolved to be gone as soon as possibly he could, but in the
mean time it happened that Quiay Panian fell into a dangerous sickness, whereof
not long after he died, to the extreme grief of Antonio de Faria, who
exceedingly affected him for many good qualities that were in him, worthy of
his friendship, and therefore he caused him to be honorably buried, as the
last duty that he could do to his Friend. After the the death of Quiay Pa^ia^
he was counseled not to hazard himself in that Voyage, because it was reported
for a certainty, how all that Country was up in arms by reason of the Wars
which the Prechau Muan had with the Kings of Chamay, and Champaa; And withal
he had Information given him of a famous Pirate, named Similau, whom he went
presently to seek out, and having found him, the said Similau related strange
wonders unto him of an Island, called Calempluy, where he assured him there
were seventeen Kings of China interred in Tombs of Gold, as also a great
number of Idols of the same Met^al, and such other immense treasures, as I dare
not deliver, for fear of not being credited. Now Antonio de Faria, being
naturally curious, and carried with that ambition, whereunto Soldiers are for
the most part inclined, lent so good ear to this Chinese report, as looking
for no other assurance of it then what he gave him, he presently resolved to
undertake this Voyage, and expose himself to danger, without taking further
counsel of any man, whereat many of his friends were with reason offended.

CHAP. XXIV. Antonio de Faria departs from Liampoo for to seek out the Island
of Calempluy, the strange things that we saw, and the hazard we ran in our
voyage thither.
THe season being now fit for Navigation,. 1.
and Antonio de Faria furnished with all that was necessary for this new
Voyage, which he had undertaken to make on Monday the fourteenth of May, in the
year one thousand five hundred forty and two, he departed from this Port to go
to the Island of Calempluy* For which purpose he imbarqued in two Pa^oures,
resembling small Galleys, but that they were a little higher, by reason he was
counseled not to use Junks, as well to avoid discovery, as in regard of the
great curran^^ of water that descended from the Bay of Nanquin, which great
Vessels with all their sails were not able to stem, especially at the time
wherein he set forth, for then the snows of Tartaria and Nixihu^fla^ dissolving
ran all the Months of May, June, and July, into these Seas with a most violent
impetuosity. In these two Vessels were fifty Portugals, one Priest to say
Mass, and forty eight Mariners, all Natives of Patana, as also two and
forty slaves, so that the whole number of our company amounted to an hundred
forty and one persons, for the Pirate Simila^, who was our Pilot, would have no
more men, nor Vessels, for fear of being known, because he was to traverse the
straight of Nanquin, and to enter into Rivers that were much frequented,
whereby we might probably be subject to great haz^rd. That day and all the night
following we employed in getting out from amongst the Islands of Angitur, and
pursued our course through Seas, which the Portugals had neither seen nor
sailed on till then. The first five days we had the wind favorable enough,
being still within sight of land till we came to the mouth of the River of the
Fishings of Nanquin; There we cro^t over a Gulf of forty leagues, and
discovered a very high Mountain, called Nangafo, toward the which bending
Northerly, we sailed fifty days; at length the wind abated somewhat, and
because in that place the Tides were very great, Similau put into a little
River, where was good anchoring and riding, inhabited by men that were white
and handsome, having very little eyes, like to the Chinese, but much different
from them, both in language and attire. Now during the space of three days,
that we continued there, the Inhabitants would have no manner of communication
with us, but contrariwise they came in troops to the shore, by which we
anchored, and running up and down like madmen they howled in a most hideous
fashion, and shot at us with slings and cross-bows. As soon as the weather and
the sea would permit us, Similau, by whom all was then governed, began to set
sail, directing his course East Northeast, and so proceeded seven days in
sight of land; then traversing another Gulf, and turning more directly to the
East, he past through a straight, ten le^gues over, called Sileupaquin; There
he sailed five days more, still in view of many goodly Cities and Towns, this
River being frequented with an infinite company of Vessels; whereupon Antonio
de Faria, knowing that if he happened to be discovered he should never escape
with life, resolved to get from thence* and continue this course no longer,
which Similau perceiving, and opposing the advice that every one gave him;
Signior, said unto him, I do not think that any of your company can accuse me
for mis-performing my duty hitherto, you know how at Liampoo I told you
publicly in the General Council that was held in the Church before an hundred
Portugals at the least, that we were to expose our selves to great dangers, and
chiefly my self, because I was a Chinese and a Pilot, for all you could be made
to endure but one death, whereas I should be made to endure two thousand if it
were possible, whereby you may well conclude, that setting apart all treason, I
must of necessity be faithful unto you, ^s I am, and ever will be, not only
this Voyage, but in all other enterprises, in despite of those that murmur,
and make false reports unto you of me; howbeit if you fear this danger so much
as you say, and are therefore pleased that we shall take some other way less
frequented with men and vessels, and where we may sail without dread of any
thing, then you must be contented to bestow a far longer time in this voyage,
wherefore resolve with your company upon it without any further delay, or let
us return back, for lo I am ready to do whatsoever you will. Antonio de Faria,
embracing, and giving him many thanks, fell to discourse with him about that
other safer way of which he spoke: Whereupon Similau told him, that some
hundred and forty leagues further forwards to the North, there was a River
somewhat larger by half a league, called Sumhepadano, where he should meet with
no Obstacle, for that it was not peopled like the straight of Nanquin, wherein
they now were, but that then they should be retarded a month longer, by the
exceeding much winding of this River. Antonio de Faria thinking it far better
to expose himself to a length of time, then to hazard his life for abridgement
of way, followed the counsel that Similau gave him; so that going out of the
straight of Nanquin, he coasted the land five days, at the end whereof we
discovered a very high Mountain toward the East, which Similau told us was
called Fanius; approaching somewhat near unto it we entered into a very fair
Port, forty fathom deep, that extending it self in the form of a Crescent was
sheltred from all sorts of winds, so spacious withal, as two thousand Vessels
how great soever might ride there at ease. Antonio de Faria went ashore with
some ten or eleven Soldiers, and rounded this haven, but could not meet with
any one body, that could instruct him in the way he pretended to make, whereat
he was very much vexed, and greatly repented him for that without any kind of
consideration, or taking advice of any one, he had rashly, and out of a
capacious humor, undertaken this Voyage: Howbeit he dissembled this
displeasure of his the best he could for fear lest his company should tax him
with want of courage. In this Haven he discoursed again with Similau before
every one concerning this our Navigation, which he told him was made but by
guess; whereunto the Chinese answered, Signior Captain, If I had any thing I
could engage to you of more value then my head, I protest unto you I would most
willingly do it, for I am so sure of the course I hold, that I would not fear
to give you my very children in Hostage of the promise I made you at Liampoo:
Nevertheless I advertise you again, that if repenting the undertaking of this
enterprise you fear to proceed any further, in regard of the tales your people
are ever tatling in your ear, as I have often observed, do but command, and you
shall find how ready I am to obey your pleasure: And whereas they would make
you believe that I spin out this Voyage longer then I promised you at Liampoo,
the reason thereof you know well enough, which seemed not amiss when I
propounded it unto you, seeing then you once allowed of it, let me entreat you
to set your heart at rest for that matter, and not to break off this design by
returning back, whereby at length you shall find how profitable this patience
of yours will prove. This speech somewhat quieted Antonio de Faria's mind, so
that he bid him go on as he thought best, and never trouble himself with the
murmuring of the Soldiers, whereof he complained, saying, that it was ever the
manner of such as were idle, to find fault with other men's actions, but if
they did not mend their error the sooner, he would take a course with them to
make them to do it; wherewith Similau rested very well satisfied and contented.

. 2.
After we were gone from this Haven, we sailed along the coast above thirteen
days together, always in sight of land, and at length arrived at a Port,
called Buxipalem, in the height of forty nine degrees. We found this Climate
somewhat colder then the rest, here we saw an infinite company of Fishes and
Serpents, of such strange forms, as I cannot speak of them without fear;
Similau told Antonio de Faria incredible things concerning them, as well of
what he had seen himself, having been there before, as of that had been
reported unto him, especially in the full Moons of the months of November,
December, and January, when the storms reign there most, as indeed this Chinese
made it appear to our own eyes, whereby he justified unto us the most of that
which he had affirmed. For in this place we saw Fishes in the shape of
Thornbacks that were four fathoms about, and had a Muzzle like an Ox; likewise
we saw others resembling great Lizards, spotted all over with green and black,
having three rows of prickles on their backs, that were very sharp, and of the
bigness of an arrow; their bodies also were full of the like, but they were
neither so long, nor so great as the others: These Fishes would ever and anon
bristle up themselves like Porcupines, which made them very dreadful to behold,
they had Snouts that were very sharp and black, with two crooked teeth out of
each jawbone, two spans long, like the tusks of a wild Boar. We also saw Fishes
whose bodies were exceeding black, so prodigious and great, that their heads
only were above six spans broad. I will pass over in silence many other
Fishes of sundry sorts, which we beheld in this place, because I hold it not
fit to stand upon things that are out of my discourse, let it suffice me to
say, that during two nights we stayed here we did not think our selves safe,
by reason of the Lizards, Whales, Fishes and Serpents, which in great numbers
showed themselves to us. Having left this Haven of Buxipalem, by us called the
River of Serpents, which in great numbers showed themselves to us, Similau
sailed fifteen leagues further to another Bay named Calindano, which was in
form of a Crescent, six leagues in circuit, and environed with high Mountains,
and very thick woods, amidst whereof diverse Brooks of fresh waters descended,
which made up four great Rivers that fell all into this Bay. There Similau told
us, that all those prodigious creatures we had both seen and heard of, as well
in this Bay, as in that where we were before, came thither to feed upon such
Ordure and Carrion, as the overflowing of these Rivers brought to this place.
Antonio de Faria demanding of him thereupon, whence those Rivers should
proceed, he answered that he knew not, but it was said that the Annals of China
affirmed, how two of those Rivers took their beginnings from a great L^ke,
called Moscombia, and the other two from a Province, named Alimania, where
there are high Mountains, that all the year long are covered with Snow, so that
the Snow coming to dissolve, these Rivers swelled in that manner as we then
beheld them, for now they were bigger, then at any other time of the year.
Hereunto he added, that entering into the mouth of the River, before the which
we rode at anchor, we should continue our course, steering Eastward, for to
find out the Port of Nanquin again, which we had left two hundred and
threescore leagues behind us, by reason that in all this distance we had
multiplied a greater height then that of the Island was, which we were in quest
of. Now although this was exceeding grievous unto us, yet Similau desired
Antonio de Faria to think the time we had past well spent, because it was done
for the best, and for the better securing of our lives; being asked then by
Antonio de Faria how long we should be in passing through this River, he
answered that we should be out of it in fourteen or fifteen days, and that in
five days after he would promise to land him and his Soldiers in the Island
of Calempluy, where he hoped fully to content his desire, and to make him
think his pains well bestowed, whereof he now so complained. Antonio de
Faria, having embraced him very lovingly thereupon; vowed to be his friend for
ever, and reconciled him to his Soldiers, who were very much out with him
before. Being thus reconfirmed by Similau^ speeches, and certified of this new
course we were to take, he encouraged his company, and put all things in
order convenient for his design, to that end preparing his Ordnance which till
then had never been charged; he caused also his Arms to be made ready, ordained
Captains, and Sentinels to keep good vvatch, together with all besides that he
thought necessary for our defense, in case of any attempt upon us. That done,
he spoke unto Diego Lobato, who was the Priest that we carried along with us,
and one that we much respected as a man of the Church, to make a Sermon unto
his company for to animate them against all dangers that might happen, which he
worthily performed, and by the efficacy of his words, full of sweetness, and
excellent examples, he so revived our spirits, that before were much dejected
through the apprehension of the dangers that menaced us, as there was not one
amongst us, but presently took fresh heart, boldly to execute the enterprise
we had undertaken: Whereupon with great devotion and zeal we sung a Salvo,
before an Image of our Lady, every man promising without any future fear to
finish the Voyage we had begun. That done, we joyfully hoysed sail, and
entering into the mouth of the River, steering directly East, and with tears in
our eyes invoked from the bottom of our hearts, the assistance of that
Sovereign Lord which sits at the right hand of the Father everlasting, to
preserve us by his Almighty power.

. 3.
Continuing on our course with the force of Oars and Sails, and steering diverse
ways, by reason of the many turnings of the River, the next day we arrived at
a very high mountain called Botinafau, whence sundry Rivers of fresh water ran
down. In this mountain were a number Tigers, Rhinocerots, Lions, Ounces, and
such other creatures of several kinds, which running and roaring in their
wild manner, made cruel war upon other weaker Beasts, as Stags, Boars, Apes,
Monkeys, Baboons, Wolves, and Foxes, wherein we took much delight, spending a
great deal of time in beholding them; and ever and anon we cried out from our
Ships to fright them, but they were little moved with it, in regard they were
not used to be hunted: We were about six days in passing this Mountain, it
being some forty or fifty leagues long. Within a pretty while after we had left
this Mountain we came to another, named Gangitanon, no less wild then the
former, beyond the which all the Country was very stony, and almost
inaccessible; moreover it was full of such thick Woods, as the Sun could not
possibly pierce them with his beams: Similau told us, that in this mountain
there were ninety leagues of desert land, altogether unfit for Tillage, and the
bottom thereof only was inhabited by certain most deformed men, called
Gigauhos, who lived after a most brutish fashion, and fed on nothing but what
they got in hunting, or some Rice, that the Merchants of China brought them to
Catan in exchange of Fu^^es; which the said Merchants carried from thence to
Pocasser and Lantau, amounting yearly as by the Books of the Customs thereof
appeared, to the number of twenty thousand Ca^es, each Ca^e, or pack,
containing threescore skins, wherewith the people used in winter to line their
Gowns, hang their Houses, and make coverings for their Beds, to withstand the
cold of the Climate, which is great there. Antonio de Faria wondering at the
Relation this Chinese made of the deformity of these Gigauhos, desired him if
it were possible to let him see one of them, whereby he said he should more
content him then if he should give him the treasures of China; whereunto
Similau made him this Answer, Signior Captain, since it it so much imports me,
as well to maintain my credit with you, as to stop their mouths that murmur
against me, and that jogging one another scoff at me, when I recount these
things unto you, which they account as so many Fables, and to the end that by
the truth of the one, they may be ascertained of the other, I will promise
before Sunsetting yet to show you a couple of these people, and that you shall
also speak with them, upon condition you do not go ashore, as you have still
used to do hitherto, for fear some mischance should happen to you, as many
times it does to Merchants in like cases: For I assure you, that the Gigauhos
are of so savage and brutish a nature, as they feed on nothing commonly but raw
flesh and blood, like the wild Beasts that live in this Forest. So continuing
our course all along the side of this Mountain, at length behind a little
point of land, we discovered a young youth, without ere an hair on his face,
driving six or seven Cows before him, that pastured there by. Similau making a
sign to him with a napkin, he presently stayed, whereupon coming a little
nearer to him, Similau showed him a piece of green Taff^^a, which he told us
was a stuff very acceptable to these brutish men, and withal by signs
demanded of him whether he would buy it; this drew him to the bank of the
River, were he answered with an hoarse voice, some words that we could not
comprehend, because there was not one in all our Vessels that understood this
barbarous language, so that of necessity this commerce was to be made by signs:
Antonio de Faria commanded three or four yards of the said piece of Taffeta to
be given him, as also six Pourcelains, wherewith this Salvage seemed to be very
well pleased, for taking both the one and the other, transported with joy he
said something to us, which we could understand no better then the former, then
making a sign with his hand toward the place of his abode, he left his Cows,
and ran away to the wood, clothed as he was with a Tigers skin, his arms and
legs naked, bare-headed, and a staff hardened at one end with the fi^e in his
hand. For his person, he was well proportioned of his limbs, his hair red and
curled hanging down on his shoulders; his stature by conjecture was above ten
foot high, but we were amazed to see him return about a quarter of an hour to
the very same place again, c^rrying a live Stag on his back, and having
thirteen persons in his company, namely eight men and five women, leading three
Cows ^yed together, and dancing as they went at the sound of a kind of Tabor,
upon the which they beat five strokes at a time, and as often clapped their
hands together singing to it, with a very hoar^e voice in their language.
Hereupon Antonio de Faria caused five or six pieces of silk stuff, and a great
many of Pourcelains to be showed them, for to make them believe that we were
Merchants, at the sight whereof they very much rejoiced. These persons, both
men and women, were apparrelled all after one and the same fashion, without any
kind of difference, saving that the women wore great tinnen Bracelets about
the middle of their arms, and their hair a great deal longer then the men's,
stuck all about with flowers, resembling our Flower de luces; they had chains
also of red Cockles about their necks, almost as big as Oyster-shels; as for
the men they carried great staves in their hands, covered to the midst with
the same skins wherewith they were clothed; moreover they had all of them
fierce looks, great lips, flat noses, wide nosthrils, and were of stature very
tall, but yet not so high as we thought they had been; for Antonio de Faria
having caused them to be measured, he found that the tallest of them exceeded
not ten spans and an half, except one old man that reached to eleven. The
women's stature was not fully ten spans: Their very countenances showed them to
be very rude and blockish, and less rational, then all the other people which
we had seen in our Conquests. Now Antonio de Faria being glad that we had not
altogether lost our labor, bestowed on them threescore Pourcelains, a piece of
green Taffety, and a pannier full of Pepper, wherewith they seemed to be so
contented, that prostrating themselves on the ground, and lifting up their
hands to heaven, they fell to saying certain words which we took for a
thanksgiving after their manner, because they fell down three several times on
the earth, and gave us the three Cows and the Stag, as also a great many of
Herbs: Having been talking about two hours with them by signs, and no less
wondering at us, then we at them, they returned into the wood from whence they
came, and we pursued our course up the River by the space of five days, during
the which we saw more of them along by the water side; after we had past all
this distance of land, which might be some forty leagues, or thereabouts, we
navigated sixteen days more with the force of Oa^s and Sails, without seeing
any person in that desert place, only for two nights together we discerned
certain fires a good way off at land: In the end it pleased God that we arrived
at the Gulf of Nanquin, as Similau had told us, with a hope in five or six
days to see our desires accomplished.

Being come into the gulf of Nanquin, Similau councelled Antonio de Faria,. 4.
that at any hand he should not suffer any Portugal to be seen, because if such
a thing should happen he feared some uproar would follow amongst the Chinese,
in regard no strangers had ever been seen in those quarters; adding withal,
that it would be safer for them to keep still in the middle of the gulf, then
by the shore, by reason of the great number of Lorches and Lanteaas, that
incessantly sailed up and down; this advice was approved of every one, so that
having continued our course some six days East and East Northeast, we
discovered a great Town, called Sileupamor, whither we directly went, and
entered the Haven about two hours within night, where we found an infinite
company of Vessels riding at anchor, to the number, according to our thinking,
of three thousand at the least, which gave us such an alarm, as not daring
scarce to wag we got out again with all the secrecy that might be; crossing
over the whole breadth of the River then, which was some six or seven
leagues, we prosecuted our course all the rest of that day, and coacted along
by a great plain, with a resolution to accommodate our selves with Victuals
wheresoever we could first meet with any, for we were in such scarcity, as
for thirteen days together, no man had more then three mouthfuls of boiled
Rice allowance. Being in this extremity we arrived close to certain old
buildings, there went ashore one morning before day, and fell upon a house,
that stood a little way off from the rest, where we found a great quantity of
Ryce, some Beans, dive^s pots full of Honey, poudred Geese, Onions, Garlic, and
Sugar Canes, vvherevvith we thoroughly furnished our selves: Certain Chinese
told us afterward, that this was the storehouse of an Hospital, which was
some two leagues off, where such were entertained, as past that way in
Pilgrimage to the Sepulchers of the Kings of China; Being re-imbarqued, and
well provided of Victual, we continued on our voyage seven days more, which
made up two months and an half, since we put out of Li^mpoo; Then Antonio de
Faria began to mistrust the truth of what Similau had said, so that he repented
the undertaking of this voyage, as he confessed publicly before us all,
nevertheless in regard there was no other remedy for it but to recommend
himself to God, and wisely to prepare for all that might happen, he
courageously performed it. Hereupon it fell out that Antonio de Faria having
one morning demanded of Similau in what part he thought they were, he answered
him so far from the purpose, and like a man that had lost his judgment, or
that knew not which way he had gone, as put Antonio de Faria into such choler,
that he was going to st^b him with a Poniard that he wore, which without doubt
he had done* had he not been diverted from i^ by some, that counseled him to
forbear, lest it should be the cause of his utter ruin, whereupon moderating
his anger he yielded to the advice of his friends, nevertheless he was not for
all that so contained, but that taking him by the Beard he swore, that if
within three days at the farthest, he did not let him see, either the truth or
the falsehood of what he had told him, he would Poniard him infallibly,
wherewith Similau was so exceedingly terrified, that the night following as we
were abiding by the shore he slid down from the Vessel into the River, and that
so closely, as he was never discovered by the Sentinels or any other until the
end of the first Watch, when as Antonio de Faria was thereof advertised: This
news put him so far besides himself, as he lost all patience, the rather for
that ^e feared some revolt upon it from his Soldiers, who he saw were too much
disposed thereunto. But he presently went ashore with a great many of his
company, and spent the most part of the night in seeking of Similau, without
meeting him, or any other living soul that was able to tell any news of him,
but the worst of it yet was, that upon his return into his Junk, of forty six
Chinese Mariners, that he had aboard him, he found six and thirty fled away to
prevent the danger they were afraid of, whereat Antonio de Faria and all his
company were so amazed, that lifting up their hands and eyes to heaven, they
stood a long time mute, their tears supplying the defect of their speech,
thereby testifying the secret sorrow of their hearts, for considering well what
had happened unto them, and the great peril they were in, the least that they
could do in this confusion was to lose their courage and judgment, much more
their speech. Howbeit falling at length to consult what we should do for the
future, after much diversity of opinion, it was in the and concluded, that we
should pursue our design, and labor to take some body that might inform us how
far it was from thence to the Island of Cal^^pl^y, and this to be done as
secretly as possible might be for fear the Country should rise; likewise that
if upon the report should be made us we found it would be (...) t^ke^* ^s
Similau had assured us, we should then proceed on, otherwise, that we should
(...) wi^h the current of the water, which would bring ^s directly to the Sea
with its ordinary course. This resolution taken and approved of every one, we
went on with no less confusion then fear, for in so manifest a danger we could
not choose but be very much perpl^^ed; the night following about break of day we
discovered a little B^rque ^ he^d of us riding at (...) in the midst of the
River; her we boarded with as little noise as might be, and took five men
asleep in her, whom Antonio de Faria questioned each one apart by himself, to
see how they would agree in that they said: To his demands they answered all of
them, that the Country wherein we were, was called Temquil^m, from whence the
Island of Cal^mpl^y was distant but ten leagues, and ^o many other questions
propounded (...) ^he^ for our common security, they answered likewise
separately one from the other to very good purpose, wherewith Antonio de Faria
and his whole company, were exceedingly well satisfied, but yet it grieved us
not a little, to think what an inconvenience the lack of Similau would prove to
us in this attempt; however Antonio de Faria causing the five Chinese to be
arrested, and chained to oars, continued his course two days and an half
more, at the end whereof it pleased God that doubling a cape of land, called
Guimai Tar^^, we discovered this Island of Cal^mpluy, which we had been
fourscore and three days seeking for with extreme confusion of pains and
labor, as I have before related.

CHAP. XXV. Our Arrival at C^lempluy, and the description thereof; what happened
to Antonio de Faria in one of the Hermitages thereof, and how we were
discovered.
. 1.
HAving doubled the Cape of Cuimai Tar^^, two leagues beyond it, we discovered a
goodly level of ground, situated in the midst of a River, which to our
seeming was not above a league in circuit, whereunto Antonio de Faria
approached with exceeding great joy, which yet was int^rmingled with much
f^^r, because he knew not to what danger he and his were exposed; about twelve
of the clock at night he anchored within a Canon shot of this Island, and the
next morning as soon as it was day he sat in Council with such of his
company as he had called to it, there it was concluded that it was not possible
so great and magnificent a thing should be without some kind of guard, and
therefore it was resolved that with the greatest silence that might be, it
should be rounded all about, for to see what advenues it had, or what Obstacles
we might meet with when there was question of landing, to the end that
accordingly we might deliberate more amply on that we had to do: With this
Resolution, which was approved by every one* Antonio de Faria weighed anchor,
and without any noise got close to the Island, and compassing it about exactly
observed every particular that presented it self to his sight. This Island was
all enclosed with a platform of Jasper, six and twenty spans high, the stones
whereof were so neatly wrought, and joined together, that the wall seemed to be
all of one piece, at which every one greatly marvelled, as having never seen
any thing till then, either in the Indiaes, or elsewhere, that merited
comparison with it; this Wall was six and twenty spans deep from the bottom of
the River to the Superficies of the water, so that the full height of it was
two and fifty spans. Furthermore the top of the Platform was bordered with the
same stone, cut into great Tower-work; Upon this wall, which environed the
whole Island, was a Gallerie of Balisters of turned Copper, that from six to
six fathom joined to certain Pillars of the same Metal, upon each of the which
was the figure of a Woman holding a bowl in her hand; within this gallery were
diverse Monsters cast in metal, standing all in a row, which holding one
another by the hand in manner of a dance encompassed the whole Island, being as
I have said, a league about: Amidst these monstrous Idols there was likewise
another row of very rich Arches, made of sundry colored pieces; a sumptuous
work, and wherewith the eye might well be entertained and contented; Within was
a little wood of Orange Trees, without any mixture of other plants, and in the
midst an hundred and threescore Hermitages dedicated to the gods of the year,
of whom these Gentiles recount many pleasant Fables in their Chronicles for the
defense of their blindness in their f^l^^ belief: A quarter of a league beyond
these Hermitages, toward the East, diverse goodly great Edifices were seen,
separated the one from the other with seven fore-fronts of Houses, built after
the manner of our Churches; from the top to the bottom as far as could be
discerned, these buildings were guilt all over, and annexed to very high
Towers, which in all likelihood were Steeples; their Edifices were environed
with two great streets arched all along, like unto the Frontispieces of the
Houses; these Arches were supported by very huge Pillars, on the top whereof,
and between every arch was a dainty Prospective; now in regard these buildings,
towers, pillars and their chapters, were so exceedingly guilt all over, as one
could discern nothing but Gold, it persuaded us that this Temple must needs be
wonderful sumptuous and rich, since such cost had been bestowed on the very
Walls. After we had surrounded this whole Island, and observed the adven^es and
entries thereof, notwithstanding it was somewhat late, yet would Antonio de
Faria needs go ashore to see if he could get any Intelligence in one of those
Hermitages, to the end he might thereupon resolve, either to prosecute his
design, or return back: So having left a guard sufficient for his two Vessels,
and Diego Lobato, his Chaplain, Captain of them, he landed with forty
Soldiers, and twenty slaves, as well Pikes, as Harquebuses; He also carried
with him four of the Chinese, which we took a while before, both for that they
knew the pla^e well, as having been there at other times, and likewise that
they might serve us for truthmen and guides: Being got to the shore unespied of
any one* and without noise, we entered the Island by one of the eight Advenues
that it had, and marching through the midst of the little wood of
Orange Trees we arrived at the gate of the first Hermitage, which might be some
two Musket Shot from the place we dis-imbarqued, where that happened unto us
which I will deliver hereafter.

Antonio de Faria went directly to the next Hermitage he saw before him with
the greatest silence that might be, and with no little fear,. 2.
for that he knew not into what danger he was going to ingag^ himself; which he
found shut on the inside, he commanded one of the Chinese to knock at it, as
he did two or three times, when at last he heard one speak in this manner,
Praised be the Creator, who has enameled the beauty of the skies, let him that
knocks at the gate go about, and he shall find it open on the other side,
where let me know what he desires. The Chinese went presently about, and
entering into the Hermitage by a back door, he opened the ^orega^e to Antonio de
Faria, and let him in with all his followers; There he found an old man, that
seemed to be an hundred years old; he was apparelled in a long violet colored
damask gown, and by his countenance appeared to be a man of quality, as we
understood afterward: Being amazed to see so many men, he fell to the ground,
where he lay a good while without speaking a word, howbeit at length he began
to be better confirmed, and beholding us with a serious look, he gravely
demanded of us what we were, and what we would have; whereunto the Interpreter
answered by the express commandment of Antonio de Faria, that he was a Captain
stranger, a native of the Kingdom of Siam, and that sailing in a Junk of his,
laden with merchandise, and bound for Liampoo, he had suffered shipwreck,
whence he had miraculously escaped with all his company, and for that he had
vowed to make a pilgrimage to this holy place, to praise God for preserving him
from so great a peril, he was now come to perform his vow; also to crave
somewhat of him by way of alms, whereby his poverty might be relieved,
protesting within three years to render him twice as much as he should then
take from him: whereupon the Hermit, named Hiticon, having mused a little on
the matter, and fixing his eye on Antonio de Faria: Whoever thou art, said he
unto him, know that I thoroughly understand what thou say, and that I
perceive but too well thy damnable intention, wherewith out of the obscurity of
thy blindness, like an infernal pilot, thou carriest both thy self, and these
others, into the profound abism of the lake of night: for instead of rendering
thanks to God for so great a favor, as thou confessest he has showed thee,
thou come hither to rob this holy house: But let me ask thee, if thou
executest thy mischievous design, what will the divine Justice, think thou,
do with thee at the last gasp of thy life? Change then thy perverse
inclination, and never suffer the imagination of so great a sin to enter thy
thoughts; give credit unto me that tells thee nothing but the very truth, even
as I hope to thrive by it all the rest of my life. Antonio de Faria seeming to
approve of the counsel, which the old Hermit gave him, earnestly desired him
not to be displeased, assuring him that he had no other means or way left to
relieve him and his, but what he could find in that place: To which the Hermit
wringing his hands, and lifting up his eyes, said weeping, Praised be thou, O
Lord, that permittest men to live on the earth, who offend thee under pretext
of seeking means to live, and that vouchsafe not to serve thee one hour,
although they know how assured thy glory is. After he had uttered these words,
he remained very pensive and much troubled to see the great disorder we used in
breaking up the coffins, and flinging them out of their places; at length
looking upon Antonio de Faria, who stood leaning upon his sword, he entreated
him to sit down by him, which he did with a great deal of compliment, not
desisting for all that from making signs to his soldiers to persist as they
had begun, that was to take the silver which was mingled amongst the bones of
the dead in the tombs, that they brake up; whereat the Hermit was so grieved as
he fell down twice in a swoon from his seat, but being come to himself, he
spoke thus to Antonio de Faria, I will declare unto thee as to a man that seems
discreet, the means whereby thou may obtain pardon for the sin, which thou
and thy people now commit, to the end that thy soul may not perish eternally,
when as the last breath of thy mouth shall go out of thy body: Seeing then, as
thou say, that it is necessity constrains thee to offend in this grievous
manner, and that thou have a purpose to make restitution before thou dyest, of
that thou take away from hence; if thou have time and power, thou may do
these three things: First, thou must render again what thou now carriest away,
that the Sovereign Lord may not turn his mercy from thee: Secondly, thou must
with tears ask him forgiveness for thy fault, which is so odious unto him,
never ceasing to chastise thy flesh both day and night: And thirdly, thou must
distribute thy goods to the poor, as liberally as to thy self, giving them alms
with prudence and discretion, to the end the servant of the night may have
nothing to accuse thee of at the last day. Now, for recompense of this counsel,
I desire thee to command thy followers to gather together the bones of the
Saints, that they may not be despised on the earth. Antonio de Faria promised
him very courteously to perform his request, wherewith the Hermit was a little
better at quiet then before, but yet not fully satisfied, howbeit he spoke him
very fair, and assured him that after he had once seen him, he very much
repented the undertaking of this enterprise, but his soldiers had threatened to
kill him, if he returned without executing of it, and this he told him as a
very great secret, God grant it be so, replied the Hermit, for that thou shall
not be so blameworthy as these other monst^rs of the night, which are so
greedy, like to famished dogs, that it seems all the silver in the world is not
able to satiate them.

3.
After we had gathered all the silver together, that was in the graves amongst
the dead men's bones, and carried it abord our ships, we were all of opinion not
to go any farther to the rest of the Hermitages, as well because we knew not
the Country, as for that it was almost night, upon hope that the next day we
might continue our enterprise more at leisure. Now before he reinba^qued
himself, Antonio de Faria took leave of the Hermit, and giving him very good
words, he desired him for Gods sake not to be offended with that his followers
had done, being constrained thereunto by mere necessity: for as his for
particular he exceedingly abhorred such like actions, adding withal, that at
the first sight of him, he would have returned back, out of the remover of
conscience, and true repentance; but that his company had hindered him, saying,
that if he did so, they would surely kill him; so that for to have his life he
was compelled to yield and consent thereunto, though he plainly saw that it was
a very great sin, in regard whereof he was resolved, as soon as he could rid
his hands of them, to go up and down the world to perform such penance as was
requisite for the purging of him from so enormous a crime. Hereunto the Hermit
answered, Pleases the Lord, who living, reigns above the beauty of the
stars, that the knowledge, which by this discourse, thou show to have, be
not prejudicial unto thee; For I be assured, that he who knows these things,
and does them not, runs a far greater danger, than he that sins through
ignorance. Then one of ours, named Nuno Coelho, who would needs have an oar in
our talk, told him, that he was not to be angry for a matter of so small
importance; whereunto the Hermit beholding him with so stern a countenance,
answered, Certainly, the fear which thou have of death is yet less, since thou
imployest thy self in actions as infamous and black as the soul that is in thy
body; and for my part, I cannot but be persuaded, that all thy ambition is
wholly placed upon money, as but too well appears by the the thirst of thy
insatiable avarice, whereby thou will make an end of heaping up the measure of
thine infernal appetite: Continue then thy theeveries, for seeing then thou
must go to hell for that which thou have already taken out of this holy house,
thou shall also go thither for those things which thou shall steal otherwise,
so the heavier the burden shall be that thou bear, the sooner shall thou be
precipitated into the bottom of hell, where already thy wicked works have
prepared thee an everlasting abode. Hereupon Nuno de Coelho prayed him to take
all things patiently, affirming that the Law of God commanded him so to do.
Then the Hermit lift up his hand by way of admiration, and as it were smiling
at what the soldier had said, Truly, answered he, I am come to see, that I
never thought to see or hear, namely, evil actions disguised with a specious
pretext of virtue, which makes me believe that thy blindness is exceeding
great, since trusting to good words, thou spendest thy life so wickedly,
wherefore it is not possible thou should ever come to Heaven, or give any
account to God at the last day, as of necessity they must do. Saying so, he
turned him to Antonio de Faria, without attending further answer from him, and
earnestly desired him not to suffer his company to spit upon and profane the
altar, which he vowed was more grievous to him, then the enduring of a thousand
deaths; whereupon to satisfy him, he presently commanded the forbearance of
it; wherewith the Hermit was somewhat comforted; Now because it grew late,
Antonio de Faria resolved to leave the place, but before he departed he held it
necessary to inform himself of certain other particulars, whereof he stood in
some doubt, so that he deserved of the Hermit how many persons there might be
in all those Hermitages: whereunto Hiticon answered, that there were about
three hundred and threescore Talagrepos, besides forty Menigrepos, appointed to
furnish them with things requisite for their maintenance, and to attend them
when they were sick: moreover he asked him, whether the King of China came not
sometimes thither; he told him, No, for, said he, the King cannot be condemned
by any body, he is the son of the Sun, but contrarily he had power to absolve
every one. Then he enquired of him if there were any arms in their Hermitages?
O no, answered the Hermit, for all such as pretend to go to heaven have more
need of patience to endure injuries, then of arms to revenge themselves: Being
also desirous to know of him the cause why so much silver was mingled with the
bones of the dead. This silver, replied the Hermit, comes of the alms that the
deceased carry with them out of this into the other life, for to serve them at
their need in the heaven of the Moon, where they live eternally: In conclusion,
having demanded of him whither they had any women, he said, That they which
would maintain the life of their souls, ought not to taste the pleasures of the
flesh, seeing experience made it apparent, that the Be which nourishes her
self in an honeycomb, does often sting such as offer to meddle with that
sweetness. After Antonio de Faria had propounded all these questions, he took
his leave of him, and so went directly to his ships, with an intention to
return again the next day, for to set upon the other Hermitages, where, as he
had been told, was great abundance of silver, and certain Idols of gold, but
our sins would not permit us to see the effect of a business, which we had been
two months and an half a purchasing with so much labor and danger of our
lives, as I will deliver hereafter.

. 4.
At the clearing up of the day, Antonio de Faria, and all of us, being
embarked, we went and anchored on the other side of the Island, about a
faulcon shot from it, with an intent, as I have before declared, to go a shore
again the next morning, and set upon the Chapels where the Kings of China were
interred, that so we might the more commodiously lade our two vessels with such
treasures, which peradventure might have succeeded according to our desires, if
the business had been well carried, and that Antonio de Faria had followed the
counsel was given him, which was, that since we had not been as yet discovered,
that he should have carried the Hermit away with him, to the end he might not
acquaint the House of the Bonzos with what we had done; howbeit he would never
hearken to it, saying, that we were to fear nothing that way, by reason the
Hermit was so old, and his legs so swollen with the gout, as he was not able to
stand, much less to go: But it fell out clean contrary to his expectation, for
the Hermit no sooner saw us imbarqued, as we understood afterward, but he
presently crawled as well as he could to the next Hermitage, which was not
above a flight shoot from his, and giving intelligence of all that had past, he
bad his companion, because himself was not able, to go away with all speed to
the Bonzo^s house to acquaint them with it, which the other instantly
performed; so that about midnight we saw a great many of fires lighted on the
top of the wall of the Temple, where the Kings were buried, being kindled to
serve for a signal to the Country about, of some extraordinary danger toward:
This made us ask of our Chinese, what they might mean, who answered, that
assuredly, we were discovered, in regard whereof they advised us without any
longer stay to set sail immediately; Herewith they acquainted Antonio de Faria,
who was fast asleep, but he straightway arose, and leaving his anchor in the
sea, rowed directly, afraid as he was, to the Island, for to learn what was
done there: Being arrived near to the Key, he heard many bells ringing in each
Hermitage, together with a noise of men talking, whereupon the Chinese that
accompanied him, said, Sir, never stand to hear or see more, but retire, we
beseech you, as fast as you may, and cause us not to be all miserably slain
with your further stay; Howbeit little regarding, or afraid of their words, he
went ashore only with six soldiers, having no other arms but swords and
targots, and going up the stairs of the Key, whither it were that he was vexed
for having lost so fair an occasion, or carried thereunto by his courage, he
entered into the gallery, that environed the Island, and ran up and down in it
like a mad man, without meeting any body; That done, and being returned abord
his vessel, much grieved and ashamed, he consulted with his company about what
they should do, who were of opinion that the best course we could take, was to
depart, and therefore they required him to put it accordingly in execution;
Seeing them all so resolved, and fearing some tumults among the soldiers, he
was fain to answer, that he was also of their mind, but first he thought it fit
to know for what cause they should fly away in that manner, and therefore he
desired them to stay for him a little in that place, because he would try
whether he could learn by some means or other the truth of the matter, whereof
they had but a bare suspicion; for which, he told them, he would ask but half
an hour at the most, so that there would be time enough to take order for any
thing before day; some would have alleged reasons against this, but he would
not hear them, wherefore having caused them all to take their oaths, upon the
holy Evangelists, that they would stay for him, he returned to land with the
same soldiers, that had accompanied him before, and entering into the little
wood, he heard the sound of a bell, which addressed him to another Hermitage,
far richer then that wherein we were the day before: There he met with two men,
apparaled like Monks, with large hoods, which made him think they were Hermits,
of whom he presently laid hold, wherewith one of them was so terrified, as he
was not able to speak a good while after: Hereupon four of the six soldiers
past into the Hermitage, and took an Idol of silver from the altar, having a
crown of gold on its head, and a wheel in its hand; they also brought away
three candlesticks of silver, with long chains of the same belonging to them:
This performed, Antonio de Faria carrying the two Hermits along with him, went
abord again, and sailing away, he propounded diverse questions to him, of the
two, that was least afraid, threatening to use him in a strange fashion if he
did not tell the truth. This Hermit seeing himself so menaced, answered, That
an holy man, named Pilau Angiroo came about midnight to the house of the Kings
Sepultures, where knocking in haste at the gate, he cried out, saying; O
miserable men, buried in the drunkenness of carnal sleep, who by a solemn vow,
have professed your selves to the honor of the Goddess Amida, the rich reward of
our labou^s, hear, hear, hear, O the most wretched men that ever were born,
There are strangers come into our Island, from the further end of the World,
which have long beards, and bodies of Iron, these wicked creatures have entered
into the Holy House of the seven and twenty Pillars, of whose sacred Temple an
holy man is keeper, that has told it me, where after they had ransacked the
rich treasures of the Saints, they contemptedly threw their bones to the
ground, which they profaned with their stinking and infectious spitting, and
made a mockery of them like Devils, obstinate and hardened in their wretched
sins, wherefore I advise you to look well to your selves, for it is said, that
they have sworn to kill us all as soon as it is day: Fly away then, or call
some people to your succor, since being Religious men you are not permitted to
meddle with any thing that may shed the blood of man. Herewith they presently
arose and ran to the gate, where they found the Hermit laid on the ground, and
half dead with grief and weariness through the imbecility of his age;
whereupon the Grepos and Meingrepos made those fires that you saw, and withal
sent in all haste to the Towns of Corpilem, and Fonbana, for to succor them
speedily with the Forces of the Country, so that you may be assured it will not
be long before they fall upon this place with all the fury that may be. Now
this is all that I am able to say concerning the truth of this affair,
wherefore I desire you to return us both unto our Hermitage with our lives
saved, for if you do not so you will commit a greater sin, then you did
yesterday: Remember also that God, in regard of the continual penance we
perform, has taken us so far into his protection, as he does visit us almost
every hour of the day, wherefore labor to save your selves as much as you
will, yet shall you hardly do it; For be sure, that the earth, the air, the
winds, the waters, the beasts, the fishes, the fowls, the trees, the plants,
and all things created will pursue and torment you so cruelly, as none but he
that lives in heaven will be able to help you. Antonio de Faria being hereby
certainly informed of the truth of the business sailed instantly away, tearing
his hair and beard for very rage, to see that through his negligence and
indiscretion he had lost the fairest occasion, that ever he should be able to
meet withal.

CHAP. XXVI. Our casting away in the Gulf of Nanquin, with all that befell us
after this lamentable Shipwreck.
WE had already sailed seven days in the Gulf of Nanquin, to the end that the
force of the Current might carry us the more swiftly away,. 1.
as men whose safety consisted wholly in flight, for we were so desolate and
sad, that we scarce spoke one to another; In the mean time we arrived at a
Village, called Susequerim, where no news being come either of us, or what we
had done, we furnished our selves with some Victual, and getting Information
very covertly of the course we were to hold, we departed within two hours
after, and then with the greatest speed we could make we entered into a
straight, named Xalingau, much less frequented then the gulf, that we had
past; here we navigated nine days more, in which time we ran an hundred and
forty leagues, then entering again into the said Gulf of Nanquin, which in that
place was not above ten or eleven leagues broad, we sailed for the space of
thirteen days from one side to another with a Westerly wind, exceedingly
afflicted, both with the great labor we were fain to endure, and the cruel
fear we were in, besides the want we began to feel of Victuals: In this case
being come within sight of the mountains of Conxinacau, which are in the height
of forty and one degrees, there arose so terrible a Southwind, called by the
Chinese Tufaon, as it could not possibly be thought a natural thing, so that
our Vessels being low built, weak, and without Mariners, we were reduced to
such extremity, that out of all hope to escape we suffered our selves to be
driven along the coast, as the current of the water would carry us, for we held
it more safeto venture our selves amongst the Rocks, then to let us be
swallowed up in the midst of the Sea, and though we had chosen this design, as
the better and less painful, yet did it not succeed, for after dinner the
wind turned to the North-west, whereby the Waves became so high, that it was
most dreadful to behold; Our fear then was so extreme, as we began to cast all
that we had into the Sea, even to the Chests full of Silver: That done, we cut
down our two Masts, and so without M^sts and Sails we floated along all the
rest of the day; at length about midnight we heard them in Antonio de Faria's
Vessel cry, Lord have mercy upon us, which persuaded us that they were cast
away, the apprehension whereof put us in such a fright, as for an hour together
no man spoke a word. Having past all this sad night in so miserable a plight,
about an hour before day our Vessel opened about the Keel, so that it was
instantly full of water eight spans high, whereupon perceiving our selves to
sink, we verily believed, it was the good pleasure of God that in this place
we should finish both our lives and labors: As soon then as it was day we
looked out to Sea, as far as possibly we could discern, but could no way
discover Antonio de Faria, which put us quite out of heart, and so continuing
in this great affliction till about ten of the clock, with so much terror and
amazement, as words are not able to express, at last we ran against the coast,
and even drowned as we were, the Waves rouled us toward a point of Rocks, that
stood out into the Sea, where we were no sooner arrived but that all went to
pieces, insomuch that of five and twenty Portugals, which we were, there were
but fourteen saved, the other eleven being drowned, together with eighteen
Christian Servants, and seven Chinese Mariners. This miserable disaster happened
on a Monday, the fifth of August, in the year one thousand five hundred forty
and two, for which the Lord be praised everlastingly.

. 2.
We fourteen Portugals, having escaped out of this shipwreck by the mere mercy
of God, spent all that day, and the night following, in bewailing our
mis^fortune, and the wretched estate whereunto we were reduced, but in the end
consulting together, what course to take for to give some remedy thereunto, we
concluded to enter into the Country, hoping that far or near we should not fail
to meet with some body, that taking us for slaves, would relieve us with meat,
till such time as it should please Heaven to terminate our travels with the end
of our lives. With this Resolution we went some six or seven leagues over rocks
and hills, and on the other side discovered a great Marsh, so large and void,
as it past the reach of our sight, there being no appearance of any land beyond
it, which made us turn back again, toward the same place where we were cast
away; being arrived there the day after about Sunset, we found upon the shore
the bodies of our men, which the Sea had cast up, over whom we recomenced our
sorrow and lamentations, and the next day we buried them in the sand, to keep
them from being devoured by the Tigers, whereof that Country is full, which we
performed with much labor and pain, in regard we had no other tools for that
purpose but our hands and nails; After these poor bodies were interred we got
us into a Marsh, where we spent all the night, as the safest place we could
choose to preserve us from the Tigers: From thence we continued our journey
toward the North, and that by such Precipes and thick woods, as we had much
ado to pass through them. Having traveled in this manner three days, at
length we arrived at a little straight, without meeting any body, over the
which resolving to swim, by ill fortune the four first that entered into it,
being three Portugals and a young youth, were miserably drowned, for being very
feeble, and the straight somewhat broad, and the current of the water very
strong, they were not able to hold out any longer when they came to the midst;
so we eleven with three servants that remained, seeing the unfortunate success
of our companions, could do nothing but weep and lament, as men that hourly
expected such or a worse end. Having spent all that dark night, exposed to the
wind, cold, and rain, it pleased our Lord that the next morning before day we
discovered a great fire toward the East, whereupon as soon as the day broke,
we marched fair and softly that way, recomending our selves to that Almighty
God from whom alone we could hope for a remedy to our miseries, and so
continuing our journey all along the River, the most part of that day, at last
we came to a little wood, where we found five men making of coals, whom on our
knees we besought for Gods sake to direct us to some place where we might get
some relief; I would, said one of them, beholding us with an eye of pity, it
lay in our power to help you, but alas! all the comfort we can give you is to
bestow some part of our Supper on you, which is a little rice, wherewith you
may pass this night here with us if you will, though I hold it better for you
to preceed on your way, and recover the place you see a little below, where you
shall find an Hospital that serves to lodge such Pilgrims, as chance to come
into these quarters. Having thanked him for his good address, we fell to the
Rice they gave us, which came but to two mouthfuls a piece, and so took our
leaves of them, going directly to the place they had showed us, as well as our
weakness would permit.

About an hour within night, we arrived at the Hospital, where we met with four
men,. 3.
that had the charge of it, who received us very charitably: The next morning
as soon as it was day they demanded of us, what we were, and from whence we
came? Thereunto we answered, that we were strangers, natives of the Kingdom of
Siam, and that coming from the Port of Liampoo to go to the fishing of Nanquin,
we were cast away at sea by the violence of a storm, having saved nothing out
of this shipwreck, but those our miserable and naked bodies. Whereupon
demanding of us again, what we intended to do, and whither we would go; we
replied, that we purposed to go to the City of Nanquin, there to imbarque our
selves as rowers in the first Lanteaa, that should put to sea, for to pass unto
Cantan, where our countrymen by the permission of the Aito of Panquin,
exercised their traffic under the protection of the son of the Sun, and Lion
crowned in the throne of the world, wherefore we desired them for Gods cause to
let us stay in that Hospital, until we had recovered our healths, and to bestow
any poor clothes of us to cover our nakednedness. After they had given good ear
unto us; It was reason, answered they, to grant you that which you require with
so much earnestness, and tears; but in regard the House is now very poor, we
cannot so easily discharge our duties unto you as we should, howbeit we will do
what we may with a very good will; Then quite naked, as we were, they lead us
all about the Village, containing some forty or fifty fires, more or less; the
inhabitants whereof were exceeding poor, having no other living but what they
got by the labor of their hands, from whom they drew by way of alms some two
Taeis in money, half a Sack of rice, a little meal, aricot beans, onions, and a
few old rags, wherewith we made the best shift we could; over and above this
they bestowed two Taeis more on us out of the Stock of the Hospital: But
whereas we desired that we might be permitted to stay there, they excused
themselves, saying, that no poor might remain there above three days, or five
at the most, unless it were sick people, or women with child, of whom special
care was to be had, because in their extremities they could not travel without
endangering their lives, wherefore they could for no other persons whatsoever
transgress that Ordinance, which had of ancient time been instituted by the
advice of very learned and religious men; nevertheless, that three leagues from
thence, we should in a great Town, called Sileyiacau, find a very rich
hospital, where all sorts of poor people were entertained, and that there we
should be far better looked unto then in their house, which was poor, and
agreeable to the place of its situation, to which end they would give us a
letter of recommendation, by means whereof we should incontinently be received.
For these good offices we rendered them infinite thanks, and told them that God
would reward them for it since they did it for his sake, whereupon an old man,
one of those four, taking the Speech upon him, It is for that consideration
alone we do it, answered he, and not in regard of the world; for God and the
World are greatly different in matters of works, and of the intention which one
my have in the doing of them; For the world being poor and miserable as it is,
can give nothing that is good, whereas God is infinitely rich, and a friend to
the poor, that in the he^ghth of their afflictions praise him with patience and
humility; The world is revengeful, but God is suffering; the world is wicked,
God is all goodness; the world is gluttonous, God is a lover of abstinence; the
world is mutinous and turbulent, God is quiet and peaceable; the world is a
liar and full of dissimulation to them that belong to it, God is always true,
free, and merciful to them that invoke him by prayer; the world is sensual and
covetous, God is liberal, and purer then the light of the Sun, or stars, or
then those other lamps which are far more excellent then they that appear to
our eyes, and are always present before his most resplendent face; the world is
full of irresolution and falsehood, wherewith it entertains it self in the smoke
of its vain glory, whereas God is constant in his truth, to the end that
thereby the humble may possess glory in all sincerity of heart; In a word, the
world is full of folly and ignorance, contrarily God is the fountain of wisdom;
wherefore my friends, although you be reduced to so pitiful an estate, do you
not for all that distrust his promises; for be assured he will not fail you, if
you do not render your selves unworthy of his favors, in regard it was never
found that he was at any time wanting to his; albeit they, that are blinded by
the world, are of another opinion, when as they see themselves oppressed with
poverty, and despised of every body. Having used this Speech to us, he gave us
a letter of recommendation to the Brotherhood of the other Hospital, whither we
were to go, and so we departed about noon, and arrived at the town an hour or
two before sunset. The first thing we did, was to go to the house of the
repose of the poor, for so the Chinese call the Hospitals; There we delivered
our letters to the Masters of that Society, which they term Tanigories, whom we
found altogether in a chamber, where they were assembled about the affairs of
the poor; After they had received the letter with a kind of compliment, that
seemed very strange to us, they commanded the Register to read it, whereupon he
stood up and read thus to them that were sitting at the Table: We the poorest
of the poor, unworthy to serve that Sovereign Lord, whose works are so
admirable, as the Sun, and the stars that twinckle in the sky, during the
darkness of the night do testify: Having been elected to the succession of
this his house of Buatendoo, situated in this Village of Catihorau, with all
manner of respect and honor, do beseech your humble persons, admitted to the
service of the Lord, that out of a zeal of charity, you will lodge and favor
these fourteen strangers, whereof three are tawny, the other eleven somewhat
whiter, whose poverty will manifestly appear to your eyes, whereby you may judge
how much reason we have to present this request unto you, for that (...) have
been cast away with all their merchandise in the impetuous waters of the sea,
that with their accustomed fury have laid the execution of the Almighty hand
upon them, which for a just punishment does often permit such like things to
happen; for to show us how dreadful his judgments are, from which may it please
him to deliver us all at the day of death, to the end we may not see the
indignation of his face. This letter being read, they caused us presently to be
lodged in a very neat chamber, accommodated with a Table, and diverse Chairs,
where after we had been served with good meat, we rested our selves that night:
The next morning the Register came along with the rest of the officers, and
demanded of us who we were, of what Nation, and whereabout we had suffered
shipwreck, whereunto we answered as we had done before to those of the Village
from whence we came, that we might not be found in two tales, and convinced of
lying; whereupon having further enquired of us what we meant to do, we told
them that our intention was to get our selves cured in that house, if it
pleased them to permit us, in regard we were so weak and sickly as we could
scarce stand upon our legs: To which they replied, that they would very
willingly see that performed for us, as a thing that was ordinarily done there
for the service of God; for the which we thanked them weeping, with so much
acknowledgment of their goodness and charity, as the tears stood in their eyes,
so that presently sending for a Physician, they bid him look carefully to us,
for that we were poor flocks, and had no other means but what we had from the
house; That done he took our names in writing, and set them down in a great
book, whereunto we all of us set our hands, saying, it was necessary it should
be so, that an account might be rendered of the expense was to be made for us.

Having spent eighteen days in this Hospital, where we were sufficiently
provided for with all things necessary,. 4.
it pleased God that we thoroughly recovered our healths, so that feeling our
selves strong enough to travel, we departed from thence for to go to a place,
called Zuzoangances, some five leagues from that Hospital, where we arrived
about sunset; Now in regard we were very weary, we sat us down upon the side
of a fountain, that stood at the entrance of that Village, being much perplexed
and unresolved what way to take: In the mean time, they which came to fetch
water, seeing us set there in so sad an equipage, returned with their pitchers
empty, and advertising the inhabitants of it, the most of them came presently
forth to us; Then wondering much, because they had never seen men like unto us,
they gathered altogether, as if they would consult thereupon, and after they
had a good while debated one with another, they sent an old woman to demand of
us what people we were, and why we sat so about that fountain, from whence they
drew all the water they used: Hereunto we answered, that we were poor
strangers, natives of the Kingdom of Siam, who by a storm at sea were cast upon
their Country, in that miserable plight wherein they beheld us. Tell me,
replied she, what course would you have us to take for you, and what resolve
you to do, for here is no house for the repose of the poor whereinto you may be
received? To these words one of our company answered with tears in his eyes,
and a gesture conformable to our design, that God, being that which he was,
would never abandon us with his Almighty hand, but would touch their hearts to
take compassion of us, and our poverty; and further, that we were resolved to
travel in that miserable case we were in till we had the good fortune to arrive
at the City of Nanquin, where we desired to put our selves into the Lanteaas,
there to serve for rowers to the Merchants that ordinarily went from thence to
Cantano, and so to get to Comhay, where great store of our Country Junks
usually lay, in which we would imbarque our selves. Thereupon having somewhat a
better opinion of us then before; Seeing you are, said she, such as you
deliver, have a little patience till I come again, and tell you what these
folks resolve to do with you; wherewith she returned to those country people,
which were about some hundred persons, with whom she entered into a great
contestation, but at length she came back with one of their Priests, attired in
a long gown of red damask; which is an ornament of chiefest dignity among them,
in this equipage he came to us with an handful of ears of corn in his hand;
Then having commanded us to approach unto him, we presently obeyed him with all
kind of respect, but he little regarded it, seeing us so poor; whereupon after
he had thrown the ears of corn into the fountain, he willed us to put our hands
upon them, which we accordingly having done: You are to confess, said he unto
us, by this holy and solemn oath, that now you take in my presence upon these
two substances of bread and water, which the high Creator of all things has
made by his holy will to sustain and nourish all that is born into the world,
during the pilgrimage of this life, whether that which you told this woman but
now be true, for upon that condition we will give you lodging in this village
conformably to the charities we are bound to exercise toward Gods poor people;
whereas contrarily, if it be not so, I command you in his Name that you
presently get you gone, upon pain of being bitten and destroyed by the teeth of
the gluttenous Serpent, that makes his abode in the bottom of the house of
smoke. Hereunto we answered, that we had said nothing but what was most true,
wh^rewith the Priest remaining satisfied; since you are, said he, such as you
say, come you along boldly with me, and rely on my word: Then returning with us
to the inhabitants of the place, be told them that they might bestow their alms
upon us without offense, and that he gave them permission so to do, whereupon
we were presently conducted into the Village, and lodged in the porch of their
Pagode, or Temple, where we were furnished with all that was needful for us,
and had two mats given us to lie upon: The next morning as soon as it was day,
we went up and down the street, begging from door to door, and got four Taeis
in silver, wherewith we supplied our most pressing necessities. After this we
went away to another place, called Xianguulea, that was not above two leagues
from that, with a resolution to travel in that sort, as it were in pilgrimage,
to the City of Nanquin, to which it was then some hundred and forty leagues;
for we thought that from thence we might go to Cantano, where our ships traded
at that time, and it may be our design had succeeded, had it not been for ill
fortune. About even-song we arrived at that village, where we sat us down under
the shadow of a great tree that stood by it self, but it was our ill hap to
meet with three boys that kept certain cattle there, who no sooner perceived
us, but betaking them to their heels, they cried our, Thieves, thieves, whereat
the inhabitants came instantly running out, armed with lances and cros-bowes,
crying out, stop the thieves, stop the thieves; and so perceiving us, that fled
from them, they mauld us cruelly with stones and staves, in such manner as we
were all of us grievously hurt, especially one of our boys that died upon it;
Then seizing on us, they tied our arms behind us, and leading us like prisoners
into the village, they so beat and buffeted us with their fists, as they had
almost killed us, then they plunged us into a cistern of standing water, that
reached up to our wastes, wherein were a great number of horse-leeches; In this
miserable place we remained two days, which seemed two hundred years to us,
having neither rest, nor any thing to eat all that time: At last, it was our
good fortune, that a man of Zuzoangance, from whence we came, passing by,
chanced to understand how we had been used by those of the Village, and
thereupon went and told them, that they did us great wrong to take us for
thieves, for that we were poor strangers, which had been cast away by a storm
at sea, wherefore they had committed a great sin to imprison, and handle us in
that sort; The report of this man wrought so effectually with them, that we
were presently taken out of the cistern, being all gore blood with the sucking
of the horse-leeches, and I verily believe that if we had stayed there but one
day longer, we had all of us been dead: So we departed from this place about
evening, and bewayling our bad fortune, continuing on our voyage.

After our departure from Xianguulea we arrived at a Village, inhabited by very
poor people, where we met with three men that were pilling Flax,. 5.
who as soon as they saw us forsook their work, and fled hastily away into a
wood of Firr trees, there they cried out to those that passed by to take heed
of us for that we were thieves, whereupon fearing to incur the same danger
whence we so lately escaped, we got us away presently from that place, although
it was almost night, and continued our journie, in the rain and the dark,
without knowing whither we went, till we came to a gate where Cattle were kept,
and there we lay the rest of the night upon a little heap of dung; the next
morning as soon as it was day we got again into the way which we had left, and
not long after we discovered from the top of a little hill a great plain full
of trees, and in the midst thereof a very fair House hard by a River, whither
forthwith we went, and sat us down by a fountain that was before the outer
gate, where we remained two or three hours without seeing any body, at length a
young Gentleman about sixteen or seventeen years of age came riding upon a very
good Horse, accompanied with four men on foot, whereof one carried two Hares,
and another five Nivatores, which are Fowls resembling our Phesants, with a
Gos-Hawk on his fist, and three or four couple of Spaniels at their heels; when
this Gentleman came at us he staid his Horse, to ask us who we were, and
whether we would have any thing with him. Hereunto we answered as well as we
could, and made him an ample Relation of the whole event of our shipwreck,
whereat he seemed to be very sorry, as we could gather by his countenance, so
that ere he went, Stay there, said he unto us, for by and by I will send you
what you have need of, and that for his sake that with a glory of great riches
lives reigning in the highest of all the Heavens. A little after he sent an old
woman for us, which was apparelled in a long garment, with a Chaplet hanging
down on her neck, the good Dame coming to us, The son of him said she, whom me
hold for Master in this house, and whose Rice we ea^, has sent for you, follow
me then with all humlity, to the end you may not seem idle fellows to those
that shall see you, and such as beg only to be exempted from getting your
living by the labor of your hands; This said, we entered with her into an
outward court, all about environed with Galleries, as if it had been some
Cloister of Religious persons, on the walls whereof were painted diverse women
on Horseback going on hunting with Hawks on their fists; over the gate of this
Court was a great arch very richly engraven, in the midst whereof hung a
Scutcheon of Arms, in the fashion of a shield, fastened to a silver chai^,
within it was a man painted almost in the form of a Tortois, with the feet up,
and the head downwards, and round about it these words were read for a device,
Ingualec finguau, potim aquarau, that is to say, So is it with all that
appertains to me; We learnt afterward, that by this Monster the Figure of the
world was represented, which the Chinese depaint in this manner to demonstrate
that there is nothing in it but falsehood, and so to dis-abuse all them that
make such account of it by making them to see how all things in it are turned
upside down. Out of this Court we went up a broad pair of stairs, made of fair
hewed stone, and entered into a great Hall, where a woman of about fifty years
of age, was set upon a Tapestry Carpet, having two young Gentlewomen by her
side, that were exceeding fair, and richly apparelled, with chains of Pearl
about their necks, and hard by them was a reverend old man laid upon a little
bed, whom one of the two Gentlewomen fanned with a V^ntiloe; at his Beds head
stood the young Gentleman that had sent for us, and a little further off upon
another Carpet nine young maids, clothed in Crimson and white Damask, sat
sowing; as soon as we came before the old man we fell on our knees, and asked
an alms of him, beginning our speech with tears, and in the best terms that
the time and our necessities could inspire us with, whereupon the old Lady
beckning to us with her hand, Come, weep no more, said she, for it grieves me
much to see you shed so many tears, it is sufficient that I know you desire an
alms of us; then the old man that lay in the bed spoke unto us, and demanded
whether any of us knew what was good for a Fever? Whereat the young Gentlewoman
that fanned him, not able to forbear smiling: Sir, said she, they have more
need that you would be pleased to give order for the satisfying of their
hunger, then to be questioned about a matter which it is likely they are
ignorant of, wherefore me thinks it were better first to give them what they
want, and afterward to talk with them about that which concerns them less;
For these words the Mother reprehending her, Go to, said she, you will ever be
prating when you should not, but surely I shall make you leave this custom;
whereunto the daughter smiling, replied, That you shall when you please, but in
the mean time I beseech you, let these poor strangers have something to eat:
For all this the old man would not give over questioning us, for he demanded of
us who we were, of what country, and whither we were going, besides many other
such like things? To which we answered as occasion required, and recounted unto
him, how, when, and in what place we had suffered shipwreck, as also how many
of our company were drowned, and that thus wandering we traveled up and down
not knowing whither to address our selves. This answer rendered the old man
pensive for a while, until at length turning him to his son, Well now, said he
unto him, what think thou of that which thou have heard these strangers
deliver? It were good for thee to imprint it well in thy memory, to the end it
may teach thee to know God better, and give him thanks for that he has given
thee a Father, who to exempt thee from the labors and necessities of this life
has parted with three of the goodliest things in this Country, whereof the
least is worth above a hundred thousand Taeis, and bestowed them on thee, but
thou art of a humor more inclined to hunt a Hare, then to retain this which I
now tell thee; The young Gentleman made no reply, but smiling looked upon his
Sisters. Then the old man caused meat to be brought unto us before him, and
commanded us to fall to it, as we most willingly did, whereat he took great
pleasure, in regard his stomach was quite gone with his sickness, but his young
daughters much more, who with their brother did nothing but laugh to see us
feed our selves with our hands, for that is contrary to the custom which is
observed throughout the whole Empire of China, where the Inhabitants at their
meat carry it to their mouths with two little sticks made like a pair of
Cizers; After we had given God thanks, the old man that had well observed us,
lifting up his hands to heaven, with tears in his eyes, Lord, said he, that
live reigning in the tranquillity of thy high wisdom, I laud thee in all
humility for that thou permittest men that are strangers, come from the
farthest end of the world, and without the knowledge of thy doctrine, to render
thee thanks, and give thee praise according to their weak capacity, which makes
me believe that thou will accept of them with as good a will, as if it were
some great offering of melodious music agreeable to thine ears. Then he
caused three pieces of linen cloth, and four Taeis of Silver to be given us,
willing us withal to pass that night in his house, because it was somewhat
too late for us to proceed on our journey; This offer we most gladly accepted,
and with complements, after the manner of the Country we testified our
thankfulness to him, wherewith himself, his wife, and his son rested very well
satisfied.

CHAP. XXVII. Our arrival at the Town of Taypor, where we were made Prisoners,
and so sent to the City of Nanquin.
THe next morning by break of day parting from that place, we went to a Village
called Einginilau* which was some four leagues from the old Gentleman's house,. 1
where we remained three days, and then continuing traveling from one place
to another, and from Village to Village, ever declining the great Towns, for
fear lest the Justice of the country should call us in question in regard we
were strangers; in this manner we spent almost two months without receiving the
least damage from any body. Now there is no doubt but we might easily have got
to the C^tie of Nanquin in that time if we had had a guide, but for w^nt of
knowing the way we wandered we knew not whither, suffering much, and running
many hazards; At length we arrived at a Village, named Chaucer, at such a time
as they were a solemnizing a sumptuous Funeral of a very rich woman, that had
disinherited her kindred, and left her estate to the Pagod of this Village,
where she was buried, as we understood by the Inhabitants; We were invited then
to this Funeral, as other poor people were, and according to the custom of the
Country we did eat on the grave of the deceased: At the end of three days that
we stayed there, which was the time ^he funeral lasted, we had six Taeis given
us for an Alms, conditionally that in all our Oraisons we should pray unto God
for the soul of the departed. Being gone from this place we continued on our
journey to another Village, called Guinapalir, from whence we were almost two
months traveling from country to country, until at last our ill fortune
brought us to a Town, named Taypor, where by chance there was at that time a
Chumbrin, that is to say, one of those Super-intendents of Justice, that every
three years are sent throughout the Provinces for to make report unto the King
of all that passes there: This naughty man seeing us go begging from door to
door called to us from a window where he was, and would know of us who we were,
and of what Nation, as also what obliged us to run up and down the World in
that manner? Having asked us these questions in the presence of three
Registers, and of many other persons, that were gathered together to behold us,
we answered him, that we were strangers, Natives of the Kingdom of Siam, who
being cast away by a storm at Sea went thus traveling and begging our living,
to the end we might sustain our selves with the charity of good people, until
such time as we could arrive at Nanquin, whither we were going with an intent
to imbarque our selves there in some of the Merchants Lanteaas for Canton,
where the shipping of our Nation lay. This answer we made unto the Chumbim, who
questionless had been well enough contented with it, and would have let us go,
had it been for one of his Clarks, for he told them that we were idle
vagabonds, that spent our time in begging from door to door, and abusing the
alms that were given us, and therefore he was at no hand to let us go free, for
fear of incurring the punishment, ordained for such as offend in that sort, as
is set forth in the seventh of the twelve books of the Statutes of the Realm;
wherefore as his faithful servant he counseled him to lay us in good and sure
hold, that we might be forthcoming to answer the Law: The Chumbim presently
followed his Clarks advice, and carried himself toward us with as much
barbarous cruelty, as could be expected from a Pagan, such as he was, that
lived without God or religion; To which effect after he had heard a number of
false witnesses, who charged us with many foul crimes, whereof we never so much
as dreamt, he caused us to be put into a deep dungeon, with irons on our hands
and feet, and great iron collars about our necks; In this miserable place we
endured such hunger, and were so fearfully whipped, that we were in perpetual
pain for six and twenty days together, at the end whereof we were by the
sentence of the same Chumbim sent to the Parliament of the Cheam of Nanquin,
because the Jurisdiction of this extended not to the condemnation of any
prisoner to death.

. 2
We remained six and twenty days in that cruel prison, whereof I spoke before,
and I vow we thought we had been six and twenty thousand years there, in regard
of the great misery we suffered in it, which was such, as one of our companions
called Ioano Roderiguez Bravo, died in our arms, being eaten up with lice, we
being no way able to help him, and it was almost a miracle that the rest of us
escaped alive from that filthy vermin; At length, one morning, when we thought
of nothing less, laden with irons as we were, and so weak that we could hardly
speak, we were drawn out of that prison, and then being chained one to another,
we were imbarqued with many others, to the number of thirty or forty, that
having been convicted for sundry heinous crimes, were also sent to the
Parliament of Nanquin, wh^^e, as I have already declared, is always residing a
Chaem of Justice, which is like to the Sovereign Title of the Viceroy of
China: There is likewise a Parliament of some five and twenty Gerozemos and
Ferucuas, which are as those we call Judges with us, and that determine all
causes, as well civil as criminal: So as there is no appeal from their
sentence, unless it be unto another Court, which has power even over the King
himself, whereunto if one appeals, it is as if he appealed to heaven: To
understand this the better, you must know that although this Parliament, and
others such like, which are in the principal Cities of the Realm, have an
absolute power from the King, both over all criminal and civil causes, without
any opposition or appeal whatsoever, yet there is another Court of Justice,
which is called the Court of the Creator of all things, whereunto it is
permitted to appeal in weighty and i^portant matters: In this Court are
ordinarily assisting four and twenty Menigrepos, which are certain religious
men, very austere in their manner of living, such as the Capuchins are amongst
the Papists, and verily if they were Christians, one might hope for great
matters from them in regard of their mavelous abstinence, and sincerity:
There are none admitted into this rank of Judges under seventy years of age,
and are elected thereunto by the suffrages of their chiefest Prelates, most
incorruptible men, and so just in all the causes, whereof there are appeals
before them, as it is not possible to meet with more upright, for were it
against the King himself, andagainst all the powers that may be imagined in the
world, no consideration, how great soever, is able to make them swerve never so
little from that they think to be justice. Having been imbarqued in the manner
I spoke of, the same day at night we went and lay at a great tower, called
Potinleu, in one of the prisons whereof were mained nine days, by reason of the
much rain that fell then upon the conjunction of the New Mood: There we
happened to meet with a Russian prisoner, that received as very charitably, of
whom demanding in the Chinese tongue, which he understood as well as we, what
countryman he was, and what fortune had brought him thither; he told us, that
he was of Moscovy, born in a town, named Hiquegens, and that some five years
past, being accused for the death of a man, he had been condemned to a
perpetual prison, but as a stranger he appealed from that sentence to the
tribunal of the Aytau of Batampina, in the City of Pequin, who was the highest
of the two and thirty Admirals, established in this Empire, that is, for every
Kingdom one: He added further, that this Admiral by a particular Jurisdiction,
had absolute power over all strangers, whereupon he hoped to find some relief
from him, intending to go and die a Christian among the Christians, if he might
have the good hap to be set at liberty. After we had passed those nine days in
this prison, being reinbarqued, we sailed up a great river seven days together,
at the end whereof we arrived at Nanquin. As this City is the second of all the
Empire, so is it also the Capital of the three Kingdoms of Liampoo, Fanius, and
Sambor: Here we lay six weeks in prison, and suffered so much pain and misery,
as reduced to the last extreamities, we died incensibly for want of succor,
not able to do any thing, but look up to heaven with a pitiful eye; for it was
our ill fortune to have all that we had stolen from us the first night we came
thither: This prison was so great, that there were four thousand prisoners in
it at that time, as we were credibly informed, so that one should hardly ^it
down in any place without being robbed, and filled ^ull of lice* having layn
there a month and an half, as I said, the Anchacy, who was one of the Judges
before whom our cause was to be pleaded, pronounced our sentence at the Suit of
the Atturny General, the tenor whereof was, That having seen and considered our
process, which the Chumbin of Taypor had sent him, it appeared by the
accusations laid to outcharge, that we were very heinous mal^factors, and
though we denied many things, yet in justice no credit was to be given unto us,
and therefore that we were to be publicly whipped, for to teach us to live
better in time to come, and that withal our two thumbs should be cut off,
wherewith it was evident by manifest suspicions, that we used to commit
robberies, and other vile crimes; and furthermore, that for the remainder of
the punishment we deserved, he referred us to the Aytau of Bataupina, unto whom
it appertained to take cognizance of such causes, in regard of the Jurisdiction
that he had of life and death. This Sentence was pronounced in the prison,
where it had been better for us to have suffered death, then the stripes that
we received, for all the ground round about us ran with blood upon our whiping,
so that it was almost a miracle, that of the eleven which we were, nine escaped
alive, for two of our company died three days after, besides one of our
servants.

After we had been whipped in that manner, I have declared,. 3.
we were carried into a great Chamber, that was in the prison, where were a
number of sick, and diseased persons, lying upon beds, and otherways; There we
had presently our stripes washed, and things applied unto them, whereby we were
somewhat eased of our pain, and that by men, much like unto the fraternity of
mercy among the Papists, which only out of charity, and for the honor of God,
do tend those that are sick, and liberally furnish them with all things
necessary. Hereafter some eleven or twelve days, we began to be pretily
recovered, and as we were lamenting our ill fortune, for being so rigorously
condemned to lose our thumbs, it pleased God one morning, when as we little
dreamt ofit, that we espied two men come into the chamber, of a good aspect,
clothed in long gowns of violet colored satin, and carrying white rods in
their hands; As soon as they arrived, all the sick persons in the Chamber cried
out, Blessed be the Ministers of the works ofGod: whereunto they answ^red,
holding up their rods, May it please God to give you patience in your
adversity: whereupon having distributed clothes and money to those that were
next to them, they came unto us, and after they had saluted us very
courteously, with demonstration of being moved at our tears, they asked us who
we were, and of what country, as also why we were imprisoned there: whereunto
we answered weeping, that we were strangers, nativ^s of the Kingdom of Siam,
and of a country called Malaca, that being Merchants and well to live, we had
imbarqued our selves with our goods, and being bound for Liampoo, we had been
cast away just against the Isles of Lamau, having lost all that we had, and
nothing left us but our miserable bodies in the case they now saw us; moreover
we added, that being thus evil entreated by fortune, arriving at the City of
Taypor, the Chumbin of Justice had caused us to be apprehended without any
cause, laying to our charge, that we were thieves and vagabonds, who to avoid
pains-taking went begging from door to door, entertaining our idle laziness
with the alms that were given us unjusty, whereof the Chumbin having made
informations at his pleasure, as being both Judge and party, he had laid us in
irons in the prison, where for two and forty days space, we had endured
incredible pain and hunger, and no man would hear us in our justifications, as
well because we had not wherewithal to give presents for to maintain our
right, as for that we wanted the language of the Country. In conclusi^n, we
told them, how in the mean time, without any cognizance of the cause, we had
been condemned to be whipped, as also to have our thumbs cut off, like thieves,
so that we had already suffered the first punishment, with so much rigor and
cruelty, that the marks thereof remained but two visibly upon our wretched
bodies, and therefore we conjured them by the charge they had to serve God in
assisting the afflicted, that they would not abandon us in this need, the
rather for that our extreme poverty rendered as odious to all the world, and
exposed us to the enduring of all affronts. These two men having heard us
attentively, remained very pensive and amazed at our speech; at length lifting
up their eyes, all bathed with tears, to heaven, and kneeling down on the
ground, O almighty Lord, said they, that governest in the highest places, and
whose patience is incomprehensible, be thou evermore blessed, for that thou art
pleased to harken unto the complaints of necessitous and miserable men, to the
end that the great offenses committed against thy divine goodness by the
Ministers of Justice may not rest unpunished, as we hope that by thy holy Law
they will be chastised at one time or other. Whereupon they informed themselves
more amply by those who were about us, of what we had told them, and presently
sending for the Register, in whose hands our sentence was, they straightly
commanded him, that upon pain of grievous punishment he should forthwith bring
them all the proceedings which had been used against us, as instantly he did;
now the two Officers, seeing there was no remedy for the whipping that we had
suff^red, presented a Petition in our behalf unto the Chaem, whereunto this
Answer was returned by the Court; Mercy has no place, where Justice loses
her name, in regard whereof your request cannot be granted. This Answer was
subscribed by the Chaem, and eight Conchacis, that are like criminal Judges.
This hard proceeding much astonished these two Proctors for the poor, so named
from their office, whe^efore carried with an extreme desire to draw us out of
this misery, they presently preferred another Petition to the Sovereign Court
of Justice, of which I spoke in the precedent Chapter, where the Menigr^pos and
Talegrepos were Judges, an Assembly which in their language is called, The
breath of the Creator of all things. In this Petition, as sinners, confessing
all that we were accus^d of, we had recourse to mercy, which sorted well for
us; for as soon as the Petition was presented unto them, they read the Process
quite through, and finding that our right was overborn for want of succor,
they instantly dispatched away two of their Court, who with an express
Mandate under their hands and Seals, went and prohibited the Chaems Court from
intermedling with this cause, which they commanded away before them. In
obedience to this Prohibition the Chaems Court made this Decree, We, that are
assembled in this Court of Justice of the Lion crowned in the throne of the
world, having perused the Petition presented to the four and twenty Judges of
the austere life, do consent, that those nine strangers be sent by way of
appeal to the Court of the Aytau of Aytaus in the City of Pequin, to the end
that in mercy the sentence pronounced against them may be favorably moderated:
Given the seventh day of the fourth Moon, in the three and twentieth year of
the reign of the Son of the Sun. This Decree, being signed by the Chaem, and
the eight Conchacis, was presently brought us by the two Proctors for the poor,
upon the Receipt whereof we told them, that we could but pray unto God to reward
them for the good they had done us for his sake; whereunto beholding us with an
eye of pity, they answered, May his Celestial goodness direct you in the
knowledge of his works, that thereby you may with patience gather the fruit of
your labors, as they which fear to offend his holy Name.

. 4.
After we had past all the adversities and miseries, whereof I have spoken
before, we were imbarqued in the company of some other thirty or forty
Prisoners, that were sent, as we were, from this Court of Justice to that other
Sovereign one by way of appeal, there to be either acquitted or condemned,
according to the crimes they had committed, and the punishment they had
deserved. Now a day before our departure, being imbarqued in a Lanteaa, and
chained three and three together, the two Proctors for the poor came to us, and
first of all furnishing us with all things needful, as clothes, and Victuals,
they asked us whether we wanted any thing else for our Voyage? Whereunto we
answered, that all we could desire of them was, that they would be pleased to
convert that further good they intended to us into a Letter of Recommendation
unto ^he Officers of that holy Fraternity of the City of Pequin, thereby to
oblige them to maintain the right of our cause, in regard (as they very well
knew) they should otherwise be sure to be utterly abandoned of every one, by
reason they were strangers and altogether unknown. The Proctors hearing us
speak in this manner: Say, not so, replied they, for though your ignorance
discharges you before God, yet have you committed a great sin, because the more
you are abased in the world through poverty, the more shall you be exalted
before the eyes of his divine Majesty, if you patiently bear your crosses,
whereunto the flesh indeed does always oppose it self, being evermore
rebellious against the Spirit, but as a Bird cannot fly without her wings, no
more can the soul meditate without works: As for the Letter you require of us,
we will give it you most willingly, knowing it will be very necessary for you,
to the end that the favor of good people be not wanting to you in your need.
This said they g^ve us a sack full of Rice, together with four Taeis in silver,
and a Coverlet to lay upon us; Then having very much recommended us unto the
Chifuu, who was the Officer of justice that conducted us, they took their
leaves of us in most courteous manner; The next morning as soon as it was day
they sent us the Letter, sealed with three Seals in green Wax, the Contents
whereof were these; Ye servants of that high Lord, the resplendent mirror of
an uncreated light, before whom our merits are nothing in comparison of his, we
the least servants of that holy house of Tauhina^el, that was founded in favor
of the fifth prison of Nanquin, with true words of respect, which we owe unto
you, we give your most humble persons to understand, that these nine strangers,
the bearers of this Letter, are men of a far country, whose bodies and goods
have been so cruelly entreated by the fury of the sea, that according to their
report, of ninety and five that they were, they only have escaped shipwreck,
being cast by the tempest on the shore of the Isles of Taut^a, upon the coast
of the Bay of Sumbor: In which pitious and lamentable case, as we have seen
them with our own eyes, begging their living from place to place of such, as
charity obliged to give them something after the manner of good folks, it was
their ill fortune without all reason or justice to be apprehended by the
Chumbin of Taypor, and sent to this fifth prison of Faniau, where they were
condemned to be whipped, which was immediately executed upon them by the
Ministers of the displeased arm, as by their Process better appears: But
afterward, when as through too much cruelty their thumbs were to be cut off,
they with tears besought us, for that Sovereign Lords sake, in whose service we
are employed, to be assisting unto them, which presently undertaken by us we
preferred a Petition in their behalf, whereunto this Answer was made by the
Court of the crowned Lion, That mercy had no place where justice lost her name;
whereupon provoked by a true zeal to Gods honor, we addressed our selves to
the Court of those four and twenty of the austere life, who carried by a
blessed devotion instantly assembled in the Holy House of the remedy for the
poor, and of an extreme desire they had to succor these miserable creatures,
they interdicted that great Court from proceeding any further against them, and
accordingly the success was agreeable to the mercy of so great a God, for these
last Judges revoking the others first Sentence, sent the cause by way of Appeal
to your City of Pequin with amendment of the second punishment, as you may see
more at large by the proceedings; In regard whereof, most reverend and humble
Brethren, We beseech you all in the Name of God to be favorable unto them, and
to assist them with whatsoever you shall think necessary for them, that they
may not be oppressed in their right which is a very great sin, and an eternal
infamy to us, who again entreat you to supply them with your Alms, and bestow
on them means to cover their nakedness, to the end they may not perish for want
of help, which if you do there is no doubt but that so pious a work will be
most acceptable to that Lord above, to whom the poor of the earth do
continually pray, and are heard in the Highest of Heavens, as we hold for an
Article of Faith; On which earth may it please that divine Majesty, for whose
sake we do this, to preserve us till death, and to render us worthy of his
presence in the house of the Sun, where he i^ seated with all his. Written in
the Chamber of the zeal of Gods honor, the ninth day of the seventh Moon, and
the three and twentieth year of the Reign of the Lion crowned in the Throne of
the World.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Marvels of the City of Nanquin, our departure from thence
toward Pequin, and that which happened unto us, till we arrived at the Town of
Sempitay.
THis Letter being brought to us very early the next morning,. 1.
we departed in the manner before declared, and continued our voyoge till
Sunset, when as we anchored at a little Village, named Minhacutem, where the
Chifuu, that conducted us* was born, and where his Wife and Children were at
that time, which was the occasion that he remained there three days, at the
end whereof he imbarqued himself with his family, and so we passed on in the
company of diverse other Vessels, that went upon this River unto diverse parts of
this Empire: Now though we were all tied together to the bank of the Lauteaa,
where we rowed, yet did we not for all that lose the view of many Towns and
Villages that were situated along this River, whereof I hold it not amiss to
make some descriptions; To which effect, I will begin with the City of Nanquin
from whence we last parted; This City is under the North in nine and thirty
degrees, and three quarters, situated upon the river of Batampina, which
signifies, The flower of fish. This river, as we were told then, and as I have
seen since, comes from Tartaria, out of a lake, called Fanistor, nine leagues
from the City of Lancama, where Tamberlan, King of the Tartarians usually kept
his Court; Out of the same lake, which is eight and twenty leagues long, twelve
broad, and of a mighty depth, the greatest rivers, that ever I saw, take their
source; The first is the same Batampina, that passing through the midst of this
Empire of China three hundred and threescore leagues in length, disimb^ques
into the sea at the bay of Nanquin in thirty six degrees; The second, named
Lechuna, runs with great swiftness all along by the mountains of Pancruum,
which separate the Country of Cauchim, and the State of Catebenan, in the
height of sixteen degrees; The third is called Tauquida, signifying the Mother
of waters, that going North-west, traverseth the Kingdom of Nacataas, a Country
where China was anciently seated, as I will declare hereafter, and enters into
the sea in the Empire of Sornau, vulgarly styled Siam, by the mouth of Cuy, one
hundred and thirty leagues below Patana; The fourth, named Batobasoy, descends
out of the Province of Sansim, which is the very same that was quite
overwhelmed by the sea in the year 1556. as I purpose to show elsewhere, and
renders it sel^ into the sea at the mouth of Cosmim, in the Kingdom of Pegu;
The fifth and last, called Leysacotay, crosses the Country by East as far as
to the Archipelago of Xinxipou, that borders upon Mocovye, and falls, as is
thought, into a sea that is not navigable, by reason the clymate there is in
the height of seventy degrees. Now to return to my discourse, the City of
Nanquin, as I said before, is seated by this river of Batampina, upon a
reasonable high hill, so as it commands all the plains about it; The climate
thereof is somewhat cold, but very healthy, and it is eight leagues about,
which way soever it is considered, three leagues broad, and one long; The
houses in it are not above two stories high, and all built of wood, only those
of the Mandarins are made of hewed stone, and also environed with walls and
ditches, over which are stone bridges, whereon they pass to the gates, that
have rich and costly arches, with diverse sorts of inventions upon the towers,
all which put together, make a pleasing object to the eye, and represent a
certain kind of I know not what Majesty. The houses of the Chaems, Anchacys,
Ayta^s, Tu^o^s, and Chumbims, which are all Gove^nours of Provinces or
Kingdoms, have stately towers, six or seven stories high, and guilt all ^ver,
wherein they have their magazines for arms, their Wardrobes, their treasuries,
and a world of rich housholdstuff, as also many other things of great value,
together with an infinite of delicate and most fine porcelain, which amongst
them is prised and esteemed as much as precious stone, for this sort of
porcelain never goes out of the Kingdom, it being expressly forbidden by the
laws of the Country, to be sold, upon pain of death to any stranger, unless to
the Xatamaas, that is, the Sophyes of the Persians, who by a particular
permission buy of it at a very dear rate. The Chinese assured us, that in this
City there are eight hundred thousand fires, fourscore thousand Mandarins
houses, threescore and two great market plac^s, an hundred and thirty butchers
shambles, each of them containing fourscore shops, and eight thousand streets,
whereof six hundred that are fairer and larger then the rest, are compassed
about with b^llisters of copper; we were further assured, that there are
likewise two thousand and three hundred Pagodes, a thousand of which were
Monestaries of religious persons, professed in their accursed Sect, whose
buildings were exceeding rich and sumptuous, with very high steeples, wherein
there were between sixty and seventy such mighty huge bells, that it was a
dreadful thing to here them rung; There are moreover in this City thirty great
strong prisons, each whereof has three or four thousand prisoners; and a
charitable Hospital, expressly established to supply the necessities of the
poor, with Proctors ordained for their defense, both in civil and criminal
causes, as is before related; At the entrance into every principal street,
there are arches and great gates, which for each man's security, are shut every
night, and in most of the streets are goodly fountains whose water is excellent
to drink; Besides, at every full and new moon, open fayrs are kept in several
places, whither Merchants resort from all parts, and where there is such
abundance of all kind of victual, as cannot well be expressed, especially of
flesh and fruit; It is not possible to deliver the great store of fish that is
taken in this river, chiefly Soles and Mullets, which are all sold alive,
besides a world of seafish, both fresh, salted, and dried; we were told by
certain Chinese, that in this City there are ten thousand trades for the
working of silks, which from thence are sent all over the Kingdom; The City it
self is environed with a very strong wall, made of fair hewed stone; The gates
of it are an hundred and thirty, at each of which there is a Porter, and two
Halberdiers, who are bound to give an account every day of all that p^sses in
and out; There are also twelve Forts or Cittadels, like unto ours, with
bulwarks and very high towers, but without any ordinance at all* The same
Chinese also affirmed unto us, that the City yielded the King daily two
thousand Taeis of silver, which amount to three thousand ducats, as I have
delivered heretofore; I will not speak of the Palace royal, because I saw it
but on the outside, howbeit the Chines^s tell such wonders of it, as would
amaze a man, for it is my intent to relate nothing save what we beheld here
with our own eyes, and that was so much as I am afraid to write it, not that it
would seem strange to those that have seen and read the marvels of the Kingdom
of China, but because I doubt, that they, which would compare those wondrous
things that are in the countries, they have not seen with that little they have
seen in their own will make some question of it, or it may be give no credit at
all to these truth, because they are not confo^mable to their understanding,
and small experience.

Continuing our course up this river,. 2.
the first two days we saw not any remarkable town or place, but only a great
number of Villages, and little hamlets of two or three hundred fires a piece,
which by their buildings seemed to be houses of fisher men, and poor people,
that live by the labor of their hands; For the rest, all that was within view
in the country, was great woods of Firr, Groves, Forests, and Orange trees,
as also plains full of wheat, rice, beans, pease, millet, panick, barley, rye,
flax, cotton wool, with great enclosures of gardens, and goodly houses of
pleasure, belonging to the Mandarins, and Lords of the Kingdom: There was
likewise all along the river such an infinite number of cattle of all sorts, as
I can assure you there is not more in Aethiopia, nor in all the dominions of
Prester John; upon the top of the mountains many houses of their Sects of
Gentiles were to be seen, adorned with high Steeples guilt all over, the
glistering whereof was such, and so great, that to behold them a far off was an
admirable sight: The fourth day of our voyage we arrived at a town, called
Pocasser, twice as big as Cantano, compassed about with strong walls of hewed
stone, and towers and bulwarks almost like ours, together with a key on the
river side, twice as long as the shot of a falconet, and enclosed with two rows
of iron grates, with very strong gates, where the Junks and vessels that
arrived there were unladen; This place abounds with all kinds of merchandise,
which from thence is transported over all the Kingdom, especially with copper,
sugar, and alum, whereof there is very great store; Here also in the midst
of a carrefour, that is almost at the end of the town, stands a mighty strong
castle, having three bulwarks and five towers, in the highest of which the
present Kings Father, as the Chinese told us, kept a King of Tartaria nine
years prisoner, at the end whereof he killed himself with poison, that his
subjects sent him, because they would not be constrained to pay that ransom,
which the King of China demanded for his deliverance: In this town the Chifuu
gave three of us leave to go up and down for to crave the alms of good people,
accompanied with four Hupes, that are as Sergeants, or Bailiffs amongst us, who
led us, chained together, as we were, through six or seven streets, where we
got in alms to the value of above twent^ ducats, as well in clothes, as money,
besides flesh, rice^ meal, fruit, and other victuals, which was ^^stowed on us,
whereof we gave the one half to the Hupes that conducted us, it being the
custom so to do. Afterward we were brought to a Pagode, whither the people
flocked from all parts that day, in regard of a very solemn feast that was then
celebrated there: This Temple, or Pagode, as we were told* had sometime been a
Palace royal, where the King then reigning was born, now because the Queen his
Mother died there in childbirth, she commanded her self to be buried in the
very same chamber where she was brought to bed, wherefore to honor her death
the better, this Temple was dedicated to the invocation of Tauhinaret, which is
one of the principal Sects of the Pagans in the Kingdom of China, as I will
more am^ly declare, when as I shall speak of the Labyrinth of the two and
thirty laws that are in it; All the buildings of this Temple, together with all
the gardens, and walks, that belong to it, are suspended in the air upon three
hundred and threescore pillars, every one of the which is of one entire stone
of a very great bigness; These three hundred and threescore pillars, are called
by the names of three hundred and threescore days of the year, and in each of
them is a particular feast kept there with many alms, gifts, and bloody
sacaifices, accompanied with music, dancing, and other sports; Under this
Pagode, namely between those pillars, are eight very fair streets, enclosed on
every side with grates of copper, and gates for the passage of pilgrims, and
others, that run continually to this feast, as it were to a Jubilee; The
Chamber above, where the Queen lay, was made in the form of a Chapel, but
round, and from the top to the bottom all garnished with silver, the
workmanship whereof was of greater cost then the matter it self; In the midst
of it stood a kind of Tribunal, framed round, like the Chamber, some fifteen
steps high, compassed about with six gra^es of silver, on the top whereof was a
great bowl, and upon that a Lion of silver, that with his head supported a
shrine of gold, three hand-bredths square, wherein they said, the bones of the
Queen were, which these blinded ignorants reverenced as a great relic; Below
this Tribunal in equal proportion were four bars of silver, that traversed the
Chamber, whereon hung three and forty lamps of the same metal, in memory of
the three and forty years that this Queen lived, and seven lamps of gold in
commamoration of seven sons that she had; moreover at the entry into the
Chapel, just against the door, were eight other bars of iron, whereon also
hung a very great number of silver lamps, which the Chinese told us were
offered by some of the Wives of the Chaems, Aytaos, Tutoens, and Anchacys, who
were assistant at the death of the Queen, so that in aknowledgment of that
honor they sent those lamps thither afterward; without the gates of the
Temple, and round about six ballisters of copper that environed it, were a
great many Statues of Giants, fifteen foot high, cast in brass, all well
proportioned with halberts or clubs in their hands, and some of them with
battle-axes on their shoulders, which made so brave and majestical a show, as
one could never be satisfied enough with looking on them; Amongst these
Statues, which were in number twelve hundred, as the Chinese affirmed, there
were four and twenty very great Serpents also of brass, and under every one of
them a woman seated, with a sword in her hand, and a silver crown on her head;
It was said, that those four and twenty women carried the Titles of Queens,
because they sacrificed themselves to the death of this Queen, to the end their
souls might serve hers in the other life, as in this their bodies had served
her body, a matter which the Chinese, that draw their extraction from these
women, hold for a very great honor, insomuch as they enrich the crests of
their coats of arms with it; round about this row of Giants was another of
triumphant arches, guilt all over, whereon a number of silver bells hung by
chains of the same metal, which moved with the air kept such a continual
ringing, as one could hardly hear one another for the noise they made; Without
these arches there were likewise at the same distance two rows of copper
grates, that enclosed all this huge work, and among them certain pillars of the
same metal, which supported Lions rampant, mounted upon bowls, being the arms
of the Kings of China, as I have related elsewhere. At each corner of the
Carrefour was a monster of brass, of so strange and unmeasurable an height,
and so deformed to behold, as it is not possible almost for a man to imagine,
so that I think it best not to speak of them, the rather for that I confess I
am not able in words to express the form wherein I saw their prodigies; Howbeit
as it is reasonable to conceal these things without giving some knowledge of
them, I will say, as much as my weak understanding is able to deliver. One of
these Monsters which is on the right hand, as one comes into the Carrefour,
whom the Chinese call, the Sergeant Gluttom of the hollow or profound house of
smoke, and that by their histories is held to be Lucifer, is represented under
the figure of a Serpent of an excessive height, with most hideous and deformed
adders coming out of his stomach, covered all over with green and black scares,
and a number of prickles on their backs above a span long, like unto Porcupins
quils; each of these Adders had a woman between his jaws, with her hair all
dishevelled, and standing an end, as one affrighted; The monster carried also
in his mouth, which was unmeasurable great, a Vizard that was above thirty foot
long, and as big as a tun, with his nostrils and chaps so full of blood, that
all the rest of his body was besmeared with it, this Vizard held a great
Eliphant between his paws, and seemed to gripe him so hard, as his very guts
came out of his throat, and all this was done so proportionably, and to the
life, that it made a man tremble to behold such a deformed figure, and which
was scarce possible for one to imagine: His tail might be some twenty fathom
long, was entortilled about such another Monster, that was the second of the
four, whereof I spoke, in the figure of a man, being an hundred foot high, and
by the Chinese called Turcamparoo, who they say was the son of that Serpent;
besides that he was very ugly, he stood with both his hands in his mouth, that
was as big as a great gate, with a row of horrible teeth, and a foul black
tongue, hanging out two fathom long, most dreadful to behold: As for the other
two Monsters, one was in the form of a woman, named by the Chinese, Magdelgau,
seventeen fathom high, and six thick; This same about the girdlesteed before
had a face made proportionable to her body, above two fathom broad, and she
breathed out of her mouth and nostrils great ^^akes, not of artificial, but
true fire, which proceeded, as they told us, from her head, where fire was
continually kept, that in like manner came out of the said face below. By this
Figure these Idolaters would demonstrate that she was the Queen of the fiery
sphere, which according to their belief is to burn the earth at the end of the
World. The fourth Monster was a man, set stooping, which with great swollen
cheeks, as big as the main sail of a Ship, seemed to blow extremely; this
Monster was also of an unmeasurable height, an^ of such an hideous and ghastly
aspect, that a man could hardly endure the sight of it; the Chinese called it
Vzanguenaboo, and said, that it was he which raised Tempests upon the Sea, and
demolished Buildings, in regard whereof the people offered many things unto him,
to the end he should do them no harm, and many presented him with a piece of
money yearly, that he might not drown their Junks, nor do any of theirs hurt
that went by Sea; I will omit many other abuses which their blindness makes
them believe, and which they hold to be so true, as there is not one of them
but would endure a thousand deaths for the maintenance thereof.

The next day being gone from the Town of Pocasser we arrived at another fair
and great Town, called Xinligau; there we saw many Buildings enclosed with
walls of Brick,. 3.
and deep ditches about them, and at one end of the Town two Castles, very well
fortified with Towers and Bulwarks after our fashion; at the gates were draw
Bridges, suspended in the air with great Iron chains, and in the midst of them
a Tower five Stories high, very curiously painted with several Pictures; the
Chinese assured us, that in those two Castles there was as much Treasure, as
amounted to fifteen thousand pieces of silver, which was the revenue of all
this Archipelage, and laid up in this place by the Kings Grandfather now
reigning, in Memorial of a Son of his that was born here, and named Leuquinau,
that is to say, The joy of all; those of the Country repute him for a Saint,
because he ended his days in Religion, where also he was buried in a Temple,
dedicated to Quiay Varatel, the God of all the Fishes of the Sea, of whom these
miserable Ignorants recount a world of Fooleries, as also the Laws he invented,
and the precepts which he left them, being able to astonish a man, as I will
more amply declare when time shall serve. In this Town and in another five
leagues higher the most part of the Silks of this Kingdom are dyed, because
they hold that the waters of these places make the colors far more lively then
those of any other part, and these Dyers, which are said to be thirteen
thousand, pay unto the King yearly three hundred thousand Taeis. Continuing our
course up the River the day after about evening we arrived at certain great
plains, where were great store of Cat^le, as Horses, Mares, Colts, and Cows,
guarded by men on Horsback, that make sale of them to Butchers, who afterward
retail them indifferently as any other flesh: Having past these plains
containing some ten or eleven Leagues, we came to a Town called Iunquileu,
walled with Brick, but without Battlements, Bulwarks, or Towers, as others had,
where^f I have spoken before; at the end of the Suburbs of this Town we saw
diverse houses built in the water upon great Piles, in the form of Magazines;
Before the gate of a little street stood a Tomb made of stone, environed with
an Iron grate, painted red and green, and over it a steeple framed of pieces of
very fine Pourcelain, sustained by four pillars of curious stone; upon the top
of the Tomb were five Globes, and two others that seemed to be of cast iron,
and on the one side thereof were graven in Letters of gold, and in the Chinese
language, words of this substance. Here lies Trannocem Mudeliar, Uncle to the
King of Malaca, whom death took out of the World before he could be revenged of
Captain Alphonso Albuquerque, the Lion of the robberies of the Sea. We were
much amazed to behold this Inscription there, wherefore enquiring what it might
mean, a Chinese, that seemed more honorable then the rest, told us; that about
some forty years before, this man which lay buried there, came thither as
Ambassador from a Prince, that styled himself King of Malaca, to demand succor
from the son of the Sun against men of a Country, that has no name, which came
by Sea from the end of the World, and had taken Malaca from him; this man
recounted many other incredible things concerning this matter, whereof mention
is made in a printed Book thereof, as also that this Ambassador having
continued three years at the Kings Court suing for this succor, just as it was
granted him, and that preparations for it were a making, it was his ill fortune
to be surprised one night at Supper with an Apoplexy, whereof he dyed at the
end of nine days, so that extremely afflicted to see himself carried away by a
sudden death before he had accomplished his business, he expressed his earnest
desire of revenge by the Inscription which he caused to be graven on his tomb,
that posterity might know wherefore he was come thither. Afterward we departed
from this place, and continued our voyage up the river, which thereabouts is
not so large as toward the City of Nanquin, but the Country is here better
peopled with Villages, Boroughs, and Gardens, then any other place, for every
stones cast we met still with some Pagode, Mansion of pleasure, or Country
house; Passing on about some two leagues further, we arrived at a place
encompassed with great iron gates, in the midst whereof stood two mighty
Statues of brass upright, sustained by pillars of cast metal of the bigness of
a bushel, and seven fathom high, the one of a man, and the other of a woman,
both of them seventy four spans in height, having their hands in their mouths,
their cheeks horribly blown out, and their eyes so staring, as they affrighted
all that looked on them. That which represented a man, was called Quiay
Xingatalor, and the other in the form of a woman, was named Apancapatur; Having
demanded of the Chinese the explication of these figures, they told us that
the male was he, which with those mighty swollen cheeks blew the fire of hell for
to torment all those miserable wretches, that would not liberally bestow alms
in this life; and for the other monster, that she was Porter of hell gate,
where she would take notice of those that did her good in this world, and
letting them fly away into a river of very cold water, called Ochilenday, would
keep them hid there from being tormented by the Devils, as other damned were:
Upon this Speech one of our company could not forbear laughing at such a
ridiculous and diabolical foolery, which three of their Priests, or Banzoes,
then present observing, they were so exceedingly offended therewith, as they
persuaded the Chifuu, which conducted us, that if he did not chastise us in
such manner, as those gods might be well contented with the punishment
inflicted on us for our mockery of them, both the one and the other would
assuredly torment his soul, and never suffer it to go out of hell; which
threatening so mightily terrified this dog, the Chifuu, that without further
delay, or hearing us speak, he caused us all to be bound hand and foot, and
commanded each of us to have an hundred lashes given him with a double cord,
which was immediately executed with so much rigor, as we were all in a gore
blood, whereby we were taught not to jeer afterward at any thing we saw, or
heard. At such time as we arrived here we found twelve Bonzoes upon the place,
who with silver censors full of perfumes of aloes and benjamin, censed those
two divel^sh Monsters, and chanted out aloud, Help us, even as we serve thee;
whereunto diverse other Priests answered in the name of the Idol with a great
noise, So I promise to do like a good Lord: In this sort they went as it were
in procession round about the place, singing with an ill tuned voice to the
sound of a great many bells, that were in Steeples thereabouts; In the mean time
there were others, that with Drums and Basins made such a dinne, as I may truly
say, put them all together, was most horrible to hear.

CHAP. XXIX. Our Arrival at Sempitay, our encounter there with a Christian
woman, together with the Original and Foundation of the Empire of China; and
who they were that first peopled it.
FRom this place we continued our voyage eleven days more up the river, which
in those parts is so peopled with Cities, Towns, Villages, Boroughs, Forts and
Castles, that commonly they are not a flight shot distant one from another,
besides a world of houses of pleasure, and temples, where Steeples were all
guilt, which made such a glorious show, as we were much amazed at it; In this
manner we arrived at a Town, named Sempitay, where we abode five days, by
reason the Chifuus wife, that conducted us, was not well: Here by his
permission we landed, and chained together, as we were, we went up and down the
streets craving of alms, which was very liberally given us by the Inhabitants,
who wondering to see such men as we, demanded of us what kind of people we
were, of what Kingdom, and how our country was called? Hereunto we answered
conformably to that we had often said before, namely that we were natives of
the Kingdom of of Siam, that going from Liampoo to Nanquin, we had lost all our
goods by shipwreck, and that although they beheld us then in so poor a case,
yet we had been forme^ly very rich; whereupon a woman who was come thither
amongst the rest to see us; It is very likely, said she, speaking to them about
her, that what these poor strangers have related is most true, for daily
experience does show how those that trade by sea, do oftentimes make it their
grave, wherefore it is best and surest to travel upon the earth, and to esteem
of it, as of that, whereof it has pleased God to frame us; saying, so she gave
us two mazes, which amounts to about sixteen pence of our money, advising us to
make no more such long voyages, since our lives were so short: Hereupon she
unbottoned one of the sleeves of a red Satin Gown she had on, and baring her
left arm, she showed us a cross imprinted on it, like to the mark of a slave,
saying, Do any of you know this sign, which amongst those, that follow the way
of truth, is called a cross? or have any of you ever heard it named? To this
falling down on our knees, we answered, with tears in our eyes, that we know
exceeding well; Then lifting up her hands, she cried out, Our Father, which art
in heaven, hallowed be thy Name, speaking these words in the Portugal tongue,
and because she could speak no more of our language, she very earnestly desired
us in Chinese to tell her whether we were Christians; we replied that we were,
and for proof thereof, after we had kissed that arm, whereon the cross was, we
repeated all the rest of the Lords prayer, which she had left unsaid, wherewith
being assured that we were Christians indeed, she drew aside from the rest
there present, and weeping said to us; Come along Christians of the other end
of the world, with her that is your true Sister in the faith of Jesus Christ,
or peradventure a kinswoman to one of you, by his side that begot me in this
miserable exile, and so going to carry us to her house, the Hupes which guarded
us, would not suffer her, saying, that if we would not continue our craving of
alms, as the Chifuu had permitted us, they would return us back to the ship;
but this they spoke in regard of their own interest, for that they were to have
the moitie of what was given us, as I have before declared, and accordingly
they made as though they would have lead us thither again, which the woman
perceiving, I understand your meaning, said she, and indeed it is but reason
you make the best of your places, for thereby you live, so opening her purse,
she gave them two Taeis in silver, wherewith they were very well satisfied;
whereupon with the leave of the Chifuu, she carried us home to her house, and
there kept us all the while we remained in that place, making exceeding much of
us, and using us very charitably; Here she showed us an Oratory, wherein she
had a cross of wood guilt, as also candlesticks, and a lamp of silver:
Furthermore she told us, that she was named, Inez de Leyria, and her Father
Tome Pirez, who had been great Ambassador from Portugal to the King of China,
and that in regard of an insurrection with a Portugal Captain, made at Canton,
the Chinese taking him for a Spy, and not for an Ambassodor, as he termed
himself, clapped him and all his followers up in prison, where by order of
Justice five of them were put to torture, receiving so many, and such cruel
stripes on their bodies, as they died instantly, and that the rest were all
banished into several parts, together with her father into this place, where he
married with her mother, that had some means, and how he made her a Christian,
living so seven and twenty years together, and converting many Gentiles to the
faith of Christ, whereof there were above three hundred then abiding in that
Town; which every Sunday assembled in her house to say the Catechism:
whereupon demanding of her what were their accustomed prayers, she answered,
that she used no other but these, which on their knees, with their eyes and
hands lift up to heaven, they pronounced in this manner, O Lord Jesus Christ,
as it is most true that thou art the very Son of God, conceived by the Holy
Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary for the salvation of sinners, so thou will be pleased to forgive us our offence^ that thereby we may become worthy to
behold thy face in the glory of thy Kingdom, where thou art sitting at the
right hand of the Almighty. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy
Name. In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. And so all
of them kissing the Cross, embraced one another, and thereupon returned every
one to his own home. Moreover she told us, that her Father had left her many
other prayers, which the Chinese had stolen from her, so that she had none
left but those before recited; whereunto we replied, that those we had heard
from her were very good, but before we went away we would leave her diverse
other good and wholesome prayers; do so then, answered she, for the respect you
owe to so good a God, as yours is, and that has done such things for you, for
me, and for all in general: Then causing the cloth to be laid, she gave us a
very good and plentiful dinner, and treated us in like sort every meal, during
the five days we continued in her house, which as I said before, was permitted
by the Chifuu in regard of a present that this good woman sent his wife, whom
she earnestly entreated so to deal with her husband, as we might be well
entreated, for that we were men of whom God had a particular care, as the
Chifuus wife promised her to do with many thanks to her for the present she had
received; In the mean space, during the five days we remained in her House, we
read the Catechism seven times to the Christians, wherewithal they were very
much edifyed, beside, Christophoro Borhalho made them a little Book in the
Chinese tongue, containing the Pater Noster, the Creed, the Ten Commandments,
and many other good Prayers. After these things we to^k our leaves of Inez de
Leyria, and the Christians who gave us fifty Taeis in Silver, which stood us
since in good stead, ^s I shall declare hereafter, and withal Inez de Leyria
gave us secretly fifty Taeis more, humbly desiring us to remember her in our
Prayers to God.

. 2.
After our departure from the Town of Sempitay we continued our course upon the
River of Bataupina, unto a place, named Lequinpau, containing about eleven or
twelve thousand fires, and very well built, at least we judged so by that we
could discern, as also enclosed with good Walls, and Curtains round about it:
Not far from it was an exceeding long House; having within it thirty Furnaces
on each side, where a great quantity of Silver was melted, which was brought in
carts from a Mountain, some five leagues off, called Tuxenguim: The Chinese
assured us, that above a thousand men wrought continually in that Mine to draw
out the Silver, and that the King of China had in yearly Revenue out of it
about five thousand Picos; This place we left about Sunset, and the next day
in the evening we arrived just between two little Towns, that stood opposite
one to another, the River only between, the one named Pacau, and the other
Nacau, which although they were little, yet were they fairly buil^, and well
walled with great hewed stone, having a number of Temples, which they call
Pagods, all guilt over, and enriched with Steeples and Fanes of great price,
very pleasing and agreeable to the eye. Now in regard of that they recounted
unto us here of these two Towns, I hold it not amiss to discour^e it in this
place, the rather for that I have heard it confirmed since, and that thereby
one may come to know the Original and Foundation of this Empire of China,
whereof ancient Writers have spoken little ^ill this present. It is written in
the first Chronicle, of fourscore which have been made of the Kings of China,
the thirteenth Chapter, as I have heard it many times delivered, That six
hundred thirty and nine years, after the Deluge there was a Country called then
Guantipocau, which as may be judged by the height of the Climate where it is
situated, being in sixty two degrees to the Northward, abutts on the backside
of our Germany; In this Country lived at that time a Prince, named Turbano,
whose state was not very great: It is said of him, that being a youth he had
three children by a Woman, called Nancaa whom he extremely affected, although
the Queen his Mother then a Widow, was exceedingly displeased at it. This King
being much importuned by the principal Persons of his Kingdom to marry, always
excused himself alleging some Reasons for it, which they did not well allow
of, but incited by his Mother, they pressed him so far, that at length they
perceived he had no intent to condescend unto them, for indeed his mind was to
legitimate the eldest Son he had by Nancaa, and to resign his Kingdom unto
him; to which effect he not long after put himself into Religion in a Temple
named Gison, which seems to have been the Idol of a certain Sect that the
Rom^^s had in their time, and that is still at this present in the Kingdoms of
China* Iappon, Cauchenchina, Cambaya, and Siam, whereof I have seen many Pagods
in those Countries: But first having declared his said ^on King, the Queen his
Mother would by no means approve of it, saying, That since the King her Son
would needs profess himself into that Religion, and leave the Kingdom without a
lawful Heir, she would labor to remedy so great a disorder, as indeed she did
by instantly marrying her self, being fifty years of age, to a Priest of hers,
called Silau, that was but six and twenty, whom she proclaimed King,
notwithstanding all opposition made to the contrary; whereof Turbano being
presently advertised, and knowing that his Mother had done it of purpose to
defeat his Son of the Crown, he got him forthwith out of his Religion for to
repossess himself of it, and to that end used all the means and diligence he
could, whereupon the Queen Mother, and Silau, fearing that which might follow
thereof to both their destructions, if he were not in time, and that speedily
prevented, they secretly assembled some of their partakers, to the number of
thirty Horse, and fourscore Foot, who going one night where Turbano was, slew
him, and all his Company; Howbeit Nancaa saved her self, with her three Sons,
and accompanied with certain of her Domestical Servants, she imbarqued her self
in a small Lanteaa, and fled away down the River to a place some seventy
leagues from thence, where she landed with those few followers she had: There
assisted with some others that resorted unto her, she fortified her self in a
little Island, that was in the midst of the River, and which she named
Pilaunere, that signifies, The retreat of the poor, with an intent there to end
the rest of her days; now having lived five years in that poor and miserable
estate, the Tyrant Silan, whom the People hated, doubting lest the three young
Princes coming to age might expel him o^t of what he had injustly usurped upon
them, or at leastwise disturb him with Wars, by reason of the right they
pretended to the Kingdom, he sent a Fleet of thirty Ienga's, wherein, as it is
said, were sixteen hundred men, for to seek them out, and destroy them, whereof
Nancaa receiving intelligence fell to consult what she should do, and at length
resolved by no means to attend these Forces, in regard her Sons were but
Infants, her self a weak Woman, her Men few in number, and unprovided of all
that was necessary to make any defense against so great a number of Enemies,
and so well furnished; whereupon taking a view of her People she found that
they were but thirteen hundred in all, and of them only five hundred Men, the
rest being Women and Children, for all which company there were but three
little Lanteaa's, and one Iangaa, in the whole River, and they not able to
carry an hundred persons; so that Nancaa seeing no means to transport them
away, the History says, She assembled all her People, and declaring the fear
she was in, desired them to advise her what she should do; but excusing
themselves, they ingenuously confessed, they knew not what counsel to give her
in that extremity: Whereupon, according to their ancient custom, they resolved
to cast Lots, to the end that on whom the Lot did fall to speak, he should
freely deliver what God would be pleased to inspire him with; For which purpose
they took three days time, wherein with fasting, cries, and tears, they would
all with one voice crav^ the favor and assistance of the Lord Almighty, in
whose hands was all the hope of their deliverance; This advice being approved
of all in general, Nancaa made it to be proclaimed, that upon pain of Death no
person whatever should eat above once during those three days, to the end that
by this abstinence of the Body, the Spirit might be carried with the greater
attention toward God.

The three days abstinence being expired, Lots were cast five times one after
another, Sect. 3.
and all those five times the Lot fell still on a little Boy of seven years of
age, named, as the Tyrant was, Silau, whereat they were all exeedingly amazed,
in regard that in the whole Troop there was not another of this same name:
After that they had made their Sacrifices with all the accustomed Ceremonies of
Music, Perfumes, and sweet Odours, to render thanks unto God, they commanded
the little Boy to lift up his hands unto Heaven, and then to say what he
thought was necessary for the remedying of so great an Affliction, as that
wherein they were; Whereupon the little Boy, Silau, beholding Nancaa, the
History affirms he said these words; O feeble and wretched Woman, now that
sorrow and affliction makes thee more troubled and perplexed then ever thou
were, in regard of the small relief that humane understanding does represent
unto thee, submit thy self with humble sighs to the omnipotent hand of the
Lord, Esloign then, or at leastwise labor to esloign, thy mind from the
vanities of the Earth, lifting up thine eyes with Faith and Hope, and thou
shall see what the Prayers of an Innocent, afflicted and pursued before the
Justice of him that has created thee, can do; For as soon as in all humility
thou have declared the weakness of thy power unto the Almighty, Victory will
incontinently be given thee from above over the Tyrant Silau; wherefore I
command thee in his Name to imbarque thy self, thy Children, and all thy
Followers in thine Enemies Vessels, wherein amidst the confused murmur of the
Waters thou shall wander so long, till thou arrivest at a placew here thou art
to lay the Foundation of a House of that Reputation, as the Mercy of the most
High shall be published there from Generation to Generation by the Voice of a
strange People, whose Cries shall be as pleasing to him, as those of sucking
Children that lie in the Cradle. This said, the little Boy, according to the
History, fell down stark dead to the ground, which much astonished Nancaa, and
all hers; The said History further delivers, and as I have often heard it read,
that five days after the success the thirty Iangaas were one morning seen
coming down the River in very good equipage, but not so much as one man in
them; the reason hereof, by the report of the History, which the Chinese hold
to be most true, was, that all these Ships of War being joined together for to
execute unmercifully upon Nancaa and her Children the cruel and damnable
intentions of the Tyrant Silau, one night as this Fleet rode at Anchor in a
place, called Catebasoy, a huge dark Cloud came over them, whereout issued such
horrible Thunder and Lightning, accompanied with mighty Rain, the Drops whereof
were so hot, that falling upon them which were asleep in the Vessels, it made
them leap into the River, so as within less, then an hour they perished all;
And it is said that one drop of this Rain coming to fall upon a body it burnt
in such sort, as it penetrated to the very marrow of the bone with most
insupportable pain, no cloths, nor arms, being able to resist it. Nancaa
receiving this favor from the hand of the Lord, with abundance of tears and
humble thanks, embarked her self, her children, and all her company, in the
said thirty Iangaas, and sailing down the River was carried by the strength of
the current, which for her sake, the History says, redoubled then, in seven
and forty days to the very place where now the City of Pequin is built; There
she, and all hers landed, and doubting lest the Tyrant Silau, whose cruelty she
feared, might still pursue her, she fortified her self in this place the best
she could.

CHAP. XXX. The Foundation of the four chief Cities of China; together with
which of the Kings of China it was that built the Wall between China and
Tartaria; and many things that we saw as we past along.
Sect. 1.
THe said History delivers, that few days after the poor Nancaa, and her
followers, were settled on shore, she caused them to swear fealty unto her
eldest Son, and to acknowledge him for their lawful Prince; Now the very same
day that he received the Oath o^ Allegiance from these few Subjects of his, he
made election of the place where the Fortress should be erected, together with
the enclosure of the Wall; Afterward, as soon as the first Foundations were
laid, which was speedily done, he went out of his Tent, accompanied with his
Mother, who governed all, together with his Brothers, and the chiefest of his
company, attired in festival Robes, with a great stone carried before him by
the noblest Personages, which he had caused to be wrought aforehand; and
arriving at the said Foundations he laid his hand upon the Stone, and on his
knees, with his eyes lifted up to Heaven, he said to all that were present,
Brethren, and worthy Friends, know that I give mine own Name, that is, Pequin,
to this Stone, upon which this new place is to be built, for I desire, that
hereafter it should be so called; wherefore I pray you all, as Friends, and
command you as your King, not to call it otherwise, to the end the memory
thereof may remain immortal to those that shall come after us to the end of the
World; By which means it shall be manifested to all men, that the thirteenth
day of the eighth Moon, in the year one thousand six hundred thirty and nine,
after the Lord of all things created had made those that lived upon the Earth,
see how much he abhorred the sins of Men, for the which he drowned the whole
World with Water, that he sent down from Heaven, in satisfaction of his divine
Justice, it shall, I say, be manifested to them, that the new Prince Pequin
built this Fortress, whereunto he gave his Name; And so conformable to the
Prophecy, which the dead child has delivered, it shall be published over
all, by the voice of strange People, in what manner the Lord is to be feared,
and what Sacrifices are to be made, that they may be just and acceptable unto
him. Now this was that which King Pequin said unto his Vassals, and which is at
this day to be seen engraven on a silver Scutcheon, fastened to an Arch of one
of the principal Gates of the City, called Pommicotay, where in memory of this
Prophecy, there is ordinarily a Guard of forty Halberdiers, with their Captain,
whereas there are but only four in all the rest, who are bound to render an
account of all that pass in and out there daily; And because the Histories
relate, that this new King laid the first foundation of this City on the 3 d of
the month of August, the Kings of China do on that day usually show themselves
to the People, and that with such Pomp and Majesty, that I profess I am not
able to declare the least part of it, much less to describe the whole. Now in
regard of this first Kings words, which the Chinese hold for an infallible
Prophecy, his Descendants do so fear the accomplishment thereof, that by a Law
expressly made by them, the admittance of any Strangers into this Kingdom,
saving Ambassadors and Slaves, is forbidden upon most grievous pains; So that
when any do chance to arrive there, they banish them presently from one place
to another, not permitting them to settle any where, as they practiced it
toward me, and my eight companions. And thus, as I have succinctly delivered,
was this Empire of China founded, and peopled by the means of this Prince,
named Pequin, the eldest of Nancaa's three Sons; As for the other two, called
Pacan and Nacau, they afterward founded the other two Towns aforesaid, and
withal gave them their own Names. It is also the general opinion, that their
Mother Nancaa founded the City of Nanquin, which took its denomination from
her, continuing so to this day, and is the second City of this great Monarchy.
The Histories further affirm, that from the time of this first Founder, the
Empire of China augmented always from one King to another, by a just Succession
till a certain Age, which according to our Computation, was in the Year of
Lord, one thousand one hundred and thirty; After which a King that then
reigned, named Xixipan, enclosed the City of Pequin, within the space of three
and twenty years, in such manner as it is seen at this day, and that fourscore
and two years after another King, his Grandchild, called Iumbileytay, made
the like, so that both together were sixty leagues in circuit, namely, each of
them thirty, ten in length, and five in breadth: Now it is certain, and I have
often times read it, that each of these Enclosures, or Walls, has a thousand
and threescore round Bulwarks, as also two hundred and forty Towers, very fair,
strong, large, and high, with gilt Lions upon Globes, being the Arms of the
Kings of China, which are very pleasing to the eye. Without the last Enclosure
is an exceeding great Ditch round about it, ten fathom deep, and forty broad,
continually replenished with many Barques and Boats, covered over head as if
they were Houses, where both Provisions, and all sorts of Merchandise are sold.
This City, according to the Chinese report, has above three hundred and
threescore Gates, in each of which, as I have before recited, there are always
four Halberdiers, who are obliged to render an account of all that go in and
out daily: There are also certain Chambers in it, whither it is the custom to
bring such Children as wander and go astray, in the Town; to the end their
Parents that lose them may be sure to hear of them there. I will refer my
speaking more largely of the Magnificences of this goodly City to another
place, for that which I have now delivered in haste, and as it were en passant,
was but to make a brief Relation of the original of this Empire, and of the
first Founder of the City of Pequin, (which may be truly said to be the
chiefest of all the World for greatness, policy, riches, and abundance of all
things that can be desired of man) as also of the Foundation of the second City
of this mighty Kingdom, that is Nanquin, and of the other two. Pacan and Nacan,
whereof I have heretofore spoken, and in which the Founders of them are buried
in very stately and rich Temples, within Tombs of white and green Alabaster,
all garnished with Gold, and erected upon Lions of Silver, with a world of
Lamps, and perfuming Pans full of diverse sorts of sweet Odours round about them.

Now that I have spoken of the Original and Foundation of this Empire, Sect. 2.
together with the circuit of the great City of Pequin, I hold it not amiss to
entreat as succinctly as I may of another particular, which is no less
admirable then those whereof I have made mention before: It is written in the
fifth Book of the Situation of all the remarkable places of this Empire, or
rather Monarchy, (for to speak truly, there is no appellation so great but may
be well attributed unto it) that a King, named Crisnagol Dicotay, who according
to the computation of that Book, reigned in the year of our Lord five hundred
and eighteen, happened to make war with the Tartar, about some difference
between them concerning the State of Xenxinapau, that borders on the Kingdom of
Lauhos, and so valiantly demeaned himself in a Battle against him, that he
defeated his Army, and remained Master of the Field; whereupon the Tartar
confederating himself with other Kings, his Friends, did by their assistance
assemble together greater Forces then the former, and therewith invaded the
Kingdom of China, where (it is said) he took three and thirty very important
Towns, of which the principal was Panquilor, insomuch that the Chinese fearing
he should not be well able to defend himself, concluded a Peace with him upon
condition to relinquish his right, which he pretended to that in question
betwixt them, and to pay him two thousand Picos of Silver for to defray the
Charges of those strangers the Tartar had entertained in this War; by this
means China continued for a good while quiet, but the King doubting lest the
Tartar might in time to come return to annoy him again, resolved to build a
Wall, that might serve for a Bulwark to his Empire; and to that end calling all
his Estates together, he declared his determination unto them, which was
presently not only well approved of, but held most necessary; so that to
enable him for the performance of a business so much concerning his state, they
gave him ten thousand Picos of Silver, which amount, according to our account,
unto fifteen Millions of Gold, after the rate of fifteen hundred Ducates each
Pico; and moreover they entertained him two hundred and fifty thousand men to
labor in the work, whereof thirty thousand were appointed for Officers, and
all the rest for manual services; Order being taken then for whatsoever was
thought fit for so prodigious an enterprise, they fell to it in such sort, as
by the report of the History all that huge Wall was in seven and twenty years
quite finished from one end to the other; which if credit may be given to the
same Chronicle is seventy Iaos in length, that is six hundred and fifteen miles
after nine miles every Iao; wherein that which seemed most wonderful and most
exceeding the belief of man, was that seven hundred and fifty thousand men
labored incessantly for so long a time in that great work, whereof the
Commonalty, as I delivered before, furnished one third part; the Priests, and
Isles of Aynen, another third; and the King assisted by the Princes, Lords,
Chaems, and Anchacys of the Kingdom, the rest of the building, which I have
both seen and measured, being thirty foot in height, and ten foot in breadth,
where it is thickest: It is made of Lime and Sand, and plaistered on the
outside with a kind of Bitumen, which renders it so strong, that no Cannon can
demolish it: Instead of Bulwarks it has Sentries, or Watch-towers, two stages
high, flanked with Buttresses of Carpentry made of a certain black wood, which
they call Caubesy, that is to say, Wood of Iron, because it is exceeding strong
and hard, every Buttress being as thick as an Hogshead, and very high, so that
these Sentries are far stronger then if they were made of Lime and Stone. Now
this Wall, by them termed Chaufacan, which signifies, Strong resistance,
extends in height equal to the Mountains, whereunto it is joined, and that
those Mountains also may serve for a Wall they are cut down very smooth and
s^eep, which renders them far stronger then the Wall it self; but you must know
that in all this extent of land there is no Wall but in the void spaces from
Hill to Hill, so that the Hills themselves make up the rest of the Wall and
Fence: Further it is to be noted, that in this whole length of an hundred and
fifteen leagues, which this Fortification contains, there are are but only 5
Entries whereby the Rivers of Tartaria do pass, which are derived from the
impetuous Torrents that descend from these Mountains, and running above five
hundred leagues in the Country, render themselves into the Seas of China and
Cauchenchina; howbeit one of these Rivers, being greater then the rest,
disemboques by the Bay of Cuy in the Kingdom of Sournau, commonly called Siam.
Now in all these five Passages both the King of China, and the King of
Tartaria, keep Garrisons; the Chinese in each of them entertains seven thousand
men giving them great pay, whereof six thousand are Horse, the rest Foot, being
for the most part strangers, as Mogores, Pancrus, Champaas, Corosones, Gizares
of Persia, and other different Nations, bordering upon this Empire, and which
in consideration of the extraordinary pay they receive, serve the Chinese; who
(to speak truth) are nothing courageous, as being but little used to the Wars,
and ill provided of Arms and Artillery. In all this length of Wall there are
three hundred and twenty Companies, each of them containing five hundred
Soldiers; so that there are in all one hundred and threescore thousand men,
besides Officers of Justice, Anchacis, Chaems, and other such like persons
necessary for the Government, and entertainment of these Forces; so that all
joined together make up the number of two hundred thousand, which are all
maintained at the Kings only charge, by reason the most of them are
Malefactors condemned to the reparations and labor of the Wall, as I shall
more amply declare when I come to speak of the Prison destined to this purpose,
in the City of Pequin, which is also another Edifice, very remarkable, wherein
there are continually above thirty thousand Prisoners, the most of them from
eighteen to forty five years of age, appointed to work in this Wall.

Being departed from those two Towns Pacau and Nacau, we continued our course
up the River, Sect. 2.
and arrived at another Town, called Mindoo, somewhat bigger then those from
whence we parted, where about half a mile off was a great Lake of Salt Water,
and a number of Salt-houses round about it; The Chinese assured us, that this
Lake did ebb and flow like the Sea, and that it extended above two hundred
leagues into the Country, rendering the King of China in yearly Revenue one
hundred thousand Taeis, only for the third of the Salt that was drawn out of
it; as also that the Town yielded him other one hundred thousand Taeis for the
Silk alone that was made there, not speaking at all of the Camphire, Sugar,
Pourcelain, Vermilion, and Quicksilver, whereof there was very great plenty;
moreover, that some two leagues from this Town were twelve exceeding long
Houses, like unto Magazines, where a world of people labored in casting and
purifying of Copper, and the horrible din which the Hammers made there was
such, and so strange, as if there were any thing on earth that could represent
Hell this was it; wherefore being desirous to understand the cause of this
extraordinary noise, we would needs go to see from whence it proceeded; and we
found that there were in each of these Houses forty Fornaces, that is twenty of
either side, with forty huge Anvils, upon every of which eight men beat in
order, and so swiftly, as a man's eye could hardly discern the blows, so as
three hundred and twenty men wrought in each of these twelve Houses, which in
all the twelve Houses made up three thousand eight hundred and forty workmen,
beside a great number of other persons that labored in other particular
things; whereupon we demanded how much Copper might be wrought every year in
each of these Houses, and they told us, one hundred and ten, or sixscore
thousand Picos, whereof the King had two thirds, because the Mines were his,
and that the Mountain from whence it was drawn was called Corotum baga, which
signifies a River of Copper, for that from the time since it was discovered,
being above two hundred years, it never failed, but rather more and more was
found. Having past about a league beyond those twelve Ho^ses up the River, we
came to a place inclos^d with three ranks of Iron grates, where we beheld
thirty Houses, divined into five rows, six in each row, which were very long
and complete, with great Towers full of Bells of cast mettle, and much carved
work, as also guilt Pillars, and the Frontispieces of fair hewed stone,
whereupon many Inventious were engraved: At this place we went ashore by the
Chif^us permission, that carried us, for that he had made a Vow to this Pagod,
which was called Bigay potim, that is to say, God of an hundred and ten
thousand Gods, Corchoo fungane ginaco ginaca, which according to their report
signifies, strong and great above all others, for one of the Errors wherewith
these wretched people are blinded is, that they believe every particular thing
has its God, who has created it, and preserves its natural being, but that
this Bigay potim brought them all forth from under his arm-pit^, and that from
him as a father, they derive their being, by a filial union, which they term
Bi^^ Porentasay; And in the Kingdom of Pegu, where I have often been, I have
seen one like unto this, named by those of the country Ginocoginans, the God of
all greatness, which Temple was in times past built by the Chinese, when as
they commanded in the Indiaes, being according to their supputation from the
year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1013. to the year 1072. by which account it
appears that the Indiaes were under the Empire of China but only fifty and
nine years, for the successor of him that conquered it, called Exiragano,
voluntarily abandoned it in regard of the great expense of money and blood that
the unprofitable keeping of it cost him: In those thirty Houses, whereof I
formerly spoke, were a great number of Idols of guilt Wood* and a like number
of Tin, L^tten, and Pourcelain, being indeed so many, as I should hardly be
believed to declare them. Now we had not past above five or six leagues from
this place but we came to a great Town, about a league in circuit, quite
destroyed and ruinated, so that asking the Chinese what might be the cause
thereof, they told us, that this Town was anciently called Cohilouza, that is,
The flower of the field, and had in former times been in very great prosperity,
and that about one hundred forty and two years before, a certain stranger, in
the company of some Merchants of the Port of Tanacarim in the Kingdom of Siam,
chanced to come thither, being as it seems an holy man, although the Bonzes
said he was a Sorcerer, by reason of the wonders he did, having raised up five
dead men, and wrought many other Miracles, whereat all men were exceedingly
astonished; and that having diverse times disputed with the Priests he had so
shamed and confounded them, as fearing to deal any more with him, they incensed
the Inhabitants against him, and persw^ded them to put him to death, affirming
that otherwise God would consume them with fire from Heaven, whereupon all the
Townsmen went unto the House of a poor Weaver, where he lodged, and killing the
Weaver, with his son and two sons in Law of his, that would have defended him,
the Holy man came forth to them, and reprehending them for this uproar, he told
them amongst other things, That the God of the Law, whereby they were to be
saved was called Jesus Christ, who came down from heaven to the earth for to
become a man, and that it was needful he should dye for men, and that with the
price of his precious blood, which he shed for sinners upn the Cross, God was
satisfied in his justice, and that giving him the charge of Heaven* and Earth,
he had promised him, that whosoever professed his Law with Faith and good works
should be saved, and have everlasting life; and withal, that the gods whom the
Bonzes served and adored with sacrifices of blood, were false, and Idols,
wherewith the Devil deceived them; Here at the Churchmen entered into so great
fury, that they called unto the people saying, Cursed be he that brings not
wood and fire for to burn him, which was presently put in execution by them,
and the fire beginning exceedingly to rage the Holy man said certain Prayers,
by virtue whereof the fire incontinently went out, wherewith the people being
amazed cried out, saying, Doubtless the God of this man is most mighty, and
worthy to be adored throughout the whole World, which one of the Bonzes
hearing, who was ringleader of this mutiny, and seeing the Town-men retire
away in consideration of that they had beheld, he threw a stone at the holy
man, saying, They which do not as I do, may the Serpent of the night ingulf
them into hell fire. At these words all the other Bonzes did the like, so that
he was presently knocked down dead with the stones they fl^ng at him, whereupon
they cast him into the river, which most prodigiously staid its course from
running down, and so continued for the space of five days together that the
body lay in it; By means of this wonder many embraced the law of that holy man,
whereof there are a great number yet remaining in that country: Whilst the
Chinese were relating thishistory unto us, we arrived at a point of land,
where going to double Cape, we descryed a little place environed with trees, in
the midst whereof was a great cross of stone very well made, which we no sooner
espied, but transported with exceeding joy, we fell on our knees before our
Conductor, humbly desiring him to give us leave to go on shore, but this
Heathen dog refused us, saying, that they had a great way yet to the place
where they were to lodge, whereat we were mightily grieved; Howbeit God of his
mercy, even miraculously so ordered it, that being gone about a league further,
his wife fell in labor, so as he was constrained to return to that place
again, it being a Village of thirty or forty houses, hard by where the Cross
stood: Here we went on land, and placed his wife in an house, where some nine
days after she died in Childbed, during which time we went to the Cross, and
prostrating our selves before it with tears in our eyes; The people of the
Village beholding us in this posture, came to us, and kneeling down also, with
their hands lift up to heaven, they said, Christo Jesus, Jesus Christo, Maria
micauvidau late impont model, which in our tongue signifies, Jesus Christ,
Jesus Christ, Mary always a Virgin conceived him, a Virgin brought him forth,
and a Virgin still remained; whereunto we weeping answered, that they spoke
the very truth; Then they asked us if we were Christians, we told them we were,
which as soon as they understood they carried us home to their houses, where
they entertained us with great affection; Now all these were Christians, and
descended of the Weaver, in whose house the holy man was lodged, of whom
demanding whether that which the Chinese had told us was true; they showed us
a book that contained the whole history thereof at large, with many other
wonders wrought by that holy man, who they said was named Matthew Escandel, and
that he was an Hermit of Mount Sinai, being an Hungarian by nation, and born in
a place called Buda: The same book also related that nine days after this Saint
was buried, the said Town of Cohilouzaa, where he was murdered, began to
tremble in such sort, as all the people thereof in a mighty fright, ran out
into the fields, and there continued in their tents, not daring to return unto
their houses, for they cried out all with one common consent, The blood of this
stranger craves vengeance for the unjust death the Bonzes has given him,
because he preached the truth unto us; But the Bonzes rebuked and told them,
that they committed a great sin in saying so, Nevertheless, they willed them to
be of good cheer, for they would go all to Quiay Tiguarem, God of the night,
and request him to command the earth to be quiet, otherwise we would offer him
no more sacrifices: Immediately whereupon all the Bonzes went accordingly in
procession to the said Idol, which was the chiefest in the Town, but none of
the people durst follow them, for fear of some earthquake, which the very next
night, about eleven of the clock, as those divelish monsters were making their
sacrifices, with odoriferous perfumes, and other ceremonies, accustomed amongst
them, increased so terribly, that by the Lords permission, and for a just
punishment of their wickedness, it quite overthrew all the Temples, houses, and
other edifices of the Town to the ground, wherewith all the Bonzes were killed,
not so much as one escaped alive, being in number above four thousand, as the
book delivers, wherein it is further said, that afterward the earth opening
such abundance of water came forth, as it clean overwhelmed and drowned the
whole Town, so that it became a great lake, and above an hundred fathom deep;
moreover they recounted many other very strange particulars unto us, and also
however since that time the place was named Fiunganorsee, that is, the
chastisement of heaven, whereas before it was called Cohilouzaa, which
signifies,. 4.
the flower of the field, as I have declared heretofore.

After our Departure from the ruins of Fiunganorsee, we arrived at a great
Town, called Iunquinilau, which is very rich, abounding with all kind of
things, fortified with a strong Garrison of Horse and Foot, and having a number
of Junks and Vessels riding before it: Here we remained five days to celebrate
the Funeral of our Chifuus wife; for whose soul he gave us by way of alms both
meat and clothes, and withal freeing us from the oar, permitted us to go
ashore without irons, which was a very great ease unto us. Having le^t this
place, we continued our course up the river, beholding still on either side a
world of goodly great Towns environed with strong walls, as also many
Fortresses and Castles all along the waters side; we saw likewise a great
number of Temples, whose Steeples were all guilt, and in the fields such
abundance of cattle that the ground was even covered over with them, so far as
we could well discern: Moreover there were so many vessels upon this river,
especially in some parts, where Fairs were kept, that at first sight one would
have thought them to be populous Towns, besides other lesser companies of three
hundred, five hundred, six hundred, and a thousand boats, which continually we
met withal on both sides of the river, wherein all things that one could
imagine were sold; Moreover the Chinese assured us, that in this Empire of
China, the number of those which levied upon the rivers, was not less, then
those that dwelled in the Towns, and that without the good order which is
observed to make the common people work, and to constrain the meaner sort to
supply themselves unto trades, for to get their living, they would eat up one
another. Now it is to be noted, that every kind of traffic and commerce is
divided among them into three or four forms, as follows: They which trade in
Ducks, whereof there are great quantities in this Country, proceed therein
diversely; some cause their eggs to be hatched for to sell the Ducklings, others
fat them when they are great for to sell them dead after they are salted; These
traffic only with the eggs, others with the feathers, and some with the heads,
feet, gizards, and intrails, no man being permitted to trench upon his
companions sale, under the penalty of thirty lashes, which no privilege can
exempt them from: In the same manner, concerning hogs, some sell them alive,
and by whole sale, others dead, and by retail, some make bacon of them, others
sell their pigs, and some again sell nothing but the chitterlings, the
sweet-breads, the blood, and the haslets; which is also observed for fish, for
such a one sels it fresh, that cannot sell it either salted or dried, and so of
other Provisions, as flesh, fruit, fowls, venison, pulse, and other things,
wherein such rigor is used, as there are chambers expressly established, whose
officers have commission and power to see, that they which trade in one
particular may not do it in another, if it be not for just and lawful couses,
and that on pain of thirty lashes. There be others likewise that get their
living by selling fish alive, which to that purpose they keep in great
well-boats, and so carry them into diverse countries, where they know there is no
other but salt fish. There are likewise all along this river of Batampina,
whereon we went from Nanquin to Pequin, which is distant one from the other one
hundred and fourscore leagues, such a number of engines for sugar, and presses
for wine and oil, made of diverse sorts of pulse and fruit, as one could hardly
^ee any other thing on either side of the water. In many other places also
there were an infinite company of Houses, and Magazines full of all kinds of
provision, that one could imagine, where all sorts of flesh are salted, dried,
smoaked, and piled up in great high heaps, as gammons of Bacon, Pork, Lard,
Geese, Ducks, Cranes, Bustards, Ostriches, Stags, Cows, Buffles, wild Goats,
Rhinoceroses, Horses, Tigers, Dogs, Foxes, and almost all other creatures that
one can name, so that we said many times amongst our selves, that it was not
possible for all the people of the world to eat up all those provisions. We saw
likewise upon the same river, a number of Vessels, which they call Panouras,
covered from the poup to the prow with nets, in manner of a cage, three inches
high, full of ducks and geese, that were carried from place to place to be
sold; when the Owners of those boats would have these fowl to feed, they
approach to the Land, and where there are rich medows, or marshes, they set
forth Planks, penning the doors of those cages, they beat three or four times
upon a Drum, which they have expressly for that purpose, whereupon all these
fowl, being six or seven thousand at the least, go out of the boat with a
mighty noise, and so fall to feeding all along the waters side; Now when the
Owner perceives, that these fowl have ^ed sufficiently, and that it is time to
return them, he beats the drum the second time, at the sound whereof they
gather all together, and re-enter with the same noise, as they went out,
wherein it is strange to observe, that they return all in again, not so much as
one missing. That done, the Master of the boat parts from that place, and
afterward when he thinks it is time for them to lay, he repairs toward land,
and where he finds the grounds dry, and good grass, he opens the doors, and
beats the drum again, at which all the fowl of the boat come forth to lay, and
then at such time as the Master judges that these fowl have laid, he beats his
drum afresh, and suddenly in haste they all throng in to the boat, not so much
as one remaining hehind; Thereupon two or three men get ashore, with baskets in
their hands, whereinto they gather up the eggs, till they have gotten eleven or
twelve baskets full, and so they proceed on their voyage to make sale of their
war, which being almost spent, to store themselves anew, they go for to buy
more unto them that breed them, whose trade it is to sell them young, for they
are not suffered to keep them when they are great, as the others do, by reason,
as I have said before, no man may deal in any commodity for which he has not
permission from the Governors of the Towns. They that get their living by
breeding of Ducks have near to their Houses certain Ponds, where many times
they keep ten or eleven thousand of these duckings, some bigger, some lesser.
Now for to hatch the Eggs, they have in very long galleries twenty and thirty
furnaces full of dung, wherein they bury two hundred, three hundred, and five
hundred Eggs together, then stopping the mouth of each furnace that the dung
may become the hotter, they leave the Eggs there till they think the young ones
are disclosed, whereupon putting into every several furnace a Capon half
pulled, and the skin stripped from off his breast, they leave him shut up therein
for the space of two days, at the end whereof being all come out of the shell,
they carry them into certain places under ground made for that purpose, setting
them bran soaked in liquor, and so being left there loose some ten or eleven
days, they go afterward of themselves into the ponds, where they feed and
bring them up for to sell them unto those former Merchants, who trade with them
into diverse parts, it being unlawful for one to trench upon another traffic,
as I have before related, so that in the Markets and public places, where
provisions for the mouth are sold, if any that sell Goose Eggs do chance to be
taken seized with Hens Eggs and it is suspected that they sell of them, they
are presently punished with thirty lashes on the bare Buttocks, without hearing
any justification they can make for themselves, being as I have said, found
seized of them, so that if they will have Hens Eggs for their own use, to avoid
incurring the penalty of the Law they must be broken at one end, whereby it may
appear that they keep them not to sell, but to eat. As for them that sell Fish
alive, if any of their Fish chance to die, they cut them in pieces, and salting
them sell them at the price of salt-fish, which is less then that of
fresh-fish, wherein they proceed so exactly, that no man dares pass the
limits, which are prescribed and ordained by the Conchalis of the State, upon
pain of most severe punishment, for in all this Country the King is so much
respected, and Justice so feared, as no kind of person, how great soever,
dares murmur, or look awry at an Officer, no not at the very Huppes, which are
as the Bailiffs or Beadles amongst us.

CHAP. XXXI. The order which is observed in the moving Towns that are made upon
the Rivers, and that which further befell us.
. 1.
We saw likewise all along this great River a number of Hogs both wild and
domestic, that were kept by certain men on horseback, and many herds of ^ame
red Deer, which were driven from place to place like Sheep, to feed, all lamed
of their right legs, to hinder them from running away, and they are lamed so,
when they are but Calves, to avoid the danger, that otherwise they might incur
of their lives: We saw also diverse Parks, wherein a world of Dogs were kept to
be sold to the Butchers, for in these Countries they eat all manner of Flesh,
whereof they know the price, and of what creatur^s they are, by the choppings
they make of them; moreover we met with many small Barques, whereof some, were
full of Pigs, others of Tortoises, Frogs, Otters, Adders, Eeeles, Snails, and
Lizards, for as I have said, they buy there of all that is judged good to eat;
now to the end that such provisions may pass at an easier rate, all that sell
them are permitted to make traffic of them in several fashions; true it is,
that in some things they have greater Franchises, then in others, to the end
that by means thereof no Merchandise may want sale: And because the Subject I
now treat of dispences me to speak of all, I will relate that which we further
observed there, and whereat we were much abashed, judging thereby how far men
suffer themselves to be carried by their Interests, and extreme avarice; you
must know then that in this Country there are a many of such as make a trade of
buying and selling men's Excrements, which is not so mean a Commerce amongst
them, but that there are many of them grow rich by it, and are held in good
account; now these Excrements serve to manure grounds that are newly grubb'd,
which is found to be far better for that purpose then the ordinary dung: They
which make a trade of buying it go up and down the streets with certain
Clappers, like our Spittle men, whereby they give to understand what they
desire without publishing of it otherwise to people, in regard the thing is
filthy of it self; whereunto I will add thus much, that this commodity is so
much esteemed amonst them, and so great a trade driven of it, that into one sea
port, sometimes there comes in one tide two or three hundred Sayls laden with
it: Oftentimes also there is such striving for it, as the Governors of the
place are fain to enterpose their authority for the distribution of this goodly
commodity, and all for to manure their grounds, which soyled with it, bears
three crops in one year. We saw many boats likewise laden with dried orange
pills, wherewith in victualing houses they boil dogs flesh, for to take away
the rank savor and humidity of it, as also to reader it more firm: In brief,
we saw so many Vaucans, Lanteaas, and Barcasses, in this river, lad^n with all
kinds of provision, that either the sea or land produces, and that in such
abundance, as I must confess I am not able to express it in words; for it is
not possible to imagine the infinite store of things that are in this Country,
of each whereof you shall see two or three hundred Vessels together at a time,
all full, especially at the Fairs, and Markets, that are kept upon the solemn
festival days of their Pagodes, for then all the fairs are free, and the
Pagodes for the most part are situated on the banks of rivers, to the end all
commodities may the more commodiously be brought thither by water. Now when all
these vessels come to join together, during these Fairs, they take such order,
as they make as it were a great and fair Town of them, so that sometimes you
shall have of them a league in length, and three quarters of a league in
breadth, being composed of above twenty thousand vessels, besides Balons,
Guedees, and Manchuas, which are small boats, whose number is infinite; For the
Government hereof there are threescore Captains appointed, of which thirty are
to see good order kept, and the other thirty are for the guard of the Merchants
that come thither, to the end they may sail in safety; Moreover there is above
them a Chaem, who has absolute power both in civil, and criminal causes,
without any appeal or opposition whatsoever, during the fifteen days, that this
Fair lasts, which is from the new to the full Moon; And indeed more come to see
the policy, order, and beauty of this kind of Town, then otherwise; for to
speak the truth, the framing of it in that manner with vessels, makes it more
to be admired then all the Edifices that can be seen upon the land; There are
in this moving Town two thousand streets, exc^eding long, and very strait,
enclosed on either side with ships, most of which are covered with silks, and
adorned with a world of banners, flags, and streamers, wherein all kind of
commodities that can be desired, are to be sold; In other streets are as many
trades to be seen, as in any Town on the Land, amidst the which they that
traffic, go up and down in little Manchuas, and that very quietly, and
without any disorder* Now if by chance any one is taken stealing, he is
instantly punished according to his offense; As soon as it is night, all these
streets are shut up with cords athwart them, to the end none may pass after
the retreat sounded; In each of these streets there are at least a d^zen of
lanthorns, with lights burning, fastened a good height on the Masts of the
vessels, by means whereof all that go in and out are seen, so that it may be
known who they are, from whence they come, and what they would have, to the end
the Chaem may the next morning receive an account thereof; And truly to behold
all these lights together in the night, is a ^ight scarce able to be imagined,
neither is there a street without a Bell, and a Sentinel, so as when that of
the Chaems ship is heard to ring, all the other bells answer it, with so great a
noise of voices adjoined thereunto, that we were almost besides our selves, at
the hearing of a thing, which cannot be well conceived; and that was ruled with
such good order: In every of these streets, even in the poorest of them, there
is a Chapel to pray in, framed upon great Barcasses, like to Galleys, very
neat, and so well accommod^ted, that for the most part they are enriched with
silks, and cloth of gold; In these Chapels are their Idols, and Priests which
administer their sacrifices, and receive the offerings that are made them,
wherewith they are abundantly furnished for their living; Out of each street,
one of the most account, or chiefest Merchant is chosen to wa^ch all night in
his turn with those of his Squadron, besides the Captains of the government,
who in Ballons, walk the round without, to the end no thief may escape by any
avenue whatsoever, and for that purpose these guards cry as loud as they can
that they may be heard. Amongst the most remarkable things, we saw one street,
where there were above an hundred vessels, laden with Idols of guilt wood, of
diverse fashions, which were sold for to be offered to the Pagodes, together
with a world of feet, thighs, arms, and heads, that sick folks bought to offer
in devotion; There also we beheld other ships, covered with silk hangings,
where Comedies, and other plays were represented to entertain the people
withal, which in great numbers flocked thither; In other places, Bills of
excha^ge for Heaven were sold, wher^by these Priests of the Devil promised them
many merits, with great interest, affirming that without these bills they could
not possibly be saved, for that God, say they, is a mortal enemy to all such as
do not some good to the Pagodes, whereupon they tell them such fables and lies,
as these unhappy wretches do often times take the very bread from their mouths
to give it them; There were also other vessels all laden with dead men's skuls,
which dive^s men bought for to present as an offering, at the tombs of their
friends, when they should happen to dye; for, say they, as the deceased is laid
in the grave in the company of these skuls, so shall his soul enter into
Heaven, attended by those unto whom those skuls belonged, wherefore when the
Porter of Paradise shall see such a Merchant, with many followers, he will do
him honor, as to a man that in this life has been a man of quality, for if he
be poor, and without a train, the Porter will not open to him, whereas
contrarily the more dead men's skuls he has buried with him, the more happy he
shall be esteemed; There were many boats likewise, where there were men that
had a great many of Cages, full of live birds, who playing on diverse
instruments of music, exhorted the people with a loud voice, to deliver those
poor creatures of God, that were there in captivity, whereupon many came and
gave them money for the redemption of those prisoners, which presently they let
out of the cages, and then as they flew away, the redeemers of them cried out
to the birds, Pichau pitauel catan vacaxi, that is, Go, and tell God, how we
serve him here below. In imitation of these, there are others also, who in
their ships, kept a great many of little live fishes in great pots of water,
and like the sellers of birds invite the people, for Gods cause to free those
poor innocent fishes, that had never sinned, so that diverse bought many of
them, and casting them into the river, said, Get ye gone, and tell there below,
the good I have done you for Gods sake. To conclude all, the vessels where
these things are exposed to sale, are seldom less in number then two hundred,
besides thousands of others, which sell such like wares in a far greater
quantity.

We saw likewise many Barcasses full of men and women; that played upon diverse
sorts of instruments,. 2
and for money gave them music that desired it; There were other vessels laden
with horns, which the Priests sold, therewith to make feasts in Heaven, for
they say, that those were the horns of several beasts, which were offered in
sacrifice to the Idols out of devotion, and for the performance of vows that
men had made in diverse kind of misfortunes, and sicknesses, wherein they had at
others times been; And that as the flesh of those beasts, had been given here
below for the honor of God to the poor, so the souls of them for whom those
horns were offered, do in the other world eat the souls of of those beasts to
whom those horns belonged, and thereunto invite the souls of their friends, as
men use to invite others here on earth; Other vessels we saw covered with
blacks, and full of tombs, torches, and great wax lights, as also women in
them, that for money would be hired to weep and lament for the dead; others
there were, called Pitaleus, that in great barques kept diverse kinds of wild
beasts to be showed for money, most dreadful to behold as Serpents, huge Adders,
monstrous Lizards, Tigers, and many others such like; we saw in like sort a
great number of Stationers, which sold all manner of books, that could be
desired, as well concerning the creation of the world, whereof they tell a
thousand lies, as touching the States, Kingdoms, Islands, and Provinces of the
world, together with the Laws and Customs of Nations, but especially of the
Kings of China, their number, brave acts, and of all things else that happened
in each of their reigns, Moreover we saw a great many of the light, swift
Foysts, wherein were men very well armed, who cried out with a loud voice, that
if any one had received an affront, whereof he desired to be avenged, let him
come unto them, and they would cause satisfaction to be made him; In other
vessels there were old women, that served for midwives, and that would bring
women speedily and easily a bed, as also a many of Nurses, ready to be
entertained for to give children suck; There were barques likewise very well
adorn^d, and set ^orth, that had in them diverse reverend old men, and grave
matrons, whose profession was to make marriages, and to comfort widows, or such
as had lost their children, or suffered any other misfortune; In others there
were a number of young men and maids, that lacked Masters, and Mistresses,
which offered themselves to any that would hire them; There were other vessels
that had in them such as undertook to tell fortunes, and to help folks to
things lost. In a word, not to dwell any longer upon every particular, that was
to be seen in this moving Town, for then I should never have done, it shall
suffice me to say, that nothing can be desired on land, which was not to be had
in their vessels, and that in greater abundance then I have delivered,
wherefore I will pass from it to show you that one of the principal causes why
this Monarchy of China, that contains two and thirty Kingdoms, is so mighty,
rich, and of so great commerce, is, because it is exceedingly replenished with
rivers, and a world of Chanals that have been anciently made by the Kings,
great Lords, and people thereof, for to render all the Country navigable, and
so communicate their labors with one another: The narrowest of these Chanals
have bridges, of hewed stone over them, that are very high, long and broad,
whereof some are of one stone, eighty, ninety, nay, an hundred spans long, and
fifteen, or twenty broad, which doubtless is very mavelous, for it is almost
impossible to comprehend by what means so huge a mass of stone could be drawn
out of the Quarry without breaking, and how it should be transported to the
place where it was to be set. All the ways and passages, from Cities, Towns,
and Villages, have very large causeys made of fair stone, at the ends whereof
are costly pillars and arches, upon which are inscriptions with letters of
gold, containing the pray sers of them that erected them; moreover there are
handsome seats placed all along for poor passengers to rest themselves on:
There are likewise innumerable Aqueducks and fountains every where, whose water
is most wholesome and excellent to drink; And in diverse parts there are certain
Wenches of love, that out of charity prostitute themselves to travelers, which
have no money, and although amongst us this is held for a great abuse and
abomination, yet with them it is accounted a work of mercy, so that many on
their deathbeds do by their testaments bequeath great revenues, for the
maintenance of this wickedness, as a thing very meritorious for the salvation
of their souls; moreover many others have left lands for the erecting and
maintaining of houses, in deserts and unhabited places, where great fires are
kept all the night to guide such as have strayed out of their way, as also
water for men to drink, and seats to repose them in, and that there may be no
default herein, there are diverse persons entertained with very good means, to
see these things carefully continued, according to the institution of him that
founded them for the health of his soul. By these marvels which are found in
the particular Towns of this Empire, may be concluded what the greatness
thereof might be, were they joined all together; but for the better
satisfaction of the Reader, I dare boldly say, if my testimony may be worthy of
credit, that in one and twenty years space, during which time, with a world of
misfortune, labor and pain, I traversed the greatest part of Asia* as may
appear by this my discourse, I had seen in some countries a wonderful abundance
of several sorts of victuals, and provisions, which we have not in our Europe,
yet without speaking what each of them might have in particular, I do not think
there is in all Europe so much as there is in China alone; And the same may be
said of all the rest, wherewith Heaven has favored this clymate, as well for
the temperature of the air, as for that which concerns the policy, and riches,
the magnificence and greatness of their estate; Now that which gives the
greatest luster unto it, is, their exact observation of justice, for there is
so well ruled a Government in this Country, as it may justly be envied of all
others in the world; And to speak the truth, such as want this particular, have
no gloss, be they otherways never so great and commendable. Verily, so often as
I represent unto my self those great things which I have seen in this China, I
am on the one side amazed to think how liberally it has pleased God to heap up
on this people, the goods of the earth, and on the other side I am exceedingly
grieved to consider how ungrateful they are in acknowledging such
extraordinary favors; for they commit amongst themselves an infinite of most
enormous sins, wherewithal they incessantly offend the Divine Goodness, as well
in their brutish and diabolical Idolatries, as in the abominable sin of
Sodomy, which is not only permitted amongst them in public, but is also
accounted for a great virtue according to the instructions of their Priests.

CHAP. XXXII. Our Arrival at the City of Pequin; together with our
imprisonment, and that which moreover happened unto us there; as also the great
Majesty of the Officers of their Court of Justice.
AFter we were departed from that rare and mavelous Town, whereof I have
spoken,. 1.
we continued our course up the river, until at length on Tuesday, the
nineteenth of October, in the year 1541. we arrived at the great City of
Pequin, whither, as I have said before, we had been remitted by Appeal; In this
manner chained three and three together, we were cast into a prison, called
Gofaniauserca, where for our welcome we had at the first dash thirty lashes a
piece given us, wherewith some of us became very sick: Now as soon as the
Chifuu who conducted us thither, had presented the process of our sentence,
sealed with twelve seals, to the Justice of the Aytao, which is their
Parliament, the twelve Chonchalis of the criminal Chamber, unto whom the
cognizance of our cause appertained, commanded us presently away to prison,
whereupon one of those twelve, assisted by two Registers, and six or seven
officers, whom they term Hupes, and are much like our Catchpoles here,
terrified us not a little, as he was leading us thither, for giving us very
threatening speeches* Come, said he unto us, By the power and authority, which I
have from the Aytao of Batampina, chief President of the two and thirty Judges
of strangers, within whose breast are the secrets of the Lion crowned on the
throne of the world enclosed, I enjoin and command you to tell me, what people
you are, as also of what country, and whether you have a King, who for the
service of God, and for the discharge of his dignity, is inclined to do good to
the poor, and to render them justice, to the end that with tears in their eyes,
and hands lifted up, they may not address their complaints to that Sovereign
Lord, which has made the bright Enamel of the skies, and for whose holy feet
all they that reign with him, serve but for sandals. To this demand we answered
him, that we were poor strangers, natives of the Kingdom of Siam, who being
imbarqued with our Merchandise for Liampoo, were cast away in a great storm at
sea, from whence we escaped naked with the loss of all that we had, and how in
that deplorable estate we were fain to get our living by begging from door to
door till such time as at our arrival at the Town of Taypor, the Chumbim, then
resident there, had arrested us for prisoners without cause, and so sent us to
the City of Nanquin, where by his report we had been condemned to the whip, and
to have our thumbs cut off, without so much as once daigning to hear us in our
justifications, by reason whereof lifting up our eyes to Heaven, we had been
adviced to have recourse with our tears to the four and twenty Judges of
aust^er life, that through their zeal to God, they might take our cause in
hand, since by reason of our poverty we were altogether without support, and
abandoned of all men, which with an holy zeal they incontinently effected by
revoking the cause, and annulling the judgment that had been given against us,
and that these things considered we most instantly besought him, that for the
service of God he would be pleased to have regard to our misery, and the great
injustice that was done us, for that we had no means in this Country, nor
person that would speak one word for us. The Judge remained sometimes in suspense
upon that we had said to him, at length he answered, that we need say no more
to him, for it is sufficient that I know you are poor, to the end this affair
may go another way then hitherto it has done, neverthertheless to acquit me of
my charge, I give you five days time, conformably to the Law of the third Book,
that within the said term you may retain a Proctor to undertake your cause, but
if you will be advised by me, you shall present your request to the Tanigores
of the sacred Office, to the end that they carried by an holy zeal of the
honor of God, may out of compassion of your miseries, take upon them to defend
your right. Having spoken thus, he gave us a Taeis in way of alms, and said
further to us, Beware of the prisoners that are here, for I assure you that
they make it their trade, to steal all that they can from any one; whereupon
entering into another chamber where there were a great number of prisoners, he
continued there above three hours in giving them audience, at the end whereof
he sent seven and twenty men, that the day before had received their judgment
to execution, which was inflicted upon them by whipping to death, a spectacle
so dreadful to us, and that put us in such a fright, as it almost set us
besides our selves: The next morning, as soon as it was day, the Jaylors clapped
irons on our feet, and manacles on ou^ hands, and put us to exceeding great
pain, but seven days after we had endured such misery, being laid on the ground
one by another, and bewayling our disaster, for the extreme fear we were in, of
suffering a most cruel death, if that which we had done at Calempluy should by
any means chance to be discovered, it pleased God that we were visited by the
Tanigores of the house of mercy, which is of the jurisdiction of this prison,
who are called in their language Cofilem Gnaxy; At their arrival all the
prisoners bowing themselves, said with a lamentable ton^, Blessed be the day
wherein God does visit us by the ministry of his servants; whereunto the
Tanigories made answer with a grave and modest countenance, The Almighty and
divine hand of him that has formed the beauty of the stars keep and preserve
you; Then approaching to us, they very courteously demanded of us what people
we were, and whence it proceeded that our imprisonment was more sensible to us
then to others? To this speech we replied with tears in our eyes, that we were
poor strangers, so abandoned of men, as in all that Country there was not one
that knew our names, and that all we could in our poverty say to entreat them
to think of us for Gods sake, was contained in a letter, that we had brought
them from the Chamber of the Society of the house of Quiay Hinarol, in the City
of Nanquin; whereupon Christophoro Borralho, presenting them with the letter,
they received it with a new ceremony, full of all courtesy, saying, Praised be
he who has created all things, for that he is pleased to serve himself of
sinners here below, Whereby they may be recompensed at the last day of all
days, by satisfying them double their labor with the riches of his holy
treasures, which shall be done, as we believe in as great abundance, as the
drops of rain fall from the clouds to the earth. After this, one of the four,
putting up the Letter, said unto us, that as soon as the Chamber of Justice for
the poor was open, they would all of them give an answer to our business, and
see us furnished with all that we had need of, and so they departed from us:
Three days after they returned to visit us in the prison, and in the next
morning coming to us again, they asked us many questions answerable to a
memorial which they had thereof, whereunto we replied in every point according
as we were questioned by each of them, so as they remained very well satisfied
with our answers; Then calling the Register to them, who had our papers in
charge, they inquired very exactly of him, touching many things that concerned
us, and withal required his advice about our affair; that done, having
digested all that might make for the conversation of our right into certain
heads, they took our process from him, saying, they would peruse it all of them
together in their Chambers of Justice with the Proctors of the house, and the
next day return it him again, that he might carry it to the Chaem, as he was
resolved before to do.

Not to trouble my self with recounting in particular all that occurred in this
affair, until such time as it was fully concluded, wherein six months and an
half were employed,. 2.
during the which we continued still prisoners in such misery, I will in few
words relate all that befell us unto the end; when as our business was come
before the twelve Conchalis of the criminal Court, the two Proctors of the
house of mercy most willingly took upon them to cause the unjust sentence,
which had been given against us, to be revoked; Having gotten then all the
proceedings to be disannulled, they by petition remonstrated unto the Chaem,
who was the President of that Court, How we could not for any cause whatsoever
be condemned to death, seeing there were no witnesses of any credit that could
testify that we had robbed any man, or had ever seen us carry any offensive
weapons contrary to the prohibition made against it by the Law of the first
book, but that we were apprehended quite naked, like wretched men, wandering
after a lamentable shipwreck, and that therefore our poverty and misery was
worthy rather of a pitiful compassion, then of that rigor, wherewith the first
Ministers of the arm of wrath had caused us to be whipped; moreover that God
alone was the Judge of our innocence, in whose name they required him once,
twice, nay many times, to consider that he was mortal, and could not last long,
for that God had given him a perishable life, at the end whereof he was to
render an account of that which had been required of him, since by a solemn
oath he was obliged to do all that should be manifest to his judgment, without
any consideration of men of the world, whose custom it was to make the balance
sway down, which God would have to be upright, according to the integrity of
his divine Justice. To this petition the Kings Proctor opposed himself, as he
that was our adverse party, and that in certain articles, which he framed
against us, set forth, how he would prove by ocular witnesses, as well of the
Country, as strangers, that we were public thieves, making a common practice
of robbing, and not merchants, such as we pretended to be; whereunto he added,
that if we had come to the Coast of China with a good design, and with an
intent to pay the King his due in his Custom-houses, we would have repaired to
the ports, where they were established by the Ordinance of the Aytan of the
Government, but for a punishment, because we went from Isle to Isle, like
Pirates, Almighty God, that detests sin and robber^, had permitted us to suffer
shipwreck, that so falling into the hands of the Ministers of his justice, we
might receive the guerdon of our wicked works, namely, the pains of death,
whereof our crimes rendered us most worthy; In regard of all which, he desired
we might be condemned according to the Law of the second book, that commanded
it in express terms; And that if for other considerations, no way remarkable in
us, we could ^y any law be exempted from death, ye^ nevertheless for that we
were strangers, and vagabonds, without either faith, or knowledge of God, that
alone would suffice at leastwise to condemn us to have our hands and noses cut
off, and so to be banished for ever into the Country of Ponxileytay, whither
such people as we, were wont to be exiled, as might be verified by diverse
sentences given and executed in like cases, and to that effect, he desired the
admittance of his articles, which he promised to prove within the time, that
should be prescribed him. These articles were presently excepted against by the
Proctor of the Court of Justice, established for the poor, who offered to make
the contrary appear within a certain term, which to that end, and for many
other reasons alleged by him in our favor, was granted him, wherefore he
required that the said articles might not be admitted, especially for that they
were infamous, and directly contrary to the Ordinances of Justice. Whereupon
the Chaem ordered, that his articles should not be admitted, unless he did
prove them by evident testimonies, and such as were conformable to the Divine
Law, within six days next ensuing, and that upon pain in case of contravention
not to be admitted to any demand of a longer delay. The said term of six days
being prescribed the Kings Proctor, he, in the mean time, producing no one
proof against us, nor any person that so much as knew us, came and demanded a
delay of other six days, which was flatly denied him, in regard it but too well
appeared, that all he did was only to win time, and therefore he would by no
means consent unto it, but contrarily he gave the Proctor for the poor five
days respit to allege all that further he could in our defense; In the mean
time, the Kings Proctor declaimed against us in such foul and opprobrious
terms, as the Chaem was much offended thereat, so that he condemned him to pay
us twenty Taeis of silver, both for his want of charity, and for that he could
not prove any one of the obligations which he had exhibited against us. Three
days being spent herein, four Tanigores of the house of the poor, coming very
early in the morning to the prison, sent for us into the Infirmirie, where they
told us that our business went very well, and how we might hope that our
sentence would have a good issue, whereupon we cast our selves at their feet,
and with abundance of tears desired God to reward them for the pains they had
taken in our behalf. Thereunto one of them replied, And we also most humbly
beseech him to keep you in the knowledge of his Law, wherein all the happiness
of good m^n consists; and so they caused two coverlets to be given us, for to
lay upon our beds in the night, because the weather was cold, and withal bid
us, that we should not stick to ask any thing we wanted, for that God Almighty
did not love a sparing hand in the distributing of alms for his sake. A little
after their departure came the Register, and showing us the Chaems order,
whereby the Kings Proctor was condemned to pay us twenty Taeis, gave us the
money, and took an acquittance under our hands for the receipt of it; For which
giving him a world of thanks, we entreated him for his pains to take as much
thereof as he pleased, but he would not touch a penny, saying, I will not for so
small a matter lose the recompense which I hope to gain from God, for the
consideration of you.

. 3.
We past nine days in great fear, still expecting to have our sentence
pronounced, when as one Saturday morning two Chumbims of Justice came to the
prison for us, accompanied with twenty officers, by them called Huppes,
carrying Halberts, Portisans, and other arms, which made them very dreadful to
the beholders; These men tying us all nine together in a long iron chain, lead
us to the Caladigan, which was the place where audience was given, and where
execution was done on delinquents; Now how we got thither, to confess the
truth, I am not able to relate, for we were at that instant so far besides our
selves, as we knew not what we did, or which way we went, so as in that
extremity all our thought was how to conform our selves to the will of God, and
beg of him with tears, that for the merit of his sacred passion, he would be
pleased to receive the punishment, that should be inflicted on us for the
satisfaction of our sins. At length after much pain, and many affronts, that
were done us by many which followed after us, with loud cries, we arrived at
the first Hall of the Caladigan, where were four and twenty Executioners, whom
they call, The Ministers of the arm of justice, with a great many of other
people, that were there about their affairs. Here we remained a long time, till
at length upon the ringing of a bell, other doors were opened, that stood under
a great A^ch of Architecture, very artificially wrought, and whereon were a
number of rich figures; On the top a monstrous Lion of silver was seen, with
his sore and hind feet upon a mighty great bowl, made of the same metal,
whereby the arms of the King of China are represented, which are ordinarily
placed on the Forefront of all the Sovereign Courts, where the Chaems precide,
who are as Viceroys amongst us. Those doors being opened, as I said before,
all that were there present entered into a very great Hall, like the Body of a
Church, hung from the top to the bottom with diverse pictures, wherein strange
kinds of execution done upon persons of all conditions, after a most dreadful
manner were constrained, and under every picture was this inscription, Such a
one was executed with this kind of death for committing such a crime; so that
in beholding the diversity of these fearful pourtraitures one might see in it,
as it were, a declaration of the kind of death that was ordained for each
crime, as also the extreme rigor which the Justice there observed in such
executions. From this Hall we went into another room far richer, and more
costly, for it was guilt all over, so that one could not have a more pleasing
object, at least wise, if we could have taken pleasure in any thing,
considering the misery we were in. In the midst of this room there was a
Tribunal, whereunto one ascended by seven steps, environed with three rows of
ballisters of iron, copper, and ebony; the tops whereof were beautified with
Mother of Pearl: At the upper end of all was a cloth of State of white damask,
frenged about with a deep cawl frenge of green silk and gold; Under this State
sat the Chaem with a world of greatness and majesty, he was seated in a very
rich Chair of silver, having before him a little table, and about him three
boys on their knees, sumptuously apparelled, with chains of gold, one of the
which (namely, he in the middle) served to give the Chaem the pen wherewithal
he signed; The other two took the petitions that were preferred, and presented
them on the Table, that they might be signed; On the right hand in another
place somewhat higher, and almost equal with the Chaem, stood a boy, some ten
or eleven years old, attired in a rich robe of white Satin, imbroidered with
roses of gold, having a chain of pearl three double about his neck, and hair as
long as a woman's, most neatly plaited with a fillet of gold, all enamelled with
green, and powdered over with great seed pearl; In his hand he held, as a mark
of that which he represented, a little branch of roses, made of silk, gold
thread, and rich pearls, very curiously intermixed; And in this manner he
appeared so gentile, handsome, and beauiful, as no woman, how fair soever,
could overmatch him; this boy leaned on his elbow upon the Chaems chair, and
figured mercy. In the like manner, on the left hand was another goodly boy,
richly apparelled in a Coat of carnation Satin, all set with roses of gold,
having his right arm bared up to the elbow, and died with a vermilion as red as
blood, and in that hand holding a naked sword, which seemed also to be bloody:
moreover, on his head he wore a crown, in fashion like to a Myter, hung all
with little razors, like unto lancets, wherewith Chyrurgions let men blood,
being thus gallantly set forth, and of most beautiful presence, yet he struck
all that beheld him with fear, in regard of that he represented, which was
Justice. For they say, that the Judge, which holds the place of the King, who
presents God on earth, ought necessarily to have those two qualities, Justice,
and Mercy; and that he which does not use them is a Tyrant, acknowledging no
Law, and usurping the power that he has. The Chaem was apparelled in a long
Gown of violet Satin, fr^nged with green silk and gold, with a kind of
s^apulair about his neck, in the midst of which was a great plate of gold,
wherein an hand holding a very even pair of balance was engraven, and the
inscription about it; It is the nature of the Lord Almighty, to observe in his
justice, weight, measure, and true account, therefore take heed to what thou
do, for if thou come to sin thou shall suffer for it eternally. Upon his
head he had a kind of round bonet, bordered about with small sprigs of gold,
all enamelled violet and green, and on the top of it was a little crowned Lion
of gold, upon a round bowl of the same metal; by which Lion crowned, as I have
delivered heretofore, is the King signified, and by the bowl, the world, as if
by these devices, they would denote, that the King is the Lion crowned on the
throne of the world; In his right hand he held a little rod of ivory, some
three spans long, in manner of a Scepter; upon the top of the three first steps
of this Tribunal stood eight Ushers with silver maces on their shoulders, and
below were threescore Mogors on their knees, disposed into three ranks,
carrying halberts in their hands, that were neatly damasked with gold; In the
vantgard of these same stood, like as if they had been, the Commanders or
Captains of this Squadron, the Statues of two Giants, of a most gallant aspect,
and very richly attired, with their swords hanging in scarfs, and mighty great
halberts in their hands, and these the Chinese in their language call Gigaos;
on the two sides of this Tribunal below in the room were two very long tables,
at each of which sat twelve men, whereof four were Presidents, or Judges, two,
Registers, four, Solicitors, and two, Conchalis, which are as it were,
Assistants to the Court, one of these Tables was for criminal, and the other
for civil causes, and all the officers of both these Tables were apparelled in
gowns of white Satin, that were very long, and had large slieves, thereby
demonstrating the latitude and purity of justice; the Tables were covered with
carpets of violet damask, and richly bordered about with gold, the Chaems
table, because it was of silver, had no carpet on it, nor any thing else, but a
cushion of cloth of gold, and a Standith; Now all these things put together, as
we saw them, carried a wonderful show of State and Majesty; But to proceed,
upon the fourth ringing of a bell, one of the C^^chalis stood up, and after a
low obeysanc^ made to the Chaem, with a very loud voice, that he might be heard
of every one, he said, Peace there, and with all submission hearken, on pain of
incurring the punishment, ordained by the Chaems of the Government for those,
that interrupt the silence of sacred Justice. Whereupon this same sitting down
again, another arose, and with the like reverence, mounting up to the Tribunal,
where the Chaem sat, he took the Sentences from him that held them in his hand,
and published them aloud one after another, with so many ceremonies, and
compliments, as he employed above an hour therein; At length coming to
pronounce our judgment, they caused us to kneel down, with our eyes fixed on
the ground, and our hands lifted up, as if we were praying unto Heaven, to the
end that in all humility we might hear the publ^cation thereof, which was thus;
Bitau Dicabor, the new Chaem of this sacred Court, where justice is rendered to
strangers, and that by the gracious pleasure of the Son of the Sun, the Lion
crowned on the throne of the world, unto whom are subjected all the Scepters
and Crowns of the Kings that govern the earth; ye are subjected under his feet
by the grace and will of the most High in Heaven, having viewed and considered
the Appeal made to me by these nine strangers, whose cause was commanded hither
by the City of Nanquin, by the four and twenty of austeer life, I say* by the
oath I have taken upon my entry into the Charge, which I exercise for the Aytao
of Batampina, the chief of two and thirty that govern all the people of this
Empire, that the ninth day of the seventh Moon, in the fifteenth year of the
reign of the Son of the Sun, I was presented with the accusations, which the
Cumbim of Taypor, sent me against them, whereby he charge them to be thieves,
and robbers of other men's goods, affirming that they have long practiced that
trade, to the great offense of the Lord above, who has created all things; and
withal that without any fear of God they used to bathe themselves in the blood
of those, that with reason resisted them, for which they have already been
condemned to be whipped, and have their thumbs cut off, whereof the one has been
put in execution; but when they came to have their thumbs cut off, the Proctors
for the poor, opposing it, alleged in their behalf, that they were wrongfully
condemned, because there was no proof of that wherewith they were charged, in
regard whereof they required for them, that in stead of judging them upon a
bare show of uncertain suspicions, voluable testimonies might be produced, and
such as were conformable to the divine Laws, and the Justice of Heaven;
whereunto answer was made by that Court, how justice was to give place to
mercy, whereupon they that undertook their cause made their complaint to the
four and twenty of austeer life, who both out of very just considerations, and
the regard they had to the little support they could have, for that they were
strangers, and of a Nation so far distant from us, as we never heard of the
Country where they say they were born, mercifully inclining to their lamentable
cries, sent them and their cause to be judged by thi^ Court, wherefore omitting
the prosecution thereof here by the Kings Proctor, being able to prove nothing
whereof he accused them, affirms only that they are worthy of death for the
suspicion and jealousy they have given of themselves, but in regard sacred
justice, that stands upon considerations which are pure and agreeable to God,
admits of no reasons from an adverse party, if they be not made good by evident
proofs, I thought it not fit to allow of the Kings Proctors accusations, since
he could not prove what he had alleged, whereupon insisting on his demand,
without showing either any just causes, or sufficient proof concerning that he
concluded against those strangers, I condemned him in twenty Taeis of silver
amends to his adverse parties, being altogether according to equity, because
the reasons alleged by him were grounded upon a bad zeal, and such as were
neither just, nor pleasing to God, whose mercy does always incline to their
side that are poor and feeble on the earth, when as they invoke him with tears
in their eyes, ^s is daily and clearly manifested by the pitiful effects of his
greatness; so that having thereupon expressly commanded the Tanigores of the
house of mercy, to allege whatsoever they could say on their behalf, they
accord^ngly did so, within the time that was prefixed them for that purpose;
And so all proceedings having received their due course, the cause is now come
to a final Judgment: wherefore every thing duly viewed and considered, without
regard had to any humane respect, but only to the merit and equity of their
cause, and according to the resolution of the Laws, accepted by the twelve
Chaems of the Government in the fifth book of the will and pleasure of the Son
of the Sun, who in such cases out of his greatness and goodness has more
regard to the complaints of the poor, then to the insolent clamors of the proud
of the earth; I do ordain, and decree, that these nine strangers shall be
clearly quit and absolved of all that, which the Kings Proctor has laid to
their charge, as also of all the punishment belonging thereunto, condemning
them only to a years exile, during which time they shall work for their living
in the reparations of Quansy; and when at eight months of the said year shall
be accomplished, then I expressly enjoin all the Chumbims, Conchalis, Monteos,
and other Ministers of their government, that immediately upon their presenting
of this my Decree unto them, they give them a passeport and safe conduct, to
the end they may freely and securely return into their Country, or to any other
place they shall think fit. After this sentence was thus published in our
hearing, we all cried out with a loud voice, The Sentence of thy clear judgment
is confirmed in us, even as the purity of thy heart is agreeable to the son of
the Sun. This said, one of the Conchalis, that sat at one of the tables, stood
up, and having made a very low obeisance to the Chaem* he said aloud five times
one after another, to all that press of people, which were there in great
number; Is there any one in this Court, in this City, or in this Kingdom, that
will oppose this Decree, or the deliverance of these nine prisoners? Whereunto
no answer being made the two boys, that represented justice and mercy, touched
the ensigns which they held in their hands together, and said aloud, Let them
be freed and discharged according to the sentence very justly pronounced for
it; whereupon one of those Ministers, whom they call Huppes, having rung a bell
thrice, the two Chumbims of execution, that had formerly bound us, unlosed us
from our chain, and withal took off our manacles, collers, and the other irons
from our legs, so that we were quite delivered, for which we gave infinite
thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, because we always thought, that for the ill
conceit men had of us, we should be condemned to death. From thence so
delivered as we were, they led us back to the prison, where the two Chumhims
signed our enlargment in the Jaylors book; nevertheless that we might be
altogether discharged, we were to go two months after to serve a year according
to our sentence, upon pain of becoming slaves for ever to the King, conformable
to his Ordinances: Now because we would presently have gone about to demand
the alms of good people in the City, the Chifun, who was as Grand Provost of
that prison, persuaded us to stay till the next day, that he might first
recommend us to the Tanigores of mercy, that they might do something for us.

CHAP. XXXIII. What past betwixt us, and the Tanigores of mercy, with the great
favors they did us; and a brief Relation of the City of Pequin, where the King
of China kept his Court.
THe next morning the four Tanigores of mercy came to visit the Infirmi^y of
this prison, as they used to do; where they rejoiced with us for the good
success of our Sentence, giving us great testimony, how well contented they
were with it, for which we returned them many thanks, not without shedding
abundance of tears, whereat they seemed to be not a little pleased, and willed
us not to be troubled with the term we were condemned to serve in, for they
told us that in stead of a year we should continue but eight months there, and
that the other four months, which made the third part of our punishment, the
King remitted it by way of alms for Gods sake, in consideration that we were
poor, for otherwise if we had been rich, and of ability, we should have had no
favor at all, promising to cause this dimunition of punishment to be endorsed
on our Sentence, and besides that they would go, and speak to a very honorable
man for us, that was appointed to be the chief Marshal, or Monteo, of Quansy,
the place where we were to serve, to the end he might show us favor, and cause
us to be truly paid for the time we should remain there: Now because this man
was naturally a friend to the poor, and inclined to do them good, they thought
it would be fit to carry us along with them to his house, the rather for that
it might be he would take us into his charge; we gave them all very humble
thanks for this good offer of theirs, and told them that God would reward this
charity, they showed us for his sake; whereupon we accompanied them to the
Monteos house, who came forth to receive us in his outward Court, leading his
wife by the hand, which he did, either out of a greater form of complement, or
to do the more honor to the Tanigores, and coming near them he prostrated
himself at their feet, and said: It is now, my Lord, and holy brethren, that I
have cause to rejoice, for that it has pleased God to permit, that you his
holy servants should come unto my house, being that which I could not hope for,
in regard I held my self unworthy of such favor. After the Tanigores had used
many complements and cereremonies to him, as is usual in that Country, they
answered him thus, May God, our Sovereign Lord, the infinite source of mercy,
recompense the good thou do for the poor with blessing in this life; for
believe it, dear brother, the strongest staff whereon the soul does lean to
keep her from falling so often as she happens to stumble, is the charity, which
we use toward our neighbor, when as the vain glory of this world does not
blind the good zeal whereunto his holy Law does oblige us, and that thou may
merit the blessed felicity of beholding his face, we have brought thee here
these nine Portugals, who are so poor, as none in this Kingdom are like to
them; wherefore we pray thee that in the place whither thou art going now, as
Monteo, thou will do for them all that thou think will be acceptable to the
Lord above, in whose behalf we crave this of thee. To this Speech the Monteo,
and his wife, replied in such courteous and remarkable terms, as we were almost
besides our selves to hear in what manner they attributed the success of their
affairs, to the principal cause of all goodness, even as though they had the
light of faith, or the knowledge of the Christian verity. Hereupon they withdrew
into a Chamber, into which we went not, and continued there about half an hour;
then as they were about to take leave of one another, they commanded us to come
in to them, where the Tanigores spoke to them again about us, and recommending
us unto them more then before, the Monteo caused our names to be written down
in a book that lay before him, and said unto us, I do this, because I am not so
good a man, as to give you something of mine own, nor so bad as to deprive you
of the sweat of your labor, whereunto the King has bound you, wherefore even
at this instant you shall begin to get your living, although you do not serve
as yet, for the desire I have that this may be accounted to me for an alms, so
that now you have nothing to do, but to be merry in my house, where I will give
order that you shall be provided of all that is necessary for you; Besides
this, I will not promise you any thing, for the fear I am in of the showing
some vanity by my promise, and so the Devil may make use thereof as of an
advantage, to lay hold on me, a matter that often arrives through the weakness
of our nature; wherefore let it suffice you for the present to know, that I
will be mindful of you for the love of these holy brethren here, who have
spoken to me for you. The four Tanigores thereupon taking their leave, gave us
four Taeis, and said unto us, Forget not to render thanks unto God for the good
success you have had in your business, for it would be a grievous sin in you
not to acknowledge so great a grace. Thus were we very well entertained in the
house of this Captain for the space of two months, that we remained there, at
the end whereof we parted from thence, for to go to Quansy, where we were to
make up our time, under the conduct of this Captain, who ever after used us
very kindly, and showed us many favors, until that the Tartars entered into
the Town, who did a world of mischief there, as I will more amply declare
hereafter.

. 2.
Before I recount that which happened unto us, after we were imbarqued with
those Chinese that conducted us, and that gave us great hope of setting us at
liberty, I think it not amiss to make a brief relation here of the City of
Pequin, which may truly be termed the capital of the Monarchy of the world, as
also of some particulars I observed there, as well for its arches and policy,
as for that which concerns its extent, its government, the laws of the Country,
and the admirable manner of providing for the good of the whole State, together
in what sort they are paid, that serve in the time of war, according to the
Ordinances of the Kingdom, and many other things like unto these, though I must
needs confess that herein I shall want the best part, namely, wit, and
capacity, to render a reason in what clymate it is situated, and in the height
of how many degrees, which is a matter the learned and curious most desire to
be satisfied in; But my design having never been other (as I have said
heretofore) then to leave this my book unto my children, that therein they may
see the sufferings I have undergone, it little imports me to write otherwise
then I do, that is, in a gross and rude manner; for I hold it better to treat
of these things in such sort as nature has taught me, then to use Hyperboles,
and speeches from the purpose, whereby the weakness of my poor understanding
may be made more evident. Howbeit since I am obliged to make mention of this
matter, by the promise I have made of it heretofore, I say, that this City,
which we call Pequin, and they of the Country Pequin, is situated in the
height of forty and one degrees of Northerly latitude; the walls of it are in
circuit (by the report of the Chinese themselves, and as I have read in a
little book, treating of the greatness thereof, and entitled Aquisendan, which
I brought since along with me into Portugal) thirty large leagues, namely ten
long, and five broad; Some others hold, that it is fifty, namely seventeen in
length, and eight in breadth: and forasmuch as they that entreat of it are of
different opinions, in that the one make the extent of it thirty leagues, as I
have said before, and others fifty, I will render a reason of this doubt,
conformable to that which I have seen my self. It is true, that in the manner
it is now built, it is thirty leagues in circuit, as they say, for it is
environed with two rows of strong walls, where there are a number of towers and
bulwarks after our fashion; But without this circuit, which is of the City it
self, there is another far greater, both in length and breadth, that the
Chinese affirm was anciently all inhabited, but at this present there are only
some Boroughs and Villages, as also a many of fair houses, or castles about it,
amongst the which there are sixteen hundred, that have great advantages over
the rest, and are the houses of the Proctors of the sixteen hundred Cities, and
most remarkable Towns of the two and thirty Kingdoms of this Monarchy, who
repair unto this City at the general Assembly of the Estates, which is held
every three years for the public good. Without this great enclosure, which
(as I have said) is not comprehended in the City, there is in a distance of
three leagues broad, and seven long, fourscore thousand Tombs of the Mandarins,
which are little Chapels all gilded within, and compassed about with
Ballisters of iron and latin, the entries whereinto are through very rich and
sumptuous arches: near to these Chapels there are also very great houses, with
gardens and tufted woods of high trees, as also many inventions of ponds,
fountains, and aqueducts; whereunto may be added, that the walls of the
enclosure are on the inside covered with fine porcelain, and on the fanes above
are many Lions pourtrayed in gold, as also in the squares of the steeples,
which are likewise very high, and embellished with pictures. It has also five
hundred very great Palaces, which are called the houses of the Son of the Sun,
whither all those retire, that have been hurt in the Wars for the service of
the King, as also many other soldiers, who in regard of age or sickness are no
longer able to bear arms, and to the end that during the rest of their days
they may be exempted from incommodity, each of them receives monthly a certain
pay to find himself withal, and to live upon. Now all these men of War, as we
learned of the Chinese, are ordinarily an hundred thousand, there being in
each of those houses two hundred men according to their report. We saw also
another long street of low houses, where there were four and twenty thousand
oar-men, belonging to the King Panoures; and another of the same structure a
good league in length, where fourteen thousand Taverners that followed the
Court dwelt* as also a third street like unto the other two, where live a great
number of light women, exempted from the tribute, which they of the City pay,
for that they are Curtisans, whereof the most part had quitted their husbands
for to follow the wretched trade; and if for that cause they come to receive
any hurt, their husbands are grievously punished for it, because they are there
as in a place of freedom, and under the protection of the Tutan of the Court,
Lord Steward of the Kings house. In this enclosure do likewise remain all the
Landresses, by them called Maynates, which wash the linen of the City, who as
we were told, are above an hundred thousand, and live in this quarter, for that
there are diverse rivers there, together with a number of wells, and deep pools
of water, compassed about with good walls. Within this same enclosure, as the
said Aquisendan relates, there are thirteen hundred gallant and very sumptuous
houses of religions men and women, who make profession of the four principal
Laws of those two and thirty which are in the Empire of China, and it is
thought that in some of these houses there are above a thousand persons,
besides the servants, that from abroad do furnish them with victuals, and other
necessary provisions. We saw also a great many houses, which have fair
buildings of a large extent, with spacious enclosures, wherein there are
gardens, and very thick woods, full of any kind of game, either for hawking, or
hunting, that may be desired; And these houses are as it were Inns, whither
come continually in great number people of all ages, and sexe^, as to see
Comedies, Plays, Combats, Bul-baitings, Wrastlings, and magnificent Feasts,
with the Tutons, Chaems, Conchacys, Aytaos, Bracalons, Chumbims, Monteos,
Lauteas, Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, Merchants, and other rich men, do make for
to give content to their kindred and friends; These houses are bravely
furnished with rich hangings, beds, chairs, and stools, as likewise with huge
cupbards of plate, not only of silver, but of gold also; and the attendants
that wait at the table, are maids ready to be married, very beautiful, and
gallantly attired; howbeit all this is nothing in comparison of the
sumptuousness, and other Magnificences that we saw there. Now the Chinese
assured us, there were some feasts that lasted ten days after the Carachina, or
Chinese manner, which in regard of the state, pomp, and charge thereof, as well
in the attendance of servants and wayters, as in the costly fare of all kind of
flesh, fowl, fish, and all delicacies in music, in sports of hunting, and
hawking, in plays, comedies, tilts, turnayes, and in shows both of horse and
foot, fighting and skirmishing together, do cost above twenty thousand Taeis.
These Inns do stand in at least a million of gold, and are maintained by
certain Companies of very rich Merchants, who in way of commerce and traffic
employ their money therein, where by it is thought they gain far more, then if
they should venture it to sea. It is said also, that there is so good and exact
an order observed there, that whenever any one will be at a charge that way,
he goes to the Xipaton of the house, who is the superintendant thereof, and
declares unto him what his design is, whereupon he shows him a book, all
divided into chapters, which treats of the ordering and sumptuousness of
Feasts, as also the rates of them, and how they shall be served in, to the end,
that he who will be at the charge, may choose which he pleases; This book,
called Pinetoreu, I have seen, and heard it read, so that I remember how in the
three first Chapters thereof, it speaks of the feasts, whereunto God is to be
invited, and of what price they are; and then it descends to the King of China,
of whom it says, That by a special grace of Heaven, and right of Sovereignty,
he has the Government of the whole earth, and of all the Kings that inhabit
it. After it has done with the King of China, it speaks of the feasts of the
Tutons, which are the ten Sovereign dignities, that command over the forty
Chaems, who are as the Vice-royes of the State. These Tutons also are termed
the beams of the Sun, for, say they, as the King of China is the Son of the
Sun, so the Tutons, who represent him, may rightly be termed his beams, for
that they proceed from him, even as the rays do from the Sun; But setting
aside the bruitishness of these Gentiles, I will only speak of the Feast,
whereunto God is to be invited, which I have seen some to make with much
devotion, though for want of faith, their works can do them little good.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Order which is observed in the Feasts, that are made in
certain Inns; and the State, which the Chaem of the two and thirty Universities
keeps; with certain remarkable things in the City of Pequin.
THe first thing whereof mention is made in the Preface of that Book, which
treats of Feasts, as I have said before, is the Feast, that is to be made unto
God here upon earth, of which it is spoken in this manner: Every Feast, how
sumptuous soever it be, may be paid for with a price, more or less, conformable
to the bounty of him that makes it, who for all his charge bestowed on it reaps
no other recompense, then the praise of flatterers and idle persons; wherefore,
O my Brother, says the Preface of the said Book, I counsel thee to employ thy
goods in feasting of God in his poor, that is to say, secretly to supply the
necessities of good folks, so that they may not perish for want of that which
thou have more then thou need. Call to mind also the vile matter wherewith
thy father engendered thee, and that too, which is far more abject, wherewith
thy mother conceived thee, and so thou will see how much inferior thou art,
even to the bruit beasts, which without distinction of reason apply themselves
to that whereunto they are carried by the flesh; and seeing that in the quality
of a man thou will invite thy friends, who possibly by to morrow may not be, to
show that thou art good and faithful, invite the poor creatures of God, of
whose groans and necessities he like a pitiful Father takes compassion, and
promises to him that does them good infinite satisfaction in the house of the
Sun, where as an Article of faith we hold, that his servants shall abide for
evermore in eternal happiness, After these words, and other such like, worthy
to be observed, the Xipaton, who, as I told you, is the chief of them that
govern this great Labyrinth, shows him all the Chapters of the Book, from one
end to the other, and bids him look what manner of men, or Lords he will
invite, what number of guests, and how many days he will have the feast to
last; for adds he, the Kings, and Tutons, at the feasts that are made for
them, have so many Messes of meat, so many Attendants, such Furniture, such
Chambers, such vessel, such plate, such sports, and so many days of hawking,
and hunting, all which amounts to such a sum of money: Then if he will not
bestow so much, the Xipaton shows him in another Chapter, the feasts which are
ordinarily made for the Chaems, Ayta^s, Ponchacis, Bracalons, Anchacis,
Conchalaas, Lanteas, or for Captains, and rich men, whereas other kind of
persons of meaner condition have nothing else to do, but to sit down, and fall
to on free cost, so that there are usually fifty or threescore rooms full of
men and women of all sorts; There are also in other rooms most excellent and
melodious consorts of music, namely of Harps, Viols, Lutes, Bando^es, Cornets,
Sackbuts, and other Instruments, which are not in use amongst us. If it be a
feast of women, as it often falls out to be, then are the wayters on the table
likewise women, or young D^mosels, richly attired, who for that they are maids,
and endued with singular beauty, it happens many times that men of
extraordinary quality fall in love with them, and do marry them. Now for a
conclusion of that which I have to say of these Inns, of all the money, which is
spent upon such feasts, four in the hundred, whereof the Xipaton paies the one
half, and they that make the feasts the other, is set apart for the
entertainment of the table of the poor, whereunto for Gods sake all manner of
people are admitted that will come to it; Moreover, they are allowed a Chamber,
and a good bed but that only for the space of three days, unless they be women
with child, or sick persons, which are not able to travel; for in that case
they are entertained a longer time, because regard is had unto the people
according to the need they are in. We saw also in this outward enclosure,
which, as I have delivered, invirons all the other City, two and thirty great
Edifices, or Colleges, distant about a ^light shoot the one from the other,
where such, as apply themselves to the study of the two and thirty Laws, which
are professed in the two and thirty Kingdoms of this Empire, do recide. Now in
each of these Colleges, according as we could guess by the great number of
persons that we saw there, there should be above ten thousand Scholars; and
indeed the Aquesendoo, which is the Book that treats of these things, makes
them amount in the whole to four hundred thousand: There is likewise somewhat
apart from the rest, another far greater and fairer Edifice, of almost a league
in circuit, where all those that have taken degrees, as well in their
Theology, as in the Laws of the government of this Monarchy, do live. In this
University there is a Chaem, who commands over all the Heads of the Colleges,
and is called, by a title of eminent dignity, Xileyxitapou, that is to say,
Lord of all the Nobles. This Chaem, for that he is more honorable, and of an
higher quality then all the rest, keeps as great a Court as any Tuton; for he
has ordinarily a guard of three hundred Mogores, four and twenty Loshers that
go with silver Maces before him, and six and thirty women, which mounted on
white ambling Nags, trapped with silk and silver, ride playing on certain very
harmonious instruments of music, and singing to the tune thereof, make a
pleasing Consort after their manner. There are also led before him twenty very
handsome spare horses, without any other furniture then their clothes of silver
tinsel, and with headstals full of little silver bells, every horse being
waited on by six Halberdiers, and four footmen very well apparelled; Before all
this train goes four hundred Huppes, with a number of great long chains, which
trailing on the ground, make such a dreadful rattling and noise, as does not a
lit le terrify all that are within hearing; Then next to them marches twelve
men on horsback, called Peretandas, each of them carrying an Umbrello of
carnation Satin, and other twelve that follow them with banners of white
damask, deeply indented, and edged about with golden frenge; Now after all this
pomp comes the Chaem sitting in a triumphant Chariot, attended by threescore
Conchalas, Chumbims, and Monteos, such as amongst us are the Chancellors,
Judges, and Counselors of the Courts of Justice, and these go all on foot,
carrying upon their shoulders Cymiters rightly garnished with gold. Last of all
follow lesser officers, that are like unto our Registers, Examiners, Auditors,
Clarks Atturneys, and Solicitors, all likewise on foot, and crying out unto the
people with a loud voice for to retire themselves into their houses, and clear
the streets, so as there may be nothing to hinder or trouble the passage of
this magnificnce. But the most observable thing herein is, that close to the
Person of the Chaem, march two little boys on horsback, one on the right hand,
the other on the left, richly attired, with their ensigns in their hands,
signifying Justice, and Mercy, whereof I have spoken heretofore; That on the
right side representing mercy, is clothed in white, and that on the left
representing justice is apparelled in red; The horses whereon these little
boys are mounted, have on them foot-clothes of the same color their garments
are, and all their furniture and trappings are of gold, with a kind of network
over them, made of silver thread; After each of these children march six young
youths, about fifteen years of age, with silver Maces in their hands, so that
all these things together are so remarkable, as there is no man that beholds
them, but on the one side trembles for fear, and on the other side remains
astonished at the sight of so much greatness, and majesty. Now that I may not
longer dwell on that which concerns this great enclosure, I will pass over in
silence many other marvels that we saw there, consisting in rich and fair
buildings in magnificent Pagodes, in bridges placed upon great pillars of
stone, on either side whereof are rayls or grates of iron finely wrought, and
in high ways, that are straight, broad, and all very well paved, whereof I
think fit not to speak, for by that which I have already said, one may easily
judge of what I have omitted, in regard of the resemblance and conformity that
is between them; wherefore I will only entreat, and that as succinctly as I
can, of certain buildings, which I saw in this City, chiefly of four, that I
observed more curiously then the rest, as also of some other particularities,
that well deserve to be insisted upon.

. 2.
This City of Pequin, whereof I have promised to speak more amply then yet I
have done, is so prodigious, and the things therein remarkable, as I do almost
repent me for undertaking to discourse of it, because to speak the truth, I
know not where to begin, that I may be as good as my word; for one must not
imagine it to be, either as the City of Rome, or Constantinople, or Venice, or
Paris, or London, or Sevill, or Lisbon, or that any of the Cities of Europe are
comparable unto it, how famous or populous soever they be: Nay I will say
further, that one must not think it to be like to Grand Cairo in Egypt, Tauris
in Persia, Amadaba in Cambaya, Bisnagar in Narsingua, Goura in Bengala, Ava in
Chaleu, Timplan in Calaminhan, Martaban and Bagou in Pegu, Guimpel and Tinlau
in Siammon, Odia in the Kingdom of Sornau, Passarvan and Dema in the Island of
Iaoa, Pangor in the Country of the Lequiens, Vsangea in the Grand Cauchin,
Lancama in Tartaria, and Meaco in Iappun, all which Cities are the Capitals of
many great Kingdoms; for I dare well affirm, that all those same are not to be
compared to the least part of the wonderful City of Pequin, much less to the
greatness and magnificence of that which is most excellent in it, whereby I
understand her stately buildings, her inward riches, her excessive abundance of
all that is necessary for the entertaining of life, also the world of people,
the infinite number of Barques and Vessels that are there, the Commerce, the
Courts of Justice, the Government and the State of the Tutons, Chaems,
Anchacys, Aytaos, Puchancys, and Bracanons, who rule whole Kingdoms, and very
spacious Provinces, with great pentions, and are ordinarily resident in this
City, or others for them, when as by the Kings command they are sent about
affairs of consequence. But setting these things aside, whereof yet I intend to
speak more amply, when time shall serve, I say that this City, (according to
that which is written of it, both in the Aquesendoo before mentioned, and all
the Chronicles of the Kingdom of China) is thirty leagues in circuit, not
comprehending therein the buildings of the other enclosure that is without it,
and is environed with a double wall, made of good strong freestone, having
three hundred and threescore gates, each of which has a small For^, composed
of two high towers, with its ditches, and draw-bridges; and at every gate is a
Register, and four Porters with halberds in their hands, who are bound to give
account of all that goes in and out. These gates by the Ordinance of the Tuton,
are divided according to the three hundred and threescore days of the year, so
that every day in his turn has the feast of the invocation of the Idol,
whereof each gate bears the name, celebrated with much solemnity. This great
City has also within that large enclosure of her walls, as the Chinese
assured us, three thousand and three hundred Pagodes or Temples, wherein are
continually sacrificed a great number of birds and wild beasts, which they hold
to be more agreeable unto God, then such as are kept tame in houses, whereof
their Priests render diverse reasons to the people, therewith persuading them to
believe so great an abuse for an article of faith. The structures of these
Pagodes, whereof I speak, are very sumptuous, especially those of the orders of
the Menegrepos, Conquiays, and Talagrepos, who are the Priests of the four
Sects of Xaca, Amida, Gizom, and Canom, which surpass in antipuity the other
two and thirty of that Labyrinth of the Devil, who appears to them many times
in diverse forms, for to make them give more credit to his impostures and lies.
The principal streets of this City are all very long and broad, with fair
houses of two or three stories high, and enclosed at both ends with ballisters
of iron and lattin; the entrance into them is through lanes, that cross these
great streets, at the ends whereof are great arches, with strong gates, which
are shut in the night, and on the top of the arches, there are watch-bels; Each
of these streets has its Captain, and officers, who walk the round in their
turns, and are bound every ten days to make report into the Townhouse of all
that passes in their quarters, to the end that the Punchacys, or Chaems of the
Government, may take such order therein, as reason requires. Moreover this
great City (if credit may be given to that which the said book, so often before
mentioned by me, records) has an hundred and twenty Canals, made by the Kings
and people in former times, which are three fathom deep, and twelve broad,
crossing through the whole length and breadth of the City, by the means of a
great number of bridges, built upon arches of strong freestone, at the end
whereof there are pillars, with chains, that reach from the one to the other,
and resting places for passengers to repose themselves in: It is said that the
bridges of these hundred and twenty Canals, or Aqueducts, are in number
eighteen hundred, and that if one of them is fair and rich, the other is yet
more, as well for the fashion, as for the rest of the workmanship thereof. The
said Book affirms, That in this City there are sixscore Piatzues, or public
places, in each of the which is a Fair kept every month. Now during the two
months time that we were at liberty in this City, we saw eleven or twelve of
these Fairs, where were an infinite company of people, both on hors-back, and
on foot, that out of boxes hanging about their necks sold all things that well
near can be named, as the Haberdashers of small wares do amongst us, besides
the ordinary shops of rich Merchants, which were ranged very orderly in the
particular streets, where was to be seen a world of silk stuffs, tinsels, cloth
of gold, linen, and cotton-cloth, sables, ermyns, musk, aloes, fine
pourcelain, gold and silver plate, pearl, seed pearl, gold in powder, and
lingots, and such other things of value, whereat we nine Portugals were
exceedingly astonished; But if I should speak in particular of all the other
commodities, that were to be sold there, as of iron, steel, lead, copper, tin,
latin, corral, cornalin, crystal, quicksilver, vermillion, ivory, cloves,
nutmegs, mace, ginger, tamarinds, cinnamon, pepper, cardamone, borax, honey,
wax, sanders, sugar, conserves, acates, fruit, meal, rice, flesh, venison,
fish, pulse, and herbs; there was such abundance of them, as it is scarce
possible to express it in words. The Chinese also assured us, that this City
has an hundred and threescore Butchers shambles, and in each of them an
hundred stalls, full of all kinds of flesh that the earth produces, for that
these people feed on all, as Veal, Mutton, Pork, Goat, the flesh of Horses,
Buffles, Rhinocerets, Tigers, Lions, Dogs, Mules, Asses, Otters, Shamois,
Bodgers, and finally of all other beasts whatsoever. Furthermore, besides the
weights which are particularly in every shambles, there is not a gate in the
City that has not its scales, wherein the meat is weighed again, for to see if
they have their due weight that have bought it, to the end that by this means
the people may not be deceived. Besides those ordinary Shambles, there is not
scarce a street but has five or six Butchers shops in it, where the choicest
meat is sold; there are withal many Taverns, where excellent fare is always
to be had, and cellers full of gammons of bacon, dried tongues, poudered geese,
and other savoury viands, for to relish ones drink, all in so great abundance,
that it would be very superfluous to say more of it; but what I speak is to
show how liberally God has imparted to these miserable blinded wretches the
good things which he has created on the earth, to the end that his holy Name
may therefore be blessed for evermore.

CHAP. XXXV. The Prison of Xinanguibaleu, wherein those are kept, which have
been condemned to serve at the reparations of the wall of Tartaria; and another
enclosure, called the Treasure of the dead, with the revenues whereof this
prison is maintained.
DEsisting now from speaking in particular of the great number of the rich and
magnificent buildings, which we saw in this City of Pequin, I will only insist
on some of the Edifices thereof, that seemed more remarkable to me then the
rest, whence it may be easy to infer, what all those might be, whereof I will
not make any mention here to avoid prolixity; And of these neither would I
speak, were it not that our Lord may one day permit, that the Portugal Nation,
full of valor, and of lofty courage, may make use of this relation for the
glory of our great God, to the end that by these humane means, and the
assistance of his divine favor, it may make those barbarous people understand
the verity of our holy Catholic faith, from which their sins have so far
esloigned them, as they mock at all that we say to them thereof: Hereunto I
will add, that they are extravagant, and senceless, as they dare boldly
affirm, that only with beholding the face of the Son of the Sun, which is their
King, a soul would be more happy then with all other things of the world
besides, which persuades me that if God of his infinite mercy and goodness
would grant, that the King of the people might become a Christian, it would be
an easy matter to convert all his Subjects, whereas otherwise I hold it
difficult for so much as one to change his belief, and all by reason of the
great awe they are in of the Law, which they fear and reverence a like, and
whereof it is not to be believed how much they cherish the Ministers. But to
return to my discourse, the first building which I saw of those that were most
remarkable, was a prison, which they call Xinanguibaleu, that is to say, The
enclosure of the Epiles; the circuit of this prison is two leagues square, or
little less, both in length and breadth: It is enclosed with a very high wall
without any battlements; the wall on the outside is environed with a great deep
ditch full of water, over the which are a many of drawbridges, that are drawn
up in the night with certain iron chains, and so hang suspended on huge cast
pillars; In this prison is an arch of strong hewed stone, abutting in two
towers, in the tops whereof are six great sentinel bells, which are never rung
but all the rest within the said enclosure do answer them, which the Chinese
affirm to be above an hundred, and indeed they make a most horrible din. In
this place there are ordinarily three hundred thousand prisoners, between
seventeen and fifty, whereat we were much amazed, and indeed we had good cause,
in regard it is a thing so unusual and extraordinary. Now desiring to know of
the Chinese the occasion of so mavelous a building, and of the great number
of prisoners that were in it; they answered us, that after the King of China,
named Crisnago Docotay, had finished a wall of three hundred leagues space
betwixt this Kingdom of China, and that of Tartaria, as I have declared other
where, he ordained by the advice of his people, (for to that effect he caused
an Assembly of his Estates to be held) that all those which should be condemned
to banishment, should be sent to work in the repairing of this wall, and that
after they had served six years together therein, they might freely depart,
though they were sentenced to serve for a longer time, because the King
pardoned them the remainder of the term by way of charity and alms; but if
during those years, they should happen to perform any remarkable act, or other
thing, wherein it appeared they had advantage over others, or if they were
three times wounded in the Sallies they should make, or if they killed some of
their enemies, they were then to be dispensed with for all the rest of their
time, and that the Chaem should grant them a certificate thereof, where it
should be declared why he had delivered them, and how he had thereby satisfied
the Ordinances of War. Two hundred and ten thousand men are to be continually
entertained in the work of the wall, by the first institution, whereof
defalcation is made of a third part, for such are dead, maimed, and delivered,
either for their notable actions, or for that they had accomplished their time:
And likewise when as the Chaem, who is as the chief of all those, sent to the
Pitaucamay, which is the highest Court of Justice, to furnish him with that
number of men, they could not assemble them together so soon as was necessary,
for that they were divided in so many several places of that Empire, which is
prodigiously great, as I have delivered before, and that withal a long time
was required for the assembling them together, another King, named Gopiley
Aparau, who succeeded to that Crisnago Dacotay, ordained that the great
enclosure should be made in the City of Pequin, to the end that as soon as any
were condemned to the work of this wall, they should be carried to
Xinanguibaleu for to be there altogether, by which means they might be sent
away without any delay, as now is done. So soon as the Court of Justice has
committed the prisoners to this prison, whereof he that brings them has a
Certificate, they are immediately left at liberty, so that they may walk at
their pleasure within this great enclosure, having nothing but a little plate
of a span long, and four fingers broad, wherein these words are engraven, Such
a one of such a place has been condemned to the general exile for such a
cause, he entered such a day, such a month, such a year. Now the reason why they
make every prisoner to carry this plate for a testimony of their evil actions,
is, to manifest for what crime he was condemned, and at what time he entered,
because every one goes forth conformably to the length of time that shall be
since he entered in. These prisoners are held for duly delivered when they are
drawn out of captivity for to go and work at the wall, for they cannot upon any
cause whatsoever be exempted from the prison of Xinanguibaleu, and the time
they are there is counted to them for nothing, in regard they have no hope of
liberty but at that instant when their turn permits them to work in the
reparations, for then they may be sure to be delivered, according to the
ordinance whereof I have made mention before. Having now delivered the occasion
whereof so great a prison was made* before I leave it I hold it not amiss to
speak of a Fair, which we saw there, of two that are usually kept every year,
which those of the Country call, Gunxinem, Apparau, Xinanguibaleu, that is to
say, The rich Fair of the prison of the condemned; These Fairs are kept in the
months of July, and January, with very magnificent feasts, solemnized for the
invocation of their Idols; And even, there they have their plenory indulgences,
by means whereof great riches of gold and silver are promised them in the other
world. They are both of them frank and free, so as the Merchants pay no duties,
which is the cause that they flock thither in such great number, as they
assured us that there were three millions of persons there; And forasmuch as I
said before, that the three hundred thousand that are imprisoned there, are at
liberty, as well as those that go in and out, you shall see what course they
hold to keep the prisoners from getting forth amongst others. Every one that is
free and comes in has a mark set on the wrist of his right arm with a certain
Confection made of Oil, Bitumen, Lacre, Rubarb, and Alum, which being once dry
cannot be any ways defaced, but by the means of vinegar and salt mingled
together very hot; And to the end that so great a number of people may be
marked, on both sides of the gates stand a many of Chainpatoens, who with
stamps of lead, dipped in this Bitumen, imprints a mark on every one that
presents himself unto them, and so they let him enter; which is only practiced
on men, not upon women, because none of that Sex are ever condemned to the
labor of the wall. When therefore they come to go out of the gates, they must
all have their arms bared where this mark is, that the said Chaintapo^ns, who
are the Porters and Ministers of this affair, may know them, and let them pass;
and if by chance any one be so unhappy as to have that mark defaced by any
accident, must even have patience, and remain with the other prisoners, in
regard there is no way to get him out of this place if he be found without that
mark. Now those Chaintapoens are so dextrous and well versed in it, that an
hundred thousand men may in an hour go in and out without trouble, so that by
this means the three hundred thousand prisoners continue in their captivity,
and none of them can slip away amongst others to get out. There are in this
prison three great enclosures like great towns, where there are a number of
houses, and very long streets, without any lanes; and at the entrance into each
street there are good gates, with their sentinel bells aloft, together with a
Chumbim, and twenty men for a Guard; within a flight shoot of those enclosures
are the lodgings of the Chaem, who commands all this prison, and those lodgings
are composed of a number of fair houses, wherein are many out-Courts, Gardens,
Ponds, Halls, and Chambers, enriched with excellent inventions, able to lodge a
King at his ease, how great a Court soever he have. In the two principal of
these Towns there are two streets, each of them about a flight shoot long,
which abut upon the Chaems lodgings, arched all along with stone, and covered
over head like the Hospital at Lisbon, but that they far surpass it. Here are
all things to be sold that one can desire, as well for victual, and other kind
of provisions, as for all sorts of Merchandise, and rich wares. In those arched
streets, which are very spacious and long, are these two Fairs kept every year,
whither such an infinite multitude of people resort, as I have declared before.
Moreover within the enclosure of this prison are diverse woods of tall and high
trees, with many small streams, and ponds of clear sweet water for the use of
the prisoners, and to wash their linen, as also sundry Hermitages, and
Hospitals, together with twelve very sumptuous and rich Monasteries, so that
whatsoever is to be had in a great Town, may in great abundance be found within
the enclosure, and with advantage in many things, because the most part of
these prisoners have their wives and children there, to whom the King gives a
lodging answerable to the household, or family, which each one has.

The second of those things, which I have undertaken to relate, is another
enclosure we saw almost as big as the former, compassed about with strong
walls, and great ditches.. 2.
This place is called Muxiparan, which signifies The treasure of the dead,
where are many towers of hewed carved stone, and steeples diversely painted. The
walls on the top are in stead of battlements environed with iron grates, where
there are a number of idols of different figures, as of Men, Serpents, Horses,
Oxen, Elephants, Fishes, Adders, and many other monstrous forms of creatures,
which were never seen, some of Brass, and Iron, and others of Tin, and Copper;
so that this infinite company of several figures joined together is one of the
most remarkable and pleasantest things that can be imagined. Having past over
the bridge of the ditch we arrived at a great Court that was at the first
entrance, enclosed round about with huge gates, and paved all over with white
and black stones in checquer work, so polished and bright, as one might see
himself in them as in a looking glass; In the midst of this Court was a pillar
of Jasper six and thirty spans high, and as it seemed all of one piece, on the
top whereof was an idol of silver in the figure of a woman, which with her
hands strangled a Serpent, that was excellently enam^lled with black and green.
A little further at the entrance of another gate, which stood between two very
high towers, and accompanied with four and twenty pillars of huge great stone,
there were two figures of men, each of them with an iron club in his hand, as
if they had served to guard that passage, being an hundred and forty spans
high, with such hideous and ugly visages, as makes them even to tremble that
behold them; The Chinese called them Xixipatau Xalican, that is to say, The
blowers of the house of smoke. At the entering into this gate there were twelve
men with halberds, and two Registers, set at a table, who e^rolled all that
entered t^ere, unto whom every one paid a matter of a groat: when we were entered
within this gate, we met with a very large street, closed on both sides with
goodly arches, as well in regard of the workmanship, as the rest, round about
the which hung an infinite company of little bells of lattin by chains of the
same metal, that moved by the air, made such a noise as one could with much
ado hear one another: This street might be about half a league long, and within
these arches, on both sides of the way, were two rows of low houses, like unto
great Churches, with steeples all guilt, and diverse inventions of painting: Of
these houses the Chinese assured us there was in that place three thousand,
all which from the very top to the bottom were full of dead m^ns skuls, a thing
so strange, that in every man's judgment a thousand great shops could hardly
contain them. Behind these houses, both on the one side and the other, were two
great Mounts of dead men's bones, reaching far above the ridges of the houses,
full as long as the street, and of a mighty breadth. These bones were ordered
and disposed one upon another so curiously and aptly, that they seemed to grow
there; Having demanded of the Chinese whether any register was kept of these
bones, they answered, there was, for the Talagrepos, unto whose charge the
administration of these three thousond houses was committed, enrolled them all;
and that none of these houses yield^d less then two thousand Taeis revenue out
of such lands, as the owners of these bones had bequeathed to them for their
souls health; and that the rent of all these three thousand houses together
amounted unto five millions of gold yearly, whereof the King had four, and the
Talagrepos the other for to defray the expenses of this Fabric; and that the
four appertained to the King, as their Support, who dispensed them in the
maintenance of the three hundred thousand prisoners of Xinanguibaleu. Being
amazed at this marvel, we began to go along this street, in the midst whereof
we found a great Piazza, compassed about with two huge grates of lattin, and
within it was an Adder of brass infolded into I know not how many boughts, and
so big that it contained thirty fathom in circuit, being withal so ugly and
dreadful, as no words are able to describe it. Some of us would estimate the
weight of it, and the least opinions reached to a thousand quintals, were it
hollow within, as I believe it was. Now although it was of an unmeasurable
greatness, yet was it in every part so well proportioned, as nothing can be
amended, whereunto also the workmanship thereof is so correspondent, that all
the perfection which can be desired from a good workman is observed in it. This
monstrous Serpent, which the Chinese call, The gluttonous Serpent of the house
of smoke, had on the top of his head a bowl of iron, two and fifty foot in
circumference, as if it had been thrown at him from some other place; Twenty
paces further was the figure of a man of the same brass in the form of a Giant,
in like manner very strange and extraordinary, as well for the greatness of the
body, as the hugeness of the limbs: This Monster held an iron bowl just as big
as the other aloft in both his hands, and beholding the Serpent with a frowning
and angry countenance, he seemed as though he would throw this bowl at him.
Round about this figure was a number of little idols all guilt on their knees,
with their hands lifted up to him, as if they would adore him. All this great
edifice was consecrated to the honor of this Idol, called Mucluparon, whom the
Chinese affirmed to be the treasurer of all the dead men's bones, and that when
the gluttonous Serpent before mentioned came to steal them away, he made at him
with that bowl which he held in his hands, whereupon the Serpent in great fear
fled immediately away to the bottom of the profound house of smoke, whither God
had precipitated him for his great wickedness; and further that he had
maintained a combat with him three thousand years already, and was to continue
the same three thousand years more, so that from three thousand to three
thousand years he was to employ five bowls, wherewith he was to make an end of
killing him; H^reunto they added, that as soon as this Serpent should be dead,
the bones that were there assembled, would return into the bodies, to which
they appertained formerly, and so should go and remain for ever in the house of
the Moon; To these brutish opinions they join many others such like, unto which
they give so much faith, that nothing can be able to remove them from it, for
it is the doctrine that is preached unto them by their Bonzes, who also tell
them that the true way to make a soul happy, is to gather these bones together
into this place, by means whereof there is not a day passes but that a thousand
or two of these wretches bones are brought thither. Now if some for their far
distance cannot bring all the bones whole thither, they will at leastwise bring
a tooth or two, and so they say that by way of an alms they make as good
satisfaction as if they brought all ^he rest; which is the reason that in all
these chunel houses there is such an infinite multitude of these teeth, that
one might lade many ships with them.

We saw in a great Plain without the walls of this City another building,. 3
very sumptuous and rich, which they call Nacapirau, that is to say, the Queen
of Heaven, for it is the opinion of these blinded wretches, that our Lord above
is married like the Kings here below, and that the children which he has had
by the Nacapirau, are the Stars we see twinkling in the Firmament by night, and
that when any exhalation comes to dissolve in the air, they say that it is one
of his children that is dead, whereof his other brothers are so grieved, that
they shed such abundance of tears, as the earth is watered therewith, by which
means God provides us of our living, as it were in manner of alms bestowed for
the souls of the deceased. But letting pass these and other such like
fooleries, I will only entreat of such particulars, as we observed in this
great Edifice, whereof the first was one hundred and forty Convents of this
accursed Religion, both of men and women, in each of which there are four
hundred persons, amounting in all to six and fifty thousand, besides an
infinite number of religious servants, that are not obliged to their vow of
profession that are within, who for a mark of their Priestly dignity are
clothed in violet, with green stars on them, having their head, beard, and
eyebrows shaven, and wearing beads about their necks to pray with, but for all
that they crave no alms, by reason they have revenue enough to live on. The
next was an enclosure within this huge building, a league in circuit, the walls
whereof were built upon arches, vaults, of strong hewed stone, and underneath
them were Galleries, environed all about with ballisters of lattin; within this
enclosure at a gate, through which we past, we saw under most deformed figures
the two porters of hell, at least they believe so, calling the one Bacharon,
and the other Quagifau, both of them with iron clubs in their hands, and so
hideous and horrible to see to, that it is impossible to behold them without
fear. Having past this gate under a chain, that went a cross from the breast of
one of these devils to the other, we entered into a very fair street, both for
breadth and length, enclosed at either end with many arches, diversely painted,
on the top whereof were all along two rows of idols to the number of five
thousand; Now we could not well judge of what matter these idols were made,
howsoever they were guilt all over, and upon their heads they wore myters of
sundry inventions. At the end of this street was a great square place, paved
with black and white stone, and compassed about with four rows of giants in
brass, each of them fifteen foot high, with halberds in their hands, and their
hair and beards all guilt, which was not only a very pleasing object to the
eye, but also represented a kind of majestical greatness. At the end of this
place was Quiay Huyan, the god of rain, which idol was so huge, that with his
head he touched the battlements of the tower, being above twelve fathom high;
he was likewise of brass, and both from his mouth, head, and breast, at six and
twenty several places came out streams of water: Having past between his legs,
which stood stradling at a great distance, one from another, we entered into a
large room, as long as a Church, where there were three ships set upon very big
and high pillars of Jasper; all along the walls thereof on both sides were a
many of idols, great and little in diverse forms all guilt, fitted and disposed
in such order, as they took up all the breadth and length of the walls, and
seemed at first sight to be all gold: At the end of this room or temple upon a
round Tribunal, whereunto one ascended by fifteen winding stairs, was an altar,
proportionable to the same Tribunal, whereon stood the image of Nacapirau, in
the likeness of a very fair woman, with her hair hanging upon her shoulders,
and her hands lifted up to Heaven. Now for that she was guilt all over with
fine gold, and that with a great deal of art and care, she glistered in that
manner as it was unpossible to continue looking on her, so dazzled were a man's
eyes with the rays that darted from her. Round about this Tribunal on the
first four stairs were the Statues of twelve Kings of China in silver, with
crowns on their heads, and maces on their shoulders; a little lower were three
rows of idols guilt, kneeling on their knees, and holding up their hands, and
all about hung a number of silver candlesticks with seven branches apiece. When
we were out of this, we went through another street all arched like that by
which we entered in, and from this we p^ssed through two other streets full of
very stately buildings, and so came to a gate, that stood between four high
towers, where there was a Chifuu, with thirty Halberdiers, and two Registers,
which wrote down the names of all that went in and out, as they did ours, and so
we gave them about a groat for our passage out.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of an Edifice, situated in the midst of the river, wherein were
the hundred and thirteen Chapels of the Kings of China; with the public
Granaries established for the relief of the poor.
TO give an end to the matter, whereof I entreat, which would be infinite if I
should recount every thing in particular, amongst the great number of
mavelous buildings, which we saw, the most remarkable to my seeming was an
enclosure, seated in the midst of the river of Batampina, containing some
league in circuit in an Island, and environed with fair hewed stone, which on
the outside was about eight and thirty foot high above the water, and on the
inside even with the ground, being encompassed with two rows of ballisters of
lattin, whereof the outermost were but six foot high, for the commodity of
such as would rest themselves there, and the innermost were nine foot high,
having six Lions of silver standing upon huge bowls, which are the arms of the
King of China, as I have said elsewhere. Within the enclosure of these
ballisters stood in very goodly order an hundred and thirteen Chapels after
the fashion of Bulwarks all round, in each of which was a rich Tomb of
Alabaster, placed with much art upon the heads of two silver Serpents, which in
regard of the many boughts wherein they were entertained seemed to be snakes,
though they had the vis^ges of women, and three horns on their heads, the
explication whereof we could not possibly learn. In each of these Chapels were
thirteen branched Candlesticks with seven great lights a piece in them, so that
to compute the whole, the candlesticks of these hundred and thirteen Chapels
amount to a thousand, four hundred, thirty and nine. In the midst of a great
place, environed round about with three rows of winding stairs, and two ranks
of idols, was a very high tower, with five steeples diversely painted, and
silver Lions on the top of all: Here the Chinese told us were the bones of
those hundred and thirteen Kings, that had been transported thither from these
Chapels below: And it is the opinion of these brutish people, that these
bones, which they hold for great relics, do feast one another at every new
Moon; in regard whereof these Barbarians use on that day to offer unto them a
great Charger full of all kind of fowl, as also Rice, Beef, Pork, Sugar, Honey,
and all other sorts of victual that one can name; wherein their blindness is
such, as in recompense of these meats, which the Priests take unto themselves,
they imagine that all their sins are forgiven them, by way as it were of a
plenory indulgence. In this tower likewise we saw an exceeding rich Chamber,
covered on the inside all over from the top to the bottom with plates of
silver. In this Chamber were the Statues of those hundred and thirteen Kings of
China all of silver, where in each of them were the bones of each several King
enclosed; Now they hold, according as they are made to believe by their
priests, that these Kings thus assembled together converse every night one with
another, and pass away the time in sundry sports, which none is worthy to see,
but certain Bonzes, whom they term Cabizundes, a title amongst them of the most
eminent dignity, such it may be as the Cardinals of Rome. To this beastly
ignorance the wretches add many other blind tales, which they are assuredly
persuaded are very clear and manifest truths: Within this great enclosure we
counted in seventeen places three hundred and forty bells of cast metal,
namely twenty in each place, which are all rung together on those days of the
Moon, wherein they say these Kings do visit and feast one another. Near to this
tower in a very rich Chapel, built upon seven and thirty pillars of fair hewed
stone, was the image of the goddess Amida, made of silver, having her hair of
gold, and seated upon a Tribunal fourteen steps high, that was all overlaid
with fine gold; Her face was very beautiful, and her hands were heaved up
toward Heaven, at her armpits hung a many of little idols not above half a
finger long filed together, whereupon demanding of the Chinese what those
meant, they answered us, That after the waters of Heaven had overflowed the
earth, so that all mankind was drowned by an universal Deluge, God seeing that
the world would be desolate, and no body to inhabit it, he sent the goddess
Amida, the chief Lady of honor to his wife Nacapirau from the Heaven of the
Moon, that she might repair the loss of drowned mankind, and that then the
goddess having set her feet on a Land, from which the waters were withdrawn,
called Calemphuy, (which was the same Island, whereof I have spoken heretofore,
in the straight of Nanquin, whereof Antonio de Faria went on land) she was
changed all into gold, and in that manner standing upright with her face
looking up unto Heaven, she sweat out at her armpits a great number of
children, namely males out of the right, and females out of the left, having no
other place about her body whence she might bring them forth, as other women of
the world have, who have sinned, and that for a chastisement of their sin, God
by the order of nature has subjected them to a misery full of corruption and
filthiness, for to show how odious unto him the sin was that had been committed
against him. The goddess Amida having thus brought forth these creatures, which
they affirm were thirty three thousand, three hundred, thirty and three, two
parts of them females, and the other males, for so say they the world was to be
repaired, she remained so feeble and faint with this delivery, having no body
to assist her at her need, that she fell down dead in the place, for which
cause the Moon at that time in memory of this death of hers, whereat she was
infinitely grieved, put her self into mourning, which mourning they affirm to
be those black spots we ordinarily behold in her face, occasioned indeed by the
shadow of the earth, and that when there shall be so many years ran out, as the
goddess Amida brought forth children, which were, as I have delivered, thirty
three thousand, three hundred, thirty and three, then the Moon will put off her
mourning, and afterward be as clear as the day. With these and such like
fopperies did the Chinese so turmoil us, as we could not choose but grieve to
consider how much those people, which otherwise are quick of apprehension, and
of good understanding, are abused in matter of Religion with such evident and
manifest untruths. After we were come out of this great place, where we saw all
these things, we went unto another Temple of religious Votaries, very sumptuous
and rich, where they told us the Mother of the then reigning King, named Nhay
Camisama, did abide, but thereunto we were not permitted to enter, because we
were strangers; From this place through a street, arched all along, we arrived
at a Key, called Hichario Topileu, where lay a great number of vessels, full of
pilgrims from diverse Kingdoms, which came incessantly on pilgrimage to this
Temple, for to gain, as they believe, plenary indulgences, which the King of
China, and the Chaems of the Government, do grant unto them, besides many
privileges and franchises throughout the whole Country, where victuals are
given them abundantly, and for nothing. I will not speak of many other Temples,
or Pagodes, which we saw in this City whilst we were at liberty, for I should
never have done to make report of them all, howbeit I may not omit some other
particulars, that I hold very fit to be related before I break off this
discourse; whereof the first were certain houses, in several parts of this
City, called Laginampurs, that is to say, The School of the poor, wherein
fatherless and motherles^ children, that are found in the streets, are taught
to write and read, as also some trade, whereby they may get their living, and
of these houses, or schools, there are about some five hundred in this City;
Now if it happen that any of them through some defect of nature cannot learn a
trade, then have they recourse to some means for to make them get their living
according to each ones incommodity; As for example, if they be blind they make
them labor in turning of handmils; if they be lame of their feet, they cause
them to make laces, riband, and such like manufactures; if they be lame of
their hands, then they make them earn their living by carrying of burdens; but
if they be lame both of feet and hands, so that nature has wholly deprived
them of means to get their living, then they shut them up in great Convents,
where there are a number of persons that pray for the dead, amongst whom they
place them, and so they have their share of half the offerings that are made
there, the Priests having the other half; if they be dumb, then they are shut
up in a great house, where they are maintained with the amerciaments that the
common sort of women, as oyster-wives, and such like, are condemned in for
their scolding and fighting one with another; As for old queans, that are past
the trade, and such of the younger sort as by the lewd exercise thereof are
becom^ diseased with the pox, or other filthy sickness, they are put into other
houses, where they are very well looked unto, and furnished abundantly with all
things necessary, at the charge of the other women that are of the same trade,
who thereunto pay a certain sum monthly, and that not unwillingly, because they
know that they shall come to be so provided for themselves by others, and for
the collecting of this money there are Commissioners expressly deputed in several
parts of the City. There are also other houses, much like unto Monasteries,
where a great many of young maids, that are Orp^ans, are bred up, and these
houses are maintained at the charge of such women as are convicted of adultery;
for say they it is most just, that if there be one which has lost her self by
her dishonesty, there should be another, that should be maintained by her
virtue. Other places there are also, where decayed old people are kept at the
charge of Lawyers, that plead unjust causes, where the parties have no right;
and of Judges, that for favoring one more th^n another, and corrupted with
bribes, do not execute justice as they ought to do; whereby one may see with
how much order and policy these people govern all things.

. 2
In the prosecution of my discourse it will not be amiss here to deliver the
mavelous order and policy, which the Kings of China observe in furnishing
their States abundantly with provisions and victuals, for the relief of the
poor people, which may very well serve for an example of charity, and good
government, to Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Their Chronicles report,
that a certain King, great Grandfather to him that then reigned in China, named
Chausi-Zarao Panagor, very much beloved of his people for his good disposition
and virtues, having lost his sight by an accident of sickness, resolved to do
some pious work, that might be acceptable to God, to which effect he assembled
his Estates, where he ordained, that for the relief of the poor there should be
Granaries established in all the Towns of his Kingdom for wheat and rice, that
in the time of dearth (which many times happened) the people might have
wherewithal to nourish themselves that year, and to that purpose he gave the
tenth part of the Duties of his Kingdom by a Grant under his hand, which when
he came to sign accordingly with a golden stamp, that he ordinarily used
because he was blind, it pleased God to restore him perfectly to his sight
again, which he enjoyed still as long as he lived; By this example, if it were
true, it seemed that our Lord Jesus Christ would demonstrate, how acceptable
the charity that good men exercise toward the poor is to him, even though they
be Gentiles, and without the knowledge of the true Religion; Ever since there
have been always a great many of Granaries in this Monarchy, and that to the
number of an hundred and fourteen thousand. As for the order which the
Magistrates observe in furnishing them continually with corn, is such as
follows; A little before reaping time all the old corn is distributed ^orth
to the inhabitants, as it were by way of love, and that for the term of two
months, after this time is expired, they unto whom the old corn was lent,
return in as much new, and withal six in the hundred over and above for waste,
to the end that this store may never fail: But when it falls out to be a dear
year, in that case the corn is distributed to the people without taking any
gain or interest for it, and that which is given to the poorer sort, who are
not able to repay what has been lent to them, is made good out of the Rents,
which the Countries pay to the King, as an alms bestowed on them by his special
grace. Touching the Kings Revenues, which are paid in silver Picos, they are
divided into three parts, whereof the first is for the maintenance of the King,
and his State, the second for the defense of the Provinces, as also for the
provisions of Magazines, and Armies, and the third to be laid up and reserved
in a Treasury, that is in this City of Pequin, which the King himself may not
touch, unless it be upon occasion for defense of the Kingdom, and to oppose the
Tartars, Cauchins, and other Neighboring Princes, who many times make grievous
war upon him. This Treasure is by them called Chidampur, that is to say, The
wall of the Kingdom, for they say, that by means of this treasure, being well
employed and carefully managed, the King needs lay no impositions upon the
people, so that they shall not be any ways vexed and oppressed, as it happens
in other Kingdoms for want of this providence. Now by this that I have related
one may see, how in all the great Monarchy the Government is so excellent, the
Laws so exactly observed, and every one so ready and careful to put the Princes
Ordinances in execution, that Father Navier, having well noted it, was wont to
say, that if ever God would grant him the grace to return into Portugal, he
would become a Suter to the King for to peruse over the rules and ordinances of
those people, and the manner how they govern both in time of war and peace;
adding withal that he did not think the Romans ever ruled so wisely in all the
time of their greatest prosperity, and that in matter of policy the Chinese
surpassed all other Nations of whom the Ancients have written.

CHAP. XXXVII. The great number of Officers, and other people, which are in the
King of China's Palace; with our going to Quincay to accomplish the time of
our Exile; and what befell us there.
OUt of the fear I am in left coming to relate in particular all those things
which we saw within the large enclosure of this City of Pequin, they that shall
chance to read them may call them in question, and not to give occasion also
unto detractors, who judging of things according to the little world they have
seen, may hold those truths for fables, which mine own eyes have beheld, I will
forbear the delivery of many matters, that possibly might bring much
contentment to more worthy spirits, who not judging of the riches and
prosperity of other Countres by the poverty and misery of their own, would be
well pleased with the relation thereof. Howbeit on the other side I have no
great cause to blame those, who shall not give credit to that which I say, or
make any doubt of it, because I must acknowledge, that many times when I call
to mind the things that mine eyes have seen, I remain confounded therewith,
whither it be the Grandeurs of this City of Pequin, or the magnificence
wherewith this Gentile King is served, or the pomp of the Chaems, and Anchacys
of the Government, or the dread and awe wherein all men are of these Ministers,
or the sumptuousness of their Temples and Pagodes, together with all the rest
that may be there, for within the only enclosure of the Kings Palace there are
above a thousand Eunuchs, three thousand women, and 12 thousand men of his
Guard, unto whom the King gives great entertainment and pentions: also twelve
Tutons, dignities that are Sovereign above all others, whom, as I have already
declared, the vulgar call, The beams of the Sun; Under these twelve Tutons,
there are forty Chaems, or Viceroys, besides many other inferior dignities,
as Judges, Majors, Governors, Treasurers, Admirals, and Generals, which they
term, Anchacys, Aytaos, Ponchacy, Lauteas, and Chumbims, whereof there are
above five hundred always residing at the Court, each of them having at the
least two hundred men in his train, which for the most part to strike the
greater terror are of diverse Nations, namely, Megores, Persians, Curazens,
Moems, Calaminhams, Tartars, Cauchins, and some Braamas of Chaleu, and Tanguu;
for in regard of valor* they make no account of the Natives, who are of a weak
and effeminate complexion, though otherwise I must confess they are exceeding
able and ingenious in whatsoever concerns Mechanic Trades Tillage, and
Husband^y; they have withal a great vivacity of spirit, and are exceeding
proper and apt for the inventing of very subtle and industrious things. The
women are fair and chaste, and more inclined to labor then the men, The
Country is fertile in victual, and so rich and abound^ng in all kind of good
things, as I cannot sufficiently express it, and such is their blindness as
they attribute all those blessings to the only merit of their King, and not to
the Divine Providence, and to the goodness of that Sovereign Lord, who has
created all things. From this blindness and incredulity of these people are
these great abuses, and confused superstitions derived, which are ordinary
amongst them, and wherein they observe a world of diabolical ceremonies; For
they are so brutish and wicked as to sacrifice humane blood, offering it up
with diverse sorts of perfumes, and sweet savors; Moreover they present their
Priests with many gifts, upon assurance from these profane wretches, of great
blessings in this life, and infinite riches and treasure in the other; To which
effects the same Priests grant them I know not what Certificates, as it were
Bills of Exchange, which the common people call Couchinnoces, that after their
death they may serve above in Heaven to procure for them a recompense of an
hundred for one; wherein these miserable creatures are so blinded, that they
save the very meat and drink from their own mouths to furnish those accursed
priests of Satan with all things necessary, believing that these goodly ^ills
they have from them, will assuredly return them that benefit. There are also
Priests of another Sect, called Naustolins, who contrary to those others
preach, and affirm with great oaths, that reasonable creatures live and die
like beasts, and therefore that they are to make merry* and spend their goods
jovially whiles life shall last, there being no other after this, as all but
fools and ignorants are to believe. There is another Sect, named Trimechau, who
are of opinion that so long time as a man shall live in this world, so long
shall he remain under ground, until at length by the prayers of their priests
his soul shall reassume the body of a child of seven days old, wherein he shall
live again till he shall grow so strong, as to re-enter into the old body,
which he head left in the grave, and so be transported into the Heaven of the
Moon, where they say he shall live many years, and in the end be converted into
a star, which shall remain fixed above in the Firmament for ever. Another Sect
there is called Gyson, who believe that only the beasts in regard of their
sufferings, and the labor which they endure in this life, shall possess Heaven
after their death, and not man, that leads his life according to the lusts of
the flesh, robbing, killing, and committing a world of other offenses, by
reason whereof, say they, it is not possible for him to be saved, unless at the
hour of death he leave all his estate to the Pagodes, and to the Priests, that
they may pray for him; whereby one may see that all the intentions of their
diabolical Sects is not founded but upon a very tyranny, and upon the interests
of the Bonzes, who are they that preach this pernicions doctrine to the people,
and persuaded them with many fables to believe it; In the mean time these
things seem so true to these wretches that hear them, as they very willingly
give them all their goods, imagining that thereby only they can be saved, and
freed from those punishments and fears, wherewithal they threaten them if they
do otherwise. I have spoken here of no more then these three Sects, omitting
the rest of the two and thirty, which are followed in this great Empire of
China, as well because I should never have done (as I have said heretofore) if
I would relate them all at large, as for that by these it may be known what the
others are, which are nothing better, but in a manner even the very same;
wherefore leaving the remedy of such evils, and great blindness to the mercy
and providence of God, unto whom only it appertains; I will pass on to the
declarations of the miseries we endured during our exille in the Town of
Quancy, until such time as we were made slaves by the Tartars, which happened
in the year, 1544.

. 2.
We had been now two months and an half in this City of Pequin, when as on
Saturday, the thirteenth of July, 1554. we were carried away to the Town of
Quansy, there to serve all the time that we were condemned unto: Now as soon as
we arrived there, the Chaem caused us to be brought before him, and after he
had asked us some questions, he appointed us to be of the number of fourscore
Halberdiers, which the King assigned him for his Guard; This we took as a
special favor from God, both in regard this employment was not very painful,
as also because the entertainment was good, and the pay of it better, being
assured besides that at the time we should recover our liberty. Thus lived we
almost a month very peaceably* and well contented for that we met with a better
fortune then we expected, when as the devil, seeing how well all we nine agreed
together (for all that we had was in common amongst us, and whatsoever misery
any one had we shared it with him like true brothers,) he so wrought that two
of our company tell into a quarrel, which proved very prejudicial to us all;
This division sprung from a certain vanity too familiar with the Portugal
Nation, whereof I can render no other reason, but that they are naturally
sensible of any thing that touches upon honour^ Now see what the difference
was, two of us nine falling by chance in contest about the extraction of the
Madureyras and the Fonsecas, for to know which of these two houses was in most
esteem at the King of Portugals Court, the matter went so far, that from one
word to another they came at length to terms of oyster-wives, saying one to the
other, Who are you? and again, who are you? so that thereupon they suffered
themselves to be so transported with choler, that one of them gave the other a
great box on the ear, who instantly returned him a blow with his sword, which
cut away almost half his cheek, this same feeling himself hurt caught up an
halbert, and therewith ran the other through the arm; this disaster begot such
part-taking amongst us, as of nine that we were seven of us found our selves
grievously wounded; In the mean time the Chaem came running in person to this
tumult with all the Anchacys of Justice, who laying hold of us gave us
presently thirty lashes a piece, which drew more blood from us then our hurts;
This done, they shut us up in a dungeon under ground, where they kept us six
and forty days with heavy iron collers about our necks, manacles on our hands,
and irons on our legs, so that we suffered exceedingly in this deplorable
estate. This while our business was brought before the Kings Atturny, who
having seen our accusations, and that one of the articles made faith, that
there were sixteen witnesses against us, he stuck not to say, That we were
people without the fear or knowledge of God, who did not confess him otherwise
with our mouths, then as any wild beast might do if he could speak; that these
things presupposed it was to be believed, that we were men of blood, of a
Language, of a Law, of a Nation, of a Country, and of a Kingdom, the
inhabitants whereof wounded and killed one another most cruelly, without any
reason or cause, and therefore no other judgment could be made of us, but that
we were the servants of the most gluttenous Serpent of the profound pit of
smoke, as appeared by our work, since they were no better then such as that
accursed Serpent had accustomed to do, so that according to the Law of the
third Book of the will of the Son of the Sun, called Mileterau, we were to be
condemned to a banishment from all commerce of people, as a venomous and
contagious plague; so that we deserved to be confined to the Mountains of
Chabaguay, Sumbor, or Lamau, whither such as we were use to be exiled, to the
end they might in that place hear the wild beasts howl in the night, which were
of as vile a breed and nature as we. From this prison we were one morning led
to a place, called by them Pitau Calidan, where the Anchacy sat in judgment
with a majestical and dreadful greatness; He was accompanied by diverse
Chumbims, Vppes, Lanteas, and Cypatons, besides a number of other persons;
there each of us had thirty lashes a piece more given us, and then by public
sentence we were removed to another prison, where we were in better case yet
then in that out of which we came, howbeit for all that we did not a little
detest amongst our selves both the Fonsecas, and the Madureyras, but much more
the devil, that wrought us this mischief. In this prison we continued almost
two months, during which time our stripes were thoroughly healed, howbeit we
were exceedingly afflicted with hunger, and thirst. At length it pleased God
that the Chaem took compassion of us; for on a certain day, wherein they use to
do works of charity for the dead, coming to review our sentence he ordained,
That in regard we were strangers, and of a Country so far distant from theirs,
as no man had any knowledge of us, nor that there was any book, or writing
which made mention of our name, and that none understood our language; as also
that we were accustomed, and even hardened to misery and poverty, which many
times puts the best and most peaceable persons into disorder, and therefore
might well trouble such, as made no profession of patience in their
adversities, whence it followed, that our discord proceeded rather from the
effects of our misery, then from any inclination unto mutiny and tumult,
wherewith the Kings Atturny charged us; and furthermore representing unto
himself what great need there was of men for the ordinary service of the State,
and of the Officers of Justice, for which provision necessarily was to be made,
he thought fit, that the punishment for the crimes we had committed, should in
the way of an alms bestowed in the Kings name be moderated, and reduced to the
whipping which we had twice already had, upon condition nevertheless that we
should be detained there as slaves for ever, unless it should please the Tuton
otherwise to ordain of us. This sentence was pronounced against us, and though
we shed a many of tears to see our selves reduced unto this miserable
condition, wherein we were, yet this seemed not so bad unto us as the former.
After the publication of this Decree we were presently drawn out of prison, and
tied three and three together, then led to certain iron Forges, where we past
six whole months in strange labors, and great necessities, being in a manner
quite naked, without any bed to lie on, and almost ^amished. At last after the
enduring of so many evils, we fell sick of a Lethargy, which was the cause, in
regard it was a contagious disease, that they turned us out of doors for to go
and seek our living, until we became well again. Being thus set at liberty we
continued four months sick, and begging the alms of good people from door to
door, which was given us but sparingly, by reason of the great dearth that then
reigned over all the Country, so as we were constrained to agree better
together, and to promise one another by a solemn oath, that we took, to live
lovingly for the future, as good Christians should do, and that every month one
should be chosen from amongst us to be as it were a kind of Chief, whom, by the
oath we had taken, all the rest of us were to obey, as their Superior, so that
none of us was to dispose of himself, nor do any thing, without his command, or
appointment; and those rules were put into writing by us, that they might be
the better observed; As indeed God gave us the grace to live ever afterward in
good peace and concord, though it were in great pain, and extreme necessity of
all things.

We had continued a good while living in peace and tranquillity, according to
our forementioned agreement, when as he, whose lot it was to be our Chief that
month,. 3
named Christovano Boralho, considering how necessary it was to seek out some
relief for our miseries by all the ways that possibly we could, appointed us to
serve weekly two and two together, some in begging up and down the Town, some
in getting water and dressing our meat, and others in fetching wood from the
Forest, both for our own use, and to sell. Now one day my self and one Gaspar
de Meyrelez being enjoined to go to the Forest, we rose betimes in the
morning, and went forth to perform our charge; And because this Gaspar de
Meyrelez was a pretty Musician, playing well on a Cittern, whereunto he
accorded his voice, which was not bad, being parts that are very agreeable to
those people, in regard they employ the most part of their times in the
delights of the flesh, they took great pleasure in hearing of him, so as for
that purpose they invited him very often to their sports, from whence he never
returned without some reward, wherewith we were not a little assisted: As he
and I then were going to the wood, and before we were out of the Town, we met
by fortune in one of the streets with a great many of people, who full of
jollity were carrying a dead corpse to the grave with diverse banners, and other
funeral pomp, in the midst whereof was a Consort of music and voices; Now he,
that had the chief ordering of the Funeral, knowing Gaspar de Meyrelez, made
him stay, and putting a Cittern into his hands, he said unto him, Oblige me, I
pray thee, by singing as loud as thou can, so as thou may be heard by this
dead man whom we are carrying to burial, for I swear unto thee, that he went
away very sad for that he was separated from his wife and children, whom he
dearly loved all his life time. Gaspar de Meyrelez would fain have excused
himself, alleging many reasons thereupon to that end, but so far was the
Governor of the Funeral from accepting them, that contrarily he answered him
very angerly. Truly, if thou will not deign to benefit this defun^t with the
gift, that God has given thee, of singing, and playing on this instrument, I
will no longer say, that thou art an holy man, as we all believed hitherto, but
that the excellency of that voice which thou have comes from the inhabitants of
the house of smoke, whose nature it was at first to sing very harmoniously,
though now they weep and wail in the profound lake of the night, like
hunger-starved dogs, that gnashing their teeth, and foaming with rage against
men discharge the froth of their malice by the offenses, which they commit
against him, that lives in the highest of the Heavens. After this ten or eleven
of them were so earnest with Gaspar de Meyrelez, as they made him play almost
by force, and led him to the place, where the deceased was to be burnt,
according to the custom of those Gentiles. In the mean time seeing my self left
alone without my comrade I went along to the Forest for to get some wood
according to my Commission, and about evening returning back with my load on my
back I met with an old man in a black damask Gown furred clean through with
white Lamb, who being all alone, as soon as he espied me, he turned a little
out of the way, but perc^iving me to pass on without regarding him, he cried so
loud to me, that I might hear him, which I no sooner did, but casting my eye
that way, I observed that he beckened to me with his hand, as if he called me,
whereupon imagining there was something more then ordinary, herein I said unto
him in the Chinese Language, Potauquinay, which is, Do thou call me?
whereunto returning no answer, he gave me to understand by signs that in
effect he called me; conjecturing then that there might be some thieves
thereabouts, which would bereave me of my load of wood, I threw it on the
ground to be the better able to defend my self, and with my staff in my hand, I
went fair and softly after him, who seeing me follow him began to double his
pace athwart a little path, which confirmed me in the belief I had before that
he was some thief, so that turning back to the place where I left my load, I
got it up again on my back as speedily as I could, with a purpose to get into
the great high way, that led unto the City; But the man guessing at my
intention, began to cry out louder to me then before, which making me turn my
look toward him, I presently perceived him on his knees, and showing me afar
off a silver cross about a span long, or thereabout, lifting up withal both
his hands unto Heaven; whereat being much amazed, I could not imagine what this
man should be, in the mean time he with a very pitiful gesture ceased not to
make signs unto me to come to him; whereupon somewhat recollecting my self, I
resolved to go and see who he was, and what he would have, to which end with my
staff in my hand I walked toward him, where he stayed for me; when as then I
came near him, having always thought him before to be a Chinese, I wondered to
see him cast himself at my feet, and with tears and sighs to say thus unto me,
Blessed and praised be the sweet Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, after so long
an exile has showed me so much grace, as to let me see a Christian man, that
professes the Law of my God fixed on the Cross. I must confess that when I
heard so extraordinary a matter, and so far beyond my expectation, I was
therewith so surprised, that scarcely knowing what I said, I conjure thee,
answered I unto him, in the Name of our Lord Jesus to tell me who thou art? At
these words this unknown man redoubling his tears, Dear Brother, replied he, I
am a poor Christian, by Nation a Portugal, and named Vasco Calvo, brother to
Diego Calvo, who was sometime Captain of Don Nuna Manoel his ship, and made a
Slave here in this Country about seven and twenty years since, together with
one Tome Perez, who Loppo Soarez sent as Ambassador into this Kingdom of China,
and that since died miserably by the occasion of a Portugal Captain. Whereupon
coming thoroughly to my self again, I lifted him up from the ground where he lay
weeping like a child; and shedding no fewer tears then he, I entreated him that
we might sit down together, which he would hardly grant, so desirous he was to
have me go presently with him to his house, but sitting down by me he began to
discourse the whole success of his travels, and all that had befallen him since
his departure from Portugal, till that very time, as also the death of the
Ambassador Tome Perez, and of all the rest, whom Fernand Perez d' Amdrada had
left at Canton to go to the King of China, which he recounted in another manner
then our Historians have delivered it. After we had spent the remainder of the
day in entertaining one another with our passed adventures, we went to the
City, where having showed me his house, he desired me that I would instantly go
and fetch the rest of my fellows, which accordingly I did, and found them all
together in the poor lodging where we lay, and having declared unto them what
had befallen me, they were much abashed at it, as indeed they had cause,
considering the stratagems of the accident, so they went presently along with
me to Vasco Calvo's house, who waiting for us, gave us such hearty welcome, as
we could not choose but weep for joy; Then he carried us into a Chamber where
was his wife, with two little boys, and two girls of his; she entertained us
very kindly, and with as much demonstration of love, as if she had been the
mother or daughter to either of us; After this we sat down at the table, which
he had caused to be covered, and made a very good meal of many several dishes
provided for us: Supper done, his wife arose very courteously from the table,
and taking a key which hung at her girdle, she opened the door of an Oratory,
where there was an altar, with a silver cross, as also two candlesticks, and a
lamp of the same, and then she and her four children falling down on their
knees, with their hands lift up to Heaven, began to pronounce these words very
distinctly in the Portugal tongue: O thou true God, we wretched sinners do
confess before thy Cross, like good Christians, as we are, the most sacred
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God; and also we
promise to live and dye in thy most Holy Catholic Faith, like good and true
Christians, confessing and believing so much of thy holy truth, as is held and
believed by thy Church; In like manner we offer up unto thee our souls, which
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, for to be wholly employed in
thy service all the time of our lives, and then to be yielded unto thee at the
hour of our death, as to our Lord and God, unto whom we acknowledge they
appertain both by Creation and Redemption. After this Confession they said the
Lords Prayer, and the Creed, which they pronounced very distinctly, whereat we
could not choose but shed a world of tears to see these innocents, born in a
Country, so far remote from ours, and where there was no knowledge of the true
God, thus to confess his Law in such religious terms. This being done, we
returned because it was three of the clock in the morning to our lodging,
exceedingly astonished at that we had seen, as at a thing which we had great
reason to admire.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A Tartar Commander enters with his Army into the Town of
Quincay, and that which followed thereupon; with the Nauticors besieging the
Castle of Nixiamcoo, and the taking of it by the means of some of us Portugals.
WE had been now eight months and an half in this captivity,. 1.
wherein we endured much misery, and many incommodities, for that we had
nothing to live upon but what we got by begging up and down the Town, when as
one Wednesday, the third of July, in the year 1544. a little after midnight
there was such a hurly burly amongst the people, that to hear the noise and
cries which was made in every part, one would have thought the earth would have
come over and over, which caused us to go in haste to Vasco Calvo his house, of
whom we demanded the occasion of so great a tumult, whereunto with tears in his
eyes he answered us, that certain news were come how the King of Tartary was
fallen upon the City of Pequin with so great an Army, as the like had never
been seen since Adams time* In this army, according to report, were seven and
twenty Kings, under whom marched eighteen hundred thousand men, whereof six
hundred thousand were horse, which were come by land from the Cities of
Luancama, Famstir, and Mecuy, with fourscore thousand Rhinocerots, that draw
the wagons, wherein was all the B^gage of the Army; as for the other twelve
hundred thousand, which were foot, it was said that they arrived by Sea in
seventeen thousand vessels, down through the river of Batampina; By reason
whereof the King of China finding himself too weak for the resisting of such
great forces, had with a few retired himself to the City of Nanquin. And that
also it was reported for a certain, that a Nauticor, one of the chiefest Tartar
Commanders, was come to the Forest of Malincataran, not above a league and an
half from Quincay, with an Army of threescore and two thousand Horse, wherewith
he marched against the Town, that in all likelihood he would be there within
two hours at the furthest. These news so troubled us, that we did nothing but
look one upon another, without being able to speak a word to any purpose,
howbeit desiring to save our selves, we prayed Vasco Calvo to show us what
means he thought we might use to effect it, who sad and full of grief thus
answered us; O that we were in our Country between Laura and Carncha, where I
have often been, and should be there now in safety, but since it cannot be so,
all that we can do for the present, is to recommend our selves to God, and to
pray unto him to assist us; for I assure you that an hour ago I would have
given a thousand Taeis in silver to any one, that could have got me from hence,
and saved me with my wife and children, but there was no possibility for it,
because the gates were then all shut up, and the walls round about environed
with armed men, which the Chaem has placed there to withstand the enemy. So my
fellows and I, that were nine in number, past the rest of the night there in
much affliction and unquietness, without any means of counselling one another,
or resolving on what we were to do, continually weeping for the extreme fear we
were in of what should become of us. The next morning a little before
Sunrising the enemy appeared in a most dreadful manner, they were divided into
seven very great Battalions, having their Ensigns quartered with green and
white, which are the colors of the King of Tartaria; marching in this order to
the sound of their Trumpets, they arrived at a Pagode, called Petilau Nam^ioo,
a place of good receipt, in regard of the many lodgings it had, which was not
much distant from the walls. In their Vantguard they had a number of
Light Horse, who ran confusedly up and down with their Lances in their Rests.
Being in this sort come to the Pagode, they stayed there about half an hour,
and then marching on till they were within an ha^qu^buse shot of the walls,
they suddenly ran to them with such hideous cries, as one would have thought
that Heaven and Earth would have come together, and rearing up above two
thousand Ladders, which for that purpose they had brought alo^g with them, they
assaulted the Town on every side with a most invincible courage. Now though the
besieged at the beginning made some resistance, yet was it not able to hinder
the enemy from effecting his design, for by the means of certain iron rams
broking up the four principal gates, they rendered themselves Masters of the
Town after they had slain the Chaem, together with a great number of Mandarins,
and Gentlemen, that were run thither to keep them from entering; Thus did these
Barbarians possess themselves of this miserable Town, whereof they put all the
inhabitants they could meet withal to the sword, without sparing any; and it
was said that the number of the slain amounted to threescore thousand persons,
amongst whom were many women and maids of very great beauty, which appertained
to the chiefest Lords of the place. After the bloody Massacre of so much
people, and that the Town was fired, the principal houses overthrown, and the
most sumptuous Temples laid level with the ground, nothing remaining on foot
during the disorder, the Tartars continued there seven days, at the end whereof
they returned toward Pequin, where their King was, and from whence he had sent
them to this execution, carrying with them a world of gold and silver only,
having burnt all the Merchandise they found there, as well because they knew
not how to transport it away, as for that the Chinese should not make any
benefit of it: Two days after their departure they arrived at a Castle, named
Nixianicoo, where the Nauticor of Luancama, their General, pitched his Camp,
and entrenched himself on all sides with an intention to take it by assault the
next day to be revenged on the Chinese there, for that upon his passing by
them toward Quincay, they had cut off an hundred of his men by an Ambuscado.

. 2
After the Army was encamped, and entrenched, and that the General had placed
sure Guards and Sentinels in all places, he retired to his Tent, whither he
sent for the seventy Captains that commanded his Army, unto whom upon their
arrival he discovered his resolution, which being well approved of they fell
into deliberation in what manner the Castle should be assaulted the day
following, which concluded on, the next morning as soon as it was light the
soldiers began to march toward the Castle, divided into fourteen Bataillions;
being come within a flight shoot of it with the sound of trumpets, and most
hideous cries, they reared up their Ladders against the walls, and courageously
mounted up; but in the heat of this assault, where every one showed his valor,
the one in bravely attempting, and the other in well defending, the Tartar in
less then two hours lost above three thousand of his men, which made him found
a retreat in great disorder, and he past the rest of that day in burying the
dead, and curing of the wounded, whereof, there being a great number, the most
part died not long after, for that the arrows wherewith they were hurt had been
smeared by the Chinese with so strange and deadly poison, as there was no
remedy to be found for it. In the mean time the Tartar Commanders seeing the
ill success of this assault, and fearing the King would be offended at so great
a loss for so small an occasion, persuaded the General to call another Council,
wherein it might be considered, whether it would be most expedient for the
Kings honor to persist in the Siege of that place, or to give it over,
whereupon this affair coming accordingly into deliberation it was a long time
debated with such diversity of opinions, as they were not able to conclude upon
any thing, so that it was thought fit, in regard it was then late to put off
the Assembly till the next day; This resolution taken, every man retired to his
quarter. Now we being led away amidst a great many of other slaves, with whom
we had escaped out of the fire of the Town, it fell out, whether for our good,
or for our greater misfortune, we could not then tell, that we were under the
Guard, as prisoners of war, of one of that Assembly, a rich and honorable man,
who returning to his tent with three other persons, of like quality to himself,
whom he had invited to Supper, it chanced after they were risen from table that
one of them espied us, where we stood chained in a corner of the tent, and
perceiving us to weep was so moved, that he demanded of us what people we were?
what the name of our Country was? and how we came to be slaves to the Chinese?
whereunto we gave such an answer, as the Tartar engaging himself further in
this discourse, enquired of us whether our King was inclined to the wars, and
whether we did use to fight in our Country? to whom one of our companions,
named Iorge Mendez, replied that we did, and that we had been trained up from
our infancy in a military course of life; which so pleased the Tartar, that
calling his two friends unto him, Come hither, said he, and have the patience
to hear what these prisoners can say; for believe me they seem to be men of
understanding; whereupon the other two came near, and hearing us relate some
part of our misfortunes, it begat a desire in them to ask us other questions,
wherein having satisfied them the best that we could, one of them that seemed
more curious then the rest, addressing himself to Iorge Mendez, spoke thus;
Since you have seen so much of the world, as you say, if there were ere a one
amongst you that could find out any device, or stratagem of war, whereby the
Mitaquer ( for so was the Nauticor called) might take this Castle, I vow to you
that he would become your prisoner, whereas you are his. Then Iorge Mendez,
never considering with what imprudence he spoke, nor understanding what he
said, nor into what danger he was putting himself, boldly answered him; If my
Lord Mitaquer will in the name of the King g^ve it us under his hand, that we
shall have a safe conduct to convey us by Sea to the Isle of Ainan, from whence
we may freely return into our Country, possibly I may be the man that will show
him how he shall take the Castle with little ado. This Speech being heard, and
maturely considered by one of the three, a man in years, and of great
authority, as having the honor to be much esteemed and beloved of the
Mitaquer, Think well of what thou say, replied he to Jorge Mendez, for I
assure thee if thou do it, that whatsoever thou demandest shall be granted
thee, I, and more too. Hereupon the rest of us seeing what Iorge Mendez was
going to undertake, as also how far he engaged himself in his promise, and that
the Tartars began already to ground some hope thereupon, we thought fit to
reprehend him for it, and to tell him, that he was not to hazard himself so at
random by promising a thing that might bring us into the danger of our lives. I
fear nothing less, said he unto us, for as for my life, in the estate where now
I am, I make so little account of it, that if any of these Barbarians would
play for it at Primero, I would with three of the worst cards in the pack
venture it upon the first encounter, for I am confident that all the benefit
they can expect from us will never oblige them to grant us either life or
liberty, so that for my particular I had as lief die to day as to morrow, judge
you only by that which you saw them do at Quincay, whether you are likely to be
better dealt withal now. The Tartars were much abashed to see us thus in
contestation one with another, and to hear us talk so loud, which is not usual
amongst them, wherefore they reprehended us very seriously, saying, That it was
for women to speak aloud, who could not put a bridle to their tongue, nor a key
to their mouths, and not for men, that carry a sword, and are made for the
wars: Howbeit if it were so that Jorge Mendez could execute what he had
propounded, the Mitaquer could not refuse him any thing he could demand. This
said, the Tartars retired every one to his lodging, for that it was eleven of
the clock at night, the first watch being newly past, and the Captains of the
Guard beginning then to walk the round about the camp at the sound of diverse
instruments, as is the custom in semblable occasions.

The same of the three Tartar Commanders, and sect;. 1.
which I said before was so esteemed of by the Mitaquer, had no sooner learnt
of Iorge Mendez, that he could tell how to take the Castle of Nixiamcoo, but
that he went presently to acquaint the General with it, and making the matter
greater then it was, he told him, that he could do no less then send for him to
hear his reasons, which peradventure would persuade him to give credit unto
him, and in case it proved not so, yet was there nothing lost thereby. The
Mitaquer being well pleased with this advice, sent incontinently a Command to
Tileymay, which was the Captain under whose Guard we were, for to bring us unto
him, as presently he did. Being then arrived, chained as we were, at the
Mitaquers Tent, we found him set in Council with the seventy Commanders of the
Army about two hours after midnight; At our coming he received us with an
affable countenance, yet grave and severe, and causing us to approach nearer
unto him, he commanded part of our chains to be undone, then asked us if we
would eat, whereunto we answered most willingly, for that in three days
together we had not so much as tasted a bit of any thing, whereat the Mitaquer
was very much offended, and sharply reproving the Tileymay for it, willed two
great platters of sodden rice, and Ducks cut in small pieces to be set before
us, whereto we fell with such an appetite, like men that were almost famished,
as those of the company, who took great pleasure to see us feed so, said to the
Mitaquer, When as you had nothing else, my Lord, but cause these to come before
you for to flack their hunger, verily you had done very much for them, by
saving them from a languishing death, which otherwise they could not have
avoided, and so you might have lost these slaves, of whom the service or sale
might have been some way profitable unto you, for if you will not make use of
them at Lancama, you may sell them for a thousand Taeis at least. Hereat some
began to laugh, but the Mitaquer commanded more rice to be given us, together
with some apples, and other things, conjuring us again to eat, as a thing which
he took pleasure to see us do, wherein we most willingly gave him satisfaction.
After we had fed well, he began to talk with Iorge Mendez about that which had
been told him of him, and of the means that were to be used for taking the
Castle, making him many great promises of honors, pentions, ^avour with the
King, and liberty for all the rest of his fellows, with other such offers, as
passed all measure: For he swore unto him that if by his means God should give
him the victory, whereby he sought nothing but to be revenged on his enemies
for the blood which they had shed of his men, he should every way be like unto
himself, or at least to any of his children which soever; Herewith Iorge Mendez
found himself somewhat perplexed, because he held it almost impossible for him
to bring it to effect, howsoever he told him, that not to hold him longer in
hand, he did not think but if he might view the Castle with his own eyes, he
might then peradventure let him know how it might be taken, wherefore if his
Lordship pleased, he would the next morning consider it all about, and
thereupon render him an account what course was to be taken therein. The
Mitaquer, and all the rest, allowed very well of his answer, and greatly
commending him for it sent us to be lodged in a Tent not far from his, where we
spent the rest of the night under a sure Guard; you may judge now in what fear
we were, knowing that if the business did not succeed according to the desire
of these Barbarians, they would cut us all in pieces, for that they were a
people which for never so small a matter would not stick to kill twenty or
thirty men, without any regard either of God, or any thing else. The next
morning about eight of the clock, Iorge Mendez, and two of us, that were
appointed to accompany him, went to survey the place with thirty horse for our
Safeguard; when as Iorge Mendez h^d well observed the situation thereof, as
also that part whereby it might most commodiously be assaulted, he returned to
the Mitaquer, that expected him with impatience, to whom he gave an acount of
what he had seen, and facilitated the taking of the Castle with little hazard,
whereat the Mitaquer was so overjoyed, that he presently caused the rest of our
irons, and the chains, wherewith we were fastened by the neck and feet to be
taken off, swearing to us by the rice he did eat, that as soon as he came to
P^quin, he would present us to the King, and infallibly accomplish all that he
had promised us, for the more assurance whereof he confirmed it by a Deed under
his hand, that was written in letters of gold, to make it more authentical.
That done, he sent for us to dinner, and would needs have us to sit with him at
table, doing us many other honors according to their manner, which greatly
contented us, but on the other side we were in no little fear, least this
affair should not for our sins have a success answerable to that hope the
Mitaquer had already conceived of it. The rest of this day the Commanders spent
in resolving upon the order that was to be observed for assaulting the Castle,
wherein Iorge Mendez was the sole Director: First of all then an infinite
company of B^vins and Fagots was gotten together for to fill up the ditches;
there were also three hundred Ladders made, very strong, and so large, that
three men might easily mount up on them a front without incombring one another;
likewise there was a world of Paniers, Dossers, and Baskets provided, together
with a great multitude of Mattocks, and Spades, that were found in the Villages
and Buroughs thereabout, which the inhabitants had deserted upon the bruit of
this war, and all the soldiers of the Army made preparation of such things as
they should need the next day when the assault was to be given a In the mean
time Iorge Mendez rode always by the Mitaquers side, who showed him many great
favors, which we perceived had begotten in him a stately carriage, far
different from that he was wont to have, whereat we wondering, some of us (who
envious of another good fortune, and out of an ill nature) could not choose but
murmur, saying one to another, as it were in disdain, and in a kind of jeering,
What think you of this dog? verily he will be the cause that either to morrow
morning we shall be all cut in pieces, or if the business he has undertaken
succeed as we desire, it is probable that he will be in such credit with these
Barbarians, that we shall account it for a happiness to be his servants; and
this was the talk which we had amongst us. The next day all the Army was put
into order, and divided into twelve Battallions, whereof they made twelve
Files, and one Counterfile in the Vantguard, that encompassed the whole Camp in
manner of an half moon: upon the wings were the foremost with all that Mass of
Bavins, Ladders, Baskets, Mattocks, Spades, and other materials to fill up the
ditch, and make it equal with the rest of the ground. Marching in this manner
they arrived at the Castle, which they found strongly manned, and with a number
of Flags and Streamers waving upon the Battlements. The first Salutation
between the besiegers and the besieged was with arrows, darts, stones, and pots
of wildfire, which continued about half an hour, then the Tartars presently
filled the ditch with bavins and earth, and so reared up their ladders against
the wall, that now by reason of the filling up of the ditch was not very high;
The first that mounted up was Iorge Mendez, accompanied with two of ours, who
as men resolved had set up their rest, either to die there, or to render their
valor remarkable by some memorable act, as in effect it pleased our Lord that
their resolution had a good success, for they not only entered first, but also
planted the first colors upon the wall, whereat the Mitaquer, and all that
were with him, were so amazed, as they said one to another, Doubtless if these
people did besiege Pequin, as we do, the Chinese, which defend that City,
would sooner lose their honor, then we shall make them to do it with all the
forces we have; in the mean time all the Tartars, that were at the foot of the
ladders, followed the three Portugals, and carried themselv^s so valiantly,
what with the example of a Captain that had showed them the way, as out of
their own natural disposition, almost as resolute as those of Iapan, that in a
very sh^rt space above 5000 of them were got upon the walls from whence with
great violence they made the Chinese to retire, whereupon so furious and
bloody a fight ensued between either party, that in less then half an hour the
business was fully decided, and the Castle taken, with the death of two
thousand Chinese and Mogores that were in it, there being not above sixscore
of the Tartars slain. That done the gates being opened, the Mitaquer with great
acclamations of joy entered, and causing the Chinese colors to be taken down,
and his own to be advanced in their places, he with a new ceremony of rejoicing
at the sound of many instruments of war after the the manner of the Tartars
gave rewards to the wounded, and made diverse of the most valiant of his
followers Knights, by putting bracelets of gold about their right arms; and
then about noon he with the chief Commanders of his Army, for the greater
triumph dined in the Castle, where he also bestowed bracelets of gold upon
Iorge Mendez, and the other Portugals, whom he made to sit down at table with
him; After the cloth was taken away, he went out of the Castle with all his
company, and then causing all the walls of it to be dismantelled, ^e razed the
place quite to the ground, setting on fire all that remained with a number of
ceremonies, which was performed with great cries and acclamations to the sound
of dive^s instruments of war; Moreover he commanded the ruins of this Castle
to be sprinkled with the blood of his enemies, and the heads of all of them
that lay dead there to be cut off; as for his own soldiers that were slain, he
caused them to be triumphantly buried, and such as were hurt to be carefully
looked unto; this done, he retired with a huge train, and in great pomp to his
tent, having Iorge Mendez close by him on horsback; As for the other eight of
us, together with many brave Noblemen and Captains, we followed him on foot.
Being arrived at his tent, which was richly hung, he sent Iorge Mendez a
thousand Taeis for a reward, and to us but an hundred a piece, whereat some of
us, that thought themselves to be better qualified, were very much
discontented, for that he was more respected then they, by whose means, as well
as his, the enterprise had been so happily achieved, though by the good
success thereof we had all obtained honor and liberty.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Mitaquer departs from the Castle of Nixiamcoo, and goes to
the King of Tartary his Camp before Pequin; with that which we saw till we
arrived there; and the Mitaquers presenting us unto the King.
THe next day the Mitaquer having nothing more to do where he was, resolved to
take his way toward the City of Pequin,. 1
before which the King lay, as I have delivered before; To this effect having
put his Army into battle array, he departed from th^nce at eight of the clock in
the morning, and marching leasurely to the sound of his warlike instruments, he
made his first station about noon upon the bank of a river, whose situation
was very pleasant, being all about environed with a world of fruit trees, and a
many goodly houses, but wholly deserted, and bereaved of all things which the
Barbarians might any way have made booty of. Having past the greatest heat of
the day there, he arose and marched on until about an hour in the night that he
took up his lodging at a pretty good Town, called Lantimay, which likewise we
found deserted, for all this whole Country was quite dispeopled for fear of the
Barbarians, who spared no kind of person, but wheresoever they came put all to
fire and sword, as the next day they did by this place, and many other along
this river, which they burnt down to the ground; and that which yet was more
lamentable, they set on fire, and clean consumed to ashes a great large plain,
being above six leagues about, and full of corn ready to be reaped. This
cruelty executed, the Army began again to move, composed as it was of some
threescore and five thousand horse, (for as touching the rest they were all
slain, as well at the taking of Quincay, as in that of the Castle of
Nixiamcoo,) and went on to a mountain, named Pommitay, where they remained that
night; The next morning dislodging from thence, they marched on somewhat faster
then before, that they might arrive by day at the City of Pequin, which was
distant about seven leagues from that mountain: At three of the clock in the
afternoon we came to the river of Palamxitan, where a Tartar Captain,
accompanied with an hundred horse, came to receive us, having waited there two
days for that purpose; The first thing that he did, was the delivering of a
letter from the King to our General, who received it with a great deal of
ceremony; From this river to the Kings quarter, which might be some two
leagues, the Army marched without order, as being unable to do otherwise,
partly as well in regard of the great concourse of people, wherewith the ways
were full incoming to see the Generals arrival, as for the great train which
the Lords brought along with them, that overspread all the fields; In this
order, or rather disorder, we arrived at the Castle of Lautir, which was the
first Fort of, nine that the Camp had for the retreat of the Spies, there we
found a young Prince, whom the Tartar had sent thither to accompany the
General, who alighting from his horse, took his Scymitar from his side, and on
his knees offered it unto him, after he had kissed the ground five times, being
the ceremony or compliment ordinarily used amongst them; The Prince was
exceedingly pleased with this honor done unto him, which with a smiling
countenance, and much acknowledgment of words he testified unto him; This past,
the Prince with a new ceremony stepped two or three paces back, and lifting up
his voice with more gravity then before, as he that represented the Person of
the King, in whose name he came, said unto him, He, the border of whose rich
vesture my mouth kisseth, and that out of an incredible greatness mastereth the
Scepters of the earth, and of the Isles of the Sea, sends thee word by me, who
am his slave, that thy honorable arrival is no less agreeable unto him, then
the Summers sweet morning is to the ground, when as the dew does comfort and
refresh our bodies, and therefore would have thee without further delay to come
and hear his voice mounted on his horse, whose trappings are garnished with
jewels taken out of his Treasury, to the end, that riding by my side, thou
may be made equal in honor to the greatest of his Court, and that they
which behold thee marching in this sort, may acknowledge that the right hand of
him is mighty and valiant unto whom the labors of war gives this recompense.
Hereupon the Mitaquer prostrating himself on the earth, with his hands lifted
up, answered him thus, Let my head be an hundred times trampled on by the sole
of his feet, that all those of my race may be sensible of so great a favor,
and that my eldest Son may ever carry it for a mark of honor. Then mounting on
the horse, which the Prince had given him, trapped with gold and precious
stones, being one of those that the King used to ride on himself, they marched
on with a great deal of State and Majesty. In this pomp were many spare horses
led richly harnessed; there were also a number of Ushers, carrying silver Maces
on their shoulders, and six hundred Halberdiers on horsback, together with
fifteen Chariots, full of silver Cymbals, and many other ill tuned barbarous
instruments, that made so great a din, as it was not possible to hear one
another. Moreover in all this distance of way, which was a league and an half,
there were so many men on horsback, as one could hardly pass through the crowd
in any part thereof. The Mitaquer being thus in triumph arrived at the first
trenches of the Camp, he sent us by one of his Servants to his quarter, where
we were very well received, and abundantly furnished with all things necessary
for us.

Fourteen days after we arrived at ^his Camp, the Mitaquer, our General,. 2
sent for us to his Tent, where in the presence of some of his Gentlemen, he
said unto us; To morrow morning about this time be you ready, that I may make
good my word unto you, which is to let you see the face of him, whom we hold
for our Sovereign Lord, a grace that is done you out of a particular respect to
me; And this his Majesty does not only grant unto you, but your liberty also,
which I have obtained of him for you, and which in truth I am no less glad of,
then of the taking of Mixiancoo, the particulars whereof you may relate unto
him, if you come to be so happy as to be questioned by him about it. Withal I
assure you that I shall take it for a great satisfaction, if when you shall
return into your Country, you will remember that I have kept my word with you,
and that therein I have showed my self so punctual, as it may be I would not
for that consideration demand of the King some other thing more profitable for
me, that you may know this was that which I only desired: Also the King has
done me the honor to grant it me presently, and that with such exceeding
demonstration of favor, as I must confess I am thereby more obliged unto you,
then you are to me. Having spoken thus unto as we prostrated our selves upon
the ground, and in this sort answered him. My Lord, the good which you have
pleased to do us is so great, that to go about to thank you with words (as the
world uses to do) in the state we now are in, would rather be an ingratitude,
then a true and due acknowledgment; so that we think it better to pass it by in
silence within the secret of that soul which God has put into us; And
therefore since our tongues are of no use to us herein, and that they cannot
frame words, capable to satisfy so great an obligation, as this is, wherein
all of us stand for ever so infinitely engaged unto you, we must with continual
tears and sighs beg of the Lord which made Heaven and earth, that he will
reward you for it; for it is he that out of his infinite mercy and goodness,
has taken upon him to pay that for the poor, which they of themselves are not
able to discharge; It is he then, that will thoroughly recompense you and your
children for this good office you have done us, and whereby you merit to have a
share in his promises, and to live long and happily in this world. Amongst
those which accompanied the Mitaquer at that time, there was one named
Bonquinuda, a man in years, and of the principalest Lords of the Kingdom, who
in this Army commanded over the strangers and Rhinocerots, that served for the
Guard of the Camp; This same, unto whom more respect was born then to all the
rest that were present, had no sooner heard our answer, but lifting up his eyes
to Heaven he said, O! who could be so happy, as to be able to ask of God the
explication of so high a secret, whereunto the weakness of our poor
understanding cannot arrive; for I would fain know from whence it comes, that
he permits people so for esloigned from the knowledge ^f our truth, to answer
on the sudden in terms so agreeable to our ears, that I dare well say, nay, I
will venture my head on it, that concerning things of God, and Heaven, they
know more sleeping, then we do broad awake, whence it may be inferred that
there are Priests amongst them that understand the course of the Stars, and the
motions of the Heavens, far better then o^^ Bonzes of the house of Lechuna.
Whereupon all that were about him answered, Your Greatness has so much reason
for it, that we were obliged to behold it as an Article of our faith, wherefore
we think it were fit, that these strangers should not be suffered to go out of
our Country, where, as our Masters and Doctors, they might teach us such things
they know of the world. That which you advise, replied the Mitaquer, is not
much amiss, and yet the King would never permit it for all the treasures of
China, because if he should, he would then violate the truth of his word, and
so lose all the reputation of his greatness, wherefore you must excuse me if I
do not propound things unto him that cannot be; whereupon turning himself
toward us, Go, get you gone, said he unto us, and to morrow morning fail not
to be ready for to come again when I shall send for you. These words
exceedingly contented us, as there was great cause they should; and accordingly
the next day he sent us nine horses very well furnished, upon which we mounted,
and so went to his Tent; He in the mean time had put himself into a Piambre
(that is somewhat like to a Litter) drawn with two horses richly harnessed;
round about him for his Guard marched threescore Halberdiers, six pages
apparelled in his Livery mounted on white Curtals, and we nine on horsback a
little more behind. In this manner he went on toward the place where the King
was, whom he ^ound lodged in the great and sumptuous Edifice of the Goddess
Nacapirau, by the Chinese called the Queen of Heaven, whereof I have spoken at
large in the thirty ^ourth Chapter. Being arrived at the first trenches of the
Kings Tent, he alighted out of his Litter, and all the rest likewise off from
their horses, for to speak to the Nautaran, of whom with a ki^d of ceremony,
after the fashion of the Gentiles, he craved leave to enter, which was
presently granted him. Thereupon the Mitaqu^r being returned into his Litter,
passed through the gates in the same manner as before, only, we and the rest of
his followers waited upon him on foot. When he came to a low and very long
Gallery, where there was a great number of Gentlemen, he alighted again out of
his Litter, and told us that we were to attend him there, for that he would go
and know whether it were a fit time to speak with the King, or no. We stayed
there then about an hour, during the which some of the Gentlemen that were in
the Gallery observing us to be strangers, and such kind of people as they had
never seen the like, they called us, and very courteously bid us to sit down by
them, where having spent some time in beholding certain tumbl^^s showing ^eats
of activity, we perceived the Mitaquer coming forth with four very beautiful
boys, attired in long coats after the Turkish fashion* guarded all over with
green and white, and wearing about the small of their legs little hoops of gold
in the fo^m of irons and shackle^. The Gentlemen that were p^esent, as soon as
they saw them rose up on their feet, and drawing out their Cour^elasses, which
they wore by their sides, they laid them on the ground with a new kind of
ceremony, saying three times, Let the Lord of our heads live an hundred
thousand years. In the mean while as ^e lay with our heads bending to the
ground, one of those boys said aloud unto us; You men of the other end of the
world, rejoice now, for that the hour is come, wherein your desire is to be
accomplished, and that you are to have the liberty, which the Mitaquer promised
you at the Castle of Nixiamcoo, wherefore arise from off the earth, and lift up
your hands to Heaven, rendering thanks unto the Lord, who during the night of
our peaceable rest, enammels the Firmament with Stars, seeing that of himself
alone, without the merit of any flesh, he has made you to encounter in your
exile with a man that delivers your persons. To this Speech, prostrated as we
were on the ground, we returned him this answer by our truch-man, May Heavens
grant us so much happiness, as that his foot may trample on our heads;
whereunto he replied, Your wish is not small, and may it please God to accord
you this gift of riches.

. 3.
These four boys, and the Mitaquer, whom we followed, past through a Gallery,
erected upon five and twenty p^llars of br^ss, and entered into a great room,
where there were a number of Gentlemen, and amongst them many strangers,
Mogores, Persians, Bordies, Calami^hams, and Bramaas. After we were out of this
room, we came unto another, where there were many armed men, ranged into five
Files all along the room, with Courtelasses on their shoulders, that were
garnished with gold. T^ese stayed the Mitaquer a little, and with great
complements asked him some questions, and took his oath upon the Maces the boys
carried, which he performed on his knees, kissing the ground three several
times, whereupon he was admitted to pass on into a great place, like a
quadrangle; there we saw four ranks of Statues of brass, in the form of wild
men, with clubs and crow^s of the same metal guilt: These Idols or Giants,
were each of them six and twenty spans high, and six broad, as well on the
bre^t, as on the shoulders; their countenances were hideous and deformed, and
their hair curled like to Negroes. The desire we had to know what these figures
signified, made us to demand it of the Tartars, who answered us, that they were
the three hundred and threescore gods, which framed the days of the year, being
placed there expressly, to the end that in their effigies they might be
continually adored, ^or having created the fruits which the earth produces;
and withal that the King of Tartary had caused them to be transported thither
from a great Temple, called Angicamoy, which he had taken in the City of
Xipaton, out of the Chapel of the Tombs of the Kings of China, for to triumph
over them, when as he should happily return into his Country, that the whole
world might know how in despite of the King of China he had captivated his
gods. Within this place, whereof I speak, and amidst a plantation of
Orange Trees, that was environed within a fence of Ivy, Roses, Rosemary, and
many other sort of flowers, which we have not in Europe, was a Tent pi^ched
upon twelve Ballisters of the wood of Champhire, each of them wreathed about
with silver in the fashion of knotted card-work, bigger then ones arm. In this
Tent was a low Throne in the form of an Altar, garnished with branched work of
fine gold, and over it was a cloth of State, set thick with silver Stars; where
also the Sun and Moon were to be seen, as also certain clouds, some of them
white, and others of the color of which appear in the time of rain, all
enammelled so to the life, and with such art, that they beguiled all those that
b^held them, for they seemed to rain indeed, so as it was impossible to see a
thing more complete, either for the proportions or colors. In the midst of
this Throne upon a bed lay a great Statue of silver called Abicau Nilancor,
which signifies, the God of the health of Kings, that had been also taken in
the Temple of Angicamoy. Now round about the same Statue were four and thirty
Idols of the height of a child of five or six years old, ranged in two Files,
and set on the^r knees, with their hands lifted up toward this Idol, as if
they would adore him. At the entry into this Tent there were four young
Gentlemen richly clad, who with each of them a Cen^er in his hand, went two and
two about, then at the sound of a bell prostrated themselves on the ground, and
censed one another, saying with a loud voice, Let our cry come unto thee as a
sweet perfume, to the end thou may hear us. For the Guard of of this Tent,
there were three^core Halberdiers, who at a little distance environed it all
about. They were clothed with guilt leather, and had Murrians on their heads
curiously engraven; all which were very agreeable and majestical objects. Out
of this place we entered into another division, where there were four Chambers
very rich and well furnished, in the which were many Gentlemen, as well
strangers as Tartars. From thence passing on whith^r the Mitaquer, and the
young boys conducted us, we arrived at the door of a great ^ow room, in form
like to a Church, where stood six Ushers with their Maces, who with a new
complement to the Mitaquer caused us ^o ^nter, but kept out all others. In this
room was the King of Tartaria, accompanied with many Princes, Lords, and
Captains, amongst whom were the Kings of Pafua, Mecuy, Capinper Raina Benan,
Anchesacotay, and others to the number of fourteen, who in rich attire were all
seated some three or four paces from the foot of the Tribunal. A little more on
the one side were two and thirty very fair women, who playing upon diverse
instruments of music, made a wonderful sweet Consort. The King was set on his
Throne under a rich Cloth of State, and had about him twelve young b^ys
kneeling on their knees, with little Maces of gold like Scepters, which they
carried on their shoulders; close behind him was a young Lady extremely
beautiful, and wonderfully richly attired, with a Ventiloe in her hand,
wherewith she ever and anon fanned him. This same was the sister of the
Mitaquer our General, and infinitely beloved of the King, for whose sake
therefore it was that he was in such credit and reputation throughout the whole
Army: The King was much about forty years of age, full stature, somewhat ^^an
and of a good aspect; His beard was very short, his Mustaches after the Turkish
manner, his eyes like to the Chinese, and his countenance severe and
majestical; As for his vesture, it was violet color, in fashion like to a
Turkish Roak imbroydered with pearl, upon his feet he had green Sandals wrought
all over with gold pearl, and great purls among it, and on his head a satin
cap of the color of his habit, with a rich band of diamonds and rubies
intermingled together: Before we past any farther, after we had gone ten or
eleven steps in the room, we made our complement by kissing of the ground three
several times, and performing other ceremonies, which the Truch-men taught us:
In the mean time the King commanded the music to cease, and addressing himself
to the Mitaquer; Ask these men of the other end of the world said he unto him,
whether they have a King, what is the name of their Country, and how far
distant it is from this Kingdom of China where now I am? Thereupon one of ours
speaking for all the rest, answered; That our Country was called Portugal, that
the King thereof was exceeding rich and mighty, and that from thence to the
City of Pequin was at the le^st three years voyage. This answer much amazed the
King, because he did not think the world had been so large, so that striking
his thigh with a wand that he had in his hand, and lifting up his eyes to
Heaven, as though he would render thanks unto God; he said aloud, so as every
one might hear him: O Creator of all things; are we able to comprehend the
marvels of thy grea^ness, we that at the best are but poor worms of the earth?
Fuxiquidane, fuxiquidane, let them approach, let them approach. Thereupon
beckening to us with his hand, he caused us to come even to the first degree of
the Throne, where the fourteen Kings sat, and demanded of him again, as a man
astonished, Pucau, pucau, that is to say, how far, how far? whereunto he
answered as before, that we should be at least three years in returning to our
Country. Then he asked why we came not rather by Land, then by Sea, where so
many labors and dangers were to be undergon? Thereunto he replied, that there
was too great an extent of land, through which we were not ^ssured to pass, for
that it was commanded by Kings of several nations. What come you to seek for
then, added the King, and wherefore do you expose your selves to such dangers?
Then having rendered him a reason to this last demand with all the submission
that might be, he stayed a pretty while without speaking, and then shaking his
head three or four times, he addressed himself to an old man that was not far
from him, and said, Certainly we must needs conclude, that there is either much
ambition, or little justice in the Country of these people, seeing they come so
far to conquer other Lands. To this Speech the old man, named Raia Benan, made
no other answer but that it must ^eeds be so, for men, said he, who have
recourse unto their industry and invention to run over the Sea for to get that
which God has not given them, are necessarily carried thereunto, either by
extreme poverty, or by an excess of blindness and vanity, derived from much
covetousness, which is the cause why they renounce God, and those that brought
them into the world. This reply of the old man was seconded with many jeering
words by the other Courtiers, who made great sport upon this occasion, that
very much pleased the King, in the mean time the women fell to their music
again, and so continued, till the King withdrew into another Chamber in the
company of these fair Musicians, and that young Lady which fanned him, not so
much as one of those great Personages, daring to enter besides: Not long after
one of those twelve boys, that carried the Scepters before mentioned, came to
the Mitaquer, and told him from his sister, that the King commanded him not to
depart away, which he held for a singular favor, by reason this message was
delivered to him in the presence of those Kings and Lords that were in the
room, so that he stirred not, but sent us word, that we should go unto out tent
with this assurance, that he would take care the Son of the Sun should be
mindful of us.

CHAP. XL. The King of Tartaria's raising of his Siege from before Pequin, for
to return into his Country, and that which passed until his Arrival there.
. 1.
WE had been now full three and forty days in this Camp, during which time
there past many fights and skirmishes between the besiegers and the besieged,
as also two assaults in the open day which were resisted by them within with an
invincible courage like resolute men as they were; In the mean time the King of
Tartaria, seeing how contrary to his hope so great an enterprise had been,
wherein h^ had consumed so much treasure, caused his Council of War to be
assembled, in the which were present the seven and twenty Kings that
accompanied him, and likewise many Princes, and Lords, and the most part of the
chief Commanders of the Army: In this Council it was resolved, that in regard
Winter was at hand, and that the rivers had already overflowed their banks with
such force and violence, as they had ravaged and carried away m^st of the
Trenches and Pallisadoes of the Camp, and that moreover great numbers of the
soldiers died daily of sickness, and for want of victuals, that therefore the
King could not do better then to raise his Siege, and be gone before Winter
came, for fear lest staying longer, he should run the hazard of losing himself,
and his Army: All these reasons seemed so good to the King, that without
further delay he resolved to follow this counsel, and to obey the present
necessity, though it were to his great grief. so that incontinently he caused
all his Infantry and Ammunition to be imbarqued, then having commanded his Camp
to be set on fire, he himself went away by Land with three hundred thousand
Horse, and twenty thousand Rhinocerots: Now after they had taken an account of
all the dead, they appeared to be four hundred and fifty thousand, the most of
whom died of sickness, as also an hundred thousand Horses, and threescore
thousand Rhinocerots, which were eaten in the space of two months and an half,
wherein they wanted victual, so that of eighteen hundred thousand men wherewith
the King of Tartaria came out of his Country to besiege the City of Pequin,
before the which he lay six months and an half, he carried home some seven
hundred and fifty thousand less then he brought forth, whereof four and fifty
thousand died of sickness, famine, and war, and three hundred thousand went and
rendered themselves unto the Chinese, drawn thereunto by the great pay which
they gave them,, and other advantages of honor and presents which they
continually bestowed on them; whereat we are not to marvel, seeing experience
does show, how that alone is of far more power to oblige men, then all other
things in the world. After the King of Tartaria was gone from this City of
Pequin, upon a Monday, the seven^eenth of October, with three hundred thousand
horse, as I have related before, the same day about evening he went and lodged
near to a river, called Quaytragun, and the next morning an hour before day the
A^my began to m^rch at the sound of the Drums, Fifes, and other instruments of
war, ac^ord^ng to the order prescribed them; In this manner he arrived a little
before night at a Town, named Guiiamp^a, which he found altogether depopulated:
After his Army had reposed thereabout an hour and an half, he set forth again,
and marching somewhat fast he came to lodge at the foot of a great mountain,
called Liampeu, from whence he departed toward morning. Thus marched he eight
leagues a day for fourteen days together, at the end whereof he arrived at a
good Town, named Guauxitim, which might contain about eleven or twelve thousand
fires; There he was counseled to furnish himself with victuals, whereof he had
great need, for which purpose therefore he begirt it round, and skali^g it in
the open day, he q^ickly m^de himself Master of it, and put it to the sack with
so cruel a Massacre of the inhabitants, as my fellows and I were ready to
swoond for very astonishment: Now after that the wood and fire had consumed all
things, and that the Army was abundantly provided of ammunition and victual, he
dep^rted at the break of day; and though he past the next morning in the view
of Caixiloo, yet would not he attaque it* for that it was a great and strong
Town, and by situation impregnable, having heard besides that there were fifty
thousand men within it, whereof ten thousand were Mogors, Cauchins, and
Champaas, resolute soldiers, and much more warlike then the Chinese. From
thence passing on he arrived at the walls of Singrachirau, which are the very
same, that, as I have said heretofore, do divide those two Empires of China and
Tartaria; There meeting with no resistance he went an^ lodged on the further
side of it at Panquinor, which was the first of his own Towns, and s^ated some
three leagues from the said wall, and the next day he marched to Psipator,
where he dismissed the most part of his people. In this place he stayed not
above seven days, which he spent in providing pay for his soldiers, and in the
execution of certain prisoners he had taken in that war, and brought along with
him: These things thus expedited, he, as a man not very well pleased, imbarqued
himself for Lanc^me, in sixscore Lanlees, with no more then ten or eleven
thousand men: So in six days after his imbarquing, he arrived at Lancame,
where not permitting any reception to be made him he landed about two hours
within night.

The King abode in this City of Lancame until such time as all his forces, as
well horse as foot,. 2
were arrived there, which was within six and twenty days, then having all his
Army together, he went on to another City far greater and fairer, called
Tuymicoa, where he was visit^d by some Princes his Neighbors, and hy the
Ambassadors of many other Kings and Sovereigns of more remoter Countries, of
which the chiefest were six great and mighty Monarchs, namely Xataanas the
Sophy of Persia; Siamon Emperor of the Gueos, whose Country borders on that of
Bramaa, and Tanguu; the Calami^ham, Lord of the indomptable force of the
Elephant of the Earth, as I shall deliver hereafter, when I come to treat of
him and his State; the Sourna^ of Odiaa, that names himself the King of Siam,
whose dominion r^ns seven hundred leagues along the coast with that of
Tanauserin, and on Champaa side with the Malayos, Berdios, and Patanes, and
through the heart of the Country with Passioloqua, Capioper, and Chiammay, as
also with the Lauhos, and Gueos, so that this Prince alone has seventeen
Kingdoms within his State, by reason whereof, for to make himself the more
redoubted amongst the Gentiles, he causes himself to be styled, The Lord of
the white Elephant; the fifth was the great Mogor, whose State is within the
heart of the Country, near to the Corazones, a Province bordering upon Persiu,
and the Kingdom of Dely, and Chitor; and the last an Emperor of a Country,
named Caran, as we were informed there, the bounds of whose Sovereignty are at
the Mountains of Goncalidau* sixty degrees further on, where a certain people
live, whom they of the Country call Moscovites, whereof we have some in this
City, which were fair of complexion, well shapen, and apparelled with
Breeches, Cassocks, and Hats, like to the Flemings which we see in Europe, the
chiefest of them wearing Gowns lined with Sables, and the rest with ordinary
furs. The Ambassador of this Emperor of Caran, was more remarkable in his
entry, then all the rest: He had for his Guard about sixscore men, armed with
^^rows, and Partisans damasked with gold and silver, and all attired alike in
violet and green; After them marched on horsback twelve Ushers, carrying silver
Maces, before whom twelve horses were led, that had carnation clothes on them,
bordered about with gold and silver; They were followed by twelve huge tall
men, that seemed to be Giants, clothed with Tigers skins as wild men are used
to be painted of them holding in his hand a great Greyhound by a silver chain;
Then appeared twelve little Pages, mounted on white Ha^kneys, having green
velvet Saddles, trimmed with silver lace and frenge, they were all apparelled
alike in crimson satin Cassocks, lined with marterns, breeches, and hats of
the same, and great chains of gold scarf-wise about them; These twelve boys
were all of one equal stature, so fair of face, so well favored, and of so
sweet a proportion of body, as I believe there have never been any seen more
accomplished: For himself, he was seated in a Chariot with three wheels on each
side, garnished all over with silver; Round about this Pirange, (for so was
this Chariot called) there were forty footmen in jerk^ns, and breeches of
green and red cloth, laced all over with carnation silk lace, having swords by
their side above three fingers b^oad, with the hilts, handles, and chaps of
silver, and hunting horns hanging in silver chains, bandrick-wise about them,
and on their heads they wore caps, with feath^rs in them full of silver
spangles: Thus was the equipage of this Ambassador so sumptuous and stately,
that one might very well conclude he belonged to some very rich and mighty
Prince. Now going one day as attendants on the Mitaqu^r, who went to visit him
from the King, amongst other things that we saw in his lodging, we observed
there for one of the greatest rarities in that Country, five Chambers hung all
with very rich Arras, such as we have in Christendom; and no question brought
from thence: In each of these Chambers was a Cloth of State of gold or silver
tinsel, and under it a Table with a Basin and Ewer of silver of a very costly
fashion; also a Chair of State of rich violet stuff trimmed with gold frenge,
and at the foot of it a Cushion of the same, all upon an exceeding large
foot-pace of tapestry; There was also a cha^ingdish of silver, with a perfuming
pot of the same, out of the which proceeded a most delicate odor; At the door
of each of those five Chambers stood two Halberdiers, who permitted persons of
quality to enter that came thither to see them; In another very great room in
form like to a Gallery, there was upon a very high and large foot-pace a little
table placed, covered with a damask table-cloth, edged about with gold-frenge,
and upon a silver plate a napkin with a fork and a spoon of gold, as also two
little salt-sellers of the same metal: Now about ten or eleven paces on the
one side from this table were two cupbards of plate of all kind of fashions,
and other vessels of great value; Moreover at the four corners of this table
were four cisterns about the bigness of a bushel, with their kettels fastened
to them with chains all of silver, as also two very great candlesticks of the
same with white wax candles in them but not lighted; There were also at the
door of the room twelve handsome Halberdiers, clothed in mantles like to Irish
rug, with Scymitars by their sides, all covered over with plates of silver,
which Guard (as ordinarily it is with them) were very haughty and rude in their
answers to all that speak to them. Although this Ambassador was come thither
in the way of visit as the r^st, yet the principal subject of his Ambassy was
to treat of a marriage between the Emperor of Caran, and a sister of the
Tartar, named Meica vidau, that is to say, a rich Saphir, a Lady about some
thirty years of age, but very handsome, and exceeding charitable to the poor,
whom we saw diverse times in this City at the chiefest Feasts, which these
people use to solemnize at certain times of the year, after the manner of the
Gentiles. Howbeit setting aside all this, whereof I had not spoken but that it
seemed more remarkable unto me then all the rest, I will return to my former
discourse, as well concerning our liberty, as the voyage that we made even to
the Islands of the Sea of China, whether the Emperor of Tartaria caused us to
be conveyed, to the end that such as shall come after us may attain to the
knowledge of a part of those things, whereof it may be they have never heard
spoken until this present.

CHAP. XLI. In what manner we were brought again before the King of Tartaria;
with our departure from that Kingdom; and all that we saw, and befell us in our
voyage, till our arrival at the Court of the King of Cauchinchina.
. 1.
AFter some time had been spent in the Celebrations of certain remarkable
Feasts, that were made for joy of the conclusion of a marriage betwixt the
Princess Meica vidau, the Kings sister, and the Emperor of Caran, the Tar^ar
by the advice of his Captains resolved to return anew to the Siege of Pequin,
which he had formerly quitted, taking the ill success that he had there as a
great affront to his person; To this effect then he caused all the Estates of
his Kingdom to be assembled, and also made a league with all the Kings and
Princes bordering in his Dominions: whereupon considering with our selves how
prejudicial this might prove to the promise had been made us for the setting of
us at liberty, we repaired to the Mitaquer, and represented unto him many
things that made for our purpose, and obliged him to keep his word with us; To
the which he returned us this answer: Certainly you have a great deal of reason
for that you say, and I have yet more not to refuse you that which you demand
of me with so much justice; wherefore I resolve to put the King in mind of you,
that you may enjoy your liberty, and the sooner you shall be gone from hence,
the sooner you shall be freed from the labors which the time begins to prepare
for us in the enterprise that his Majesty has newly undertaken by the counsel
of some particulars, who for that they know not how to govern themselves have
more need to be counseled, then the earth has need of water to produce the
fruits that are sowed in her; but to morrow morning I shall put the King in
mind of you, and your poverty, and withal I shall p^esent unto him how you
have poor fatherless child ren, as you have heretofore told me, to the end he
may be thereby inc^ted to cast his eyes upon you, as he is accustomed to do in
like cases, which is none of the least marks of his greatness. Hereupon he
dismissed us for that day, and the next morning he went to Pontiveu, which is a
place where the King uses to give audience to all such as have any suit to
him; There beseeching his Majesty to think of us, he answered him, that as soon
as he dispatched away an Ambassador to the King of Cauchenchina, he would send
us along with him, for so he had resolved to do: With this answer the Mitaquer
returned to his house, where we were ready attending his coming, and told us
what the King had promised him, wherewithal not a little contented we went back
to our lodging; There in the expectation of the good success of this promise we
continued ten days with some impatience, at the end whereof the Mitaquer by the
Kings express command carried us with him to the Court, where causing us to
approach near to his Majesty, with those ceremonies of greatness which are
observed in coming before him, being the same we used at Pequin, after he had
beheld us with a gentle eye, he bid the Mitaquer ask of us whether we would
serve him, and in case we would, he should not only be very well pleased with
it, but he would also give us better entertainment, and more advantageous
conditions then all the strangers that should follow him in this war. To this
demand the Mitaquer answered very favorably for us, how he had often heard us
say, that we were married in our Country* and had a great charge of children,
who had no other means to maintain them, but what we got with our labor, which
was poorly enough God knows: The King heard this speech with some demonstration
of pity, so that looking on the Mitaquer; I am glad, said he, to know that they
have such good cause to return home as they speak of, that I may with the more
contentmant acquit me of that which thou have promised them in my name. At
these words the Mitaquer, and all we that were with him, lifting up our hands,
^s to a testimony of our thankfulness unto him, we kissed the ground three
times, and said, May thy feet rest themselves upon a thousand generations, to
the end that thou may be Lord of the inhabitants of the earth. Hereat the
King began to smile, and said to a Prince that was near him, These men speak as
if they had been bred amongst us; Then casting his eyes on Iorge Mendez, who
stood before all us next to the Mitaquer, And thou, said he unto him, in what
condition art thou, will thou go, or stay? whereupon Mendez, who had long
before premeditated his answer, Sir, replied he, for me, that have neither
wife, nor children to bewail my absence, the thing I most desire in the world
is to serve your Majesty, since you are pleased therewith, whereunto I have
more affection then to be Cha^m of Pequim one thousand years together. At this
the King smiled again, and then dismissed us, so that we returned very well
satisfied to our lodging, where we continued three days in a readiness to
depart, at the end of which by the mediation of the Mitaquer, and means of his
sister, who, as I have said before, was wonderfully beloved of the King, his
Majesty sent us for the eight that we were two thousand Taeis, and gave us in
charge to his Ambassador, whom he sent to the City of Vzamguee in
Cauchenchina, in the company of the same King of Cauchenchina's Ambassador:
With him we departed from thence five days after, being imbarqued in the vessel
wherein he went himself: But before our departure Iorge Mendez gave us a
thousand Ducats, which was easy for him to do, for that he had already six
thousand of yearly rent, withal he kept us company all that day, and at length
took his leave of us, not without shedding many a tear for grief that he had so
exposed himself to a voluntary exile.

. 2
Being departed from this City of Tuymican on the ninth day of May, in the year
one thousand, five hundred, forty and four, we came to lodge that night at a
University in a Pagode called Guatipanior, where the two Ambassadors were very
well entertained by the Tuyxivau of the house, which is as the Rector thereof,
and the next morning when it was broad day, both of them continued their course
down the river, each one in his own ship; besides other two wherein their stuff
was; About two hours in the night we arrived at a little Town, named Puxanguim,
well fortified with Towers and bulwarks after our manner, as also with very
broad ditches, and strong bridges of hewed stone; there was likewise great
store of Artillery, or Cannons of wood, made like unto the pumps of ships,
behind the which they put boxes of iron, that held their charge, and were
fastened unto them with iron bands; as for the bullets which they shot, they
were like unto those of Falconets, and half black: Being much amazed to see
this, we demanded of the Ambassador who it was that had invented those kind of
guns? whereunto they answered, that it was certain men, called Almains, and of
a Country named Muscovy, who by a very great lake of salt water, came down to
this Town in nine vessels rowed with oars, in the company of a widow woman,
Lady of a place, called Gaytor, who they said was chased out of her Country by
a King of Denmark, so that flying for refuge with three sons of her, the great
Grandfather of this King of Tartaria made them all great Lords, and gave them
certain kinswoman of his in marriage, from whom are extracted the chiefest
families of this Empire. The next morning we parted from this Town, and that
night lay at another more nobler, named Euxcau: Five days after we continued
our voyage down this river, and then we arrived at a great Temple, called
Singuafatur, where we saw an enclosure of above a league in circuit, in which
were builded an hundred, threescore, and four houses, very long and broad,
after the fashion of Arcenals, all full up to the very tyles of dead men's
heads, whereof there was so great a number, that I am afraid to speak it, for
that it will hardly be credited. Without each of these houses were also great
piles of the bones of these heads, which were three fathom higher then the
ridges of them, so that the house seemed to be buried, no other part of them
appearing but the frontispiece where the gate stood; not far from thence upon a
little hill on the South Side of them was a kind of a platform, whereunto one
went up by certain winding-stairs of iron, and through four several doors; Upon
this platform was the tallest, the most deformed, and dreadful Monster that
possibly can be imagined, standing upon his feet, and leaning against a mighty
tower of hewed stone; he was made of cast iron, and of so great and prodigious
a stature, that by guess he seemed to be above thirty fathom high, and more
then six broad, notwithstanding the which deformity he was exceedingly well
proportioned in all his limbs, only his head was somewhat too little for so
great a body. This monster held in both his hands a bowl of the same iron,
being six and thirty spans about. Beholding so strange and monstrous a thing,
we demanded of the Tartar Ambassador the explication thereof, who willing to
satisfy our curiosity, If you knew, answered he, what the power of this God
is, and how needful it is for you to have him to friend, certainly you would
think it well employed if you presented him with all your means, how great
soever they might be, and give them to him rather then to your own children;
for you must know that this great Saint, which you see there, is the Treasurer
of the bones of all those that are born into the world, to the end that at the
last day, when men come to be born again he may give to every one the same
bones which he had upon earth, for he knows them all, and can tell in
particular to what body each of those bones belong: whereupon you are further
to understand, that he, who in this life shall be so unadvised as not to honor
him, nor present him with something, will be but in an ill case in the other
world, for this Saint will then give him some of the rottenest bones he can
meet withal, and one or two less then he should have, by means whereof he will
become deformed, lame, or crooked, and therefore if you will follow my counsel,
you shall make your selves of his fraternity, by offering something unto him,
and you will find by experience the good that will redound to you thereof
hereafter. We desired also to know of him what the bowl which this Monster
held in his hand, signified, whereunto he answered us, That he held it to fling
it at the head of the gluttonous Serpent, that lived in the profound Obism of
the house of smoke, when he should come thither to steal away any of those
bones. After this we enquired of him how this Monster was called, and he told
us that his name was, Pachinavau du beculem Prinaufaque, and that it was
threescore and fourteen thousand years since he was begotten on a Tortois,
called Migama, by a Seahorse, that was an hundred and thirty fathom long,
named Tybrem vucam, who had been King of the Giants of Fanius; he told us
likewise many other brutish fooleries and absurdities, which those of that
Country believe as their Creed, and wherewith the Devil precipitates them all
into hell; Moreover this Ambassador assured us, that the gifts which were
presented to this Idol, amounted to above two hundred thousand Taeis of yearly
rent, without comprising therein what came from Chapels, and other foundations
of obits from the principal Lords of the Country, the Revenue whereof was far
greater then that of the gifts; For a conclusion he told us, that this same
Idol had ordinarily twelve thousand priests attending on his service, who were
maintained with m^at, drink, and clothing, only to pray for the dead, that is
to say, for those unto whom these bones appertained; we were also assured, that
these priests never went out of this enclosure without the permission of their
Superiors, but that there was still without six hundred servants, who took
care for the providing of all things necessary for them; And further that it
was not lawful for these priests, save once a year, to break within this
enclosure the vow which they had made of chastity, but without the same they
might whore their pleasure with whomsoever they would, without committing any
sin; There was also a Serraglio there, wherein many women, appointed for that
purpose were shut up, whom their Governesses permitted to have to do with the
priests of this beastly and diabolical Sect.

Continuing our voyage from this Pagode, or Monastery of Gentiles, whereof we
have spoken, the next day we arrived at a very fair Town, called Quanginau,. 3
which stands on the bank of the river; In this place the Ambassadors stayed
three whole days for to furnish themselves with certain things they wanted, as
also for to see the feastings and joy that was made at that time upon the entry
of the Tal^picor of Echuna, which is their Pope, who was going then unto the
King for to comfort him about the ill success he had in China. Amongst other
graces, which this Tolapicor bestowed on the inhabitants of this Town, in
recompense of the charge they had been at for his reception, he granted unto
them, that they might be all Priests, and administer their sacrifices in what
places soever they were, and likewise that they might therefore receive the
same entertainment and gifts, that were accustomed to be given unto our
Priests, without any difference between them and those that upon examination
had been promoted to that dignity; Moreover he gave them power to grant Bills
of Exchange for Heaven unto all such as should do them good here b^low. To the
Ambassador of Cauchinchina he granted as a most singular favor, that he might
legitimate any that would pay him for it, and also confer on the Lords of the
Court titles, and marks of honor, as far forth as if he had been King, whereof
the foolish Ambassador was so proud, as setting aside covetousness, though it
were a vice he was naturally inclined unto, he employed all that ever he had
there in gifts upon those Priests, and besides not contented therewith, he for
that end borrowed of us the two thousand Taeis the King had given us, which
afterward he paid us again with interest after fifteen in the hundred. After
these matters the two Ambassadors resolved to continue their voyage, but before
their departure they went to visit the Talapicor in a Pagode where he was
lodged, for in regard of his greatness, and that he was held for a Saint, he
might not abide with any man, but with the King only. Now as soon as he
understood of the Ambassadors coming to him he sent them word not to go away
that day, because he was to preach at the Church of certain religious women of
the Invocation of Pontimaqueu; this they took for a great honor, and
incontinently went to the Pagode, where the Sermon was to be: At their arrival
they found such a concourse of people, that they were constrained to remove the
Pulpit to another very great place, which in less then an hour was environed
with Scaffolds, hung about with silk stuff, whereon the one side were the
Ladies, richly apparelled, and on the other the Princess, called Vanguenarau,
with all the Menigregues, or religious women of the Pagode, being in number
above three hundred. After the Talapicor was gone up into the Pulpit, and that
he had made an exterior show of much holiness, ever and anon lifting up his
hands and eyes to Heaven, he began his Sermon in this manner, Like as it is the
property of water to cleanse all things, and of the Sun to warm all creatures,
so it is the property of God through a celestial and divine nature to do good
unto all; wherefore we are all bound, as well in general and particular, to
imitate this our Lord, who has created, and does nourish us, by doing that
unto those, who stand in need of the good of this world, as we would that they
should do unto us, for that by this work we are more pleasing unto him, then by
any other whatsoever. For as the good Father of a Family rejoices to see his
children made much of, and presents given to them, so our Heavenly Lord, who is
the true Father of us all, rejoices at such time as with a zeal of charity we
communicate one with another; whereby it is evident, that the covetous man, who
shuts his hand, when the poor ask something of him which they want, constrained
thereunto by necessity, and that turns him another way without assisting them,
shall be treated in the same manner by a just judgment of God, and driven down
into the bottom of the sink of the night, where like a frog he shall croke
without ceasing, being tormented by the hunger of his covetousness: This being
so, I do advise and enjoin you all, since you have ears to hear me, that you do
that which the Law of the Lord obliges you to do, which is, that you give of
that whereof you have too much, to the poor, who have not wherewith to feed
themselves, to the end God may not be wanting to you when you shall be at the
last gasp of your life: Go to then, let this charity be so remarkable and
universal in you, that the very fowls of the air may taste of your liberality;
And this you ought to do to keep the poor, having need of what you possess in
excess, from being forced by their necessity to rob other men of their goods,
whereof you would be no less blameable, then if you killed an infant in the
cradle; I commend also unto your remembrance that which is written in the Book
of our truth, touching the good you are bound to do unto the Priests, that pray
for you, to the end they may not perish for want of the good you ought to do
unto them, which would be as great a sin before God, as if you should cut the
throat of a little white heifer when she is sucking of her Dam, by the death of
whom a thousand souls would die, which are buried in her as in a golden Tomb,
in expectation of the day, which is to accomplish the promise, that was made
unto them, wherein they shall be transformed into white pearls for to dance in
Heaven, like unto the moats which are in the beams of the Sun. Having uttered
these things, he added many others thereunto, and delivering a world of
extravagancies and fooleries, he bestirred himself in such manner, as was a
wonder to behold, so that we eight Portugals were exceedingly amazed at the
extreme devotion of these people, and how that in lifting up their hands to
Hands to Heaven, they ever and anon repeated this word Taiximida, that is to
say, So we believe; In the mean time one of our fellows, named Vincent Morosa,
hearing the auditors so often use that word Taiximida, said in imitation of
them, Such may thy life be; and that with such a grace, and so settled a
countenance, not seeming any way to jeer him, that not one in the Assembly
could forbear laughing: He in the mean while continued still firm, and more and
more confirmed, seeming even to weep out of an excess of devotion; Now his eyes
being always fixed on the Talapicor, he whenever he chanced to look on him
could not choose but do as the rest did, so that upon the conclusion of his
Sermon all that heard him fell to laughing outright: The Prioress her self,
and all the Menigregues of her Monastery could not contain themselves in their
serious humor, imagining that the faces which the Portugal made, and his
actions, were so many effects of his devotion, and good meaning; For if one had
thought it to be otherwise, and that he had not done it out of derision, no
question but he had been so chastised, as he should never have been able to
mock again. When the Sermon was ended, the Talapicor returned to the Pagod
where he lodged, being accompanied with the most honorable of all the
Assembly, together with the Ambassadors, unto whom all the way as he went he
ceased not to commend the devotion of the Portugal, Look, said he, there is not
so much as these people, who live like beasts, and without the knowledge of our
truth, but see well enough that there is nothing but what is godly in that I
have preached; whereunto all answered that it was as he said.

. 4
The day after we parted from the Town of Quanginau, and continued our voyage
down the river for the space of fourteen days, during the which we saw a
number of Towns, and great Boroughs on either side of us, at the end whereof we
arrived at a City, called Lechuna, the chiefest of the Religion of these
Gentiles, and such it may be, as Rome is amongst us. In this City was a very
sumptuous Temple, where there were many remarkable edifices, in the which seven
and twenty Kings or Emperors of this Monarchy of Tartaria have been buried.
Their Tomb^ are in Chapels, wonderful rich, as well for the excellency of
their workmanship, which is of an infinite cost, as for that they are within
covered all over with plates of silver, wherein there are diverse Idols of
different forms made also of silver. On the North side a little part from the
Temple was an enclosure worthy the observation, both for its extent, and the
fortification thereof; within it were two hundred and fourscore Monasteries, as
well of men, as of women, dedicated to certain Idols, and for the service of
all these Pagodes, or Temples there are ordinarily, as we were assured, two and
forty thousand Priests and Menigrepes, not comprising therein those which were
lodged without the enclosure for the service of these false priests. We
observed that in these two hundred and fourscore houses there was an infinite
company of pillars of brass, and upon the top of each pillar are idols of the
same m^ttal guilt, besides thos^ which l^kewise were there all of silver: These
Idols are the Statues of them, whom in their false Sect they hold for Saints,
and of whom they recount such fopperies, as would make a man wonder to hear
them; For they give unto each of them a Statue, more or less rich, and gilded,
according to the degrees of virtue which they have exercised in this life: And
this they do expressly, that the living may be incited to imitate them, to the
end there may be as much done unto them when they are dead. In one of these
Monasteries of the Invocation of Quiay Frigau, that is to say, The God of the
moats of the Sun, was a sister of the Kings, the widow of Rai^ Benan, Prince
of Pafua, whom the death of her husband had made resolve to shut her self up in
this Monastery, with six thousand women that had followed her thither, and she
had taken upon her, as the most honorable Title she could think on, the name
of, the broom of the House of God. The Ambassadors went to see this Lady, and
kissed her feet as a Saint; she received them very courteously, and demanded
many things of them with great discretion, whereunto they rendered such answers
as became them; but coming to cast her eye upon us, who stood somewhat far off,
and understanding that never any of our Nation was seen in those parts before,
she enquired of the Ambassadors of what Country we were? They answered, that we
were come from a place at the other end of the world, whereof no man there knew
the name. At those words she stood much amazed, and causing us to come nearer,
she questioned us about many things, whereof we gave her such an account as
greatly contented her, and all that were present; In the mean time the Princess
wondering at the answers, which one of ours made her, They speak, said she, like
men that have been brought up amongst people, who have seen more of the world
then we have. So after she had heard us talk a while of some matters, that she
had propounded unto us, she dismissed us with very good words, and caused an
hundred Taeis to be given us in way of an alms. The Ambassadors having taken
their leave of her, continued their voyage down along the river, so that at the
end of five days we arrived at a great Town, called Rendacal^m, situated on
the uttermost Confines of the Kingdom of Tartaria: Out of this place we entered
upon the State of the Xinal^ygrau, and therein we proceeded on four days
together, until such time as we came to a Town, named Voulem, where the
Ambassadors were very well entertained by the Lord of the Country, and
abundantly furnished with all things necessary for their voyage, as also with
Pilots to guide them in those rivers. From thence we pursued our course for
seven days together, during the which we saw not any thing worthy of note, and
at length came to a straight, called Caten^ur, whereinto the Pilots entered, as
well to abridge their voyage, as to avoid the encounter of a famous Pirot, who
had robbed those parts of most of their wealth. Through this straight running
East, as also East, North-east; and sometimes East, and by East, according to
the windings of the water we arrived at the Lake of Singapamor, called by them
of the Country Cunebetea, which was, as our Pilots affirmed, six and thirty
leagues in extent, where we saw so many several sorts of birds, that I am not
able to recount them. Out of this Lake of Singapamor (which as an admirable
Masterpiece nature has opened in the heart of this Country) do four very
large and deep rivers proceed, whereof the first is named Ventrau, that runs
Eastward through all the Kingdoms of Sorna^* and Siam, entering into the Sea by
the B^^ of Chiamtabuu, in six and twenty d^grees; The second, Iangumaa, that
going South, and South-east, traverseth also the greatest part of this Country,
as likewise the Kingdom of Chiammay, the Laos, Gueos, and another part of
Danbambur, disimboking into the Sea by the Bar of Martabano, in the K^ngdom of
Pegu, and there is in distance from the one to the other by the degrees of this
Climate, above seven hundred leagues; The third, called Pamphileu, passes in
the same manner through all the Countries of Capimper and Sacotay, and turning
above that second river runs quite through the Empire of Monginoco, and a part
of Meleytay, and Sovady, rendering it self into the Sea by the Bar of Cosmim,
near to Arraca^; The fourth, which in all likelihood is as great as the rest,
is not known by any name, neither could the Ambassadors give us any reason for
it: but it is probable, according to the opinion of diverse, that it is Ganges
in the Kingdom of Bengala, so that by all the discoveries which have been made
in these Oriental Countries it is conceived, that there is not a greater river
then it: Having crossed this Lake we continued our course for the space of
seven days, till we came to a place named Caleyputa, the inhabitants whereof
would by no means permit us to land, for the Ambassadors endeavoring to do so,
they entertained us with such store of darts and stones from the shore, as we
thought us not a little happy in that we could save our selves from the danger
of it. After we had gotten out of this place, much vexed with the bad entreaty
we had received there, that which most afflicted us was to s^t our selves
unprovided of things we were greatly in need of, but by the counsel of our
Pilots we sailed by another river far larger then the straight which we had
left, and that by the sp^ce of nine days, at the end whereof we arrived at a
very good Town, called Tarem, the Lord of which was subject to the Cauchin, who
received the Ambassadors with great Demonstrations of love, and furnished them
abundantly with all that they wanted. The next day we departed from thence
about Sur-set, and continuing our voyage down the river about seven days after
we came to an Anchor in the Port of Xolor, which is a very fair Town, where all
the enammelled purcelain, which is carried to China, is made. There the
Ambassadors stayed five days, during which time they caused their ships, that
were very heavy, to be haled ashore by the force of boats: That done, and
provision made of all things n^cessary, they went to see certain Mines, which
the King of Cauchin has in that place, from whence great store of silver is
drawn, and the Ambassadors being desirous to know how much silver those Mines
yielded every year, they were answer^d, that the whole amounted to some six
thousand Picos, which make eight thousand Quintals of our weight.

. 5.
After our departure from the Town of Xolor we still continued our course for
five days together down that great river, and saw all along that while a many
of great Bo^oughs, and goodly Towns; for in that Climate the Land is better
then other where, very well pe^pled, and full of riches; withal the rivers are
frequented with a world of vessels, and the fields very well tilled, and
replenished with abundance of wheat, rice, all kind of pulse, and exceeding
great Sugarcanes, whereof there is mavelous store in all that Country. The
Gentlemen there are ordinarily clothed in silk, and mounted on horses handsomely
furnish^d; as for the women, they are exceeding white and fair. Now it was not
without much labor, pain, and danger, that we passed those two Channels* as
also the river of Ventinau, by reason of the Pirates that usually are encountered
there, nevertheless we at the length arrived at the Town of Manaquileu, which
is situated at the foot of the Mountains of Chomay, upon the Frontiers of the
two Kingdoms of China, and Cauchenchina, where the Ambassadors were both well
received by the Governor thereof. The next morning departing from that place,
they went and lay in a Town, named Quinancaxi, which appertained to an Aunt of
the Kings, whom they went to visit; she gave them a very kind reception, and
withal told them for news, that the King her Nephew, was newly returned from
the War of the Tinocouhos, and wonderfu^ly well pleased with his good success
therein; whereunto she added many particularities, which they were glad to
hear, especially when she assured them, that the King, after he had dismissed
the forces that he had carried out with him, was gone with a small Train to the
City of Fanaugrem, where he intended to spend some time in hunting and fishing,
and then to go and winter at Vsamgue^, the capital City of this Empire of
Cauchim. When as they had consulted a while upon these news, they resolved to
send their four vessels away to Vsamguee, and themselves to trav^l by land to
Fanaugrem, where they understood the King was. This deliberation taken they put
incontinently into execution and that by the advice of this Princess, who for
that purpose caused them to be furnished with horses for themselves, and their
people, as also with eight Rhinocerots for the transportation of their baggage.
They began their journey then about three days after, and having trav^lled
fourscore and six leagues, in the space of thirteen days, and that with much
toil and labor, by reason of certain mountains which they were to pass, that
were of a long extent, and very rough and stony, in the end they arrived at a
great lodging, called Taraudachit, seat^d upon the bank of a river; There they
passed the night, and the next morning they parted thence for to go to a Town,
named Lindau Panoo, where they were very well received by the Captain thereof,
a kinsman of the Ambassadors of Cauchenchina; who was come not about six days
before from Fanaugrem, where the King remained still, being not more then
fifteen leagues from that place. After that this Cap^ain has told this
Ambassador his kinsman some other news of the Court, and of the success of the
war, he further advertised him that a Son in law of his was dead, for the love
of whom his daughter the wife of the deceased, had cast her self into a pile of
flaming fire, where with her husbands body she was consumed to ashes, at which
all her kindred exceedingly rejoiced, for that by so generous an end she had
given proof of what she had ever been. The Ambassador himself, her father,
testified also no little content for the same, saying; Now it is, O my
daughter, that I know assuredly thou art a Saint, and that thou servest thy
husband in Heaven, wherefore I promise and swear to thee, that for so memorable
an end, wherein thou have given an infallible proof of the Royal blood whereof
thou art descended, I will in memory of thy goodness ^uild thee such a
magnificent and honorable house, as shall make thee desi^^ to come from were
thou art, for to recreate thy self in it, in imitation of those blessed souls,
which we hold have heretofore done the like. This said, he fell fla^ down with
his face on the ground, and in that posture continued till the day following,
when as he was visited by all the religious men of the place, who comforted him
with full assurance that his daughter was a Saint, so that all of them granted
him permission to erect a Statue of silver unto her. These speeches of the
Priests greatly pleased the Ambassador, who very much acknowledged the same
unto them, giving money both to them, and to all the poor that were thereabout;
At this place we spent nine days in celebrating the Funerals of the Defunct,
and then departing we went the next day to a certain Monastery, called
Latiparau, that is to say, The remedy of the poor, where the two Ambassadors
remained three days in expectation of news from the King, whom they had already
advertised of their arrival; Now his answer to them was, that they should go to
a Town, named Agimpur, three leagues from the place where they were, and but
one from Fanaugrem, whither he would send for them when time served.

CHAP. XLII. The reception of the Tartarian Ambassador by the King of
Cauchenchina, with the said Kings going from thence to the City of Uzamguee,
and his triumphal Entry thereinto.
THe King being advertised by his Ambassador,. 1
that he brought another along with him from the King of Tartaria, sent for him
not long after from Agimpur by the Brother of the Queen his wife, a very
valiant and rich Prince: He was mounted on a Chariot with three wheels on a
side, adorned all within with plates of silver, and drawn by four white Horses,
whose furniture was all imbroidered with gold; This Chariot, which they of the
Country call Piamber, was waited on by threescore footmen, half on the one
side, and half on the other, clothed in green leather, with Scymiters by their
sides, whose Scabberds were garnished with gold, and before them went twelve
Ushers bearing their Maces on their shoulders; After the footmen followed
certain others carrying Halberts trimmed with silver, in gowns and breeches of
green and white silk, and with Scymiters by their sides; These fellows se^med
very haughty and proud, so that by their outward behaviors, which in all their
actions appeared to be like unto their surly dispositions, they rendered
themselves somewhat terrible to others; Thirty paces after this Guard marched
fourscore Elephants exceeding well furnished, with chairs and castles adorned
with silver which they carried on their backs, and on their teeth their
Panores, or warlick Defenses, together with many little bells of the same
metal hanging about their necks; Before these Elephants, which were said to be
the Kings Guard, rode a number of men at Arms in very good Equipage, and in the
Vantgard of all this train went twelve Chariots with Cymbals of silver, and
covered with silk. When this Prince was come in this stately manner to the
Ambassador of Tartaria, who attended him, and that they had performed all such
compliments one to another, as are usual amongst them, the Prince gave the
Ambassador the Chariot wherein he came thither, and mounting on a gallant
Courser, he placed himself on the right hand of him, and the Kings Ambassador
on the left: In this pomp, and with the same order as before, as also with the
sound of diverse instruments of music, they arrived at the first Court of the
Kings house, where the Broquem, Captain of the Guard of the Palace attended
them, being accompanied with many Noblemen, besides a number on horsback,
wh^^h stood ranked in two files all along the Court. After they had with a new
ceremony been complemented withal, they went on foot to the Pallace-gate,
where they encountered with an old man, above fourscore years of age, who was
said to be the Kings Uncle; This same, being waited upon by diverse great Lords,
was no sooner perceived by the Ambassadors, but with a new kind of complement
they kissed the Scymiter that hung by his side, whereupon he returned them the
like, together with an honor, which is of no little estimation amongst them,
that was to hold his hand upon their heads, so long as they were prostrated on
the ground before him. Then having caused the Tartar to rise, and to march even
check by jole with him, he led him through a very long Hall to a door which was
at the end thereof, where after he had knocked three times, one demanded of
him, who he was, and what he would have? whereunto answering very soberly, Here
is come, said he, out of an ancient custom of true amity, an Ambassador from
the great Xinarau of Tartaria, to demand audience of P^echau Guimian, whom we
all hold for the Lord of our heads. This answer being returned, the door was
opened, into which they presently entered; the Prince marched fore-most with the
Ambassador of Tartaria, whom de held by the hand, and a little behind them went
the other belonging to the King, with the Captain of the Guard, then followed
all the company by three and three. Having gone through that room, where there
was none but certain of the Guard on their knees with Halberds in their hands,
we went into another room far more spacious and fair then the former, in the
which we saw threescore and four Statues of brass, and nineteen of silver, all
tied by the neck with iron chains; At so extraordinary a thing as this being
much abashed, we demanded of one of their Grepes, or priests, the reason of it,
who answered us. That the Statues which we beheld there were the fourscore and
three gods of the Tinocouhos, whom the King in the late war had taken from them
out of a Temple, where they were placed; for, added he, there is nothing in the
world held in more esteem, or for a greater honor by the King, then to triumph
over the gods of his enemies, which he has led away captive in despite of
them* whereupon enquiring further of him, why they were set there, he replied,
that it was to have them in a readiness against the time that the King should
make his entry in^o Vzamguee, whither he purposed shortly to go, for to make a
show of them so chained in his triumph as a special mark of the victory he had
gained. After we were at the end of this room, where the Idols were, we entered
into another very great one, where we saw a number of very fair women, who were
set all along, some employed in curious needle-works, and others singing and
playing upon certain instruments of music, very pleasing to hear. Passing on
we arrived at the door of the Kings Chamber, where we found six women, which
were as it were porters there, and carried silver Maces; In this room was the
King, in the company of a few ancient men, and a great number of young women,
to the tune of whose music certain little girls sung very harmoniously: The
King was set on a Throne of eight ^teps high in the manner of an Altar, over
the which was a cloth of State supported by pillars, all covered over with gold
engraven; near to him were six little children upon their knees with Scepters
in their hands, and a little further off stood a woman reasonably well in
years, which fanned him ever and anon, and had a great Garland about her neck.
This Prince was about some five and thirty years of age, and of a goodly
presence: He had full eyes, auborn hair and beard, a grave look, and in all
points the countenance of a generous King. As soon as the Ambassadors came into
the room they prostrated themselves three times on the ground, and at the third
time the Kings lay still flat all along, whilst the Tartar passed on; who
being come near to the first step of the Throne where the King sat, he said
unto him with so loud a voice as all there present might hear him, O thou the
Prop of all the Forces of the Earth, and the breath of the High God which has
created all things, may the Majestical Being of thy greatness prosper for ever
and ever, so that thy Sandals may serve for hairs to the heads of Kings, making
thee like to the bones and flesh of the great Prince of the silver mountains,
by whose commandment I come to visit thee, as thou may perceive by this his
Letter sealed with his Royal arms. When he had made an end of speaking thus,
the Cauchin beholding him with a smiling countenance, May the Sun, answered he,
put a conformity between the desires of the King thy Master, and mine, and that
by the sweet heat of his amorous rays, to the end that the great amity, which
is betwixt us, may endure and continue firm till the last noise the Sea shall
make, that so the Lord may be eternally praised in his peace. At these words
all the Lords that were in the room answered with one voice, So grant it may be
O Lord Almighty, that give a being to the night and the day. Then the same
women, which played before, beginning their music again, the King used no
further speech, but only in kindly entertaining the Ambassador, I will, said
he, read my brother Xinarau's Letter, and return an answer thereunto according
to thy desire, to the end thou may go from me contented. The Ambassador made
him no reply, but prostrated himself again at the foot of the Royal Throne,
laying his head three times on the upp^rmost ^tep where the Kings feet stood.
That done the Captain of the Guard took him by the hand, and led him to his
house, where he lodged during the three days that he abode there, at the end
whereof the King departed thence for to go to Vzamguee.

. 2.
In regard of the Kings journey to Vzamguee, the Tartar Ambassador had audience
but once by the way, in the which he moved him about our particular, according
to the express commandment he had received from his M^ster for that purpose,
and it was said that the King heard him very willingly, answering, that he
would do what he desired, and therefore willed him to put him in mind of it,
when the time should serve, to the end we might not lose the opportunity of the
season for our voyage. With this good news the Ambassador acquainted us at his
return, and demanded of us for this good office he had done us, that we would
write him out some of those prayers which we made to our God, whose slave, he
said, he i^finitely desired to be, in regard of the great exc^llencies which he
had heard us deliver of him; This we not only granted him very readily, but
also gave him infinite thanks besides for this his great favor showed unto us,
which we made more account of then all the benefits that had been propounded
unto us by the King of Tartaria, if we would have continued in his service.
After the King was departed from the City of Fanaugrem, he proceeded on in his
journey traveling but only six leagues a day, by reason of the great number of
persons that he carried along with him; The first day he dined at a little
Town, called Benau, where he stayed until the evening, and then went to lodge
at a Monastery, named Pamgatur; The next morning he departed from thence, and
so with not above three thousand horse in his Train, he prosecuted his journey
for nine days together, passing by many goodly Towns, at least they seemed to
be so, without permitting any reception to be made him by any of them; In this
manner he arrived at the City of Lingator, sea^ed on a river of fresh water,
which for the breadth and deepness of it is frequented with much shipping; There
he abode five days, for that he found himself somewhat indisposod with the
tediousness of the journey: From this place he departed before day, taking no
greater company with him then thirty horse, and so withdrawing himself from the
communication of so much people, as continually importuned him, he spent most
part of the time as he went by the way in hawking and hunting; those of the
Countries by which he past providing game always ready for him. In this sort
going on he slept most commonly amidst very thick woods in Tents pitched for
him to that purpose. Being arrived at the river of Baguetor, he passed down the
same in certain vessels, called Laulees and Iangoas, which were there ready for
him, till he came to a Town, named Natibasoy, where about evening he landed
without any kind of pomp* The rest of his journey he made by land, so that at
the end of thirteen days he arrived at Vzamguee, where he had a most
magnificent reception. At his entry thereinto there marched before him, as it
were in triumph, all the spoils which he had taken in the wars, whereof the
principal, and those which he made most reckoning of, were twelve Chariots
laden with the Idols, of whom I have spoken heretofore, and whereof the forms
were different, as they use to have them in their Pagod^. Of these Idols there
were threescore and four of brass, which seemed to be Giants, and nineteen of
silver of the same Stature, for, as I have delivered before, these people glory
in nothing so ^uch, as to triumph over those idols, that so they may say, That
in despite of their enemies he had made their gods his slaves; Round about
these twelve Chariots went diverse Priests by three and three weeping, and bound
with iron chains; After them followed forty other Chariots, each of them being
drawn by two Rhinocerots, and full from the bottom to the top of an infinite
company of Arms, and trayled Colors; In the tail of them there were twenty
more, carrying each of them a very great Chest, barred with iron, and wherein,
as we were told, was the treasure of the T^nocouhos; In the same order marched
all other things, which are used to be most esteemed of in such triumphant
entries, as two hundred Elephants armed with Castles, and warlike Panoures,
which are certain swords that are fastened to their teeth when they fight, and
a great number of horses laden with sacks full of dead men's heads and bones; so
that in this entry this King of Cauchin presented to the view of his people all
that he had gained from his enemies in the battle he had given them. After we
had been a full month in this City, during which time we had seen a world of
stately shows, sports, and several sorts of rejoycings, accompanied with most
costly feasts and banquets, set forth and made not only by the greater
persons, but by the common people also, the Tartar Ambassador, that had
brought us thither, moved the King again about our voyage, whereunto he gave us
so gracious an ear, that he presently commanded we should be furnished with a
Vessel for to carry us to the Coast of China, where we hoped to mee^ with some
Portugal ship, that might transport us to Malaca, and from thence to the
Indiaes, which accordingly was done, whereupon without further delay we
prepared all things necessary for our departure.

CHAP. XLIII. Our Departure from the City of Uzamguee, and our adventures till
our arrival at the Isle of Tanixumaa, which is the first Land of Jappon; with
our going ashore there.
UPon the twelfth of January we departed from the City of Vzamguee, exceedingly
rejoicing at our escape from so many labors and crosses,. 1
which we before had sustained, and imbarqued our selves upon a river, that was
above a league broad, down the which we went seven days together, beholding in
the mean time on either side thereof many fair Towns, and goodly Boroughs,
which by the outward appearance we believed were inhabited by very rich people,
in regard of the sumptuousness of the buildings, not only of particular houses,
but much more of the Temples, whose steeples were all covered over with gold,
as likewise in reg^rd of the great number of Barques and Vessels, that were on
this river, abundantly fraught with all sorts of provisions and merchandise.
Now when we were come to a very fair Town, called Qua^geparun, containing some
eighteen or twenty thousand fires, the Naudelum, who was he that conducted us
by the express commandm^nt from the King, stayed there twelve days ^o trade in
exchange of silver and pearl; whereby he confessed to us that he had gained
fourteen for one, and that if he had been so advised as to have brought salt
thither, he had doubled his money above thirty times: we were assured that in
this Town the King had yearly out of the silver Min^s above fifteen hundred
Picos, which are forty thousand Quintals of our weight, besides the huge
revenue, that he drew out of many other different things: This Town has no
other fortification then a weak brick wall, eight foot high, and a shallow
ditch some thirty foot broad; The inhabitants are weak and una^med, having
neither Artillery, nor any thing for their defense, so that five hundred
resolute soldiers might easily take it. We parted from this place on Tuesday
morning, and continued our course thirteen days, at the end whereof we got to
the Port of Sanchan, in the Kingdom of China. Now because there was no shipping
of Malaca there, for they were gone from thence nine days before, we went
seven leagues further to another Port, named Lampacau, where we found two
Juncks of Malaya, one of Patana, and another of Lugor; And whereas it is the
quality of us Portugals to abound in our own sense, and to be obstinate in our
opinions, there arose amongst us eight so great a contrariety of judgment about
a thing, wherein nothing was so neces^ary for us, as to maintain our selves in
peace and unity, that we were even upon the point of killing one another; But
because the matter would be too shameful to recount in the manner as it past,
I will say no more but that the Necoda of the Lorche, which had brought us
thither from Vzamguee, am^zed at this so great barbarousness of ours, separated
himself from us in such displeasure, that he would not charge himself either
with our messages or letters, saying, that he had rather the King should
command his head to be cut off, then to offend God in car^ying with him any
thing whatsoever that belonged to us. Thus different as we were in opinions,
and in very bad terms amongst our selves, we lingered above nine days in this
little Island, during which time the three Juncks departed without vouchsafing
to take us in, so that we were constrained to remain in these solitud^s,
exposed to many great dangers, out of which I did not think that ever we could
have escaped, if God had not been extraordinarily merciful unto us; for having
been there seventeen days in great misery and want; it hapened that a Pyrat,
named Samipocheca, arrived in this place, who having been defeated, went flying
from the Fleet of Aytao of Chincheo, that of eight and twenty Sail, which this
Pyrat had, had taken six and twenty of them from him, so that he had with much
ado escaped with those only two remaining, wherein the most part of his men
were hurt, for which cause he was cons^rained to stay there seven days to have
them cured: Now the present necessity enforcing us to take some course
whatsoever it were, we were glad to agree for to serve under him until such
time as we might meet with some good opportunity to get unto Malaca. Those
twenty days ended, wherein yet there was no manner of reconciliation between
us, but still continuing in discord we imbarqued our selves with this Pyrat,
namely three in the Junk where he himself was, and five in the other, whereof
he had made a Nephew of his Captain. Having left this Island with an intent to
sail unto a Port, called Lailoo, some seven leagues from Chincheo, we continued
our voyage with a good wind all along the Coast of Lamau for the (...) of nine
days, until that one mo^ning when we were near to the river of salt, which is
about five leagues from Chabaquea, it was our ill fortune to be assailed by a
Pirate, who with seven great Juncks fell to fighting with us from six in the
morning till ten of the clock before noon, in which conflict we were so
entertained with sho^, and pots full of ar^^fic^al fire, that at last th^re
were three S^il burnt, to wit, two of the Pirates, and one of ours, which was
the Junck wherein the five Portugals were, whom we could by no means succor,
for that then most of our men were hurt; But at length toward night being well
refreshed by the afternoons gale, it pleased our Lord that we escaped out of
this Pirates hands. In this ill equipage wherein we were we continued our course
for three days together, at the end whereof we were environed by so great and
impetuous a Tempest, that the same night in which it seized us we lost the
Coast, and because the violence of the Storm would never suffer us after to
recover it again, we were forced to make with full Sail toward the Islands of
the Lequios, where the Pirate, with whom we went, was well known, both to the
King, and those of the Country; with this resolution we set our selves to ^ail
through the Archipelage of these Islands, where not withstanding we could not
make land, as well for that we wanted a Pilot to steer the vessel, ours being
slain in the last fight, as also because the wind and tide was against us;
Amidst so many crosses we beat up and down with labor enough from one ^homb to
another for three and twenty days together, at the end whereof it pleased God
that we discovered land, whereunto approaching to see if we could descry any
appearance of a Port, or good anchorage, we perceived on the South-coast near
to the Horizon of the Sea a great fire, which persuaded us that there we might
peradventure find some Borough, where we might furn^sh our selves with fresh
water, whereof we had very great need. So we went and rode just before the
Island in seventy fathom, and presently we beheld two Almedias come toward us
from the Land with six men in them, who being come close to the side of our
Junck, and having complemented with us according to their manner, demanded of
us from whence we come? whereunto having answered, that we came from China with
merchandise intending to trade in this place if we might be suffered, one of
the six replied; That the Nautaquim, Lord of that Island, called Tanixumaa,
would very willingly permit it upon payment of such customs as are usual in
Iapan, which is, co^^inued he, this great Country that you see here before you:
At these news, and many other things, which they told us, we were exceeding
glad, so that after they had showed us the Port, we weighed anchor, and went
and put our selves under the lee-shoar of a cr^ek, which was on the South Side,
and where stood a great Town, named Miay-gimaa, from whence there came
instantly abord of us diverse Paraoos with refreshments, which we bought.

We had not been two hours in this Creek of Miaygimaa, when as the Nautaquim,.
2.
Prince of this Island of Tanixumaa came directly to our Junck, attended by
diverse Gentlemen and Merchants, who had brought with them many Chests full of
silver Ingots, therewith to barter for our commodities; so after ordinary
complemen^s past on either side, and that we had given our word for his easiest
coming aboard of us; he no sooner perceived us three Portugals, but he demanded
what people we were, saying, that by our beards and faces we could not be
Chinese: Hereunto the Pirate answer^d, That we were of a Country called
Malaca, whither many years before we were come from another Lend, named
Portugal, which was at the further end of the world; At these words the
Nautaquim remained much amazed, and turning himself to his followers; Let me
not live, said he unto them, if these men here be not the Chenchicogis, of whom
it is written in our books, that flying on the top of the waters they shall
from thence subdue the inhabitants of the earth, where God has created the
riches of the world, wherefore it will be a good fortune for us if they come
into our Country as good friends. Thereupon having called a woman of Lequia,
whom he had brought to serve as an interpreter between him and the Chinese,
Captain of the Junck; Ask the Necoda, said he unto her, where he met with these
men, and upon what occasion he has brought them hither with him into our
Country of Jappon? The Captain thereunto replied, That we were honest men and
Merchants, and that having found us at Lampacau, where we had been cast away,
he had out of charity taken us in, as he used to do unto all such as he met
withal in the like case, to the end that God might out of his gracious
goodness be thereby moved to deliver him from the danger of such violent
Tempests, as commonly they that sail on the Sea are subject to perish in. This
saying of the Pirate seemed so reasonable to the Nautaquim, that he presently
came abord of us, and because those of his Train were very many, he commanded
that none but such (...) he named should enter in. After he had seen all the
commodities in the Junck, he sat him down in a Chair upon the Deck, and began
to question us about certain things which he desired to know, to the which we
answered him in such sort, as we thought would be most agreeable to his humor,
so that he seemed ^o be exceedingly satisfied therewith* In this manner he
entertained us a good while together, making it apparent by his d^mands that he
was a man very curious, and much inclined to hear of novelties, and rare
things. That done he took his leave of us, and the Necoda, little regarding the
rest, saying, Come and see me at my house to morrow, and for a present bring me
an ample relation of the strange things of that great world through which you
have traveled, as also of the Countries that you have seen, and withal
remember to tell me how they are called, for I swear unto you that I would far
more willingly buy this commodity then any that you can sell me. This said, he
returned to Land, and the next morning as soon as it was day he sent us to our
Junck a great Parao, full of diverse sorts of refreshments, as Reasons, Pears,
Melons, and other kinds of f^uits of that Country; In exchange of this present
the Necoda returned him by the same messenger diverse rich pieces of stuff,
together with certain knacks and rarities of China, and withal sent him word,
that as soon as his Junck should be at anchor, and out of danger of the
weather, he would come and wait on him ashore, and bring him some patterns of
the commodities which we had to sell; as indeed the next mor^ing he went on
land, and ca^ried us three along with him, as also some ten or eleven of the
chiefest of the Chinese of his Company, to the end that at this first sight he
might settle a good opinion of himself in this people for the better
satisfaction o^ that vanity whereunto they are naturally inclined; we went then
to the Nautaquims house, where we were very well entertained, and the Necoda
having given him a rich present, showed him the patterns of all the commodities
he had, wherewith he rested so contented, that he sent presently for the
principal Merchants of the place, with whom ^he Necoda having agreed upon a
price for his commodities, it was resolved that the next day they should be
transported from the Junck unto a certain house, which was appointed for the
Necoda and his people to remain in till such time as he should set sail for
China: After all this was concluded, the Nautaquim fell again to questioning of
us about many several matters, whereunto we rendered him such answers as might
rather fit his humor, then agree with the truth indeed, which yet we did not
observe but in some certain demands that he made us, where we thought it
necessary to make use of certain particulars altogether fained by us, that so
we might not derogate from the great opinion he had conceived of our Country.
The first thing he propounded was, how he had learned from the Chinese and
Lequios, that Portugal was far richer, and of a larger extent, then the whole
Empire of China, which we confirmed unto him. The second, how he had likewise
been assured, that our King had upon the Sea conquered the greatest part of the
world, which also we averred to be so; The third, that our King was so rich in
gold and silver, as it was held for most certain, that he had above two thouand
houses full of it even to the very tops; but thereunto we answered, that we
could not truly say the number of the houses, because the Kingdom of Portugal
was so spacious, so abounding with treasure, and so populous, a^ it was
impossible to specify the same. So after the Nautaquim had entertained us
above two hours with such and the like discourse, he turned him to those of his
Train, and said, Assuredly not one of those Kings, which at this present we
know to be on the earth, is to be esteemed happy, if he be not the vassal of so
great a Monarch as the Emperor of this people here. Whereupon having dismissed
the Necoda and his Company, he entreated us to pass that night on shore with
him, for to satisfy the extreme desire that he had to be informed from us of
many things of the world, whereunto he was exceedingly carried by his own
inclination; withal he told us, that the next day he would assign us a
lodging next to his own Palace, which wa^ in the most commodious place of the
Town, and for that instant he sent us to lie at a very rich Merchants house,
who entertained us very bountifully that night.

CHAP. XLIV. The great honor which the Nautaquim, Lord of the Isle, did to one
of us for having seen him shoot with an Harquebuse; and his sending me to the
King of Bungo; and that which passed till my arrival at his Court.
. 1
THe next day the Chinese Necoda disimbarqued all his commodities, as the
Nautaquim had enjoined him, and put them into sure rooms, which were given him
for that purpose, and in three days he sold them all, as well for that he had
not many, as because his good fortune was such that the Country was at that
time utterly unfurnished thereof, by which means this Pirate profited so much,
that by this Sale he wholly recovered himself of the loss of the six and
twenty Sail which the Chinese Pirate had taken from him; for they gave him any
price he demanded, so that he confessed unto us, that of the value of some five
and twenty hundred Taeis which he might have in goods, he made above thirty
thousand. Now as for us three Portugals, having nothing to sell, we employed
our time either in fishing, hunting, or seeing the Temples of these Gentiles,
which were very sumptuous and rich, whereinto the Bonzes, who are their
priests, received us very courteously, for indeed it is the custom of th^se of
Iappon to be exceeding kind and courteous. Thus we having little to do, one of
us, called Diego Zeimoto, went many times a shooting for his pleasure in an
Harquebuse that he h^d, wherein he was very expert, so that going one day by
chance to a certain M^rsh, where there was great store of fowl, he killed at
that time about six and twenty wild Ducks; In the mean time these people
beholding this manner of shooting, which they had never seen before, were much
amazed at it, insomuch that it came to the notice of the Nautaquim, who was at
that instant riding of horses, and not knowing what to think of this novelty
sent presently for Zeimoto, just as he was shooting in the Marsh, but when he
saw him come with his Harquebuse on his shoulder and two Chinese with him
carrying the fowl, he wasso mightily taken with the matter, as he could not
sufficiently admire it: for whereas they had never seen any Gun before in that
Country, they could not comprehend what it might be, so that for want of
understanding the secret of the powder, they all concluded that of necessity it
must be some Sorcery; Thereupon Zeimoto seeing them so astonished, and the
Nautaquim so contented, made three shoots before them, whereof the effect was
such* that he kill^d one Kite, and two Turtle Doves; In a word then, and not to
lose time, by endeering the matter with much Speech, I will say no more, but
that the Nautaquim caused Zeimoto to get up on the horses croupper behind him,
and so accompanied with a great crowd of people, and four Hushers, who with
Battouns headed with iron went before him, crying a^l along the streets, Know
all men, that the Nautaquim, Prince of this Island of Tanixuma^, and Lord of
our heads, enjoins and expressly commands* That all persons whatsoever, which
inhabit the Land that lies between the two Seas, do honor thi^ Chenchicogim,
of the further end of the world, for even at this present and for hereafter he
makes him his kinsman, in such manner as the Jacharons are, who sit next his
Person; and whosoever shall not do so willingly, he shall be sure to lose his
head. Whereunto all the people answered with a great noise; We will do so for
ever. In this pomp Zeimoto being come to the Palace gate, the Nautaquim
alighted from his horse, and taking him by the hand, whilst we two followed on
foot a pretty way after, he led him into his Court, where he made him sit with
him at his own table, and to honor him the more, he would needs have him lodge
there that night, showing many other favors to him afterward, and to us also
for his sake. Now Zeimoto conceiving, that he could not better acknowledge the
honor which the Nautaquim did him, then by giving him his Harquebuse, which he
thought would be a most accept^ble present unto him; on a day when he came home
from shooting, he ^endred it unto him with a number of Pigeons and
Turtle-doves, which he received very kindly, as a thing of great value,
assuring him that he esteemed of it more, then of all the treasures of China,
and giving him withal in recompense thereof a thousand Taeis in silver, he
desired him to teach him how to make the powder, saying, that without that the
Harquebuse would be of no use to him, as being but a piece of unprofitable
iron, which Zeimoto promised him to do, and accordingly performed the same. Now
the Nautaquim taking pleasure in nothing so much as shooting in this
Harquebuse, and his Subjects perceiving that they could not content him better
in any thing, then in this, wherewith he was so much delighted, they took a
pattern of the said Harquebuse to make others by it, and the effect thereof was
such, that before our departure (whichwas five months and an half after) there
was six hundred of them made in the Country; nay I will say more, that
afterward, namely* the l^st time that the Viceroy Don Alphonso de Noro^ha
sent me thither with a present to the King of Bungo, which happened in the year
1556. those of Iappon affirmed, that in the City of Fucheo, being the chief of
that Kingdom, there were above thirty thousand; whereat finding my self to be
much amazed, for that it seemed impossible unto me, that this invention should
multiply in such sort, certain Merchants of good credit assured me that in the
whole Island of Iappon there were above three hundred thousand Harquebuses, and
that they alone had transported of them in the way of trade to the Country of
the Lequios, at ^ix several times, to the number of five and twenty hundred; so
that by the means of that one, which Zeimoto presented to the Nautaquim in
acknowledgment of the honor and good offices that he had done him, as I have
declared before, the Country was filled with such abundance of them, as at this
day there is not so small an h^mlet but ^ath an hundred at the least; for as
for Cities and great Towns they have them by thousands, whereby one may
perceive what the inclination of this people is, and how much they are
naturally addicted to the wars, wherein they take more delight, then any other
Nation that we know.

. 2.
We had been now three and twenty days in the Island of Tanixumaa, where very
contentedly we past away the time, either in fishing, fowling, or hunting,
whereunto these people of Iappon are much addicted, when as a vessel belonging
to the King of Bungo a (...) in that Port, in the which were diverse men of
quality, and certain Merchants, who^as ^oon as ^h^y were landed went to wait
upon the Nautaquim with their presents, according to the usual* (...) of the
Country: Amongst them there was an ancient man, very well att^nd^d, and unto
whom the rest carried much respect, that falling on his knees before the
Nautaquim, presented him with a letter, and a rich Court^lass garnished with
gold, together with a box full of ve^^iloes, which the Nautaquim received with
a great deal of ceremony: Then having spent some time with him in asking of
certain questions, he read the letter to himself, and thereupon having remained
a pretty while as it were in suspenc^, and dismissed the bearer thereof from his
presence, with an express charge unto those about him to see him honorably
entertained, he called us unto him, and commanded the Truchman that was there
by, to use these words unto us, My good Friends, I entreat you that you will
hear this letter read, which is sent me from my Lord and Uncle, and then I will
let you know what I desire of you; So giving it to a Treasurer of his, he
commanded him to read it, which instantly he did, and these were the contents
of it, Thou right eye of my face, Hyascarangoxo, Nautaquim of Tanixuma, I
Orgemdoo, who am your Father in the true love of my bowels, as he from whom you
have taken the name and being of your Person, King of Bungo and Facataa, Lord
of the great House of Fiancima, Tosa, and Bandou, Chief Sovereign of the petty
Kings of the Islands of Goto, and Xamanaxequa, I give you to understand, my
Son, by the words of my mouth, which are spoken of your person, that some days
since certain men, coming from your Country, have assured me, that you have in
your Town three Chenchicogims of the other end of the world, men that
accommodate themselves very well with those of Japan, are clothed in silk, and
usually wear swords by their sides, not like Merchants that use traffic, but
in the quality of persons that make profession of honor, and which by that
only mean pretend to render their names immortal; Moreover I have heard for a
truth, that these same men have entertained you at large with all matters of
the whole Universe, and have affirmed unto you on their faith that there is
another world greater then ours, inhabited with black and tawny people, of whom
they have told you things most incredible to our judgment, for which cause I
infinitely desire you, as if you were my Son, that by Fiangeandono, whom I have
dispatched from hence to visit my daughter, you will send me one of those three
strangers, which I am told you have in your house; the rather for that you know
my long in^isposition, accompanied with so much pain and grief, has great need
of some diversion: Now if it should happen that they would not be willing
thereunto, you may then assure them, as well on your own faith, as on mine,
that I will not fail to return them back in all safety; whereupon, like a good
Son that desires to please his Father, so order the matter that I may rejoice
my self in the sight if them, and so have my desire accomplished. What I have
further to say unto you, my Ambassador Fingeandono shall acquaint you with, by
whom I pray you liberally import to me the good news of your person, and that
of my daughter, seeing she is as you know the apple of my right eye, whereof
the sight is all the joy of my face. From the house of Fucheo the seventh
Mamoque of the Moon. After that the Nautaquim had heard this letter read; The
King of Bungo, said he unto us, is my Lord, and my Uncle, the brother of my
mother, and above all he is my good Father, for I call him by that name,
because he is so to my wife, which is the reason that he loves me no less then
his own children, wherefore I count my self exceedingly bound unto him, and do
so much desire to please him, that I could now find in my heart to give the
best part of my Estate for to be transformed into one of you, as well for to go
unto him, as to give him the content of seeing you, which out of the knowledge
I have of his disposition, I am assured he will value more then all the
treasures of China; Now having thus acquainted you with his desire, I earnestly
entreat you to render your selves conformable thereunto, and that one of you
two will take the pains to go to Bungo, there to see that King whom I hold for
my Father, and my Lord, for as for this other to whom I have given the name and
being of a kinsman, I am not willing to part with him till he has taught me to
shoot as well as himself. Hereupon Christovano Borralho, and I, greatly
satisfied with the Nautaquim's courtesy, answered him, that we kiss^d his
Highness hands for the exceeding honor he did us in vouchsafing to make use of
us, and seeing it was his pleasure so to do, that he should for that effect
make choice of which of us two he thought best, and he should not fail to be
suddenly ready for the voyage. At these words standing a while in musing to
himself, he looked on me, and said, I am resolved to send him there, because he
seems not so solemn, but is of a more lively humou^, wherewith those of Iapon
are infinitely delighted, and may thereby cheer up the sick man, whereas the
too serious gravity of this other, said he, turning him to Borralho, though
very commendable for more important matters, would serve but to entertain his
melancholy in stead of diverting it. Thereupon falling into merry discourse and
jesting with those about him, whereunto the people of Iapon are much inclined,
the Fingeandono arrived, unto whom he presented me, with a special and
particular recommendation touching the assurance of my person, wherewith I was
not only well satisfied, but had my mind also cleared from certain doubts,
which out of the little knowledge I had of these peoples humors, had formerly
troubled me. This done, the Nautaquim commanded two hundred Taeis to be given
me for the expense of my voyage, whereupon the Fingeandono and I imbarqued our
selves in a vessel with O^rs, called a Funce, and in one night having traversed
all this Island of Tanixumaa, the next morning we c^st anchor in an Haven,
named Hiamangoo, from whence we went to a good Town, called Quanquixumaa, and
so continuing our course before the wind, with a very fair gale, we arrived the
day ensuing at a very sweet place, named Tanora, whence the morrow after we
went to Minato, and so forward to a Fortress of the King of Bungoes, cal^ed
Osquy, where the Fingeandono stayed some time, by reason that the Captain of
the place (who was his Brother in law) found himself much indisposed in his
health. There we left the vessel in which we came, and so went by land directly
to the City, where being arrived about noon, the Fingeandono, because it was
not a time fit to wait upon the King, went to his own house. After dinner
having rested a little, and shifted himself into a better habit, he mounted on
horsback, and with certain of his friends rode to the Court, carrying me along
with him, where the King was no sooner advertised of his coming, but he sent a
Son of his about nine or ten years of age to receive him, who accompanied with
a number of Noblemen, richly apparelled, and his Ushers with their Maces going
before him, took the Fingeandono by the hand, and beholding him with a smiling
countenance; May thy entrance, said he unto him, into this house of the King my
Lord, bring thee as much content and honor as thy children deserve, and are
worthy, being thine, to sit at table with me in the solemn Feasts. At these
words the Fingeandono prostrating himself on the ground; My Lord, answered he,
I most humbly beseech them that are in Heaven above, which have taught thee to
be so courteous and so good, either to answer for me, or to give me a tongue so
voluble, as may express my thankfulness in terms agreeable to thy ears for the
great honor thou art pleased to do me at this present, for in doing otherwise
I should offend no less, then those ungrateful wretches, which inhabit the
lowest pit of the profound and obscure house of smoke: This said, he offered to
kiss the Curtelass which the young Prince wore by his side, which he would by
no means permit, but taking him by the hand, he led him to the King his Father,
unto whom, lying sick in his bed, he delivered a letter from the Nautaquim,
which after he had read, he commanded him to call me in from the next room
where I staid attending, which instantly he did, and presented me to the King,
who entertaining me very graciously. Thy arrival, said he unto me, in this my
Country is no less pleasing to me, then the rain which falls from Heaven is
profitable to our fields that are sowed with Rice. Finding my self somewhat
perplexed with the novelty of these terms, and this manner of salutation, I
made him no answer for the instant, which made the King say to the Lords that
were about him, I ^magine that this str^nger is daunted with seeing so much
company here, for that peradventure he has not been accustomed unto it,
wherefore I hold it fit to remit him unto some other time, when as he may be
better acquainted, and not be so abashed at the sight of people. Upon this
Speech of the Kings I answered by my Truchm^n, that whereas his Highness had
said that I was daunted, I confessed that it was true, not in regard of so many
folks as were about me, because I had seen far many more, but that my amazement
proceeded from the consideration that I was now before the feet of so great a
King, which was sufficient to make me mute an hundred thous^nd years, if I
could live so long* I added further, that those which were present there seemed
to me but men, as I my self was, but as for his Highness, that God had given
him such great advantages above all, as it was his pleasure that he should be
Lord, and that others should be mere servants, yea, and that I my self was but
a silly Ant, in comparison of his greatness, so that his Majesty could not see
me in regard of my smalness, nor I in respect thereof be able to answer unto
his demands. All the Assistants made such account of this mad answer of mine,
as clapping their hands by way of astonishment, they said unto the King, Mark I
beseech your Highness how he speaks to purpose; verily it seems that this man
is not a Merchant, which meddles with base things as buying and selling, but
rather a Bonzo, that offers sacrifices for the people, or if not so, surely he
is some great Captain that has a long time scoured the Seas. Truly, said the
King, I am of the same opinion, now that I see him so resolute; but let every
man be silent, because I purpose that none shall speak to him but my self
alone, for I assure you that I take so much delight in hearing him talk, that
at this instant I feel no pain. At those words the Queen and her daughters,
which were set by him, were not a little glad, and falling on their knees, with
their hands li^^ed up to Heaven, they thanked God for this his great goodness
unto him.

CHAP. XLV. The great mishap that befell the King of Bungo's Son, with the
extreme danger that I was in for the same; and what followed thereupon.
A Little after the King caused me to approach unto his bed, where he lay sick
of the Gout, when I was near him,. 1
I pree thee, said he unto me, be not unwilling to stay here by me, for it does
me much good to look on thee, and talk with thee; thou shall also oblige me to
let me know whether in thy Country, which is at the further end of the world,
thou have not learned any remedy for this disease wherewith I am tormented, or
for the lack of appetite, which has continued with me now almost these two
months without eating any thing to speak of. Hereunto I answered, that I made
no profession of physic, for that I had never learnt that art, but that in the
Junck, wherein I came from China, there was a certain wood, which infused in
water healed far greater sicknesses then that whereof he complained, and that
if he took of it, it would assuredly help him; To hear of this he was very
glad, insomuch that transported with an extreme desire to be healed, he sent
away for it in all haste to Tanixumaa, where the Junck lay, and having used of
it thirty days together, he perfectly recovered of this disease, which had
held him so for two years together, as he was not able to stir from one place
to another. Now during the time that I remained with much content in this City
of Fuchea, being some twenty days, I wanted not occasions to entertain my self
withal; for sometimes I was employed in answering the questions, which the
King, Queen, Princes, and Lords asked of me, wherein I easily satisfied them,
for that the matters they demanded of me, were of very little consequence.
Other-whiles I bestowed my self in beholding their Solemnities, the Temples,
where they offered up their prayers, their warlike Exercises, their naval
Fleets, as also their fishing and hunting, wherein they greatly delight,
especially in the high flying of Falcons, and Vultures. Oftentimes I past away
the time with my Harquebuse in killing of Turtles, and Quails, whereof there
is great abundance in the Country. In the mean season this new manner of
shooting seemed no less mavelous and strange to the inhabitants of this Land,
then to them of Tanixumaa, so that beholding a thing which they had never seen
before, they made more reckoning of it then I am able to express, which was the
cause that the Kings second Son, named Arichaudono, of the age of sixteen or
seventeen years, and whom the King wonderfully loved, entreated me one day to
teach him to shoot, but I put him off, by saying that there needed a far longer
time for it then he imagined, wherewith not well pleased, he complained to his
Father of me, who to content the Prince desired me to give him a couple of
charges for the satisfying of his mind; whereunto I answered, that I would give
him as many as his Highness would be pleased to command me. Now because he was
that day to dine with his Father, the matter was referred to the afternoon,
howbeit then too there was nothing done, for that he waited on his Mother to a
Village adjoining, whither they came from all parts on pilgrimage by reason of
a certain feast, which was celebrated there for the health of the King: The
next day this young Prince came with only two young Gentlemen waiting on him to
my lodging, where finding me asleep on a Mat, and my Harquebuse hanging on a
hook by, he would not wake me till he had shot off a couple of charges,
intending, as he told me afterward himself, that these two shoots should not
be comprised in them I had promised him: H^ving then commanded one of the young
Gentlemen, that attended him, to go softly and kindle the Match, he took down
the Harquebuse from the place where it hung, and going to charge it, as he had
seen me do, not knowing how much powder he should put in, he charged the Piece
almost two spans deep, then putting in the bullet, he set himself with it to
shoot at an Orange tree that was not far off, but fire being given, it was his
ill hap that the Harquebuse brake into three pieces, and gave him two hurts, by
one of the which his right hand thumb was in a manner lost, instantly whereupon
the Prince fell down as one dead, which the two Gentlemen perceiving, they ran
away toward the Court, crying along in the streets that the strangers
Harquebuse had killed the Prince; At these sad news the people flocked in all
haste with weapons and great cries to the house where I was; Now God knows
whether I was not a little amazed when coming to awake I saw this tumult, as
also the young Prince lying along upon the floor by me weltring in his own
blood without stirring either hand or foot; All that I could do then was to
embrace him in my arms, so besides my self, as I knew not where I was. In the
mean time, behold the King comes in a Chair carried upon four men's shoulders,
and so sad and pale, as he seemed more dead then alive; after him followed the
Queen on foot leaning upon two Ladies, with her two daughters, and a many of
women all weeping. As soon as they were entered into the Chamber, and beheld the
young Prince extended on the ground, as if he had been dead, embraced in my
arms, and both of us wallowing in blood, they all concluded that I had killed
him, so that two of the Company drawing out their Scymitars, would have slain
me; which the King perceiving, Stay, stay, cried he, let us know first how the
matter goes, for I fear it comes further off, and that this fellow here has
been corrupted by some of those Traitors kindred, whom I caused to be last
executed. Thereupon commanding the two young Gentlemen to be called which had
accompanied the Prince, his Son, thither, he questioned them very exactly;
Their answer was, that my Harquebuse with the enchantments in it had killed
him: This deposition served but to incense the Assistants the more, who in a
rage addressing themselves to the King; What need, Sir, have you to hear more,
cried they? here is but too much, let him be put to a cruel death: Therewith
they sent in all have for the Iarabuca, who was my Interpreter, to them; now
for that upon the arrival of this disaster he was out of extreme fear fled
away, they brought him straightly bound to the King, but before they fell to
examining of him, they mightily threatened him, in case he did not confess the
truth; whereunto he answered trembling, and with tears in his eyes, that he
would reveal all that he knew. In the mean time being on my knees, with my
hands bound, a Bonzo, that was President of their Justice, having his arms
bared up to his shoulders, and a Poynard in his hand dipped in the blood of the
young Prince, said thus unto me, I conjure thee, thou Son of some Devil, and
culpable of the same crime, for which they are damned that inhabit in the house
of smoke, where they lie buried in the obscure and deep pit of the Center of
the earth, that thou confess unto me with a voice so loud, that every one may
hear thee, for what cause thou have with these sorceries and enchantments
killed this young innocent, whom we hold for the hairs, and principal ornament
of our heads. To this demand I knew not what to answer upon the sudden, for
that I was so far besides my self, as if one had taken away my life, I believe
I should not have felt it; which the President perceiving, and beholding me
with a terrible countenance, See thou not, continued he, that if thou do
not answer to the questions I ask thee, that thou may hold thy self for
condemned to a death of blood, of fire, of water, and of the blasts of the
wind; for thou shall be dismembered into the air, like the feathers of dead
fowl, which the wind carries from one place to another, separated from the body
with which they were joined whilst they lived. This said, he gave me a great
kick with his foo^ for to rowse up my spirits, and cried out again, Speak,
confess who they are that have corrupted thee? What sum of money have they given
thee? how are they called? and where are they at this present? At these words
being somewhat come again to my self, I answered him, that God knew my
innocence, and that I took him for witness thereof* But he not contented with
what he had done began to menace me more then before, and set before my eyes an
infinite of torments and terrible things; wherein a long time being spent, it
ple^sed God at length that the young Prince came to himself, who no sooner saw
the King his Father, as also his Mother and Sisters dissolved into tears, but
that he desired them not to weep, and that if he chanced to die, they would
attribute his death to none but himself, who was the only cause thereof,
conjuring them moreover by the blood, wherein they beheld him weltring, to
cause me to be unbound without all delay, if they desired not to make him die
anew: The King much amazed with this language, commanded the Manacles to be
taken off which they had put upon me; whereupon came in four Bonzoes to apply
remedies unto him, but when they saw in what manner he was wounded, and that
his thumb hung in a sort but by the skin, they were so troubled a^ it, as they
knew not what to do; which the poor Prince observing, Away, away, said he, send
hence these devils, and let others come that have more heart to judge of my
hurt, since it has pleased God to send it me; Therewith the four Bonzoes were
sent away, and other four came in their stead, who likewise wanted the courage
to dress him, which the King perceiving was so much troubled as he knew not
what to do, howbeit he resolved at length to be advised therein by them that
were about him, who counseled him to send for a Bonzo, called Teix^andono, a
man of great reputation amongst them, and that lived then at the City of
Facataa, some seventy leagues from that place; but the wounded Prince not able
to brook these delays; I kn^w not, answered he, what you mean by this counsel
which you give my Father, seeing me in the deplorable estate wherein I am, for
whereas I ought to have been dr^st already, you would have me stay for an old
rotten man, who cannot be here until one has made a journey of an hundred and
forty leagues, both in going and coming, so that it must be a month at least
before he can arrive, wherefore speak no more of it, but if you desire to do me
a pleasure, free this Stranger a little from the fear you have put him in, and
clear the room of all this throng, he that you believe has hurt me will help
me as he may, for I had rather die under the hands of this poor wretch, that
has wept so much for me, then be touched by the Bonzo of Faca^a^, who at the
age he is of, of ninety and two years, can see no further then his nose.

CHAP. XLVI. My curing the young Prince of Bungo; with my return to Tanixu^^a,
and imbarquing there for Liampoo; and also that which hapened to us on land,
after the shipwreck we suffered by the way.
. 1.
THe King of Bungo being extremely grieved to see the disaster of his Son,
turned himself to me, and beholding me with a very gentle countenance;
Stranger, said he unto me, try I pray thee if thou can assist my Son in this
peril of his life, for I swear unto thee if thou can do it, I will make no
less esteem of thee, then of him himself, and will give thee whatsoever thou will demand of me: Hereunto I answered the King, that I desired his Majesty to
command all those people away, because the coil that they kept confounded me,
and that then I would see whether his hurts were dangerous, for if I found that
I was able to cure them, I would do it most willingly: Presently the King
willed every one to be gone, whereupon approaching unto the Prince, I perceived
that he had but two hurts; one on the top of his forehead, which was no great
matter, and the other on his right hand thumb, that was almost cut off: So that
our Lord inspiring me, as it were, with new courage, I besought the King not to
be grieved, for I hoped in les^ then a month to render him his Son perfectly
recovered. Having comfor^ed him in this manner, I began to prepare my self for
the dressing of the Prince, but in the mean time the King was very much
reprehended by the Bon^oes, who told him, that his Son would assuredly die that
night, and therefore it was better for him to put me to death presently, then
to suffer me to kill the Prince outright, adding further, that if it should
happen to prove so, as it was very likely, it would not only be a great scandal
unto him, but also much alienate his peoples affections from him. To these
speeches of the Bonzoes the King replied, that he thought they had reason for
that they said, and therefore he desired them to let him know how he should
govern himself in this extremity; You must, said they, stay the coming of the
Bonzo Teix^andono, and never think of any other course, for we assure you in
regard he is the holiest man living he will no sooner lay his hand on him but
he will heal him straight, as he has healed many others in our ^ight: As the
King was even resolved to follow the cursed counsel of th^se servants of the
Devil, the Prince complained that his wounds pained (...) in such sort a^ he
was no^ ^ble to endure it, and therefore prayed any handsome remedy might* be
instantly applied to them, whereupon the King, much distracted between the
opinion of the Bonzoes, and the danger that his Son was in of his life,
together with the extreme pain that he suffered, desired those about him to
advice him what he should resolve on, in that exigent; not one of them but was
of the mind, that it was far more expedient to have the Prince dressed out of
hand, then to stay the time which the Bonzoes spoke of. This counsel being
approved of the King, he came again to me, and making very much of me, he
promised me mighty matters if I could recover his Son; I answered him with
tears in my eyes, that by the help of God I would do it, and that he himself
should be witness of my care therein: So recommending my self to God, and
taking a good heart unto me, for I saw there was no other way to save my life,
but that, I prepared all things necessary to perform the cure. Now because the
hurt of the right hand thumb was most dangerous, I begun with that, and give it
seven stitches, whereas peradventure if a Surgeon had dressed him, he would
have given it fewer; as for that of the forehead, I gave it but four, in regard
it was much slighter then the other; that done, I applied to them tow wet in
the whites of eggs, and so bound them up very close, as I had seen others done
in the Indiaes: Five days after I cut the stitches, and continued dressing him
as before, until that at the end of twenty days it plea^^d God he was thoroughly
cured, without any other inconvenience remaining to him, then a little weakness
in his thumb; For this cause after that time the King and all his Lords did me
much honor; the Queen also, and the Princesses her daughters presented me with
a great many Suits of silks, and the chiefest of the Court with Cymitars, and
other things, besides all which the King gave me six hundred Taeis, so that
after this sort I received in recompense of this my cure above fifteen hundred
Ducats, that I carried with me from this place. After things were past in this
manner, being advertised by letters from my two Companions at Tanixumaa, that
the Chinese Pirate, with whom we came thither, was preparing for his return to
China, I besought the King of Bungo to give me leave to go back, which he
readily granted me, and with much acknowledgement of the curing of his Son he
willed a Funce to be made ready for me, furnished with all things necessary,
wherein commanded a man of quality, that was attended by twenty of the Kings
servants, with whom I departed one Saturday morning from the City of Fucheo,
and the Friday following about Sunset I arrived at Tanixumaa, where I found my
two Comrades, who received me with much joy. Here we continued fifteen days
longer, till such time as the Junck was quite ready, and then we set Sail for
Liampoo, which is a Seaport of the Kingdom of China, whereof I have spoken at
large heretofore, and where at that time the Portugals traded. Having continued
our voyage with a prosperous wind, it pleased God that we arrived safe at our
desired Port, where it is not to be believed how much we were welcome by the
Inhabitants of the place. Now because it seemed strange unto them, that we had
voluntarily submitted our selves in that sort to the bad faith of the Chinese,
they asked of us from what Country we came, and where it was that we imbarqued
our selves with them? whereupon we freely declared unto them the truth of all,
and gave them an account of our Voyage, as also of the new Land of Iapon that
we had discovered, the great abundance of silver that was there, and the
exceeding profit that might be made by carrying the commodities of China
thither; wherewith they were wonderfully contented, and instantly ordained a
general Procession to be made by way of thanksgiving unto God for so great a
blessing: But withal covetousness began in such sort to seize upon the hearts
of most of the Inhabitants, every one striving to be the foremost in this
voyage, as they came to divide themselves into troops, and to make several
parties, so that even with weapons in their hands they went thronging to buy up
the commodities of that Country, which made the Chinese Merchants, upon the
sight of our unruly avarice, set so high a price upon their wares, that whereas
a Pico of silk was at first not worth forty Taeis, it rose before the end of
eight days to an hundred and threescore, at which rate too the Merchants
seemed to part with it very willingly. Thus by the means of this unreasonable
desire of gain nine Juncks, which were then in the Port, were in fifteen days
ready to set Sail, though to say the truth they were all in such disorder, and
so unprovided, that some amongst them had no other Pilots then the Masters
themselves, who had but little underst^anding in Navigation. In this bad order
they departed all in company together one Sunday morning, notwithstanding that
they had the wind, the season, the sea, and all things else contrary, not
suffering themselves to be guided by reason, or the consideration of the
dangers which they are subject unto that commit themselves to this Element; For
they were so obstinate and so blinded as they would not represent any
inconvenience to themselves, and I my self was so unfortunate, that I went
along with them in one of their Vessels. In this manner they sailed all that
same day as it were groping between the Islands and the firm Land, but about
midnight there arose in the dark so mighty a Storm, accompanied with such
horrible rain, that suffering themselves to be carried at the mercy of the
wind, they ran upon the Sands of Gotom, whereof the nine Juncks two only, as it
were by miracle, were saved, so that the other seven were lost out of which not
so much as one man escaped. This loss was thought to amount unto above three
hundred thousand Crowns in commodities, besides the greater, which was of six
hundred persons that left their lives there, whereof there were an hundred and
forty Portugals, all rich men, and of quality. As for the other two Juncks in
one of the which by good hap I was, joining in con^ort together, they followed
the course they had begun, until such time as they arrived at the Island of the
Lequios; There we were beaten with so furious a North-east wind, which
in^reased by the conjunction of the new Moon, that our vessels were separated
in such sort as we could never see one another again: After dinner the wind
turned to West North-west, whereby the Sea was so moved, and the waves rose
with such fury, as it was a most dreadful thing to behold; whereupon our
Captain, named Gaspar Melo, a very courageous Gentleman, seeing the greatest
part of the prow of the Junck to be half open, and that there was ni^e spans
water in the bottom of her, he resolved by the advice of all the Officers to
cut down the two Masts, whose weight was the cause of the opening of the Junck,
howbeit this could not be done with such care, but that the main Mast in its
^all overwhelmed fourteen persons, whereof five were Portugals, which were all
crushed in pieces, a spectacle so lamentable to behold that it exceedingly
grieved every man's heart. Now forasmuch as the Storm increased more and more,
we were constrained to let our selves be carried at the mercy of the Sea even
until Sunset, at which time the Junck made an end of splitting quite asunder,
whereupon our Captain and every one of us, seeing the deplorable estate
whereunto our sins had reduced us, fell to preparing our selves for our last
end. Having in this sort past away half of the night, about the first quarter
of the watch we struck upon a Shel^, where at the first blow the Junck broke
all to pieces, the event whereof was so lamentable that threescore and two men
left their lives there, some of which were drowned, and the rest squeezed to
death under the Keel of the Vessel.

. 2.
There were but four and twenty of us, besides some women, that escaped from
this miserable Shipwreck; Now as soon as it was day we perceived by the sight
of the Island of fire, and of the Mountain of Taydacano, that the Land where we
were was the great Lequio, whereupon wi^h tears in our eyes recommending our
selves ^o God, and marching up to the breast in water, we swam over certain
d^eper places, and so went five days together in great pain, not finding in
all that time any thing to eat but the slime which the Sea cast up on the mud;
Howbeit a^ length by the mercy of God we got to land, where going into the
woods we sustained our selves with a certain herb like unto Sorrel, whereof
there was great plenty along these Coasts, which was all the nourishment that
we had for three days space that we were there, until at last we were espied by
a boy that was keeping of cattle, who as soon as he had discovered us, ran to
the next Village, which was some quarter of a league off, for to give notice of
it to the inhabitants there; who presently thereupon with the sound of Drums
and Cornets assembled all their Neighbors round about them, so that within
three or four hours they were a Company of about two hundred men, whereof there
were fourteen on horsback. As soon as they descried us a far off, they made
dir^ctly toward us, whereupon our Captain, seeing the wretched estate
whereunto we were reduced, fell down upon his knees, and began to encourage us
with many good words, desi^ing us to remember, That nothing in the world could
fall out without the Providence of God, and therefore like good Christians we
should assure our selves it was his pleasure, that this should be the last hour
of our lives, so that we could not do better then to conform our selves to his
holy will, and with patience embrace this pitiful end, which came from his
Almighty hand, craving pardon from the botto^ of our hearts for all our sins
past; and that for himself he had such confidence in his mercy, that we duly
repenting us according as we were obliged by his holy Commandments, he would
not forget us in this our extremity. Having made us this Exhortation, and
lifted up his hands to Heaven, he cried out three times together with abundance
of tears, Lord have mercy upon us, which words were reiterated by all the rest,
but with such sighs and groans of true Christians, and so full of devotion and
zeal, that I may truly say, the thing which then we feared least was that which
naturally is most abhorred. As we were in this grievous agony six horsemen came
unto us, and beholding us in a manner naked, without arms, on the ground upon
ou^ knees, and two women lying as it were dead before us, they were so moved
with compassion, that four of them turning back to the footmen, which were
coming on, made them all to stay, not suffering them to approach us; Howbeit a
little after they came to us again, bringing with them six footmen, which
seemed to b^ some of the Officers of Justice, who by the commandment of the
horsemen tied us, three and three together, and with some show of pity bid us,
That we should not be afraid, for that the King of the Lequios was a man
greatly fearing God, and very well inclined to the poor, upon whom he
continually bestowed much alms: Moreover they swore unto us by their Law, that
we should receive no hurt, yet could we not by any means be persuaded
thereunto, for at that time we had so little hope of life, that if persons
worthy of credit had assured us of it we should hardly have believed them, much
les^ those cruel and detestable Gentiles, who neither had Religion, nor any
knowledge of God: When they had tied us together, the footmen placed us in the
midst of them, whilst those on horsback coursed up and down on every side, as
though they had gone the round; now we no sooner began to march, but that the
three wom^n, which were with us more dead then alive, fell down on the place in
a swoon, partly through their natural weakness, and partly through the fear
they were in, so that the footmen were forced to take them up in their arms,
and each one to carry them in his turn, howbeit for all that before we could
arrive at the place whither they were leading us, two of the three died, and
were left in the Wood for a prey to the Wolves, Foxes, and other Wild-beasts,
whereof we saw great plenty thereabout. At length after we had marched a good
while we arrived about Sunset at a great Borough where we were presently put
into a Pagode or Temple of theirs, which was environed with very high walls,
and yet for the more security they placed an hundred men about it to guard us
all that night, who with their cries and beating of their Drums, kept us waking
till the next morning, for the noise thereof, and the consideration of our
present misery, would not suffer us to take any rest.

CHAP. XLVII. The carrying of us to the Town of Pungor, and presenting us to
the Broquen, Governor of the Kingdom; with that which ensued upon it.
AS soon as it was morning the next day the chiefest women of the Town came to
visit us,. 1
and in way of charity brought us a quantity of Rice, boiled fish, and certain
fruits of the Country for us to eat, she wing themselves to be much moved with
our misery, as well by their words, as by their tears; and seeing the extreme
need we stood in of clothes, for that we had little, or scarce any upon our
bodies, six amongst them, which for that purpose were chosen by the rest, went
a begging for us through all the streets of the Town, saying; O good folks,
good folks, which make profession of the Law of the Lord, whose property it is,
if one may say so, to show himself pro^igal toward us by communicating his
benefits unto us, come forth of your houses to behold the flesh of our flesh,
which the wrath of the hand of the Lord Almighty has touched, and succor them
with your alms, to the end the mercy of his greatness may not abandon you, as
it has done them. These words were of such force to stir up their charity, as
within less then an hour we were abundantly furnished with all things necessary
for us: But about three of the clock in the afternoon came a Post to this
Borough with letters to the Xivalon of the place, that is the Captain thereof,
who had no sooner read them, but he caused two Drums to beat an Alarm, at the
sound whereof all the people ass^mbled together in ^ great Pagode or Temple,
where out of a window he spoke unto them, and gave them to understand that the
Broquen, the Governor of the Kingdom, had commanded us to be brought to the
Town of Pung^r, which was some seven leagues from thence. The most part of them
at first refused to obey this command, so that there was great contention about
it, in such sort that nothing could be agreed upon all that day, by means
whereof the Post was returned to the Broquen with a relation of that which had
past, and so we were left there till eight of the clock the next morning, at
which time two Peretanda^s, who are as it were Judges, came accompanied with
diverse Burgesses, and some twenty horsemen unto us, and after many writing^
drawn up by certain public Registers concerning us, they sent us away the
same day to a Town, called Gond^xilau, where we were put into a dungeon, made
in the fashion of a Ci^ter^, remaining there till the next day up to the middle
in filthy standing water, that was full of ho^sleeches, which made us all gore
blood* As soon as it was morning they carried us toward Pungor, where we
arrived about four of the clock in the afternoon, now because it was late the
Broquen would not see us till the day following, and then bound together as we
were, he caused us to be led through ^our of the principal streets of the City,
where the people thronging from all parts to behold us, seemed much to pity our
misery, chiefly the women; In this manner we were brought to a Court of
Justice, where there was a great many of Officers, amongst whom we continued a
long time waiting for the coming of the Judge, at length upon the thrice
striking of a clock, a door that stood just against the place where we
attended, was presently opened, by which we entered into a very spacious Hall,
where the Governor sat upon a Throne all adorned with rich tapestry, and under
a Cloth of State of silver tinsel; round about him were six Ushers upon their
knees, carrying Maces on their shoulders, and all along the room stood a Guard
with Halberds in their hands, damasked with gold and silver; All the rest of
the Hall was full of people of div^rs Nations, the like whereof we had not seen
in those Countries. After silence was imposed on ^l^ that were present, we
prostrated our selves before the Throne of the Broquen, and weeping said unto
him, Sir, we beseech thee by that God which has made Heaven and Earth, and on
whose power we all of us depend, to take pity of our miserable fortune, for
since the waves of the Sea has brought us to the lamentable estate, and
wretched condition wherein thou see us, we most humbly desire thee that thy
goodness will be pleased to put us into a better before the King, to the end he
may be incited to have compassion on us poor strangers, that are destitute of
all succor and favor of the world, for so it has pleased God to have it in
regard of our sins. At these words the Broquen looking on them that were about
him, and shaking his head, What think you of these people, said he unto them,
verily here is one of them that speaks of God as a man which has the knowledge
of his truth, so that we may conclude without all doubt, that there is another
great world whereof we have no notice, wherefore since these men know the
Source of all good, it is reasonable that we should proceed with them according
to the request they have made unto us with so many tears. Whereupon turning him
toward us, who all this while lay prostrated on the ground, with our hands
lifted up, as if we were worshipping God; I must confess, said he unto us, that
I have so great compassion of your misery, and am so grieved to see you so poor
as you are, as I assure you in all verity, that I had rather, if it were the
good pleasure of the King, be like unto one of you, as wretched as you are,
then to see my self in this office, which questionless was conferred on me for
my sins: wherefore I would be loath to offend you, but the duty of my place
obliging me thereunto, I must desire you as friends not to be troubled, if I
ask you some questions, which are necessary for the good of Justice; and as
touching your deliverance, if God affords me life, be assured you shall have
it, for I am most confident that the King my Masters inclination to the poor is
truly Royal. These promises exceedingly contented us, and to thank him for them
we had recourse to our tears, which we shed in abundance, for our hearts were
so full, as we could not possibly bring forth a word to answer him.

. 2.
The Broquen caused four Registers, the two Peretandaos of the Court aforesaid,
and some eleven or twelve other Officers of Justice, to come immediately before
him; Then rising on his feet, he began with a severe countenance, and a naked
Scymitar in his hand, to examine us, speaking so loud as every one might hear
him; I Pinaquila, said he, Broquen of this City of Pungor by the good pleasure
of him whom we all hold for the hairs of our heads, King of the Nation of the
Lequios, and of all this Country of the two Seas, where the fresh and salt
waters divide the Mines of his treasures, do advise and command you by the
rigor and force of my words, to tell me clearly, and with a clean heart, what
people, and of what Nation you are, as also where your Country is, and how it
is called? To this demand we answered according to the truth, that we were
Portugals, Natives of Malaca. It is well, added he, but what adventure brought
you into this Country, and whither did you intend to go when as you suffered
shipwreck? We replied thereunto, That being Merchants, who make no other
profession then of traffic, we had imbarqued our selves in the Kingdom of
China, for to go from the Port of Liampoo to Tanixumaa, where we had formerly
been, but that arriving near to the Island of Fire we were surprised by a
mighty tempest, so that not able to oppose the violence of the Sea, we were
constrained to lie at the mercy of the winds for the space of three days and
three nights together; and that at the end thereof our Junck ran her self upon
the Sands of Taydican, where, of ninety and two persons that we were,
threescore and eight were drowned, no more escaping of that great number but
these four and twenty of us which stood before him all covered over with
wounds, that were saved as it were by miracle through the sp^cial grace of God.
At these words standing a little in suspense, By what title, replied he, did
you possess so much riches, and so many pieces of silk which were in your
Iunck, and that were worth above an hundred Taeis, as I am informed? Truly, it
is not credible that you could get so much wealth any other way then by
theeving, which being a great offense against God, is a thing proper to the
servants of the Serpent of the house of smoke, and not to those of the house of
the Sun, where they that are just, and of a pure heart, do bathe themselves
amidst perfumes in the great Pool of the most Almighty: We answered hereunto,
that assuredly we were Merchants, and not thieves, as he was pleased to charge
us, because the God in whom we believed forbad us by his holy Law, either to
kill or to rob. Hereupon the Broquen beholding them which were about him;
Doubtless, continued he, if that which these men affirm be true, we may well
say that they are like unto us, and that their God is much better then all
others, as me thinks may be inferred from the truth of their words. Then
turning himself toward us, he examined us as before with a stern countenance,
and the behavior of a Judge that exercises his charge with integrity: In this
examination he bestowed almost an hour, and in the last place said unto us; I
would fain know why those of your Country, when as heretofore they took Malaca,
carried thereunto by extreme avarice, did kill our men with so little pity?
which is still made good by diverse widows who in these Countries have survived
their husbands. To this we made answer, how that happened rather by the chance of
war, then out of any desire of robbing, which we had never used to do in any
place wheresoever we came; What is this you say, replied he, can you maintain
that he that conquers, does not rob? that he which uses force, does not kill?
that he which shows himself covetous, is not a thief? that which he oppresses,
performs not the action of a Tyrant? and lo, all these are the goodly qualities
which are given to you, and whereof you are said to be culpable, and that by
the affirmation of verity it self: whence it is manifest, that Gods abandoning
of you, and permitting the waves of the Sea to swallow you up, is rather a pure
^ffect of his justice, then any injury that is done to you. This said he arose
out of the Chair where he was set, and commanded the Officers to return us back
to prison, promising to give us audience according to the grace which it should
please the King to show us, and the compassion that he would have of us;
wherewith we were very much afflicted, and in great despair of our lives. The
next day the King was advertised, as well of our imprisonment, as of the
^nswers we had made, by the Broquens letters, wherein he had intermingled
something in favor of us, by means whereof he did not cause us to be executed,
as it was said he had resolved to have done upon certain false reports which
the Chinese had made to him of us. In this prison we continued very near two
months with much pain, never hearing in all that time so much as any word
spoken of that first proceeding against us. Now forasmuch as the King desired
to be more amply informed concerning us by other more particular inquiries then
the letters of the Broquen, he sen^ a certain man unto us, named Randinaa, for
to come secretly to the prison where we were, to the end that under the pretext
of being a Merchant^ stranger, he might exactly learn the cause of ou^ arrival
in that place, and that upon the report he should make thereof to the King, he
might proceed to do that which should seem just unto him. Howbeit though this
was closely carried, yet was it our good fortune to be advertised of it the day
before his coming to us, so that we had time enough to arm our selves outwardly
with all the apparances of misery and affliction we could possibly devise, and
counterfeit; which expedient next to Gods assistance stood us in more stead
then any other we could have thought upon. This man then came one morning well
accompanied to the prison, and after he had viewed us all one after another, he
called to him the Iurabaca, who served to interpret for him; Ask these men,
said he, what is the cause that the mighty hand of God has so abandoned them,
as to permit their lives through an effect of his Divine Justice to be
subjected to the judgment of men, without having so much remorse of
conscience, as to set before their eyes the t^rrour of that dreadful vision,
which does use to fright the soul at the last gasp of a man's life, for it is to
be believed that they, who have done that which I observe in them, have heaped
sin upon sin. We answered him thereunto, that he had a great deal of reason for
what he spoke, in regard it was very probable that the sins of men were the
principal cause of their sufferings, howbeit that God, as the Sovereign Lord of
all, did nevertheless in that case accustom to take pity of them, with sobs
and tears continually called upon him, and that it was also his bounty wherein
all our hope was placed, to the end he would be pleased to inspire the Kings
heart with a will to do as justice according to our works, for that we were
poor strangers destitute of all favor, a thing whereof men make most account
in this wo^ld. That which you say, replied he, is very well, provided that your
hearts be conformable to your words, and then you are not to be found fault
with, for it is most certain, that he, which enammels all that our eyes do
behold for the beautifying ^f the night, and that has likewise made whatsoever
the day does show us for the sustenance of man, who are but worms of the earth,
will not refuse you your deliverance, seeing you beg of him with so many sighs
and tears; wherefore I entreat you not to dissemble with me, but truly to
confess what I desire to understand from you at this present; namely, what
people you are? of what Nation? in what part of the world you live in, and how
the Kingdom of your King is named? whereunto you shall add the cause that has
brought you hither, and to what place you were going with so much riches, which
the Sea has cast up on the shoars of Taydican, whereat all the Inhabitants
have so wondered, as they were persuaded that you were Masters of all the Trade
of China. To these, and other like questions, which this Spy asked of us, we
returned him such answers, as was most behoofull for us to give him, wherewith
he was so contented, that making us many offers, he promised to move the King
for our deliverance. In the mean time he spoke not a word to us of the occasion
for which he was sent, but still fained himself to be a stranger, and a
Merchant like one of us. Howbeit when he went away, he carefully recommended us
to the Jaylour, and willed him not to let us want any thing, promising to
satisfy him for it to his content; In acknowledgment whereof we gave him many
humble thanks with tears in our eyes, whereby he was greatly moved to
compassion, so that he gave us a Bracelet of gold, that weighed thirty Ducats,
and also six sacks of Rice, and withal desired us to excuse him for the
smalness of the present he had given us. After this he returned back to the
King, unto whom he rendered an account of all that had past with us, assuring
him that we were not such as the Chinese had made him to believe, and offered
for proof thereof to pawn his life an hundred times, if need were, which was
the cause that the King abated much of the suspicion wherewithal they had
inveighed him about our manner of lying. But as he was resolving to give order
for our enlargement, as well upon the report of this man, as in regard of the
letter which the Broquen had written him, there arrived at the Port a Chinese
Pyrat with four Juncks, unto whom the King gave his Country for a place of
Retreat, upon condition that he should share with him the moity of the booty
which he should take, by means whereof he was in great favor with the King,
and all them of the Country. Now forasmuch as our sins would have it, that this
Pyrate was one of the greatest enemies the Portugals had at that time, by
reason of a fight that we had had with him a little before in the Port of
Lamau, where La^cerote Pareyra, born at Lyma, commanded in chief, and in which
he had two Juncks burnt, and three hundred of his men slain; this dog was no
sooner advertised of our imprisonment, and how the King was resolved to free
us, but that he imbroyled the business in a strange manner, and told him so
many lies of us, that he lacked but little of persuading him, that ere long we
would be the cause of the loss of his Kingdom: For he assured him that it was
our custom to play the Spies in a Count^y under pretense of trading, and then
to make our selves Masters of it like robbers as we were, putting all to the
sword that we met withal in it; which wrought so powerfully with the King,
that he revoked all that he had resolved to have done, and changing his mind he
ordained that in regard of what had been told him, we should each of us be
dismembered into four quarters, and the same set up in the public streets,
that all the world might know we had deserved to be used so.

CHAP. XLVIII. The King of the Lequios sending a cruel Sentence against us to
the Broquen of the Town, where we were prisoners, to the end he should put it
in execution; and that which hapened unto us, till our arrival at Liampoo.
. 1.
AFter that this ^ruel Sentence of death had been pronounced against us, the
King sent a Peretanda to the Broquen of the City, where we were prisoners, to
the end that within four days it should be executed upon our persons. This
Peretanda departed presently away, and upon his arrival at the City, he went
and lodged himself at a certain widows house, that was his sister, a very
honorable woman, and from whom we had received much alms; This same man having
secretly imparted unto her the cause of his coming* and how he was not to
return but with a good Certificate unto the King of the performance of this
ex^cu^ion, she went strait-way, and acquainted a Niece of hers with it, who was
daughter to the Broquen of the City, in whose house lay a Portugal woman, the
wife of a Pilot who was a prisoner with us, and two children of hers, d^siring
then to comfort her, she discovered unto her all that she had learnt, which she
had no sooner understood, but that extremely afflicted at so sad a news, she
fell instantly to the ground in a swoon, wherein she continued a long time
speechless; At length being come to her self again, she fell to tearing of her
cheeks so cruelly with her nails, that all her face was nothing but gore blood,
which, for that it was a new and extraordinary thing in that Country, was
incontinently spread abroad throughout all the City, insomuch that all the
women being frighted with it, the most part of them went forth with their
children in their hands to the Broquens daughters house, where the Portugal
woman was, more ready to die, then to answer to the questions one or another of
them asked her, and being exceedingly moved with pi^y to b^hold her, so
lamentably taking on, drowned all in tears and blood, which passion and grief
had drawn from her, they all resolved to write a letter in favor of us to the
old Queen, the Kings Mother, as accordingly they did, and the contents of it
were these; Sacred pearl, congealed in the greatest shell of the profoundest
depth of the waters; thou Star, enammelled with rays of fire; thou tress of
golden hair, intermixed with a Garland of roses, whose feet are so replenished
with greatness that they rest upon the top of our heads, like to rubies
enchaced in gold, whereof the price is inestimable: We that are no other then
the least and poorest of thy creatures, the daughters and kinswomen of the
Broquens wife, together with the rest of thy captives that have set their hands
to these presents, do make our moan unto thee concerning a thing which we have
seen with our eyes, that is a poor woman, a stranger, who seems to have neither
flesh nor face, drowned as she is in a pool of blood, beating her breast with
such cruelty, as would stir up even wild-beasts in the Forest to compassion,
and strike fear into every one; Moreover we have heard her cry so loud, as we
assure thee by the Law of all verity, that if God should lend an ear unto her,
as we believe he will, because he does usually assist the poor, that are
despised of the world, it is to be feared that some great chastisement of
famine and fire will fall upon us; wherefore the extreme apprehension, which we
have of these things, causes us to join all our voices together, like little
children hungry after their mothers, and humbly beseech thee, that casting
thine eyes upon the soul of the deceased King, thy Husbband, for whose sake we
beg this of thee, thou will vouchsafe to make thy self like the Saints,
setting aside all respect of the flesh; For the more thou shall do for God, the
greater thou shall be in his house, where we verily believe thou shall find the
King thy Husband, singing to the sound of the harp of those children, that have
never sinned, the song of this charitable alms, which for Gods sake, and his,
we pray thee to obtain of the King, thy Son: And this we hope shall be a means
to move him, both for the love of God, and of thy self, as also by the force of
our tears and cries, to take pity on these strangers, and freely pardon them
all the faults, wherewith they are unjustly charged, since, as thou know,
they are not the Saints of Heaven that use to accuse us, but men, that are
infamous, and of an evil life, to whom we are forbidden to lend an ear.
Conchenilau, the fair Gentlewoman, and well born, but above all more honorable
then all those of this City, for having been bred up in thy service ^y her
Aunt, shall represent unto thee on the behalf of God, and the King thy Husband,
for the love of whom we prefer this request unto thee, all the other
particularities of this affair, as also the grievous tears and groa^s of these
poor folks, and the extreme sadness* and fear of all the inhabitants of this
place, who most earnestly beseech thee to present their humble Suit to the
King, thy Son, cherished above all others, on whom may it please the Lord of
all good to bestow so much thereof, as with that, which only shall be resting
to him, all these people, that inhabit the Land, and Islands of the Sea, may be
replenished. This letter, signed by above an hundred of the chiefest women of
the City, was sent by a Gentlewoman, the daughter of the Mandarin Comanilau,
Governor of the Island of Bancaa, which is on the the South Side of that of
the Lequios, and good luck would have it that this young Damosel came thither,
but three days before the Sentence of death was to be put into execution upon
us, in the company of two of her brothers, and ten or eleven Gentl^men, her
kinsmen.

This Gentlewoman being arrived at the City of Bintor,. 2.
where the King and the Queen his Mother were, she went to the house of an Aunt
of hers, the chief Lady of honor to the Queen, and that infinitely loved her,
to whom she rendered an account of the occasion of her coming, and withal
represented unto her how much it imported both her honor and credit, seeing
all the rest had made choice of her for this affair, that her Highness should
grant her the grace which all of them together made such suit unto her for: The
Lady having given her Niece the best welcome that possibly she could by all
demonstrations of her affection, she said unto her, that since she perceived
this business so much concerned her honor, she would labor by all the means
she could that she should not return discontented, and frustrated of the hope
of her request, the rather for that the thing was just in it self, and so
earnestly sought for by so many great Ladies; whereupon the Gentlewoman, having
given her very humble thanks, besought her to dispatch the business with as
much speed as might be, in regard we had but two days more to live, according
to the tenor of our Sentence, after which time all help would be in vain.
Since it is so, answered her Aunt, and that for want of requisite diligence the
poor wretches are like to suffer the punishment, whereunto the King has
destined them upon the Chinese report, I will go and lay my self at the Queens
feet, as soon as she awakes, which will be within an hour at the furthest, to
the end that this novelty, not having done so these six years by reason of my
indisposition, may draw her to demand of me the cause of it. Having said this,
she left her Niece behind her, and went and opened a Gallery door, whereof she
alone had the key, and so entered into the Chamber where the Queen lay; A while
after the Queen awaking, found her lying at her feet, whereupon she said unto
her; How now Nhay Meicamur, (for so was this Lady called) what is it has
brought you hither at this time? certainly it is some extraordinary matter.
Madam, answered she, that which your Majesty says, is very true, and I assure
my self that it will seem no less strange in your ears, then it was to me to
see my Niece arrive here lately with so much sorrow and grief, that I am not
able to express it in words. The Queen having then commanded her to call her
in, she presently fetched her; The first thing that this young Gentlewoman did,
was to prostrate her self before the Queen, who was in her bed, and so told her
weeping the occasion that brought her thither, and therewithal presented her
with the letter, which the Queen commanded her to read, as accordingly she did;
and it is said the Queen was so moved with compassion at it, that not enduring
to have her make an end of reading it, she said many times unto her with tears
in her eyes; Enough, enough, I will hear no more of it at this time, and since
the business stands in the terms you speak of, God, and the Soul of the King my
Husband, for whose sake all these Ladies beg this boon of me, forbid, that
these poor wretches should lose their lives so unjustly: The false reports
which the Chinese have made of them, together with the miseries they have
endured at Sea, may serve them in stead of great punishments; Wherefore rely
upon me for your request, and in the mean space withdraw your selves til to
morrow morning betimes, when we will go all three to the King my Son before it
be day, and then you shall read this letter to him, as you have read it to me,
that being incited to pity he may make no difficulty to grant us that which we
demand of him with so much reason. This resolution taken, the Queen was no
sooner up the next day, but carrying along with her only her chief Lady, and
the Gentlewoman her Niece, she past through a Gallery to the Chamber of the
King her Son, whom she found still in bed, and having rendered him an account of
the occasion of her coming, she commanded the Gentlewoman to read the letter,
as also to tell by word of mouth all that had happened in that affair, which
the Gentlewoman performed very exactly, but not without mingling her tears with
those of her Aunts, as we knew afterward: In the mean time the King looking on
his Mother, Madam, answered he unto her, I must needs confess, that I dreamed
this night how I saw my self before a very angry Judge, who carrying his hand
three times to his face, as if he had threatened me, I promise thee, said he
unto me, that if the blood of these strangers does cry unto me for vengeance,
thou and thine shall satisfy my justice, which makes me believe, that
assuredly this vision comes from God, for whose sake I will do this alms to his
praise, giving them both life and liberty, that so they may go where they will,
and moreover I will cause a vessel to be provided for them, furnished with all
things they shall need, all at mine own charge. The Queen gave the King her Son
thanks for this his great grace unto them, and withal commanded her Lady and
the Gentlewoman to kiss his feet, as instantly they did, and so the Queen
retired to her own lodging. Hereupon the King sent for the Chumbim to command
him that the Sentence against us might be revoked, telling him all that had
past, as well concerning his dream, as the request the Queen his Mother had
made unto him, which he had granted her. Then the Officers of Justice
commending the King much for this action, revoking the former, drew up another
Sentence in favor of us, which contained words to this effect, Broquen of my
City of Pungor, I, the Lord of seven Generations, and of the hairs of thy head,
do send thee the smiles of my mouth, that thy reputation may be thereby
augmented. Considering the information which the Chinese had given me of the
pernicious manner of living of th^se strangers, assuring me by a solemn oath,
and upon the faith they owe unto their Gods, that infallibly they were Pirates
and robbers, who used no other trade then to steal away othermens goods, and
bath^e heir hands in the blood of those that would defend their own according
to reason, as they said was manifest to all the world, which they have run
over, not leaving any Island, Port of the Sea, River, nor Land, that they have
not invaded with fire and sword, committing such enormous and horrible crimes,
as for fear of offending God, I may not mention. All which things have at first
sight seemed unto me most worthy to be punished in justice according to the
Laws of my Kingdom; wherefore I sent their Process to the principal officers of
my Crown, who all with one common consent swore unto me that these strangers
deserved not only one, but many death^, if it were possible, so that relying
upon their advice, I wrote unto Nhay Peretanda, that he should enjoin thee from
me not to fail within four days to put that Sentence of mine in execution. Now
forasmuch as the chiefest Dames of your City, whom I hold for my kinswomen,
have been Suitors unto me since, that I would be pleased to bestow their lives
upon them by way of an alms, alleging many reasons in their letters to that
purpose, whereby I might be induced not to deny, but rather to accord them that
grace; the fear which I have least their cries should in case of refusal arrive
at the highest of the Heavens, where that Lord lives reigning, whose property
it is to have pity on the tears, which are truly shed by those that have a
right zeal to his holy Law, has wrought so with me, that freeing my self from
that blind passion, whereunto the flesh rendered me inclined, I would not let my
choler prevail over the blood of those wretches. For which reasons I command
thee, that as soon as this fair Gentlewoman, who is of noble extraction, and my
kinswoman, shall present thee these letters, signed with my hand, wherewith I
confess, I am well contented, in regard of the persons that have made this
Suite unto me, thou go unto the prison, whither thou have committed these
strangers, and that without all delay thou set them at liberty, as also that
thou furnish them with a vessel at my charge, giving them moreover such alms as
the Law of the Lord commands thee to bestow on them, and that too with a
liberal hand; whereupon thou shall tell them, that they may go away without
seeing my Person, for which I will dispense with them, as well because that
labor would be to no purpose, as for that, performing as I do the Office of a
King, it is not fit for me to behold men, who have a great knowledge of God,
and yet seem to make little account of his Law, in that they accustom
themselves to rob others of their goods. Given at Bintor in the third Chavequa
of the first Mamoquo of the Moon, in the presence of the Queen my Mother, the
Source of my right eye, and Lady of all my Kingdom. And signed a little below,
Hira Pitau, Xinancor, Ambulec, the firm prop of all Justice. As soon as the
Gentlewoman had this Letter of the Kings in her hands, she was never at quiet,
till she had left her Aunt, and put her self upon her journey, which she
continued with such diligence, that in a short space she arrived at the City,
and delivered the Letter to the Broquen, who presently upon the reading of it
caused all the Peretandas, Chumbims, and other Officers of Justice to assemble
together, and then went with them directly to the Prison, where we were at that
instant under a sure guard; we no sooner saw them enter, but all of us cried
out three or four times together, Lord have mercy upon us, wherewith the
Broquen, and all that accompanied him, whereof the prison was full, were so
moved, as some of them could not forbear weeping, out of the compassion they
had of us: In the mean time the Broquen fell to comforting us in such kind and
loving terms, as well expressed the greatness of his charity: Withal he
commanded the irons to be taken off from our hands and feet, and drawing us
into an outward Court, he recounted unto us all that had past in our business,
whereof we had not any knowledge at all, in regard of the strict watch that was
set upon us all the while; Then having caused the Kings Letters to be
published: My friends, said he unto us, now that God has showed you so much
grace, to deliver you as you see, I have one request to make unto you, which
is, that for my sake, you will thank him from the bottom of your heart, and
praise him for it; for if you make this acknowledgement unto him, he will
communicate to you from above, whence all good does proceed, an agreeable
repose, which is a thing far more convenient for us then to live three or four
days in the miseries of this world, where there is nothing but labor, grief,
great affliction, and above all poverty, which is the accomplishment of all
evils, and whereby ordinarily our souls are wholly consumed in the deep abyss
of the house of smoke.

. 3.
The Broquen moreover caused two Paniers full of clothes to be brought to that
place, and distributed to them amongst us according to each ones need; That
done he carried us home to his house, where all the Ladies of the Town came to
see us, testifying by their countenances that they greatly rejoiced at the good
success of our deliverance: They comforted us also with great demonstration of
pity, which is an effect of the good nature of the women of this Country, that
is common to them all; and not contented therewith they entertained us in their
houses, one after another during all the time we were there until our
departure, for we continued in this City afterward the space of forty six
days, in which time we were furnished with all things necessary for us, and
that in such abundance, as there was not one of us but carried above an hundred
Ducats away with him. As for the Portugal woman, of whom I spoke before, she
had above a thousand, as well in money, as in other gifts which were given her,
by which means her husband in less then an year recovered himself of all the
losses he had sustained. After we had with a great deal of contentment past
those forty six days there, the season proper for our voyage being come, the
Broquen procured us passage in the Junck of a Chinese, which was bound for the
Port of Liampoo in the Kingdom of China, according to the commandment that he
had received of the King for that purpose, bu^ first he caused the Captain of
the Junck to put in good security for the safety of our persons during all the
time of the voyage. In this manner we departed from Pungor the capital City of
the Island of Lequios, of which I will here make a brief relation, to the end
that if it shall one day please God to inspire the Portugal Nation, principally
for the exaltation and increase of the Catholic faith, and next for the great
benefit that may redound thereof, to undertake the Conquest of this Island,
they may know where first to begin, as also the commodities of it, and the
easiness of this Conquest. We must understand then that this Island of Lequios,
situated in nine and twenty degrees, is two hundred leagues in circuit,
threescore in length, and thirty in breadth. The Country is almost like that of
Iapon, saving that it is a little more mountainous in certain parts, but in the
middle it is plainer and more fertile. It is rendered very agreeable by many
large Plains, that are watered with diverse rivers of fresh water, and from
whence are gathered great provisions, especially of Rice and Wheat. It has
Mountains out of which is drawn such quantity of copper, as in regard of the
abundance thereof it is so common among those people, that whole Ships are
laden with it from thence in way of traffic to all the Ports of China, Lamau,
Sumbor, Chabaquea, Tosa, Miacoo, and Iapon, as likewise to all the other
Islands on the South Side thereof, as those of Sesirau, Goto, Fucanxi, and
Pollem: Moreover in all this Country of the Lequios, there is also great store
of iron, steel, lead, tin, alum, salt-peeter, brimstone, honey, wax, sugar, and
ginger, far better then that which comes from the Indiaes. It has withal a
world of Angelin-wood, Chestnuts, Trees, Oak, and Cedar, wherewith thousands of
Ships may be made. On the East Side it has five very great Islands, where many
Mines of Silver are found, as also Pearls, Amber, Frankincense, Silk, Ebony,
Brasil, and a great abundance of a certain wood fit for Carpentry, called
Poytan; It is true that there is not such store of Silk there, as in China. The
Inhabitants of all this Country do as the Chinese cloth themselves, with
Linen, Cotton, Silk, and a kind of Damask-stuff, which comes to them from
Nanquin; They are great eaters, very much addicted to the delights of the
flesh, little inclined to arms, and altogether unfurnished of them; which
induces me to believe that they might be easily conquered, and the rather for
that in the year, a thousand, five hundred, fi^ty and six, a Portugal arrived
at Malaca, named Pero Gomez a' Almeyda, servant to the Grand Master of
Santiago, with a rich Present, and Letters from the Nautaquim, Prince of the
Island of Tanixumaa, directed to King John the third; the Substance and
Contents of his request was, to have five hundred Portugals granted to him, to
the end that with them, and his own Forces, he might conquer the Island of
Lequio, for which he would remain tributary to him at five thousand Kintals of
Copper, and a thousand of Lattin yearly; which Ambassy came to no effect,
because the Messenger was lost in the Gallion, where Manael de
Souzad*Sepulveda, also perished. A little further to the Northward of this
Island of Lequio, there is a great Archipelago of small Islands, from whence is
drawn a great quantity of silver, which in my opinion, and by what I gathered
out of a petition which Ray Lopez de Vilhalobos General of the Castillians
presented to Iorge de Castro, at that time Captain of Ternate, should be those
whereof the Inhabitants had some knowledge, and which they called the Islands
of Silver; and yet I cannot see with what reason that may be, because both by
what I have observed, and read, as well in the writings of Ptolomie, as other
Geographers, not any one of them has pierced into the Kingdom of Siam, and the
Island of Sumatra, only our Cosmographers, since the time of Alphonso d'
Albuquerque have passed a little further, and treated of the Selebres, Pasuaas,
Mindanaus, Champas, as also of China, and Iapon, but not of the Lequios, or
other Archipelagoes, which are to be discovered within the vast extent of that
Sea. From this brief relation which I have made of the Island of Lequios, may
be inferred, both out of what I have heard and ^een, that with two thousand men
only this Island might be taken, together with all the rest of these
Archipelagoes, whence more profit might be drawn then from the Indiaes, and
they might be conserved with less charge, as well in regard of men, as
otherwise; for we spoke there with Merchants, who assured us, that the sole
Revenue of three Custom houses, and of the Island of Lequios, amounted unto one
million and an half of gold, not comprising therein either the Mass of the
whole Kingdom, or the Mines of Silver, Copper, Iron, Steel, Lead, and Tin,
which are of a far greater revenue, then the Customs. I will not speak further
of other particularities of this Island, which I might here insert, for that I
hold this sufficient to awaken the courages of the Portugals, and incite them
to an Enterprise, of so much service for our King, and profit for themselves.

CHAP. XLIX. My sailing from Liampoo to Malaca, from whence the Captain of the
Fortress, sent me to the Chaubainhaa at Martabano; and all that bef^l us in our
voyage thither.
BEing arrived at Liampoo, we were very well received by the Portugals, that
lived there, 1
From whence within a while after I imbarqued my self in the Ship of a
Portugal, named Tristano de Gaa, for to return unto Malaca, with an intention
once more to try my fortune, which had so often been contrary to me, as may
appear by that which I have delivered before. This Ship being safely arrived at
Malaca, I went presently unto Pedro de Faria, Governor of the Fortress, who
desiring to benefit me somewhat before the time of his Government was expired,
he caused me to undertake the voyage of Martaban, which was usually very
profitable, and that in the Junck of a Mahumetan, named Necoda Mamude, who had
wife and children at Malaca. Now the principal design of this voyage was, to
conclude a peace with the Chaubainhaa, King of Martabano, as also to continue
the commerce of those of that Country with us, because their Juncks did greatly
serve for the prov^sions of our Fortress, which at that time was unfurnished
thereof by reason of the success of the Wars of Iaoa. Besides I had a design
in this my voyage of no less consequence, then the res^, which was to get one,
called Lancarote Gu^rreyro, to come thither, who was then on the Coast of
Tanaucarim with an hundred men in four Foists, under the name of a Rebel or
Mutiner; I was to require him to come to the succor of the Fortress, in regard
it was held for certain, that the King of Achem was suddenly to fall upon it;
so that Pedro de Faria, seeing himself destitute of all that was necessary for
him to sustain a Siege, and of men likewise; found it fit to make use of these
hundred men, the rather for that they were nearest, and so might be the sooner
with him. In the third place he sent me upon another important occasion, namely
to give advice to the Ships of Bengala, that they should come all carefully in
consort together, left their negligence in their Navigation should be the cause
of some distaster. This voyage then I undertook very unwillingly, and parted
from Malaca upon a Wednesday, the ninth day of January, in the year, one
thousand, five hundred, forty and five; being under Sail I continued my course
with a good wind to Pullo Pracelar, where the Pilot was a little retarded by
means of the Shelves, which cross all that Channel of the firm Land, even unto
the Island of Sumetra; When we were got forth with much labor we passed on to
the Islands of Pullo Sambillam, where I put my self into a Manchua, which I had
very well equipped, and sailing in it the space of twelve days, I observed,
according to the order Pedro de Faria had given me for it, all the Coast of
that Country of Malaya, which unto Iuncalan contains an hundred and thirty
leagues, entering by all the Rivers of Bartuhaas, Salangor, Panaagim, Qued^m,
Parles, Pendan, and Sambilan, Siam, without so much as hearing any news at all
of his enemies in any of them: So continuing the same course nine days more,
being the three and twentieth of our voyage, we went and cast anchor at a
little Island, called Pisandur^a, where the Necoda, the Mohammedan Captain of
the Junck, was of necessity to make a cable, and furnish himself with wood and
water; With this resolution going on shore every man applied himself so the
labor he was appointed unto, and therein spent most part of the day; Now
whilst they were thus at work the Son of this Mohammedan Captain came and asked
me whither I would go with him, and see if we could kill a Stag, whereof there
was great plenty in that Island; I answered him that I would accompany him with
all my heart, so that having taken my Harquebuse, I went along with him athwart
the wood, where we had not walked above an hundred spaces, but that we espied a
many of wild boars, that were rooting in the earth near to a pond; Having
discovered this game, we got as near to them as we could, and discharging
amongst them, we carried two of them to the ground: Being very glad of this
good success we presently gave a great shout, and ran straight to the place we
had seen them rooting. But so dreadful to behold, in this place we found above
a dozen bodies of men dug out of the earth, and some nine or ten others half
eaten. B^ing much amazed at this object, we withdrew a little aside by reason
of the great stanch, which proceeded from these dead bodies. Hereupon the
Sarrazin told me, that he thought we should do well to advertise his father of
this, to the end we might instantly surround this Island all about for to see
whether we could discover any vessels with Pirates; for, said he, there may be
some lie hidden behind yonder point, whereby we may very well run the hazard of
our lives, as it has often befallen other ships, where many m^n have been lost
by the carelessness of their Captains. This advice of the Sarrazin seemed so
good unto me, that we presently returned back unto the Rode, where he gave an
account to his father of that we had seen. Now for that the Necoda was a very
prudent man, and scalded (as one may say) with the like inconveniences, he
straight way gave order to have the Island surrounded, then causing the women,
children, and linen, although it were but half washed, to be imbarqued, he
himself being followed by forty men, armed with Harquebuses and Lances, went
directly to the place where we had discovered those bodies, and viewing them
one after another, with stopping our noses by reason of the st^nch, which was
insupportable, he was so moved to compassion, that he commanded the Mariners
to dig a great pit for to bury them in; But as they were about to render them
this last duty, and looking over them again, there was found upon some of them
little daggers garnished with gold, and on others bracelets: Whereupon the
Necoda, understanding well this mystery, wished me with all speed to dispatch
away the roving vessel that I had to the Captain of Malaca, for that, as he
assured me, those dead men, which they saw there, were Achems, who had been
defeated near to Tanaucarim, whither their Armies ordinarily retired because of
the war which they had with the King of Siam. The reason he alleged to us for
this was, that those which we saw there lying dead, having golden bracelets
about them, were Captains of Achem, who had caused themselves to be buried
without permitting them to be taken away, and that he would lose his head if it
were not so. For a greater proof whereof, he further added, that he would make
some more of them to be dis-enterred, as incontinently he did, and having
dug some seven and thirty of them out of the earth, there was found about
them sixteen bracelets of gold, twelve very rich daggers, and many jewels, so
that thinking of no other but hunting, we got a booty worth above a thousand
Ducats, which the Necoda had, besides what was concealed; but the truth is,
this was not altogether to our advantage, for the most part of our men became
sick with the extreme stench of those bodies. At the very instant I dispatched
away the towing vessel that we had to Malaca, and advertised Pedro de Faria of
the whole success of our voyage; Withal I certified him* what course we had
held, as also into what Ports, and into what Rivers we had entered, without
hearing any other news of his enemies, then that it was suspected they had been
at Tanaucarim, where by the appearances of those dead bodies, it was to be
believed that they had been defeated, whereunto I added for a conclusion, that
if I could light on any more assured news concerning them, I would presently
acquaint him with it, in what part soever I were.

. 2.
After I had dispatched away the rowing Vessel to Malaca, with the Letters which
I had directed to Pedro de Faria, and that our Junck was furnished with all
things necessary for her, we sailed toward the Coast of Tanaucarim, where, as
I said before, I had order to land for to treat with Lancerote Guerreyro, that
he, and the rest of the Portugals of his Company might come to the succor of
Malaca, which the Achems intended to besiege, according to the report that went
of it. Being under Sail then we arrived at a little Island, a league in
circuit, called Pulho Hinhor, where a Parao came unto us, in the which were six
taw^y Moors, poorly clad, with red Bonets on their heads; their Boat being come
close to our Junck, which was then under Sail, they saluted us in a way of
peace, whereunto we answered in the like m^nner; That done they demanded of us
if there were any Portugals amongst us? we told them that there were, but
mistrusting it, they desired to see one or two of them upon the hatches,
because, added they, it imports much that it should be so. Whereupon the Necoda
prayed me to come up, which incontinently I did, though at that time I was shut
up in my Cabin below somewhat indisposed in my health; when I was on the deck
I called to them that were in the Parao, who had no sooner seen me, and known
me to be a Portugal, but they gave a great shout, and clapping their hands for
joy they came abord our Junck. Then one of them, who by his countenance seemed
to have more Authority then the rest, began to say unto me; Signior, Before I
crave leave of thee to speak, I desire thee to read this Letter, to the end it
may induce thee the more readily to believe that which I am to say unto thee.
Thereupon out of an old filthy clout he took a Letter, wherein after I had
opened it, I found this written: Signiors Portugals, which are true Christians,
this honorable man, that shall show you this Letter, is King of this Island,
newly converted to the Faith, and called Dom Lancerote; He has rendered many
good Offices, not only to them, who have subscribed this writing, but to us
also that have navigated on these Coasts: For he has given us very important
advertisements of the treasons, which the Achems and Turks have plotted against
us, so that by the means of this honest man we have discovered all their
designs: withal God has made use of him for to give us not long since a
great victory against them, wherein we have taken from them one Gally, four
Galliots, and five Foists, with the death of above a thousand Sarrazins.
Wherefore we entreat you, by the wounds of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
merits of his holy passion, not only to keep him from all wrong, but to assist
him with all your power, as the manner is of all good Portugals, that it may
serve for an example to those which shall know this, to do the like in
imitation of you; And so we kiss your hands this thirteenth day of November,
1544. This Letter was signed by more then fifty Portugals, among^t whom were
the four Captains that I sought for, namely, Lancerote Guerreyra, Antonio
Gomez, Pedro Ferreyra, and Cosmo Bernaldes. When I had read this Letter, I made
a tender of my person to this petty King, for otherwise my power was so small,
as it could not reach further then to the giving him a bad dinner, and a red
Bonnet I had on, which all worn as it was, was yet better then his own. Now
after this poor King had made some Declaration to me of himself, and of his
miseries, lifting up his hands to Heaven, and shedding abundance of tears; Our
Lord Jesus Christ, said he unto me, whose slave I am, does know what great need
I have now of the favor and succor of some Christians, for because I am a
Christian, as they are, a Mohammedan slave of mine about four months ago,
reduced me to that extremity, wherein I behold my self at this instant, being
not able in the state I am in to do any other then cast up mine eyes to Heaven,
and lament my misfortune, with much sorrow, and little remedy. And I assure
thee by the verity of that holy and new Law, whereof I now make profession,
that only for being a Christian, and a friend to the Portugals, I am persecuted
in this sort. Now for that being alone, as thou art, it is not possible for
thee to assist me; I beseech thee, Signior, to take me along with thee, to the
end that this Soul which God has put into me may not perish, and in recompense
thereof I promise to serve thee as a slave all the days of my life. Lo this is
that which this poor King said with so many tears, as it was great pity to
behold it, in the mean time the Necoda, who was of a good disposition, and
charitably inclined, was very much moved with the disaster of this unfortunate
King, so that he gave him a little Rice, and some linen to cover himself
withal, for he was so ragged, that one might see his naked skin every where
about him. After he had informed himself from him of certain particulars, the
knowledge whereof concerned him, he demanded him where his enemy was, and what
forc^s he had? Whereunto he answered. That he was a quarter of a league from
thence, in a Cabin covered with straw, having not above thirty fishermen with
him, who were most of them without Arms. Hereupon the Necoda cast his eye upon
me, and seeing me sad, for that I was not able of my self to succor this poor
Christian* thinking withal that he should much oblige me thereby, Signior,
said he unto me, if thou were now Captain of this Iunck, as I am, what remedy
would thou give to the tears of this poor man, wherewith also thy eyes do
participate? I knew not what reply to make him, for that I was greatly moved to
behold my Neighbor, a Christian like my self, to suffer in that manner, which
the Necoda's son perceiving, who was, as I have said, ^ young man of a good
spirit, and brought up amongst the Portugals, and guessing at the shame and
sorrow I was in, he desired his father to lend him twenty Mariners of his
Junck, that by their means he might re-establish this poor King, and chase the
Thief out of the Island; To this the Necoda answered, That if I would demand so
much of him, he would do it very willingly; whereupon casting my self at his
feet and embracing him, which is the humblest complement used amongst them, I
told him with tears in my eyes, that if he would do me this favor I would be
his slave whilst I lived, and that both he and his children should find how
ready I would be always to acknowledge the same; He presently granted my
request, so that causing the Junck to approach near the shoa^, he prepared
himself in three Boats with one Faulcon, three Bases, and threescore Men, Iaos
and Lesons, all well armed, for thirty of them carried Ha^quebuses, the rest
Lances, and Bows and Arrows, besides Grenadoes, and other such like Fireworks,
as we thought were convenient for our design.

. 3.
It was about two of the clock in the afternoon when we landed, and so we went
directly to the Trench where the Enemies were. The Necoda's son led the
Vauntgard, consisting of forty men, whereof twenty were armed with Harquebuses,
and the rest with Bows and Arrows; The Necoda himself brought on the Rere,
wherein were thirty Soldiers, carrying a Banner, which Pedro de Faria had given
him at his parting from Malaca, with a cross painted in it, ^o the end he might
be known for a Vassal to our King, in case he should encounter any of our
Ships. Marching in this order by the guiding of this petty King, we arrived
where the Rebel was with his men set in order, who by their shouting and cries
seemed in show not to make any reckoning of us. They were in numb^r about
fifty, but weak, unarmed, and utterly destitu^e of all things necessary for
their defense, having for all their Arms but Staves, ten or eleven Lances, and
one Harquebuse. As soon as we had discovered them we gave fire to the Faulcon
and Bases, discharging withal twenty Harquebuses, whereupon the Thieves betook
themselves presently to flight, being in great disorder, and most of them hurt;
We pursued them then so close, that we overtook them on the top of a little
hill, where they were defeated in the space of two credoes, not one of them
escaping with life save only three, whom we spared for that they said they were
Christians. That done, we went to a Village, where there were not above twenty
poor low Cabbins, covered with straw, in it we found some threescore and four
women, with a many of little children, who no sooner perceived us, but all of
them with tears fell a cried out, Christian, Christian, Jesus, Jesus. At these
words being fully persuaded that they were Christians, I desired the Necoda
that he would cause his son to retire, and not suffer any of them to be killed
because they were not Gentiles, which he presently yielded unto, and yet for
all that he could not keep the Cabbins from sacking, though in them all there
was not found the value of five Ducats. For the people of this Island are so
poor, that scarce one of them is worth a groat; they feed on nothing but a
little fish, which they take with angling, and eat it broiled on the coals
without salt, yet are they so vain and presumptuous, that not one almost
amongst them but terms himself a King of some vile piece of ground, whereon
there is little more then one poor Cabin; besides, neither the men nor the
women have wherewithal to cover their nakedness. After the slaughter of the
rebellious Sarrazin and his followers, and the re-establishment of the poor
Christian King, putting him in possession of his wife and children, whom his
Enemy had made slaves, together with above threescore and three Christian
Souls, we ordained a kind of Church amongst them, for the instruction of those
that were newly converted; And then returning to our Junck, we presently set
sail, and continued our course toward Tanaucarim, where I was persuaded I
should find Lancerote Guerreyra, and his companions, for to treat with them
about the business, whereof I have formerly spoken: But for as much as in the
Letter, which the petty King showed me, the Portugals made mention of a Victory
which God had given them against the Turks and Achems of this Coast, I hold it
not amiss to relate here how that happened, as well for the content the Reader
may take therein, as to show that there is no enterprise which valiant Soldiers
at a need may not bring to pass, in regard whereof it imports much to cherish,
and make esteem of them. For eight months and more our hundred Portugals had
scoured up and down this Coast in four well rig'd Foists, wherewith they had
taken three and twenty rich Ships, and many other lesser Vessels, so that they
which used to sail in those parts were so terrified with the sole name of the
Portugals, as they quitted their Commerce without making any further use of
their shipping: By this surcease of Trade the Custom-houses of the Ports of
Tanaucarim, Iuncalan, Merguim, Vagaruu, and Tavay, fell much in their Revenue,
in so much that those people were constrained to give notice of it to the
Emperor of Sornan, King of Siam, and sovereign Lord of all that Country,
beseeching him to give a remedy to this mischief, whereof every one complained.
Instantly whereupon, being then at the City of Odiaa, he sent with all speed to
the Frontire of La^hos for a Turkish Captain of his, named Heredrin Mahomet,
the same who in the year one thousand five hundred thirty and eight came from
Suez to the Army of Soliman the Bashaw, Viceroy of Cairo, when as the great
Turk sent him to invade the Indiaes; but it fell out that this man slipping
from the body of the Army arrived in a Gally on the Coast of Tanaucarim, where
he was entertained by the Sornau King of Siam, and for a Pention of twelve
thousand Ducats by the year served him as a General of that Frontire. Now for
that the King held this Turk for invincible, and made more account of him then
of all others, he commanded him from the place where he was, with three hundred
Ianizaries that he had with him, and giving him a great sum of money he made him
General of all the Coast of this Sea, to the end he might free those people
from our incursions, withal he promised to make him Duke of Banchaa, which is
an estate of great extent, if he could bring him the heads of four Portugal
Captains. This proud Turk, becoming more insolent by the reward and promises
which the King made him posted presently away to Tanaucarim, where being
arrived he rigged forth a Fleet of ten Sails for to fight with us, being so
confident of vanquishing us, as in answer of certain Letters, which the Sornau
had written unto him from Odiaa, these words was found in one of them. From the
time that my head was esloigned from the feet of your Highness for to execute
this small enterprise, wherein it seems you are pleased I should serve you, I
continued my Voyage till at the end of nine days I arrived at Tanaucarim, where
I presently provided my self of such Vessels as were necessary for me, and
indeed would have had but only two, for I hold it most infallible that those
would suffice to chase away these petty Thieves; howbeit not to disobey the
Commission, which Combracalon the Governor of the Empire has given me under
your great Seal, I have made ready the great Gally, as also the four little
ones, and the five Foists, with which I purpose to set forth with all speed;
For I fear left these Dogs should have news of my coming, and that for my sins
God should be so much their friend, as to give them leisure to fly, which would
be so great a grief unto me, that the very imagination thereof might be my
death, or through an excess of despair render me like unto them; but I hope
that the Prophet Mahomet, of whose Law I have made profession from mine
infancy, will not permit that it should so happen for my sins. This Heredrin
Mahomet being arrived at Tanaucarim, as I have delivered before, presently made
ready his Fleet, which was composed of five Foists, four Galliots, and one
Gally Royal: Within these Vessels he imbarqued eight hundred Mahometans, men of
combat (besides the Mariners.) amongst the which were three hundred Ianizaries,
as for the rest they were Turks, Greeks, Malabares, Achems, and Mogores, all
choice men, and so disciplined, that their Captain held the Victory already for
most assured; Assisted with these Forces he parted from the Port of Tanaucarim
for to go in the quest of our men, who at that time were in this Island of
Pul^o Hinhor, whereof the foresaid Christian was King. Now during those levies
of men of War, this petty King going to the Town for to sell some dried fish
there, as soon as he perceived what was intended against us, he left all his
Commodities behind him, and in all haste returned to this Island of his; where
finding our men in great security, as little dreaming of that which was in hand
against us, he related it all unto them, whereat they remained so much amazed,
as the importance of the matter did require; In so much that the same night and
the next day having well caulked their Vessels which they had drawn ashore,
they lanched them into the Sea, after they had imbarqued their provisions,
their water, their artillery, and ammunition. So falling to their oars, with a
purpose (as I have heard them say since) to get to Bengala, or to Racan, for
that they durst not withstand so great an Army; but as they were unresolved
thereupon, and divided in opinion, behold they saw all the ten Sails appearing
together, and behind them five great Ships of Guzarates, whose Masters had
given Heredrin Mahomet thirty thousand Ducats for to secure them against our
Portugals. The sight of these fifteen Sails put our men into a very great
confusion, and because they were not able at that time to make to Sea for that
the wind was contrary, they put themselves into a Creek, which was on the South
side of the Island, and invironned by a Down, or Hill, where they resolved to
attend what God would send them: In the mean time the five Guzarat Ships showed
themselves with full sails at Sea, and the ten Sails* with oars went directly
to the Island, where they arrived about Sunset. Presently thereupon the
Turkish Captain sent out Spies to the Ports, where he was advertised that they
had been, and entered by little and little into the mouth of the Haven, that so
he might render himself more assured of the prize which he pretended to make*
with hope that as soon as it was day he should take them all, and so bound hand
and foot present them to the Sornau of Siam, who in recompense thereof had
promised him the State of Banchaa, as I have said before. The Manchua, which
had been at the Port to spy them out, returned to the Fleet about two hours
within night, and told H^redrin for news, that they were fled and gone,
wherewith it is said this Barbarian was so afflicted, that teering his hair, I
always feared, said he weeping, my sins would be the cause that in the
execution of this enterprise God would show himself more a Christian, then a
Sarazin, and that Mahomet would be like to these Dogs, of whom I go in quest.
This said, he fell down all along in the place, and so continued a good while
without speaking a word. Nevertheless being come again to himself he gave
order, like a good Captain, to all that was necessary. First of all then he
sent the four Galliots in quest of them to an Island, called Ta^basoy, distant
from that of Pulho Hinhor about seven leagues, for he was persuaded that our
men were retired thither, because this was a better Harbor then that of the
Island from whence they were gone. As for the five Foists he divided them into
three, whereof he sent two to another Island, named Sambilan, and other two to
those which were nearest to the firm Land, for that all these places were very
proper to shelter one in; As for the filth Foist, in regard she was fleeter
then the rest, he sent her along with the four Galliots, that she might before
it was day bring him news of that which should happen, with promise of great
reward for the same; but during these things our men, who had always a watchful
eye, seeing the Turk had rid himself of his greatest Forces, and that there was
no more remaining with him but the Gally wherein he was, they resolved to fight
with him, and so sallying out of the Creek, where they had shrouded themselves,
they rowed directly to her. Now in regard it was past midnight, and that the
Enemies had but weak Sentinels, for that they thought themselves most secure,
and never dreamt of any body lying in wait to attaque them there, our four
Foists had the opportunity to board her all together, and threescore of their
lustiest men leaping suddenly into her, in less then a quarter of an hour, and
before the Enemies knew where they were for to make use of their Arms, they
killed above fourscore Turks, as for the rest they cast themselves all into the
Sea, not one man remaining alive: The dog H^redrin Mahomet was slain amongst
the rest, and in this great action God was so gracious to our men, and gave
them this Victory at so cheap a rate, that they had but one young man killed,
and nine Portugals hurt. They assured me since, that in this Gally in so short
a time, what by water, and the sword, above three hundred Mahometans lost their
lives, whereof the most part were Ianizaries of the Gold Chain, which among the
Turks is a mark of honor. Our Portugals having past the rest of the night with
much contentment, and always keeping good watch, it pleased God that the next
morning the two Foists arrived from the Island whither they had been sent* who
altogether ignorant of that which had past, came carelessly doubling the point
of the Haven, where the Gally lay, so that the four Foists made themselves
Masters of them in a little space, and with the loss of but a few men. After so
good a success they fell diligently to work in fortifying the Gally and the two
Foists, which they had taken, and then flanked the South Side of the Island
with five great Pieces of Ordnance to defend the entry into the Haven. Now
about evening the other two Foists arrived, making to Land with the same
indiscretion as the others, and although they had much ado to reach them, yet
were they constrained at length to render themselves, with the loss only of two
Portugals. Hereupon our men resolved to attend the four Galliots that remained,
and which had been sent to the next Island, but the next day so great a wind
arose from the North, that two of them were cast away upon the Coast, not one
that was in them escaping. As for the other two about evening they discovered
them very much in disorder, destitute of oars, and separated above three
leagues the one from the other; But at last about Sunset one of them came to
the Port, and ran the same fortune as the former, without saving any one of the
Sarazins lives. The next morning an hour before day, the wind being very calm,
our men discovered the other Galliot, which for want of oars was not able to
recover the Port, in regard whereof our men resolved to go and fetch her in, as
accordingly they did, and coming somewhat near her with two Cannon shot, they
killed the most part of them that were in her, and so bording her took her very
easily; Now because all her men were either slain, or hurt, they drew her to
land by force of other Boats; so that of the ^en Sail of this Fleet, our men
had the Gally, two Galliots, and four Foysts; as for the other two Galliots,
they were cast away on the Isle of Taubasoy, as I have delivered before, and
touching the fifth Foyst, no news could be heard of her, which made it credible
that she also suffered shipwreck, or that the wind had cast her upon some of
the other Islands. This glorious victory, which it pleased God to give us, was
obtained in the month of September, one thousand, five hundred, forty and four,
on Michaelmas Eve, which rendered the name of the Portugals so famous through
all those Coasts, that for three years after there was nothing else spoken of,
so that the Chaubainhaa, King of Martabano hearing of it, sent presently to
seek them out, and promised them great advantages if they would succor him
against the King of Bramaa, who at that time was making preparation in his City
of Pegu, for to go and besiege Martabano, with an Army of seven hundred
thousand men.

CHAP. L. The Continuance of our voyage to the Bar of Martabano; and certain
memorable particularities hapening there.
BEing departed, as I said, from the Island of Pulho Hinhor, we continued our
course toward the Port of Tarnassery for the affair, of which I have spoken,.
1.
but upon the approach of the night, the Pilot desiring to avoid certain sands
that were to the Prow-ward of him, put forth to Sea, with an intention as soon
as it was day to return toward land with the Westerly wind, which at that
instant blew from the Indiaes by reason of the Season* We had now held this
course five days, running with much labor by many different roombs, when as
it pleased God that we accidentally discovered a little vessel, and for as much
as we thought it to be a Fisher-boat, we made to it, for to be informed from
them in her whereabouts we were, and how many leagues it was from thence to
Tarnassery, but having passed close by her, and haled her without receiving any
answer, we sent off a Shallop well furnished with men for to compel her to come
abord us: Our Boat then going directly to the vessel, we entered her, but were
much amazed to find in her only five Portugals, two dead, and three alive, with
a Coffer, and a sack full of Tangues, and Larius, which is the money of that
Country, and a fardle, wherein there were Basins and Ewers of silver, and two
other very great Basins. Having laid up all this safely, I caused the Portugals
to be brought into our Junck, where looking very carefully unto them, yet could
I not in two days get one word from them; But at length by the means of yolks
of eggs, and good broaths, which I made them take, they came again to
themselves, so that in six or seven days they were able to render me a reason
of their accident. One of those Portugals was called Christovano Doria, who was
since sent into this Country for a Captain to Saint Tome; the other Luys
Tabo^da, and the third Simano de Brito, all men of credit, and rich Merchants.
These same recounted unto us, that coming from the Indiaes in a vess^l
belonging to Iorge Manhoz, that was married at Goa, with a purpose to go to the
Port of Charingan, in the Kingdom of Bengala, they were cast away in the sands
of Rucano for want of taking heed, so that of four^core persons, that they were
in the vessel, only seventeen being saved, they had continued their course all
along by the Coast for five days together, int^nding if possibly they could to
recover the river of Cosmira in the Kingdom of Pegu, there to sh^p th^mselves
for the Indiaes in some v^ss^l or other tha^ they should meet with in the Port;
but whilst they were in this resolution, they were so driven by a most
impetuous Westerly wind, that in one day and a night they lost the sight of
Land, finding themselves in the ma^n Sea without Oars, without Sayls, and all
knowledge of the winds, they continued in that State sixteen da^s together, at
the end whereof their water coming to sail, all died but those three he saw
before him. Upon the finishing of this relation we proceeded on in our course,
and within four days after we met with five Portugal vessels, which were
sailing from Bengala to Malaca. Having showed them Pedro de Faria's Order, I
desired them to keep in consort together for fear of the Achems Army, that
ranged all over the Coast, lest through their imprudence they should fall into
any mischief, and thereof I demanded a Certificate from them, which they
willingly granted, as also furnished me very plentifully with all things
necessary. Having made this dispatch we continued our course, and nine days
after we arrived at the Bar of Martabano, on a Friday, the seven and twentieth
of March, one thousand, five hundred, forty and five, having past by
Tarnassery, Tovay, M^rguin, Iuncay, Pullo, Camuda, and Vagaruu, without hearing
any tidings of those hundred Portugals, in search of whom I went, because
before that they had taken pay in the service of the Chaubainhaa, King of
Martabano, who, according to report, had sent for them to assist him against
the King of Bramaa, that held him besieged with an Army of seven hundred
thousand men, as I have declared before; howbeit they were not at this time in
his Service, as we shall see presently.

. 2.
It was almost two hours within night, when we arrived at the mouth of the
River, where we cast anchor with a resolution to go up the next day to the
City; Having continued some time very quiet, we ^ver and anon heard many Cannon
shot, whereat we were so troubled, as we knew not what to resolve on; As soon
as the Sun rose, the N^coda assembled his men to Council, for in Semblable
occasions he always used so to do, and told them, that as sure as they were all
to have a share in the peril, so it was fit that every one should give his
advice about it; Then he made them a Speech, wherein he represented unto them
that which they had heard that night, and how in regard thereof he feared to go
unto the City. Their opinions upon it were very different, howbeit at length
they concluded, that their eyes were to be witnesses of that whereof they stood
in such doubt: To this end we set Sail, having both wind and tide, and doubled
a po^nt, called Mounay, from whence we discovered the City, environed with a
world of men, and upon the River almost as many vessels, and although we
suspected what this might be, because we had heard something of it, yet left we
not off from sailing to the Port, where we arrrived with a great deal of care,
and having discharged our Ordnance according to the usual manner in sign of
peace, we perceived a vessel very well furnished, came directly to us from the
shore, wherein there was six Portugals, at which we exceedingly rejoiced; These
presently came abord our Junck, where they were very well entertained, and
having declared unto us what we were to do for the safety of our persons, they
councelled us not to budge from thence for any thing in the world, as we had
told them our resolution was to have fled that night to Bengala, because if we
had followed that design, we had (...) been lost, and taken by the Fleet which
the King of Bramaa had in that place, consisting (...) seventeen hundred Sayls,
wherein were comprised an hundred Galleys very well furnished with strangers.
They added withal, that they were of opinion I should go ashore with them to
Ioano Cay^yro, who was Captain of the Portugals, for to give him an account of
the cause that brought me thither, the rather for that he was a man of a sweet
disposition, and a great friend of Pedro de Faria's, to whom they had often
heard him give much commendation, as well for his noble extraction, as for the
goodly qualities that were in him; besides they told me that I should find
Lancarote Gueyreyro, and the rest of the Captains with him, unto whom my
aforesaid Letters were directed, and that I should do nothing therein
prejudicial to the Service of God, and the King. This counsel seeming good unto
me, I went presently to land with the Portugals to wait on Ioano Cayeyro, to
whom I was exceeding w^lcome, as likewise to all the rest that were in his
quarters, to the number of seven hundred Portugals, all rich men, and of good
esteem. Then I showed Ioano Cayeyro my Letters, and the Order that Pedro de
Faria had given me; Moreover I treated with him about the affair that led me
thither: whereupon I observed that he was very instant with the Captains, to
whom I was addressed, who answered him that they were ready to serve the King in
all occasions that should be presented, howbeit since the Letter of Pedro de
Faria, Governor of Malaca, was grounded on the fear that he was in of the Army
of the Achems, composed of an hundred and thirty Sail, whereof Bijaya Sora King
of Pedir, was General, and it having fallen out, that his Admiral had been
defeated at Tarnasery by those of the Country, with the loss of seventy
Lanchares, and six thousand men, it was not needful they should stir for that
occasion; for according to what they had seen with their own eyes, the Forces
of that enemy were so mightily weakened, as they did not think he could in ten
years space recover again the loss he had sustained. To this they added many
other reasons, which made them all to agree, that it was not necessary they
should go to Malaca. After these things I desired Ioano Cayeyro to make me a
D^claration of all that had past in this business, that it might serve me as it
were for a Certificate at my return to our Fortress, determining as soon as I
had it to get me from this place, for that I had nothing more to do there. With
this resolution I stayed there with Ioano Cayeyro, in continual expectation to
be gone when the Season should serve for the Junck to depart, and remained with
him at this Siege the space of six and forty days, which was the chief time of
the King of Bramaa his abode there, of whom I will say something here in a few
words, because I conceive the curious would be well content to know what
success the Chaubainhaa, King of Martabano, had in this war. This Siege had
lasted now six months and thirteen days, in which space the City had been
assaulted five times in plain-day, but the besieged defended themselves always
very valiantly, and like men of great courage: Howbeit in regard they were
insensibly consumed with length of time, and the success of war, and that no
succor came to them from any part, their enemies were without comparison far
more in number then they, in such sort as the Chaubainhaa found himself so
destitute of men, as it was thought he had not above five thousand soldiers
left in the City, the hundred and thirty thousand which were said to be there
at the beginning of the Siege, being consumed by Famine, or the Sword, by
reason whereof the Council assembling for to deliberate what was to be done
thereupon, it was resolved that the King should sound his enemy by his
Interest, which he presently put in execution: For that effect he sent to tell
him, that if he would raise the Siege he would give him thirty thousand Bisses
of silver, which is in value a million of gold, and would become his Tributary
at threescore thousand Ducats by the year. The answer made by the King of
Bramaa hereunto was, that he could accept of no conditions from him, if he did
not first yield himself to his mercy. The second time he propounded unto him,
that if he would suffer him to depart away with two ships, in one of the which
should be his Treasure, and in the other his Wife and Children, that then he
would deliver him the City, and all that was in it. But the King of Bramaa
would hearken no more to that then the former. The third Proposition which he
made him was this, That he should retire with his Army to Tagalaa, some six
leagues off, that so he might have liberty to go away freely with all his, and
thereupon he would deliver him the City, and the Kingdom, together with all the
Treasure belonging to the King his Predecessor, or that in lieu thereof he
would give him three millions of gold: But he also refused this last offer,
insomuch that the Chaubainhaa utterly dispairing of ever making his peace with
so cruel an enemy, began to meditate with himself what means he might use to
save himself from him; Having long thought upon it he found no better an
expedient then therein to serve himself of the succor of the Portugals, for he
was persuaded that by their means he might escape the present danger. He sent
then secretly to tell Ioano Cayeyro, that if he would imbarque himself in the
night in his four ships, and take him in, with his wife, and children, and so
save them, he would give him half his treasure. In this affair he very closely
employed a certain Portugal, named Paulo de Seixas, born in the Town of Obidos,
who at that time was with him in the City; This same having disguised himself
in a Pegu habit, that he might not be known, stole one night to Cayeyro's Tent,
and delivered him a Letter from the Chaubainhaa, wherein this was contained:
Valiant and faithful Commander of the Portugals, through the Grace of the great
King of the other end of the world, the strong and mighty Lion, dreadfully
roaring, with a Crown of Majesty in the House of the Sun, I the unhappy
Chaubainhaa, heretofore a Prince, but now no longer so, finding my self
besieged in this wretched and unfortunate City, do give thee to understand by
the words pronounced out of my mouth, with an assurance no less faithful then
true, that I now render my self the Vassel of the great King of Portugal,
Sovereign Lord of me, and my children, with an acknowledgement of homage, and
such tribute as he at his pleasure shall impose on me: wherefore I require thee
on his behalf, that as soon as Paulo Seixas shall present this my Letter unto
thee, thou come speedily with thy Ships to the Bulwark of the Chappel-key,
where thou shall find me ready attending thee, and then without taking further
counsel, I will deliver my self up to thy mercy, with all the treasures that I
have in gold, and precious stones, whereof I will most willingly give the one
half to the King of Portugal, upon condition that he shall permit me with the
remainder to leavy in his Kingdom, or in the Fortresses which he has in the
Indiaes, two thousand Portugals, to whom I will give extraordinary great pay
that by their means I may be re-established in this State, which now I am
constrained to abandon; since my ill fortune will have it so. As for that which
concerns thee, and thy men, I do promise them by the faith of my verity, that
in case they do help to save me, I will divide my treasure so liberally among
them, that all of them shall be very well satisfied and contented; And for
that, time will not suffer me to enlarge any further; Paulo de Seixas, by whom
I send this unto thee, shall assure thee both of that which he has seen, and
of the rest which I have communicated unto him. Ioano Cayeyro had no sooner
received this Letter, but he presently caused the chief of his followers
secretly to assemble together in Council. Having showed them the Letter, he
represented unto them how important and profitable it would be for the service
of God and the King to accept of the offer, which the Chaubainhaa had made
them; Whereupon causing an Oath to be given to Paulo de Seixas, he willed him
freely to declare all his knowledge of the matter, and whether it were true that
the Chaubainhaa his Treasure was so great, as it was reported to be. Thereunto
he answered by the Oath that he had taken, That he knew not certainly how great
his Treasure was, but that he was well assured how he had often seen with his
own eyes, an house in form of a Church, and of a reasonable bigness, all ^ull
up to the very tyles of bars and wedges of Gold, which might very well lade two
great Ships: He further said, That he had moreover seen six and twenty Chests
bound about with strong cords, wherein according to the Chaubainhaa his own
report was the Treasure of the deceased Bresaguean King of Pegu, which said
Treasure containing an hundred and thirty thousand Bisses, and every Biss in
value five hundred Ducats, made up all together the sum of threescore Millions
of Gold: He said also, That he knew not certainly the number of the wedges of
Gold which he had seen in the Temple of the God of Thunder, but he was most
assured notwithstanding that they would fully lade four good Vessels: And for a
conclusion he told them, That the same Chaubainhaa had showed him the golden
Image of Quiay Frigau, which was taken at Degum, all full of such rich and
resplendent stones, as it was thought the like again were not in the whole
world; So that this Declaration which this man made upon Oath astonished them
so that heard it, as they could not possibly believe it to be true. Howbeit
after they had sent him out of the Tent, they entered into consultation about
this affair, wherein nothing was resolved, of which I verily believe our sins
were the cause, for there were in this Assembly as many different opinions, as
Babel had diversities of Languages, which proceeded especially from the envy of
six or seven men there present, who would needs persuade the rest, that if this
affair should happen to have such success, as was hoped for, Ioano Cayeyro
(unto whom they all bore no good will) would go then into Portugal with so much
honor and reputation, as it would be a small matter for the King to make him an
Earl, or a Marquis, or at least recompense him with the Government of the
Indiaes; so that after these Ministers of the Devil had alleged many reasons
wherefore it might not be done, which I think was but the mask of their
weakness and ill nature, though it may be they did it out of the fear they were
in of losing both their goods and lives if this matter should come to be
discovered to the King of Bramaa; howsoever they would not agree to accept of
this offer, but contrariwise they threatened Ioano Cayeyro, that if he desisted
not from his purpose, which was to comply with the Chaubainhaa, they would
disclose it to the Bramaa, so that Cayeyro was constrained to abandon this
business, lest if he should persist therein the Portugals themselves would
discover him, as they threatened to do, without either fear of God, or regard
of men.

. 3.
Ioana Cayeyro, seeing he could not possibly bring his desire to pass, wrote a
Letter to the Caubainhaa, wherein he used many weak excuses for not performing
that which he demanded of him, and giving it to Paulo de Seixas, he speedily
dispatched him away with it, so that departing about three hours after midnight
he arrived safe at the City, where he found the Caubainhaa attending him in the
same place which he had named in his Letter, unto whom he delivered the Answer
he had brought; After he had read it, and thereby found that he could not be
succored by our men, as he always thought he should, it is said that he
remained so confounded, that for very grief and sorrow he sunk down to the
ground like a dead man, and continuing a pretty while in that manner, at length
he came again to himself, and then beating his breast, and bewailing his
miserable fortune, Ah Portugals, said he with tears in his eyes, how ill do you
acknowledge that which I have done for you, imagining that thereby I should make
acquisition of your friendship, as of a treasure, to the end that like faithful
men you would be assisting to me in so great a necessity as this is which now I
am in, whereby I desired no other thing then to save my childrens lives, enrich
your King, and state you in the number of my chiefest friends? And would it had
pleased him, who raigns in the beauty of these stars, that you had merited
before him the doing me this good office, which only for my sins you have
refused me, for in so doing you had by my means augmented his Law, and I been
saved in the promises of his truth. Thereupon sending away Paulo de Seixas,
with a young Wench, by whom he had had two sons, he gave him a pair of
Bracelets, and said unto him, I desire thee not to think of this little which
now I give thee, but of the great love I have always born thee; above all,
forget not to tell the Portugals, with how much cause and grief I complain of
their extreme ingratitude, whereof I will render them culpaple before God at
the last and dreadful day of Judgment. The night following Paul de Seixas came
back to the Portugals, with two children, and a very fair young Damosal their
Mother, with whom he married afterward at Coromandel, and showed to Simon de
Binto, and Pedro de Bruges* Lapidares, the Bracelets which the Chaubainhaa had
given him, who buying them of him paid six and thirty thousand Ducats for
them, and had afterward fourscore thousand for them of Trimira Raia Governor
of Narsingua. Five days after Paulo de Seixas coming to the Camp, where he
recounted all that I have related before, the Chaubainhaa, seeing himself
destitute of all humane remedy, advised with his Council what course he should
take in so many misfortunes, that daily in the neck of one another fell upon
him, and it was resolved by them to put to the sword all things living that
were not able to fight, and with the blood of them to make a Sacrifice to Q^iay
Nivandel, God of Battles, then to cast all the treasure into the Sea, that
their Enemies might make no benefit of it, afterward to set the whole City on
fire, and lastly that all those which were able to beat arms should make
themselves Amoucos, that is to say, men resolved either to dye, or vanquish, in
fighting with the Bramaas. The Chaubainhaa very much approved this counsel, and
concluding of it accordingly they fell presently to the demolishing of houses,
and were preparing all other things for the effecting of their design, when as
one of the three principal Commanders of the City, apprehending that which was
to follow the next day, fled the night ensuing to the Enemies Camp, and there
rendered himself with four thousand men under his leading to the Bramaa;
Hereupon the courages of all the rest were so abated by such a strange
infidelity and flight, that not one of them cared afterward either to keep
watch, maintain the brea^hes, or do any other service whatsoever, but
contrarily all that remained stuck not to say publicly, that if the
Chaubainhaa would not suddenly resolve to yield himself to the Bramaa, they
would open the gates and let him in, for that it would be better for them to
^ye so, then to languish and consume away like rotten beasts as they did* The
Chaubainhaa seeing them stiffly bent thereunto for to appease them answered,
that he would perform their desire, howbeit withal he caused a review to be
made of those that would fight, but he ^ound them to be not above two thousand
in all, and they too so destitute of courage, as they ^ould hardly have
resisted feeble women: Beholding himself then reduced to the last cast, he
communicated his mind to the Queen only, as having no other at that time by
whom he may be advised, or that indeed could advise him; The only expedient
then that he could rest on, was to render himself into the hands of his Enemy,
and to stand to his mercy, or his rigor. Wherefore the next day about six of
the clock in the morning he c^u^ed a white flag to be hung out over the wall in
sign of peace, whereunto they of the Camp answered with another like banner;
Hereupon the Xenimbrum, who was as it were Marshal of the Camp, sent an
horseman to the bulwark, where the flag stood, unto whom it was delivered from
the top of the wall, That the Chaubainhaa desired to send a Letter to the King,
so as he might have a safe conduct for it, which being signified to the
Xenimbrum, he instantly dispatched away two of good quality in the Army with a
safe conduct, and so these two Bramaa^ remaining for hostages in the City, the
Chaubainhaa sent the King a Letter by one of his Priests, that was fourscore
years of age, and reputed for a Saint amongst them. The contents of this Letter
were these: The love of children has so much power in this house of our
weakness, that amongst us, who are fathers, there is not so much as one that
for their sakes would not be well contented to descend a thousand times into
the deep pit of the house of the Serpent, much more would expose his life for
them, and put himself into the hands of one that uses so much clemency toward
them that shall do so: For which reason I resolved this night with my wife and
children, contrary to the opinions that would dissuade me from this good, which
I hold the greatest of all others, to render my self unto your Highness, that
you may do with me as you think fit, and as shall be most agreeable to your
good pleasure. As for the fault, wherewith I may be charged, and which I submit
at your feet, I humbly beseech you not to regard it, that so the merit of the
mercy, which you shall show me, may be the greater before God and men. May your
Highness therefore be pleased to send some presently for to take possession of
my person, of my wife, of my children, of the City, of the Treasure, and of all
the Kingdom; all which I do even now yield up unto you, as to my Sovereign
Lord, and lawful King. All the request that I have to make unto you thereupon
with my knees on the ground, i^, that we may all of us with your permission
finish our days in a Cloister, where I have already vowed continually to bewail
and repent my fault past; For as touching the honors and estates of the world,
wherewith your Highness might enrich me, as Lord of the most part of the Earth,
and of the Isles of the Sea, they are things which I utterly renounce for
evermore. In a word, I do solemnly swear unto you before the greatest of all
the Gods, who with the gentle touch of his Almighty hand makes the Clouds of
Heaven to move, never to leave that Religion which by your pleasure I shall be
commanded to profess, where being freed from the vain hopes of the world, my
repentance may be the more pleasing to him that pardons all things. This holy
Grepo, Dean of the golden House of Saint Quiay, who for his goodness and
austerity of life has all power over me, will make a more ample relation unto
you of what I have omitted, and can more particularly tell you that which
concerns the offer I make you of rendering my self, that so relying on the
reality of his Speech, the unquietness wherewith my soul is incessantly
troubled may be appeased. The King of Bramaa having read this Letter instantly
returned another in answer thereunto full of promises and oaths to this effect,
That he would forget all that was past, and that for the future he would
provide him an estate of so great a Revenue, as should very well content him:
Which he but badly accomplished, as I shall declare hereafter. These news was
published throughout all the Camp with a great deal of joy, and the next
morning all the Equipage and Train that the King had in his quarter was set
forth to view: First of all there were to be seen fourscore and six
Field-Tents, wonderful rich, each of them being environed with thirty
Elephants, ranked in two Files, as if they had been ready to fight, with
Castles on their backs full of Banners, and their Panores fastened to their
Trunks, the whole number of them amounted unto two thousand, five hundred, and
fourscore: Not far from them were twelve thousand and five hundred Bramaas, all
mounted on horses, very richly accoustred; with the order, which they kept,
they enclosed all the Kings quarter in four Files, and were all armed in
Corslets, or Coats of Mayl, with Lances, Cymitars, and gilded Bucklers. After
these Horse followed four Files of Foot, all Bramaas, being in number above
twenty thousand. For all the other Soldiers of the Camp there were so many as
they could not be counted, and they marched all in order after their Captains.
In this public Muster were to be seen^ world of Banners, and rich colors,
and such a number of Instruments of war sounded, that the noise thereof,
together with that which the Soldiers made, was most dreadful, and so great as
it was not possible to hear one another. Now for that the King of Bramaa would
this day make show of his greatness in the reddition of the Chaubainhaa, he
gave express Command, that all the Captains which were strangers, with their
men, should put on their best clothes, and Arms, and so ranged in two Files,
they should make as it were a kind of street, through which the Chaubainhaa
might pass; this accordingly was put in execution; and this street took
beginning from the City gate, and reached as far as to the Kings Tent, being in
length about three quarters of a League, or better: In this street there were
six and thirty thousand strangers of two and forty different Nations, namely
Portugals, Grecians, Venetians, Turks, Ianizaries, Jews, Arm^nians, Tartars,
Mogores, Abyssins, Raizbutos, Nobins, Coracones, Persians, Tuparaas, Gizares,
Tanacos, Malabares, Iaos, Achems, Moens, Siams, Lussons of the Island Borneo,
Chacomas, Arracons, Predins, Papuaas, S^lebres, Mindanoas, Pegus, Bramaas, and
many others whose names I know not. All these Nations were ranked according to
the Xemimbrums order, whereby the Portugals were placed in the Vantgard, which
was next to the gate of the City where the Chabainhaa was to come; After them
followed the Arm^nians, then the Ianizaries and Turks, and so the rest.

CHAP. LI. In what manner the Chaubainhaa rendered himself to the King of
Bramaa, and the cruel proceeding against the Queen of Martabano, and the
Ladies, her Attendants.
ABout one of the clock in the afternoon a Cannon was shot off, which was the
Signal for the instant opening of the gates of the City,. 1
whereupon first of all issued out the Soldiers, whom the King had sent
thither for the guard of it, being four thousand Siams and Bramaas, all
Harquebusiers, Halberdiers, and Pikemen, with above three hundred armed
Elephants; all which were commanded by a Bramaa, Uncle to the King, named
Monpocasser, Bainba of the City of Melietay; Ten or eleven paces after this
Guard of Elephants marched diverse Princes, and great Lords, whom the King had
sent to receive the Chaubainhaa, all mounted on Elephants, richly harnessed,
with Chairs upon their backs, plated over with gold, and Collars of precious
stones about their necks; Then followed at some eight or nine paces distance
the Rolim of Monnay, Sovereign Talapoy of all the Priests of the Kingdom, and
held in the reputation of a Saint, who went alone with the Chaubainhaa, as a
Mediator between the King and him; immediately after them came in a close
Chair, carried upon men's shoulders, Nhay Canatoo, the daughter of the King of
Pegu, from whom this Bramaa had taken his Kingdom, and wife to the Chaubainhaa,
having with her four small children, namely, two boys, and two girls, whereof
the eldest was not seven years old; round about her and them went some thirty
or forty young women of noble extraction, and wonderful fair, with cast down
looks, and tears in their eyes, leaning upon other women: After them marched in
order certain Talagrepos, which are amongst them as the Capuchins with us, who
barefoot and bare-headed went along praying, holding beads in their hands, and
ever and anon comforting those Ladies the best they could, and casting water in
their faces for to bring them to themselves again, when as they fainted, which
they did very often; A spectacle so lamentable, as it was not possible to
behold it without shedding of tears: This desolate Company was attended by
another Guard of Foot, and five hundred Bramaas on Horseback. The Chaubainhaa
was mounted on a little Elephant, in sign of poverty and contempt of the
world, conformable to the Religion which he intended to enter into, being
simply apparelled in a long Cassock of black velvet, as a mark of his mourning,
having his beard, head, and eyebrows shaven, with an old cord about his neck,
so to render himself to the King; In this Equipage he appeared so sad and
afflicted, that one could not forbear weeping to behold him; As for his age, he
was about some threescore and two years old, tall of Stature, with a grave and
severe look, and the countenance of a generous Prince. As soon as he was
arrived at a place, which was near to the gate of the City, where a great
throng of women, children, and old men waited for him, when they saw him in so
deplorable an estate, they all made seven times one after another so loud and
dreadful a cry, as if Heaven and earth would have come together. Now these
lamentations and complaints were presently seconded with such terrible blows,
that they gave themselves without pity on their faces with stones, as they were
most of them all of a gore blood; In the mean time things so horrible to
behold, and mournful to hear, so much afflicted all the Assistants, that the
very Bramaas of the Guard, though men of war, and consequently but little
inclined to compassion, being also enemies to the Chaubainhaa, could not
forbear weeping. It was likewise in this place, where Nhay Cauatoo, and all the
other Ladies that attended on her, fainted twice, by reason whereof they were
fain to let the Chaubainhaa alight from his Elephant for to go and comfort her;
whereupon seeing her lying upon the ground in a swoon with her four children in
her arms, he kneeled down on both his knees, and looking up to Heaven with his
eyes full of tears. O mighty Power of God, cried he, who is able to comprehend
the righteous judgments of thy divine Justice, in that thou, having no regard
to the innocence of these little creatures, give way to thy wrath, which
passes far beyond the reach of our weak capacities! but remember; O Lord, who
thou art, and not what I am: This said, he fell with his face on the ground,
near to the Queen his wife, which caused all the Assembly, who were without
number, to make another such loud and horrible cry, as my words are not able to
express it; The Chaubainhaa then took water in his mouth, and spurted it on his
wife, by which means he brought her to her self again* and so taking her up in
his arms, he fell a comforting her with speeches so full of zeal and devotion,
as any one that heard him would have taken him rather for a Christian, then a
Gentile. After he had employed about half an hours time therein, and that they
had remounted him on his Elephant, they proceeded on their way in the same
orderas they held before, and as soon as the Chaubainhaa was out of the City
gate, and came to the streets which was formed of the several Companies of the
strangers, ranked in two Files, he by chance cast his eye on that side, where
the seven hundred Portugals were, all of them in their best clothes, with their
buffe-coats, great feathers in their Caps, and their Ha^quebuses on their
shoulders, as also Ioano Cayeyro ^n the midst of them, in a Carnation Satin
Suit, and a guilt Par^isan in his hand, wherewith he made room; the afflicted
Prince no sooner knew him, but he presently fell down on the Elephant, and
there standing still without passing on, he said with tears in his eyes, to
those that were about him; My brethren, and good friends, I protest unto you,
that it is a less grief unto me to make this sacrifice of my self, which the
divine Justice of God permits me to make him this day, then to look upon men so
wicked and ungrateful as these same here are; either kill me then, or send
these away, for otherwise I will not stir a foot further. Having said so he
turned away his face three times that he might not behold us, thereby showing
the great spleen that he bore us; and indeed all things well considered there
was a great deal of reason that he should carry himself in that sort toward us
in regard of that which I have related before: In the mean time the Captain of
the Guard seeing the stay which the Chaubainhaa had made, and understanding the
cause why he would not go on, though he could not imagine wherefore he
complained so of the Portugals, yet he hastily turned his Elephant toward
Cayeyro, and giving him a scurvy look: Ge^ you gone, said he, and that
instantly, for such wicked men as you are do not deserve to stand on any ground
that bears fruit, and I pray God to pardon him which has put it in the Kings
head that you can be any ways profitable unto him; It were fitter for you
therefore to shave away your beards that you may not deceive the world as you
do, and we will have women in your places that shall serve us for our money.
Whereupon the Bramaas of the Guard, being incensed against us, drove us away
from thence with a great deal of shame and contumely. And truly, not to lie,
never was I so sensible of any thing as this in respect of the honor of my
Countrymen. After this, the Chaubainhaa went on till he came to the Tent of
the King, who attended him with a Royal Pomp: for he was accompanied with a
great number of Lords, amongst the which there were fifteen Bainhaas, who are
as Dukes with us, and of six or seven others, that were of greater dignity then
they: As soon as the Chaubainhaa came near him, he threw himself at his feet,
and so prostrated on the ground he lay there a good while, as it were in a
swoon, wi^h^ut ^peaking a word, but the Rolim of Mounay, that was close by him,
supplied that defect, and lik^ a religious man, as he was, spoke for him to the
King, saying; Sir, Here is a Sp^ctacle able to move thy heart to pity, though
the crime be such as it is; Remember then that the thing most pleasing to God
in this world, and whereunto the effects of his mercy is soonest communicated,
is such an action, and voluntary submission, as this is, which here thou
behold^st: It is for thee now to imitate his clemency, and so to do thou art
most humbly entreated by the hearts of all them that are mollified by so great
a misfortune as this is; Now if thou grantest them this their request, which
with so much instance they beg of thee, be assured that God will take it in
good part, and that at the hour of thy death he will stretch forth his mighty
hand over thee, to the end thou may be exempted from all manner of faults.
Hereunto he added many other speeches, whereby he persuaded the King to pardon
him; at leastwise he promised so to do, wherewith the Rolim, and all the Lords
there present, showed themselves very well contented, and commended him
exceedingly for it, imagining that the effect should be answerable to that
which he had engaged himself for before all. Now because it began to be night,
he commanded the most of them that were about him to retire, as for the
Chaubainhaa, he committed him into the hands of a Bramaa Commander, named Xemin
Comm^dau, and the Queen his wife, with his children, and the other Ladies were
put into the custody of Xemin Ansedaa, as well because he had his wife there,
as for that he was an honorable old man, in whom the King of Bramaa much
confided.

. 2.
The fear which the King of Bramaa was in left the men of war should enter into
the City of Martabano, and should pillage it now that it was night before he
had done all that, which I am hereafter to relate, was the cause that he sent
to all the gates of the City, being four and twenty, Bramaa Captains for to
guard them, with express Commandment, that upon pain of death no man should be
suffered to enter in at any of them, before he had taken order for the
performance of the promise, which he had made to the strangers to give them the
spoil of it; howbeit he took not that care, and used such diligence for the
consideration he sp^ke of, but only that he might preserve the Chaubainhaas
treasure, to which effect he spent two whole days in conveighing it away, it
being so great that a thousand men were for that space altogether employed
therein; At the end of these two days the King went very early in the morning
to an hill, called Beidao, distant from his quarters some two or three flight
shoot, and then caused the Captains that were at the Guard of the gates to
leave them, and retire away; whereupon the miserable City of Martabono was
delivered to the mercy of the Soldiers, who at the shooting off of a Cannon,
which was the signal thereof, entered presently into it pell-mell, and so
thronging together, that at the entering into the gates, it is said above three
hundred were stifled, for as there was there an infinite company of men of War
of different Nations, the most of them without King, without Law, and without
the fear and knowledge of God, they went all to the Spoil with closed eyes,
and therein showed themselves so cruel minded, that the thing they made least
reckoning of was to kill an hundred men for a crown; And truly the disorder was
such in the City, as the King himself was fain to go thither six or seven times
in Person for to appease it. The Sack of this City endured three days and an
half, with so much avarice and cruelty of these barbarous enemies* as it was
wholly pillaged, without any thing left that might give an eye-cause to covet
it. That done, the King with a new ceremony of Proclamations caused the
Chaubainhaas Palaces, together with thirty or forty very fair rich Houses of
his principal Lords, and all the Pagods and Temples of the City to be
demolished, so that according to the opinion of many, it was thought that the
loss of those magnificent Edifices amounted to above ten millions of gold:
wherewith not yet contented he commanded all the buildings of the City that
were still a foot, to be set on fire, which by the violence of the wind kindled
in such manner, as in that only night there remained nothing unburnt, yea the
very Walls, Towers, and Bulwarks were consumed even to the foundations. The
number of them that were killed in this Sack was threescore thousand persons,
nor was that of the prisoners much less. There were an hundred and forty
thousand houses, and seventeen hundred Temples burnt, wherein also were
consumed threescore thousand Statues, or Idols of diverse metals, during this
Siege they of the City had eaten three thousand Elephants. There was found in
this City six thousand pieces of Artillery, what of brass and iron, an hundred
thousand Quintals of Pepper, and as much of Sanders, Benjamin, Lacre, Lignum
Aloes, Camphire, Silk, and many other kinds of rich Merchandise, but above all
an infinite number of commodities, which were come thither from the Indiaes in
above an hundred vessels of Cambaya, Achem, Melinda, Ceilam, and of all the
Straight of Mecqua, of the Lequios, and of China. As for the gold, silver,
precious stones, and jewels, that were found there, one knows not truly what
they were, for those things are ordinarily concealed; wherefore it shall
suffice me to say, that so much as the King of Bramaa had for certain of the
Chaubainhaas Treasure, amounted to an hundred Millions of gold, whereof, as I
have said before, our King lost the Moitie, as well for our sins, as through
the malice and envy of wicked dispositions. The next day after the City was
pillaged, demolished, and burnt, there was seen in the morning upon the hill
where the King was, one and twenty pair of Gallows, twenty of the which were of
an equal height, and the other a little lower erected on pillars of stone, and
guarded by an hundred Bramaa Horsemen; There were also round about the place
very large Trenches, where a great many Banners spotted with drops of bloods
were planted. As this Novelty promised somewhat which no man had heard of
before, six of us Portugals ran thither to learn what the matter might be, and
as we were going along we heard a great noise made by the men of War from the
Camp, whereupon we saw come out of the Kings Quarter a number of Horsemen, who
with Lances in their hands prepared a great Street, and cried out aloud; Let no
man upon pain of death appear in Arms, nor utter that with his mouth which he
thinks in his heart. A pretty way off from these Horse was the Xemimbrum, with
an hundred armed Elephants, and a good many Foot; after them went fifteen
hundred Bramaas on Horsback, cast into four Orders of Files, each of them six
in a rank, whereof the Talanagybras, Viceroy of Tangu, was Commander: Then
marched the Chauseroo Siammon with three thousand Siammes, armed with
Harquebuses and Lances, all in one Battalion: In the midst of these was an
hundred and twenty women tied and bound four and four together, and accompanied
with Talagrepos, men of great Austerity, and are such as the Capachins amongst
us, who labored all they might to comfort them in this last act of life;
Behind them were twelve Ushers with Maces, that went before Nhay Canatoo,
Daughter to the King of Pegu, from whom this Bramaa Tyrant had usurped his
Kingdom, and wife to the Chaubainhaa, with four children of hers, which were
carried by so many Horsemen: all these sufferers were the wives or daughters of
the principal Commanders that the Chaubainhaa had with him in the City, upon
whom in the way of a strange revenge this Bramaa Tyrant desired to wreak his
spite, and the hatred that he had always born unto women. The most of these
poor wretches were between seventeen and five and twenty years of age, all of
them very white and fair, with bright auborn hair, but so weak in body, that
oftentimes they fell down in a swoon, out of which certain women upon whom they
leaned, endeavored still to bring them again, presenting them Comfits, and
other such things fit for that purpose, but they would take none of them, for
that they were, as I have said, so feeble and benumbed, as they could scarce
hear what the Talegr^pes spoke unto them, only they now and then lifted up
their hands to Heaven. After this Princess marched threescore Grepos, in two
Files, praying with their looks fixed on the ground, and their eyes watered
with tears, saying ever and anon in a doleful tone; Thou which hold thy
Being of none but thy self, so justify our works, that they may be agreeable
to thy Justice. Whereunto others answered weeping; Grant, Lord, that it may be
so, that through our fault we lose not the rich gifts of thy promises. After
these Grepos followed a procession of three or four hundred little children,
quite naked from the Girdle-sted downwards, having in their hands great white
wax lights, and cords about their necks; These, like the others, with a sad and
lamentable voice, which moved every one to compassion, uttered these words: We
most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, to give ear unto our cries and groans, and
show mercy to these thy Captives, that with a full rejoicing they may have a
part of the graces and benefits of thy rich treasures; and much more they said
to that purpose in ^avour of these poor sufferers: Behind this Procession was
another Guard of Footmen, all Bramaas, and armed with Lances, Arrows, and some
Harquebuses. As for the Rear-ward, it consisted of an hundred Elephants, like
to them that marched first of all, so that the number of the men of War that
assisted at this Execution, as well for the Guard, as for the Pomp thereof, was
ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, besides the two hundred Elephants,
and a world of other people, both Strangers and Natives, that came thither to
behold the end of so mournful and lamentable and action.

CHAP. LII. In what sort the sentence of Death was executed on the person of
the Chaubainhaa, King of Martaban, Nhay Canatoo his wife, and an hundred and
forty women; with that which the King of Bramaa did after his return to Pegu.
THese poor sufferers having been led in the order before mentioned clean
through the Camp, they came at last to the place of Execution, 1.
where the six Ushers with a loud voice made this Proclamation: Let all manner
of people see and observe the bloody justice, which is here to be done by the
living God, Lord of all truth, and our King the Sovereign of our Heads, who of
his absolute power does command that these hundred and forty Women be put to
death, and thrown into the air, for that by their counsel and incitement their
Fathers and Husbands stood out against us in this City, and at times killed
twelve thousand Bramaas of the Kingdom of Tangu. Then at the ringing of a Bell
all the Officers and Ministers of Justice pel-mell together with the guards,
made such a cry, as was most dreadful to hear; whereupon the cruel Hangmen being
ready to put the sentence of Death in execution, those poor wretches embraced
one another, and shedding abundance of tears they addressed themselves to Nhay
Canatoo, who lay at that time almost dead in the lap of an old Lady, and with
their last complements one of them spoke for all the rest unto her in this
manner; Excellent Lady, that art as a crown of Roses upon our Heads, now that
we thy humble servants are entering into those mournful Mansions where Death
does reside, comfort us we beseech thee with thy dear sight, that so we may
with less grief quit these bodies full of anguish for to present our selves
before that Almighty just Judge, of whom we will for ever implore his justice
for a perpetual vengeance of the wrong that is done us. Then Nhay Canatoo
beholding them with a countenance more dead then alive, answered them with a
feeble voice, that could scarce be heard, Go not away so soon, my Sisters, but
help me to sustain these little children. That said, she leaned down again on
the bosom of that Lady, without speaking a word more, whereupon the Ministers
of the Arm of Vengeance, so they term the Hangmen, laid hold on those poor
women, and hanged them up all by the feet, with their heads downwards, upon
twenty Gibbets, namely seven on each one: now so painful a death as this was,
made them give strange and fearful groans and sobs, until at length the blood
stifled them all in less then an hour. In the mean time Nhay Canatoo was
conducted by the four women, upon whom she leaned, directly to the Gallows
whereon she and her four children were to be hanged, and there the Rolim of
Mounay, who was held amongst them for a holy man, used some speeches unto her
for to encourage her the better to suffer death, whereupon she desired them to
give her a little water, which being brought unto her, she filled he mouth with
it, and so spurted it upon her four children, whom she held in her arms; then
having kissed them many times, she said unto them weeping, O my Children, my
Children, whom I have conceived anew within the interior of my Soul, how happy
would I think my self if I might redeem your lives with the loss of mine own a
thousand times over if it were possible! for in regard of the fear and anguish
wherein I see you at this present, and wherein every one sees me also, I should
receive Death with as good an heart from the hand of this cruel Enemy, as I
willingly desire to see my self in the presence of the Sovereign Lord of all
things, within the repose of his celestial Habitation. Then turning her to the
Hangman, who was going to bind her two little boys, Good Friend, said she, be
not I pray thee so void of pity, as to make me see my children dye, for in so
doing thou would commit a great sin; wherefore put me first to death, and
refuse me not this boon which I crave of thee for Gods sake. After she had thus
spoken she took her children again in her arms, and kissing them over and over
in giving them her last farewell, she yielded up the ghost in the Ladies lap
upon whom she leaned, not so much as once stirring ever after, which the
Hangman perceiving, ran presently unto her and hanged her as he had done the
rest, together with her four little children, two of each side of her, and she
in the middle. At this cruel and pitiful spectacle there arose from amongst all
this people so great and hideous a cry, that the Earth seemed to tremble under
the feet of them that stood upon it, and withal there followed such a Mutiny
throughout the whole Camp, as the King was constrained to fortify himself in
his quarter with six thousand Bramaa Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, and yet
for all that be thought not himself secure enough from it, had not the night
come, which only was able to calm the furious motions of these men of war; For
of seven hundred thousand which were in the Camp, six hundred thousand were by
Nation Pegu's, whose King was the Father of this Queen, that was thus put to
death; but this Tyrant of Bramaa had so disarmed and subjected them, as they
durst not so much as quich upon any occasion. Behold in what an infamous manner
Nhay Canatoo finished her days, a Princess every way accomplished, wife to the
Chaubainhaa King of Martabano, and the daughter of the King of Pegu, Emperor of
nine Kingdoms, whose yearly Revenue amounted unto three millions of Gold. As
for the unfortunate King her Husband, he was the same night cast into the River
with a great stone tied about his neck, together with fifty or threescore of
his chiefest Lords, who were either the Fathers, Husbands or Brothers of those
hundred and forty Ladies, that were most unjustly put to such an ignominious
death, amongst the which there were three, whom this King of Bramaa had
demanded in marriage at such time as he was but a simple Earl, but not one of
their Fathers would condescend unto it, whereby one may see how great the
revolutions of time and fortune are.

. 2.
After the Tyrant of Bramaa had caused this rigorous Justice to be done, he
stayed there nine whole days, during the which many of the Inhabitants of the
City were also execued; At last he departed for to go to Pegu, leaving behind
him Bainhaa Chaque, Lord Steward of his House, to take order for all things
that might conduce to the pacifying of that Kingdom, and to provide for the
repairing of what the fire had consumed, to which purpose he placed a good
Garrison there, and carried with him the rest of his Army; Ioano Cayeyro
followed him also with seven hundred Portugals, not above three or four
remaining behind in the ruins of Martabano, and those too not very
considerable, except it were one, named Goncalo Falcan, a Gentleman well born,
and whom these Gentiles commonly called Crisna Pacan, that is to say, Flower of
Flowers, a very honorable Title amongst them, which the King of Bramaa had
given him in recompense of his services: Now for as much as at my departure
from Malaca, Pedro de Faria had given me a Letter directed unto him, whereby he
desired him to assist me with his favor, in case I had need of it in the affair
for which he sent me thither, as well for the service of the King, as for his
own particular; as soon as I arrived at Martabano, where I found him resident,
I delivered him this Letter, and withal gave him an account of the occasion
that brought me thither, which was to confirm the ancient league of Peace that
the Chaubainhaa had made by his Ambassadors with them of Malaca, at such time
as Pedro de Faria was first Governor of it, and whereof he could not choose but
have some knowledge; adding moreover, how to that effect I had brought the
Chaubainhaa Letters full of great protestations of amity, and a Present of
certain very rich Pieces of China. Hereupon this Goncalo Falcan imagining that
by means hereof he might insinuate himself much more into the good grace of the
King of Bramaa, to whose side he turned at the siege of Martabano, quitting
that of the Chaubainhaa, whom formerly he served, he went three days after the
Kings departure to his said Governor, and told him that I was come thither, as
Ambassador from the Captain of Malaca to treat with the Chaubainhaa, unto whom
the Captain sent an offer of great Forces against the King of Bramaa, in so
much that they of the Country were upon the point of fortifying themselves in
Martabano, and chasing away the Bramaas out of the Kingdom; whereunto he added
so many other such like matters, that the Governor sent presently to apprehend
me, and after he had put me into safe custody, he went directly to the Junck,
in which I came from Malaca, and seized upon all the goods that were in her,
which were worth above an hundred thousand ducats, committing the Necoda,
Captain and Master of the Junck, to prison, as also all the rest that were in
her, to the number of an hundred threescore and four persons, wherein comprised
forty rich Merchants, Malayes, Menancabo's, Mahumetans, and Gentiles, Natives
of Malaca. All these were incontinently condemned to a confiscation of their
goods, and to remain the Kings prisoners, as well as I, for being accomplices in
the Treason, which the Captain of Malaca had plotted in secret with the
Chaubainhaa against the King of Bramaa. Having thus caused them to be put into
a deep Dungeon, he made them to be so cruelly scourged, that within a month
after their imprisonment, of an hundred sixty four of them, which they were,
there dyed nineteen, either of a Lethargy, or of hunger, or thirst. As for the
rest, they were put into a miserable Shallop without Sails or Oars, wherein
they were exposed down the River: Being delivered in this sort to the mercy of
Fortune, they were cast by the wind into a desert Island, called Pulho Canuida,
seated twenty leagues within the Sea of this Bar, where they furnished
themselves with some Seafish, and such fruits as they found in the woods, and
in this necessity making a kind of sail of the clothes they had, and with two
Oars, which it may be they met withal there, or made themselves, they took
their course all along by the Coast of Iuncalan, and from thence to another
place, wherein they employed the space of two months, arriving at length at the
River of Parles in the Kingdom of Qu^da, where they all dyed of certain
Impostumes, which rose in their throats like unto Carbuncles, two only
excepted, who came to Malaca, and recounted to Pedro de Faria the whole success
of this sad Voyage, and how that I was condemned to dye, as indeed I expected
every hour to be led to execution, when as it pleased God to deliver me
miraculously; for as soon as the Necoda and the Merchants were banished in the
manner that I have declared, I was committed to another prison farther off,
where I remained six and thirty days laden with chains and irons in a most
cruel and insupportable manner; During all that time the Traitor Goncalo
exhibited against me daily new and false allegations, wherein he charged me
with a world of things, which I never so much as thought of, and that to no
other intent but to procure my death, that so he might rob me, as he had done
all the rest that were in the Junck: To which end, having questioned me three
several times in Judgment, I never answered any thing to his Interrogatories
that was to purpose, whereat he and other of my Enemies were much enraged,
saying, that I did it out of pride, and in contempt of Justice, so that for a
punishment thereof they caused me to be openly whipped, and a great deal of
lacre, which is like unto hard wax, to be dropped scalding hot upon me, whereof
the pain was such, as it had almost killed me, and indeed all that were by,
held me for a dead man. Now because for the most part I knew not what I spoke,
but talked like a desperate man, I happened three or four times to say, that
for to rob me of my goods I had all these false accusations put upon me, but
that Captain Ioano Cayeyro, who was at Pegu, would ere it were long acquaint
the King with this cruel usage of me, which was the cause of saving my life;
for even as this wicked Governor was going to have the sentence executed, which
was given against me, some of his friends counseled him to forbear, saying,
that if he put me to death, no doubt but that all the Portugals, which were at
Pegu, would complain of him to the King, and tell him, that for to rob me of an
hundred thousand ducats, which I had there in Commodities, appertaining to the
Captain of Malaca, he had most unjustly taken away my life: And that this being
so, the King would demand an account of him of all those Commodities, or of the
Money for them, and that if he rendered him even all that he had taken from me,
yet would not that content him, imagining still there was somewhat more,
whereby he would so put himself out of the good grace of the King, as he would
never recover it again, which would be the cause of the utter overthrown both
of himself and his children, besides the dishonor that would redound to him
over and above. This dog the Governor Bainbaa Chaque, fearing lest that should
come to pass which they ^ad said, desisted from his former obstinacy, and
correcting the sentence he had given, he ordained, That I should not dye, but
that my goods should be confiscated, and my self arrested for the Kings
prisoner; As indeed so soon as I was healed of the hurts, which the burning of
the lacre, and the stripes of the whips had made upon me, I was conducted in
chains to Pegu, and there as a prisoner was put into the hands of a Bramaa,
Treasurer to the King, named Diosoray, who had also in his custody eight other
Portugals, whose sins had procured them the same misfortune, which mine had
caused unto me; for it was now full six months since these poor wretches had
been in his power, being taken in the ship of Don Anrique Deca of Cananor,
which by a tempest was cast on that Coast. Now seeing that hitherto I have
discoursed of the success of my Voyage to Martabano, and of the benefit that
redounded to me by my going thither for the service of the King, which was no
other then the loss of my goods, and the imprisonment of my person; before I
engage my self further in these relations, I am resolved to entreat of the
diverse Fortunes, which I ran in that Kingdom for the space of two years and an
half that I traveled therein, being the time of my Captivity, as also of the
several Count^^es through which I was carried by my crosses and mishaps, as
holding it altogether necessary for the declaration of that which I am going on
withal. I say then, that after this King of Bramaa was departed from the City
of Martabano, as I have related before, he journeyed so long that at length he
came to Pegu, where, before he dismissed his Commanders, he caused a Muster to
be made of his Army, and found that of seven hundred thousand men, which he had
carried along with him to the besieging of the Chaubainhaa, there was fourscore
and six thousand of them wanting: And for as much as he had about that time
some inckling how the King of Avaa, confederated with the Savadis and Chaleus,
would give entry unto the Sianmon (whose Country borders on the West and
Northwest side on the Calaminban, Emperor of the indomptable Forces of the
Elephants of the Earth, as I will show hereafter when I speak of him) to the
end he might win from this Bramaa the chiefest strengths of his Kingdom, he
like a good Captain as he was, and very cunning in matter of War, before he
passed on further, caused men to be levied, with whom, as also with all other
necessary things he furnished those principal Fortresses from whence his
greatest fear proceeded. Then having resolved to go and besiege the City of
Prom, he retained the Army, which he had already a foot, and made new and great
preparations throughout the Kingdom, using such diligence therein, as in six
months time he had got together the number of nine hundred thousand men, whom
he imba^qued in twelve thousand rowing Vessels, whereof two thousand were
Seroos, Laulers, Caturos, and Foists. Now all this great Fleet set forth from
Pegu the ninth day of March, 1545. and going up the River of Ansedaa, it went
to Danapluu, where it was furnished with all such provisions as was necessary.
From this place following on their way through a great River of fresh water,
called Picau Malacou, which was above a league broad, at length upon the
thirteenth of April they came within view of Prom. There, by some whom they
took that night, they learned, that the King was dead, and how he had left for
his successor to the Kingdom a son of his of thirteen years of age, whom the
King his Father before he dyed had married to his wives sister, the Aunt of the
said young Prince, and Daughter to the King of Avaa. This young King was no
sooner advertised of the King of Bramaa his coming to besiege him in his City
of Prom, but he sent presently away to the King his Father-in-law for succor,
which he instantly granted, and to that end speedily raised an Army of 30000
Mons, Tarces, and Chalems, choice men and trained up in the Wars, of whom he
made a son of his, and brother to the Queen, General. In the mean time the
Bramaa, having intelligence thereof, used all possible diligence for to besiege
the City before so great a succor might arrive. To which purpose, having landed
his Army in a plain, called Meigavotau, some two leagues below the City, he
continued there five days in making ready such preparations as were needful;
Having given order for all things, he caused his Army to march one morning
before day directly to the City, with the sound of Drums, Fifes, and other such
instruments of War; where being arrived about noon without any opposition, he
began presently to settle his Camp, so that before it was night, the whole City
was environed with Trenches* and very great Ditches, as also with six rows of
Cannons, and other Pieces of Ordnance.

CHAP. LIII. That which passed between the Queen of Prom, and the King of
Bramaa, together with the first Assault that was given to the City and the
Success thereof.
THe King of Bramaa had been now five days before the City of Prom,. 1.
when as the Queen that governed the State in the place of her Husband, seeing
her self thus besieged, sent to visit this her enemy with a rich jewel of
precious stones, which was presented unto him by a Talagrepo, or religious man,
of above an hundred years old, who was held amongst them for a Saint, together
with a Letter, wherein this was written; Great and mighty Lord, more favored
in the House of fortune then all the Kings of the earth, the force of an
extreme power, an increasing of the Salt-seas, whereinto all lesser rivers do
render themselvos a Shield full of very fair devices, Processor of the greatest
States, upon the Throne whereof thy feet do repose with a mavelous Majesty: I
Nhay Nivolau, a poor woman, Governess, and Tutress of my Son, an Orphan, do
prostrate my self before thee with tears in mine eyes, and with the respect
which ought to be rendered unto thee; I beseech thee not to draw thy Sword
against my weakness, for thou know that I am but a silly woman, which can
but only cry unto God for the wrong that it done me, whose property also it is
to succor with mercy, and to chastise with justice the States of the world be
they never so great, trampling them under his feet with so redoubted a power,
that the very Inhabitants of the profound house of smoke do fear and tremble
before this Almighty Lord: I pray and conjure thee not to take from me that
which is mine, seeing it is so small a thing, as thou shall not be the greater
for it when thou have it, nor yet the less if thou have it not; whereas
contrarily, if thou, my Lord, wilt show thy self pitiful to me, that act of
clemency will bring thee such reputation, as the very Infants themselves will
cease from sucking the white breasts of their Mothers for to praise thee with
the pure lips of their innocence, and likewise all they of my Country, and
Strangers will ever remember such thy charity toward me, and I my self will
cause it to be graven on the Tombs of the dead, that both they and the living
may give thee thanks for a thing, which I do beg of thee with so much instance
from the bottom of my heart. This holy man, Avenlachim, from whom thou shall
receive this Letter, written with mine own hand, has Power and Authority to
treat with thee in the Name of my Fatherless Son, concerning all that shall be
judged reasonable touching the tribute and homage which thou shall think fit to
have rendered unto thee, upon condition that thou will be pleased to let us
enjoy our houses, so that under a true assurance thereof we may bring up our
children, and gather the fruit of our labors for the nourishment of the poor
Inhabitants of this paltry Town, who will all serve thee, and I to with a most
humble respect in all things, wherein thou shall think good to employ us at thy
pleasure.

The Bramaa received this Letter and Embassage with a great deal of authority,
and entertained the Religious man, that delivered it to him, with much honor,
as well in reguard of his age, as for that he was held as a Saint amongst them;
with all he granted him certain things which were at first demanded, as a
Cessation of Arms till such time as Articles should be agreed on, as also a
permission for the Besieged to converse with the Besiegers, and other such
things of little consequence; In the mean time judging with himself that all
those offers, which this poor Queen made him, and the humble submissions of her
Letter proceeded from weakness and fear, he would never answer the Ambassador
clearly, or to purpose: Contrarily he caused all the places there abouts that
were weak* and unarmed, to be secretly ransaked, and the poor Inhabitants
thereof to be unmercifully butchered by their barbarous enemies, whose cruelty
was so great, that in five days, according to report, they killed fourteen
thousand persons, the most part whereof, were women, children, and old men,
that were not able to bear Arms. Hereupon the Rolim, who brought this Letter,
relying no longer on the false promises of this Tyrant, and discontented with
the little respect he used toward him, demanded leave of him to return to the
City, which the B^amaa gave him, together with this answer; That if the Queen
would deliver up her self, her Treasure, her Kingdom, and her Vassals to him,
he would recompense her another way for the loss of her State: but withal that
she was to return him a peremptory answer to this proposition of his the very
same day, which was all the time I could give her, that so he might upon the
knowledge of her resolution determine upon what he had to do. The Rolim went
herewith back to the City, where he gave the Queen an account of all things,
saying, That this Tyrant was a man without faith, and replete with damnable
intentions, for proof whereof he represented unto her the Siege of Martabano,
the usage of the Chaubainhaa after he rendered himself unto him upon his word,
and how he had put him, his wife, his children, and the chiefest Nobility of
his Kingdom to a most shameful death. These things considered it was instantly
concluded, as well by the Queen, as by all those of her Council, that she
should defend the City, till such time as succor came from her Father, which
would be within fifteen days at the furthest: This resolution taken, she being
of a great courage without further delay took order for all things, that were
thought necessary for the defense of the City, animating to that end her people
with great prudence, and a man-like Spirit, though she was but a woman;
Moreover, as she liberally imparted to them of her Treasure, so she promised
every one thoroughly to acknowledge their services with all manner of recompenses
and honors, whereby they were mightily encouraged to fight: In the mean space
the King of Bramaa, seeing that the Rolim returned him no answer within the
time prefixed, began the next day to fortify all the Quarters of his Camp with
double rows of Cannon, for to batter the City on every side; and for assaulting
of the walls he caused a great number of Ladders to be made, publishing withal
throughout his whole Army, that all Soldiers upon pain of death should be
ready within three days to go to the Assault; The time then being come, which
was the third of May, 1545. About an hour before day the King went out of his
Quarter, where he was at anchor upon the river with two thousand vessels of
choice men, and giving the Signal to the Commanders which were on Land, to
prepare themselves, they altogether in one Body assailed the walls, with so
great a cry, as if Heaven and earth would have come together, so that both
sides falling to encounter pell-mell with one another, there was such a
conflict betwixt them, as within a little while the air was seen all on fire,
and the earth all bloody, whereunto being added the clashing of weapons, and
noise of guns, it was a spectacle so dreadful, that we few Portugals, who
beheld these things, remained astonished, and almost besides our selves: This
fight endured full five hours, at the end whereof the Tyrant of Bramaa seeing
those within defend themselves so valiantly, and the most part of his Forces to
grow faint, he went to land with ten or eleven thousand of his best men, and
with all diligence re-inforcing the Companies, that were fighting, the
Bickering renewing in such sort, as one would have said it did but then begin,
so great was the fury of it. The second trial continued till night, yet would
not the King desist from the fight, what counsel soever was given him to
retire, but contrarily he swore not to give over the Enterprise begun, and that
he would lie that night within the enclosure of the City walls, or cut off the
heads of all those Commanders that were not wounded at their coming off; In the
mean time this obstinacy was very pejudicial to him, for continuing the Assault
till the Moon was gone down, which was two hours past midnight, he was then
forced to sound a Retreat, after he had lost in this Assault, as was the next
day found upon a Muster, fourscore thousand of his men, besides those which
were hurt, which were thirty thousand at the least, whereof many died for want
of dressing, whence issued such a plague in the Camp, as well through the
corruption of the air, as the water of the river, that was all tainted with
blood and dead bodies, that thereby about fourscore thousand more perished,
amongst whom were five hundred Portugals, having no other burial then the
bellies of Vultures, Crows, and such like birds of prey, which devoured them
all along the Coast where they lay.

The King of Bramaa, having considered that this first Assault having cost him
so dear, would no more haza^d his men in that manner,. 2.
but he caused a great Terrace to be made with Bavins, and above ten thousand
Date-trees, which he commanded to be cut down, and on that he raised up a
platform so high, as it over-topped the walls of the City two fathom, and more,
where he placed fourscore pieces of Ordnance, and with them continually
battering the City for the space of nine days together, it was for the most
part demolished with the death of fourteen thousand persons, which quite abated
the poor Queens courage, especially when she came to understand that she had
but six thousand fighting men left, all the rest, which consisted of women,
chidren, and old men, being unfit and unable to bear Arms. The miserable
besieged seeing themselves reduced to such extremity, assembled together in
Council, and there by the advice of the chiefest of them, it was concluded,
That all in general should anoint themselves with the Oil of the Lamps of the
Chapel of Quiay Nivandel, God of Battle of the field Vitan, and so offering
themselves up in sacrifice to him, set upon the platform, with a determination
either to dye, or to vanquish, in vowing themselves all for the defense of
their young King, to whom they had so lately done homage, and sworn to be true
and faithful Subjects. This resolution taken, which the Queen and all her
Nobility approved of for the best and most assured, in a time wherein all
things were wanting to them for the longer defending themselves, they promised
to accomplish it in the manner aforesaid by a solemn O^th, which they all took;
Now there being no further question but to see how they should carry themselves
in this affair, they first of all made an Uncle of the Queens the Captains of
this resolute Band, who assembling these six thousand together, the same night,
about the first quarter of the watch, made a sally out of the two gates that
were nearest to the Terrace and platform, and so taking courage from their
despair, and resolution to dye, they fought so valiantly, that in less then
half an hour the whole Camp was put in disorder, the Terrace gained, the
fourscore pieces of Cannon taken, the King himself hurt, the Pallisado burnt,
the Trenches broken, and the Xenimbrum, General of the Army, slain, with above
fifteen thousand ^en more, amongst the which were five hundred Turks; there
we^e moreover forty Elephants taken, besides those that were killed, and eight
hundred Bramaas made prisoners, so that these six thousand resolute men did
that, which an hundred thousand, though valiant enough, could hardly have
effected. After this they retreated an hour before day, and upon a review they
found, that of six thousand which they were, there was but seven hundred slain.
This bad success so grieved and incensed the King of Bramaa, as attributing the
cause thereof to the negligence of some of his Cap^ains in the ^ll guarding of
the Terrace, that the day following he caused two thousand Pegu's to be
b^h^aded, which had stood sentinel that night. This adventure rendered things
quiet for the space of twelve days, during which the besieged stirred not; in
the mean time one of the four principal Captain of the City, named Xemim
Meleytay, fearing that which all others in general misdoubted, namely, that
they could not escape from falling into the hands of so cruel an Enemy, treated
secretly with the Tyrant, and upon condition that he would continue him in his
charge, not meddle with any of the houses of his friends, and make him Xemin of
Ansedaa in the Kingdom of Pegu, with all the Revenue which the Bainhaa of
Malacou had there, being thirty thousand Ducats a year, he would deliver him
up the City by giving him entrance into it through the gate which he commanded:
The King of Bramaa accepted hereof, and for a gage of performance on his part,
he sent him a rich Ring from off his finger. This Treason so concluded, was
effected on the three and twentieth of August, in the year 1545. wherein this
Tyrant of Bramaa carried himself with all the barbarousness and cruelty that he
used to practice in the like cases. And for as much as I conceive that I should
never have done, if I should recount here at large how this affair past, I will
say no more, but that the gate was opened, the City delivered up, the
Inhabitants all cut in pieces, without so much as sparing one; the King and
Queen made prisoners, their Treasurers taken, the Buildings and Temples
demolished, and many other inhumanities exercised with such outragiousness, the
belief whereof is beyond the imagination and thought of man, and truly I never
represent unto my self in what manner it was done, as having seen it with mine
own eyes, but that I remain as it were astonished and besides my self at it.
For as this Tyrant was touched to the quick with the affront he had lately
received, so he executed all the cruelties he could imagine against thos^
miserable Inhabitants, for to be revenged of the ill success he had had in the
siege, which could not proceed from any other but a base mind and vile
extraction, for it ordinarily falls out, that barbarousness finds place in such
kind of people, rather then in generous and valiant hearts; Whereunto may be
added, that he was a man without faith, and of an eff^minate disposition,
though he was nevertheless an Enemy to women, albeit there were in that
Kingdom, and in all the others whereof he was Lord, those that were very white
and fair. After the bloody ruin of that wretched City, the Tyrant entered into
it in great pomp, and and as it were in triumph, through a breach that was made
of purpose in the wall, and by his express commandment. When he was arrived at
the young Kings palace, he caused himself to be crowned King of Prom, and
during the Ceremony of this Coronation, he made that poor Prince, whom he had
deprived of his Kingdom, to continue kneeling before him, with his hands held
up, as if he adored some God, and ever and anon they constrained him to stoup
down and kiss the Tyrants feet, who in the mean time made show as if he were
not pleased therewith. This done, he went into a Balcone, which looked on a
great Market place, whither he commanded all the dead children, that lay up and
down the streets, to be brought, and then causing them to be hacked very small,
he gave them, mingled with Bran, Rice, and Herbs, to his Elephants to eat.
Afterward, with a strange kind of ceremony, at the sound of Trumpets, Drums,
and other such like Instruments, there was above an hundred Horses led in,
laden with the quarters of men and women, which also he commanded to be cut
small, and then cast into a great fire, kindled expressly for it. These things
so done, the Queen was brought before him, that was wife to the poor little
King, who, as I said before, was but thirteen years of age, and she thirty and
six, a woman very white, and well-favored, Aunt to her own Husband, Sister to
his Mother, and Daughter to the King of Avaa, which is the Country from whence
the Rubies, Saphirs, and Emeralds do come to Pegu; and it was the same Lady,
whom this Bramaa had sent to demand in marriage of her Father, as it was then
spoken, but that he refused him, saying to his Ambassador for an answer, That
the thoughts of his Daughter soared a pitch higher then to be the wife of the
Xemim of Tanguu, which was the family whence this Tyrant was issued: But now
that she was fallen into his hands as his slave, whether he used her so, either
out of a revenge of that affront, or out of scorn and contempt, so it was that
he made her to be publicly stripped stark naked, and to be torn and mangled
with whipping, and then in that manner to be led up and down all the City,
where amidst the cries and hooting of the people, he exposed her to other cruel
torments, wherewith she was tortured till she gave up the ghost; When she was
dead, he made her to be bound to the little King her Husband, who was yet
living, and having commanded a great stone to be tied about their necks, they
were cast into the River, which was a kind of cruelty very dreadful to all that
beheld it. To these barbarous parts he added many others so inhumane, as it is
not likely that any other but he could imagine the like; And for a conclusion
of his cruelties, the next day he caused all the Gentlemen that were taken
alive, being some three hundred, to be impaled, and so spitted like roasted
Pigs, to be also thrown into the River, whereby may be seen how great and
unheard of the injustice of this Tyrant was, which he exercised on these
miserable wretches.

CHAP. LIVE. The King of Bramaa his besieging of the Fortress of Meleytay, with
his going from thence to Avaa; and that which passed there.
. 1.
FOurteen days were past since the doing of these things, during the which the
Tyrant employed himself in fortifying the City with a great deal of diligence
and care, when as his spies, whom he had sent out, brought him word, that from
the City of Avaa a Fleet of four hundred rowing Vessels was come down the River
of Queitor, wherein there were thirty thousand Siamon Soldiers, besides the
Mariners, of which the King of Avaas son, and brother to the poor Queen, was
General; for this Prince having received advertisement of the taking of the
City of Prom, and of the death of his sister and brother-in-law, went and
lodged in the Fortress of Meleytay, which was some twelve leagues up the River
from Prom. This news much troubled the Tyrant, howbeit he resolved to go
himself in person against his Enemies before that other succors came to join
with them, as indeed the report went, that fourscore thousand, all Mons by
Nation, and led by the King of Avaa, were on their way thither: With this
resolution the Tyrant of Bramaa set forth toward Meleytay with an Army of
three hundred thousand men, namely two hundred thousand by Land along the
Rivers side, whereof the Chaumigrem his Foster-brother was Commander in chief,
and the other hundred thousand under his own conduct, being all choice men, and
imbarqued in two thousand Seroos; Being come within sight of Meleytay, the
Avaas desiring to show that the resolution wherewith they were come thither,
was of far more power with them, then any fear they could have, and that also
their Enemies might not receive any benefit by their Fleet which lay on the
River, and do them an affront besides by taking of it, they set all the^^
Vessels on fire, and burnt them every one; Then, without any dread of that
which the flesh does naturally most fear, they got all into the field, and
ranged themselves into four Battalions, in three of which, whereof each one
made ten thousand men, were the thirty thousand Mons; and in the the other,
that were somewhat bigger, were all the Mariners of the four hundred Vessels
they had burnt: These same they placed in the Vaunt-guard, with an intention
that they should weary the Enemies, with whom they made a cruel fight, which
lasted about half an hour, wherein all these Mariners were cut in pieces;
presently after them the thirty thousand Mons, close compacted together in
three Battalions, presented themselves, and with wonderful violence set upon
their Enemies, between whom and them followed so extraordinary and cruel a
battle, as not longer to insist upon it, nor to recount in particular how
things past, which also I cannot well do, it shall suffice me to say, that of
the thirty thousand Mons, eight hundred only escaped out of it, who being
routed, made their retreat into the Fortress of Meleytay; but that which was
most memorable herein was that of the King of Bramaas two hundred thousand men,
an hundred and fifteen thousand lay dead in field, and all the rest for the
most part were wounded. In the mean time the Tyrant, which came along on the
River in the two thousand Seroos, arrived at the place of Battle, where
beholding the strange massacre which the Mons had made of his people, he became
so enraged at it, that dis-imbarquing his Forces, he instantly laid siege unto
the Fortress, with a purpose, as he said, to take all those eight hundred that
were in it alive. This siege continued seven whole days together, during the
which those without gave five assaults to it, and the besieged defended
themselves always very valiantly, howbeit seeing that the last hour of their
life was come, and that they could no longer hold that place for their King, as
they had hoped they might, by reason of the fresh Forces which the King of
Bramaa had landed, like courageous men as they were they resolved to dye in the
field, as their companions had done, and valiantly revenge their deaths with
that of their Enemies, whereunto they were the more willingly carried, because
they perceived well that if they continued still in the place, they should
never make use of their valor, as they desired to do, for that the Tyrants
Ordnance would by little and little consume them: This resolution taken, they
under the favor of a very dark and rainy night sallyed forth, and first of all
fell upon the two first Courts of guard that were on the Lands side, cutting
all in pieces that they met withal* Then following their design they passed on
like desperate men, and whether they did it, either to show that they regarded
not death which threatened them, or for the desire they had to gain honor, so
it was that they behaved themselves so courageously, and pressed the Tyrant so
near, as they forced him to leap into the River, and swim for his life, in so
much that all the Camp was in disorder, and broken through in I know not how
many places, with the death of above twelve thousand men, amongst whom were
fifteen hundred Bramaas, two thousand strangers of diverse Nations, and all the
rest Pegu's. This ^ight last not above half an hour, in which time the eight
hundred Mons were all slain, there being not so much as one of them that would
yield upon any composition whatsoever. Hereupon the Tyrant of Bramaa seeing the
fight ended, and all things quiet, went and reassembled his Forces together,
and so entered into the Fortress of Meleytay, where he presently commanded the
Xemims head to be cut off, saying, that he was the sole cause of that disaster,
and that he who had been a Traitor to his King, could not be faithful unto him:
behold the recompense which this Tyrant made him for delivering up the City of
Prom unto him, howsoever it justly belonged unto him for a punishment of his
perfidiousness, that carried him to betray his King and his own Country into
the power of his Enemies: After this they fell to dressing of the hurt men,
which were in very great number.

We p^st all this night with much apprehension, always keeping good watch,. 2.
and the next morning as soon as it was day, the first thing that we did was to
rid away the dead bodies, which were in so great number all over the Camp, that
the ground was quite covered with them; After this we took a view of those that
were killed, as well on the one, as the other party, and we found that on the
Bramaas side there were an hundred and fourscore thousand, and on the Prince of
Avaas forty and two thousand, wherein were comprised the thirty thousand Mons.
That done, after the Tyrant had fortified the City of Prom, as also the Fort of
Meleytay, and made two other Forts upon the bank of the River, in such places
as he judged to be most important for the safety of that Kingdom, he went up
the River of Queitor in a thousand rowing Ser^os, wherein were imbarqued
seventy thousand men. In this Voyage his intention was to go in his own person,
for to observe the Kingdom of Avaa, and to see the City himself, the better to
consider the strength of it, and thereby judge what Forces he should bring for
to take it; So he proceeded still on for the space of eight and twenty days,
and during that time passed by many goodly places, which within the Kingdom of
Chaleu and Iacucalaon were upon the bank of the River: At length he arrived at
the City of Avaa the thirteenth of October the same year, a thousand five
hundred forty and five; Being come to the Port, he remained there thirteen
days, and that while burned between two and three thousand Vessels that he
found there; Moreover he set fire on many Villages thereabout, which cost him
not so little but that he lost in all these degasts eight thousand of his men,
amongst the which were threescore and two Portugals. Now whereas this City was
very strong, as well in regard of the situation of it, as of the
Fortifications which were newly made there, it had besides within it twenty
thousand Mons, who it was said were come thither some five days before from the
Mountains of Pondal^u, where the King of Avaa, by the permission of the Siamon,
Emperor of that Monarchy, was levying above fourscore thousand men for to go
and regain the City of Prom: for as soon as that King had received certain news
of the death of his daughter and son-in-law, perceiving that he was not strong
enough of himself to revenge the wrongs this Tyrant had done him, or to secure
himself from those which he feared to receive of him in time to come, namely
the depriving him of his Kingdom, as he was threatened, he went in person with
his wife and children and cast himself at the Siamons feet, and acquainting him
with the great affronts he had received, and what his desire was, he made
himself his Tributary at threescore thousand Bisses by the year, which amount
to an hundred thousand Ducats of our money, and a gueta of Rubies, being a
measure like to our pynt, therewith to make a jewel for his wife, of which
Tribute it was said, that he advanced the payment for ten years beforehand,
besides many other precious stones, and very rich Plate, which he presented him
with, estimated in all at two millions, in recompense whereof the Siamon
obliged himself to take him into his protection, yea and to march into the
field for him as often as need should require, and to re-establish him within a
year in the Kingdom of Prom, so as for that effect he granted him those thirty
thousand men of succor, which the Bramaa defeated at Meleytay, as also the
twenty thousand that were then in the City, and the fourscore thousand which
were to come to him, over whom the said King of Avaa was to be the General. The
Tyrant having intelligence thereof, and apprehending that this, above all other
things he could fear, might be the cause of his ruin, he gave present order
for the fortifying of Prom with much more care and diligence then formerly:
howbeit before his departure from this River where he lay at anchor, being
about some le^gue from the City of Avaa, he sent his Treasurer, named Diocory
(with whom we eight Portugals, as I have related before, remained prisoners)
Ambassador to the Calaminhan, a Prince of mighty power, who is seated in the
midst of this region in a great and spacious extent of Country, and of whom I
shall say something when I come to speak of him. The subject of this Embassage
was to make him his Brother in Arms by a League and Contract of new amity,
offering for that effect to give him a certain quantity of Gold and precious
stones, as also to render unto him certain Frontier Lands of his Kingdom, upon
condition that the Spring following he should keep the Siamon in war for to
divert him from succoring the King of Avaa, and thereby give him means the more
easily to take his City from him, without fear of that assistance which that
King hoped should serve for an obstacle to his design. This Ambassador departed
then after he had imbarqued himself in a Laulea, that was attended on by twelve
Seroos, wherein there were three hundred men of service, and his guard, besides
the Watermen and Mariners, whose number was little less. The Presents which he
carried to the Calaminhan were very great, and consisted in diverse rich pieces,
as well of Gold as of precious stones, but above all in the Harness of an
Elephant, which according to reports was worth above six hundred thousand
Ducats, and it was thought that all the Presents put together amounted to a
Million of Gold. At his departure, amongst other favors, which the King his
Master conferred on him, this same was not the least for us, that he gave us
eight unto him for to be his perpetual slaves; Having clothed us then very
well, and furnished us abundantly with all things necessary, he seemed to be
exceedingly contented with having us along with him in this Voyage, and ever
after he made more account of us, then of all the rest that followed him.

CHAP. LV. Our going with the King of B^am^a's Ambassador to the Calaminham,
with the Course which we held until we arrived at the Temple or Pagod of
Timagoogoo, and a Description thereof.
IT seems fit unto me,. 1*
and conformable to that which I am rela^ing* to leave for a while this Tyrant
of Bramaa, to whom I will return again when time shall serve, for to entreat
here of the way we held for to go into Timplan, the capital City of the Empire
of the Calaminham, which signifies, Lord of the world* for in their language
Cala is Lord, and Minhan the world; This Prince also entitles himself, The
absolu^e Lord of the indomptable force of the Elephants of the Earth; And
indeed I do not think that in all the world there is a greater Lord then he, as
I shall declare hereafter. This Ambassador then departing from Avaa in the
month of October, a thousand, five hundred, forty and five, took his course up
the r^ver of Queitor, steering West, South-East, and in many places Eastward by
reason of the winding of the water, and so in this diversity of ^homb^s we
continued our voyage seven days together, at the end whereof we arrived at a
Chann^l, called Guampanoo, through which the Rhobamo, who was our Pilot, took
his course, that he might decline the Siamons Country, being so commanded to do
by the express Order of the King: A while after we came to a great Town, named
Gataldy, where the Ambassador stayed three days to make provision of certain
things necessary for his voyage. Having left this place we w^nt on still,
rowing up through his Channel eleven days longer, during which time we met not
with any place that was remarkable, only we saw some small villages, the houses
whereof were covered with thatch, and peopled with very poor folks, and yet for
all that the fields are full of Cattle, which seemed to have no Master, for we
killed twenty and thirty of them in a day in the sight of those of the Country,
no man so much as finding fault with it, but contrarily they brought them in
courtesy to us, as if they were glad to see us kill them in that sort. At our
going out of this Channel of Guampanoo we entered into a very great river,
called Angegumaa, that was above three Leagues broad, and in some places six
and twenty fathom deep, with such impetuous currents as they drove us
oftentimes from our course; This river we coasted above seven days together,
and at length arrived at a pretty little walled Town, named Gumbim, in the
Kingdom of Iangromaa, environed on the Lands side for five or six ^^agues space
with Forests of B^njamin, as al^o with Plains of Lacre, wherewith they
ordinarily traded to Mar^aban^, and do also lade there many vessels with those
commodities for to transport them into d^vers Countries of the Indiaes, as to
the Straight of Mecqua, to Alcocer, and Iudaa. There is also in this Town great
store of Musk, far better then that of China, which from thence is carri^d to
Mart^bano and Pegu, where those of our Nation buy of it therewith to traffiq^e
at Nar^ingua, Orixaa, and Masulepatan. The women of this Country are all very
white and well-^avoured; They apparel themselves with Stuffs made of Silk and
Cotten-wool, wear links of gold and silver about their legs, and rich Carcanets
about their necks; The ground there is of ^t self exceeding fertile in Wheat,
Rice, Millets, Sugar, Wax, and Cattle: This Town with ten leagues of circuit
about it, yields every year to the King of Iangomaa threescore Altars of gold,
which are seven hundred thousand Ducats of our money. From thence we coasted
the river Southward, for the space of above seven days, and arrived at a great
Town named Catamm^^, which in our language signifies, the golden Crevice, being
the Patrimony of Raud^av^a Tinhau, the Calaminhams second Son. The Naugator of
this Town gave good entertainment to the Ambassador, and sent him many sorts
of refreshments for his followers; withal he gave him to understand that the
Calaminham was at the City of T^mplan. We d^parted from this place on a Sunday
morning, and the day after about evening we came to a Fortress, called
Campalagor, built in the midst of the river in the form of an Island upon a
rock, and environed with good freestone, having three Bulwarks and two Towers
seven stories high* wherein, they told the Ambassador, was one of the four and
twenty Treasures, which the Calaminham had in this Kingdom, the most part
wh^reof con^^sted ^n L^ng^ts of silver, of the weight of six thousand Caudins,
which are four and twenty thousand Quintals, and it was said, that all this
silver was buried in wells under ground. After this we still continued our
course for the space of thirteen days, during the which we saw on both sides of
the river many very goodly places, whereof the most were fair Towns, and the
rest stately high Trees, delicate Gardens, and great Plains full of Corn, as
also much Cattle, red Deer, Shamoises, and Rhinocerots, under the keeping of
certain men on horsback who looked to them whilst they ^ed. On the river there
were a great number of vessels, where in much abundance was all things to be
sold which the earth produces, wherewith it has pleased God to enrich these
Countries more then any other in the world. Now forasmuch as the Ambassador
fell sick here of an Impostume in his stomach, he was councelled to proceed no
further till he was healed, so that he resolved to go with some of his Train
for to be cured to a famous Hospital, some twelve Leagues from thence, in a
Pagode, named Tinagoogoo, which signifies the God of thousand Gods, and so
departing at the same instant he arrived there on Saturday about night.

. 2.
The Ambassador being set on shore was the next day led to an Hospital, called
Chipanocan, whither the greatest Lords used to repair when they were sick, and
where there were two and forty several Lodgings very neat and convenient, in
one of the which he was placed by the express command of the Puitaleu, who was
as it were Governor of the Hospital: There care was taken that he wanted for
nothing, but was furnished in abundance with all that was necessary for him: I
will omit the odours, the neatness, the care of attendance, the vessels, the
robes, the exquisite meats, the delicacies, and all the delights that may be
imagined, which were to be had there with as much perfection and curiosity, as
more cannot be desired. Thither likewise came twice a day to him exceeding fair
women, who sung to the Tune of Instruments of Music, and at certain hours
represented Plays, or Comedies before him, that were very pleasant, and finely
set forth. Now that I may not trouble my self in recounting here at length the
infinite number of things, which I could speak of concerning this Subject, I
will pass over many of them in silence, whereof, other persons that could
better express them then my self, would peradventure make great esteem. After
we had been eight and twenty days there, by which time the Ambassador was
perfectly cured, we departed from thence for to go to a Town, named Meidur,
twelve leagues further up the river of Angeguma; But that I may not be blamed
for failing in the promise which I made heretofore of speaking of this Pagods
of Tinagoogoo, I will here leave the Ambassador to his Voyage, and return me
to the Pagode, that of so many things which we saw there I may deliver some
one, for to show how little we Christians do to save our souls, in comparison
of that much these wretches do to lose theirs. During the eight and twenty
days which the Ambassador employed in recovering his health, we nine
Portugals that waited on him not knowing what to do, or how to bestow our time
in the mean while, no more then the rest, we past it away in diverse things,
according to each ones fancy and delight, for to that purpose we wanted no
commodities. Thus some applied themselves to the hunting of Stags and
Wild-boars, whereof there is great store in that Country; Some to the pursuing
of Tigers, Rhinocerots, Ounces, Zeores, Lions, Buffles, Wild-bulls, and of many
other such kind of beasts which we have not heard spoken of in our Europe; some
to shooting at Wild-ducks, Geese, and such like Waterfowl; some to hawking
with Vultures and Faulcons; and some to fishing for Trowts, Mackarels, Chevins,
Mullets, Soles, and many other sorts of fish, whereof there is great abundance
in all the rivers of this Empire. In this manner we bestowed our time, now in
one thing, and then in another, but that which we gave our selves most unto was
to hear, and see, as also to enquire after the Laws of the Country, the
Pagodes, and Sacrifices which we beheld there with much terror and
astonishment: Howbeit I purpose not to make any relation here more then of a
few of them, which I conceive may suffice to draw out the consequences of those
that I shall not discourse of. I say then that one of those sacrifices was made
on the day of the new Moon of December, namely on the ninth of that Month,
which is a time wherein these blinded people are accustomed to celebrate a
Feast, called by those of the Country Massunterivoo; by those of Iappon,
Ferioo; by the Chi^eses Man^ioo; by the Lequios Champas, and Cauchins,
Ampatilor; by the Siamens, Bramaas, P^fuas, and Sacotays, Sansaporau; so that
though all these names through the diversity of those languages are different,
yet do they in our tongue signify all one thing, that is, The memorial of all
the dead. This was then the Feast which we saw celebrated here with so much
diversity of things that we never dreamt of, as I know not where to begin; for
such a multitude of people of all the Nations of these Countries came flocking
to this place, as is not to be expressed, howbeit the chiefest cause of their
repair thither in such numbers, is a Fair, which is kept all the time of the
Feast, being fifteen days, namely from the new to the full Moon. In this Fair
are all things to be sold, which Nature has created on the earth, or in the
Se^* and that in so high a degree of abundance, as there is not any one kind of
thing, whereof there are not whole Streets of Houses, Cabbins, or Tents, so
long that one can hardly see from one end to the other. All these streets are
replenished with very rich Merchants, besides an infinite company of other
people, who are lodged all along the River, which is above two Leagues broad,
and planted about with several sorts of Trees, as Walnuts, Chestnuts, Cocos, and
Dates, whereof every one takes what he pleases, because it does all belong to
the Pagode. The Temple of this Idol is a very sumptuous Edifice, situated in
the midst of a Plain upon a little round hill, more then half a league in
circuit: It is built all slope fifteen fathom high, and from thence upward it
has a wall of freestone of some three fathom, with its Bulwarks, and Towers,
after the fashion of ours. Within the enclosure of this wall there is a
platform made level with Battlements, a stones cast in breadth, which together
with the wall extends round about the hill, so that at first sight one would
take it for a Gallery. There are likewise all along an hundred and threescore
Hospitals, in each whereof are above an hundred houses, which are low, but very
neat and convenient, where the Pilgrims, Fucatous, and Daroezes are
entertained, which come thither in troops, like the Gypsies in our Europe, with
their Captains, each company of them having two or three thousand persons, some
more, some less, according as the Kingdoms from whence they resort are nearer
or further off; now it is known of what Country they are by the devices which
they carry in their Banners. From the top to the bottom it is all environed
with Cypress-trees, and Cedars, where many fountains of most excellent water do
continually flow forth, and on the highest part of this hill, almost a quarter
of a league in circuit, there are four Convents, and in them very sumptuous and
rich Temples, namely two of men, and as many of women, in each of which, as we
were assured, were very near five hundred persons. In the midst of these four
Monasteries there is a Garden, compassed about with three enclosures of
Ballisters of Lattin, having very fair Arches, of curious Masons-work* and
Steeples guilt all over, with a number of little silver bells in them, which
^ing continually with the moving of the air. This Chapel of the Idol
Tinagoogoo is of a round form, all overlaid on the inside with plates of
silver wrought in flowers, and garnished with a great many Branches for lights
of the same metal. This Monster, of whom we could not judge, whether he were
gold, wood, or copper guilt, stood upright on his feet, with his hands lifted
up to Heaven, and a rich Crown on his head; round about him were many other
little Idols on their knees, and beholding him as it were amazed: Below were
two men made of brass, in the fashion of Giants, seven and thirty spans high,
and very ugly and deformed, whom they held for the Gods of the twelve months of
the year. Without this place also there were an hundred and forty Giants, who
ranked in two Files enclosed it round about, and were made of cast iron,
holding Halberds in their hands, as if they had been the Guard of it; so that
all the Marvels of this Edifice put together made it appear so stately, that
looking upon it one could not sufficiently esteem the riches and sumptuousness
thereof. But setting aside for this present the relation I could make of the
buildings of this Pagode, because that which I have said of it may, me thinks,
suffice for the understanding of the rest, I will entreat here of the
Sacrifices which we saw to be made there on a festival day, called by them,
Xipatil^^, signif^ing, The refreshing of good people.

CHAP. LVI. The great and sumptuous Procession made in this Pagode, together
with their Sacrifices; and other particularities.
. 1.
Whilst this Feast of these Gentiles, as also the Fair, which was kept all the
time thereof, endured for the space of fifteen days, with an infinite concourse
of Merchants and Pilgrims, that came flocking thither from all parts, as I have
declared before, there were many Sacrifices made there with different
ceremonies, not a day passing without some new thing or other. For amongst many
of great charge, and very worthy of observation, one of the chiefest was a
Iubile after their manner, which was published the fifth day of the Moon,
together with a Procession, that was above three leagues in length, as we could
guess; It was the common opinion of all, that in this Procession there were
forty thousand Priests of the four and twenty Sects, which are in this Empire,
most of them were of different dignities, and called Grepos, Talagrepos,
Roolims, Neepois, Bicos, Sacareus, and Chanfarauhos; Now by the ornaments they
wear, as also by the devices and ensigns which they carry in their hands, they
may be distinguished, and so every of them is respected according to his
dignity; Howbeit these went not on foot as the other ordinary Priests, for that
they were as this day forbidden upon pain of great sin to ^read upon the
ground, so that they caused themselves to be born in Pallaquins, or Arm-chairs,
upon the shoulders of other Priests their inferiors, apparelled in green
Satin, with their Stoles of Carnation Damask. In the midst of the ranks of
this Proc^ssion were all the inventions of their Sacrifices to be seen, as also
the rich Custodes of their Idols, for the which each of them had a particular
Devotion; They that carried them were clothed in yellow, having each of them a
big wax candle in his hand, and between every fifteen of those Custodes went a
triumphant Charet, all which Charets put together were in number an hundred
twenty and six: All these Charets were four, and some five stories high, with
as many wheels on either side; In each of them there were at the least two
hundred persons, what with the Priests and the Guards, and on the top of all an
Idol of Silver, with a Miter of Gold on its head, and all of them had rich
chains of Pearl and precious stones about their necks; round about every Charet
went little Boys, carrying Silver Maces on their shoulders, and behind them
were a many of Caskets full of exquisite perfumes, as also diverse persons with
Censors in their hands, who ever and anon censed the Idol to the tune of
certain Instruments of Music, saying three times with a lamentable voice,
Lord, assuage the pains of the dead, to the end they may praise thee peaceably;
whereunto all the people answered with a strange noise, Such may thy pleasure
be, and so may it come to pass every day wherein thou show us the Sun. Each
of these Charets was drawn by above three thousand persons, who for that
purpose made use of very long coards, covered with silk, and thereby gained to
themselves plenary remission of their sins, without restitution to be made of
any thing at all: Now that many might participate of this absolution by drawing
the coard, they set their hands to it one after and close to another,
continuing doing so to the very end, in such sort that the whole coard was
covered with hands, and nothing else to be seen; but that they also which were
without might gain this indulgence, they helped those that had their hands on
the coard by pu^ting theirs about their shoulders, then they that were behind
them did the like, and so consequently all the rest: In this manner throughout
the whole l^ngth of the coard there were six or seven Ranks or Files, and in
each of them above five hundred persons. This Procession was envi^oned with a
great number of Horsemen, that carried staves with pikes at both ends, who
riding all about, went crying to the people, which were infinite in number,
that they should make way, and not interrupt the Priests in their prayers: Many
times also they struck those so rudely whom they first met withal, as they
brat down three or four together, or hurt them grievously, no man daring to
find fault with, or so much as speak a word against it. In this order this
mervelous Procession passed through above an hundred streets, which to that end
were all adorned with boughs of Palms and Myrtle, amongst the which were many
Standarts and Banners of Silk planted; There were also many Tables set up in
diverse places, where all that desired it for Gods sake were admitted to eat of
free cost, yea and in other parts they had clothes and money given them; There
likewise Enemies reconciled themselves one to another, and the rich men forgave
them their debts which were not able to pay. In a word, so many good works were
done there, more proper for Cristians, then for Gentiles, as I must needs
conclude, that if they had been done with Faith and Baptism for the love of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and without any mixture of the things of this world,
assuredly they would have been acceptable to him. But (...) the best was
wanting to them, and that both for theirs and our sins. Whilst this
Procession, together with the Charets wherein the Idols were, passed along in
this manner, and that with a dreadful noise of Drums, and other such
instruments, behold where out of certain wooden Sheds made expressly for that
purpose, six, seven, eight, or ten men, all besmeared with odors, and wrapped
up in silk, wearing Gold Bracelets about their wrists, start forth all at once,
and room being instantly made them by the people, after they had saluted the
Idol which was on the top of the Charet, they went and laid themselves down
athwart on the ground, so that the wheels coming to go over them crushed them
all to pieces, which the assistants beholding, cried out aloud together, My
Soul be with thine: Presently whereupon nine or ten of the Priests descending
from the Charet took up these blessed, or rather accursed, creatures, that
sacrificed themselves in this sort, and putting the head, bowels, and all the
other members so crushed in pieces into great bowls made for that purpose, they
showed them to the people from the highest part of the Charet where the Idol
stood, saying with a pitiful voice, Miserable sinners, fall ye to praying, that
God may make you worthy to be a Saint, as this here is, who has now offered
himself up as a sweet smelling Sacrifice. Whereunto all the people prostrated
on the ground answered with a fearful noise, We hope that the God of a thousand
Gods will permit to be so. In this manner many other of these wretches
sacrificed themselves, to the number, as we were told by certain Merchants
worthy of credit, of six hundred and more. After these followed other Martyrs
of the Devil, whom they called Xixaporaus, which sacrificed themselves before
the said Charets, by most mercilesly sl^shing themselves with sharp Rasors,
that to behold them how they did it, one could not think but that they were
altogether insensible; for they cut off great gobbets of their flesh, and
holding them on high at the end of Arrows, as if they would shoot them up to
Heaven, they said, That they made a Present thereof to God for the Souls of
their Fathers, of their Wives, of their Children, or of such a one, for whose
sake they did this wicked work. Now wheresoever this gobbet of flesh chanced to
fall, there ran so much people to catch it up, as oftentimes many were stifled
in the press, for they held it as a very great relic. In this sort these
miserable wretches stood upon their feet, all bathed in their own blood,
without Noses, without Ears, and without any resemblance at all of man, until
at length they fell down stark dead on the Earth, then came the Grepos in all
haste down from the top of the Charet, and cutting off their heads, showed them
to all the people, who kneeling on the ground, and lifting up their hands to
Heaven cried out with a loud voice, Let us, O Lord, live to that time, wherein
for thy service we may do as this same here has done. There were others also
whom the Devil drew thither after another manner; Those same craving an Alms,
said, Give me an Alms for Gods sake, or if thou do it not, I will kill my
self. So that if they were not presently contented, they would instantly cut
their own throats with Rasors which they held in their hands, or stab
themselves in to the belly, and so drop down stark dead; whereupon the Grepos
ran suddenly to them, and having cut off their heads, showed them, as before,
to the people, who reverenced them prostrated on the ground. We likewise saw
some, named Nucaramons, men of a very ill look, clothed with Tigers skins, and
carrying in their hands certain pots of Copper full of excrements, and filthy
corrupted urine, the stench whereof was so horrible and insupportable, as it
was not possible for any nostril to endure it; These craving an Alms of the
people, said; Give me an Alms, and that instantly, otherwise I will ^at this
ordure which the Devil eats, and bespatter thee with it, that so thou may be
accursed as he is. They no sooner uttered these words, but that all ran hastily
to give them an Alms, for if they stayed never so little, they straightway set
the pot to their mouths, and taking a great sup of that stinking stuff, they
there with all to bedashed such as they pleased; in the mean time all others
that beheld them so dressed, holding them accursed, fell upon them, and entreated
them in such a strange fashion, as the poor wretches knew not which way to turn
themselves, for there was not a man of the company that drove them not away
with blows, and that railed not at them, saying; That they were accursed for
having been the cause that this holy man had eaten of that beastly filth which
the Devil feeds upon, and therefore was become stinking before God, so that he
could neither go into Paradise, nor live amongst men. Behold how strange the
blindness of this people is, who otherwise have judgment and wit enough. I will
pass by much other beastliness committed by them, which is so far esloigned
from all reason, as they serve for a great motive unto us, to render thanks
without ceasing unto God for the infinite mercy and goodness that he shows us,
in giving us the light of true Faith for the saving of our Souls.

. 2.
Of the fifteen days that this Feast was to last, nine being past, all the
people, which were there assembled, feigning that the g^uttonous Serpent of the
House of Smoke (who is their Lucifer, as I have said elsewhere) was come for to
steal away the ashes of them that were dead in these several Sacrifices, and so
to keep their Souls from going into Heaven, there arose among them so great and
dreadful a noise, as words are not able to express it; for to the confused
voices that were heard from every part, there was adjoined such a ringing of
Bells and Basins, beating of Drums, and winding of Horns, as it was not
possible to hear one another, and all this was done to fright away the Devil.
Now this noise endured from one of the clock in the afternoon till the next
morning, and it is not to be believed what a world of lights and Torches were
spent that night, besides the infinite number of fires that were kindled every
where; the reason hereof was, as they said, For that Tinagoogoo, the God of
thousand Gods, was gone in quest of the gluttonous Serpent, for to kill him
with a Sword which had been given him from Heaven. After the night had been
past thus amidst this infernal noise and tumult, as soon as it was day the
whole Hill, whereon the Temple was built, appeared full of white Banners, which
the people beholding, they fell straight to giving thanks unto God, and to that
end they prostrated themselves on the ground with great demonstrations of joy,
and then began to send presents one to another for the good news they received
from the Priests by the show of those white Banners, an assured sign that the
gluttonous Serpent was killed. So all the people, transported with incredible
gladness, fell to going up the hill, whereon the Temple stood, by four and
twenty several accesses that there were unto it, for to give thanks unto the
Idol, and chaunt his praises for the victory he had the night past obtained
over the gluttonous Serpent, and cutting off his head: This throng of people
continued three days, and three nights, so that during that time it was not
possible to break through the press on the way, but with much pain. Now we
Portugals having little to do, resolved to go thither also for to see those
abuses, wherefore we went to ask leave of the Ambassador, but he denied us for
the present, willing us to stay till the next day, and that then we should wait
on him thither, for in his last sickness he had vowed to visit it; hereat we
were very glad, because we thought that by this means we should the more easily
see all that we desired: The morrow after, which was the third day of this
Assembly, the greatest crowd being over, we went along with him to the Temple
of Tinagoogoo, and at length arrived, though with much ado, at the Hill whereon
it was built. There we saw six very fair long streets, all full of Scales
hanging on great Rods of Brass; In these Scales a number of people weighed
themselves, as well for the accomplishment of the vows they had made in their
adversities and sickness, as for the remission of all the sins they had
committed till that present, and the weight which each of them laid in the
other Scale was answerable to the quality of the fault they had done: So they
that found themselves culpable of gluttony, and had not all that year used any
abstinence, weighed themselves with Honey, Sugar, Eggs, and Butter, which were
things not displeasing to the Priests, from whom they were to receive
absolution; They that were addicted to sensuality weighed themselves with
Cotton wool, Feathers, Cloth, Apparel, Wine, and sweet Odors, because, say
they, those things incite a man to that sin: They that were uncharitable to the
poor weighed themselves with Coin of Copper, Tin, and Silver, or with pieces of
Gold; The slothful with Wood, Rice, Coals, Pork, and Fruit; and the envious,
because they reap no benefit by their maligning the prosperity of others,
expiated their sin by confessing it publicly, and suffering a dozen boxes on
the ear to be given them in the memory and praise of the twelve Moons of the
year: As for the sin of pride, it was satisfied with dried fish, Brooms, and
Cow Dung, as being the ba^est of things; And touching them that had spoken ill
of their Neighbors, without asking them forgiveness, they put for that a Cow
into the Scale, or else an Hog, a Sheep, or a Stag: so that infinite was the
number of those which weighed themselves in the Scales that were in those six
streets, from whom the Priests received so much Alms, as there were great piles
of all sorts of things made up all along. Now for the poor that had nothing to
give for the remission of their sins, they offered their own hair, which was
presently cut off by above an hundred Priests, who for that effect sat in order
one by another on low stools, with Sizzars in their hands; There also we saw
great heaps of that hair, whereof other Grepos, which were a thousand at least,
and ranked also in order, made Wreathes, Tresses, Rings, and Bracelets, which
one or another bought for to carry home to their houses, even as our Pilgrims
use to do, that come from Santiago de Compostella, or other such places. Our
Ambassador, being amazed at the sight of these things, enquired further of the
Priests concerning them, who besides other particulars told him, that all those
alms, and other offerings which were given there during the fifteen days of
this Assembly, amounted to a great Revenue, and that even of the hair of the
poor alone there was raised every year above an hundred thousand pardanis of
Gold, which are fourscore and ten thousand Ducats of our Money, whereby one may
judge what a world of wealth was made of all the rest. After that the Ambassador
had stayed sometime in the streets of the Scales, he passed on through all the
other quarters, where were Comedies, dancing, wrestling, and excellent consorts
of all kinds of music, till at length we arrived at Tinagoogoo, but with much
labor and pain, because the throng was so great, as one could hardly break
through it. This Temple had but one ^sle, that was very long and spacious, and
full of great wax lights, each of them having ten or eleven wieks in it, set up
all about in Silver Candlesticks; there was also great store of perfumes of
Aloes and Benjamin: As for the Image of Tinagoogoo, it was placed in the midst
of the Temple upon a stately Tribunal in the form of an Altar, environed with a
number of Silver Candlesticks, and a many of Children attired in purple, which
did nothing but cense it at the sound of Instruments of music, whereon the
Priests played reasonable well: Before this Idol danced, to the tune of the
said Instrument, (...) in Ladies, which were wonderful fair, and richly clad,
to whom the people presented their alms and offerings, which the Priests
received for them, and th^n laid them before the Tribunal of the Idol with a
great deal of ceremony and complement, ever and anon prostrating themselves on
the ground. The Status of this Monster was seven and twenty spans high, having
the face of a Giant, the hair of a Negro, wide distorted nostrils, mighty great
lips, and a very sour and ill-favored countenance; He had in his hand an
Hatchet in the form of a Coopers Addis, but with a far longer handle: With this
Addis, as the Priests made the people believe, this Monster the night before
killed the gluttonous Serpent of the House of Smoke, for that he would have
stolen away the ashes of those that sacrificed themselves. There also we saw the
Serpent amidst the place before the Tribunal in the form of an Adder, more
horrible to behold then the wit of man can imagine, and done so to the life, as
all that looked on it trembled for fear; It was laid all along, with the head
cut off, being eight fathom long, and the neck of it as thick as a Bushel, so
lively represented, that though we knew it to be an artificial thing, yet could
we not choose but be afraid of it. In the mean time all the assistants ran
thronging about it, some pricking it with the points of their Halberds, and
some with their Daggers, every one with railing speeches cursing, and calling
it, Proud, presumptuous, accursed, infernal Manor, Pool of Damnation, envious
of Gods goodness, hunger-starved Dragon, in the midst of the night, and many
other names, which they delivered in such extraordinary terms, and so fitted to
the effects of this Serpent, as we could not but admire them. That done, they
put into Basins which stood at the foot of the Idols Tribunal a world of alms,
of Gold, Silver, Jewels, pieces of Silk, fine Callicoes, Money, and hundred
other things in very great abundance. After we had seen all these things, we
continued following the Ambassador, who went to see the Grots of the Hermits or
Penitents, which were at the utmost end of the Wood, all cut out of the hard
Rock, and in such order, as one would have thought that Nature, rather then the
hand of man, had labored in it. There were an hundred forty and two of them, in
some of the which remained diverse men, whom they held for Saints, and that did
very great and austere penance; They in the first Grots wore long Robes like
the Bonzes of Iapan, and followed the Law of an Idol, that had sometimes been a
man, called Situmpor michay, who during his life enjoined those of his Sect to
lead their lives in great austerity, assuring them that the only and true way
to gain Heaven, was to subdue the flesh, and that the more they labored to
afflict themselves, the more liberally God would grant them all they could
demand of him. They which accompanied us thither, told us, that they seldom eat
any thing bu^ herbs boiled a few Beans of Aricot roasted, and wild fruit, which
were provided for them by other Priests, who as the Purveyors of a Cloister
took care to furnish these Peniten^s with such things as were confortmable to
the Law whereof they made profession. After these we saw in a Grot others of a
Sect of one of their Saints, or rather of a Devil, named Ang^macur, these lived
in deep holes, made in the midst of the Rock, according to the Rule of their
wretched order, eating nothing but Flies, Ants, Scorpions, and Spiders, with
the juice of a certain Herb growing in abundance thereabout, much like to
sorrel; These spent their time in meditating day and night, with their eyes
lifted up to Heaven* and their hands closed one within another, for a testimony
that they desired nothing of this world, and in that manner dyed like beasts,
but they are accounted greater Saints then all the rest, and as such, after
they are dead, they burn them in fires, whereinto they cast great quantities of
most precious perfumes; the Funeral pomp being celebrated with great state, and
very rich offerings, they have sumptuous Temples erected unto them, thereby to
draw the living to do as they had done, for to obtain this vain glory, which is
all the recompense that the world gives them for their excessive penance. We
likewise saw others of a Sect al^ogether diabolical, invented by a certain
Gileu Mitray; These have sundry orders of penance, and are not much different
in their Opinions from the Abissins of Ethiopia; Now that their abstinence may
be the more agreeable to their Idol, some of them eat nothing but filthy thick
^pitings and snot, with Grasshoppers and Hens dung; others clots of blood drawn
from other men, with bitter fruits and herbs brought to them from the wood, by
reason whereof they live but a short time, and have so bad a look and color,
as they fright those that behold them. I will pass by them of the Sect of
Godomem, who spend their whole life in crying day and night on those mountains,
Godomem, Godomem, and desist not from it until they fall down stark dead to the
ground for want of breath: Neither will I speak of them which they call
Taxilacons, who dye more brutishly then the rest, for they shut themselves up
in certain Grots made of purposefor it, that are very little and close, stopped
on all (...), and then burning green ^histles and thorns in them, they choke
themselves with the smoke thereof; Whereby one may see how by such rude and
different ways of living these miserable creatures render themselves the Devils
Martyrs, who in reward thereof gives them everlasting Hellfire; and verily it
is a pititiful thing to behold the great pains which these wretches take to
lose themselves, and the little that we do to be saved.

CHAP. LVII. What we saw in the continuing of our voyage, until we arrived at
the City of Timplan.
AFter we had seen all these things with wonder enough,. 1.
we departed from this Pagod of Tinagoogoo, and continued on our way for
thirteen days together, at the end whereof we arrived at two great Towns,
situated on the Bank of the river, just opposite the one against the other,
about the distance of a stones cast, one of the which was called Manavedea, and
the other Singilapau; in the midst of this same river, which was there somewhat
narrow, there was an Island by nature formed round, and in it a rock six and
thirty fathom high, and a Cros-bow shoot broad; upon this rock was a Fort
built, with nine Bulwarks and five Towers; without the rampire of the wall it
was environed with two rows of great iron gates, and from the Bulwarks to the
other side of the river ran a huge Chain of iron, to keep vessels from passing
along, so that nothing could possibly enter there: At one of these two Towns,
which was called Singilapau, the Ambassador landed, where he was exceedingly
well entertained by the Xemimbrum, or Governor of it, who likewise furnished
all his Train with great store of refreshments. The next morning we left this
place, accompanied with twenty Laules, wherein there were a thousand men and
better, and about evening we arrived at the Custom-houses of the Kingdom, which
are two strong places, and from the one to the other run five mighty great
chains of Latten all atwart the whole breadth of the river, so that nothing can
pass in and out without leave; Hither came a man in a swift Seroo to the
Ambassador, and told him that he was to go ashore at Campalagro, which was one
of the two Castles on the South Side, for to show the Letter which this King
had sent by him to the Calaminham, to see if it were written in the form that
was required in speaking to him, as was usually observed. The Ambassador
presently obeyed, and being come to land he was led into a great Hall, where
were three men (...) a table, with a great many Gentlemen, who gave him good
entertainment, and demanded of him the occasion of his coming thither, as they
that knew nothing of it; Whereunto the Ambassador answered; That he came
thither from the King of Bramaa, Lord of Tanguu, and that he had a message to
deliver unto the holy Calaminham concerning matters greatly importing his
Estate. Then having made further answer to other questions, which were put to
him in a way of ceremony by the three principal persons that were at the Table,
he showed them the letter, wherein they corrected some words, which were not of
the style wherewith they were accustomed to speak to the Calaminham; together
with this letter the Ambassador showed them the present which he had brought
for him, whereat they very much wondered, especially when they saw the Chair for
an Elephant of gold and precious stones, which in the judgments of diverse
Lapidaries was worth above six hundred thousand Ducats, besides the other rich
pieces that he carried him also, as I have before related. After we had our
dispatch from this first Custom-house, we went to the other, where we found
more venerable men then the former, who with another new Ceremony looked
likewise on the Letter, and the present, and put to all the several parcels of
it strings of wreathed carnation silk, with three Seals in Lacre, which was as
the conclusion of the receiving of the Ambassy by the Calaminham. The same day
there came a man from the next Town of Questor, sent by the Governor of the
Kingdom to visit the Ambassador with a present of refreshments of flesh,
fruit, and other such things after their manner. During nine days that the
Ambassador stayed in this place he was abundantly furnished with all things
necessary, both for his own Person, and his Train, and withal was entertained
with sundry sports of hunting and fishing* as also with Feasts, accompaied with
music and Comedies represented by very beautiful women, and richly attired: In
the mean time we Portugals went with the permission of the Ambassador to see
certain things, which they of the Country had much commended un^o us* namely
very antique buildings, rich and sumptuous Temples, very fair Gardens, Hou^es
and Castles, that were all along the side of this river, made after a strange
fashion, well ^ortified, and of great charge, amongst the which there was an
Hospital for to lodge pilgrims in* called Manicafaran, signifying in our
tongue, The Prison of the Gods, which was above a L^ague in breadth; Here we saw
twelve streets, all vaulted over, and in every one of them two hundred and
forty houses, namely, sixscore on each side, which made in all two thousand,
eight hundred, and fourscore, all full of pilgrims, who the whole year
throughout came thither in pilgrimage from diverse Countries; for, as they hold,
this pilgrimage ought to be of far greater merit then all others, because that
these Idols imprisoned by strangers have need of company. All these pilgrims,
which, as they of the Country say, are all the year long without discontinuing
above six thousand, have meat given them the whole time of their abode there,
at the charge, and out of the revenue of the house: They are served by four
thousand Priests of Manicafaran, who with many others reside within the same
enclosure in sixscore religious houses, where there are also as many women that
serve in the like manner. The Temple of this Hospital was very great, with
three Isles after the fashion of ours, in the midst whereof was a remarkable
Chapel built round, and environed with three very big Ballist^rs of Latten;
within it there were fourscore Idols of men and women, besides many other
little gods, that lay prostrated on the ground, for the fourscore great Idols
only stood upright, and were all tied together with chains of iron; As for the
little ones, they were, as I said, laid along on the pavement, as the children
of these greater, and tied six to six by the middle with other slighter chains:
Moreover without the Ballisters in two Files there stood two hundred, forty and
four Giants of brass, six and twenty spans high, with their Halberds and Clubs
upon their shoulders, as if they had been set there for the Guard of the
captive Gods. There was over-head upon iron rods, that traversed the Isles of
the Temple, great store of Lamps hanging, having seven or eight Matches apiece
in them, in the fashion of Candlesticks, like to them of the Indiaes, all
varnished without, as also the walls were, and every thing else that we saw
there, in token of mourning, by reason of the captivity of these Gods. Being
amazed as well at that which I have recounted, as at many other things which I
pass over in silence, and not able to comprehend what they meant by the
imprisonment of these gods, we demanded the signification of it of the Priests,
whereunto one amongst them, that seemed of more authority then the rest, made
us this answer; Since I see that being Strangers, you desire to learn of me
that which I know very well, and which you have never heard spoken, nor read of
in your Books, I will declare the matter unto you as it past, according as it
is truly delivered by our Histories. Know then, that it now seven thousand,
three hundred, and twenty Moons, which make six hundred and ten years after the
supputation of other Nations, since the time that an holy Calaminham, named
Xixivarem Melentay, commanding over the Monarchy of the six and twenty Kingdoms
of this Crown, waged wars with the Siamon, Emperor of the Mountains of the
Earth, insomuch that there assembled what on the one part and the other
threescore and two Kings, who putting themselves into the Field, fought so
cruel and bloody a battle, as it endured from an hour before day till night,
and there was slain on both sides sixteen Laquesaas of men, each of which makes
an hundred thousand; At length the victory remaining to our Calaminham, without
any more resting alive of his Forces then two hundred and thirty thousand, he
ru^ned in four months space all the enemies Countries, with such a destruction
of people, as if credit may be given to our Histories, or to what any other
besides have assured, there died fifty Laquesaas of persons. This battle was
fought in the first of the said seven thousand, three hundred, and twenty
Moons, in the renowned Field Vitau, where Quiay Nivandel appeared to the
Calaminham, sitting in a Chair of wood, who acquired unto himself in this place
a greater and more famous Title of honor, then all the other Gods of the Mons
and Siammes, in regard whereof so often as they that inhabit the earth desire
to make oath of things which pass the belief of men, they use for the more
authorizing thereof to swear by the holy Quiay Nivandel God of Battails of the
field Vitau. Now in a great City named Sarocatam, where five hundred thousand
persons were slain, all these Gods, which here you see before you, were made
prisoners in despite of the Kings that believed in them, and the Priests that
served them with perfumes in their sacrifices. Thus by reason of so glorious a
victory all those people became subject to us, and tributaries to the Crown of
the Calaminham, who at this day holds the Scepter of this Monarchy, whereunto
he was not raised but with much labor, and the shedding of a world of blood,
during the threescore and four rebellions made by the said people since that
time until this present; who not able to endure the captivity of their gods,
for that, to say the truth, it is a mighty affront unto them, they do still in
memory of so unhappy a success continue making great demonstrations of sorrow
for it, renewing every year the vow they have made not to celebrate any Feast,
nor to rejoice in any kind of sort whatsoever, until they have provided for the
deliverance of these prisoners; which also is the cause that no Lamps are seen
in their Temples, and that they are resolved to light up none during the
captivity of their Idols. Some of us seeming to doubt the verity hereof,
because it seemed strange unto them, the Grepo swore that it was most true, and
that also there had been killed at sundry times about the deliverance of these
Gods, whom there we saw captive, above three millions of men, besides those
that fell in precedent Battails; whereby one may clearly see in what a strange
manner the Devil keeps these poor blinded wretches subjected unto him, and with
how much abuse and extravagancy he precipitates them into hell. When we had
well observed all the singularities of this Temple, we went to see another,
called Vrpanesendoo, to speak of which I desire to be excused, that I may not
be forced to treat of infamous and abominable matters, wherefore omitting the
great abundance of riches, and other things which we saw there; it shall
suffice me to say, that this Temple is served by none but women, who are all of
them the daughters of Princes, and of the principal Lords of the Kingdom, which
dedicates them from their infancy to offer up their honor in sacrifice there;
Now this filthy and sensual sacrifice is performed with so great charge, that
many of them bestow above ten thousand Ducats in it, besides the offerings
which are made to this Idol Vrpanesendoo, to whom they sacrifice their honor.
This Idol is in a Chapel that is round, and guilt all over; it is made of
silver, and set upon a Tribunal in form of an Altar, environed over-head with a
great number of Candlesticks, which are all of silver likewise, every light in
them having six wieks: Round about this Tribunal are many other Idols gilded
over, of very comely and well-favoured women, who with their knees on the
ground, and hands lifted up, adore this Idol; These same, as the Priests told
us, are the holy souls of certain young Ladies, which finished their days
there to the great honor of their parents, who made more esteem of that then
of all the King could give them. They assured us that the Revenue belonging to
the Idol, was three hundred thousand Ducats by the year, besides the offerings
and rich ornaments of their abominable sacrifices, which was yet worth more. In
this Diabolical Temple were shut up within many religious houses that we saw
above five thousand women, being all of them old, and for the most part
exceeding rich, so that coming to die, they make a donation of all their wealth
to the Pagode, wherefore it is no marvel, if it have the revenue I spoke of.
From this place we went to see the companies of the strangers, which came
thither in pilgrimage in the manner that I have declared. These Companies were
forty and six in number, every one of an hundred, two hundred, three hundred,
four hundred, or five hundred persons; nay, some of them were more, and were
all lodged along by the river, as if it had been a Camp. Amidst these troops of
strangers we met by chance with a Portugal woman, whereat we wondered more then
at all we had seen before, so that desiring to know of her the reason of so
strange an accident, she told us with tears, who she was, what occasion had
brought her thither, and how she was at that instant the wife of one of those
Pilgrims, to whom she had been married three or four and twenty years;
whereunto she further added, that not daring to go and live amongst Christians
because of her sin, she continued still in her wickedness, but that she hoped
God would at length be pleased to bring her into some Country, where before she
ended her days, she might repent her of her life past; and that although we
found her in the company of people devoted to the service of the Devil, yet she
left not for all that to be still a true Christian: we remained much amazed at
so strange a relation, and not a little sorrowful also to see and understand to
what a point of misfortune this poor woman was reduced, so that we told her our
opinion, and what we thought was fit for her to do, whereupon she concluded to
go along with us to Timplam, and so to Pegu, and from thence to set sail for
Coromandel, there to finish her days in the Island of St Thome. Having vowed
unto us to do thus we quitted her, not doubting that she would lose so good an
opportunity to retire her self out of the errors wherein she was, and to
restore her self to an estate wherein she might be saved, since it had pleased
God to permit her to meet with us in a Country so far distant from that which
she could hope for: Howbeit she performed nothing, for we could never see nor
hear of her afterward, which made us to believe, that either some thing was
befallen her that kept her from coming to us, or that through the obstinacy of
her sins, she deserved not to make her profit of the grace which our Lord had
offered to her out of his infinite goodness and mercy.

CHAP. LVIII. The Magnificent Reception of the King of Bramaa his Ambassador,
at the City of Timplam; and that which passed betwixt the Calaminham, and him.
. 1.
NIne days after the King of Bramaa his Ambassador had reposed himself there
by way of ceremony, according to the fashion of the Co^try, for the more honor
of his Embassage, one of the Governors of the City, called Quampanogrem, came
to fetch him, accompanied with fourscore Seroos and Laulees, very well eqipped,
and full of lu^ty able men: Throughout this Fleet they played on so many
barbarous and ill accorded instruments, as Bel^, Cymbals, Drums, and
Sea-corners, that the din thereof coming to join with the noise, which the
Rowers made, terrified all those that heard it; and indeed one would have
thought it at first to be some enchantment, or to say better, a music of hell,
if there be any there. Amidst this stir we drew near to the City, where we
arrived about noon; Being come to the first Key, that was named Campalarraia,
we saw a great many men, both Horse and Foot, all richly accoutred, as also a
number of fighting Elephants, very well harnessed, having their chairs and
for^-head pieces garnished with silver, and their warlike Panores fastened to
their teeth, which rendered them very terrible. The Ambassador was no sooner
come on shore, but the Campanogrem took him by the hand, and falling on his
knees, presented him to another great man that attended for him at the Key in
great pomp; This same was called Patedacan, one of the chiefest of the Kingdom,
as we were told; After he had with a new complement of courtesy received the
Ambassador, he offered him an Elephant furnished with a Chair and harness of
gold, but whatsoever the Mandarin could do to make the Ambassador accept of
it, he could by no means draw him thereunto, whereupon he caused another almost
as well furnished to be brought, and gave it to him. As for us nine Portugals,
and fifty or threescore Bramaas they provided Horses, on which we mounted: In
this manner we departed from that place, having his Chariots before us full of
men, that amidst the acclamations of the people played upon diverse kinds of
instruments; namely on silver Cymbals, Bells, and Drums; Thus we were conducted
through many long Streets, whereof nine were environed with Ballisters of
Lattin, and at the entrance into them, there were Arches very richly wrought,
as also many Chapters of pillars guilt, and great Bells, which like unto clocks
struck the hours, nay the quarters of the hour of the day, whereby the people
were ordinarily directed. After that with much ado, by reason of the great
press of people that was in the streets, we were come to the outward Court of
the Calaminham's Palace, which was as long, or little less, as a Faulcons
shot, and broad proportionable thereunto, we saw in it above six thousand
Horses, all trapped with silver and silk, and those that were mounted on them
were armed with Co^slets of Lattin and Copper, head-pieces of silver, carrying
Ensigns in their hands of diverse Colors, and Targets at their Saddle-bow^. The
C^mmander of th^se Troops was the Quietor of Justice, who is as the
Super-intendent over all the other Civil and Criminal Ministers, which is a
Jurisdiction ^epe^ate by it self, from whence there is no appeal. The
Ambassador being come near unto him, who was also advanced to receive him, and
the two Governors, they all prostra^e^ themselves on the ground three times,
which is amongst them a new kind of Compliment, whereupon the Queitor spoke not
a word to the Ambassador, but only laid his hand on his head, and then gave
him a rich Scymitar that he wore by his side, which the Ambassador accepted of
very thankfully, and kissed it thrice; That done the Quieor set the Ambassador
on his right hand, and leaving the two Mandarins a little behind, they past
along through two ranks of Elephants* which made a kind of Street of the length
of the outward Court, they being fifteen hundred in number, all furnished with
Castles, and rich Chairs of diverse inventions, as also with a great many of
silk Banners, and gorgeous Coverings; round about were a great Company of
Halberdiers, and many other shows of Greatness and Majesty, which made us
believe that this Prince was one of the mightiest of the Country. When we were
come to a great Gate, that stood between two high Towers, two hundred men which
guarded it no sooner saw the Quietor, but they all fell down on their knees.
Through this Gate, we entered into another very long outward Court, where the
Kings second Guard was, composed of a thousand men, who were all in guilt Arms,
their Swords by their sides, and on their heads Helmets wrought with gold and
silver, wherein stuck gallant plums of several colors. After we had past
through the middle of all this Guard we arrived at a great Hall, where there
was a Mandarim, Uncle to the King, called the Monvagaruu, a man of above
seventy years of age, accompanied with a great number of Nobity, as also with
many Captains and Officers of the Kingdom; About him were twelve little boys
richly clad, with great Chains of gold three or four times double about their
necks, and each of them a silver Mace upon his shoulder: As soon as the
Ambassador was come near him, he touched him on the head with a Ventiloo that
he held in his hand, and beholding him, May thy entrance, said he, into this
Palace of the Lord of the world, be as agreeable to his eyes, as the rain is to
our fields of Rice, for so shall he grant thee all that thy King demands of
him. From thence we went up an high pair of stairs, and entered into a very long
room, wherein there were many great Lords, who seeing the Monvagaruu stood up
on their feet, as acknowledging him for their Superior; Out of this room we
entered into another, where there were four Altars, very well accommodated with
Idols of silver; upon one of these Altars we saw the Statue of a woman as big
as a Giant, being eighteen spans high, and with her arms all abroad looking up
to Heaven: This Idol was of silver, and her hair of gold, which was very long,
and spread over her shoulders; There also we saw a great Throne, encompassed
round about with thirty Giants of brass, who had gilded Clubs upon their
shoulders, and faces as deformed as those they paint for the Devil. From this
room we past into a manner of a Gallery, adorned from the top to the bottom
with a number of little Tables of Ebony, inlayed with Ivory, and full of men's
heads, under every one of the which the name of him to whom it belonged was
written in letters of gold; At the end of this Gallery there were a dozen of
iron Rods guilt, whereon hung a great many silver Candlesticks of great value,
and a number of persuming Pans, from whence breathed forth a most excellent
odor of Amber, and Calambuco, or Lignum Aloes, but such as we have none in
Christendom. There on an Altar environed all about with three rows of
Ballisters of silver, we saw thirteen Kings vissages of the same metal, with
golden Mitars upon their heads, and under each of them a dead man's head, and
below many Candlesticks of silver, with great white wax lights in them, which
were stuffed ever and anon by little boys, who accorded their voices to those
of the Grepos that sung in form of a Letany, answering one another. The Grepos
told us that those thirteen dead men's heads which were under the vissages were
the skulls of thirteen Calaminhams, which in times past gained this Empire from
certain strangers, called Roparons, who by Arms had usurped the same upon them
of the Country: As for the other dead men's heads which we saw there, they were
the sk^ls of such Commanders, as by their Heroic deeds had honorably ended
their days in helping to recover this Empire, in regard whereof it was most
reasonable, that though death had deprived them of the recompense which they
had merited by their action, yet their memory should not be abolished out of
the world. When we were gone out of this Gallery, we proceeded on upon a great
Bridge, that was in the form of a Street, rayled on either side with Ballisters
of Lattin, and beautified with a many of Arches curiously wrought, upon which
were Scutchions of Arms, charged with several devices in gold, and the Cr^^ts
over them were silver Globes, five spans in circumferences, all very stately
and majestical to behold. At the end of this bridge was another building, the
doors whereof we found shut, whereupon we knocked four times, they within not
deigning to answer us, which is a ceremony observed by them in such occasions;
At the length after we had rung a bell four times more as it were in haste, out
comes a woman of about fifty years of age, accompanied with six little girls,
richly attired, and Scymitars upon their shoulders garnished with ^lowers
wrought in gold: This anci^nt woman having demanded of the Monvagaruu why he
had rung the bell, and what he would have, he answered her with a great deal of
respect, That he had there an Ambassador from the King of Bramaa, the Lord of
Tanguu, who was come thither to treat at the feet of the Calaminham about
certain matters much importing his service. By reason of the great authority
which this woman was in she seemed little to regard this answer, whereat we
wondered much, because he that spoke to her was one of the chiefest Lords of the
Kingdom, and Uncle to the Calaminham, as it was said; Nevertheless one of the
six girls that accompanied her, spoke thus in her behalf to the Monvagaruu, My
Lord, may it please your Greatness to have a little patience till we may know
whether, the time be fit for the kissing of the foot of the Throne of this Lord
of the World, and advertising him of the coming of this stranger, and so
according to the grace which our Lord will show him therein, his heart may
rejoice, and we with him. That said, the door was shut again for the space of
three or four Credoes, and then the six Girls came and opened it, but the
anciant woman that at first came along with them, we saw no more, howbeit in
stead of her there came a Boy of about nine years of age, richly apparelled,
and having on his head an hurfangua of Gold, which is a kind of Myter, but that
it is somewhat more closed all about, and without any overture, he had also a
Mace of Gold, much like a Scepter, which he carried upon his shoulder: this
same, without making much reckoning of the Monvagaruu, or of any of the other
Lords there present, took the Ambassador by the hand, and said unto him, The
news of thy arrival is come unto the feet of Binaigaa the Calaminhan, and
Scepter of the Kings that govern the Earth, and is so agreeable to his ears,
that with a smiling look he now sends for thee to give thee audience concerning
that which is desired of him by thy King, whom he newly receives into the
number of his brethren, with a love of the son of his entrals, that so he may
remain powerful and victorious over his Enemies: Thereupon he caused him,
together with the Kings Uncle, and the other Governors that accompanied him, to
come in, l^aving all the rest without; the Ambassador then seeing none of his
Train follow him, looked three or four times back, seeming by his countenance
to be somewhat discontented, which the Monvagaruu perceiving, spoke to the
Queitor, who was a little behind, that he should cause the strangers to be let
in, and none else; the doors being then opened again, we Portugals began to go
in with the Bramaas, but such a number of others came thrusting in amongst us,
as the Gentlemen Ushers, who were above twenty, had much ado to keep the doors,
striking many with Battouns which they had in their hands, and of those some
that were persons of quality, and yet could they not therewith, neither with
their cries, nor menaces, stop them all from entering: Thus being come in, we
past along through the midst of a great garden, made with such art, and where
appeared so many goodly things, so diverse, and so pleasing to the eye, as words
are not able to express them: For there were there many Alleys environed with
Ballisters of Silver, and many Arbors of extraordinary scent, which we were
told had so much sympathy with the Moons of the year, that in all seasons
whatsoever they bare flowers and fruits; withal there was such abundance and
variety of Roses and other flowers, as almost passes belief. In the midst of
this Garden we saw a great many young women, very fair, and well clad, whereof
some past away their time in dancing, and others in playing on sundry sorts of
Instruments much after our manner, which they performed with so much harmony,
as we were not a little delighted therewith: some also bestowed themselves in
making of curious Needle-works and Gold-strings, some in other things, whilst
their companions gathered fruit to eat; and all this was done so quietly, and
with such order and good behavior, as made us admire it. At our going out of
this Garden, where the Monvagaruu would needs have the Ambassador to stay
awhile, that he might there observe something worthy to entertain his King with
at his return to Pegu, we went into a very great Antichamber, where many
Commanders and Lords were sitting, as also some great Princes, who received the
Ambassador with new ceremonies, and complements, and yet not one of them
stirred from his place; Through this Antichamber we came to a door, where there
were six Gentlemen Ushers with Silver Maces, by which we entered into another
room very richly furnished: in this was the Calaminhan seated on a most
majestical Throne, encompassed with three rows of Ballisters of Silver; At the
foot of the degrees of his Throne sat twelve women that were exceeding
beautiful, and most richly apparelled, playing on diverse sorts of Instruments,
whereunto they accorded their voices; On the top of the Throne, and not far
from his person, were twelve young Damsels about nine or ten years old, all of
them on their knees round about him, and carrying Maces of Gold in the fashion
of Scepters; amongst them there was also another that stood on her feet, and
fanned him. Below, all along the whole length of the room, were a great many of
old men, wearing Myters of Gold on their heads, and long Robes of Satin and
Damask, curiously embroidered, every one having Silver Maces on their
shoulders, and ranked in order on either side against the walls: Over all the
rest of the room were sitting, upon rich Persian Carpets, about two hundred
young Ladies, as we could guess, that were wonderful fair, and exceeding well
favored. Thus did this room, both for the marvelous structure of it, and for
the excellent order that was observed therein, represent so great and
extraordinary a Majesty, as we heard the Ambassador say afterward talking of
it, that if God would grant him the grace to return to Pegu, he would never
speak of it to the King, as well for fear of grieving him, as of being taken
for a man that reports things which seem altogether incredible.

As soon as the Ambassador was ent^red into the room where the Calaminhan was,.
2.
accompanied with the four Princes that conducted him, he prostrated himself
five times on the ground, without so much as daring to behold the Calaminhan,
in sign of the great respect he carried toward him, which the Monvagaruu
perceiving, willed him to advance forward, so that being arrived near to the
first degree of his Throne, with his face still bending downward, he said to
the Calaminhan, with so loud a voice as every one might hear him; The Clouds of
the Air, which recreate the fruits whereof we eat, have published over the
whole Monarchy of the World the great Majesty of thy Power, which has caused
my King, desiring to be honored with thy amity, as with a rich pearl, to send
me for that purpose, and to tell thee from him, that thou shall much oblige
him, if thou please to accept of him for thy true Brother, with the honorable
obedience which he will always render to thee, as to him that is the elder, as
thou art: And for that end it is, that he sends thee this Letter, which is the
jewel of all his treasure that he prizes most, and wherein his eyes take m^re
pleasure, for the honor and contentment they receive by it, then in being Lord
of the Kings of Avaa, and of all the precious stone of the mountain of Falent,
of Jatir, and Pontau. Hereunto the Calaminhan made him this answer following,
and that with a grave and severe countenance; For my part I accept of this new
amity, thereby to give full satisfaction to thy King, as to a son newly born of
my intrals. Then began the women to play on Instruments of Music, and six of
them danced with little children for the space of three or four credo^s; After
that, other six little girls danced with six of the oldest men that were in the
room, which seemed to us a very pretty fantasticalness. This dance ended, there
was a very fine Comedy represented by twelve Ladies, exceeding beautiful, and
gorgeously attired, wherein appeared on the Stage a great Sea Monster, holding
in his mouth the daughter of a King, whom the fish swallowed up before them
all, which the twelve Ladies seeing, went in all haste weeping to an Hermitage,
that was at the foot of a Mountain, from whence they returned with an Hermit,
who made earnest supplications to Quiay Patureu, God of the Sea, that he would
bring this Monster to the shore, so as they might come to bury the Damsel
according to her quality; The Hermit was answered by Quiay Patureu, That the
twelve Ladies should change their lamentations and complaints into so many
consorts of music, that were agreeable to his ears, and he would then command
the Sea to cast the fish upon the strand to be done withal as they thought
good; whereupon comes on the Stage six little Boys with wings and crowns of
Gold upon their heads, in the same manner as we use to paint Angels, and naked
all over, who falling on their knees before the Ladies, presented them with
three Harps and three Viols, saying, that Quiay Patureu s^nt them these
Instruments from the Heaven of the Moon, therewith to cast the Monster of the
Sea into a sleep, that so they might have their desire on him, whereupon the
twelve Ladies took them out of the hands of the little Boys, and began to play
upon them, tuning them unto their voices with so lamentable and sad a tone, and
such abundance of tears, that it drew some from the eyes of diverse Lords that
were in the room; Having continued their music about half a quarter of an
hour, they saw the Monster coming out of the Sea, and by little and little as
it were astonished, making to the shore where these fair Musicians were; all
which was performed so properly, and to the li^e, that the Assistants could
hardly imagine it to be a Fable, and a matter devised for pleasure, but a very
truth, besides the Scean was set forth with a world of state and riches. Then
one of the twelve Ladies drawing out a Poignard, all set with precious stones,
which she wore by her side, ripped up the fish, and out of the belly of it drew
the Infanta alive, which presently went and danced to the tune of their
Instruments, and so went and kissed the Calaminhans hand, who received her very
graciously, and made her sit down by him; It was said, that this young Lady was
his Niepce, the Daughter of a Brother of his; as for the other twelve, they
were all the Daughters of Princes, and of the greatest Lords of the Country,
whose Fathers and Brothers were there present. There were also three or four
Comedies more like this, acted by other young Ladies of great quality, and set
forth with so much pomp and magnificence, as more could not be desired. About
evening the Calaminhan retired into another room, accompanied with women only,
for all the rest they went along with the Monvagaruu, who took the Ambassador
by the hand, and led him back to the outermost room of all, where with many
complements after their manner, he took his leave of him, and so committed him
to the Queitor, who straightway ca^ryed him to his House, where he lodged all
the while that he was there, being two and thirty days, during which time he
was feasted by the principal Lords of the Court in a splendid and sumptuous
manner, and continually entertained with several sports of fishing, hunting,
hawking, and other such like recreations; As for us Portugals, we took a
singular content in observing, over all the City and about it, the excellent
structure of very sumptuous and magnificent edifices, of stat^ly Pagodes or
Temples, and of houses adorned with goodly workmanship, and of inestimable
value. Now amongst all these Buildings there was not in the wh^le City a more
majestical one then that which was dedicated to Quiay Pimpocau, who is The God
of the Sick: In it serve continually a number of Priests, apparelled in gray
Gowns, who being of greater knowledge then all the rest of the four and twenty
Sects of this Empire, do distinguish themselves from the others by certain
yellow strings, which serve them for girdles; they are also by the vulgar
people in a sovereign degree of honor called ordinarily, Perfect men. The
Ambassador himself went five times to their Temple, as well to see very
marvelous things, as to hear the doctrine of those* that preached there, of
which, and of all that concerns the extravagancies of their Religion, he
brought a great volume to the King of Bramaa, which was so pleasing to him, as
he afterward commanded the said Doctrine to be preached in all the Temples of
that Kingdom, which is to this day exactly observed in all his states. Of this
Book I brought a Translation into the Kingdom of Portugal, which a Florentine
borrowed of me, and when I asked him for it again, he told me that it was lost,
but I found afterward that he had carried it to Florence, and presented it to
the Duke of Tuscany, who commanded it to be printed under this Title, The new
Belief of the Pagans of the other end of the World. Upon a day as the
Ambassador was talking in this Pagode with one of the Grepos, who professed
much kindness unto him, for indeed they are all of a good nature, easy of
access, and communicating themselves to strangers freely enough, he demanded of
him, how long it was since the Creation of the World, or whether those things
had a beginning which God does show so clearly to our eyes, such as the Night,
the Day, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and other Creatures that have neither
Father nor Mother, and of whom no reason can be rendered in Nature how they
began: The Grep^ relying more on his own knowledge, then on the others that were
about him made this answer to his Question; Nature, said he, had no other
Creation but that which proceeded from the Will of the Creator, who in a
certain time, determined in his divine Counsel, manifested it to the
Inhabitants of Heaven, created before by his sovereign power, and according to
that which is written thereof, it was fourscore and two thousand Moons, since
the Earth was discovered from under the Waters, when as God created therein a
very fair Garden, where he placed the first man, whom he named Adaa, together
with his wife Bazagon, them he expressly commanded, for to reduce them under the
yoke of obedience, that they should not touch a certain fruit of a tree, called
Hil^for^n, for that he reserved the same for himself; and in case they came to
eat thereof, they should for a chastisement of their fault prove the rigor of
his Justice, whereof they and their descendants should feel the dire effects:
This being known to the great Lupantoo, who is the gluttonous Serpent of the
profound House of Smoke, and perceiving how by this commandment, God would for
man's obedience on Earth give him Heaven for a reward, he went to Adaas wife and
bid her eat of that fruit, and that she should also make her Husband eat
thereof, for he assured her that in so doing they should both of them be more
excellent in knowledge then all other creatures, and free from that heavy nature
wher^^f he had composed them, so that in a moment their bodies should mount to
Heaven. Then Bazagon, hearing what Lupantoo had said unto her, was so taken
with a desire of enjoying that excellent prerogative of knowledge which he
promised her, (...) to attain thereunto she eat of the fruit, and made her
Husband likewise to eat of it, whence it insued, that they were both of them by
that unhappy morsel subjected to the pains of death of sorrow, and of poverty.
For God seeing the disobedience of these two first creatures, made them feel
the ^igor of his Justice, by chasing them out of the Garden where he had placed
them, and confirming the punishments upon them wherewith he had threatened them
before; Wherefore Ada^, fearing lest the divine Justice should proceed further
against him, gave himself up for a long time to continual tears; whereupon God
sent him word, that if he continued in his repentance he would forgive him his
sin. Whilst the Grepo was speaking thus, the Ambassador wondering at his
discourse, which was a great novelty to him, Certainly, said he unto him, I am
well assured that the King my Master has never heard the like of this from the
Priests of our Temples, for they in recompense of our works propound no other
thing unto us but the possession of riches in this life; for, as they say,
there is no guerdon after death, and that we must finish our lives a^ all the
beasts of the field do, except the Cows, which for a reward of the milk they
have given us, are converted into other Sea-cows, of the apples of whose eyes
are pearls engendered. At these words the Grepo, puffed up with vanity for that
which he had said to the Ambassador; Think not, answered he unto him, that
there is any one in all this Country can let thee understand so much as I have
done, unless it be one Grepo, who is as learned as my self: With this ^ume of
presumption he chanced to cast his eye on us Portugal^, that were behind the
Ambassador, and as the Minister of the Devil, believing that we esteemed him as
much as he did himself, Verily, said he unto us, I should be glad, that you,
who as strangers have no knowledge of this truth, would come more often to hear
me, for to understand how God has created all these things, and how much we
are bound to him for the benefit of this Creation: Then one of our company,
named Gaspar de Meyrelez, showing himself therein more curious then the rest,
after he had thanked the Grepo in the name of us all, he prayed him to give him
leave to ask him something which he desired to know of him; Whereunto the Grepo
made answer, that he was very well contented; For, added he, it is as well the
property of a wise and curious man to enquire for to learn, as of an ignorant
to hear, and not be able to answer: whereupon Gaspar de Meyrelez demanded of
him, whether God, after he had created all these things whereof he spoke, had
not done some heroical works upon Earth, either by his Justice, or by his
Mercy. To this the Grepo replied, that he had, it being evident, that as long
as man lived in this flesh, he could not choose but commit sins which would
render him punishable, nor God be without a great desire to pardon him; and he
added further, That the sins of men coming to be multiplied on Earth, God had
overwhelmed the whole World, by commanding the Clouds of Heaven to rain upon
it, and to drown all living things, except one just man with his Family, which
God put into a great House of wood, from whom issued afterward all the
Inhabitants of the Earth. The Portugal again enquired, whether God after this
chastisement had not sent some other. God did not, answered he, send any, which
taken in general, was like unto that; but it is true, that in particular he
chastises Kingdoms and People with Wars, and other scourges which he sends
them, as we see that he punishes men with infinite afflictions, labors,
diseases, and above all with extreme poverty, which is the last and extremest
of all evils. The Portugal continuing in his demands, desired him to tell him,
whether he had any hope that God would one day be appeased, so as men might
have entrance into Heaven; Whereunto the Grepo replied, That he knew nothing
thereof, but that it was an evident thing, and to be believed as an Article of
Faith, that even as God was an infinite good, so he would have regard to the
good which men did upon Earth for his sake. Hereupon he demanded of him,
whether he had not heard it said, or found written, That after all those
things, whereof he spoke, a man was come into the World, who dying on the
Cross, had satisfied God for all men; or whether there was not among them some
knowledge thereof: Whereunto the Grepo answered, None can make satisfaction to
God but God himself, although there be in the World holy and virtuous men,
which satisfy for themselves, and for some of their friends, such as are the
Gods of our Temples, as the Grepos do assure us; But to say, that one alone
has satisfied for all, is a thing which we have never heard of till now,
besides, on Earth, which is so base of it self, a Ruby of so high a price
cannot be engendered: It is true nevertheless, that in times past so much was
certified to the Inhabitants of this Country by a man, named John, who came
into this City, and was held for an holy man, having been the Disciple of
another, called Tome Modeliar, the Servant of God, whom those of the Country
put to death, because he went publicly preaching, That God was made man, and
that he had suffered death for mankind; which at first wrought such a Division
amongst the people of this Nation, as many believed it for a very truth, and
others opposed it, and formed a contrary party against it, incited thereunto by
the Grepoes of the Law of Quiay Figrau, God of the Atoms of the Sun; so that
they reproved all that this stranger said, by reason whereof He was banished
from this City to the Kingdom of Brama^, and from thence for the same cause to
the Town of Digan, where he was put to death for preaching publicly, as I
said before, That God became man, and was crucified for men. Upon these
speeches Gaspar de Meyrelez and we, said, that this man had preached nothing in
this Country which was not most true; wherewith the Grepo was so taken, that he
fell down on his knees before all that were present, and lifting up his hands
and eyes to Heaven, he said with tears in his eyes, Lord, of whose beauty and
goodness the Heavens and the Stars do give testimony, I with all my heart do
beseech thee to permit, that in our times the hour may come, wherein the People
of the other end of the World may give thee thanks for so great a Grace. After
that these matters were past in this manner, and many others besides, which
well deserved to be related, if my gross wit were able to describe them, the
Ambassador took his leave of the Grepo with many complements and words of
courtesy, whereof they are nothing sparing, as being much accustomed to
practice them one with another.

CHAP. XLIX. An ample relation of this Empire of the Calaminham, and of the
Kingdoms of Pegu, and Bramaa, with the continuance of our voyage, and what we
saw among the same.
A Month after our arrival at this City of Timphan, where the Court then was,
the Ambassador demanded an answer to his Ambassie, and it was immediately
granted him by the Calaminham, with whom he spoke himself, and being graciously
entertained by him, he referred him for his dispatch to the Monuagaruu, that
was, as I have heretofore delivered, the chief man in governing the Kingdom,
who gave him an answer on the behalf of the Calaminham* as also a present in
exchange of that which the King of Bramaa had sent him, withal he wrote him a
Letter, that contained these words, Thou arm of a clear Ruby, which God has
newly enchaced into my body, and whose flesh is fitly fastened to me, as that of
my brother, by that new league and amity now accorded unto thee, by me Prechau
Guimiam, Lord of the seven and twenty Crowns of the Montaignes of the earth,
inherited by a lawful succession from him, who these two and twenty months
has not set his feet upon my head; for so long it is since he left me, never
to set me again, by reason of the sanctification which his soul does now enjoy
in feeling the sweet heat of the beams of the Sun. I have seen thy Letter,
dated the fifth cha^eca of the eighth moon of the year, whereunto I have given
the true credit of a brother, and as such a one I accept of the party thou do
present me with, obliging my self to render thee the two passages of Savady
free, that so thou may without fear of the Siamon be King of Avaa, as thou
desire me by thy Letter: And as for the other conditions, whereof thy
Ambassador has made some mention unto me, I will make answer thereunto by one
of mine own, whom will send unto thee from hence e're it be long, to the end
thou may have a good success in the pleasure thou seem to take in making
war upon thine enemies. The Ambassador having received this Letter, departed
from the Court the third day of November, in the year one thousand five hundred
forty and six, accompanied with certain Lords, who by the express commandment
of the Calaminham went along with him to Bidor, where they took their leave of
him, after they had made him a great feast, and presented him with diverse
gifts. But before I entreat of the way which we held from this place till we
came to Pegu, where the King of Bramaa was, I think it convenient and necessary
to make a relation here of certain things which we saw in this country, wherein
I will acquit my self as succinctly as I can, as I have done in all other
matters whereof (...) have spoken heretofore; for if I would discourse in
particular of all that I have seen, and of that which has past as well in this
Empire, as in other Kingdoms, where I have been during my painful voyages, I
had then need to make another volume far bigger then this same, and be endued
with a wit much above that I have: howbeit that I may not wholly conceal things
so remarkable, I am contented to say so much thereof as my gross style will
permit me to deliver. The Kingdom of Pegu has in circuit an hundred and forty
leagues, is situate on the South side in sixteen degrees, and in the hear^ of
the Country toward the rhomb of the East it has an hundred forty leagues,
being environed all above with an high ground, named Pangavirau, where the
Nation of the Bramaas does inhabit, whose country is fourscore leagues broad,
and two hundred long. This Monarchy was in times past one sole Kingdom, which
now it is not, but is divided into thirteen estates of Sovereigns, who made
themselves masters of it by poisoning their King in a banquet which they made
him in the City of Chaleu, as their histories relate: of these thirteen
estates, there are eleven that are commanded by other Nations, who by a tract
of another great country are joined to all the bounds of the Bramaas, where two
great Emperors abide, of which the one is called the Siamon, and the other the
Calaminham, who is the same I purpose only to treat of. According to report,
the Empire of the Prince is above three hundred leagues breadth, and as much in
length, and it is said that anciently it contained seven and twenty Kingdoms,
the inhabitants whereof spoke all one language: within this Empire we saw many
goodly Cities, exceedingly well peopled, and abounding with all provisions
necessary for man's life, as flesh, fresh water, fish, corn, pulse, rice,
past^res, vines, and fruits; the chief of all these Cities is Tymphan, where
this Emperor, the Calaminham, with his Court commonly resides: it is seated
along by a great river, named Pit^y, and environed all about with two broad
walls of earth, made up with strong stone on either side, having very broad
ditches, and at each gate a Castle with high Towers; certain Merchants affirmed
unto us, that this City had within it some four hundred thousand fires, and
albeit the houses are for the most part not above two stories high, yet in
recompense thereof they are built very stately, and with great charge,
especially those of the Nobility, and of the Merchants, not speaking of the
great Lords, which are separated by great enclosures, where are spacious
outward Courts, and at the entering into them arches after the manner of China,
as also gardens, and walks planted with trees, and great ponds, all very
handsomely accommodated to the pleasures and delights of this life, whereunto
these people are very much inclined: We were also certified, that both within
the enclosure of the City, and a league about it, there were six and twenty
hundred Pagodes, some of which, wherein we had been, were very sumptuous and
rich, indeed for the rest the most of them were but petty houses in the fashion
of Hermitages: These people follow four and twenty Sects, all different one
from another, amongst the which there is so great a confusion of errors, and
diabolical precepts, principally in that which concerns their bloody
Sacrifices, as ^abhor to speak of them; but the Idol which is most in vogue
amongst them, and most frequented, is that whereof I have already made mention,
called Qui^y Frigau, that is to say, The God of the Meats of the Sun, for it is
in this false God that the Calaminham believes, and does adore him, and so do
all the chiefest Lords of the Kingdom, wherefore the Grepos, Menigrepos, and
Talagrepos of this false god are honored far more then all others, and held in
the retation of holy personages; their superiors, who by an eminent title are
called Cabizondos, never know women, as they say, but to content their brutish
and sensual appetites they want not diabolical inventions, which are more
worthy of tears then recital: during the ordinary Fairs of this City, called by
them Chandu^^s, we saw all things there that nature has created, as iron,
steel, lead, tin, copper, lattin, saltpeter, brimstone, oil, vermillion, honey,
wax, sugar, lacre, benjamin, diverse sorts of stuffes and garments of silk,
pepper, ginger, cinnamon, linen cloth, cotton wool, alum, borax, cor^alines,
crystal, camphire, musk, yvory, cassia, rhubarbe, turbith, scamony, azure,
woad, incense, cochenill, saffron, myr^he, rich porcelain, gold, silver,
rubies, diamonds, emerauds, saphirs, and generally all other kind of things
that can be named, and that in so great abundance, as it is not possible for me
to speak that which I have seen, and be believed; women there are ordinarily
very white and fair, but that which most commends them is, that they are of a
good nature, chaste, charitable, and much inclined to compassion: The Priests of
all these four and twenty Sects, whereof there are a very great number in this
Empire, are clothed in yellow, like the Roolims of Pegu, they have no money
either of gold or silver, but all their commerce is made with the weight of
cates, casis, maazes, and conderins. The Court of the Calaminham is very rich,
the Nobility exceeding gallant, and the revenue of the Lords and Princes very
great, the King is feared and respected in a mavelous manner; he has in his
Court many Commanders that are strangers, unto whom he gives great pensions to
serve him for the safety of his person, our Ambassador was assured, that in the
City of Timphan, where most commonly the Court is, there are above threescore
thousand horse, and ten thousand Elephants: the gentlemen of the country live
very hand somely, and are served in vessels of silver, and sometimes of gold,
but as for the common people they use porcelain and lattin; in summer they are
apparrelled in satin, damask, and wrought taffeti^s, which come from Persia,
and in winter in gowns furred with marterns; there is no going to Law amongst
them, no^ does any man enter into bond there, but if there be any difference
among the common people, certain Magistrates, like to our Aldermen of Wards, do
decide it, and if contention happens to arise between persons of an higher
quality, then they submit to the judgment of certain religious men, who are
expressly deputed for that purpose, and from them matters pas^e on in manner of
appeal to the Queitor of Justice, which is as the superintendent thereof, from
whose sentence there is no appeal, how great and important soever the business
be: The Monarchy of these seven and twenty Kingdoms has seven hundred
Provinces, that is six and twenty in every Kingdom; and in the capital town
of each of those Provinces does a Governor preside, all of them being of like
and equal power. Now on every new Moon, each Captain is bound to muster the
soldiers that are under his charge, which ordinarily are two thousand foot,
five hundred horse, and fourscore fighting Elephants, one of the which is
called by the name of the capital town of the same Province, so that if one
should make a just computation of all those men of war that are in those seven
hundred companies of those Provinces, they would appear to be seventeen hundred
and fifty thousand, whereof there are three hundred and fifty thousand horse,
and five and fifty thousand Elephants; for in regard of the great number that
there are of those beasts in that country, this Emperor styles himself in his
titles, Lord of the indomptable force of Elephants. The revenue which the
Monarch draws from his Royal Prerogatives, by them called, the price of the
Scepter, as also from his Mines, amounts to twenty millions of gold, without
comp^ising therein the presents which are given him by the Princes, Lords and
Captains, and a great quantity of money that is distributed amongst the men of
war, according to every on^^ merit, which are not of that account. In all this
country, pearl, amber, and salt are very much esteemed of, because they are
things that come from the Sea, which is far distant from the City of Timpla^,
but of all other commodities they have infinite store: The Country of it self
is very healthy, the air very good, and likewise the waters. When they sneeze
they use to say, the God of truth is three and one, whereby one may judge that
these people have had some knowledge of the Christian Religion.

Being departed from the town of Bidor, we held on our course down the great
river of Pit^y, and the same day at night we went and lodged at a certain Abbey
of the land of Quiay Iareno, the God of married folks; this Abbey is seated on
the bank of the river in a plain, where are a great many of trees planted, and
very rich buildings, here the Ambassador was well entertained by the Cabizondo
and the Talagrepos; then continuing our voyage seven days longer, we arrived
at a town named Pavel, where we staid three days to furnish our vessels with
some provisions which we needed; in this place the Ambassador bought diverse
knacks of China, and other commodities that were sold there at a very cheap
rate, as musk, fine porcelains, wrought silks, Ermins, and many other sorts of
furs, which are much used in that country, because it is extreme cold there;
these wares were brought thither by great troops of Elephants and Rhinocero's
from a certain far distant Province, as the Merchants told us, called
Friou^araniaa, beyond the which, they said, was a kind of people called
Calog^^s and Funcaos, tawny men, and great Archers, having their feet like unto
Oxen, but hands like unto other men, save that they are exceeding hairy, they
are naturally inclined to cruelty, and have below at the end of the backbone a
lump of flesh as big as ones two fists, their dwelling is in mountains that are
very high and rough on some parts, where there are mighty deep pits or caves,
from whence are heard in winter nights most dreadful cries, and doleful
lamentations: We were told likewise, that not far from these people there were
others, called Calouhos, Timpates, and Bugems, and a good way beyond them some,
named Oquens and Magores, who feed on wild beasts which they catch in hunting,
and eat raw, as also on all kind of contagious creatures, as lizards, serpents,
and adders; they hunt those wild beasts mounted on certain animalls, as big as
horses, which have three horns in the midst of their foreheads, with thick
short legs, and on the middle of their backs a row of prickles, wherewith they
prick when they are angry, and all the rest of the body is like ^ great lizard;
besides they have on their necks, instead of hair, other prickles far longer
and bigger then those on their backs, and on the joints of their shoulders
short wings like to the sins of fishes, wherewith they fly, as it were, leaping
the length of five or six and twenty paces at a jump: These creatures are
called Banazes, upon which these savage ride into the country of their enemies,
with whom they hold continual war, and whereof some pay them tribute in salt,
which is the thing they make most account of, in regard of the need they have
of it, for that they are very far distant from the Sea. We spoke also with
other men called Bumioens, who live on high mountains, where there are Mines of
Alum and Lacre, and great store of wood; of this Nation, we saw a troop
conducting of above two thousand oxen, on whom they had put pack-saddles, and
so made them to carry their Merchandise; these men were very tall, and had eyes
and beards like the Chinese: We saw others likewise, that had reasonable long
beards, their faces full of freckles, and their ears and nostrills pierced, and
in the holes thereof small threads of gold made into clasps, these were called
Ginaphogaas, and the Province whereof they were Natives Surobosay, which within
the mountains of the La^hos are bounded with the lake of Chiammay, and are
clothed with hairy skins, going barefoot and bare-headed, certain Merchants
told us that these had great riche^, and that all their traffic was in
silver, whereof they had great store. We spoke also with another sort of men,
call d Tuparo^ns, who are tawny, great eaters, and much addicted to the
pleasures of the flesh; these gave us better entertainment then all the rest,
and oftentimes feasted us. Now because in a certain banquet, where we nine
Portugals were with the Ambassador; one of us, named Francisco Temuda,
challenged them to drink, they taking it for a great affront, caused the feast
to continue the longer for the recovery of their honor, but the Portugal set on
them so lustily, twenty that they were, as he laid them all along drunk on the
ground, himself remaining still sober; when they were out of their drink, the
Sapiton, that was their Captain, and in whose house the feast had been made,
called his company together, which were above three hundred, and whether the
Portugal would or no made him to mount upon an Elephant, and so lead him
through all the town, accompanied with a great multitude of people that
followed him at the sound of trumpets, drums, and other such instruments; the
Captain himself, as also the Ambassador, and the rest of us, together with all
the Bramaas, marching on foot after him, with boughs in our hands, and two men
before him on horseback, that rode crying, O all ye people, praise with
gladness the beams which proceed from the midst of the Sun, who is the God that
makes our rice to grow, for that you have lived to see a man so holy, that
knowing how to drink better then all the men of the world, has laid on the
ground twenty of the principal drinkers of our troop, to the end his renown
may be daily more and more augmented. Whereunto all the crowd of people that
accompanied him, answered with such cries and acclamations, as the very noise
thereof frighted all that heard it. In this equipage they lead the Portugal to
the Ambassadors house, where they set him down with a great deal of respect and
many complements, then on their knees they rendered him to the Ambassador,
desiring him to have a care of him as of an holy man, or the son of some great
King, for, said they, it cannot be otherwise, seeing God has bestowed so great
a gift on him, as to know how to drink so well. Whereupon having made a
gathering for him, they got together above two hundred lingots of silver, which
they gave him, and until the time that we departed he was continually visited
by the inhabitants, whereof many presented him with rich pieces of silk, and
other gifts, as if they had made an offering to some Saint upon a solemn day of
his invocation. After these we saw other men that were very white, named
Pavilens, great archers, and good horsemen, apparrelled in caslocks of silk
like those of Iapon, and that carried their meat to their mouths with little
sticks, after the manner of the Chinese; these same told us that their Coyntry
was called Binagorem, and that it was distant from thence about two hundred
leagues up the river, their merchandise was store of gold in powder, like to
that of Menancab^, of the Island of Su^atra, as also lacre, aloes, musk, tin,
copper, silk, and wax, which they exchanged for pepper, ginger, salt; wine, and
rice: the wives of these men which we saw there are very white, of better
conversation then all the rest of those countries, well natured, and exceeding
charitable, demanding of them what was their Law, and what was the divinity
that they adored they answered us, That their Gods were the Sun, the heaven,
and the stars, for that from them they received by an holy communication all
the good that they enjoyed upon earth; and furthermore, that the soul of man
was but a breath which ended in the death of the body, and that afterward
tumbling up and down in the air she mingled her self with the clouds, until
such time as coming to be dissolved into water, she died again upon the earth,
as the body had done before. I omit an infinite many of such extravagances
which were told us, and that gave us good cause to wonder at the blindness and
confusion of these wretches, and does also oblige us to render thanks
continually unto God for delivering us from these errors, and this false
belief. Now from the diversity of these unknown Nations, which we saw in these
parts, it is easy to infer, that in this Monarchy of the world there are many
countries yet undivided, and unknown to us.

CHAP. LX. Our arrival at Pegu, with the death of the Roolim of Mounay.
COntinuing our course from this town of Pavel,. 1.
we came the next day to a village, called Luncor, environed about the space of
three leagues, with a great number of trees of Benjamin, which from this place
is transported into the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Siam. From thence we sailed for
nine days together down that great river, all along the which we saw many
goodly towns, and then we arrived at another river, called Ventrau thorough the
which we continued our voyage to Penauchin, the first Borough of the Kingdom
of Iangumaa, where the Ambassador registered his vessels, and all that were
within them, because such was the custom of the country. Being departed from
thence, we went and lay that night at the Rauditens, which are two strong
places belonging to the Prince of Poncanor. Five days after we came to a great
town, called Magdaleu, which is the country from whence lacre is brought to
Martabano; the Prince thereof, during the time that we stayed there, showed the
Ambassador a general muster of all the men of war that he had levied against
the King of the Lau^os, with whom he was at difference, because he had
repudiated a daughter of his, which he had married three years before,
intending to espouse a gentlewoman by whom he had had a son that he had
legitimated, and made choice of for heir of his Kingdom, thereby frustrating
his Nephew (by his daughter) of his right. Passing on then thorough the
straight of Madur, wherein we sailed five days, we arrived at a village called
Mouchell, the first place of the Kingdom of Pegu; there one Chalag^ni^, a
famous Pyrat, that went up and down robbing in this place with thirty Ceroos,
well equipped, and full of warlike men, assailed us one night, and fighting
with us till it was almost day, he handled us in such sort, as it was the great
grace of God that we escaped out of his hands, nevertheless it was not without
the loss of five of the twelve vessels that we had, together with an hundred
and fourscore of our men* whereof two were Portugals: The Ambassador himself
had a cut on one of his arms, and two wounds besides with arrow shot, which had
almost cost him his life; all of us likewise were cruelly hurt, and the Present
which the Calaminham sent to the King of Bramaa, being worth above an hundred
thousand ducats, was taken by the Pyrat, together with a great deal of rich
merchandise that was in the five vessels, whereof he had made himself master.
In this sad equipage we arrived three days after at the City of Martabano, from
whence the Ambassador wrote the King a letter, wherein he rendered him an
account of all that had happened to him in his voyage, as also in his disaster.
Whereupon the King sent presently away a Fleet of sixscore Ceroos, with a
number of choice men, amongst which were an hundred Portugals in quest of this
Pyrat. This Fleet having by good fortune discovered him, found that he had put
on shore his thirty Ceroos, wherewith he had assailed us, and was with all his
forces retired into a fortress, which was full of diverse prizes that he had
taken in several parts thereabout; our men immediately attacqued the place,
and carried it easily at the very first assault, only with the loss of some few
Bramaas and one Portugal, howbeit many were hurt with arrows, but they
recovered in a short time without the ma^^ing of any one. As soon as the
fortress was gained, all that were found within it were put to the sword, not
sparing the life of any, but that of the Pyrat, and sixscore others of his
company which were led alive to the King of Bramaa, who caused them to be cast
to his Elephants, that instantly dismembered them. In the mean time the taking
of this fortress was so advantageous to the Portugals that were sent thither,
as they returned from thence all very rich; and it was thought that five or six
of them got each of them the value of five and twenty, or thirty thousand
ducats a piece, and that he which had least, had the worth of two or three
thousand for his share: After that the Ambassador was cured at Martaban^ of the
hurts which he had received in the fight, he went directly to the City of Pegu,
where, as I have declared, the King of Bramaas Court was at that time, who
being advertised of his arrival, and of the letter which he brought him from
the Calaminham, whereby he accepted of his amity, and allied himself with him,
he sent the Chaumigrem, his foster-brother, and brother-in-law, to receive him;
to which end he set forth, accompanied with all the Grandees of the Kingdom,
and four battalions of strangers, amongst the which were a thousand Portugals
commanded by Antonio Ferreira, born in Braguenca, a man of great understanding,
and to whom this King gave twelve thousand ducats a year pension, besides the
Presents which he bestowed on him in particular, that came to little less.
Hereupon the King of Bramaa seeing that by this new league God had contented
his desire, he resolved to show himself thankful for so great a favor,
wherefore he caused great feasts to be made amongst these people, and a number
of Sacrifices to be offered in their Temples, where there was no spare of
perfumes, and wherein it was thought there were killed above a thousand, stags,
cows, and hogs, which were bestowed for an alms among the poor, besides many
other works of charity, as the clothing of five thousand poor folks, and
employing great sums of money in the releasing of a thousand prisoners which
were detained for debt. After that these feasts had continued seven whole days
together, with a most ardent zeal, and at the incredible charge of the King,
Lords, and people, news came to the City of the death of the Aixquendoo, Roolim
of Mounay, who was as it were their Sovereign Bishop, which caused all
rejoycings to cease in an instant, and every one to fall into mourning, with
great expressions of sorrow: The King himself retired, the fairs were given
over, the windows, doors, and shops were shut up, so that no living thing was
seen to stir in the City, withal their Temples and Pagods were full of
penitents of all sorts, who with incessant shedding of tears, exercised such an
excess of repentance, as some of them died therewith. In the mean time the
King departed away the same night for to go to Mounay, which was some twenty
leagues from thence, for that he was necessarily to be assistant at this
funeral pomp, according to the ancient custom of the Kings of Pegu; he arrived
there the next day somewhat late, and then gave order for all that was
necessary for his funerals, so that the next day every thing being in a
readiness; the body of the deceased was about evening brought from the place
where he died, and laid on a Scaffold that was erected in the midst of a great
place, hung all about with white velvet, and covered over head with three
cloths of Estate of gold and silver tinsell: in the middle of it was a Throne
of twelve steps ascent unto it, and an hearse almost like unto ours, set forth
with diverse rich works of gold and precious stones; round about hung a number
of silver candlesticks, and perfuming pots, wherein great quantities of sweet
odours were burnt, by reason of the corruption of the body, which already began
to have an ill savor. In this manner they kept it all that night, during the
which was no little ado, and such a tumult of cries and lamentations made by
the people, as words are not able to express; for the only number of the Bicos;
Grepos, Menigrepos, Talagrepos, Guimons, and Roolims, who are the chiefest of
their Priests, amounted to above thirty thousand, that were assembled together
there, besides a world of others which came thither every hour. When diverse
inventions of sorrow, that were well accommodated to the subject of this
mourning, had been shown, there came some two hours after midnight out of a
Temple, called Quiay Figrau, god of the Motes of the Sun, a procession, wherein
were seen five hundred little boys stark naked, and bound about the neck and
the middle with cords, and chains of iron; upon their heads they carried
bundles of wood, and in their hands knives, singing in two Quires with a tone,
so lamentable and sad, as few that heard them could hardly forbear crying: In
the mean time one amongst them went, saying in this manner, Thou that art going
to enjoy the contentments of heaven, leave us not prisoners in this exile;
whereunto another Quire answered, To the end we may rejoice with thee in the
blessings of the Lord: then continuing their song in manner of a Letany, they
said many otherthings with the same tone. After that, when they were all fallen
on their knees before the Scaffold where the body lay, a Grepo above an hundred
years old, prostrated on the ground with his hands lifted up on high, made a
speech to him in the name of these little boys* whereunto another Grepo, who
was near the hearse, as if he had spoken in the person of the deceased, came to
answer thus, Since it has pleased God by his holy will to form me of earth, it
has pleased him also to resolve me into earth, I recommend unto you, my
children, the fear of that hour, wherein the hand of the Lord shall put us into
the balance of his justice; whereupon all the rest with a great cry replied in
this sort, May it please the most Almighty high Lord that raigns in the Sun, to
have no regard to our works, that so we may be delivered from the pains of
death: These little boys being retired, there came others about the age of ten
or eleven years, apparrelled in white Satin robes, with chains of gold on
their feet, and about their necks many rich jewels and pearls: After they had
with much ceremony done a great deal of reverence to the dead body, they went
and flourished naked scymitars which they had in their hands all about the
hearse, as if they would chase away the devil, saying aloud, Get thee gone,
accursed as thou art, into the bottom of the house of smoke, where dying with a
perpetual pain, without making an end of dying, thou shall pay, without making
an end also of paying the rigorous justice of the Lord above. This said, they
withdrew, as if they would show that by this action they had left the body of
the deceased exempt from the power of the devil, which besieged it before; In
the place of these same came in six and twenty of their principal Talagrepos,
being fourscore years old and upwards, apparrelled in robes of violet colored
damask, and carrying silver censors in their hands, before whom for the greater
gracing of them marched twelve gentlemen Ushers with Maces of the same metal;
as soon as these Priests had censed the hearse four several times with many
ceremonies, they all prostrated themselves with their faces on the ground, and
then one of them began to say, as if he had spoken to the dead man, If the
clouds of heaven were able to tell our grief unto the beasts of the fiel^* they
would forsake their pasture for to help us to wail thy death, and the great
extremity whereunto we are reduced; or else they would beseech thee Lord, to
imbarque us with thee into this deadly house, where thou see not us, because
we are not worthy of so great a favor* but that all this people may be
comforted in thee before the tomb shall hide thy body from us, show us, Lord,
by figures of earth* the peaceable joy, and sweet contentment of thy repose,
that we may be all awaked out of the heavy sleep, wherein the obscurities of
the flesh does wrap us, and that we miserable wretches may be incited to
imitate thee, and follow thy steps, for to behold thee in the joyful house of
the Sun at the last gasp of our lives. To these words, the people having made a
very dreadful cry, answered incontinently, The Lord grant us this grace. Then
the twelve gentlemen Ushers that carried the Maces, going on before to make way
thorough the press, though with much ado, because the people would not
withdraw, there came forth of an house on the right side of the Scaffold four
and twenty little boys richly apparelled, with chains of gold and precious
stones about their necks, who playing after their manner on diverse instruments
of music, and falling down on their knees in two ranks before the hearse, they
continued playing on their instruments, to the tune whereof there were only two
of them that sung, whereunto five others answered from time to time in such a
doleful manner, as made all the assistants shed abundance of tears, yea some
of them were so sensible of it, as they could not forbear plucking of their
hair, and knocking their heads against the steps of the Throne where the hearse
stood. During this and many other ceremonies there performed, six young
gentlemen Grepos sacrificed themselves, by drinking out of a golden cup a
certain yellow liquor, so venomous, that before they had made an end of their
draught, they fell down stark dead on the ground; this action of theirs brought
these Martyrs of the devil into the number of their Saints, so as they were
envied by every one for it, and presently their bodies were carried with a
solemn procession to be burnt in a great fire, that was made of Sanders, Aloes,
and Benjamin, where they were quickly reduced unto ashes. The next morning the
Scaffold was disgarnished of all the richest pieces about it, and the hearse,
but the cloths of estate, the hangings and banners, as also many other
movables of great worth were not stirred, and so with diverse ceremonies,
fearful cries and lamentations, and a strange noise of several sorts of
instruments, they set fire on the Scaffold, and all that was upon it, anointing
it often with odoriferous liquors, and confections of great price. Thus was the
body consumed to ashes in a very short time, but whilst it was burning, the
King and all the Grandees of his Court which were then present, cast in by way
of alms many pieces of gold, pre^ious stones, jewels, and chains of pearl of
exceeding great value, all which so ill employed were instantly consumed by the
fire, together with the body and bones of that wretched dead man, so as we were
certainly informed afterward, that this funeral pomp cost above an hundred
thousand ducats, besides the garments which the King and the Grandees of the
country gave to thirty thousand Priests that were assisting at it, wherein was
employed an incredible quantity of stuffes of several sorts, witness the
Portugals, who mightily profited by so lucky an occasion, because they sold at
what price they would such as they brought from B^ngala, for which they were
paid in lingots of gold and silver.

CHAP. LXI. The election of the new Roolim of Mounay, the grand Talagrepo of
these Gentiles of the Kingdom of Pegu.
THe next day between seven and eight in the morning,. 1.
which was the time when the ashes of the deceased began to be cold, the King
and all the great Lords of the Court came unto the place where the body had
been burnt, marching all in order after the manner of a stately procession, and
assisted by all the Grepos, amongst whom there were an hundred and thirty with
silver censors, and fourteen with miters of gold on their heads; they were
apparrelled in long robes of yellow satin, as for all the rest, to the number
of ten thousand, they were clothed with taffeta of the same color, and with a
kind of surpliss of fine linen, which was not done without a very great
charge, by reason of the number of them. Being arrived at the place where the
Roolim had been burnt, after some ceremonies performed, as is usual with them,
according to the time and sense that every one had of it, a Talagrepo of the
Bramaa Nation, and Uncle to the King, as Brother to his Father, whom the people
held for the ablest of them all, having been chosen to preach that day, went up
into the Pulpit for that effect: The beginning of his Sermon was an Elegy
touching the defunct, whose life he commended with many speeches that made for
his purpose, wherein he grew so earnest and hot, as turning himself to the King
with tears in his eyes, and lifting up his voice somewhat louder, to the end he
might hear him the better, he said unto him, If the Kings in these times
wherein we live do consider how little a time they have to live, and with what
rigor of justice they shall be chastised by the Almighty hand of the most high
God for the crimes of their tyrannical lives, possibly it would be better for
them to feed in the open fields like bruit beasts, then to be so absolute in
their will, and to use it with so little reason, even as to be cruel to the
good, and slack in punishing the wicked, whom by their sovereign power they
have put into greatness and authority; and truly they are much to be lamented,
whose good fortune has raised them up to an estate so dangerous, as is that of
Kings at this day, by reason of the insolence and liberty wherein they
continually live, without so much as the least apprehe^sion of any fear or
shame. But you must know, O ye blinded of the world, that God has made you
Kings to use clemency toward men, to give them audience, to content, to
chastise them, but not to kill them tyrannically: Nevertheless, O ye bad
Kings, in the condition whereunto you are raised, you oppose your selves to the
nature which God has endued you with, and take upon you many other different
forms, in apparrelling your selves every hour with some such livery as ^^^ms
best unto you, to the end you may be to the one very bloud-suckers, that
incessantly suck from them their goods and their lives, never leaving them so
long as they have one drop of blood in their veins; and to others you are
dreadful roaring Lions, who to give a ^a^k and a color to your ambition and
avarice, cause supreme Laws of death to be published for the least faults, and
all for to confiscate other men's goods, which is the main end of your
pretensions. Contrarily if there be any that you love, and unto whom you, or
the world, or I know not what, have given the name of Grandees, you are so
negligent in chastising their proud humors, and so prodigal in enriching them
with the spoils and undoing of the poor, whom you have left naked, and even
flayed to the very quick, as you cannot doubt but that they will one day accuse
you before God for all these things, when you will have no excuse to make, so
that there will be nothing left you but a dreadful confusion to trouble you,
and to put you into an horrible disorder. To these he added so many other
remonstrances in favor of the poor subjects, cried out so mainly, and shed so
many tears in their behalf, as the King remained almost besides himself, and
was touched ^o nearly therewith, that he instantly called Brazagaran, the
Governor of Pegu, unto him, and commanded him without all delay to dismiss all
the Deputies of the Provinces of the Kingdom, whom he had caused to be
assembled in the Town of Cosmin, for to demand of them a great sum of money,
that he might set upon the Kingdom of Savady, on which he had newly resolved to
make war. Withal he swear publicly on the ashes of the defunct, that during
his reign he would never charge his subjects with imposts, nor would make them
to serve by force, as he had formerly done; yea, and that for the future he
would have a most special care to hear the poor, and to do them justice
against the misdemeanors of the great ones, conformable to the merit of every
one, together with many other things very just and good, which might well serve
for a lesson to us that are Christians. This Sermon being finished, the ashes
of the defunct, which had been gathered up, was distributed as a relic into
fourteen golden basins, whereof the King himself took up one on his head, and
the Grepos of chiefest quality carried the rest; so the Procession going from
thence in the same order as it came thither, those ashes were conveyed into a
very rich Temple, which might be some flight shot from that place, and named
Quiay D^cco, that is, the god of the afflicted of the earth, there they were
put into a shallow grave, without other pomp or vanity, for so had Aixequendoo,
the late Roolim, commanded. This grave then was environed about with three iron
grates, and with two of silver, and one of latten, and upon three iron rods
that crossed the whole breadth of the chapel, hung seventy and two lamps of
silver, namely four and twenty on each of them, all of great value, and
fastened together with great silver chains. Furthermore, there were placed
about the steps, whereby one descended into the grave, thirty and six little
perfuming pots, with Benjamin, Aloes, and other confections, wherein was great
store of Ambergreece, all which was not finished till it was almost night, by
reason of the many ceremonies used in this funeral; all that day long they
freed an infinite number of birds which had been brought thither in above an
hundred cages, these Gentiles being of the opinion that they were so many souls
of deceased persons, which before times had passed out of this life, and that
were deposited as it were in the bodies of those birds, till the day of their
deliverance should come, at which time they were in all liberty to accompany
the soul of the defunct: The like they did with a great many of little fishes
which had been transported thither also in certain vessels full of water, so
that to set them at liberty, they cast them into the river with another new
ceremony, to the end they might serve the soul of him whose ashes were then
buried: There was also brought thither all kind of venison and foul, which was
distributed as an alms to all the poor that were present there, whereof the
number was almost infinite. These ceremonies, and other such like which were
performed in this action being finished, the King in regard it was near night
retired into his quarter, where he had caused tents to be pitched for to lodge
in, and that in sign of mourning, the like did all the great ones, so that all
the Assembly by little and little withdrew. The next morning as soon as it was
day, the King made it to be proclaimed, that all persons of what condition
soever they were, should upon pain of death dislodge speedily out of the
Island, and that they which were Priests should return to the attendance of
their cures, with this penalty, in care of contravention to be degraded from
their dignity. Whereupon all the Priests went pre^ently out of the Island,
ninety of them excepted, who were deputed for the election of him that was to
succeed in the place of the defunct. These same then assembled in the house of
Gangsparo to acquit themselves of their charge, and for that in the two first
days, which was the term limited to make this election, it could not succeed
by reason of the diversity of opinions, and great contrariety that was found
amongst them, which were to give their votes; the King thought fit, that out of
those deputed ninety, there should nine be chosen, who alone should make the
election. This resolution being taken, these nine continued five days, and as
many nights together in continual prayer; in the mean time a world of
offerings were made, and alms given; a great number of poor people were also
clothed, and tables prepared, where all men that would might eat of free cost,
and all this was accompanied with processions in every quarter. At last these
nine being agreed in conformity of votes, elected for Roolim one Manichae
Mouchan, who at that time was a Capizondo, or Prelate in the town of Digum of a
Pagode, called Quiay Figrau, that is to say, god of the atoms of the Sun, of
whom I have oftentimes spoken; he was a man of about threescore and eight years
of age, accounted amongst them for an holy personage, very knowing in the
customs and laws of those Sects of the Gentiles, and above all exceeding
charitable to the poor: With this election the King and all the great ones of
the Court remained very well satisfied: The King then speedily dispatched away
the Chaumigrem his foster-brother, to whom he gave thereupon the title of
Coutalanhaa, which signifies, the Kings brother, to the end he might be the
more honorably qualified with an hundred Lauleas, wherein was the Flower of all
the Brama^ Nobility, together with the nine Electors, for to go and fetch him
which had been newly chosen to the dignity of Roolim: And having brought him
nine days after with a great deal of respect and honor to a place called
Tagalaa, some five leagues from the Isle of Mounay, the King met him with all
the great men of the Court, besides a world of other people, and above two
thousand vessels with oars. When he was come in this equipage where the new
Roolim was, he prostrated himself before him, and kissing the ground three
times, O thou holy pearl, said he unto him, which art in the midst of the Sun,
breath forth upon me by an agreeable inspiration of the Lord of uncreated
power, that I may not dread upon earth the insupportable yoke of mine enemies:
At these words the new Roolim putting forth his hand to raise him from the
ground, spoke thus unto him, Labor my Son that thy works may be pleasing to
God, and I will pray for thee without ceasing. Hereupon the King rising up, the
Roolim made him sit down by him, and stroked him three times with his hand on
the head, which the King took for the greatest honor he could do him; then
having said something unto him vvhi^h we could not hear, for that we were a
little too far off, he blovved three times on the Kings head* vvhilest he was
on his knees again before him, and all the people laid flat on the earth. This
done, he parted from that place amidst the applauses that were given him from
all parts, and the sound of bells and instruments of music, and imbarqued
himself in the Kings Laulea, where he was seated in a rich chair of gold, set
with precious stones, and the King at his feet, which was also taken for a
great honor done him by the Roolim; round about, and a little distant from him
were twelve little boys attired in yellow satin, with scarfes of silver
Tinsell, golden Maces, and Scepters in their hands: All along the sides of the
vessel, instead of Mariners, stood the Lords of the Kingdom with guilt oars by
them; and as well in the Poop as the Prow were two Quires of young striplings,
apparrelled in carnation satin, and having diverse sorts of instruments in
their hands, to the tune whereof they sung the praises of God. Some of our
company observed, that one of their songs said thus; Children of a pure heart,
praise this admirable and divine Lord, for as ^or me being a sinner I am not
worthy to do it; and if that too be not permitted unto you let your eyes weep
before his feet, that so you may render your selves agreeable unto him. In the
same manner they sung many other songs to the tune of their instruments, and
with so much ardor and zeal, as if they had been Christians; it would have been
able to have stirred up the devotion of them that heard them. After that the
Rooli^ was in this sumptuous ^ort arrived at the City of Martabano, he did not
go to Land, as it had been resolved, because it was night, for it was not
lawful for him at any hand to touch the ground with his feet, in regard of the
great dignity of his person, but stayed till the next morning, at which time
the King disimbarqued him first of all upon his own shoulders, and so too did
the Princes and great Lordsof the Kingdom carry him alternatively to the Pagod^
of Quiay Ponuedea, as being the greatest and most sumptuous of the whole City,
in the midst whereof was a Theater richly set forth of yellow satin, which is
the livery of that sovereign dignity. There, out of a new ceremony, being laid
all along upon a ^ittle bed of gold, he made as though he were dead, and then
at the sound of a bell which gave three toles, the Bonzes prostrated themselves
all with their faces on the ground for the space of half an hour, during which
time, all the assistants for a sign of sadness held their hands before their
eyes, in saying aloud, Lord recall this thy servant to a new life, to the end we
may have one to pray for us. Instantly thereupon they took him from thence, and
put him into a Tomb adorned with the same livery, then chanting out certain, I
know not what, very sorrowful words with tears in their eyes, they left him,
after they had surrounded the Temple thrice, in a grave made expressly for that
purpose, covered over with a cloth of black velvet, and invi^oned about with
dead men's heads. This done, they said certain prayers after their manner,
weeping, which very much moved the King; and then all the throng of people that
made a strange noise, being commanded to silence, they gave three toles with a
great bell, for a sign to all the rest of the bells in the City to answer them,
as they did with so horrible and dreadful a din, that the earth even trembled
therewith: After the ceasing of this noise, two Talagrepos, men of great
reputation amongst them, and very well versed in their Laws, went up into two
Pulpits, prepared expressly for them, and that were hung with rich Turkey
Carpets, where they entertained their Auditors with the subject of this
ceremony, and gave them the explication of every thing, making an ample
relation unto them of the life and death of the deceased Roolim, and of the
election of this same, together with the excellent qualities with which he was
endued for to be raised to so high a charge whereunto he was called by a
particular grace of God; to this they added many other things wherewith the
people were exceedingly satisfied and contented; then the same bell having
tolled three times more, the two Priests descended from their Pulpits, which
together with all their furniture were presently burned with another new kind
of ceremony, whereof I will forbear here making a relation, because it seems
unnecessary to me to lose time in these superfluities, having said but too much
already thereof. After all things were peaceable and quiet, and that for the
space of five or six Credoes nothing had been spoken, there appeared coming
from the next Temple, which was about a flight shot off, a very rich and
sumptuous Procession of little children, attired all in white taffets, for a
mark of their innocence and pureness; they had about their necks a number of
jewels, chains of gold upon their legs in form of bracelets, white wax lights
in their hands, and upon their heads bonnets imbroydered with silk and gold,
and set with Pearls, Rubies, and Saphirs; in the middle of this Procession was
a rich Canopy of cloth of gold, which twelve of those little children carried,
environed round about with perfuming pans and censors of silver, from whence
breathed forth excellent odors most pleasing to the sent. These little children
played on diverse instruments of music, and went on singing praises to God, and
praying him to resuscitate this defunct to a new life. When they were arrived
at the place where the Roolim lay, they drew to the shrine, and taking away the
cloth wherewith it was covered, there came out of it a little child, which
could not be above three or four years old, and although he was naked, yet was
not his nakedness seen, because he was all covered over with gold and precious
stones, and appeared in the same fashion as we are accustomed to paint Angels;
he had also golden wings, and a very rich Crown upon his head: Whenas he was
come from out the shrine, the Assistants being prostrated on the ground, fell
to saying aloud with a voice that made those to tremble which heard them, Thou
Angel of God, sent from heaven for our salvation, pray for us when thou
returnest thither again. The King went instantly to this child, and having
taken him in his arms with a great deal of respect, and a strange ceremony, as
if he would show that he was not worthy to touch him, in regard he was an
Angel sent from heaven, he set him on the brink of the grave, where after the
child had taken away the cloth of black Velvet that covered him, whilst all
were on their knees, with their hands and eyes lift up to heaven, he said aloud,
as if he had spoken to him, Thou which have been conceived in sin, amidst the
misery and filthiness of the flesh, God commands thee by me, who am the least
of his servants, that thou do resuscitate to a new life which may be agreeable
unto him, always dreading the chastisement of his mighty hand, to the end that
as the last gasp of thy life thou may not stumble like the children of the
world; and that from this place where thou art extended stark dead, thou do
rise up presently, because it has been so decreed by the greatest of the
greatest in the Temple of the earth, and come after me, and come after me, and
come after me. The King thereupon took this child again in his arms, and then
the Roolim rising up in the grave where he was, as it were amazed with this
vision, fell on his knees before the child whom the King held, and said, I
accept of this new grace from the hand of the Lord, conformably to that which
thou have told me from him, obliging my self to be even till death an example
of humility, and the least of all his, to the end the toads of the earth may
not lose themselves in the abundance of the world. This said, the child rid
himself again out of the Kings arms, and going directly to the grave, he lent
the Roolim his hand to help him out of it. Now he was scarce come forth, whenas
they gave five toles with a Bell, which was a sign for all the people to
prostrate themselves on the ground the second time, saying, Blessed be thou, O
Lord, for so great a grace; whereupon all the bells in the City began to ring,
and all the Ordnance that were on the land to shoot of, as also those of above
two thousand vessels that rode at Anchor in the Port, from whence proceeded so
strange a noise, as was most insupportable to the ears of them that heard it.

CHAP. LXII. In what manner the Roolim was conducted to the Isle of Mounay, and
put into possession of his dignity.
THe new Roolim was conducted from that place in a chair of gold exceeding
rich, and set with Precious Stones, which the principal Lords of the Kingdom
carried upon their shoulders; the King in the mean time marched on foot before
him, bearing a rich S^ymitar upright in his hand. In this equipage he
accompanied him to his Palace, which was gorgeously furnished, and where he was
lodged three days, during which time the preparations necessary for his entry
was made in the Isle of Mounay. Now whilst he abode in the City of Martabano
there were many sorts of inventions of great charge made by the Princes, Lord,
and Inhabitants; In two of those feasts the King himself was present in person,
with a most sumptuous entertainment, which I shall not describe, because to say
the truth I do not know how it did pass. The day being arrived, wherein the
new Roolim, who is (as I have already declared) their Sovereign High Priest,
was to make his entry into the Isle of Mounay, the whole Fleet of Seroos,
Iangoas, Lauleas, and such other vessels of diverse sorts which were upon the
river, to the number of two thousand and better, were ranked in two files, some
a league and half in length, being the space between the City and the Island;
so that of all those vessels joined together was formed a street, the fairest
that possibly could be seen, for every vessel was covered with boughs full of
several dainty fruits, together with all kind of flowers, Tangets, Standards,
and banners of silk, each one striving in emulation of another to gain their
pretended Jubilee, and a plenary indulgence and absolution of all the robberies
they had formerly committed, without being subject to the restitution of any
thing whatsoever. This they did also to be absolved from an infinite of other
abuses of their abominable lives, which I pass by in silence, as a matter
unfit for devout ears, but conformable to their diabolical Sects, and the
damnable intentions of those which have instituted them, for their whole manner
of living is nothing but dissolution and excess in the lasciviousness of the
flesh, as in like manner are all other infidells, and arch-heretiques. In the
Roolims company there were not above thirty Lauleas; who were replenished with
a great number of the Nobility; as for him he was in a rich Seroo, seated in a
Throne of silver, under a cloth of State of cloth of gold, and the King at his
feet, as not being worthy to sit in a more eminent place; round about him were
thirty children on their knees attired in Crimson Satin, with silver Maces on
their shoulders, and twelve standing on their feet clothed with white Damask,
having censors in their hands, from whence breathed forth most delicate
perfumes. In the rest of the shipping followed two hundred of the most
honorable Talagrepos, such as Archbishops and other Prelates may be amongst us,
in the number of whom were also six or seven young Princes, all the Sons of
Kings, comprehended. Now because these Vessels were so full of people as one
could not row, they had fifteen Lauleas, or little Skiffes, wherein the Supreme
religious men of those nine Sects did row, to bring them the sooner to land. In
this equipage, and in this order the new Roolim parted from the City of
Martabano two hours before day, and continued his course amidst these Vessell^,
which made, as I have delivered, a kind of street, and forasmuch as it was not
yet day, there were a great number of Lanterns of different fashions placed
amongst the boughs. As soon as he began to set forth, a Canon was shot off
three times, at which sign there was such a noise of Bells, and great Ordnance,
as also of diverse sorts of very strange Instruments intermingled with the cries
and acclamations of the people, as one would have thought that heaven and earth
would have come together. When he was arrived at the Kay, where he was to land,
he was received with a solemn Procession by certain religious men that live in
solitary places, and are called Menigr^pos, which are like to the Capucins in
France, whom these Gentiles infinitely respect, by reason of their manner of
living, for according to the rule which they observe, they use more abstinence
by far then all the rest; These same, being some six or seven thousand in
number, were all bare foot, and clothed with black Mat, to show their contempt
of the world: upon their heads they wore the sculls and bones of dead men, and
great cords about their necks, having all their faces dawbed over with dirt,
and a writing hanging upon them which contained these words, Mire, mire, do not
cast thine eye on thy baseness, but on the recompenses which God has promised
to those that vilify themselves to serve him. When as they were very near to
the Roolim, who received them very affably, they prostrated themselves with
their faces down to the ground, and after they had continued so some time, the
chiefest amongst them looking on the Roolim, May it please him* said he, from
whose hand thou have newly received so great a blessing, as to be the Head of
all on the earth, to rend^r thee so good and so holy a man, that all thy works
may be as pleasing unto him, as the innocence of children which hold their
peace when their mother gives them the dug. Whereunto all the rest answered
with a great noise of confused voices, Permit O Lord Almighty that it may be
so. Passing on then, accompanied with this Procession, which the King for the
greater honor governed himself, together with some of the principal
personages, whom he called unto him for that purpose, he went directly to the
place where the dead Roolim lay buried, and being arrived at his Tomb, he fell
down flat with his face upon it, then having shed a great many tears, he said
with a sad and doleful voice, as if he had spoken to the deceased, May it
please him, who raigns in the beauty of the Stars, to make me deserve the honor
to be thy Slave, to the end, that in the house of the Sun, where now thou
recreatest thy self, I may serve as a broom to thy feet, for so shall I be made
a Diamond of so high a price, as the world, and all the riches thereof
together, shall not be able to equal the value of it: whereunto the Grepos
answered, God grant it. Thereupon taking a pair of Beads which had belonged to
the deceased, and that was upon the Tomb, he put it about his neck as a relic
of great worth, giving as an Alms, six Lamps of silver, two Censors, and six
or seven pieces of violet colored Damask. This done, he retired unto his
Palace, accompanied still with the King, the Princes, and great Lords of the
Kingdom, as also with the Priests that were there assistant, from whom he
presently rid himself, and then from out of the window he threw down upon the
Assembly handfulls of Rice, as amongst the Papists they use to cast Holy Water,
which all the people received upon their knees, with their hands lifted up.
This Ceremony ended, which lasted very near three hours, they gave three toles
with a Bell, upon which Signal the Roolim retired for altogether, and so did
the Vessels, and they that came in them, wherein all that day was wholly
bestowed. About evening the King took his leave of the Roolim, and returned to
the City, making directly the next morning toward Pegu, which was some
eighteen leagues from thence, where he arrived the day following two hours
within night, without making any entry or show, to testify the extreme grief
he was in for the death of the late Roolim, whom it was said, he greatly
affected.

CHAP. LXIII. That which the King of Bramaa did after his arrival at the City
of Pegu, together with his besieging of Savady.
TWo and twenty days after the King of Bramaa arrived at the City of Pegu, he
perceived by the Letter which his Ambassador brought him from the Calaminham,
that he had concluded the League with him against the Siamon, yet in regard the
season was not fit for him, either to commence that war, or to assail the
Kingdom of Avaa, as he desired, he resolved to send his Foster-brother, unto
whom, as I have already declared, he had given the title of lawful Brother, to
the siege of Savady, which was some hundred and thirty Leagues from thence to
the North-East. Having assembled an Army then of an hundred and fifty thousand
men, amongst whom were thirty thousand strangers of diverse Nations, and five
thousand fighting Elephants, besides three thousand others that carried the
baggage, and the victuals, the Chaumigrem departed from Pegu with a Fleet of
thirteen hundred rowing Vessels, the fifteenth of the month of March.
Fourteen days after he arrived in the sight of Savady, and having cast Anchor
near to a great Plain, called G^mpalaor, he remained there six days in
attending the five thousand Elephants which were to come to him by land, who
were no sooner arrived, but he began to besiege the Town, so that having begirt
it round, he assaulted it three times in the open day, and retreated still with
very great loss, as well in regard of the notable resistance which they within
made against him, as of the extreme trouble his people were at in planting
their ladders against the walls, by reason of their bad situation, which was
all of Slate; whereupon consulting with his Commanders about what he should do,
they were all of opinion to have it battered with the Canon on the weakest
side, until that by the overthrow of some part of the wall, a breach might be
made, whereby they might enter with more ease and less danger. This resolution
was as soon executed as taken, so that the Ingineers fell to making of two
manner of bullworks on the outside upon a great Platform, composed of great
beams and bavins, which in five days they raised up to such an height, as it
surpassed the wall two fathom at the least. This done, they planted on each
bulwark twenty great pieces of Ordnance, wherewith they began to batter the
Town so violently, that in a little time they beat down a pane of the wall; and
besides those pieces of battery, there were above three hundred Falcons that
shot incessantly, with an intention only to kill those that were in the
streets, as indeed they made a great havoc, which was the cause that seeing
themselves so ill-intreated, and their people slain in that manner, they
resolved, like valiant men as they were, to sell their lives as dearly as they
could, so that one morning having sallied forth by the same breach of the wall
which the Canon had made, they gave so valiantly upon those of the Camp, that
in less then an hour they almost routed the Bramaas whole Army. Now because it
began to be day, the Savadis thought it fit to re-enter into the Town, leaving
eight thousand of their enemies dead on the place. After this they repaired the
breach in a very little time by the means of a rampire of earth, which they
made up with bavins and other materials, that was strong enough to resist the
Canon. Hereupon the Chaumigrem seeing the bad success he had had, resolved to
make war, both upon the places near about, as also upon the frontiers that were
furthest off from the Town, for which purpose he sent Diosa^ay, high Treasurer
of the Kingdom, whose Slaves we Portugals were, Colonel of five thousand men
to spoil a certain Borough, called Valentay, which furnished the besieged Town
with provisions; but this voyage was so unfortunate unto him, that before his
arrival at the designed place, his forces were by two thousand Savadis, whom
he incountred by the way, all cut in pieces in less then half an hour, not one
escaping with life that fell into the enemies hands. Nevertheless it pleased
our Lord that amidst this defeat we saved our selves by the favor of the
night, and without knowing whither we went, we took the way of a very craggy
mountain, where we marched in exceeding great pain three days and an half, at
the end whereof we entered into certain Moorish Plains, where we could meet with
no path or way, nor having other company then Tigers, Serpents, and other
savage beasts, which put us into a mighty fear. But as our God, whom
incessantly we invoked with tears in our eyes is the true guide of travelers,
he out of his infinite mercy permitted, that at length we perceived one evening
a certain fire toward the East, so that continuing our course toward that
place where we saw this light, we found our selves the next morning near to a
great Lake, where there were some Cottages, which in all likelihood were
inhabited by very poor people; howbeit not daring to discover our selves as
yet, we hid us all that day in certain hanging precipices that were very boggy,
and full of Horsle^ches, which made us all gore blood. As soon as it was night
we fell to marching again until the next morning, whenas we arrived near to a
great river, all along the which we continued going for five days together.
At last with much pain we got to another Lake, that was far greater then the
former, upon the bank whereof was a little Temple in the form of an Hermitage,
and there we found an old Hermit, who gave us the best entertainment that
possibly he could: This old man permitted us to repose our selves two days
with him, during which time we demanded many things of him that made for our
purpose; whereunto he always answered according to the truth, and told us,
that we were still within the Territories of the King of Savady, that this Lake
was called Oreg^ant^r, that is to say, the opening of the night, and the
Hermitage, the God of succor. Whereupon being desirous to know of him the
signification of this abuse, he laid his hand on an horse of brass, that stood
for the Idol upon the Altar, and said that he often read in a book, which
entreated of the foundation of the Kingdom, that some two hundred, thirty, and
seven years before, this Lake being a great Town, called O^umhaleu, a King that
was named Ava^ had taken it in war, that in acknowledgement of this victory,
his Priests, by whom he was wholly governed, counseled him to sacrifice unto
Quiay Gua^or, the God of war, all the young male children which had been made
captives; and in case he did not so, they would when they became men regain the
Kingdom from him. The King apprehending the event of this threatening, caused
all these children, being fourscore and five thousand in number, to be brought
all into one place, and so upon a day that was kept very solemn amongst them,
he made them to be put most inhumanely to the edge of the sword, with an intent
to have them burned the next morning in Sacrifice; but the night following
there came a great earthquake, and such lightning and fire fell from heaven
upon the Town, as within less then half an hour it was quite demolished, and
all that was in it reduced to nothing, so that by this just judgment of God,
the King, together with all his were stricken dead, not so much as one
escaping, and besides them thirty thousand Priests in like manner, who ever
since during all the New Moons are heard to cry and roar so dreadfully, that
all the inhabitants thereabouts were ready to go besides themselves with fear,
by reason whereof the Country was utterly depopulated, no other habitation
remaining therein, save only fourscore and five Hermitages, which were erected
in memory of the fourscore and five thousand children, whom the King had caused
to be butchered through the evil counsel of his Priests.

CHAP. LXIIII. A continuation of the success which we had in this voyage, with
my departure from Goa to Zunda, and what passed during my abode there.
WE past two days in this Hermitage, where, as I declared before, we were very
well entertained by the Hermit;. 1.
the third day after betimes in the morning we took our leave of him, and
departed from thence not a little afflicted with that which we had heard, and
so all the same day and the night following we continued on our way along by
the river; the next morning we arrived at a place where were a great many of
sugar canes, of which we took some, for that we had nothing else to nourish us
withal. In this manner we marched still along by this river, which we kept for
a guide of our voyage, because we judged that how long soever it were, yet
would it at last ingulfe it self in the Sea, where we hoped that our Lord would
raise us up some remedy for our miseries. The day ensuing we arrived at a
village called Pommiseray, where we hid our selves in a very thick wood from
being descried by passengers, and two hours within night we continued our
design in following the current of this river, being resolved to take our death
in good part, if it should please God to send it us, for to put an end to so
many sufferings as we had undergone day and night; and without lying, the
apprehension and visions of this last end troubled us more then death it self,
wherewith we imagined our selves to be already ensnared. At the end of
seventeen days, that this painful and sad voyage had lasted, God showed us so
much grace, that during the obscurity of a very rainy night, we discovered a
certain light little more then a Faulcon shot before us, the fear we were in at
the first that we were near some Town, made us to stand still for a good space,
without knowing what to resolve upon, until we observed that this light seemed
to move, whereby we conjectured that it was some Vessel which went from one
port to another; as indeed half an hour after we perceived one, wherein there
were nine persons, who approaching to the bank of the river, near to the place
where we were, landed all in a Creek that was there in the form of an Haven,
and presently making a fire, they began to prepare their supper, which was no
sooner ready, but they fell to eating with great demonstrations of mirth,
wherein they bestowed a pretty good time. At length when they were well
replenished with meat and drink, it happened that all nine of them, amongst
whom there were three women, fell fast asleep; whereupon seeing that we could
not find a more favorable occasion to make our benefit of this adventure, we
went all eight of us very softly into the barque, that stuck half in the Ouze,
and was tied fast to a great stake, which pushing forth with our shoulders we
set aflote, and then imbarquing our selves in it with all speed, we began to
row down the river with as little noise as possibly we could make. Now in
regard the current of the water and the wind were both very favorable unto us,
we found our selves the next morning above ten leagues from the place whence
we parted, namely near to a Pagode, called Quiay Hinarel, that is to say, the
God of Rice, where we met but only with one man and seven and thirty women,
the most of them old, and Religionaries of this Temple, who received us with
a great deal of charity, although in my opinion they did it rather out of fear
of us, then any will that they had to do ^s good. Having questioned them about
many things which served for our purpose, they could give us no pertinent
answer thereunto, alleging still, that they were but poor women, who upon
a solemn vovv had renounced all things in the world, and confined themselves
into this enclosure, where they bestovved all their time in continual prayer
to Quiay Ponuedea, which moves the clouds of heaven, that he would be pleased
to give them rain, whereby their grounds might be made fruitful to produce
them abandance of Rice. In this place we spent all the day in caulking our
barque, and furnishing our selves at these religious vvomens cost, with Rice,
Sugar, French Beans, Onyons, and some smoak-dried flesh, vvherevvith they were
sufficiently provided. Being parted from hence about an hour within night, we
continued our course with our Oars and Sails for seven whole days together,
without so much as once daring to touch the Land, so much were we in fear of
some disaster that might easily arrive to us from those places which we savv
all along the river: But as it is impossible to avoid that here below which
is determined there above, just at the instant, as we were continuing on our
course, all confused as we were, and in a perpetual alarm, by reason of the
danger that was always present before our eyes, as well for that which we
savv, as for that we were in doubt of, our ill hap would have it, that an
hour before day, as we past thorough the mouth of a Channel, three Paraos of
Pirates assaulted us with such violence, and with so many different sorts of
D^rts, which they showred upon us, that within less then two Credoes they had
killed three of our companions; as for us five that remained, we cast our
selves into the Sea all bloody as we were with the vvounds which we had
received, whereof two others died a little after: When as we were got
ashore we hid our selves in the vvoods, where we past all that day in
lamenting our present mishap after so many fortunes as we had run thorough
before time. Thus vvounded as we were, parting from thence in more hope of
death then life, we proceeded on our way by Land, with so much pain and
irresolution concerning what we were to do, as we fell many times a
weeping, without being able to comfort one another, in regard of the small
likelihood there was of saving our lives by any humane means. As we were
reduced to this deplorable estate, with two of our companions ready to die,
it pleased our Lord (whose succor does ordinarily supply our defects) that in
a place where we found our selves upon the bank of the water, there chanced
to pass by a Vessel, wherein there was a Christian woman, named Violenta,
who was married to a Pagan, to whom this Vessel appertained, which he had
laden with Cotton Wool to sell off at Cosmin; this woman no sooner perceived
us, but moved with pity at the sight of us, Jesus, cried she, these are
Christians which I behold! that said, she caused the Vessel wherein she was
to come to the shore, and leaping on Land, together with her husband, they
fell both of them to embracing us with tears in their eyes, and then made us to
be imbarqued with them; presently whereupon this virtuous Dame took a care to
have our vvounds dressed, and provided us of clothes the best that she could,
rendering us many other good offices of a true and charitable Christian: Then
setting aside all fear, we parted from this place with all speed, and five
days after thorough Gods grace we arrived safely at the Town of Cosmin,
which is a part of the Sea in the Kingdom of P^gu, where in the house of
this good Christian woman we were as well looked unto, that in a short time
we found our selves thoroughly cured of all our hurts. Now whereas there is
never any want in the grace which God does to his creatures, it pleased him
that at that very time we met in this Port with a ship, whereof Luis de
Montorrayo was Master, who was upon the point of setting sail for Bengala,
so that after we had taken our leave of our Hostess, to whom we rendered many
thanks for all the benefits which we had received of her, we imbarqued our
selves with the said Luis de Montarroyo, who likewise entreated us exceeding
well, and furnished us abundantly with all that was necessary for us. At our
arrival at the Port of Cha^igan in the Kingdom of Bengala, where there was at
that time many Portugals, I instantly imbarqued my self in the foist of a
certain Merchant, called F^rnando Caldeyra, who was bound for Goa, where it
pleased God I arrived in good health. There I found Pedro de Faria, who had
been Captain of Malaca, and by whom I had been sent as Ambassador to the
Chaiubanbaa of Mar^abano, as I have declared heretofore. To him I rendered an
exact account of all that had past, for which he showed himself very
Sorrowful, and accommodated me with diverse things, whereunto his conscience
and generosity obliged him, in regard of the goods which I had lost for his
occasion. A little after, that I might not lose the opportunity of the season, I
imbarqued my self with an intention to go to the Southward, and once more to
try my fortune in the Kingdoms of China and Iapan, to see if in those
countries where I had so many times lost my coat, I could not find a better
then that I had on.

Being imbarqued at Goa in a Junck that belonged to Pedro de Faria,. 2.
which was bound in way of trade for Zunda, I arrived at Malaca the same day
that Ruy vas Pereyra, termed Marramaque died, who was then Captain of the
fortress there. Being departed from that place to go to Zunda, at the end of
seventeen days I arrived at Banta, where the Portugals are accustomed to
traffic. And because there was at that time great scarcity of pepper over all
the country, and that we came thither of purpose for it, we were constrained to
pass the winter there, with a resolution to go for China the year following.
We had been almost two months in this Port, where we exer^ised our commerce
very peaceably, whenas from the King of Demaa, Emperor of all the Islands of
Iaoa, Angenia, B^la, Madura, and of the rest of the Islands of that
Archipelago, there landed in this country a widow woman, named Nhay Pombaya,
about the age of threescore years, who came as Ambassador to Tagaril* King of
Zu^da, that was also his Vassal as well as all the rest of that Monarchy, for
to tell him that he was within the term of six weeks to be in person at the
town of Iapara, where he was then making preparation to invade the Kingdom of
Passaruan. When this woman arrived in this Port, the King went in person to the
Vessel where she was, from whence he carried her to his Palace with great
pomp, and put her into the company of his wife for her better entertainment,
whilst he himself retired to another lodging farther off to do her the more
honor. Now that one may know the reason wherefore this embassage was executed
rather by a woman then a man, you must note, that it has always been the
custom of the Kings of this Kingdom to treat of the most important matters of
their State by the mediation of women, especially when it concerns peace,
which they observe not only in particular messages that are sent by the Lords
to their Vassalls, such as this was, but also in matter of public and
general affairs, which is performed by embassage from one King to another, and
all the reason they give for it, is; That God has given more gentleness and
inclination to courtesy, yea and more authority to women then to men, who are
severe, as they say, and by consequent less agreeable to those unto whom they
are sent. Now it is their opinion, that every one of those women which the
Kings are accustomed to send about affairs of importance, ought to have
certain qualities for well executing of an embassage, and worthily discharging
the Commission which is granted to them: for first of all, they say, That she
must not be a Maid* for fear she chance to lose her honor in going out of her
house, because that even as with her beauty she contents every one, so by the
same reason she may be a motive of discord and unquietness in matters where
unity is required, rather then an access to concord, and the peace which is
pretended unto. To this they add, that she must be married, or at leastwise a
widow after a lawful marriage; that if she have had children, she must have a
Certificate how she has given them all suck with her own breasts, alleging
thereupon, that she who has borne children, and does not nourish them if she
can, is rather a carnal, voluptuous, corrupted, and dishonest woman, then a
true mother. And this custom is observed so exactly over all this country,
principally amongst persons of quality, that if a mother has a child which she
cannot give suck unto for some valuable consideration, she must make an
attestation thereof, as of a thing very serious, and much importing her honor.
That if being young too she happens to lose her husband, and becomes a widow,
she must for the better testifying of her virtue enter into Religion, to the
end she may thereby show, that she did not formerly marry for the pleasure
which she expected from her marriage, but to have children, according to the
pure and honest intention, wherewith God joined together the first married
couple in the terrestiall Paradise. Furthermore, that there might be nothing to
be found fault with in the purity of their marriage, and that it might be
altogether conformable to the Law of God, they say, that after a woman is
with-child, she ought no longer to have the company of her husband, because the
same could not then be but dishonest and sensual. To these conditions they add
many others which I will pass over in silence, for that I think it
unreasonable to use prolixity in matters that I hold worthy of excuse, if I do
not relate them at length. In the mean time after that Nhay Pombaya had
delivered her Embassage to the King of Zunda, as I have declared before, and
treated with him about the occasion which brought her thither, she presently
departed from this Town of Ba^ta; whereupon the King having speedily prepared
all things in readiness, he set sail with a Fleet of thirty Calaluzes, and ten
Iuripang^es, well furnished with ammunition and victual, in which forty
vessels there were seven thousand fighting men, besides the Mariners and
Rowers. Amongst this number were forty Portugalls, of six and forty that we
were in all, in regard whereof they did us many particular favors in the
business of our Merchandise, and publicly confessed, that they were much
obliged to us for following them as we did, so that we should have had little
reason to have excused our selves from accompanying them in this war.

CHAP. XLIV. The expedition of the Pangueyran, Emperor of Jaoa, and King of
Demaa, against the King of Passeruan, and all that which passed in this war.
. 1.
THe King of Zunda being departed from the Port of Banta the fifth day of
January, in the year one thousand five hundred forty and six, arrived on the
nineteenth of the same at the Town of Iapura, where the King of Demaa, Emperor
of this Island of Iaoa, was then making his preparatives, having an army on
foot of eight hundred thousand men. This Prince being advertised of the King of
Zundaes coming, who was his brother-in-law and vassal, he sent the King of
Panaruca, Admiral of the Fleet, to receive him, who brought along with him an
hundred and threescore Calaluzes, and ninety Lanchares, full of Luffons from
the Isle of Borneo: With all this company he arrived where the King of Zunda
was, who entertained him very courteously, and with a great deal of honor.
Fourteen days after our coming to this Town of Iapara, the King of Demaa went
and imbarqued himself for the Kingdom of Passar^an in a Fleet of two thousand
and seven hundred sails, amongst the which were a thousand high-built Juncks,
and all the rest were Vessels with oars. The eleventh of February he arrived
at the river of Hicandurea, which is at the entrance of the bar; and because
the King of Panaruca, Admiral of the Fleet, perceived that the great Vessels
could not pass unto the Port, which was two leagues off, by reason of certain
shelves of sand that were in diverse parts of the river, he caused all those
that were in them to be disimbarqued, and the other V^ssells with oars to go
and anchor in the road before the Town, with an intention to burn the Ships
that were in the Port, which indeed was accordingly executed. In this Army was
the Emperor Pangu^yran in person, accompanied with all the grande^s of the
Kingdom; the King of Zunda, his brother-in-law who was General of the Army,
went by land with a great part of the forces, and being all arrived at the
place where they meant to pitch their Camp, they took care in the first place
for the fortifying thereof, and for placing the Canon in the most commodious
places to batter the Town, in which labor they bestowed the most part of the
day. As for the night ensuing it was spent in rejoycings, and keeping good
watch until such time as it was day, whenas each Captain applied himself to
that whereunto his duty obliged him, all in general employing themselves
according to the ingineers directions, so that by the second day the whole Town
was environed with high Pallisadoes, and their Platformes fortified with great
beams, whereupon they planted diverse great pieces of Ordnance, amongst the
which were Eagles and Lions of metal, that the Ache^s and Turks had cast by
the invention of a certain Renegado, born in the Kingdom of Algar^es,
appertaining to the Crown of Portugal, and by reason this wicked wretch had
changed his belief, he called himself Coia Geinal, for as for the name which he
had before when he was a Christian, I am contented to pass it over in silence
for the honor of his Family, being indeed of no mean extraction. In the mean
time the besieged having taken notice how ill-advised they had been in
suffering the enemies to labor two whole days together peaceably in
fortifying of their Camp, without any impeachment of theirs; and taking the
same for a great affront, they desired their King to permit them to fall upon
them the night following, alleging how it was probable that men vvearied with
labor could not make any great use of their arms, nor be able to resist this
first impetuosity. The King, who at that time commanded the Kingdom of
Passaruan, was young, and endued with many excellent qualities which made him
to be exeeedingly beloved of all his subjects, for as it was reported of him,
he was very liberal, no manner of Tyrant, exceedingly affable to the common
people, a friend to the poor, and so charitable toward Widovvs, that if they
acquainted him with their necessities, he relieved them instantly, and did
them more good then they asked of him. Besides these perfections that were so
recommendable, he possessed some others so confor^able to men's desires, as
there was not any one that would not have exposed his life a thousand times
for his service if need ^ad been. Furthermore he had none but choice men with
him, even the flovver of all his Kingdom, besides many strangers, upon whom
he conferred much wealth, honor, and many graces, which he accompanied with
good words, that being indeed the means whereby the minds both of great and
small are so strongly gained, that they make them Lions of sheep, whereas
carrying ones self other vvayes, of generous Lions, they are made fearful
hares. This King then examining the request vvh^ch his people made unto him,
and referring himself to the advice of the antientest and most prudent
Counselors of his State which were with him, there was a great contention
about the success that the affairs might have, but in the end, by the counsel
of all in general, it was concluded That in case ^ortune should be altogether
adverse unto them in this sally which they m^ant to make against their enemies,
yet would it be a much less evil, and less consider^ble affront, then to see
the King so besieged by vile people, who against all reason would reduce them
by force to quit their belief, w^erein they had been bred by their Fathers, to
embrace another new one by the suscitation of the Farazes, who place their
salvation in washing their parts behind, in not eating of swines flesh, and
mar^ying of seven wives, whereby the best advised may easily judge* that God
was so much their enemy, as he would not assist them in any thing, seeing that
with so great offense they would under pretext of Religion, and with reasons so
full of contradiction, compel their King to become a Mohammedan, and render
himself tributary to them To these reasons they added many others, which the
King, and they that were with him found to be so good, as they all with one
common consent agreed thereunto, which is en evident mark, that it is a thing
no less natural for a good Subject to expose his life for his King, then for
a virtuous wife to conserve her chastity for the husband which God has given
her: This being so, said they, a matter of so great importance was no longer to
be deferred, but we all in general, and each one in particular, are by this
sally to make demonstration of the extreme affection which we bear to our good
King, who we are assured will never be unmindfull of them that shall fight best
for his defense, which is all the inheritance we desire to leave to our
children Whereupon it was resolved that the night following they should make a
sally upon their enemies.

Whereas the joy,. 1.
which this designed sally brought to all the inhabitants of the Town was
general, they never stayed till they were called, but two hours after
midnight, and before the time which the King had appointed, they assembled all
in a great place, which was not far from the Royal Palace, and where they of
the country had accustomed to keep their Fairs and to solemnize their most
remarkable feasts on those principal days which were destined to the
invocation of their Pagod^s. The King in the mean time, wonderfully content to
see such heat of courage in them, of seventy thousand inhabitants which were in
the Town, drew out twelve thousand only for this enterprise, and divided them
into four companies, each of them containing three thousand, whereof an Uncle
of the Kings was General, a man whom experience had rendered very knowing in
such undertakings, and that marched in the head of the first company. Of the
second was Captain another of the principal Ma^dacins; Of the third a
stranger, a Champaa by Nation, and born in the Island of Barneo; and of the
fourth one called Panbacaluio; all of them good Commanders, very valiant, and
exceeding expert in matters of war. When they were all ready, the King made
them a Speech, whereby he succinctly represented unto them the confidence which
he had in them touching this enterprise. After which, the better to encourage
them, and assure them of his love, he took a cup of gold and drunk to them all,
causing the chiefest of them to pledge him, and craving pardon of the rest, for
that the time would not permit them to do the like. This gracious carriage of
his so encouraged the soldiers, that without further delay the most part of
them went and anointed themselves with Mi^hamundi, which is a certain
confection of an odoriferous oil, wherewith these people are accustomed to
frote themselves with, when they have taken a full resolution to die, and these
same are ordinarily called A^acos. The hour being come wherein this sally was
to be made, four of twelve gates that were in the Town were opened, thorough
each of the which sallied forth one of the four Captains with his company,
having first sent out for Spies into the Camp six Orobalons, of the most
valiant that were about the King, whom he had honored with new titles, and with
such special favors, as use to give courage to them that want it, and to
increase it in them that are endued with some resolution. The four Captains
marched a little after the six Spies, and went and joined all together in a
certain place, where they were to fight with the enemies: whereupon falling
into the midst of them with a mavelous impetuosity, they fought so valiantly,
that in less then an hours time, which the fight endured, the twelve thousand
Passaruans left above thirty thousand enemies upon the place, besides those
that were wounded, which were in a far greater number, and whereof many died
afterward. Furthermore they took prisoner three Kings, and eight Pates, which
are as the Dukes amongst us, the King of Zunda too, with whom we forty
Portugalls were, could not so save himself, but that he was hurt with a Lance
in three places, a number being killed in defending him. Thus was the Camp put
in so great disorder, as it was almost destroyed, the Pa^gueyran himself being
wounded with a dart, and constrained to leap into the water, where little
lacked but that he had been drowned. Whereby one may see what the force of a
number of resolute and fearlesse men is against such as are surprised when
least they think of it; for before that the enemies could know what they did,
or the Commanders could put their soldiers into order, they were twice routed.
The next morning, as soon as the day gave them leave to know the truth of the
business, the Passeruans retired into the Town, where they found that they
had not lost above nine hundred of their men, nor more then two or three
thousand hurt.

It is scarcely to be believed how much the King of Demaa was grieved with the
disaster of the former day,. 3.
as well for the affront which he received from those within by the loss of his
people, as for the bad success of the beginning of this siege, whereof he
seemed in some sort to impute the fault unto our King of Zunda, saying that
this fortune had happened by the bad directions he had given to the Centinells.
Now after he had commanded that the wounded should be dressed, and the dead
buried, he called to Council all the Kings, Princes, and Captains of the
forces that he had, both by Land and Water, unto whom he said, That he had made
a solemn vow, and oath upon the M^zapho of Mahomet, which is their Alcoran, or
the book of their Law, never to raise the siege from before this Town, until
he had utterly destroyed it, or lost his own State therein. Whereunto he added,
That he protested he would put to death whomsoever should oppose this
resolution of his, what reason soever he could allege thereupon; which begot
so great a terror in the minds of all that heard him, as there was not one that
du^st contradict his will, but contrarily they infinitely approved and
commended it. He used then all kind of diligence for the new fortifying of the
Camp with good ditches, strong Pallisadoes, and diverse Bulworks made of stone
and timber, garnished on the inside with their Platformes, where he caused a
great many of Canons to be planted, so that by this means the Camp was
stronger then the Town it self, in regard whereof the besieged did often
times jeere the Centinells without, telling them, That it must needs be
concluded they were notorious cowards, since instead of besieging their enemies
like valiant men, they besieged themselves like feeble women, wherefore they
bid them return^ home to their houses, where it was fitter for them to fall to
spinning, then to make war. These were the jeers which they ordinarily put upon
the besiegers, who were greatly offended with them. This Town had been
almost three months besieged, and yet had the enemies advanced but little, for
during all that time, wherein there had been five batteries, and three
assaults given to it, with above a thousand ladders planted against the vvalls,
the besieged defended themselves still like valiant and courageous men,
fortifying them selves with counter-mires which they opposed to the breaches,
which they made with pieces of timber taken from the houses; so that all the
power of the Pangueyran, which (as I have declared) was about eight hundred
thousand men, whereof the number was much diminished, was not able to give him
entrance into it. Hereupon the principal Ingineer of the Camp, who was a
Renegado of Maillorque, seeing that this affair had not a success answerable
to what he had promised the King, he resolved to take another far different
course. To that effect, with a great amasse of earth and bavins he framed a
kind of a Platform, which he fortified with six rows of beams, and wrought so,
that in nine days he raised it a fathom higher then the wall* that done, he
planted forty great pieces of Canon upon it, together with a number of Bases
and Faulconets, wherewith he fell to battering the Town in such sort, as the
besieged were therewith mightily damnified, so that the King perceiving that
this invention of the enemy was the only thing in the world that could most
incommodate him in the Town, he resolved by the means of ten thousand
Volunteers, who had offered themselves unto him for that purpose, and to whom
for ^ mark of honor he gave the title of Tigers of the world, to attacque this
Fort, and they that were upon it; this matter was no sooner resolved upon, but
was presently put in execution, and for the better encouragement of them, the
King himself would be their Captain, albeit this whole enterprise was
governed by the four Panari^ons, which had formerly commanded in the first
sally. Having put themselves into the field then with the rising of the Sun,
they fought so valiantly without any fear at all of the dreadful Ordnance;
which were planted on the Platform, as in less then two Credoes they got to
the top of it, and there setting on the enemies, who were thirty thousand in
number, they defeated them all in a very short time. The Pangueyran of Pate
seeing his forces thus routed, ran thither in person with twenty thousand
choice soldiers, intending to beat the Passeruans from the place which they
had gained, but they defended it so courageously, as is not possible to
express it in words. This bloody battle having endured till evening, the
Passeruan, who had lost the most part of his men, made his retreat into the
Town by the gate that was next to the Platform, whereunto having first set
fire in six or seven places, it took hold of some barrells of powder, whereof
there was great store there, which inflamed it so terribly in several parts,
as it was not possible to approach unto it by the space of a flight shoot; this
accident was very favorable to the besieged, because the enemies were thereby
kept from joining together, and so the Town was for this time preserved from
the great danger wherewithal it was threatened; howbeit the Passeruans escaped
not so scot-free, but that of the ten thousand Volunteers employed in this
service, six thousand remained dead on the top of the Platform. True it is,
that in the Pangueyran part there was above forty thousand killed, amongst the
vvhhich were three thousand strangers of diverse Nations, the most part Achems,
Turks, and Malabares, as also twelve Pates, or Dukes, five Kings, with many
other Commanders, and men of quality.

All this night was spent on both sides in lamentations and complaints, as also
in dressing the vvounded, and casting the dead into the river.. 4.
The next morning as soon as it was day the Pangueyran of Pata seeing the bad
success which his enterprise had had until that present, could not for all
that be drawn to desist from it, so that he caused all his soldiers to
prepare themselves for a new assaulting of the Town, being persuaded that
the besieged had no great force lef^ to defend them vvithall, considering their
vvalls were overthrovvn in many places, their ammunition spent, the most part
of their people slain, and their King dangerously hurt, at leastvvise it was
so reported. Now the better to be assured thereof, he caused some of his
forces to be laid in ambush in certain avenues, by which he had been
advertised, that diverse of the frontizing inhabitants would pass, to bring
unto the Town Eggs, Pullaine, and other such like things necessary for the
recovery of sick persons. Now they, whom he had sent for that purpose,
arrived at the Camp a little before day, and brought nine prisoners with them,
amongst the which there was one Portugal. After then that they had racked and
tortured the other eight, and were come to do as much to the Portugal, who was
the last, he imagined that it may be they would show him some favor if he
declared unto them what he was, so that upon the first torment he cried out,
That he was a Portugal, he not knowing hitherto any thing of us, nor we of him:
Our King of Zunda no sooner heard this Declaration of his, but he commanded him
to be taken from the rack, and instantly sent for us to know whether that which
this wretch delivered was true; whereupon six of us that were the least hurt
went unto him, and at the first sight we judged him by his countenance to be a
Portugal, so that prostrating our selves before the King, we besought him to
give us this man, representing unto him, that in regard he was of our Nation we
were bound to make this suit for him, which he very willingly granted us, and
so we in way of thankfulness kissed his feet. After we had received him, we
carried him to the place where our companions lay wounded, and then we would
needs understand of him whether he were a Portugal indeed, because he looked so
strangely as we could not well know him, no not by his speech; but after he was
a little come to himself, and that he had shed a many of tears, My Masters,
said he unto us, I assure you that I am a Christian, and a Portugal, both by
father and mother, although as you see I do not wear the habit of one; my
country is Penamocor, and my name Nuno Rodriguez Taborda; I went out of
Portugal in the year one thousand five hundred and thirteen, after I had
enrolled my self in the Marshalls Army, and in the Ship called the S. Joano,
whereof Ruy Diaz Pereyra was Captain. Now because in those first beginnings I
showed my self in all occasions a worthy man, Alphonso d'Albuquerque made me
Captain of the four brigandines which he had in the Indiaes at that time;
afterward I was present with him at the taking of Goa and Malaca; withal I
labored in the foundations of Ormuz and Calecut, never failing in any of the
services performed in those times by that famous Commander, to whom so many
different Nations do at this day give the title of Great. I continued the same
proof of my courage during the Governments of Lopo, Suarez, of Diego, Lopez de
Siqueyra, and of other Governors of the Indiaes, even unto Don An^iaque de
Menesez, who succeeded to that charge by the death of the Vice Roy Vasco de
Gama; who at the entrance into his Government made Francisco de Sa General of
a Fleet of twelve Vessels, wherein were three hundred men which he was to make
use of for the building of a Fort at Zunda, in regard of the fear they were
then in of the Spaniards, who at that time went to the Molucca^s by the new way
which Magellan ^ad discovered unto them; in this Fleet I was made Captain of a
Brigandine, called the S. Jorge, where I commanded over six and twenty very
courageous and valiant men. We departed then from the bar of Bintan, whenas
Pedro de Mascarenhas destroyed it; but when we arrived at the Isle of Lingua,
we were beaten with so furious a tempest, that unable to resist it, we were
forced to make toward Jaoa, where of seven rowing Vessels that we were, six
were lost, and my sins would have it that mine was one of that number; besides
for my greater infortune, the tempest cast my Brigandine upon the coast of this
Country, where I have now remained these three and twenty years, not one of all
that were in the Vessel escaping save three of my companions, who are every
one dead but my self, and would to God it had pleased him to show me the grace
that I had been so too, that so I might not have offended him as I have done
since, for seeing my self continually pressed by th^se Gentiles to follow their
pernicious errors, I withstood them a long time, but whereas the flesh is
frail, being very poor, far from my country, and without hope of liberty, my
sins made me at their entreaties to yield to that which they desired of me with
so much importunity; by reason whereof this King^ Father did me many great
favors; and being sent for yesterday from a place where I was to look unto two
of the chiefest Gentlemen of this country, it pleased God that I fell into the
hands of these dogs, to the end I should no longer be one, for which the Lord
be blessed for evermore. This man's discourse exceedingly astonished us, and as
much as the novelty of so strange an accident required, so that having
comforted him as well as we could in such terms as we thought were necessaty
for the time wherein we were, we asked him whether he would go with us to
Zunda, and from thence to Malaca, where God might show him the grace to die in
his service like a good Christian. Whereunto having made answer, that he
desired nothing more, and that he had never had other design, we gave him
another habit, because he was clothed like a Pagan, and kept him always with
us as long as the siege lasted.

CHAP. XLV. The death of the King of Demaa by a very strange accident, and that
which arrived thereupon.
TO come again now to our history, you are to understand, that the Pangueyran
of Pata, King of Demaa, being certified by some of the enemies,. 1.
whom his men had taken prisoners, of the piteous estate whereunto the besieged
were reduced, the most part of them dead, their ammunition failing, and their
King dangerously hurt; all these things together carried him more ardently then
ever to the assault, which he had purposed with himself to give to the besieged
Town. He resolved then to scale it in plain day, and to assault it with more
violence then before, so that instantly great preparations were made over all
the Camp, where diverse Sergeants at Arms, on horseback, and carrying Maces on
their shoulders, went proclaiming aloud after the men of war had been made to
assemble together with the sound of trumpets, The Pangueyran of Pata by the
power of him who has created all things, Lord of the Lands which inviron the
Seas, being willing to discover unto all in general the secret of his soul*
does let you know, that nine days hence he will have you be in a readiness, to
the end that with the courages of Tigers, and redoubled forces, you assist him
in the assault which he intends to give unto the Town, for a recompense whereof
he liberally promises to do great favors, as well in money, as in honorable
and remarkable titles, those to the five soldiers* which first of all shall
plant colors on the enemies walls, or that shall perform actions which shall
be agreeable to him. Whereas contrarily, they which do not carry themselves
valiantly in this enterprise, conformably to his pleasure, shall be executed by
the way of justice, without any regard had to their condition. This Ordinance
of the Kings, full of menaces, being published over every part of the Camp, put
them into such an alarm, as the Commanders began incontinently to make
themselves ready, and to provide all things necessary for this assault, without
scarce taking any rest either day or night, making withal so great a noise, by
intermingling their hues and cries with the sounds of drums, and other
instruments of war, as it could not be heard without much terror. In the mean
time, whereas of the nine days, destined for the purpose aforesaid, seven were
already p^st, so as there rested no more but two, at the end whereof an assault
was to be given to the Town, one morning as the Pangueyran sat in Council,
to resolve of the ^ffairs of this siege with the principal Lords of his Army,
as also of the means, of the time, and places, whereby they were to assault the
Town, and of other necessary things, it was said, that from the diversity of
opinions, which the one and the other had, there arose so great a contention
amongst them, as the King was constrained to take every ones advice in writing.
During this time, whereas he had always near about him a young Page, who
carried Bethel, an herb whose leaves are like unto Plantain, which these Pagans
are accustomed to chaw, because it makes them have a sweet breath, and also
purges the humors of the stomach; he asked this Page then for some of it, who
at first seemed not to hear him, being much about twelve or thirteen years old,
for I hold it fit to make mention of his age, in regard of that I am to say of
him hereafter. Now to return to the Pangueyran, as he was continuing his
discourse with his Council of War; thorough much speaking, and somevvhat in
choler, his mouth became dry, so that he asked the Page again for some Bethel,
which he ordinarily carried in a little box of gold, but he heard him no more
this second time, then he had done the first; insomuch as the King having asked
him for some the third time, one of the Lords that was near to the Page
pulled him by the sleeve, and bid him give the King some Bethel, which
immediately he did, and falling on his knees he presented him with the box
which he had in his hands; the King then took two or three leaves of it, as
he used to do, and without being otherwise angry, giving him a light touch
with his hand on the head, art thou deaf, said he unto him, that thou could
not hear me? and thereupon re-entred into discourse with them of his Council.
Now because these Iaoas are the most punctillious and perfidious Nation of the
world, and that vvithall they of this country hold it for the greatest affront
that can be done thena, when one gives them a touch on the head, this young
Page imagining that the King had touched him so out of a mark of so great a
contempt, as he should thereby be made infamous for ever, though indeed none of
the company took notice of it, he went aside weeping and sobbing by himself,
and in the end resolved to revenge the injury which the King had done him, so
that drawing out a little knife which he wore at his girdle, he stabbed the
King with it into the midst of the left pap, and so because the blow was
mortal, the King fell instantly down on the ground, not able to say any more
then these two or three words, I am dead: wherewithal those of the Council
were so frighted, as it is not possible to express it. After that this emotion
was a little calmed, they fell first unto looking to the King, to see if some
remedy might not be applied to his wound; but because he was hurt just in the
heart there was no hope of recovery, so that he died within a very short time
after: Presently they seized on the Page, whom they put to torture, by reason
of some suspicions which they had upon this accident, but he never confessed
any thing, and said naught else, save* That he had done it of his own free will,
and to be revenged of the blow which the King had given him on his head by way
of contempt, as if he had struck some dog that was barking up and down the
streets in the night, without considering that he was the son of the Pate
Pondan, Lord of Surebayaa. The Page then was impaled alive, with a good big
stake, which was thrust in at his Fundament, and came out at the nape of his
neck. As much was done to his Father, to three of his brothers, and to
threescore and twelve of his kinsmen, so that his whole Race was exterminated,
upon which so cruel and rigorous an execution, many great troubles ensued
afterward in all the country of Iaoa, and in all the Islands of ^ale, Tymor,
and Madura, which are very great, and whereof the Governors are Sovereigns by
their Laws, and from all antiquity. After the end of this execution, question
was made what should be done with the Kings body, whereupon there were many
different opinions amongst them, for some said, that to bury him in that place
was as much as to leave him in the power of the Passeruans; and others, that if
he were transported to Demaa, where his Tomb was, it was not possible but that
it would be corrupted before it arrived there; whereunto was added, that if
they interred him so putrified and corrupted, his soul could not be received
into Paradis^, according to the Law of the country, which is that of Mahomet,
wherein he died. After many contestations thereupon, in the end they followed
the counsel which one of our Portugals gave them, that was so profitable to
him afterward, as it was worth him above ten thousand ducats, wherewith the
Lords rewarded him as it were in vye of one another for a recompense of the
good service which he did then to the deceased. This counsel was, that they
should put the body into a Coffin full of Lime and Camphire, and so bury it in
a Junck also full of earth; so that albeit the thing was not so mavelous of
it self, yet left it not to be very profitable to the Portugals, because they
all found it very good, and well invented, as indeed the success of it was
such, as by means thereof the Kings body was carried to Demaa, without any kind
of corruption or ill savor.

As soon as the Kings body was put into the Iunck appointed for it, the King of
Zunda,. 2.
General of the Army, caused the great Ordinance and the ammunition to be
imbarqued, and with the least noise that might be, committed to safe custody
the most precious things the King had, together with all the treasures of the
Tents. But whatsoever care and silence was used therein, the enemy could not be
kept from having some inkling of it, and from understanding how things went in
the Camp, so that instantly the King marched out of the Town in person, with
only three thousand soldiers of the past confederacy, who by a solemn vow
caused themselves to be anointed with the oil which they call Minhamundi, as
men resolved, and that had vowed themselves to death. Thus fully determined as
they were, they went and fell upon the enemies, whom finding busy in trussing
up their baggage, they entreated so ill, as in less then half an hours space,
for no longer lasted the heat of the fight, they cut twelve thousand of them in
pieces. Withal they took two Kings, and five Pates, or Dukes prisoners,
together with above three hundred Turks, Abyssines, and Achems, yea and their
Ca^ismoubana, the Sovereign dignity amongst the Mahometans, by whose counsel
the Pangueyran was come thither. There were also four hundred ships burnt,
wherein were the hurt men, so that by this means all the Camp was near lost.
After this the King retreated into the Town with his men, whereof he lost
but four hundred. In the mean time the King of Zunda having caused the
remainder of the Army to be re-imbarqued with all speed the same day, being
the nineth of March, they set sail directly for the City of Demaa, bringing
along with them the body of the Pangueyran, which upon the arrival thereof
was received by the people with great cries, and strange demonstrations of a
universal mourning. The day after a revievv was taken of all the men of war,
for to know how many were dead, and there was found missing an hundred and
thirty thousand; whereas the Passeruans, according to report, had lost but
five and twenty thousand; but be it as it will, and let fortune make the best
market that she can of these things, yet they never arrive, but the field is
died with the blood of the vanquishers, and by a stronger reason with that of
the vanguished, to whom these events do alvvayes cost far dearer, then to the
others. The same day there was question of creating a new Pangueyran, who,
as I have said heretofore, is Emperor over all the Pates and Kings of that
great Archipelago, which the Chinese, Tartar, Iapon, and Lequio, Historians
are wont to call Raterra Vendau, that is to say, the eyelid of the world, as
one may see in the Card, if the elevation of the heights prove true. Now
because that after the death of the Pangueyran, there was not a lavvfull
successor to be found that might inherit this Crown, it was resolved that one
should be made by election; for which effect by the common consent of all,
eight men were chosen, as heads of all the people, to create a Pangueyran.
These same assembled then together in a house, and after order had been taken
for the pacifying of all things in the City, they continued seven whole days
together without being able to come to any agreement about this election; for
whereas there were eight pretendents of the principal Lords of the Kingdom,
there were found amongst these Electors many different opinions, which
proceeded from this, that the most part, or all of them, were merely allied to
these ^ight, or to their kinsmen, so that each one labored to make him
Pangueyran, which was most to his mind. Whereupon the inhabitants of the
City, and the soldiers of the Army, making use of this delay to their
advantage, as men who imagined that this affair would never be terminated,
and that there would be no chastisement for them, they began shamelessly to
break out into all kind of actions full of insolency and malice. And forasmuch
as there was a great number of Merchants Ships in the Port, they got aboard
them, and fell pell-mell to rifling both of strangers, and those of the
country, with so much licentiousness, as it was said, that in four days
they took an hundred Juncks, wherein they killed above six thousand men;
whereof notice being given to the King of Panaruca, Prince of Balambuam, and
Admiral of the Sea of this Empire, he ran thither with all speed, and of the
number of those which were convicted of manifest robbery, he caused fourscore
to be hanged all along the shore, to the terror of those that should behold
them. After this action, Quiay Ansedeaa, Pate or Duke of Cherbom, who was
Governor of the Town, and greatly in authority, taking this which the King of
Panaruca had done for a manifest contempt, because he had, said he, little
respected his charge of Governor, was so mightily offended ^t it, as having
instantly got together about six or seven thousand men, he went and (...) this
Kings Palace, with an intent to seize upon his person; but the Panaruca
resisted him with his followers, and as it was said* he endeavored with many
complements to justify himself to him all that ever he could; whereunto Quiay
Ans^d^aa was so far from having any regard, as contrarily entering by force into
his house he flew thirty or forty of his men; in the mean time so many people
ran to this mutiny as it was a dreadful thing to behold. For whereas these two
heads were great Lords, one Admiral of the Fleet, the other Governor of the
Town, and both of them allied to the principal families of the Country, the
devil sowed so great a division amongst them, as if night had not separated
the fight, it is credible that not one of them had escaped; nevertheless the
difference went yet much farther, and ended not so; for the men of war, who
were at that time above six hundred thousand in number, coming to consider the
great affront which Quiay Ansedeaa, Governor of the Town, had done to their
Admiral, they to be revenged thereof went all ashore the same night, the
Pa^aruca not being of power enough to keep them from it, notwithstanding he
labored all that he could to do it. Thus all of them animated and transported
with wrath, and a desire of revenge, went and set upon Quiay Ansedeaas house,
where they slew him, and ten thousand men; wherewith not contented, they
assaulted the Town in ten or eleven places, and fell to killing and plundering
all that ever they met with, so that they carried themselves therein with so
much violence, as in three days alone, which was as long as the siege of this
Town last^d, nothing remained that was not an insupportable object to the
sight. There was withal so great a confusion of howling, weeping, and heavy
lamentation, as all that heard it could think no other but that the earth was
going to turn topsie turvy. In a word, and not to lose time in aggravating this
with superfluous speeches, the Town was all on fire, which burnt to the very
foundations, so that according to report there were above an hundred thousand
houses consumed, above three hundred thousand persons cut in pieces, and almost
as many made prisoners, which were led away slaves, and sold in diverse
countries. Besides, there was an infinite of riches stolen, whereof the value,
as it was said, only in silver and gold, amounted even to forty millions, and
all put together, to an hundred millions of gold. As for the number of
prisoners, and of such as were slain, it was near five hundred thousand
persons; and all these things arrived by the evil counsel of a young King,
bred up amongst young people like himself, who did every thing at his own
pleasure, without any body contradicting him.

CHAP. LXVI. That which befell us, until our departure toward the Port of
Zunda, from whence we s^^ sail for China, and what afterward happened unto us.
. 1.
THree days after so cruel and horrible a mutiny, whenas all things were
peaceable, the principal Heads of this commotion fearing as soon as a
Pangueyran should be elected, that they should be punished according to the
enormity of their crime, they all of them set sail without longer attending the
danger which threatened them. They departed away then in the same Vessels
wherein they came, the King of Panaruca, their Admiral, being not possibly
able to stay them, but contrarily was twice in jeopardy of losing himself in
endeavoring to do it with those few men that were of his party. Thus in the
space of two days only, the two thousand sails which were in the Port went
away, leaving the Town still burning, which was the cause that those few Lords,
which remained, being joined together, resolved to pas^ unto the Town of
Iapara, some five leagues from thence toward the Coast of the Mediterranean
Sea. This resolution being taken, they put it presently in execution, to the
end that with the more tranquillity (for the popular commotion was not yet well
appeased) they might make election of the Pangu^yran, which properly signifies
Emperor; As indeed they created one, called Pat^ Suday^, Prince of S^rubayaa,
who had been none of those eight Pretendents of whom we have spoken; but this
election they made, because it seemed to them necessary for their common good,
and the qui^t of the Country: All the inhabitant^ ^o were exceedingly satisfied
with it, and they immediately sent the Panarut^ for (...) to a place some dozen
leagues from thence, called Pisammenes, where he at that time lived. Nine days
after he was sent for, he failed not to come, accompanied with above two
hundred thousand men, imbarqued in fifteen hundred Calaluz^s and Iuripangos. He
was received by all the people with great demonstrations of j^y, and a little
after he was crowned with the accustomed ceremonies, as Pangueyran of all the
countries of Ia^a, Bala, and Mad^ra, which is a Monarchy that is very populous,
and exceeding rich and mighty. That done, he returned to the Town of Demaa,
with an intent to have it rebuilt anew, and to restore it to its former estate.
At his arrival in that place, the first thing he did was to give order for the
punishing of those which were found attainted and convict^d of the sacking of
the Town, who proved not to be above five thousand, though the number of them
was far greater, for all the rest were fled away, some here, some there. Th^se
wretches suffered only two kinds of death, some were impaled alive, and the
rest were burned in the very same ships wherein they were apprehended; and of
four days, wherein this justice was executed, there past not one without the
putting to death of a great number, which so mightily terrified us Portugals
that were there present, as seeing the commotion very great still over the
whole country, and no likelihood that things would of a long time be peaceable,
we humbly desired the King of Zunda to give us leave to go to our ship which
lay in the Port of Bant^, in regard the season for the voyage to China was
already come. This King having easily granted our request, with an exemption of
the customs of our Merchandise, presented every one of us besides with an
hundred ducats, and to each of the heirs of fourteen of ours, which were slain
in the war, he gave three hundred, which we accepted of as a very honorable
reward, and worthy of a most liberal, and good natured Prince. Thus went we
presently away very well satisfied of him to the Port of Banta, and there we
remained twelve whole days together, during the which we made an end of
preparing our selves for our voyage. After this, we set sail for China in the
company of other four ships, who were bound for the same place, and we took
along with us the same Ioan^ Rodriguez, whom we incountred at Passeruan, as
I have before declared, that had made himself a Brachman of Pagode, called
Quiay Nacorel, and as for him he had named himself Gauxita^ Facal^m, which is
as much to say as, the Council of the Saint. The same Ioane Rodriguez no
sooner arrived at China, but he imbarqued himself for Malaca, where (through
the grace of God) he was reconciled anew to the Catholic faith, and after he
had continued a year there, he died with great demonstrations of a good and
true Christian, whereby it seems we may believe that our Lord received him to
mercy, since after so many years profession of an infidel, he reserved him to
come and die in his service, for which be he praised for evermore. Our five
ships then, with which we parted from Zunda, being arrived at Chinche^,
where the Portugals at that time traded, we abode three months and an half
there with travel and danger enough of our persons; for we were in a
country, where nothing but revolts and mutinies were spoken of. Withal,
there were great armies afoot all along the Coast, by reason of many
robberies which the Pirates of Iapon had committed thereabout, so that in this
disorder there was no means to exercise any commerce, for the Merchants durst
not leave their houses to go to Sea. By reason of all this we were
constrained to pass unto the Port of Chabaqu^a, where we found at anchor
sixscore Iuneks* who having set upon us, took three of our five Vessels,
wherein four hundred Christians were killed, of which fourscore and two were
Portugals. As for the other two Vessels, in one of the which I was, they
escaped as it were by miracle. But because we could not make to Land, by
reason of the Easterly winds which were contrary to us all that same month,
we were constrained (though to our great grief) to regain the Coast of Iaoa.
At length after we had continued our course by the space of two and twenty
days with a great deal of travel and danger, we discovered an Island called
Pullo Condor, distant eight degrees, and one third of height from the bar of
the Kingdom of Camboya. Whereupon as we were even ready to reach it, so
furious a storm came from the South Coast, as we were all in jeopardy to be
cast away. Nevertheless driving along we got to the Isle of Lingua, where a
tempest surprised us at West and South-West, with so impetuous a wind, as
struggling against the billow, it kept us from making use of our sails: so that
being in fear of rocks and shelves of sand, which were on the Prow side, we
steered the other way, until that after some time the Forekeel of our Poup
opened within nine hand-bredths of the water, which was the cause, seeing our
selves so near unto death, that we were enforced to cut down our two masts, and
to cast all our Merchandises into the Sea, whereby our Ship was somewhat eased.
This done, whereas we had left our ship the rest of the day, and a good part
of the night to the mercy of the Sea, it pleased our Lord out of an effect of
his divine justice, that without knowing how, or without seeing any thing, our
ship ran her self against a rock, with the death of seventy and two persons.
This miserable success so deprived us of all our understanding and forces,
that not so much as one of us ever thought of any way saving himself, as the
Chinese, whom we had for Mariners in our Junck had done, for they had so
bestirred themselves all the night long, that before it was day they had made a
raft of such planks and beams as came to their hands, tying them together in
such sort with the cordage of their sails, that forty persons might abide upon
it with ease. Now whereas we were all in an imminent danger, and in a time
wherein (as they say) the father does nothing for the son, nor the son for the
father, no man took care but for himself alone, whereof we had a fair example
in our Chinese-Mariners, whom we accounted but as our slaves; for Martin
Esteuez, the Captain and Master of the Junck, having entreated his own
servants, who were upon the raft, to receive him amongst them, they ansvvered
him, that they could not do it at any hand, which coming to the ears of one of
ours called Ruy de Moura, whereas he could not endure that these persidious
villains should use us with so much discourtesie and ingratitude, he got him up
on his feet from a place where he lay hurt, and made unto us a short speech,
whereby he represented unto us, That we were to remember how odious a thing
cowardice was; and withal, how absolutely it imported us to seize upon this
raf^ for the saving of our lives. To these words he added many other such like,
which so encouraged us, that with one accord, and with one and the same
resolution, whereunto the present necessity obliged us, being but eight and
twenty Portugals, we set upon the forty Chinese which were upon the raft. We
opposed our swords then to their iron hatchets, and fought so lustily with
them, as we killed them all in the space of two or three Credoes. It is true
indeed, that of us eight and twenty Portugals, sixteen were slain, and twelve
escaped, but so wounded, that four of them died the next day. This was an
accident, whereof no doubt the like has seldom been heard of* or seen,
whereby one may clearly perceive how great the misery of humane life is, for it
was not twelve hours before, when as we all embraced each other in the ship,
and behaved our selves like right brethren, intending to die for one another,
and so soon after our sins carried us to such great extremity, as hardly
sustaining our selves upon four scu^vy planks, tied together with two ropes, we
kissed one another with as much barbarism, as if we had been mortal enemies,
or something worse. It is true, that the excuse which may be alleged thereupon
is, that necessity, which has no law, compelled us thereunto.

. 2.
Whenas we were were Masters of this raft, which had cost us and the Chinese so
much blood, we set upon it eight and thirty persons of us that we were, of
which there were twelve Portugals, some of their children, our servants, and
the remainder of those that were hurt, whereof the most part died afterward.
Now forasmuch as we were so great a number upon a very little raft, where we
floated at the mercy of the waves of the Sea, the water came up to our middles,
and in this fashion we escaped from that dangerous and unfortunate rock, one
Saturday, being Christmas day, one thousand five hundred forty and seven, with
one only piece of an old counter-point, which served us for a ^ail, having
neither needle no^ compass to guide us: True it is, that we supplied this
defect with the great hope which we had in our Lord, whom we invoked
incessantly with groans and sighs, that were accompanied with abundance of
tears. In this pitiful equipage we navigated four whole days without eating
any thing, so that upon the fifth day necessity constrained us to feed on a
Cap^a^ which died amongst us, with whose body we sustained our selves five
days longer, which made up the nineth of our voyage, so that during other
four, wherein we continued in this case, we had nothing else to eat but the
foam and sl^me of the Sea; for we resolved to die with hunger rather then
feed on any of those four Portugals which lay dead by us. After we had
vvandred thus at the mercy of the Sea, it pleased our Lord out of his infinite
goodness to let us discover land on the twelfth day, which was so agreeable
a sight to us, as the joy of it proved mortal to some of ours, for of fifteen
of us that were still alive, four died suddenly, whereof three were
Portugals; so that of eight and thirty persons which had been imbarqued on the
raft, there was but eleven that escaped, namely seven Portugals, and f^ur of
our boys. In the end having got to land, we found our selves in a shallovv
rode, fashioned much like to an Haven, where we began to render infinite
thanks to God for having thus delivered us from the perils of the Sea,
promising our selves also, that through his infinite mercy he would dravv us
out of those of the land. Having then made provision of certain shellfish, as
oysters, and sea-crabs to nourish our selves vvithall, because we had observed
how all this country was very desert, and full of Elephants and Tigers, we
got up into certain trees, to the end we might avoid the fury of these beasts,
and some others which we saw there; then when as we thought that we might
proceed on our way with less danger, we gathered us together, and went on
thorough a vvood, where to secure our lives, we had recourse to loud cries, and
hollowings. In the mean time, as it is the property of the divine mercy never
to forsake the poor sufferers that are upon the earth, it permitted us to see
coming along in a channel of fresh water, that ran ingulphing it self into
the Sea, a little barque, laden with timber and other wood, wherein were nine
Negroes, Iaoas, and Papua^. As soon as these men savv us, imagining that we
were some devils, as they confessed to us afterward; they leapt into the
water, and quite left the Vessel, not so much as one of them abiding in her
But when they perceived what we were, they abandoned the fear they were in
before, and coming unto us they questioned us about many particulars,
whereunto we ansvvered according to the truth, and vvithall, desired them for
Gods sake to lead us vvhithersoever they would, and there to sell us as sl^ves
to some that would carry us to Malaca; adding that we were Merchants, and that
in acknowledgement of so good an office, they should get a great deal of money
for us, or as much in commodities as they would require. Now whereas these
Iaoas are naturally inclined to avarice, when they heard us talk of their
interest, they began to be more tractable, and gave us better words, with hope
of doing that which we desired of them, but these courtesies lasted no longer
but till such time as they could get again into their barque, which they had
quitted; for as soon as they saw themselves aboard her, they put off from the
land, and making as though they would part without taking us in, they told us,
that to be assured of what we had said to them, they would have us before they
proceeded any further, to yield up our arms to them, whereas otherwise they
would never take us in, no not though they saw us eaten up with Lions. Seeing
our selves thus constrained by necessity, and by a certain despair of finding
any other remedy to our present extremity, we were enforced to do all that
these men required of us; so that having brought their barque a little nearer,
they bid us swim to them, because they had never a boat to fetch us from the
shore, which we presently resolved to do. Whereupon two boys and one Portugal,
leapt into the Sea to take hold of a rope, which they had thrown out to us from
of the poup of the barque; but before they could reach it, they were devoured
by three great Lizards, nothing of the bodies of all these three appearing to
us, but only the blood, wherewith the Sea was all died. Whilst this passed so,
we the other eight that remained on the shore were so seized with fear and
terror, as we were not our selves a long time after, wherewith those dogs which
were in the barque were not awhit moved; but contra^^l^ ^l^pping their hands
together in sign of joy, they said in a way of jeering, O how happy are these
three, for that they have ended their days without pain! Then whenas they saw
that we were half sunk up into the Ouze, without so much strength as to get our
selves out of it, five of them leaped ashore, and tying us by the middle, drew
us into their barque, with a thousand injuries and affronts. After this setting
sail they carried us to a village called Che^bom, which was some dozen leagues
from thence, where they sold all eight of us, namely six Portugals, one Chinese
boy, and a Caphar, for the sum of thirteen Pardains, which are in value three
hundred realls of our money. He that bought us was a Pagan Merchant of the Isle
of Zel^bres, in whose power we continued five or six and twenty days, and
without lying, we had no lack with him, either of clothes or meat. The same
Merchant sold us afterward for twelve Pistolls to the King of Calapa, who used
so great a magnificence toward us, as he sent us freely to the Port of Zunda,
where there were three Portugal Vessels, whereof Ieronimo Gomez Sarmento was
General, who gave us a very good reception; and furnished us abundantly with
all that was necessary for us, until such time as he put to Sea from the Port,
to sail to China.

CHAP. XLVII. My passing from Zunda to Siam, where in the company of the
Portugals I went to the War of Chiammay; and that which the King of Siam did,
until he returned into his Kingdom, where his Queen poisoned him.
AFter we had been very near a month in this Port of Zunda, where a good
number of Portugals were assembled together,. 1.
so soon as the season to go to China was come, the three Vessels set sail for
Chincheo, no more Portugals remaining ashore, but only two, who went to Siam in
a Junck of Patana with their Merchandise. I bethought me then to lay hold on
this occasion, and put my self into their company, because they offered to bear
my charges in this voyage, yea and to lend me some money for to try fortune
once more, and see whether by the force of importuning her, she would not use
me b^tter then formerly she had done. Being departed then from this place, in
six and twenty days we arrived at the City of Odiaa, the Capital of this
Empire of Sarnau, which they of this country do ordinarily call Siam, where we
were wonderfully well received and entreated by the Portugals, which we found
there. Now having been a month and better in this City, attending the season
for the voyage to China, that so I might pass to Iapon in the company of six
or seven Portugals, who had imbarqued themselves for that purpose, I made
account to employ in commodities some hundred ducats, which those two, with
whom I came from Zunda, had lent me. In the mean time very certain news came to
the King of Siam, who was at that time with all his Court at the said City of
Odiaa, that the King of Chiammay, allied with the Timocouhos, Laaos, and Gueos,
people which on the North East hold the most part of that country above
Capimp^r and Passil^^o, and are all Sovereigns, exceeding rich and mighty in
Estates, had laid siege to the Town of Quiteruan, with the death of above
thirty thousand men, and of Oyaa Capimper, Governor and Lieutenant General of
all that Frontire. The King remained so much appalled with this news, that
without further temporising, he passed over the very same day to the other side
of the river, and never standing to lodge in houses, he went and encamped under
Tents in the open field, thereby to draw others to do the like in imitation of
him: Withal he caused Proclamation to be made over all the City, That all such
as were neither old nor lame, and so could not be dispensed with for going to
this war, should be ready to march within twelve days at the uttermost, upon
pain of being burned alive, with perpetual infamy for themselves, and their
descendants, and confiscation of their Estates to the Crown: To the which he
added many other such great and dreadful penalties, as the only recital of
them struck terror, not into them of the country, but into the very strangers,
whom the King would not exempt from this war, of what Nation soever they were;
for if they would not serve, they were very expressly enjoined to depart out of
his Kingdom within three days. In the mean time so rigorous an Edict
terrified every one in such sort, as they knew not what counsel to take, or
what resolution to follow. As for us Portugals, in regard that more respect had
always been carried in that country to them, then to all other Nations, this
King sent to desire them that they would accompany him in this voyage, wherein
they should do him a pleasure, because he would trust them only with the guard
of his person, as judgi^g them more proper for it then any other that he could
make choice of; and to oblige them the more thereunto, the message was
accompanied with many fair promises, and very great hopes of pensions, graces,
benefits, favors, and honors, but above all, with a permission which should be
granted them to build Churches in his Kingdom, which so obliged us, that of an
hundred and thirty Portugals which we were, there were sixscore of us that
agreed together to go to this war. The twelve days limited being past, the
King put himself into the field with an Army of four hundred thousand men,
whereof seventy thousand were strangers of diverse Nations: They imbarqued all
in three hundred S^roos, Lauleas, and Iang^s, so that on the nineth day of this
voyage the King arrived at a Frontire Town, named Suropis^^, some twelve or
thirteen leagues from Quitiruan, which the enemies had besieged. There he abode
above seven days to attend four thousand Elephants which came to him by Land.
During that time, he was certified that the Town was greatly pressed, both on the
rivers side, which the enemies had seized upon with two thousand Vessels, as
also toward the Land, where there were so many men, as the number of them was
not truly known, but as it was judged by conjecture, they might be some three
hundred thousand, whereof forty thousand were horse, but no Elephants at all.
This news made the King h^sten the more, so that instantly he made a review of
his forces, and found that he had five hundred thousand men, for since his
coming forth many had joined with him by the way, as also four thousand
Elephants, and two hundred carts with field pieces. With this Army he parted
from Suropisem, and drew toward Quitiruan, marching not above four or five
leagues a day. At the end of the the third, then he arrived at a valley called
Siputay, a league and an half from the place where the enemies lay. Then all
these men of War, with the Elephants, being set in battle array by the three
Masters of the Camp, whereof two were Turks by Nation, and the third a
Portugal, named Doming^s de S^ixas, they proceeded on in their way toward
Quitiruan, where they arrived before the Sun appeared. Now whereas the enemies
were already prepared, in regard they had been advertised by their Spies of the
King of Sia^s forces, and of the design which he had, they attended him
resolutely in the plain field, relying much on their forty thousand horse. As
soon as they discovered him, they presently advanced, and with their
vant-guard, which were the said forty thousand horse, they so charged the King
of Siams rearward, composed of threescore thousand foot, as they defeated them
in less then a quarter of an hour, with the loss of three Princes that were
slain upon the place. The King of Siam seeing his men thus routed, resolved
not to follow the order which he had formerly appointed, but to fall on with
the whole body of his Army, and the four thousand Elephants joined together.
With these forces he gave upon the battalion of the enemies with so much
impetuosity, as at this first shock they were wholly discomfited, from whence
ensued the death of an infinite company of men; for whereas their prin^^s ^ll
strength consisted in their horse, as soon as the Elephants, sustained by the
harque^uses, and the field pieces, fell upon them, they were defeated in less
then an half hour, so that after the routing of these same, all the rest began
instantly to retreat. In the mean time the King of Siam, following the honor
of the victory, pursued them to the rivers side, which the enemies perceiving,
they formed a new Squadron of all those that remained of them, wherein there
were above an hundred thousand men, as well sound as hurt, and so past all the
same day there, joined together in one entire body of an Army, the King not
daring to fight with them, by reason he saw them fortified with two thousand
ships, wherein there were great numbers of men. Nevertheless as soon as it was
dark night the enemies began to march away with all speed all along by the
river, wherewith the King was nothing displeased, because the most part of his
soldiers being hurt, they were necessarily to be dressed, as indeed that was
presently executed, and the most part of the day and the night following
employed therein.

After the King of Siam had obtained so happy a victory,. 2.
the first thing that he did was to provide with all diligence for the
fortifications of the town, and whatsoever else he thought to be necessary for
the security thereof. After that he commanded a general muster to be made of
all his men of war, that he might know how many he had lost in this battle;
whereupon he found that some fifty thousand were wanting, all men of little
reckoning, whom the rigor of the Kings Edict had compelled to serve in this
war, ill provided, and without defensive arms: As for the enemies, it was known
the next day that an hundred and thirty thousand of them had been slain. As
soon as the hurt men were recovered, the King, having put into the principal
places of this frontier such guards as seemed requisite to him, was counseled
by his Lords to make war upon the Kingdom of Guibem, which was not above
fifteen leagues from thence on the North side, to be revenged on the Queen of
Guibem, for having given free passage thorough her dominions to those of
Chiammay, in regard whereof he attributed to her the loss of Oyaa Capimper,
and the thirty thousand men that had been killed with him. The King approving
of this advice, parted from this town with an army of four hundred thousand
men, and went and fell upon one of this Queens towns, called Fumbacor, which
was easily taken, and all the inhabitants put to the sword, not one excepted.
This done, he continued his voyage till he came to Guitor, the capital town of
the Kingdom of Guibem, where the Queen then was, who being a widow governed
the State under the title of Regent, during the minority of her son, that was
about the age of nine years: At his arrival he laid siege to the Town, and
forasmuch a^ the Queen found not her self strong enough to resist the King of
Siams power, she fell to accord with him to pay him an annual tribute of five
thousand Turmes of silver, which are threescore thousand Ducats of our money,
whereof she paid him five years advance in hand. Besides that, the young Prince
her son did him homage as his vassal, and the King led him away with him to
Siam. Hereupon he raised his siege from before the Town, and passed on toward
the North-East to the Town of Taysiran, where he had news that the King of
Chiammay was fallen off from the league aforesaid. In the mean time, whereas he
had been six days march in the enemies territories, he sacked as many places
as he met withal, not permitting the life of any male whatsoever to be saved.
So proceeding onward, he arrived at the Lake of Singipamor, which ordinarily is
called Chiammay, where he stayed six and twenty days, during the which he took
twelve goodly places, environed with ditches and bullworks after our fashion,
all of brick and mortar, without any stone or lime in them, because in the
country it is not the custom to build so; but they had no other Artillery then
some Faulconets, and certain muskets of brass. Now forasmuch as winter began
to approach, and that it was very rainy weather, the King too feeling himself
not very well, he retired back again to the Town of Quitiruan, where he tarried
three and twenty days and better, in which space he made an end of fortifying
it with walls, and many broad and deep ditches, so that having put this Town
into an estate of being able to defend it self against any attempt, he
imbarqued his Army in the three thousand vessels which brought him thither,
and so returned toward Siam. Nine days after he arrived at Odiaa, the chief
City of his whole Kingdom, where for the most part he kept his Court. At his
arrival the inhabitants gave him a stately reception, wherein they bestowed a
(...) of money upon diverse inventions, which were made against his entry. Now
whereas during the six months of the Kings absence, the Queen his wife had
committed adultery with a Purveyor of her house, named Vquu^che^iraa, and that
at the Kings return she found her self gone four months with-child by him,
the fear she was in left it should be discovered, made her, for the saving of
her self from the danger that threatened her, resolve to poison the King her
husband, as indeed without further delaying her pernicious intention, she gave
him in a mess of milk, which wrought that effect, as he died of it within five
days after; during which time he took order by his Testament for the most
important affairs of his Kingdom, and discharged himself of the obligation
wherein he stood engaged to the strangers which had served him in this war of
Chiammay. In this Testament, whenas he came to make mention of us Portugals, he
would needs have this clause added thereunto, It is my intent that the sixscore
Portugals, which have always so faithfully watched upon the gu^rd ^f my
person, shall ^eceive for a recompense of their good services, half a years
tribute which the Queen of Gu^bem gives me; and that in my custom houses,
their Merchandise shall pay no custom for the space of three years: Moreover
my intent is, that their Priests may throughout all the Towns of my Kingdom
publish the Law whereof they m^ke prof^ssion namely of a God made man for the
salvation of mankind, as they have many times assured me. To these things he
added many others such like, which well deserve to be reported here, though I
pass them under silence, because I hope to make a more ample mention of them
hereafter. Furthermore, he desired all the Grandees of his Court which were
present with him, that they would give him the consolation before he died, to
make his eldest Son be declared King, which was incontinently executed. For
which effect, after that all the Oyaas, Conchalis, and Mont^os, which are
Sovereign dignities over all the rest of the Kingdom, had taken the oath of
Allegiance to this young Prince, they showed him out at a window to all the
people, who were in a great place below, and they set upon his head a rich
Crown of gold in the form of a Miter, and put a svvord into his right hand,
and a pair of balances into his left, a custom which they always observe in
such a like ceremony. Then Oya Passilico, who was the highest in dignity in the
Kingdom, falling on his knees before this new King, said unto him with tears
in his eyes, and so loud that every one might hear him, Blessed child, that in
so tender an age do hold from the good influence of thy Star the happiness
to be chosen by heaven there above for Governor of this E^pire of Sornau; see
how God puts it into thy hand by me who am thy vassal, to the end thou may
take thy first oath, whereby thou do protest to hold it with obedience from
his divine will, as also to observe justice equally to all the people, without
having any regard to persons, whether it be in chastising or recompencing the
great or small, the mighty or the humble, that so in time to come thou may
not be reproached for not having accomplished that which thou have sworn in
this solemn action. For if it shall happen, that humane considerations shall
make thee swarve from that which for thy justification thou art obliged to do
before so just a Lord, thou shall be greatly punished for it in the profound
pit of the house of smoke, the burning lake of insupportable stench, where the
wicked and damned howl continually with a sadness of obscure night in their
entrails. And to the end thou may oblige thy self to the charge which thou
take upon thee* say now Xamxaimpom, which is as much as to say amongst us,
Amen. The Passilico having finished his speech, the young Prince said weeping
Xamxaimpom, which so mightily moved all the Assembly of the people, as there
was nothing heard for a good while together, but sighing and wailing. At
length, after that this noise was appeased, the Passilico proceeding on with
his discourse in looking on the young King; This Sword, said he unto him, which
thou hold naked in thy hand, is given thee as a Scepter of Sovereign power
upon earth for the subduing of the rebellious, which is also to say that thou
art truly obliged to be the support of the feeble and poor, to the end that
they which grow lofty with their power, may not overthrow them with the puff
of their pride, which the Lord does as much abhor, as he does the mouth of him
that blasphemeth against a little infant which has never sinned: And that thou
may in all things satisfy the fair ena^elling of the stars of heaven, which
is the perfect, just, and good God, whose power is admirable over all things of
the world, say once again Xamxaimpom; whereunto the Prince answered twice
weeping, Maxinau, Maxinau, that is to say, I promise so to do. After this, the
Passilico having instructed him in diverse other such like things, the young
Prince answered seven times Xamxaimpom, and so the ceremony of his Coronation
was finished; only there came first a Talagrepo, of a sovereign dignity above
all the other Priests, named Quiay Ponuedea, who it was said was above an
hundred years old: This same prostrating himself at the feet of the Prince,
gave him an oath upon a golden basin full of rice, and that done, they put him
into it, after they had created him thus anew, for time would not permit them
to hold him there longer, in regard the King his Father was at the point of
death, besides there was so universal a mourning amongst the people, that in
every place there was nothing heard but lamentations and wailing.

CHAP. XLVIII. The lamentable death of the King of Siam, with certain
illustrious and memorable things done by him during his life, (...) many other
accidents that arrived in this Kingdom.
WHenas the day and the night following had been spent in the manner that I
have related,. 1.
the next morning about eight of the clock the unfortunate King yielded up the
Ghost in the presence of the most part of the Lords of his Kingdom, for the
which all the people made so great demonstrations of mourning, as every where
there was nothing but wailing and weeping. Now forasmuch as this Prince had
lived in the reputation of being charitable to the poor, liberal in his
benefits and recompenses, pitiful and gentle toward every one, and above all
incorrupt in doing of justice, and chastising the wicked; his subjects spoke so
amply thereof in their lamentations, as if all that they said of it was true,
we are to believe, that there was never a better King then he, either amongst
these Pagans, or in all the countries of the world. Howbeit, whereas I cannot
assure, that those things which they affirmed in their complaints were true,
because I did not see them, I will only insist upon those which past concerning
him, in the time whilst I was trading in this Kingdom, whereof I will report
three or four amongst many others, which I have seen him do, from the year
1540. until 1545. The first was, that in the year 1540. Pedro de Faria, being
Governor of Malaca, King Ioan^ the John, the third of glorious memory wrote
him a letter, whereby above all things he recommended unto him his using all
possible means for the redeeming of a certain Domingos de Seixas, who for the
space of three and twenty years had been a slave in the Kingdom of Siam,
adding that the doing thereof would be very important for Gods service and his,
in regard he was informed, that from him, rather then from any other he might
be certified of the great things which were recounted to him of this Kingdom;
and in case he could redeem this Christian, that he should send him
incontinently to Don Garcia, the Viceroy of the Indiaes, to whom he had also
written, that he should imbarque him in the ship which was to part that year
for to return into Portugal. Pedro de Faria had no sooner received this
letter, but seeing with how much care the King his Master recommended this
affair unto him, he sent us his Ambassador to Siam one Francisco de Crasto, a
noble and very rich man, to the end he should treat about the ransom of this
Domingos de Seixas, and other sixteen Portugals, which were also slaves there
as well as he. According to this Commission Francisco de Castro came to the
City of Odiaa, whilst I was there, where he delivered his letter to the King
of Siam, who gave him a very good reception, and after he had read it, and
questioned him concerning many new and curious things, he answered him
presently, which was a thing he did not usually do to any Ambassador, his
answer contained this much, As for Domingos de Seixas, whom the Captain of
Malaca sends to me for, advertising me that I shall do the King of Portugal a
great pleasure in releasing him, I do most willingly grant to do it, as also to
deliver all the rest that are with him. Whereupon Francisco de Crasto, having
had this dispatch from the King, gave him most humble thanks for it, and
prostrated himself three several times before him, with his head bowed down to
the ground, as the custom was to do unto this King, in regard he was more
absolute then others. Whenas then the season permitted Francisco de Castro to
return to Malaca, the King sent to fetch Domingos de Seixas from the Town of
Goutaleu, where he was at that time General of the Frontire, having under his
charge thirty thousand foot, five thousand horse, and eighteen thousand ducats
pension by the year: With him also he caused to be brought the other sixteen
Portugals, and consigned them all into the hands of Francisco de Castro, who
gave him thanks again for the grace which he did him. A little after, whenas
Domingos de Seixas and his companions went to take their leave of this King, he
caused a thousand turmes of silver to be given to them, which are in value
twelve thousand ducats of our money, and desired them to pardon him for giving
them so little. Another time, which was in the year a thousand five hundred
forty and five, Simano de Melo, being Captain of the same fortress of Malaca,
one Luys de Montarroyo coming from China to go to Patana, it happened that the
ship wherein he was, being beaten with a furious tempest, was cast away in the
Port of Charir, some five leagues from Lugor, where all his good^ were seized
upon by the Xabandar of the country, after that the Sea had cast him ashore,
and withal, he himself was made a prisoner, together with all the rest which
were saved, to the number of four and twenty Portugal, and fifty boys, which
made in all seventy and four persons; the goods too that were saved out of this
Shipwreck, amounted at least to fifteen thousand ducats. Now the reason which
the Xabandar alleged for this same was, that by the ancient custom of the
Kingdom all these goods belonged unto him* whereof Luis de Montarrayo having
advertised certain Portugals which were at that instant in the City, they
concluded amongst themselves to make an Odiaa, or present of some rich pieces,
to the value of a thousand ducka^s, and ther^with to go unto the King, upon the
day which was named of the white Elephant, that was ten days after, and on
the which, in regard it was a very solemn feast, this Prince was accustomed to
do many graces to such as were suitors to him for them. So on the solemnity of
this day, which they call O^idaypileu, that is to say, the rejoicing of
goodmen, all the Portugals, who were threescore and odd, placed themselves in a
certain passage of one of the three principal streets, thorough which the King
was to pass with a great deal of pomp and Majesty, and whenas they savv the
King come by, they prostrated themselves all upon the ground, as the
inhabitants of Siam use to do, and one of them, being deputed thereunto,
recounted unto the King the whole business of Luis de Montarrayo and his
companions, just as it had past, beseeching him he would do them so much
grace, as to command the releasement of those poor prisoners, without speaking
of the goods which the Xabandar had seized upon, because it seemed not
reasonable unto them. But the King, who presently understood their demand, was
so moved with the tears which he savv some of them shed, as he caused the
white Elephant vvhereon he was mounted to stay, then casting his eye on the
Portugals, and the Present that some of them held out in their hands, which he
knevv they intended to offer unto him; My friends, said he unto him, I take
that for received which you would present me with* and do thank you for it; for
in so solemn a day as this is I do not use to take any thing of any body, but
to give, and oblige every one with benefits; wherefore I desire you for the
love of your God, whose servant I am, and ever will be, to bestow this Present
upon such of your company as are in most need of it; for you shall do far
better in gaining thereby therecompence of this Alms, which you shall give for
his sake then you could get by all that which I should confer on you in
acknowledgement of this Present, it being most certain that before him I am but
a poor worm of the earth. As for the prisoners which you demand of me, it is my
pleasure to bestow them as an Alms upon you, that so in all liberty they may
return unto Malaca; and further, I command that all the goods which they say
have been taken from them, be restored to them again; for things which are done
for Gods sake, ought to be accomplished with much more liberality then the need
of the poor requires, especially when they crave it with tears in their eyes.
Hereupon the Portugals prostrated themselves all before him, and the next day
the King by his L^tters Patents ordained, That within the term of ten days the
prisoners should be brought to the City, together with all that which had been
taken from them; which incontinently was executed very exactly, for there were
restored unto them all the goods which had been saved out of the ship,
amounting, as I have already said, to fifteen thousand ducats, which the King
freely gave them. Two or three months after, in the same year one thousand
five hundred forty and five, it greatly importing this King of Siam to go in
person and repulse the King of T^parahos, who on Passilica^s side had invaded
his country, and sacked some of the weakest places, with an intent to besiege
the fortress of Xinan and Laut^^, whereon depended the whole safety of this
state, he resolved to go against him in person. Wherefore he sent certain
Colonells over all the Kingdom to levy men, with an express Commission to
return within twenty days with their men of war to the City of Odiaa, for it
was his intention to set forth from thence about that time. Withal he enjoined
his Commanders upon pain of a rigorous chastisement not to dispense with a man
that could fight, from this war, except it were such as were any way impotent*
and above threescore years of age, whereupon each of these Colonells was
assigned the Province wherein he should make his levies: It happened then that
one Quiay Raudiuaa, a man of quality, and one that the King made oftentimes use
of, had for his lot the frontier of Blan^haa, where the most part of the
inhabitants being very rich, as well in money, as other ways, gave themselves
to the delights of the flesh, and spent the most part of their time in feasts,
in sports, and other such like pleasures of this life, so that when they saw
that Quiay Raudiuaa would compel them to go to this war, as he was enjoined to
do, they took it for too heavy a yoke, and too insupportable a burden, and
that did not well agree with the manner of life which they were wont to lead,
and therefore the richest of the country assembled together, and resolved to
get a dispensation from this voyage by the means of a great sum of money which
they made up amongst themselves, and carried to the Colonel. Now whereas there
is no place where money is not powerful enough to overthrow all things, and
from which a man can hardly defend himself, the Colonel Raudiuaa suffered
himself to be overcome with such a mass of coin as these men presented him
with, and consented that they should not budge from their homes. In this sort
he was constrained to take up in their steads most of the poor impotent, and
old men of the country, without any regard had to the Kings express Injunction
to the contrary. Being arrived with this goodly company of soldiers at the
City of Odiaa, he was commanded to make a show of them before the King, as all
the Colonels did of theirs; as soon as this Prince cast his eye from a window
where he was, upon men so wretched, old, and poorly clad, he caused one file of
them to come before him; then having asked of them how old they were, and why
they presented themselves before him in so bad an equipage; one amongst them
speaking for the rest, recounted unto him the whole business as it had past,
which put the King into such choler, that having presently commanded Quiay
Raudiuaa to be brought before him, and reviled him publicly for his villainy
and baseness, he caused him to be bound hand and foot, and having given order
for the melting of five Turmes of silver, he made it to be powered into his
mouth in his presence, whereof he died instantly. Whereupon beholding him lie
dead before him; If it be so, said he unto him, that there needed but five
Turmes of silver to kill thee, how could thou imagine that the threescore
thousand ducats which thou tookest of the cowards of Banchaa for to dispense
with them from the war, should not be capable of sending th^^ into the other
world? God forgive thee thy avarice, and ^e the little punishment I have
inflicted on thee for the same. After this, he sent presently to search his
house, where the five thousand Turmes he had taken were found, which were
immediately brought to the King, who caused this money to be distributed in his
presence to those old and impotent poor wretches which Raudiuaa had brought
thither, being in number above three thousand; that done he sent them home to
their houses, willing them to pray unto God for him. As for those effeminate
men, who to be exempted from going to the war had given the five thousand
Turmes to the Colonel, he commanded them to be attired like women, and so
banished them into an Island called Pulho Caton; wherewith yet not contented,
he confiscated all their estates, which he ordered should be bestowed on such
as behaved themselves best in the war. And not long after, observing that one
of the hundred and threescore Portugals, which went along with him in this
expedition, hung back in a certain attempt, which the rest of his fellows went
upon, where they carried themselves so valiantly, and with such courage, as
they regained the principal Fort which the enemy had taken in the Town of
Lautor, he commanded him to return to Siam, seeing he was not like his other
companions, and that as long as he continued there, he should neither offer to
go out of the house where he was, nor take upon him the name of a Portugal, on
pain of having his beard shaven off, and used like those of Banchaa, since he
was as cowardly as they; whereas contrarily to all the rest of the Portugals he
sent treble pay, and exempted them from all duties that were to be paid for
their Merchandise, as also gave them power to build Churches in any part of his
Kingdom for the adoring of the name of the God of the Portugals. By these and
many other examples which I could produce here, it is manifest how great and
commendable the inclinations of this Prince were, who notwithstanding that he
was a Gentile, was of a wonderful good nature, and exceedingly addicted to
virtuous actions.

. 2.
It is not to be believed with what infinite sorrow, both all the great Lords,
and generally all the subjects of this Kingdom bewailed the death of their
good King; but at length an Assembly was made of all the Priests of this City,
who as it was said, were twenty thousand in number, by whose direction the
principal persons of the Kingdom concluded upon the funeral pomp, and
ceremonies which were to be used thereabout, according to the custom of the
country: whereupon a mighty great pile was forthwith erected, ^^^ade of Sandal,
Aloes Calembaa, and Benjamin, on the which the body of the deceased King being
laid, fire was put to it, with a strange ceremony: during all the time that the
body was a burning, the people did nothing but wail and lament beyond all
expression* but in the end, it being consumed to ashes, they put them into a
silver shrine, which they imbarqued in a Laulea very richly equipped, that was
accompanied with forty Seroos full of Talagrepos, which are the highest dignity
of their Gentile Priests, and a great number of other Vessels, wherein there
was a world of people; after them followed an hundred small barques laden with
diverse figures of Idols, under the forms of Adders, Lizards, Tigers, Lions,
Toads, Serpents, Bats, Geese, Bucks, Dogs, Elephants, Cats, Vultures, Kites,
Crows, and other such like creatures, whose figures were so well represented to
the life, as they seemed to be living In another very great ship was the King
of all these Idols, which they called, The gluttonous Serpent of the profound
pit of the house of smoke. This Idol had the figure of a monstrous Adder, was
as big about as an hogshead* and vvrithed into nine circles, so that whenas it
was extended* it was above ^n hundred spans long, it had the neck standing
upright, and out of the eyes, throat, and breast issued flames of artificial
fire, which rendered this monster so dreadful and furious, as all that beheld
it trembled for fear. Now upon a Theater three fathom high, and richly guilt,
was a very beautiful little boy, about four or five years old, covered all over
with pearls, and chains, and bracelets of precious stones, having wings, and a
bush of hair of fine gold, much after the manner as we use to paint Angels.
This child held a rich Curtelas in his hand, by which invention these Pagans
would give to understand, That it was an Angel of heaven sent from God to
imprison all those many devils, to the end they should not steal away the
Kings soul, before it should arrive at the place of rest, which was prepared
for it there above in glory, for a recompense of the good works which he had
done below in the world. In this order all these Vessels got to land at a
Pagode, called Quiay Pout^r, where after that the silver shrine, in which the
Kings ashes were, was placed, and the little boy taken from thence, fire was
put to all that infinite number of Idols, just in the manner as they stood in
the Barques; and this was accompanied with so horrible a din of cries, great
Ordnance, Harquebuzes, Drums, Bells, Cornets, and other different kinds of
noise, as it was impossible to hear it without trembling. This ceremony lasted
not above an hour, for whereas all these figures were made of combustible
stuff, and the Vessels filled with pitch and rozen, so dreadful a flame
ensued presently thereupon, as one might well have said that it was a very
pourtraiture of hell; so that in an instant the Vessels, and all that were in
them were seen to be reduced to nothing. Whenas this, and many other very
lively inventions, which had cost a great deal of money, were finished, all
the inhabitants, which were come thronging thither, and whereof the number
seemed to be infinite, retired back to their houses, where they remained with
their doors and windows shut, not one appearing in the streets for the space of
ten days, during which time all places were unfrequented, and none were seen
stirring but some poor people, who in the night went up and down begging with
strange lamentations. At the end of the ten days wherein they had shut
themselves up so, they opened their doors and windows, and their Pagodes, or
Temples, were adorned with many Ensigns of rejoicing, together with a world of
hangings, standards, and banners of silk. Hereupon there went through all the
streets certain men on horseback, apparelled in white Damask, who at the sound
of very harmonious instruments, cried aloud with tears in their eyes, Ye sad
inhabitants of this Kingdom^ of Siam, hearken, hearken to that which is made
known to you from God, and with humble and pure hearts praise ye all his holy
name, for the effects of his divine justice are great; withal laying aside
your mourning, come forth of your a^odes wherein you are shut up, and sing the
praises of the goodness of your God, since he has been pleased to give you a
new King, who fears him, and is a friend of the poor. This Proclamation being
made, all the Assistants, with their faces prostrated on the ground, and their
hands lifted up, as people that rendered thanks to God, answered aloud weeping;
We make the Angels of heaven our Attorneys, to the end they may continually
praise the Lord for us. After this, all the inhabitants of the City coming out
of their houses, and thinking of nothing but dancing and rejoicing, went to the
Temple of Quiay Fanarel, that is to say, the God of the joyful, where they
offered sweet perfumes, and the poorest sort, fruits, pullen, and rice, for the
entertainment of the Priests. The same day the new King showed himself over
all the City with a great deal of pomp and Majesty, in regard whereof the
people made great demonstrations of joy and gladness. And forasmuch as the
King was but nine years old, it was ordained by the four and twenty Bracalo^s
of the Government, that the Queen his mother should be the Protector or Regent
of him, and that she should bear rule over all the Officers of the Crown.
Things past thus for the space of four months and an half, during the which
there was no manner of disorder, but all was peaceable in the Kingdom; howbeit
at the end of that time, the Queen coming to be delivered of a Son which she
had had by her Purveyor, being displeased with the bad report that went of her,
she resolved with her self to satisfy her desire, which was to marry with the
Father of this new Son, for that she was desperately in love with him: And
further, she wickedly enterprised to make away the new King, her lawful child,
to the end that by this means the Crown might pass to the bastard by right of
inheritance. Now to execute this horrible design of hers, she made show that
the excess of her affection to the young King her Son, kept her always in
fear, left some attempt should be made upon his life; so that one day having
caused all the Council of the State to be assembled, the represented unto
them, that having but this only pearl enchaced in her heart, she desired to
keep it from being plucked from thence by some disaster; for which effect she
thought it requisite, as well to secure her from her apprehensions, as to
prevent the great mischiefs which carelessenesse is wont to bring in such like
cases, that there should be a guard set about the Palace, and the person of the
King. This affair was immediately debated in the Council, and accorded to the
Queen, in regard the matter seemed good of it self. The Queen seeing then that
her design had succeeded so well, took instantly for the guard of the Palace,
and the person of her Son, such as she judged were proper for the executing of
her damnable enterprise, and in whom she most confided. She ordained a guard
then of two thousand foot, and five hundred horse, besides the ordinary guard
of her house, which were six hundred Cauehins and Lequios, and thereof she made
Captain one called Tileubacus, the cozen of the same Purveyor, by whom she had
had a child, to the end that by this man's favor she might dispose of things as
she pleased, and the more easily bring to pass her pernicious design.
Whereupon relying on the great forces which she had already on her party, she
began to revenge her self upon some of the great ones of the Kingdom, because
she knew they despised her, and held her not in that esteem she desired, The
two first whom she caused to be laid hands on were two Deputies of the
Government, making use of this pretext, that they held secret intelligence with
the King of Chiamway, and were to give him an entry into the Kingdom thorough
their lands, so that under color of justice she caused them to be both
executed, and confiscated their estates, whereof she gave the one to her
Favorite, and the other to a brother-in-law of his, who (it was said) had been
a Smith: But in regard this execution had been done precipitously, and without
any proof, the greatest part of the Lords of the Kingdom murmured against the
Queen for it, representing unto her the merit of them whom she had put to
death, the services they had rendered to the Crown, the quality of the persons,
and the nobility and antiquity of their extractions, as being of the blood
royal, and lineally descended from the Kings of Siam, howbeit she made no
reckoning thereof, but contrarily a little after making show as if she had not
been well, she in a full Council renounced her regency, and conferred it on
Vquumcheuiraa, her Favorite, to the end that by this means bearing rule over
all others, he might dispose of the affairs of the kingdom at his pleasure, and
give the most important charges thereof to such as would be of his party, which
he thought to be the most assured way for him to usurp this Crown, and make
himself absolute Lord of the Empire of S^rna^, whereof the revenue was twelve
millions of gold, besides other comings in, which amounted to as much more.
With all these inventions this Queen used so great diligence for the contenting
of the desire which she had to raise her Favorite to the Royalty, to marry her
self to him, and to make the illegitimate son, which she had bad by him,
successor of the Crown, as within the space of eight months, fortune favoring
her designs, and hoping more fully to execute her wicked plot, she caused
most of the great men of the kingdom to be put to death, and confiscated all
their lands, goods and treasures, which she distributed amongst such of her
creatures as she daily drew to her party. Now forasmuch as the young King her
son served for the principal obstacle to her intentions, this young Prince
could not escape her abominable fury, for she her self poisoned him even as she
had poisoned the King his father. That done, she married with Vquumcheniraa,
who had been one of the Purveyors of her house, and caused him to be crowned
King in the city of Odiaa, the eleventh of November in the year one thousand
five hundred forty five. But whereas Heaven never leaves wicked actions
unpunished, the year after, one thousand five hundred forty and six, and on the
fifteenth day of January, they were both of them slain by Oyaa Passilico, and
the King of Cambaya, at a certain banquet which these Princes made in a Temple,
that was called Quiay Figrau, that is to say, the god of the atoms of the Sun,
whose solemnity was that day celebrated: So that, as well by the death of these
two persons, as of all the rest of their party, whom these Princes also killed
with them, all things became very peaceable, without any further prejudice to
the people of the kingdom; only it is true, that it was despoyled of the most
part of the Nobility, which formerly it had, by the wicked inventions, and
pernicious practices, whereof I have spoken before.

CHAP. LXIX. The King of Bramaa's enterprise upon the Kingdom of Siam; and that
which past until hi^ arrival at the city of Odiaa, with his besieging of it,
and all that ensued thereupon.
. 1.
THe Empire of Siam remaining without a lawful successor, those two great Lords
of the Kingdom, namely, Oyaa Passili^^, and the King of Cambaia, together with
four or five more of the trustiest that were left, and which had been
confederate with them, thought fit to choose for King, a certain religious man,
named Preti^m, in regard he was the natural brother of the deceased Prince,
husband to that wicked Queen of whom I have spoken; whereupon this religious
man, who was Talagrepo of a Pagod^, called Quiay Mitrau, from whence he had not
budg'd for the space of thirty years, was the day after drawn forth of it by
Oyaa Passilico, who brought him on the seventeenth day of January into the city
of Odiaa, where on the nineteenth he was crowned King with a new kind of
ceremony, and a world of magnificence, which (to avoid prolixity) I will not
make mention of here, having formerly treated of such like things. Withal
passing by all that further arrived in this Kingdom of Siam, I will content my
self with reporting such things as I imagine will be most agreeable to the
curious. It happened then that the King of Bramaa, who at that time reigned
tyrannically in Pegu, being advertised of the deplorable estate whereinto the
Empire of S^rnau was reduced; and of the death of the greatest Lords of the
Country, as also that the new King of this Monarchy was a religious man, who
had no knowledge either of arms or war, and withal of a cowardly disposition,
a tyrant, and ill beloved of his subjects, he fell to consult thereupon with
his Lords in the town of Anapleu, where at that time he kept his Court.
Desiring their advice then upon so important an enterprise, they all of them
told him, that by no means he should desist from it, in regard this Kingdom
was one of the best of the world, as well in riches, as in abundance of all
things; thereunto they added, that the season which was then so favorable for
him, ^romised it to him at so good a rate, as it was likely it would not cost
him above the revenue of one only year, what expense soever he should make of
his treasure; besides, if he chanced to get it, he should remain Monarch of all
the Emperors of the world, and therewithal he should be honored with the
sovereign title of Lord of the while Elephant, by which means the seventeene
Kings of Capimper, who made profession of his Law, must of necessity render him
obedience. They told him moreover, that having made so great a conquest, he
might, thorough the same territories, and with the succor of the Princes his
Allies, pass into China, where was that great City of Pequin, the incomparable
pearl of all the world, and against which the great Cham of Tartaria, the
Siamon, and the Calaminham, had brought such prodigious Armies into the field.
The King of Bramaa, having heard all these reasons, and many others which his
great Lords alleged unto him, wherein his interest was especially concerned,
which always works powerfully on every man, was persuaded by them, and
resolved to undertake this enterprise. For this effect he went directly to
Martabano, where in less then two months and an half, he raised an Army of
eight hundred thousand men, wherein there were an hundred thousand strangers,
and amongst them a thousand Portugals, which were commanded by Diego Suar^z d'
Albergaria, called Galego by way of nick name. This Diego Suarez departed out
of the Kingdom of Portugal in the year one thousand five hundred thirty and
eight, and went into the Indiaes with the Fleet of the Viceroy, Don Garcia de
Noronha, in a Junck, whereof Ioano de Sepulveda of the town of Euora was
Captain; but in the time of which I speak, namely in the year one thousand
five hundred forty and eight, he had of this King of Bramaa two hundred
thousand ducats a year, with the title of his brother, and Governor of the
Kingdom of Pegu. The King departed then from the Town of Mar^abano the Sunday
after Easter, being the seventh of April 1548. His Army, as I have already
said, was eight hundred thousand men, whereof only forty thousand were horse,
and all the rest foor, threescore thousand of them being Harquebuziers; there
were moreover five thousand warlike Elephants; with whom they fight in those
countries, and also a world of baggage, together with a thousand pieces of
Canon, which were drawn by a thousand couple of Buffles and Rhinocerots;
withal, there was a like number of yoke of oxen for the carriage of the
victuals. Having taken the field then with these forces, he caused his Army to
march still on, until at length he entered into the Territories of the King of
Siam, where after five days he came to a fortress called Tapurau, containing
some two thousand fires, commanded by a certain Mogor, a valiant man, and well
verst in matters of war. The King of Bramaa having invested it, gave three
assaults to it in the open day, and labored to s^ale it with a world of
ladders which he had caused to be brought thither for that purpose; but not
being able to carry it, in regard of the great resistance of them within, he
retreated for that time. But having by the counsel of Diego Suarez, who was
General of the Camp, and by whom he was wholly governed, caused forty great
pieces of Ordnance, whereof the most of them shot bullets of iron, to be
planted against it, he fell to battering it with so much fury, as having made a
breach in the wall twelve fathom wide, he assaulted it with ten thousand
strangers, Turks, Abyssin^, Moors, Malauares, Ac^ems, Iaaos, and Malayes;
whereupon ensued so terrible a conflict between the one and the other, that in
less then half an hour, the besieged, which were six thousand Siamites, were
all cut in pieces, for not so much as one of them would render himself. As for
the King of Bramaa, he lost above three thousand of his men, vvhereat he was
enraged, as to be revenged for this loss he caused all the women to be put to
the sword, which no doubt was a strange kind of cruelty: After this
execution, he drevv directly toward the Town of Saco^ay, which was nine
leagues beyond, desiring to make himself master of that, as well as of the
other. He arrived in the sight of this Town one Saturday about Sunset, and
encamped all along the river of Lebrau, which is one of the three that issue
out of the Lake of Chiammay, whereof I have formerly made mention, with a
design to march thorough it directly to Odiaa, the Capital City of the Empire
of Sornau; for he had already been advertised that the King was there in
person, and that he was making preparation to fight with him in the field; he
no sooner received this advice, but his Lords counseled him to make no
tarrying in any place, as well that he might not lose time, as that he might
keep himself from insensibly consuming his forces, in lying before places
which he pretended to take, that were so well fortified, as they would cost
him dear if he amused himself about them, so that at his arrival at Odiaa he
would find the most part of his men vvanting, and his victuals quite spent.
The King having approved of this advice, caused his Army to march away the
next day thorough vvoods that were cut down by threescore thousand Pioners,
whom he had sent before to plane the passages and vvays; which with much ado
they performed. When he was come to a place, called Tila^, which is besides
Iuncala^, on the South-East Coast, near to the Kingdom of Quedea, an hundred
and forty leagues from Malaca, he took guides that were very well acquainted
with the way, by whose means in nine days journey he arrived in the sight of
Odiaa, where he pitched his Camp, which he environed with trenches and strong
Pallisadoes.

. 2.
During the first five days that the King of Bramaa had been before the City of
Odiaa, he had bestowed labor and pains enough, as well in making of trenches
and Pallisadoes, as in providing all things necessary for this siege, in all
which time the besieged never offered to stir, whereof Diego Suarez, the
Marshall of the Camp being aware, as also of the little reckoning which the
Siamites made of so great a power as was there assembled, and not knowing
whereunto he should attribute the cause of it, he resolved to execute the
design for which he came, to which effect, of the most part of the men which he
had under his command, he made two separated Squadrons, in each of which there
were six battalions of six thousand a piece. After this manner he marched in
battle array, at the sound of many instruments, toward the two points which
the City made on the South Side, because the entrance there seemed more facile
to him then any other where. So upon the nineteenth day of June, in the year
one thousand five hundred forty and eight, an hour before day, all these men of
war, having set up above a thousand ladders against the walls, endeavored to
mount up on them; but the besieged opposed them so valiantly, that in less
then half an hour there remained dead on the place above ten thousand on either
part. In the mean time the King, who encouraged his soldiers, seeing the ill
success of this fight, commanded these to retreat, and then made the wall to
be assaulted afresh, making use for that effect of five thousand Elephants of
war which he had brought thither, and divided into twenty troops, of two
hundred and fifty apiece, upon whom there were twenty thousand Moe^s and
Chale^s, choice men, and that had double pay. The wall then was assaulted by
these forces with so terrible an impetuosity, as I want words to express it.
For whereas all the Elephants carried wooden Castles on their backs, from
whence they shot with muskets, brass culverins, and a great number of harquzes
a crock, each of them ten or twelve spans long, these guns made such an havoc
of the besieged, that in less then a quarter of an hour the most of them were
beaten down; the Elephants withal setting their trunks to the target fences,
which served as battlements, and wherewith they within defended themselves,
tore them down in such sort, as not one of them remained entire, so that by
this means the wall was abandoned of all defense, no man daring to show himself
above. In this sort was the entry into the City very easy to the Assailants,
who being invited by so good success to make their profit of so favorable an
occasion, set up their ladders again which they had quitted, and mounting up by
them to the top of the wall, with a world of cries and acclamations, they
planted thereon in sign of victory a number of Banners and Ensigns. Now because
the Turks desired to have therein a better share then the rest, they besought
the King to do them so much favor as to give them the vantguard, which the
King easily granted them, and that by the counsel of Diego Suarez, who desired
nothing more then to see their number lessened, always gave them the most
dangerous employments. They in the mean time extraordinarily contented, and
proud to see themselves preferred before so many other Nations as were in the
Camp, resolved to come off with honor from this service which they had
undertaken. For which purpose having formed a Squadron of twelve hundred men,
wherein some Abyssius and Ianizaries were comprised, they mounted with great
cries by those ladders up to the top of the wall, which as I have declared, was
at that time in the power of the King of Bramaaes people. These Turks then,
whither more ^ash, or more unfortunate then the rest, sliding down by a pane of
the wall, descended thorough a bullwork into a place which was below, with an
intent to open a gate, and give an entrance unto the King, to the end they
might rightly boast, that they all alone had delivered to him the Capital City
of the Kingdom of Siam, and so might gain the recompense which they might
well expect for so brave an action; for the King had before promised to give
unto whomsoever should deliver up the City unto him, a thousand bisses of gold,
which in value are five hundred thousand ducats of our money. These Turks
being gotten down, as I have said, labored to break open a gate with two
rams which they had brought with them for that purpose; but as they were
occupied about it, upon a confidence that they alone should gain the thousand
bisses of gold, which the King had promised to whomsoever should open him the
gates, they saw themselves suddenly charged by three thousand Ia^s, all
reso^ute soldiers, who fell upon them with such fury, as little more then a
quarter of an hour, there was not so much as one Turk left alive in the place,
wherewith not contented, they mounted up immediately to the top of the wall
with a wonderful courage, and so flesht as they were, and covered over with
the blood of the Turks, whom they had newly cut in pieces, they set upon the
Bramaaes men which they found there, and fought with them so valiantly, that
they durst not make head against them, so that most of them were there slain,
and the rest tumbled down over the wall. The King of Bramaa redoubling his
courage more then before, would not for all that give over this assault, but
contrarily resolved to undertake it anew, so as imagining that those Elephants
alone would be able to give him an entry into the City, he caused them once
again to approach unto the wall. At the noise hereof, Oyaa Passilico, Captain
General of the City, ran in all have to this part of the wall, accompanied
with fifteen thousand men, whereof the most part were Luzons, B^rn^^s, and
Champaa^s, with some Menancabos among, and caused the gate to be presently
opened, ^horough which the Bramaa pretended to enter, and then sent him word,
that whereas he was given to understand how his Highness had promised to give
a thousand biss^s of gold to whomsoever should open him the gates, that so he
might thereby enter into the City, he had now performed it, so that h^ might
enter if he would, provided that like a great King as he was, he would ma^^
good his word, and send him the thousand bisses of gold which he stayed there
to rec^^ve. The King of Bramaa having received this jeer, would not vouchsafe
to return an answer, thereby to show his contempt of Oya^ Passilico; but
instantly he commanded the City to be assaulted, which was presently executed
with a great deal of fury; for the fight became so terrible, as it was a
dreadful thing to behold, the rather for that the violence of it lasted above
three whole hours, during the which time the gate was twice forced open, and
twice the Assailants got an entrance into the City, which the King of Siam no
sooner perceived, and that all was in danger to be lost, but he ran speedily
to oppose them with his followers, which were about thirty thousand in
number, and the best soldiers that were in all the City; whereupon the
conflict grew much better then before, and continued half an hour and better,
during the which I do not know what past, nor can say any other thing, save
that we savv streams of blood running every where, and the air all of a light
fire; there was also on either part such a tumult and noise, as one would have
said the earth had been tottering; for it was a most dreadful thing to hear
the discord and jarring of those barbarous instruments, as bells, drums, and
trumpets, intermingled with the noise of the great Ordnance and smaller shot,
and the dreadful yelling of six thousand Elephants, whence ensued so great a
terror, that it took from them that heard it both courage and sense; withal,
that place at the City gate, whereof the Bramaa had been Master, was all
covered over with bodies drowned in blood, a spectacle so horrible, that the
very sight of it put us almost besides our selves. Diego Suarez then, seeing
their forces q^ite repulsed out of the City, the most part of the Elephants
hurt, and the rest so scared with the noise of the great Ordnance, as it was
impossible to make them return unto the wall; as also that the best men of
those that had fought at the gate were slain, and that the Sun was almost down,
came to the King, and counseled him to sound a retreat, whereunto the King
yielded, though much against his will, because he observed, that both he and
the most part of the Portugals were wounded, but it was with a purpose to
return to the same enterprise again the next morning.

. 2.
The King being retired to his quarter, found himself wounded with the shot of
an arrow which he received in that days conflict, and which he felt not until
then, by reason of the heat of the fight. This accident hindered the executing
of the resolution he had taken to give another assault to the City the next
day; for he was constrained to keep his bed twelve days together, but at
seventeen days end, when he was fully cured of his hurt, he undertook again the
prosecution of his design, and to effect that which he had so resolved upon,
namely, not to raise his siege from before the City until he had made himself
Master of it, though it cost him both his life and his whole State. He gave
then a second assault unto the City, which proved like unto the former, for he
lost a world of men in it, so that he was forced to retreat; but his
wilfulness was such, as nothing daunted with the great slaughter of his men,
he gave five assaults more to it in the open day, wherein he made use of many
warlike stratagems, which a Greek Ingineer daily invented for him; but
whatsoever he could do, he was always fain to retire with loss, whereat he was
greatly troubled. In the mean time, whereas the siege of this City had already
endured four months and an half, he commanded a general muster of his
soldiers to be made, and he found that an hundred and forty thousand of them
were wanting. Whereupon seeing to what estate he was reduced, for the putting
of an end to the business, he resolved to assault the City again with another
new invention, and this assault was the eighth he had already given to it,
during the siege, which he enterprised by the Council of war, and that under
the favor of the night; for they alleged unto him, that darkness would make
the assault less dangerous, and the scaling of the walls more facile. This
resolution taken, he instantly commanded all preparations necessary for this
design to be made, so that in seventeen days they built up six and twenty
Castles of strong pieces of timber, whereof each one was set upon six and
twenty wheels of iron, which facilitated the motion of so great a frame. Every
Castle was fifty foot broad, threescore and five long, and five and twenty
high, and all of them were reinforced with double beams, covered over with
sheets of lead: Moreover each of them was full of wood, and had fastened to them
before great iron chains, and that were very long in regard of the fire. Things
thus prepared, one Friday about midnight, being very dark and rainy, the King
of Bramaa caused three times one after another all the great Ordnance of the
Camp to be discharged, which, as I remember, I have already said, consisted of
an hundred and threescore great pieces, whereof the most part shot iron
bullets, besides a many of Falconets, bases, and muskets, to the number of
fifteen hundred, so that from all these guns shot off together three times one
after another, proceeded so horrible and dreadful a noise, as I cannot think
that any where but in hell the like could be; for on whatsoever the
imagination can be fixed, it cannot meet with any thing that may be rightly
compared thereunto. At this time, it was not only the great pieces of Ordnance,
whereof I have spoken before, and the small ones too, which were shot off, but
the like was done by all the guns which were both within the City, and without
in the Camp, of what bigness soever they were, being at least an hundred
thousand in all, for whereas there were, as I have already said, threescore
thousand Harquebuziers in the King of Bramaaes Army, there were thirty
thousand also in the City, besides seven or eight thousand Falconets and Bases;
so that to hear all these shot off continually for the space of three hours
together, and intermingled with thunder, lightning, and the tempest of the
night, was, to say the truth, a thing which was never seen, read of, or
imagined, and such indeed as put every one almost besides himself; for some
fell flat on the ground, some crept behind walls, and others got into walls.
During the greatest violence of this horrible and furious tempest, they set
fire on the six and twenty Castles which they had before brought close to the
walls, so that by the force of the wind, which was at that time very great,
and by the means of barrels of pitch that had been put into them, they fell a
flaming in such a strange manner, as there was anew to be seen so dreadful a
picture of hell (for it is the only name that can be given it, because there is
nothing upon earth that may rightly he resembled unto it) that if even those
which were without trembled at it, I leave you to think with how much more
reason were they to fear it whom necessity constrained to abide the violence
of it. Hereupon began a most bloody conflict on either part, they without
falling to scale the walls, and the besieged, who took no less care for all
things then they, valiantly to defend themselves, so that no advantage was to
be found on either side, but rather both of them were in a condition to be
utterly destroyed; for whereas the one and other reinforced themselves
continually with fresh supplies, and that the King of Bramaaes obstinacy was
such, as he went himself in person amongst his soldiers, encouraging them with
his speeches, and the great promises that he made them, the fight proceeded so
far, and increased so mightily, as being unable to deliver the least part of
that which passed therein, ^ leave it to the understanding of every one to
imagine what it might be. Four hours after midnight, the six and twenty
Castles being quite burned to the ground, with so terrible a blaze, as no man
durst come within a stones cast of it, the King of Bramaa caused a retreat to
be sounded, at the request of the Captains of the strangers, for there were so
many hurt men amongst them, as all the day, and most part of the night
following was employed in dressing of them.

CHAP. LXX. The King of Bramaaes raising his siege from before the City of
Odia^; with a description of the Kingdom of Siam; and the fertility thereof.
THe King of Bramaa,. 1.
seeing that neither the great Ordnance wherewith he had battered the City,
nor the assaults which he had given unto it, nor his inventions of Castles,
accompanied with so many artifices of fire, whereon he had so much relied, had
served him to any purpose for the execution of that which he had so mightily
desired, and being resolved not to desist from the enterprise which he had
begun, he called a Council of War, wherein all the Princes, Dukes, Lords, and
Commanders that were in the Army were present. Having then propounded his
desire and intention unto them, he required them to give him their advice
thereupon; immediately the affair being put into deliberation, and thoroughly
debated on either part, they concluded in ^he end, that the King was by no
means to raise this siege, in regard this enterprise was the most glorious, and
most profi^able of all that ever might be offered unto him; they represented
moreover unto him the world of treasure that he had employed therein, and that
if he continued battering the City without desisting from his assaults, at
length the enemies would be spent, because it was apparent (as they were
informed) that they were no longer able to vvithstand the least attempt that
should be made against them. The King being exceedingly contented, for that
their opinions proved to be conformable to his desire, testified the great
satisfaction that he received thereby, so that he gave them many recompenses in
money, and vowed to them, that if they could take the City, he would confer
upon them the greatest commands of the Kingdom, with very honorable titles
and revenues. This resolution being taken, there was no further question but of
considering in what manner the business should be carried; whereupon by the
counsel of Diego Suarez, and of the Ingineer, it was concluded, that with
bavin^ and green turfe a kind of Platform should be erected higher then the
vvalls, and that there on should be mounted good store of great Ordnance,
wherewith the principal fortifications of the City should be battered, since
that in them alone consisted all the enemies defense. Order then was presently
given for all that was judged necessary thereunto, and the threescore thousand
Pioners which were in the Camp were employed about it, who in twelve days
brought the Fort or Platform into the estate which the King desired. There
were already planted on it then forty pieces of Canon for the battering of the
City the day ensuing, whenas a Post arrived with Letters to the King,
whereby he was advertised, That the Zemindoo being risen up in the Kingdom
of Pegu, had cut fifteen thousand Bramaaes there in pieces, and had withal
seiz^d on the principal places of the country. At these news the King was so
troubled, that without further delay he raised the siege, and imbarqued himself
on a river, called Paca^au, where he stayed but that night, and the day
following, which he employed in retiring his great Ordnance and ammunition.
Then having set fire on all the Pallisadoes, and lodgings of the Camp, he
parted away one Tuesday, the fifteenth day of October, in the year a thousand
five hundred forty and eight, for to go to the Town of Mar^abano. Having used
all possible speed in his voyage, at seventeen days end he came thither, and
there was amply informed by the Chalagonim, his Captain of all the Zemindoos
proceedings, in making himself King, and seizing on his treasure; by killing
fifteen thousand Bramaaes, and that in diverse places he had lodged five hundred
thousand men, with an intention to stop his passage into the Kingdom. This
news very much perplexed the King of Bramaa, so that he fell to thinking with
himself what course he should take for the remedying of so great a mischief as
he was threatened with: In the end he resolved to tarry a while at Martabano, to
attend some of his forces that were still behind, and then to go and fight a
battle with his enemy; but it was his ill luck, that in the space of fourteen
days only which he abode there, of four hundred thousand men which he had,
fifty thousand quitted him: For whereas they were all Peg^es, and consequently
desirous to shake off the Bramaaes yoke, they thought it best to side with the
new King the Zemindoo, who was a Pegu as well as they; and they were the rather
induced thereunto, by understanding, that this Prince was of an eminent
condition, liberal, and so affable to every one, that he thereby won most men
to be of his party. In the mean time the King of Bramaa, fearing lest the
defection of his soldiers should daily more and more increase, was advised by
his Council to stay no longer there, in regard the longer he should tarry, the
more his forces would diminish, for that a great part of his Army was Pegues,
which were not likely to be very faithful unto him. This counsel was approved
of by the King, who presently marched away toward Pegu, near unto which he was
no sooner arrived, but he was certified that the Zemindoo, being advertised of
his coming, was attending ready to receive him. So these two Kings being in the
view of one another, encamped in a great ^laine, some two leagues from the City
of Pegu, the Zemindoo with six hundred thousand men, and the Bramaa with three
hundred and fifty thousand. The next day these two Armies being put into
battle array, came to join together one Friday the sixteenth of November, the
same year, a thousand five hundred forty and eight. It was about six of the
clock in the morning when first they began their encounter, which was
performed with so much violence, as a general defeat ensued thereupon, yet
fought they with an invincible courage on either part; but the Zemindoo had the
worse, for in less then three hours his whole Army was routed, with the
slaughter of three hundred thousand of his men, so that in this extremity he
was forced to save himself only with six horse in a fortress, called Battelor,
where he stayed but one hour, during the which, he furnished himself with a
little Vessel, wherein he fled the night ensuing up the river to C^daa. Let us
leave him now flying, until we shall come to him again whenas time shall
serve, and return to the King of Bramaa, who exceedingly contented with the
victory which he had gotten, marched the next morning against the City of
Pegu; where as soon as he arrived, the inhabitants rendered themselves unto him,
on condition to have their lives and goods saved. Whereupon he took order for
the dressing of them that were hurt; as for those that he lost in this battle,
they were found to be threescore thousand in number, amongst the which were two
hundred and fourscore Portugals, all the rest of them being grievously wounded.

. 2.
Having already entreated of the success which the King of Bramaas voyage had
in the kingdom of Siam, and of the rebellion of the Kingdom of Pegu, me thinks
it will not be amiss for me to speak here succinctly of the situation,
extent, abundance, riches, and fertility which I saw in this kingdom of Siam,
and in this Empire of Sorna^, to show that the conquest thereof would have been
far more utile unto us, then all the estates which now we have in the India's,
and that we might obtain it with a great deal less charge. This kingdom, as
may be seen in the Map, is seven hundred leagues in length, and a hundred and
threescore in breadth; the most part of it consists in great plains, where are
a world of corn grounds, and rivers of fresh water, by reason whereof the
Country is exceeding fertile, and abundantly stored with cattle and victuals.
In the most eminent parts of it are thick Forests of Angelin wood, whereof
thousands of ships might be made; there are also many mines of Silver, Iron,
Steel, Lead, Tin, Saltpetre, and Brimstone; likewise great abundance of Silk,
Aloes, Benjamin, Lacre, Indico, Cotton wool, Rubies, Saphires, Ivory and gold;
There is moreover in the woods marvailous store of Brasill and Ebony, wherewith
an hundred Juncks are every year laden, to be transported to China, Hainan, the
Lequios, Camboya and Camp^aa; besides Wax, Honey, and Sugar, which diverse
places there do yield very plentifully. The Kings yearly revenue is ordinarily
twelve millions of gold, over and above the presents which the great Lords make
him, that comes to a great matter. In the jurisdiction of his territories there
are six and twenty hundred populations, which they call Prodou, as cities and
towns amongst us, besides villages and small hamlets, whereof I have no
reckoning. The most part of those populations have no other fortifications or
walls, then palisadoes of wood, so that it would be easy for any that should
attaque them to make themselves masters thereof; the rather for that the
inhabitants of those places are naturally effeminate, and destitute of arms
offensive and defensive. This coast of this kingdom joins upon the two North
and South Seas; on that of the Indiaes by Iuncalo and Tanaucarius, and on that
of China by Monpolocata, Cuy, Lugor, Chintabu, and Berdio. The capital City of
all this Empire is Odiaa, whereof I have spoken heretofore; it is fortified
with walls of brick and mortar, and contains, according to some, four hundred
thousand fires, whereof an hundred thousand are strangers of diverse countries
of the world: for whereas the country is very rich of it self, and of great
traffic, there passes not a year whereunto from the Provinces and Islands of
Iaoa, Bale, Madoura, Augenio, B^rneo, and Solor, there sails at the least a
thousand Iuncks, besides other smaller vessels wherewith all the rivers and
all the harbors are full. The King naturally is no way given to tyranny. The
customs of all the Kingdom are charitably destinated for the maintenance of
certain Pagodes, where the duties that are paid are very easy; for whereas the
religious men are forbidden to trade with money, they take no more of Merchants
then what they will give them out of alms. There are in this Country twelve
Sects of Gentiles, as in the Kingdom of Pegu; and the King for a sovereign
title causes himself to be called Prechau Saliu, which in our tongue
signifies, A holy member of God. He shows not himself to the people save only
twice in the year, but then with so much riches and majesty, as he has power
and greatness, and yet for all this that I say, he less not to acknowledge
himself the vassal and tributarie to the King of China, to the end that by
means thereof his subjects Juncks may be admitted into the port of Combay,
where ordinarily they exercise their commerce. There is also in this Kingdom a
great quantity of Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, Camphire, Allume, Cassia, Tamarinds
and Cardamon; so as one may truly affirm that, which I have often heard say in
those parts, namely, that this Kingdom is one of the best countries in the
world, and easier to be subdued then any other Province, how little soever, I
could here report likewise many more particularities of things which I have
seen only in the city of Odiaa, but I am not minded to make mention of them,
that I may not beget in them that shall read this the same grief which I have
for the loss which we made of it through our sins, and the gain we might make
in conquering this Kingdom.

CHAP. LXXI. A continuation of that which happened in the Kingdom of Pegu, as
well during the life, as after the death of the King of Bramaa.
TO return now unto the history which heretofore I have left, you must know,
that after the King of Bramaa had obtained that memorable victory near to
Pegu,. 1.
as I have declared heretofore, by means whereof he remained peaceable
possessor of the whole Kingdom, the first thing he employed himself in was to
punish the offenders, which had formerly rebelled; for which effect he cut off
the heads of a great many of the Nobility, and Commanders, all whose estates
were confiscated to the Crown, which (according to report) amounted unto ten
millions of gold, besides plate and jewels, whereby that common Proverb, which
was common in the mouths of all, was verified, namely, That one man's offense
cost many men very dear. Whilst the King continued more and more in his
cruelties, and injustice, which he executed against diverse persons during the
space of two months and a half, certain news came to him, that the city of
Martabano was revolted, with the death of two thousand Bramaas, and that the
Chalogomin, Governor of the same city, had declared himself for the Xemindoo.
But that the cause of this revolt may be the better understood by such as are
curious, I will (before I proceed any further) succinctly relate, how this
Xemindoo had been of a religious order in Pegu, a man of noble extraction, and
(as some affirmed) near of kin to the precedent King, whom this Bramaa had put
to death twelve years before, as I have already declared. This Xemindoo had
formerly to name Xoripam Xay, a man of about forty five years of age, of a
great understanding, and held by every one for a Saint: he was withal very well
verst in the Laws of their Sects and false Religion, and had many excellent
parts, which rendered him so agreeable unto all that heard him preach, as he
was no sooner in the Pulpit, but all the assistants prostrated themselves on
the ground, saying at every word that he uttered, Assuredly God speaks in thee.
This Xemindoo, seeing himself then in such great credit with the people,
spurred on by the generosity of his nature, and the occasion which was then so
favorable unto him, resolved to try his fortune, and see to what degree it
might arrive. To this end, at such time as the King of Bramaa was fallen upon
the kingdom of Siam, and had laid siege to the city of Odiaa, the Xemindoo
preaching in the temple of Conquiay at Pegu, which is as it were the Cathedral
of all the rest, where there was a very great assembly of people, he discoursed
at large of the loss of this Kingdom, of the death of their lawful King, as
also of the great extortions, cruel punishments, and many other mischiefs
which the Bramaas had done to their Nation; with so many insolences, and with
so many offenses against God, as even the very houses which had been founded by
the charity of good people, to serve for Temples wherein the Divine Word might
be preached, were all desolated and demolished; or if any were found still
standing, they were made use of, either for stables, lay-stalls, or other such
places accustomed to lay filth or dung in. These, and many other such like
things, which the X^mindoo delivered, accompanied with many sighs and tears,
made so great an impression in the minds of the people, as from thenceforward
they acknowledged him for their lawful King, and swore allegiance unto him; so
that instead of calling him, as they did before, Xoripam Xay, they named him
Xemindoo, as a sovereign title which they gave him above all others. Seeing
himself raised then to the dignity of King, the first thing during the heat and
fury of this people, was to go to the King of Bramaas palace, where having
found five thousand Bramaas, he cut them all in pieces, not sparing the life of
one of them; the like did he afterward to all the rest of them that were
abiding in the most important places of the State, and withal he seized on the
Kings treasure, which was not small. In this manner he slew all the Bramaas
that were in the Kingdom, which were fifteen thousand, besides the women of
that Nation of what age soever, and seized on the places where they resided,
which were instantly demolished; so that in the space of three and twenty days
only he became absolute possessor of the Kingdom, and prepared a great Army to
fight with the King of Bramaa, if he should chance to return upon the bruit of
this rebellion, as indeed he fought with him to his great damage, being
defeated by him, as I have heretofore declared. And thus having methinks said
enough for the intelligence of that which I am to recount, I will come again to
my first discourse. This King of Bra^aa being advertised of the revolt of the
Town of Martabano, and of the death of those two thousand Bramaaes, gave order
immediately to all the Lords of the Kingdom for their repair unto him with as
many men as they could levy, and that within the te^m of fifteen days at the
furthest, in regard the present necessity would not endure a longer delay. This
done, he parted the day following with a small train from the City of Pegu, to
give example to others to do the like, and wept and lodged at a Town called
Mouchan, with an intention to tarry there those fifteen days he had limited the
Lords to come unto him. Now whenas six or seven of them were already past, he
was advertised that Xemin de Satan, Governor of a Town so named, had secretly
sent a great sum of gold to the Zemindoo, and had withal done him homage for
the same Town where he commanded. This news somewhat troubled the King of
Bramaa, who devising with himself of the means which he might use to meet with
the mischief that threatened him, he sent for Xemin de Satan, who was then in
the said Town of his Government, with a purpose to cut off his head; but he,
betaking himself to his bed, and making show of being sick, answered, that he
would wait upon the King as soon as he was able to rise. Now in regard he found
himself to be guilty, and misdoubting the cause wherefore he was sent for, he
communicated this affair to a dozen of his kinsmen that were there present with
him, who all of them concluded together, how since there was no better way to
save himself then in killing the King, that without further delay it was to be
put in execution, so that all of them offering secretly to assist him in this
enterprise, they speedily assembled all their Confidents, without declaring
unto them at first the occasion wherefore they did it; and withal, drawing
others unto them with many fair promises, they made up of all being joined
together a company of six hundred men. Whereupon being informed that the King
was lodged in a certain Pagode, they fell upon it with great violence, and
fortune was so favorable unto them that finding him almost alone in his
chamber, they slew him without incurring any danger. That done, they retired
into an outward Court, where the Kings Guard having had some notice of this
treason, set upon them, and the conflict was so hot between them, that in half
an hours space, or thereabout, eight hundred men lay dead in the place, whereof
the most part were Bramaaes. After this Xemin de Satan making away with four
hundred of his followers, went to a place of a large extent, called Poutel,
whither all those of the country round about resorted unto him, who being
advertised of the death of the King of Bramaa, whom they mortally hated, made
up a body of five thousand men, and went to seek out the three thousand
Bramaaes which the King had brought thither with him: And forasmuch as these
same were dispersed in several places, they were all of them easily slain,
not scarce so much as one escaping. With them also were killed fourscore of
three hundred Portugals that Diego Suarez had with him, who, together with
all the rest which remained with their lives saved, rendered themselves upon
composition, and were received to mercy, upon condition that for the future
they should faithfully serve Xemin de Satan, as their proper King, which they
easily promised to do. Nine days after this mutiny, the Rebel seeing himself
favored by fortune, and such a multitude of people at his devotion, which were
come to him out of this Province, to the number of thirty thousand men, caused
himself to be declared King of Pegu, promising great recompenses to such as
should follow and accompany him, until he had wholly gained the Kingdom, and
driven the Bramaaes out of the country. With this design he retired to a
fortress called Tagalaa, and resolved to fortify himself there out of the
fear he was in of the forces which were to come to the succor of the
deceased King, thinking to find him alive, having been advertised that many
were already set forth from the City of Pegu for that purpose. Now of those
Bramaaes which Xemin de Satan had slain, one by chance escaped, and cast
himself all wounde^ as he was into the river, and swimming over, never left
traveling all that night, and the day follovving, for fear of the Pegues,
until he arrived at a place, called Coutasarem, where he incountred with the
Chaumigrem, the deceased Kings Foster-brother, who was encamped there with
an army of an hundred and ^ourscore thousand men, whereof there were but only
thirty thousand Bramaaes, all the rest Pegues; finding him then upon the point
of parting from thence, in regard of the heat that would be within two hours
after, he acquainted him with the death of the King, and all that had past
besides. Now though this news greatly troubled the Chaumigrem, yet he
dissembled it for the present with so much courage and prudence, as not one of
his followers perceived any alteration in him: But contrarily, putting on a
rich habit of Carnation Satin, imbroidered with gold, and a chain of precious
stones about his neck, he caused all the Lords and Commanders of his Army to
assemble before him, and then speaking to them with the semblance of a joyful
man, Gentlemen, said he, this fellow which you saw come to me but now in such
have, has brought me this Letter, which I have here in my hand, from the King,
my Lord and yours; and although by the contents thereof he seems to blame us
for our careless^ness in lingering thus, yet I hope e're long to render him
such an account of it, as his Highness shall give us all thanks for the
service we have done him. By this letter too he certifies me, that he has very
certain intelligence, how the Zemindoo has raised an army, with an intent to
fall upon the Towns of Cosmin and Dal^^ and to gain all along the rivers of
Digon and Me^doo, the whole Province of Danapl^^ even to Ansedaa; wherefore he
has expressly enjoined me, that as soon as possibly I may, I put into those
places (as the most important) such forces as shall be able to resist the
enemy; and that I take heed nothing be lost through my n^gligence, because in
that case ^e will admit of no excuse. This being so, it seems to me very
importan^ and necessary for his service, that you my Lord Xemi^brum go
instantly without all delay, and put your self with your forces into the Town
of D^laa; and your brother-in-law Ba^^haa Quem into that of Digon, with his
fifteen thousand men; as for Colonel Gipray and Monpocasser, they shall go with
their thirty thousand soldiers into Ansedaa, and Danapluu, and Ciguamcan, with
twenty thousand men shall march along to Xaraa, and so to M^lacou; moreo^er
Quiay Brazagaran, with his brethren and kinsmen, shall go for General of the
Frontier, with an Army of fifty thousand men, to the end that assisted with
those forces, he may in person give order wheresoever need shall be. Behold,
what the King has written to me, whereof I pray you let us make an agreement,
and all sign it together, for it is no reason that my head should answer for
your want of care, and imprudence. His Commanders presently obeyed him, and
without longer tarrying there, each of them went straight to the place, whither
his Commission directed him. The Chaumigrem, by means of this so cunning and
well dissembled a slight, rid himself in less then three hours of all the
hundred and fifty thousand Pegues, who he knew, if once they came to hear of
the Kings death, would fall upon the thirty thousand Bramaaes that he had there
with him, and not leave one of them alive. This done, as soon as it was night,
turning back to the City, which was not above a league from thence, he seized
with all speed on the deceased Kings Treasure, which amounted, according to
report, unto above thirty millions of gold, besides jewels that were not to be
estimated; and withal, he saved all the Bramaa^s wives and children, and took
as many arms and as much ammunition as he could carry away. After this, he set
fire on all that was in the Magazines, caused all the lesser Ordnance to be
rived asunder, and the greater, which he could not use so, to be cloyed.
Furthermore, he made seven thousand Elephants that were in the country to be
killed, reserving only two thousand for the carriage of his treasure,
ammunition, and baggage. As for all the rest, it was consumed with fire, so
that neither in the Palace, where were chambers all seeked with gold, nor in
the Magazines and Arsenalls, nor on the river, where were two thousand rowing
Vessels, remained ought that was not reduced to ashes. After this execution,
he departed in all have, an hour before day, and drew directly toward Tanguu,
which was his own country, from whence he came some fourteen years before to
the conquest of the Kingdom of Pegu, which in the heart of the country was
distant from thence about an hundred and threescore leagues. Now whereas fear
commonly adds wings to the feet, it made him march with such speed, as he and
his arrived in fifteen days at the place whither they were a going. In the mean
time, whereas the Chaumigrem had cunningly sent away the hundred and fifty
thousand Pegues, as I have declared already, it happened that two days after
they understood how the King of Bramaa was dead: Now in regard they were
mortal enemies of that Nation, sixscore thousand of them in one great body
turned back in have for to go in quest of the thirty thousand Bramaaes, but
when they arrived at the City, they found that they were gone from thence three
days before; this making them to follow in pursuit of them with all the speed
that possibly they could, they came to a place, called Guinacoutel, some forty
leagues from the City whence they came; there they were informed, that it was
five days since they passed by, so that dispairing of being able to execute the
design which they had of cutting them in pieces, they returned back to the
place from whence they were parted, where they consulted amongst themselves
about that which they were to do and resolved in the end, since they had no
lawful King, and that the Land was quite freed of the Bramaaes, to go to Xemin
de Satan, as incontinently they did, who received them, not only with a great
deal of joy and good entertainment, but promised them mighty matters, and much
honor, by raising them to the principal commands of the Kingdom, as soon as
time should serve, and that he was more peaceably settled. Thereupon he went
directly to the City of Pegu, where he was received with the magnificence of a
King, and for such crowned in the Temple of Comquiay, which is the chief of all
the rest.

CHAP. LXXII. That which arrived in the time of Xenim de Satan, and an
abominable ^ase that befell to Diego Suarez; together with the Xemindoos
expedition against Xenim de Satan; and that which insued thereupon.
THree months and nine days had this Tyrant Xenim de Satan already peaceably
possessed the city and kingdom of Pegu, whenas without fearing any thing, or
being contradicted by none, he fell to distributing the treasure and revenues
of the Crown to whomsoever he pleased, whereupon great scandalls insued, which
were the cause of diverse quarrels and divisions amongst many of the Lords, who
for this cause, and the injustice which this tyrant did them, retired into
several foraigne Countries and Kingdoms. Some also went and sided with the
Xemindo^, who began at that time to be in reputation again: For after he had
fled from the battle only with six horse, as I have declared heretofore, he
got into the Kingdom of Ansedaa, where as well by the efficacy of his Sermons,
as by the authority of his person, he won so many to his devotion, as assisted
by the favor and forces of those Lords as adhered to him, he made up an army
of threescore thousand men, with which he marched to Meidoo, where he was very
well received by those of the Country. Now setting aside what he did in those
parts, during the space of four months, that he abode there, I will in the
mean time pass to a strange accident which in a few days fell out in this
city, that one may know what end the good fortune of the great Diego Suarez
had, who had been Governor of this Kingdom of Peg^; and the recompense which
the world is accustomed to make at last unto all such as serve and trust in it,
under the semblance of a good countenance which she shows them at first. The
matter past in this sort; There was in this city of Pegu a Merchant, called
Manbagoaa, a rich man, and that of good reputation in the country: This same
resolved to marry a daughter of his to a young man, the son of a worshipful
and very rich Merchant also, named Manicaniandarim, about that time that Diego
Suarez was in the greatest height of his fortune, and termed the Kings brother,
and in dignity above all the Princes and Lords of the Kingdom. So the fathers
of these young couple being agreed on this marriage, and of the dowry that was
to be given, which by report was three hundred thousand ducats; when as the
day was come wherein the nuptials were celebrated with a great deal of state
and magnificence, and honored with the presence of most of the gentlemen of
chiefest quality in the city, it happened that Diego Suarez, being come a
little before Sunset from the royal palace, with a great train both of horse
and foot, as his manner was to be always well accompanied, passed by
Mambogoaas door, where hearing the music and rejoicing that was in the house,
asked what the matter was, whereunto answer being made him, that Mambogoaa had
married his daughter, and that the wedding was kept there, he presently caused
the Elephant on which he was mounted to stay, and sent one to tell the father
of the bride, that he congratulated with him for this marriage, and wished a
long and happy life to the new married couple; to these words he added many
others by way of complement, yea and made him many offers if he would make use
of him; wherewith the old father of the bride finding himself so exceedingly
honored, as not knowing how to acknowledge it, in regard the person who did him
so much honor, was no less then the King himself in greatness and dignity,
the desire which he had to satisfy this obligation in part, if he could not
wholly do it, made him go and take his daughter by the hand, accompanied with
many Ladies of quality, and so leading her to the street door, where Diego
Suarez was, he prostrated himself on the ground with a great deal of respect,
and with many complements after his manner, thanked him for the favor and
honor that he had done him. Thereupon the new married bride, having taken from
off her finger a rich ring, presented it on her knees by her fathers express
commandment, to Diego Suarez; but he that naturally was sensual and
lascivious, instead of using civility, whereunto the Laws of generosity and
friendship obliged him, having taken the ring which the maid presented unto
him, he reached out his hand, and plucked her to him by force, saying, God
forbid that so fair a maid as you should fall into any other hands but mine;
whereupon the poor old man seeing Diego Suarez hale his daughter so rudely,
lifting up both his hands to heaven, with his knees on the ground, and tears in
his eyes, My Lord, said he unto him I humbly beseech thee for the love and
respect of the great God, whom thou adorest, and which was conceived without
any spot of sin in the Virgins womb, as I confess and believe, according to
that which I have heard thereof, that thou will not forcibly take away my
daughter; for if thou do so, I shall assuredly die with grief and
displeasure at it; but if thou desire of me that I should give thee her dowry,
together with all that is in my house, and that I deliver up my self unto thee
for thy slave, I will instantly do it, provided thou will permit that her
husband may possess her, for I have no other good in the world but ^^e, nor
will I have any other as long as I live. Whereupon offering to lay hold on his
daughter, Diego Suarez making no answer to him, turned himself about to the
Captain of his guard, who was a Turk by Nation, and said unto him, kill this
dog The Turk presently drew out his Scymitar to kill the poor old man, but he
suddenly fled away, leaving his daughter with her hair all about her ears in
Diego Suarez his hands. In the mean time the Bridegroom came running to this
tumult, with his cheeks all bedeawed with tears, but he was scarcely arrived
there, whenas these Barbarians slew him, and his Father too, with six or seven
other of his kinsmen. Whilst this past so, the women made such fearful cries
in the house, as terrified all those that heard them, so that even the earth
and the air seemed to tremble at it, or to say better, they demanded vengeance
of God for the little respect which was had to his divine justice, and for so
great a violence as this was; and truly if I do not more amply report the
particularities of so black and so abominable an action, I desire to be
excused, in regard I pass them by for the honor of the Portugal Nation.
Wherefore it shall suffice me to say, that this poor Maid seeing her self upon
the point to be forced, strangled her self with a string that she wore about
her middle for a girdle, which she chose rather to do, then suffer this
sensual and brutish man to carry her away with him by force; but he was
therewith so displeased, as he was heard to say, that he repented him more for
that he had not enjoyed her, then for using her in that sort as he did. Now
from the day of this abhorred act, till four years after, the good old man, the
Father of the Bride, was never seen to go out of his house; but at length to
give a greater demonstration of his sorrow, and to show his extreme resentment
of the matter, he covered himself with an old tattered mat, and in that sad
equipage went up and down, begging an alms of his very slaves, never eating
any thing, but lying all along naked, and his face fixed on the ground. Thus
continued he in so sad a manner of life, until in the end he saw that the
season invited him to have recourse unto justice, which he demanded in this
sort; perceiving that in the Kingdom there was another King, other Governors,
and other Jurisdiction, alterations which time ordinarily produces in every
country, and in all kind of affairs, he went out of his house in the wretched
fashion he had so long used, having a big cord about his neck, and a white
beard, reaching almost down to his girdle, and got him into the midst of a
great place, where stood a Temple called Quiay Fantare^, that is to say, the
God of the afflicted; there he took the idol from off the Altar, and holding
it in his arms, he returned out of the Temple, to the said great place, where
having cried out aloud three times to draw the people together, as accordingly
they came flocking in unto him, he said with tears in his eyes; O ye people, ye
people! who with a clean and peaceable heart make profession of the truth of
this God of the afflicted, which you see here in my arms, come forth like
lightning in a dark and rainy night, and join with me in crying so loud, that
our cries may pierce the heavens, to the end the pitiful ear of the Lord may
be drawn to hear our heavy lamentations, and by them he may know the reason we
have to demand justice against this accursed stranger, as the most wicked man
that ever was born into the world; for this abominable wretch has not been
contented with spoiling us of our goods, but has also dishonored our families;
wherefore whosoever shall not with me accompany the God which I hold in my
hands, and water with my tears, in detesting so horrible a crime, let the
gluttonous Serpent of the profound pit of smoke abridge his days miserably,
and tear his body in pieces at midnight. This old man's words so mightily
terrified the Assistants, and made so deep an impression in their minds, that
in a short time fifty thousand persons assembled in that place, with so much
fury and desire of revenge, as was wonderful to behold. Thus the number of the
people still more and more increasing, they ran thronging strait to the Kings
Palace, with so horrible a noise, as struck terror into all that heard them. In
this disorder, being arrived at the outward Court of the Palace, they cried out
six or seven times with a dreadful tone; O King come out of the place wherein
thou art shut up, to hearken to the voice of thy God, who demands justice of
thee by the mouth of thy poor people. At these cries the King put forth his
head out of the window, and affrighted with so strange an accident, would needs
know of them what they would have? whereunto they all answered unanimously with
such loud cries, as seemed to pierce the heavens, Justice, justice against a
wicked infidel, who to spoil us of our goods has killed our fathers, our
children, our brothers, and our kinsmen. The King having thereupon inquired of
them who it was, it is, answered they, an accursed thief, participating with
the works of the Serpent, who in the fields of delight abused the first man
that God created. Is it possible, said he unto them, that there should be any
such thing as you tell me? whereunto they all replied, This same is the most
accursed man that ever was born on the earth, and is so out of his wicked
nature and inclination, wherefore we all of us beseech thee in the name of this
God of the afflicted, that his veins may be as much emptied of his blood, as
hell is filled with his wicked works. At these words the King turning toward
them that were about him, What do you think hereof, said he unto them? What am
I to do? and how am I to carry my self in so strange and extraordinary a
matter? To which they all answered, My Lord, if thou will not hearken to that
which this God of the afflicted comes to demand of thee, it is to be feared
that he will take care no longer to aid th^e, and will refuse to support thee
in thy dignity. Then the King turning himself again to the multitude that were
below in the Court, bad them go to the place where the great Market was kept,
and he would give order that the man whom they required should be delivered
unto them to be disposed of at their pleasure. Whereupon having sent for the
Chirca of justice, who is as the Sovereign Superintendent thereof above all
others, he commanded him to go and apprehend Diego Suarez, and deliver him
bound hand and foot to the people, that they might do justice upon him, for he
feared if he did otherwise, that God would execute it upon him.

The Chirca of Justice went immediately to Diego Suarez his house, and told
him tsiat the King had sent for him;. 2.
he in the mean time was so troubled to see the Chirca come for him, that he
remained a pretty while not able to answer him, as a man that was always
besides himself, and had lost his understanding; but at length being somewhat
come to himself again; He earnestly desired him to dispense with him at this
time for going with him, in regard of a great pain that he had in his head, and
that in acknowledgement of so good an office, he would give him forty ^isses of
gold. Whereunto the Chirca replied, The offer which thou make me is too
little for me to take upon me that great pain which thou s^yest thou have in
thy head, wherefore thou must go along with me, either by fair means or by
force, since thou obligest me to tell thee the truth. Diego Suarez then, seeing
that there was no means to excuse him, would have taken along with him six or
seven of his servants, and the Chirca not permitting it; I must, said he unto
him, fulfill the Kings command, which is, that thou shall come alone, and not
with six or seven men, for the time is now past wherein thou were wont to go so
well accompanied, as I have oftentimes seen thee do; all thy support is gone by
the death of the Tyrant of Bramaa, who was the quill wherewith thou blowedst up
thy self to an unsupportable pride, as is apparent by the wicked actions which
thou have committed, which at this present accuse thee before the justice of
God. This said, he took him by the hand, and led him along with him, environed
with a guard of three hundred men, whereat we remained very much dismayed. Thus
marching from one street to another, he arrived in the end at the Bazor, which
was a public place where all kind of wares was sold; but as he was going
thither, he met by chance with Balthazar Suarez his son, who came from a
Merchants house, whither his Father had sent him that morning to receive some
money that was owing to him. The Son, seeing his Father in this plight,
alighted presently from his horse, and casting himself at his feet; What means
this, my Lord, said he unto him with tears in his eyes, and whence cemes it that
you are led along in this sort? Ask it of my sins, answered Diego Suarez, and
they will tell thee, for I protest unto thee my Son, that in the case I am in,
all things seem dreams unto me. Thereupon embracing one another, and mingling
their tears together, they continued so, until such time as the Chirca
commanded Balthazar Suarez to get him gone, which he would not do, being loath
to part from his father, but the Ministers of justice haled him away by force,
and pushed him so rudely, as he fell and broke his head, yea and withal they
gave him many blows besides, whereat his Father fell into a swoun. Being come
again to himself, he craved a little water, which he had no sooner taken, but
lifting up his hands to heaven, he said with tears in his eyes, Si iniquitates
observab^ris Domine, Domine quis sustinebit? But, O Lord, added he, out of the
great confidence I have in the infinite price of thy precious blood, which thou
have shed for me upon the cross, I may say with more assurance, Misericordias
Domini in aeternum cantabo. Thus altogether desolated as he was in this last
affliction, when he was come in sight of the place, whither the King had
commanded him to be conducted, it is said, that perceiving so many people, he
remained so exceedingly dismayed, that turning himself to a Portugal, who was
permitted to accompany him, Jesus, said he unto him, have all these accused me
to the King? whereunto the Chirca made him this answer, It is no longer time
for thee to think of this, for thou have wit enough to know, that the people
a^e of so unruly a humor, that they always follow evil whereunto they are
naturally inclined. It is not that, replied Diego Suarez with tears in his eyes,
for I know that if there be any unrulinesse in them, it proceeds from my sins.
Thou see thereby, said the Chirca, that this is the ordinary recompense which
the world is accustomed to give to them, who during their life, have lost the
memory of the divine justice, as thou have done, and God g^ve thee the grace
that in this little time thou have to live, thou may repent thee of the
faults thou committed, which possibly may avail thee more then all the gold
that thou leavest behind thee, for an inheritance to him, who peradventure is
the cause of thy death. Here Diego Suarez falling down on his knees, and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, O Lord Jesus Christ, cried he, my true Redeemer,
I beseech thee by the pains which thou have suffered upon the Cross, to permit
that the accusation of these hundred thousand hunger-starved dogs against me,
may serve to satisfy the chastisement of thy divine justice in my behalf, to
the end that the inestimable price which thou have employed for the salvation
of my soul, without any merit of mine, may not be unprofitable unto me. This
said, he ascended the stairs which led to the market place, and the Portugal
that assisted him, told me, how at every step he kissed the ground, and called
upon the name of JESUS; at length when he was come to the top, the Manbogoaa,
who held the Idol in his arms, animating the people with great cries, said
unto them, Whosoever shall not for the honor of this God of the afflicted,
whom I have here in my arms, stone this accursed Serpent, let him for ever be
miserable, and let the brains of his children be consumed in the midst of the
night, to the end that by the punishment of so great a sin, the righteous
judgment of the Lord above may be justified in them. He had no sooner made an
end of speaking thus, but there fell so great a shower of stones on Diego
Suarez, as in less then a quarter of an hour he was buried under them, and
they that flung them at him, did it so indiscreetly, as the most part of them
hurt one another therewith. An hour after they drew forth the poor Diego
Suarez from under the stones, and with another new tumult of cries and voices
they tore him in pieces, with so much fury and hatred of the whole people in
general, as there was not he which did not believe that he did a charitable
and holy work in giving a reward to the most mutinous amongst those, which
dragged his members and entrails up and down the streets. This execution
done, the King willing to confiscate his goods, sent men to his house for that
purpose, where the disorder was so great, in regard of the extreme avarice
which these hungry dogs had, they left not a tile unmoved; and because they
found not so much as they expected, they put all his slaves and servants to
torture, with such an excess of cruelty, as eight and thirty of them remained
dead in the place, amongst which were seventeen Portugals, who bore the pain of
a thing whereof they were not guilty. In all this spoil there were no more
then six hundred bisses of gold found, which are in value three hundred
thousand ducats, besides some pieces of rich housholdstuffe, but no precious
stones, nor jewels at all, which persuaded men that Diego Suarez had buried
all the rest; howsoever it could never be found out, notwithstanding all the
search that was made for it, and yet it was verified by the judgment of some
who had seen him in his prosperity, that he had in means above three millions
of gold, according to the supputation of the country. Behold what was the end
of the great Diego Suarez, whom fortune had so favored in this Kingdom of
Pegu, as she had raised him up to the degree of the Kings Brother, the highest
and most absolute title of all others, and given him withal two hundred
thousand ducats yearly rent, with the charge of General of eight hundred
thousand men, and Sovereign over all the other Governors or Vice-Royes of
fourteen Kingdoms, which the King of Bramaa had at that time in his
possession. But it is the ordinary course of the goods of this world,
especially of such as are ill gotten, always to serve for a way to disgraces
and misfortunes.

. 3.
I return now to the Xemindoo* of whom I have not spoken a long time. Whereas
that Tyrant and avaritious King Xenim de Satan gave daily new increases to the
cruelties and tyrannies which he exercised against all sorts of persons, never
ceasing killing and robbing indifferently those, who were thought to have
money; nor sparing any thing on which he could lay his hands, his rapines
proceeded so far, as it was that in the space of seven months only, wherein he
was peaceable possessor of this Kingdom of Pegu, he put to death six thousand
very rich Merchants, besides many ancient Lords of the Country, who by way of
right of inheritance held their estates from the Crown. These extortions
rendered him so odious, as the most part of those that were with him abandoned
him to side with the Xemindoo, who had for him at that time the towns of Digon,
Meideo, Dalaa, and Coulam, even to the confines of Xaraa, from whence he parted
in have to go and besiege this Tyrant with an army of two hundred thousand men,
and five thousand Elephants. When he was arrived at the city of Pegu, where
Xemin de Satan then kept his Court, he invested it round about with palisadoes
and very strong trenches, yea and gave some assaults to it, but he could not
enter it so easily as he believed, in regard of the great resistance he found
from them within; wherefore judging it requisite for him to alter his mind,
being prudent as he was, he came very subti ly to a truce of twenty days with
the Tyrant upon certain conditions, whereof the principal was, that if within
the term of those twenty days he gave him a thousand bisses of gold, which
are in value five hundred thousand Ducats, he would desist from the pretension
and right which he had to this Kingdom; and all this he did (as I have already
said) cunningly, hoping by this means to bring him to his bow with less
peril. So the time of the truce beginning to run on, all things remained
peaceable on either side, and the besiegers fell to communicate with the
besieged. During this pacification every morning two hours before day, they of
the Xemindooes Camp played after their manner upon diverse sorts of instruments
very melodiously, at the sound whereof all they of the city ran to the walls to
see what the matter was. Whereupon those instruments ceasing to play, a
Proclamation was made by a Priest, accounted by every man a holy personage, who
said these words with a very sad voice, O ye people, ye people! unto whom
Nature has given ears to hear, hear^en to the voice of the holy Captain the
Xemindoo, of whom God will make use for the restoring you to your liberty and
former quiet; in order whereunto he admonishes you from Quiay Niuandel, the god
of battles of the field Vitau, that none of you be so hardy as to lift up your
hand against him, nor against this holy assembly which he has made, out of a
holy zeal toward these people of Pegu, as brother, that he is, to the least of
all the poor: Otherwise whosoever shall come against the army of these servants
of God, or shall have the will to do them any harm, let him be accursed for it,
and as deformed and vile as the children of the night, who foaming with poison
make horrible cries, and be delivered into the burning jaws of the dragon of
discord, whom the true Lord of all the Gods has cursed for ever; whereas
contrarily, to those, that shall be so happy as to obey this Proclamation, as
his holy brethren and allies, shall be granted in this life a perpetual peace,
accompanied with a great deal of wealth and riches; and after their death
their souls shall be no less pure and agreeable to God, then those of the
Saints which go dancing amidst the beams of the Sun in the celestial repose
of the Lord Almighty. This publication made, the music began to play again
with a great noise as before, which made such an impression in the hearts of
them that heard it, as in seven nights that it contin^ed above threescore
thousand persons went and rendered themselves to the Xemindoo; for most of them
which heard those words gave as much credit thereunto, as if an Angel from
heaven had spoken them. In the mean time the besieged Tyrant, seeing that
these secret Proclamations of the enemy were so prejudicial unto him, as they
could not choose but turn to his utter ruin, brake the truce at twelve days
end, and deliberated with his Council what he should do, who advised him by no
means to suffer h mself to remain any longer besieged, for fear left the
inhabitants should mutiny, and fall from him to the enemy; and that the best
and surest way was to fight with the Xemindoo in the open field, before he grew
to any further strength. This resolution being approved of by Zenim de Satan,
he prepared himself for the execution of it; to which effect he two days after
before it was day sallied out at five gates of the city with fourscore thousand
men, which then he had, and charged the enemies with strange fury. They then in
the mean time, who always stood upon their guard, received them with a great
deal of courage, whereupon insued so cruel a conflict between them, that in
less then half an hour, for so long lasted the heat of the fight, there fell
on both sides above forty thousand men; but at the end of that time the new
King Zenim was born from his Elephant by an harquebuze shot, discharged at him
by a Portugal, named Goncalo N^to, which caused all the rest to render
themselves, and the city likewise, upon condition that the inhabitants should
have their goods and lives saved. By this means the Xemindoo entered peaceably
into it, and the very same day, which was a Saturday the three and twentieth of
February, a thousand five hundred fifty and one, he caused himself to be
crowned King of Pegu in the greatest Temple of the city. As for Goncalo N^to,
he gave him in recompense for killing the Tyrant twenty Bisses of gold, which
are ten thousand Ducats; and to the other Portugalls, being eighty in number,
he gave five thousand Ducats, besides the honors and prsviledges which they
had in the country; he also exempted them for three years from paying any
custom for their merchandise, which was afterward very exactly observed.

CHAP. LXXIII. That which the Xemindoo did, after he was Crowned King of Pegu,
with the Chaumigrems; the King of Bramaaes Foster-Brothers coming against him,
with a great Army; and diverse other memorable things.
THe Xemindoo seeing himself Crowned King of Pegu, and peaceable Lord of all
the kingdom; began to have thoughts far different from those which Xemin de
Satan had had, being raised to the same dignity of King; for the first and
principal thing wherein he employed himself with all his endeavor, was to
maintain his Kingdom in peace, and to cause Justice to flourish; as indeed he
established it with so much integrity, as no man how great so ever he was,
durst wrong a lesser then himself: withal in that which concerned the
government of the Kingdom, he proceeded with so much virtue, and equity, as it
filled the strangers that were there with admiration, so that one could not
without marvel consider the peace the quiet, and union of the wills of the
people; during the happy and peaceable estate of this Kingdom, which continued
the space of a year, and better; at the end whereof the Chaumigrem,
foster-brother to the same King of Bramaa, whom Xemin de Satan had slain, as I
have before declared, having received advertisement, that by reason of the
rebellions and wars, which since his departure from thence had happened in
the Kingdom of Pegu; the principal men of the State there, had lost their
lives; and the Xemindoo who then reigned, was unprovided of all things
necessary for his defense; he resolved once again to adventure upon the same
enterprise, which had formerly been undertaken by his late King. With this
design, he entertained into his pay a mighty Army of strangers, unto whom he
gave a Tincall of gold by the month, which is five dackets of our money; when as
he had prepared all things in a readiness, he departed from Tanguu, the place
of his birth: On the ninth day of March, a thousand, five hundred, fifty and
two, with an Army of three hundred thousand men, whereof only fifty thousand
were Bramaas, and all the rest Mons, Chaleus, Calaminhams, Sau^nis, Pam^rus,
and Auaas. In the mean time the Xemindoo, the new King of Pegu, having certain
intelligence of these great forces, which were coming to fall upon him, made
preparation to go and meet them, with a design to give them battle; for which
effect, he assembled in the same City where he was; a huge Army of nine hundred
thousand men, which were all Pegues by nation, and consequently of a weak
constitution, and less warlick then all the others, whereof I have spoken; and
on Tueseday the fourth of April, about noone, having received advice that the
enemies Army was encamped all along the river of Meleytay some twelve leagues
from thence, he used such expedition, as the same day, and the next night all
his Soldiers were put into battle array, for whereas they had prepared every
thing long before, and had also been trained by their Capt. there needed no
great ado to bring them into order. The day ensueing, all these men of war
begun about nine of the clock in the morning, to march at the sound of an
infinite company of warlick instruments, and went and lodged that night some
two leagues from thence near to the river Potar^u. The next day, an hour before
Sunset the Bramaa Chaumigrem appeared with so great a body of men, as it took
up the extent of a league and an half of ground; his Army being composed of
seaventy thousand horse, of two hundred and thirty thousand foot, and six
thousand fighting elephants, besides as many more which carried the baggage and
victuals; and in regard it was almost night, he thought fit to lodge himself
all along by the mountain, that he might be in the greater safety. Thus the
night past with a good guard, and a strange noise that was made on either part.
The day following, which was a Saturday, the seventh of April in the year one
thousand, five hundred, fifty and three, about five of the clock in the
morning, these two Armies began to move, but with different intentions; for the
design of the Bramaa was to pass the foard, and recover an advantageous piece
of ground, which lay near to another river; and the Xemindoo had a desire to
keep him from it, and to stop his passage; upon this contention, some
skirmishes ensued, which continued most part of the day, and wherein about five
hundred men on the one side, and the other were slain, howbeit the advantage
remained with the Chaumigrem, because he gained the place whereunto he
pretented, and passed all the night there in banqueting, and making great
bonfires for this good success. The next day betimes in the morning the
Xemindoo, King of Pegu, presented the battle to his enemies, who did not
refuse it; so that they incountred one another with all the fury that a cruel
hatred is accustomed to kindle in such like cases; the two vantgards then, who
were the best Soldiers amongst them, fell so lustily unto it, that in less
then half an hour, all the Field was covered with dead bodies, and the Pegues
began to lack courage. Whereupon the Xemindoo seeing his men give ground, came
to succor them with a body of three thousand elephants, wherewith he set upon
the seventy thousand horse so courageously, and to the purpose, as the Bramaaes
lost all that they had gained; which perceived by the Chaumigrem, who was
better experienced in matters of War, knowing full well what he was to do,
to recover all again; made show of retyring, as if he had been vanquished; the
Xemindoo thereupon, who understood not this stratagem, and that thought of
nothing but the victory, pursued his enemy about a quarter of a league: but
incontinently the Bramaa facing about with all his forces, fell upon his enemy
with such violence and horrible cries, as not only men, but even the very
earth, and all the other elements seemed to tremble at it. By this means the
conflict renewed in such sort, as in a little time the air was seen all on
fire, and the ground watered all over with blood; for the Pegu Lords and
Commanders, beholding their King so far engaged in the battle, and likely to
lose the day, ran instantly to his succor, the like did the Panonsaray, the
Bramaaes brother, on his side, with forty thousand men, and two thousand
elephants; so that there ensued betwixt them, so bloody and dreadful a fight,
as words are not able to express the truth of it; wherefore I shall say no
more, but that half an hour, or there about, before Sunset, the Army of nine
hundred thousand Pegues was utterly discomfited; and as it was said, four
hundred thousand of them were left dead on the place, and all the rest, or the
most part of them, grievously wounded; which the Xemindoo seeing, fled out of
the field, and so escaped. Thus did the victory remain unto the Chaumigrem, who
thereupon caused himself to be crowned King of Pegu, with the same royal
Ensigns, magnificence, and triumph, as the other King of Bramaa, whom Xemin de
Satan slew, had formerly been. And in regard it was already night, they
bestowed the time in no other thing, but in dressing the hurt men, and keeping
good watch in the Camp.

The next day, as soon as it was light, all the victorious soldiers, Sect. 1.
as well wounded as unwounded, ^an to the spoil of the dead bodies; wherewith
diverse amongst them were mightily enriched; for they found there great store of
Gold and Jewels, by reason the custom of those Gentiles is, (as I think, I
have heretofore delivered) to carry all their wealth about them to the War. The
soldiers being well satisfied in this particular, the new King of this
miserable Kingdom parted forthwith from the place where he had gotten the
Victory, and marched toward the City of Pegu, distant so^^ three leagues from
thence. Now forasmuch as he would not that day enter into it, for certain
considerations which I will relate hereafter, he set himself down in the view
of it, about half a league off, in a Plain, called Sunday Patir: and after he
had thus encamped his Army, he gave order for the guard of the four and twenty
gates thereof, by placing at each of them a Bramaa Commander with five thousand
Horse. In this manner he remained there five days, without being able to
resolve to enter into the City, out of the fear he was in, lest the strangers
should require of him the pillage of it, as indeed, he was obliged to grant it
to them by the promise which he had made them for it at Tanguu. Now the custom
of men of War, who live but upon their pay, being to have regard to nothing but
their interests, these six Nations seeing the King thus defer his entry into
the City, which they could not brook, began to mutiny, and this by the
instigation of a Portugal, named Christonano Surnento, a man of a turbulent
spirit, but otherwise a good and valiant Commander; and this mutiny proceeded
so far, as the King of Bramaa for his own safety was constrained to retire into
a Pagode, where he fortified himself with his Bramaaes, until that the next
morning about nine of the clock he came to a truce with them, and causing them
to assemble together, from the top of a wall he spoke to them in this sort, My
worthy Friends, and valiant Commanders, I have caused you to come to this holy
resting place of the dead, to the end that with a solemn Oath I may discover
unto you my intentions; whereof, with my knees on the ground, and my eyes lift
up unto heaven, I take to witness Quiay Nivandel, the God of Battle of the
field Vitau, beseeching him to be Judge of this between you and me, and to
strike me dumb, if I do not tell you the truth. I very well remember the
promise I made you at Tanguu, which was, to give you the pillage of this
tumultuous City; as well because I believed your valor would be as it were the
minister of my revenge, as in some sort to satisfy your avarice, whereunto I
know you are naturally very much inclined: Now having given you this promise
for a gage of my faith, I acknowledge that I am altogether obliged not to break
my word with you But when on the other side, I come to consider the great
inconveniences which may accrue to me thereby, and the strict account which I
shall one day render for it before the equitable and rigorous justice of the
Lord above, I must confess unto you, that I am very much afraid of charging
my self with so heavy a burden: wherefore Reason advises me to render my self
^aulty toward men, rather then to fall into the displeasure of God: Besides,
it is not reasonable that the innocent should pay for the guilty, and of whom I
am sufficiently satisfied with the death which they have received in this last
battle by your hands. Behold, how I earnestly entreat you, as children that
you are of my bowels, that having regard to my good intention, you will not
kindle this fire wherein my soul will be burnt, since you see well enough how
reasonable that is which I desire of you, and how unjust it would be for you to
refuse it me. Nevertheless, to the end you may not remain altogether without
recompense, I do here promise you to contribute thereunto all that shall seem
reasonable to you, and to supply this default in part with my own goods, with
my Person, with my Kingdom, and with my State. Hereupon the Commanders of those
six Nations hearing the Kings justification, and the promise which he made
them, yielded to agree unto whatsoever he would do: howbeit, they prayed him
above all things to have regard unto soldiers pretensions, who were not at any
hand to be discontented, but greatly to be made account of. Whereunto the King
replied, That they had reason, and that in all things he would endeavor to
conform himself to whatsoever they should judge reasonable. In the mean time, to
avoid disputes which might ensue hereupon, it was concluded, that they should
referr themselves to Arbitrators: for which effect the Mutiners were to name
three on their side, and the King three others on his, which made six in all,
whereof three were to be Religious men, and the rest Strangers, that so the
judgment might be given with less suspicion. This resolution being taken
between them, they agreed together, that the three Religious men should be the
Menigrepos of a Pagode, that was named Quiay Hifaron, that is to say, the God
of Poverty; and that for the other three Strangers, the King and the Mutiners
should cast lots, to see who should choose one or two of them on his side. This
Election being fallen to the King, he made a choice of two Portugals, of an
hundred and forty that were then in the City; whereof the one was Goncalo
Pacheco, the King our Masters Factor for Lacre, a worthy man, and of a good
conscience; and the other a worshipful Merchant, named Nuno Fernandez Teixeyra,
whom the King held in good esteem, as having known him in the life time of the
deceased King. By the same means the Commanders of the Mutiners elected another
stranger, whose name I do not know. Things thus concluded, the Judges destined
for the resolution of this Affair, were sent for, because the King was not
willing to stir out of the place where he was, until the matter was
determined; to the end he might dismiss them all peaceably before he entered
into the City, for fear lest if they entered with him, they should not keep
their word. For this purpose then the King about midnight sent a Bramaa on
horseback to the Portugals quarter, who were in no less fear then the Pegues
of being plundered and killed. After that the Bramaa was come into the City,
and that he had asked aloud (for so they use to do when they come from the
King) where the Captain of the Portugals was, he was presently conducted to
his Lodging, where being arrived, It is a thing (said he to the Captain) as
proper to the nature of that Lord above, who has created the firmament and the
whole heavens, to make good men for the conversion of the wicked, as it is
ordinary with the pernicious Dragon to nourish in his bosom spirits of
commotion and tumult, to bring disorder unto the peace which conserves us in
the holy Law of the Lord. I mean hereby (continued he) that amongst all those
of your Nation there is one wicked man found, vomiting out of his infernal
stomach flames of discord and sedition, by means whereof he has caused the
three strange Nations of the Chalons, Meleytes and Savadis to mutiny in the
King my Masters Army, whereupon has ensued so great a mischief, that besides
almost the utter ruin of the Camp, three thousand Bramaaes have been slain,
and the King himself has been in such danger, as he was fain to retire into a
Fort, where he has remained three days, and still is there, not daring to
come out, because he cannot put any trust in those strangers. Howbeit, for a
remedy of so great unquietness, it has pleased God, who is the true Father of
concord, to inspire the Kings heart with patience to endure this injury, being
prudent as he is, to the end he may by that means pacify the tumult and
rebellion of these three turbulent Nations, who inhabit the most desert parts
of the mountains of Mons, and are the most accursed of God amongst all people.
Now, to make an entry into this peace and union, a Treaty has been had between
the King and the Commanders of the Mutiners, whereby it has been concluded on
either part with an Oath, That to exempt this City from the plundering which
had been promised to the Soldiers, the King shall give them out of his own
estate, as much as six men, deputed for that purpose, shall award; of which
number there are already four, so that to make up the whole six, there wants
none but thee, whom the King has chosen for him; and another Portugal, whose
name is written in this paper, whereby thou shall be ascertained of that which
I have said unto thee. Thereupon he delivered a Letter unto him from the King
of Bramaa; which Goncalo Pacheco received upon his knees, and laid upon his
head, with exterior complements so full of civilitie and courtesy, as the
Bramaa remained very much contented and satisfied therewith, and said unto him,
Surely, the King my Master must needs have a great knowledge of thee, in that
he has chosen thee for a Judge of his Honor and Estate* Hereupon Goncalo
Pacheco read the Letter aloud before all the Portugals, who heard it standing,
with their hats in their hands: The contents of it were to this effect, Captain
Goncalo Pacheco, my dear Friend, and that appears before my eyes like a
precious Pearl, as being no less virtuous in the tranquillity of thy life,
then the holiest Menigrepos which live in the Deserts; I, the ancient
Chaumigrem, and new King of fourteen States, which God has now put into my
hands by the death of the holy King my Master, do send thee a smile of my
mouth, to the end thou may be as agreeable to me, as those whom I cause to
sit at my table in a day of joy and feasting: Know then, that I have thought
good to take thee for a Judge of the Affair that is in question, and therefore
have sent for thee, together with my good Friend, Nuno Fernandez Teixeyra, to
come presently unto me, for to give an end to this business, which I wholly
commit unto your trust. And for so much as concerns the security of your
persons, in regard of the fear you may be in of the late Mutiny, I do engage
my word, and swear to you by the faith which a King ought to have, whom God
himself has anointed, that I will take you, and all those of your Nation,
with all others that believe in your God, into my protection. After that this
Letter was read, to the great astonishment of all us that heard it, we could
believe no other, but that by Divine permission it came from Heaven for the
assurance of our lives, whereof we stood in very great doubt until then.
Goncalo Pacheco and Nuno Fernandez, with ten other Portugals which were chosen
for that purpose, instantly prepared a Present of diverse rich Pieces to carry
to the King, unto whom they went that very same night an hour before day, in
the company of the Bramaa who brought the Letter, in regard the haste the King
was in would brook no delay.

Goncalo Pacheco, Nuno Fernandez, and the other Portugals, arrived at the camp
an hour before Sunrising, and the King sent to receive them one of the
chiefest Bramaa Commanders that he had, and in whom he very much confided, who
was accompanied with above an hundred horse, and six Sergeants at arms that
carried maces. This same received the Portugals, and lead them to the King, who
did much honor unto Goncalo Pacheco, and Nuno Fernandez; and after he had
talked with them of diverse matters, he put them in mind of the importance of
the business for which he had sent for them, and willed them by any means to
lean rather to the Commanders then to him, assuring them that he should be
very well contented therewith, and said many things to them to that purpose.
Then he caused them to be conducted by the same Bramaa Lord to the Tent, where
the other four Arbitrators were with the high Treasuror and two Registers; when
as they had commanded silence to all that were without, they fell to debating
of the business for which they were assembled together; whereupon there were
many opinions, which took up the most part of the day, but at last all six came
to conclude, That albeit on the one side the King, by the promise which he had
made at Tanguu to the foreign Soldiers, for to give them the spoil or
pillage of the places which he should take by force, was exceedingly obliged to
the performance thereof, yet seeing that on the other side this promise was of
great and notable prejudice to the innocent, because it could not be put in
execution without greatly offending God; these things considered, they ordained
by their award; That the King, in regard of the promise which he had made them,
should pay unto them a thousand bisses of gold out of his own treasure; and
that upon the Soldiers receiving thereof, they should pass over to the other
side of the River, and retire directly into their countries; but that they
should first be also paid all that was due to them before this mutiny began,
and that they should be furnished with victuals sufficient for twenty days.
This award being published, was received with much content to either party; So
that the King commanded it to be instantly and punctually executed; and for a
greater testimony of his liberality, after he had paid them all this sum of
money, he bestowed upon the Commanders and Officers of each Company many
bountiful rewards, wherewith they were all of them very well pleased, and
satisfied. In this sort were these three mutinous nations discharged; for the
King would by no means trust, or make use of them any longer: Howbeit, he
would not suffer these strangers to go all away together, but caused them to be
divided into troops; each of them consisting of a thousand men, to the end that
by this means, they should give the less suspicion in their return, and
should be less able to plunder the open towns, by which they were to pass;
and thus the next day they departed. As for Goncalo Pacheco, and Nuno Fernandez
Teixyra, the King gave them ten bisses of gold, for being his Arbitrators in
this affair, whereunto he added a passport written with his own hand, whereby
the Portugals were permitted to retire freely into the Indies, without paying
any custom or duty for their merchandise; whereof we made more account then of
all the money could have been given us, because that for three years before the
precedent Kings had retained us in this country, with exceeding much vexation
and tyranny, whereby we were oftentimes in great danger of our lives, by reason
of the success of that which I have spoken heretofore. This done, there were
Proclamations made by men on horseback, to give notice that the day following,
the King would enter into the City in a peaceable manner, threatening all such
as should do the contrary, with a cruel death. Accordingly, the next morning
at nine of the clock the King parted from the Pagode, whither he had retired
himself; and about an hour after arrived at the City, wherein to entering by the
chiefest gate, he was received by an assembly (in form of a* Procession) of six
thousand Priests of all the twelve Sects which are in this Kingdom; by one of
whom, called Capizundo, an oration was made unto him, whereof the preface was
thus, Blessed and praised be that Lord, who ought truly to be acknowledged of
all men for such, in regard of the holy works which he has made with his
Divine hands, testified to us by the light of the day, the shining of the
night, and all the other magnificences of his mercy which he has produced in
us; Praised be he, I say, for that by the effects of his infinite power, which
are agreeable unto him, he has been pleased to establish thee on the earth
above all the Kings that govern it; and seeing we hold thee for his favorite,
we humbly beseech thee our Lord, that thou will never more remember the faults
and offenses which we have committed against thee, to the end that these thy
afflicted people may be comforted with the promise thereof, which they hope thy
Majesty will make them at this present. This same request was likewise made
unto him by the six thousand Grepos, all prostrated on the ground, and with
their hands lifted up to heaven, who with a dreadful tumult of voices said unto
him; Grant, our Lord and King, peace and pardon for that is past to all the
people of this thy Kingdom of Pegu, to the end they may not be troubled with
the fear of their offenses, which they confess publicly before thee. The
King answered them, that he was contented so to do, and swore to them by the
head of Quiay Nivandel, the God of Battle of the field Vitau, for the
confirmation thereof. Upon this promise all the people prostrated themselves
with their faces on the ground, and said unto him; God make thee to prosper for
infinite years in the victory over thy enemies, that thou may trample their
heads under thy feet. Hereupon for a token of great gladness, they fell to
playing on diverse instruments after their manner, though very barbarously, and
untunably; and the Grepo Capizondo set on his head a rich Crown of gold and
precious stones of the fashion of a Miter, wherewith the King made his entry
into the City, with a great deal of state and triumph, causing to march before
him all the spoil of the elephants and chariots, as also the statue of the
Xemindoo, whom he had vanquished, bound with a great iron chain, and forty
Colors trayled on the ground; As for him, he was seated on a very mighty
elephant, harnessed with gold, and environed with forty Sergeants at arms
bearing Maces: there marched likewise all the great Lords and Commanders on
foot with their Scymitars covered with plates of gold, which they carried on
their shouldiers, and three thousand fighting elephants, with their Castles of
diverse inventions, besides a world of other people, as well foot as horse,
which followed him without number.

CHAP. LXXIV. The finding of the Xemindoo, and bringing of him to the King;
with the manner of his execution and death; and other particularities
concerning the same.
AFter that the King of Bramaa had continued peaceably in this City of Pegu
for the space of six and twenty days, the first thing he did was to make
himself Master of the principal places of this Kingdom, which not knowing the
defeat of the Xemindoo, held still for him: To this purpose, having given
Commission to some Commanders for it, he wrote to the inhabitants of those
places diverse courteous Letters, wherein he called them his dear children, and
gave them an abolition of all that was past: He also promised them by a solemn
oath, to maintain them in peace for the time to come, and always to minister
justice to them, without any Imposts or other oppression; but that he would
contrarily do them new favors, as to the very Bramaas which served him in the
Wars. To these words he added many others, very well accommodated to the
time and his desire; for the better crediting whereof, they that were already
reduced under his obedience, wrote their Letters also unto them* wherein they
made an ample relation of the Franchises and Immunities which the King had
granted to them. All this, accompanied with the same which ran thereof in all
parts, wrought so great an effect, as all those places rendered unto him, and
put themselves under his obedience: so that in imitation of them all the other
Cities, Towns, States and Provinces that were in the Kingdom did the like. For
my part, I hold, that this Kingdom whereof the King of Bramaa made at this
time a new Conquest, is the best, the most abundant, and richest in Gold, in
Silver, and precious Stones that may be found in any part of the world. Things
being thus accomplished, to the great advantage of the Bramaa, he dispatches
diverse Horsemen with all speed into all parts, to go in quest of the Xemindoo,
who (as I have already declared) had escaped from the past Battle, and was so
unhappy, that he was discovered in a place named Fauleu, a league from the Town
of Potem, which separates the Kingdom from Aracam: Presently whereupon, he was
lead with great joy by a man of base condition, to this King of Bramaa, who in
recompense thereof, gave him thirty thousand Ducats of yearly rent. Being
brought before him, bound as he was with an iron collar, and manacles, he said
unto him in way of derision, Thou art welcome ( King of Pegu) and may well
kiss the ground which thou see; for I assure thee, I have set my foot on it;
whereby thou may perceive how much I am thy Friend, since I do thee an
honor which thou could never imagine. To these words the Xemindoo made no
answer; so that the King falling to jeer this miserable man anew, who lay
before him with his face on the ground, said unto him, What means this? Art
thou amazed to see me, or to see thy self in so great honor? Or what is the
matter, that thou do not answer to that which I demand of thee? After this
affront, the Xemindoo, whether it were that he was troubled with his
misfortunes, or ashamed of his dishonor, answered him in this sort; If the
clouds of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the other creatures, which cannot
express in words that which God has created for the service of man, and for
the beautifying of the Firmament, which hides from us the rich treasures of his
power, could naturally with the horrible voice of their dreadful Thunder
explain to them which now look upon me, the estate whereunto I see my self
reduced before thee, and the extreme affliction which my soul does suffer, they
would answer for me, and declare the cause I have to be mute in the condition
wherein my sins have set me: and whereas thou can not be Judge of that which I
say, being the party that accusest me, and the minister of the execution of thy
design, I hold my self for excused, if I do not make thee an answer, as I
would do before that blessed Lord, who, how faulty soever I could be, would
have pity on me, moved with the least tear that I should shed. This said, he
fell down with his face on the ground, and twice together asked for a little
water: Whereupon the King of Bramaa, the more to afflict him, commanded that
the Xemindoo should receive this water from the hand of a Daughter of his,
(held by him as a slave) whom he exceedingly loved, and had at that time of his
defeat promised to the Prince of Nautir, Son to the King of Avaa. The Princess
no sooner saw her Father lying in that manner on the ground, but she cast her
self at his feet, and straightly embracing him, after she had kissed him thrice,
she said to him with her eyes all bathed in tears, O my Father, my Lord, and my
King, I entreat you, for the extreme affection which I have always born you,
and for that also which you have at all times showed to me, that you will be
pleased to lead me with you, thus embracing you as I do, to the end that in
this sad passage you may have one to comfort you with a cup of water, now that
for my sins the world refuses you that respect which is due unto you. It is
said, that the Father would fain have answered to these words, yet could not
possibly do it, so much was he oppressed with grief and anguish of mind, to
see this Daughter whom he so dearly loved, in such a taking; but fell as it
were in a swoun, and so continued a good while; wherewith some Lords that
were there present were so moved, as the tears came into their eyes; which
observed by the King of Bramaa, and that they were Pegues, who had formerly
been the Xemindoo's Subjects, fearing lest they should betray him in time to
come, he caused their heads to be presently stricken off, saying with a
disdainful and fierce countenance, Seeing you have so great pity of the
Xemindoo your King, get you before and prepare a lodging for him, and there he
will pay you for this affection which you testify to have for him. After this,
his wrath redoubled in such sort, as instantly he caused this very Daughter to
be killed in her Fathers arms; which truly was more then a brutish and savage
cruelty, in seeking to hinder the affections which nature has imprinted in us.
Then no longer enduring the sight of the Xemindoo, he commanded him to be taken
from thence, and to be carried to a close prison, where he passed all the night
following under a sure guard.

The next morning, Proclamation was made over all the City, for the people to
be present at the death of the unhappy Xemindoo; now, the chiefest reason why
the Bramaa did this, was, that the inhabitants seeing him dead, might for ever
lose all hope of having him for their King, as all generally desired; for
whereas he was their Countryman, and the Bramaa a Stranger, they were in
extreme fear, least the Bramaa should become in time like unto him whom X^min
de Satan slew, and that had been during his reign a mortal enemy to the
P^gues; entreating them with such extraordinary cruelty, as their scarcely
passed a day, wherein he did not execute hundreds of them; and all for matters
of small importance, and which deserved no punishment, had they been proceeded
against, by the ways of true Justice. About ten of the clock, the unfortunate
Xemindoo was drawn out of the dungeon where he was, in the manner ensuing.
Before him marched through the Streets, by which he was to pass, forty men on
horseback with lances in their hands, to prepare and clear the ways; there
were as many behind as before him, which carried naked swords, crying aloud to
the people, whereof the number was infinite, to make room: After them followed
about fifteen hundred harquebusiers with their matches lighted; next to these
last, which they of the country use to call, the avaunt coureurs of the Kings
wrath, went an hundred and threescore elephants armed with their Castles, and
covered with silk tapestry, marching by five and five in a rank; after them
rode in the same order by five in a rank, fifteen men on horseback, which
carried black ensigns all bloody; crying aloud, as it were by way of
Proclamation; Let those miserable wretches, which are the slaves of hunger, and
are continually persecuted by the disgrace of fortune, hearken to the cry of
the arm of wrath, executed on them that have offended their King, to the end
that the astonishment of the pain, which is ordained them for it, may be deeply
imprinted in their memory. Behind these same were other fifteen, clothed with a
kind of bloody garment, which rendered them dreadful and of a bad aspect; who
at the sound of five Bell^, which they rung in haste, said with so lamentable a
voice, as they that heard them were moved to weep: This rigorous Justice is
done by the living God, the Lord of all truth, of whose holy body, the hairs of
our heads are the feet; It is he that will have the Xemindoo put to death, for
usurping the Estates of the great King of Bramaa, Lord of Tanguu. These
Proclamations were answered by a troop of people, which marched thronging
before with such loud cries, as made one tremble to hear them, saying these
words; Let him die without having pity on him, that has committed such an
offense: These were followed by a company of five hundred Bramaa horse, and
after them came another of foot, whereof some held naked swords and buckle^s in
their hands, and the rest were armed with corselets, and coats of maile; In the
midst of th^se, came the poor patient, mounted on a lean ill-favored jade, and
the hangman on the crupper behind him, holding him up under both the arms.
This miserable Prince was so poorly clad, that his naked skin was every where
seen; withal, in an exceeding derision of his person, they had set upon his
head a Crown of straw, like unto an Urinall case; which Crown was garnished
with muscle-shells, fastened together with blew thread; and round about his iron
collar were a number of onions tied: Howbeit, though he was reduced to so
deplorable an estate, and that his face was scarce like to that of a living
man, yet lest he not for all that, from having something of I know not what in
his eyes, which manifested the condition of a King. There was besides observed
in him, a majesticall sweetness, which drew tears from all that beheld him.
About this guard which accompanied him, there was another of above a thousand
horse men, intermingled with many armed elephants; Passing thus through the
twelve principal streets of the City, where there was a world of people, he
arrived at last at a certain street called Cabam Bainhaa, out of which he went
but two and twenty days before, to go and fight with the Bramaa, in such pomp
and greatness, as by the report of them that saw it, and of which number I was
one, it was without doubt, one of the most mavelous sights that ever has
been seen in the world; whereof notwithstanding I will make no mention here,
either in regard I cannot promise to recount rightly how all past, or for that
I fear some will receive these truths for lies; nevertheless mine eyes having
been the witnesses of these two successes, if I do not speak of the greatness
of the first, I will at leastwise declare the miseries of the second, to the
end that by these two so different accidents, happening in so short a time, one
may learn what little assurance is to be put in the prosperities of the earth,
and in all the goods which are given us by inconstant and deceitful Fortune.
Whenas the poor Patient had past that street of Cabam Bainha^, he arrived at a
place where Goncalo Pacheco our Captain was, with above an hundred Portugals in
his Company; amongst the which there was one of a very base birth, and of a
mind yet more vile, who having been robbed of his goods some years before, as
he said, at such time as the Patient reigned, and complained to him of those
who had done it, he would not vouchsafe to give him audience; so that thinking
to be revenged on him for it now, with extravagant and unseemly speech; as
soon as this poor Prince came where Goncalo Pacheco was, with all the other
Portugals, the witless fellow said aloud to him, that all might hear him O
Robber Xemindoo, remember how when I complained to thee of those that had
robbed me of my goods, thou would not do me justice; but I hope that now thou
shall satisfy what thy works deserve: for I will at supper eat a piece of that
flesh of thine, whereunto I will invite two dogs that I have at home. The sad
Patient having heard the words of this hair-brained fellow, lifted up his eyes
to heaven, and after he had continued a while pensive, turning himself with a
severe countenance toward him that uttered them, Friend, said he unto him, I
pray thee, by the great goodness of that God in whom thou believe, to pardon
me that for which thou accusest me, and to remember that it is not the part of
a Christian, in this painful estate wherein I see my self at this present, to
put me in mind of that which I have done heretofore; for besides that, thou
can not thereby recover the loss which thou say thou have sustained, it
will but serve to afflict and trouble me the more. Pacheco having heard what
this fellow said, commanded him to hold his peace, which immediately he did;
whereupon the Xemindoo with a grave countenance made show that this action
pleased him, so that seeming to be more quiet, it made him to acknowledge that
with his mouth, which he could not otherwise requite, I must confess, said he
unto him, that I could wish, if God would permit it, I might have one hour
longer of life to profess the excellency of the faith wherein you Portugals
live; for, as I have heretofore heard it said, your God alone is true, and all
other gods are liars. The Hangman had no sooner heard these words, but he gave
him so great a buffet on the face, that his nose ran out with blood, so that
the poor Patient stooping with his hands^downward, Brother (said he unto him)
suffer me to save this blood, to the end thou may not want some to fry my
flesh withal. So passing on in the same order as before, he finally arrived at
the place where he was to be executed, with so little life as he scarcely
thought of any thing: When he was amounted on a great Scaffold, which had been
expressly erected for him, the Chirca of Justice fell to reading of his Sentence
from an high Seat, where he was placed; the contents whereof were in few words
these; The living God of our heads, Lord of the Crown of the Kings of Avaa,
commands, that the perfidious Xemindoo be executed as the Perturbator of the
people of the earth, and the mortal enemy of the Bramaa Nation. This said, he
made a sign with his hand, and instantly the Hangman cut off his head at one
blow, showing it to all the people, which were there without number, and
divided his body into eight quarters, setting his bowels and other interior
parts which were put together, in a place by themselves; then covering all
with a yellow cloth, which is a mark of mourning amongst them, they were
left there till the going down of the Sun, at which time they were burnt in
the manner ensuing.

Sect. 2.
The eight quarters of the Xemindooes body were exposed from midday till three
of Clock in the afternoon to the view of all the people, whereof there was an
infinite company there, for every one came thronging thither, as well to avoid
the punishment wherewith they had been threatened, as to gain in so doing, the
Plenary indulgence called by them Axiperan, which their Priests gave them of
their sins, without restitution of any thing of all the Theeveries by them
formerly committed. After then, that the tumult was appeased, and that certain
men on horseback had imposed silence on the people by making certain
publications, whereby the Transgressors therein were threatened with terrible
punishments, a bell was heard to toll five several times; upon this signal
twelve men clothed in black robes, spotted all over with blood, having their
faces covered, and bearing silver Maces on their shoulders, came out of a house
of wood, made expressly for that purpose, and distant some five or six paces
from the Scaffold; after them followed twelve Priests, which they call
Talagrepos, being, as I have said, the most eminent Dignities amongst these
Pagans, and held by them as Saints; then appeared the Xemin Pocasser, the King
of Bramaaes Uncle, who seemed to be near an hundred years old, and was as the
rest, all in mourning, and environed with twelve little boys richly
apparelled, carrying on their shoulders Courtelasses curiously Damasked. After
that the Xemin had with a great deal of Ceremony prostrated himself three
times on the ground, in way of extraordinary reverence; O holy flesh (said he)
which art more to be ^ste^med then all the Kingdoms of Avaa, thou orient
Pearl of as many Carats as there be Atoms in the beams of the Sun, whom God
has placed in an height of Honor, with a Scepter of Sovereign power above
that of Kings, I that am the least of thy meiny, and so unlike thee through my
baseness, as I can scarcely see my self, so little I am, do most humbly bese^ch
thee, O thou Lord of my head, by the fresh Meadow where thy soul does now
recreat thy self, to hear that with thy sorrowful ears which my mouth says to
thee in public, to the end thou may remain satisfied for the offense which
has been done thee in this world. Oretanan Chaumigrem, thy brother, Prince of
Savady and Tanguu, sends to entreat thee by me thy slave, that before he
departs out of this life thou will pardon him that which is past if he have
given thee any discontent, and withal that thou will take possession of all
his Kingdoms, because he does even now yield them up unto thee, without
reserving the least part thereof for himself; withal he protests unto thee by
me thy vassal, that he makes this reconciliation with thee voluntarily, to the
end that the complaints which thou may prefer against him there above in
heaven, may not be heard of God: Moreover, for a punishment of the displeasure
he has done thee, he offers to be for thee during this pilgrimage of life, the
Captain and Guardian of this thy Kingdom of Pegu, for which he does thee
homage, with an oath to accomplish always upon earth whatsoever thou shall
command him from heaven above; upon condition that thou will bestow the profit
which shall arise thereof upon him at an alms for his entertainment; for he
knows very well, that otherwise he should not be permitted to possess the
Kingdom, neither would the Menigrepos ever consent thereunto, nor at the hour
of death give him absolution for so great a sin. Upon these words, one of the
Priests that was present, and that seemed to have more authority then all the
rest, made him answer, as if the deceased himself had spoken; Since I see, O my
Son, that thou do now confess thy past faults, and cravest pardon of me
for them in this public assembly, I do grant it thee with all my hear^; and it
pleases me to leave thee in this Kingdom for the pastor of this my flock, on
condition that thou do not violate the faith thou have given me by this oath;
which would be as great an offense, as if thou should now come to lay hands
on me without the permission of Heaven. All the people having heard these
words, answered thereunto with joyful voices; Perform so much, my Lord, my
Lord. After this, the Priest being got into the pulpit, began to speak thus to
the assistants; Present me with part of the tears of your eyes for the
entertainment of my soul, because of the good news I now bring you, which is,
that by the will of God this Country is settled on our King Chaumigrem, without
being tied to make any restitution thereof, for which you have all of you good
cause to rejoice, like good and faithful servants as you are. He had scarcely
made an end of speaking thus, when as all those of the assembly clapping their
hands, gave great demonstrations of joy, and cried out in a way of
thanksgiving, Be thou praised, O Lord. All this ceremony ended, the Priests
full of devotion and zeal immediately took all the parts of this poor King,
dismembered in that sort, and with great veneration carried them to a place
below, where a great fire was kindled of Sandal, Aloes, and Benjamin, which
cost a great deal; then three of them taking up of the body of the deceased,
with the bowels, and all the rest, threw it into it, and afterwads with a
strange ceremony offered many sacrifices unto him, whereof the most part were
of sheep. The body burned all that night until the next mo^ning, and the ashes
thereof was put into a silver urne, wherein, with a very solemn assembly of
above ten thousand Priests, it was carried to a Temple, called The God of
thousand Gods, and there was buried in a rich tomb within a Chapel guilt all
over. Behold what was the end of the great and mighty Xemindoo King of Pegu,
unto whom his subjects bore so great respect and honor, during the time of his
reign, which was so flourishing, that it seemed there was no other Monarch
greater then he on the earth; but such is the course of all the world.

CHAP. LXXV. My imbarking in the Kingdom of Pegu to go to Malaca, and from
thence to Japan; and a strange accident which arrived there.
THe death of the good King of Siam, and the adultery of the Queen his wife,
whereof I have spoken at large heretofore, were the root and beginning of so
many discords, and of so many cruel wars, which happening in those two
Kingdoms of Pegu and Siam, endured three years and an half, with so much
expense of money and blood, as is horrible to think of. Now the end of all those
wars was, that the Chaumigrem, King of Bramaa, remained absolute Lord of the
Kingdom of Pegu: howbeit for the present I will speak no further of him, but
will deliver that which arrived in other Countries, until such time as the
same Chaumigrem King of Bramaa returned upon the Kingdom of Siam, with so
mighty an Army, as never any King whatsoever in the Indiaes brought a greater
into the field, as consisting of seventeen hundred thousand men, and of sixteen
thousand elephants; whereof nine thousand were for the carriage of the Baggage,
and seven thousand for fighting; an enterprise that was so dammageable for us,
as I learned afterward, that it cost us two hundred and four score Portugals.
I come now again to my design, from which I have wandered a good while. After
that these commotions, whereof I have spoken heretofore, were all appeased,
Goncalo Pacheco departed from the City of Pegu, with all us the rest of the
Portugals which remained there, and whom the new King of Bramaa had delivered,
as I have already declared, causing their merchandise to be restored unto them,
and obliging them with many other courtesies, as well of Honor, as of Liberty:
So we, an hundred and three score Portugals as we were, imbarqued our selves in
five vessels, which were at that time in the Port of Cosmin, one of the
principal Towns of that Kingdom; and there we divided our selves as pilgrims
and travelers to the Indiaes, for to go into diverse Countries, according as
each of us thought to be most convenient for him. As for me, I set sail for
Malaca, with six and twenty of my companions; where when we were arrived, I
sojourned there one month only, and then imbarqued my self again to go to Iapan
with one Iorge Alvarez, who in a Sip belonging to Simono de Mello, Captain of
the Fortress, went to traffic. Now having been already six and twenty days
under sail, in conti^^ing our course with a good wind, according to the
season, we came in sight of an Island, called Tanixumaa, some nine Leagues
South toward the point of the Land of Iapan; so that turning our prow that
way, we went and rode the next day in the midst of the haven of Ganxiroo: In
this place the Nautaquin, who was Governor thereof, had the curiosity to come
unto us for to see a thing which he had never seen before; to which effect he
got aboard of us, where amazed with the fashion and equipage of our vessel, as
being the first that ever arrived in that Country, he seemed to be infinitely
glad of our coming, yea, and was very earnest with us to have us trade in that
place with him: but Iorge Alvarez and the Merchants excused themselves, saying,
that this port was not safe for their Ship, if any contrary wind should happen
to arise. The day following, being parted from this place, to go to the Kingdom
of Bungo, from whence we were distant some hundred leagues to the Northward;
in five days after our departure it pleased God that we arrived in the port of
the Town of Fucheo, where we were well received, as well by the King as the
people, who greatly favored us in that which concerned the duties of our
Merchandise; and the King had yet more obliged us, if in the little time that
we abode there he had not been miserably slain by a Vassal of his named
Fucarandono, a mighty Prince, Lord of many Subjects, and exceeding rich; a
disaster, which happened as follows, At the time when we arrived there, there
was in the King of Bungo's Court a young man, called Axirandoo, Nephew to the
King of Arimaa, who in regard of the ill entreaty which he had received from
the King his Uncle, had retired himself into this Court, and continued there
above a year, with an intent never to return into his Country again: but his
good fortune was such, as his Uncle coming to die, and having no other to
succeed him, he declared him for his Heir. Whereupon the Fucarandono, of whom I
lately made mention, desiring to marry this Prince to a Daughter of his,
entreated the King to mediate this marriage for him, which he easily
condescended unto. For which effect the King one day invited the Prince to go
a hunting with him into a Wood, which was some two leagues off, and where there
was great store of game, which he much delighted in. When they were there in
private together, he moved this Marriage unto him, and certified how
exceedingly it would content him that he would accept of it; which
accordingly he did; wherewith the King seemed to be extremely satisfied; so
that upon his return unto the Town, he sent for the Fucarandono, and told him
how he had prevailed for the Marriage of his Daughter with the King of Arimaa,
and therefore willed him to go and acknowledge unto him with all thankfulness
this grace and honor which he did him; for he assured him on the word of a
King, that he himself had desired him for his Son-in-Law. Hereupon the
Fucarandono cast himself presently at the Kings feet, and in convenient terms
for so great an obligation, kissed them, with much sense of so extraordinary a
favor as he had showed him. That done, he went home to his Palace, where, with
much joy and contentment, he gave an account of this Affair to his Wife, to his
Sons, and his kinsmen, who showing themselves exceedingly satisfied therewith,
congratulated one another for it, as they commonly use to do in such honorable
Matches as this. In the mean time, the Mother of the Bride, as she that had the
best part in this Joy, went unto a chamber where her Daughter was sowing, with
diverse other young Maids that served her; and taking her by the hand, lead her
into the room, where her Father, Brethren, and kinsmen were, who rejoiced with
her for so happy a fortune, and honored her with the Title of Highness, as
being already Queen of the Kingdom of Arimaa; and so all that day was spent in
Feasts, Banquets, visits of Ladies, and presenting her with many rich Gifts.
But whereas the good or evil of such like Affairs consists more in that which
follows, then in the original thereof, upon the good and joyful beginning of
this Marriage, such great disasters ensued, as they almost equalled them of the
Kingdom of Siam, whereof I have spoken heretofore: which I stick not to say, in
regard I can affirm it with truth, as having seen these two Successes with mine
own eyes, and been present at them which danger enough of my person. All this
day was spent in the visits of the principal persons of the Kingdom; But in
this public rejoicing there was none save the Bride alone that was
discontented, in regard she was desperately in love with a young Gentleman, the
son of one Groge Arum, who was as a Baron amongst us, but very much different
in extraction and quality from the Fucarandono, the Father of the Bride: who,
as soon as it was night, compelled by the violence of the love which she bore
to him, sent him word by her whom she had always secretly made use of in this
Affair, that she would have him come and steal her away out of her Fathers
house before some other mischief arrived. Whereupon the young man, who was no
more free from this passion then she, failed not to come to her to a place in
which they used to meet together, where his Mistress importuned him in such
manner, as he was constrained to carry her away from her Fathers house, and put
her into a Monastery of Religious women, whereof an Aunt of hers was as it
were the Abbess; in which she continued nine days concealed, without the
knowledge or privity of any body. The next morning her Governesse went into her
chamber where she had left her the night before; but not finding her there, she
presently repaired to her Mothers chamber, imagining that she was gone thither
to trick up her self extraordinarily, in regard of the time, or for some other
such like occasion; and missing of her there too, she returned to her
bedchamber, where she found one of the windows that looked into a garden,
open, together with a sheet fastened to one of the bars, and one of her sandals
lying below on the ground. Presently misdoubting the business, she went
without farther delay to impart the sad news unto her Mother, who was still in
her bed, out of which in all haste she arose, and diligently searching all the
women chambers, where she conceived she might be, and not finding her, it was
said, that she was so overcome with grief, as she fell down dead in the
place. In the mean time, the Fucarandono, who as yet understood nothing of the
matter, hearing the noise which the women made, ran in haste to know the cause
thereof: Whereupon, being assured of the flight of his Daughter, he sent with
all speed to acquaint his kinsmen therewith; who amazed with the novelty of so
unfortunate and unexpected an accident, came instantly unto him: Having
consulted then amongst themselves what they should do in this Affair, they
resolved to proceed therein with all the rigor that possibly could be used; so
that presently beginning with the women of the house, they cut off I know not
how many of their heads, under pretext of being accomplices of this rape or
flight. After this execution, being of different opinions touching the place
where this maid might be, they were all of the mind not to proceed any
further, until they had first acquainted the King with the business; which
instantly they did, and withal, very earnestly besought him to permit them to
go and search the houses of some whom they named unto him, where they believed
she was: Which the King refusing, as well to exempt the Masters of them from
such an affront, as also to prevent the tumult which this disorder might cause;
the Fucarandono offended for that the King did not grant him his request,
returned with his kinsmen to his Palace, where he resolved with them to do
therein all that in such a case he thought was for his honor, alleging that
it was only for men of little worth, and base minds, to proceed by way of
justice in matters which might be carried by force. This resolution taken, as
it is the custom of these people of Iapan to be more ^mbitious of honor then
all the Nations of the world, he determined to bring his design to pass at
any price whatsoever, without regard to any thing that might arrive thereupon;
so that giving intelligence thereof to all his friends and kinsmen that were in
the Court, they came all to him that night, and approved of this his
resolution, after he had declared it unto them; insomuch that they went without
further delay to the houses of them where they were persuaded this Maid lay
hid: but they being already fortified and furnished with men, upon notice given
them beforehand of their intent, such a great and terrible uproar ensued
thereupon, as there were above twelve thousand persons killed that night. To
this disorder the King ran in person with his guard, to see if he could pacifi^
it; but the quarrel grew so hot betwixt them, as it was impossible to appease
it: so that after they had lost the respect which they owed to the King, they
turned all their fury against him, and slew the most part of them that were
with him, so that he was constrained to retire unto his Palace, where he
gathered unto him as many as possibly he could upon a sudden; but all that
served him to little purpose, for they pursued him thither, and killed him,
together with very near all them that he had drawn to his defense, amounting to
the number of seven or eight thousand men; amongst the which were six and
twenty Portugals of forty that were with the King. But these ministers of
Satan, not contented with having committed so horrible a Treason, went directly
to the Queens lodging, where having found her sick in her bed* they most
mercilesly butchered her with three of her Daughters, and all the women they
could meet withal. After this, with an enraged fury, they set fire on the Town
in six or seven places, which kindling by the violence of the vvinde, that was
very high at that time, it took hold of it in such sort, as in less then two
hours it was almost burnt down to the ground. Whereupon, we seven and twenty
Portugals that remained, retired with much ado to our Vessel, where we saved
our selves as it were by miracle, leaving our anchor in the sea, and setting
sail with all the speed we could. The next morning the mutiners, who were about
ten thousand, having sacked the Town, divided themselves into two troops, and
retired to a hill, called Canaphama^; there they fortified themselves, with an
intent to create a new Head that should govern them, because the Fucarandono
had been slain with the stroke of a lance, which he had received in his throat,
together with all the rest of his kinsmen, which had given a beginning to this
Mutiny.

Sect. 1.
The same day, after the end of this disorder, advertisement was given thereof
to the Prince, the Kings Son, who was at that time in the fort of Osquy, some
seven leagues from the town of Fucheo. This young Prince, extremely afflicted
with this news, would presently have gone to the town with some of his
favorites, which were all the company that he had then with him; but the
Fingeindono his governor, was utterly against it, alleging many reasons to
persuade him not to budge from that place, until he had been more amply
informed in what terms this affair stood; for it was very credible, that they
who durst kill his father, would not stick to dispatch him out of the way too,
since it lay in their power so to do, he not being in a condition to defend
himself: Wherefore he advised him to assemble all the forces he could, to the
end he might by their means subdue and chastise his enemies. The Prince
approved of this counsel, and having taken order for that which he judged was
most necessary according to the estate wherein he as, he commanded some that
were about him, to go and wind the horn, a thing observed in Iapan, which
caused such a hurly burly over all the country, as words are not able to
express it. Now the better to understand this same, you must know, that by an
ancient custom of this Kingdom of Iapan, all the inhabitants, in whatsoever
place they lived, from the least to the greatest, are bound to have in their
houses a horn of a great sea-winckles shell, which they are forbidden at any
time to wind upon pain of great punishment, save in one of these four cases,
namely, a tumult, a fire, a robbery, and a treason; so that if one winds a
horn, the cause of it is presently known; because if it be a tumult, one winds
it once; if a fire, twice; if a robbery, thrice; and if it be a treason, four
times; insomuch, that at the first winding of the horn, all others are bound
upon pain of death to wind theirs, and in such sort as the first has winded
his, to the end that it may be distinctly known what it is, and that there may
be no confusion. Now, because this signal of treason is not so ordinary as the
others, which arrive very often; when it happens to be given, all the people
are so affrightrd with it, as without further delay, they run thronging to the
place where the horn was first winded; so that by this means, the bruit passes
from one to another with such speed, as within less then an hour, one is
advertised thereof above twenty ^eagues about. But to return to that which I
said but now; as soon as the Prince had given order for that particular, he
retired into a Monastery of Religious persons, which stood in the midst of a
wood; there he remained shut up three days, during the which, he did nothing
but bewail his Father, Mother, and Sisters; and that with exceeding
demonstrations of sorrovv, testified by his sighs, and tears. At the end of
that time, in regard great numbers of his subjects were assembled unto him, he
went out of that Monastery to provide for that which he judged necessary, as
well for the safety of his kingdom, as for the chastisement of the rebels;
whose goods and estates were immediately confiscated, their houses demolished,
and such terrible Proclamations published against them, as could not be heard
without trembling. Seven days after this deplorable event, the Prince was
counseled, in regard he had, as already I have said, great numbers come unto
him, to go and besiege the ten thousand Mutiners in the place of their retreat:
Whereupon he parted from the fort of Osquy, and marched directly to the town
with his Army, which it was said, consisted of very near an hundred and thirty
thousand men, whereof seventeen thousand were horse, and the rest foot, all
lusty and well armed, and capable of executing any high enterprise. Being
arrived at the town, he was wonderfully well received by the people, who
^estified a great deal of resentment for the death of the late King his father:
He would not go at first to the Royal Palace, but went before he past any
further to the Pagode, where his father was buried; there he took care to make
him a funeral Pomp, with a great deal of cost and honor, according to the
manner of the country, which lasted the two nights following. In conclusion, he
was showed the same robe all bloody, that his father had on when he was killed;
upon which he took a solemn oath, never to pardon any of them that should be
found guilty, no not if they were Bonzes; and to burn all the Temples whereinto
those traitors had fled for sanctuary. The fourth day after his entry into the
town, he was proclaimed King, though but with little ceremony and magnificence,
in regard of the general mourning. That done, accompanied as he was, with an
hundred and threescore thousand men, he marched directly to the place, whither
the mutiners were retired: Now to the end he might the more easily take them,
and keep them from flying away; he besieged them in the mountain where they
were, and that for the space of nine days: But whereas they saw that they
could hold out no longer for lack of victuals, and that they had no hope of
succor, they thought it was better for them to die like valiant men, then to
let themselves be besieged like cowards; with this resolution, under the favor
of a very dark and rainy night, they descended from the mountain by four
several ways, and falling on the Kings Army, which was ready to receive them
in battle array, as having been advertised of their design, there ensued so
dreadful and furious a fight betwixt them, as it lasted two hours within day,
but at length, the conflict ended with the death of seven and thirty thousand
men; amongst the which, the ten thousand Mutiners were slain, not one of them
deigning to save himself upon any terms whatsoever. In the mean time, the
death of his men greatly afflicted the King, who after this punishment of the
rebels, retyring to the town, the first thing he did was to provide for the
curing of the hurt men, wherein he spent a good time, in regard they were very
many, and whereof a great number died afterward.

CHAP. LXXVI. Our passing from the Town of Fucheo, to the Port of Hiamangoo;
and that which befell us there; together with my departure from Malaca, and
arrival at Goa.
After that this revolt had taken an end by the death of so many men on the one
and the other side, we few Portugals that remained, as soon as time would
permit us, got to the port of the town, where seeing the Country desolated, the
merchants fled away, and the King resolved to leave the town, we lost all hope
of selling our commodities, yea and of being safe in this harbor, which made us
set sail, and go ninety leagues further to another Port, called Hiamangoo,
which is in the bay of Canguexumaa; there we sojourned two months and an
half, not able to sell any thing at all, because the country was so full of
Chinese commodities, as they fell above half in half in the price: for there
was not a Port or Read in all this Island of Iapan, where there were not
thirty or forty Iuncks at anchor and in some places above an hundred; so that
in the same very year, at least two thousand merchants ships came from China to
Iapan. Now most of this merchandise consisted in Silk, which was given at so
cheap a rate, that the piece of Silk which at that time was worth an hundred
Taies in China, was sold in Iapan for eight and twenty, or thirty at the most,
and that too with much ado; besides, the prices of all other commodities were
so low, as holding our selves utterly undone, we knew not what resolution or
counsel to take. But whereas the Lord does dispose of things according to his
good pleasure, by ways which surpass our understanding; he permitted, for
reasons only known to himself, that on the new moon in December, being the
fifth day of the month, there arose so furious a tempest of wind and rain, as
all those vessels saving a few perished, in it: so that the loss caused by
this storm, amounted unto a thousand, nine hundred, and seventy two Iuncks;
amongst the which, were six and twenty Portugals ships, wherein five hundred
and two of our nation were drowned; besides, a thousand Christians of other
Countries, and eight hundred thousand ducats worth of goods cast away. Of
Chinese vessels, according to report, there were a thousand, nine hundred,
thirty and six lost, together with above two millions of gold, and an hundred
and threescore thousand persons. Now from so miserable a shipwreck, not above
ten or eleven ships escaped, of which number, was that wherein I was imbarqued,
and that almost by miracle; by reason whereof these same sold their commodities
at what price they would. As for us, after we had uttered (...), and prepared
our selves for our departure, we put to sea on a twelfth day in the morning;
and although we were well enough contented in regard of the profit we had made,
yet were we not a little sad, to see things fall out so to the cost of so many
lives and riches, both of those of our nation, and of strangers; But when we
had weighed anchor, and hoisted our sails for the prosecution of our course,
the ties of our main sail brake; by which means, the sail yard falling down
upon the of the ship, brake all to pieces; so that we were constrained by this
accident, to recover the port again, and to send a shallop on shore to seek for
a sail yard, and shipwrights to fit it for us. To this effect, we sent a
present to the Captain of the place, that he might suddenly give us necessary
succor, as accordingly he did; so that the very same day, the ship was put into
her former estate, and better then before: Nevertheless, as we were weighing
anchor again, the cable of our anchor broke, and because we had but one more in
the ship, we were forced to endeavor all that we might for the recovery
thereof, by reason of the great need we stood in of it; now, to do this, we
sent to land for such as could dive, who in consideration of ten ducats that
we gave them, fell to diving into the sea, where they found our anchor in six
and twenty fathom depth, so that by the means which we fastened unto it, we
hoysted it up, though with a great deal of labor, wherein we all of us
bestovved our selves, and spent the most part of the night. As soon as it was
day, we set sail, and parting from this river of Hiamangoo, it pleased God,
that in fourteen days, with a good vvind, we arrived at Chincheo, which is
one of the most renowned and richest Ports of the Kingdom of China; there we
were advertised, that at the entrance of this river, there lay at that time a
famous Pirate, called Cheopocheca, with a mighty fleet, which put us into
such a fear, that in all have we got away to Lamau, where we made some
provision of victuals, which lasted us until our arrival at Malaca.

Having stayed some time at Malaca, for the dispatch of certain affairs that I
had there, I imbarqued my self for Goa, with an intent of length, to return
into Portugal, if I could meet with shipping ready to depart from thence at
that time; but some fevv days after my arrival there it happened, that a
Portugal named Antonio Ferreyra, brought a present of very rich pieces to the
Viceroy Don Pedro Mascarenhas, which the King of Bungo sent him from Iapan, to
getherwith a letter, whereof the contents were these, Illustrious Lord, and of
great majesty, Viceroy of the limits of the Indiaes, the dreadful Lion in the
floods of the sea, by the force of thy ships and artillery: I Yacatauandono
King of Bungo, Facata^, Omangucha, and the Countries of the two seas, Lord of
the petty Kings of the Islands of Tosa, Xemenarequa, and Miaygimaa, do give thee
to understand by this my letter, that Father Francisco Xavier having been not
long since in this Country, preaching to them of Omangucha the new law of the
Creator of all things, I secretly promised to him, that at his return into my
Kingdom I would receive from his hand the name and water of holy Baptism,
howsoever the noveltie of so unexpected a thing might put me into bad terms
with my subjects, Whereupon, he also promised me on his side, that if God gave
him life, he would come back again unto me as speedily as he could. And for
as much as his return has been longer then I looked for, I have sent thus
expressly to know both of him, and of you, the cause of this retardment of his.
Wherefore my Lord, I desire you, that he may hasten away to me with all the
speed that the first season which shall be proper for navigation, will permit.
For besides, that his arrival in my Kingdom is greatly important for the
service of God, it will be also very profitable to my self, for the contracting
of a new league with the great King of Portugal, to the end that by this
amity, my country and his may hereafter be but one thing, and that his
subjects may in all our ports and rivers be as free as they are in your Cochim
where you are; wherefore your Lordship shall exceedingly oblige me by sending
one unto me, that may be witness of the desire I have to serve your King; for
I will do it as willingly, as the Sun is ready to hasten his course from the
morning to the night. Moreover, Antonio Ferreyra will give thee the very same
arms wherewith I vanquished the Kings of Fiangaa and Xemenarequa, and which I
wore in the day of battle. I am ready in all things to obey my elder Brother,
that invincible King of the other end of the world, Lord of the treasures of
great Portugal. The Viceroy having read this Letter, sent for one father
Belquior, Rector of the College of the Jesuits, and having imparted unto him
the King of Bungoes desire, he told him, that in regard Father Xavier was dead,
he could wish that he would in his stead undertake this voyage to Iapan, which
in all probalitie would very much redound to the service of God, and the
propogation of the Christian faith. The Rector upon the hearing hereof,
willingly embraced the employment, wherewith the Viceroy was exceedingly well
pleased, and very much commended him for such his good and pious resolution.
After this, the Viceroy consulting with some of his friends about the choosing
of a man, that in quality of his Ambassador, might accompany the Father in
this expedition; I was nominated unto him, as the fittest he could fix upon, in
regard of the knowledge I had, both of the Country, and of the then King
thereof: whereupon, I was immediately also sent for, and the Viceroy
acquainting me with the great desire he had, that I should take this
negotiation upon me, which he said, did so much import the honor of God, and
the King our Masters service; he pressed me so earnestly to it, that I knew not
how to refuse him, although I must confess, I was very unwilling thereunto: So
that consenting to what I could not well avoid, he commanded that all things
necessary for our voyage should with all convenient speed be prepared.

CHAP. LXXVII. Father Belquior's and my departure from the Indiaes to go to
Japan, and that which befell us till our arrival at the Island of Champeiloo.
FOurteen days after, namely on the sixteenth of April, One thousand five
hundred fifty and four, Father Belquior and I set sail for Malaca in a ship,
wherein also was Don Antonio de Noronha, Son to Don Garcia de Noronha, who had
been Viceroy of the Indiaes, that was going to take possession of the
Government of the Fortress there; from the which the Viceroy had sent order
to displace Don Alvaro de Tayda, who was Captain of it, as well for that he
would not obey his Commands, as for many other misdemeanors which he had
committed, whereof I will not speak in particular here, because they are
altogether from my purpose at this time. The fifth day of June following, we
and the new Captain arrived at Malaca, where the Licentiat Gasper Iorge
Superintendant General of the Indiaes, who was the man that prosecuted this
business, caused the people of the Town to assemble together upon the tolling
of a Bell; and having read unto them the Viceroys Letters Patents, whereby he
displaced Don Alvaro, he examined him upon diverse Interrogatories, whereof two
Registers made a verbal process, which was signed both by them and the said
Superintendent, and the new Captain. After all this, Don Alvaro was deposed
from his Government, made a prisoner* and all his estate confiscated: the like
was done to all his partakers who had favored him in the imprisoning of
Gamboa, Superintendent of the Treasure, and in disobeying the Viceroys
Commissions, as also in many other disorders that had been committed thereupon:
which was executed with so much rigor, as the most part fled to the
Mahometans, whereby the Fortress remained so bare of men, as it was in danger
of being undone, had not the new Captain provided for it with a great deal of
prudence, granting a general Abolition unto all, although they returned for all
that but with an ill will. These revolutions, and this excess of justice,
which put all the Country into an uproar, were the cause that Father Belquior
and I could not this year pass unto Iapan, as we had resolved; so that we were
constrained to winter at Malaca until April following, in the year One thousand
five hundred fifty and five, which was ten months. During that time, the
Auditor Gaspar Iorge continuing the rigorous executions which he exercised day
by day, was a subject of great scandal to all the Country; wherewith not yet
contented, and relying on the large Commission which the Viceroy had given
him, he would needs intermeddle with the Captain Don Antonio's Jurisdiction;
and indeed, he incroached so far on his Authority, as Don Antonio had no more
but the name of it, and was no other then as a guard of the Fortress. Now
though he was very sensible of this affront, yet he did dissemble and endure it
with a great deal of patience: But these excessive rigours of this Auditor
continuing for the space of four months; during the which there were many
discontentments, whereof I will not treat here in particular, because the
discourse of it would be infinite. One day Don Antonio, seeing the time proper
for the execution of that which he had formerly resolved on, caused some, whom
he had destined for it, to seize on him in the Fortress, and carry him to a
private house; where (according to report) he was stripped stark naked, and his
hands and feet being bound with cords, he was grievously whipped: After which,
having dropped scalding oil on his bare flesh, (which had almost killed him) and
clapped irons on his legs, and manacles on his hands, they plucked off all the
hair of his beard, leaving him not so much as one, and did many other such like
things unto him, as it was publicly spoken: so that the poor Licentiat Gaspar
Iorge, who termed himself Auditor General of the Indiaes, great Provisor of
the deceased and Orphelins, and Superintendent of the Treasure of Malaca, and
or the Countries of the South, for the King our Sovereign Lord, was thus
handled by Don Antonio, if the report of it be true. Finally, when the season
of Navigation was come, he was sent, so manacled as he was to the Indiaes, with
an infamous verbal process; which the Parliament of Goa annulled afterward:
And Don Antonio had thereupon an express Commandment from the Viceroy Don
Pedro de Mascarenhas, who governed the State of the Indiaes at that time, to
appear personally before him as a Prisoner, for to be confronted in judgment
with Gaspar Iorge, and render an account of his proceeding against him; as
indeed Don Antonio failed not in making his appearance at Goa accordingly:
where being about to justify himself for that which had past, he was ordered
to answer within three days to an ignominious Libel, which Gaspar Iorge had
exhibited against him: But forasmuch as Don Antonio was naturally an enemy of
Justifications by Answers and Replies, whereby it was said, the Counselors of
the Parliament intended to surprise him, the report went (at least wise such
was the saying of Detractors; for as for me, I neither saw nor am assured of
it) that in stead of employing the three days which had been given him, in
making answer to this Libell, he within four and twenty hours having met
accidentally with Gaspar Iorge, sent him to prosecute his Suit in the other
World, laying him so sure on the ground, as he never rose again. Howbeit, there
are those which recount this Affair quite otherwise, and that say, how in a
Feast, whereunto he was invited, he was poisoned. By this death of his all
this difference was decided, and this business wholy ceased, so that Don
Antonio was by Sentence absolutely cleared, and sent back to his Government:
wherein he continued not above two months and a half, at the end whereof he
died of a bloody Flux: and so were all the storms of envy and discord
wherewith the Fortress of Malaca had been beaten, appeased.

When the season was come wherein we might continue our Voyage, Sect. 1.
on the first day of April, in the year One thousand five hundred fifty and
five, we parted from Malaca, after we had imbarqued our selves in a Carvel
belonging to the King our Sovereign Lord, which Don Antonio, the Captain of the
Fortress gave us by the express command of the Viceroy. Three days after
our putting to sea, we arrived at an Island called Pulho Pisan, at the entering
into the Straight of Sincaapura, where the Pilot having never navigated that
way before, ran us with full sails so dangerously on certain Rocks, as we
thought our selves to be utterly lost, without all hope of recovery: In regard
whereof, by the advice of all the rest, the Father and I were constrained to
get into a Manchua, for to go and demand succor of one Luis Dalmeida, who two
hours before had passed by us in a Vessel of his, and lay at anchor two
leagues off us, by reason the wind was against him: So the Father and I made
to him with peril enough. For whereas all that Country, which appertained to
the King of Iantana, Grandchild to him that had been King of Malaca, our
mortal Enemy, were at that time in arms, his Balons and Lanchares, that were
assembled in a Fleet of War, continually gave us chase, with an intention to
take us; but by Gods providence we escaped them. At length, after we had got to
this ship, with no little fear and trouble, he that was Captain of her
furnished us with a Boat and Mariners, and so we returned to our Carvel as
speedily as we could, for to succor and draw her out of the danger wherein we
had left her: But it pleased the Lord that we found her the day after delivered
from it; though it is true, that she took in water abundantly in the prow's
side; but in the end we stanched it at Patana, where we arrived seven days
after. There I went ashore with two others, to see the King; unto whom I
delivered a Letter from the Captain of Malaca: and being received very
graciously by him, he read it over, whereby he understood, that the cause of
our coming thither was to provide our selves of victuals, and some other things
which we had not taken in at Malaca; as also that we were resolved to proceed
on in our course directly to China, and from thence to Iapan, where Father
Belquior and others with him were to preach the Christian Law to the Gentiles:
which the King of Patana having read, after he had mused a little, he turned
to them that were about him, and said smiling to them, O how much better were
it for these men, since they expose themselves to so many travels, to go to
China and enrich themselves there, then to recount tales in strange Countries?
Whereupon, calling the Xabandar to him, Be sure, said he unto him, that thou
give these men here all that they shall demand of thee, and that for the love
of the Captain of Malaca, who has greatly recommended them unto me: and above
all remember, That it is not my custom to command a thing twice. When we had
taken leave of the King, exceedingly contented with the good reception he had
given us, we fell presently to buying of Victuals, and other such things as we
stood in need of; So that in eight days we were abundantly furnished with
whatsoever was necessary for us. Being departed from this Haven of Patana, we
sailed two days together with a South-east wind along by the coast of Lugor
and Siam, traversing the Bar of Cuy, to go to Pulho Cambim, and from thence to
the Islands of Canton, with an intent there to attend the conjunction of the
new Moon: But it was our ill fortune to be surprised by East and South-east
wind, (which reign in that Coast the most part of the year) whereof the
violence was so great, that we were in fear to be cast away: so that to decline
the event thereof, we were forced to tack about again to the Coast of Malaya;
and arriving at an Island, called Pullo Timan, we ran into great danger there,
as well by reason of the tempest which we had upon the sea, as in regard of the
great treason of the people of the Country. Now after five days that we had
continued there, without having either fresh water or victuals, because for the
easing of our Vessel we had cast out all into the Sea, it pleased God that we
encountered with three Portugal Ships which came from Sunda, by whose arrival
we were very much comforted in our travels: Whereupon Father Belquior and I
began to treat with the Captains of those Vess^ls about that which they thought
was requisite we should do; and all were of the opinion, that we should send
back the Carvel wherein we were, to Malaca; saying, that there was no
likelihood we should be able to make so long a Voyage in her as that of Iapan.
Having approved of this counsel, we presently imbarqued our selves in the Ship
of one Fr^ncisco Toscano, a Worshipful and rich man, who defrayed our change
during all our Voyage, yea, and most part of the time that we were in China,
not permitting any of our Company to spend a penny. From this Island Pullo Timan
we put to sea on Friday the seventh of June in the same year One thousand five
hundred fifty and five, and discovering the firm land of the Kingdom of
Champaa, we sailed along the Coast with a North-West wind, and in twelve days
we arrived at an Island called Pullo Champeiloo, in the Straight of
Cauchenchina, where we took in fresh water at a River which descended from an
high Mountain. There amongst the Rocks we perceived a very-fair Cross graven on
a great free Stone, and under it 1518, with six letters abbreviated, which
said, Duart Coelho: We observed also toward the River, and on the South Side,
two flight shot off, threescore and two men hanged on trees along the Strand,
besides others that lay on the ground half eaten; a thing which seemed to have
been done not above six or seven days before. Upon another tree there hung a
great Banner, wherein these words were seen in Chinese letters, Let every
Ship or Iunck which shall arrive in this place, be sure to dislodg quickly from
thence after she has furnished her self with fresh water, whether she has
time, or has it not; on pain of incurring the same justice as these wretches
have done, whom the fury of the arm of the son of the Sun has overwhelmed. We
were mightily surprised with so strange an accident, so that we could make no
other judgment of it, but that some Chinese Army had arrived there, and meeting
with those vvretches, had (as Pirates use to do) entreated them as we saw,
under the specious pretext of Justice.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Our departure from the Island of Champeiloo, and our arrival at
that of Lampacau; with a relation of two great disasters which happened in China
unto two Portugal Colonies; and of a strange accident that befell in the
Country.
WHen we were parted from the Island of Champieloo, we got to the Islands of
Canton, so that on the fifth day of our voyage, it pleased God that we arrived
at one of them, called Lampacau, where at that time the Portugals excercised
their commerce with the Chinese, which continued until the year One thousand
five hundred, fifty and seven; when as the Mandarins of Canton, at the request
of the Merchants of the Country, gave us the port of Macao, where the trade now
is; of which place (that was but a desert Island before) our country men made a
very goodly plantation, wherein there were houses worth three or four thousand
Ducats, together with a Cathedral Church: Moreover, this Colony has its
Governor, Auditor, and Officers of Justice; whereunto I shall add, that the
inhabitants of this place are in as great safety there, as if they were in the
quietest part of Portugal. But God grant of his infinite mercy, and goodness,
that this Colony may be of longer durance then that of Liampoo, which was
another of the Portugals, and whereof I have spoken at large heretofore, being
two hundred leagues from this same on the North Coast. But ill fortune would,
that by the disorder of one Portugal, it was demolished in a very little time;
in which disaster, I my self was present, and can say, that the loss which was
made there, as well of people, as of riches, was inestimable. For in this
plantation, were three thousand men, whereof twelve hundred were Portugals, and
the rest Christians of diverse nations: Yea, and I have heard many say, which
spoke like knowing men thereof, that the Portugals traffic there, exceeded
three millions of gold: Now, the most part of this traffic was in lingots of
silver of Iapan, which had been found out not above two months before, and was
such as a man doubled his money three or four times by the commodities which he
sent thither. In this Colony, there was a Governor, who resided in the Country;
there were also an Auditor, Judges, Sheriffs, Aldermen, a Provisor of the
deceased and Orphelins, a town Clark, and all other Officers that are usually
in a Commonwealth; together with four public Notaries, and six Registers, each
of whose offices were sold for three thousand ducats; yea, and there were some
far dearer. There were also two Hospitals, wherein above thirty thousand
ducats was spent every year, and the Town house had in revenue six thousand
per annum; So that it was generally said, that this Colony was the richest, and
best peopled, of any that was in the Indiaes; besides, for matter of extent, it
had not its fellow in all Asia. Furthermore, when the Registers or Secretaries
passed any Grant, or when the public Notaries made any writings, they
ordinarily used these terms; In this most noble and always faithful town of
Liampoo, for the King our Sovereign Lord. Now, having said so much of it, I
hold it not amiss to tell you, how and wherefore so noble and rich a Colony
was destroyed, which arrived in this sort. There was living there a man of a
good extraction and rank, named Lancerote Pereyra, born at Pont de Lima, a town
in Portugal; it is said, that this same had lent some thousand ducats to
certain Chinese, who were not men solvent, but became bankrupts, and never
paid him any thing, nor could he hear any news of them afterward; which was
the cause that desiring to make good this loss, and to recover it of them
which were not the occasion of it, he assembled for that effect some eighteen
or twenty Portugals, idle fellows, and of lewd dispositions, with whom, under
the favor of the night, he fell upon a village, some two leagues from thence
where he robbed eleven or twelve laboring men; and withal, seizing on their
wives and children, killed about half a score persons, without any reason at
all so to do. In the mean time, the Alarm being taken up by the whole country
round about, by reason of this violence, the inhabitants went and complained to
the Chumbin for Justice; and having made a verbal process of the business,
they presented it in the name of the people to the Chaem of the Government,
which is as one of the Viceroys of the Kingdom; who immediately thereupon,
disp^tched away an Haitau, who is as an Admiral amongst us* with an Army of
three hundred Juncks, and four score Vancons with Oars; wherein there were
threescore thousand men, which being all made ready in seventeen days, came
and fell on this misfortunate Colony, and the matter passed in so strange a
manner for them, as I must confess, I have not capacity enough to recount it
sufficiently, neither understanding enough to imagine it; only it shall suffice
me to say, as one who saw it, that in less then the space of five hours, which
this dreadful chastisement of the hand of God endured; these cruel enemies,
left not any thing at all in Liampoo to which one could give a name, for they
demolished and burnt all that they could find; they put to death withal twelve
hundred Christians, amongst the which, were eight hundred Portugals, who were
all burned alive in five and twenty ships, and two and forty Juncks. It is
said, that in this common ruin, there was lost to the value of two millions of
Gold, as well in Lingots, Pepper, Sandal, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeggs, as in
other Commodities; and all these desasters arrived by the ill conscience, and
little judgment of an avaricious Portugal. Now, from this misfortune, was
another far greater derived; which was, that we lost our credit and
reputation so mightily over all the Country, as the inhabitants would no longer
endure the sight of us; saying, that we were devils incarnate, engendered by the
malediction of the wrath of God, for the punishment of sinners. This happened in
the year, one thousand, five hundred, forty and two, Martim Alfonso de Sousa
being Governor of the Indiaes, and Ruy Van Pereyra Marramaque Captain of
Malaca. Two years after, the Portugals desiring to make another new Colony in a
Port, called Chincheo, in the same Kingdom of China, five leagues lower then
Liampoo, with an intention to settle their trade there, the Merchants of the
Country coming to consider what great profit would redound to them thereby,
entreated the Mandarins to make show of permitting it, and obliged them
thereunto with many great presents; we had commerce then with those of the
Country about two years and an half, until such time as by the express
command of Simano de Mello, Captain of the Fortress, there was sent into this
place another man of the same humor as Lancerote Pereyra was of, unto whom the
said Simano de Mello gave a commission to be Governor of this Port of Chincheo,
and Provisor of the Deceased: but the bruit went of him, that the extreme
covetuousnesse wherewith he was possessed, made him lay hands on all things,
without any the least respect to ought whatsoever. It happened then that in his
time there arrived in the Port of Chincheo a stranger, by nation an Armenian,
who was held by every one for a very good Christian: This man, who had an
estate of ten or twelve thousand ducats, and being a Christian, as I have
said, and a stranger, as we were, passed out of a Mahometans Junck, wherein he
was, into the ship of a Portugal, named Luis de Montaroyo. Now having lived
some six or seven months very peaceably amongst us, and much respected and
favored of every one, he chanced to ^all sick of a fever, whereof he died, but
before he gave up the Ghost, he declared by his Testament, that he had a wife
and children in a town of Armenia, called Gaborem, and that of his twelve
thousand ducats estate he left two thousand to the Hospital at Malaca; and
for the rest, he desired it might be kept in safe hands, until there were an
opportunity to have consigned it unto his children, as to his lawful heirs;
and in case they were dead, he left it to the Hospital. Behold, what was the
Testament of this faithful Christian, who was no sooner buried, but Ayr^z
Botelho de Sousa, Provisor of the dead, seized on all his estate, without
making any Inventorie, or other kind of account, saying, that before any
farther proceeding therein, they were to send to make enquiry in Armenia, which
was above two thosand leagues from thence, to see whether there were not some
engagements, or seizure of Justice upon it: There arrived also at the same
time, two Chinese Merchants, who had to the value of three thousand ducats in
silk, pieces of damask, musk, and porcelaines, appertaining to the deceased
Armenian: the Provisor arrested them all, and not contented therewith, he would
needs make the Chinese believe, that all the merchandise which they had,
belonged also unto the Armenian; so that under the pretext thereof, he took
eight thousand ducats from them, and bid them go to Goa and there demand
justice of the Provisor General, by reason he could do no otherwise then he
did; for that, he was obliged to deal in that sort by the duty of his Charge.
Now, not to stand upon the delivering of the reasons, which in vain were
alleged by them against this injustice of his; I will only say, that these two
Merchants returning home without any of their merchandise, went with their
Wives and Children, and casting themselves at the Chaems feet, represented unto
him in a Petition the whole business, as it past: informing him, moreover,
that we were men quite-void of the fear of God. The Chaem willing to do justice
then to these Merchants, and to many others which had formerly complained
against us, caused it to be every where proclaimed, that no man on pain of death
should converse with us; whereupon, the scarcity of victuals came to be so
great amongst us, as that which was wont to be bought for six blanks, was then
worth above a ducket; so that necessity constrained us to go unto certain
hamlets; whereupon ensued such disorders, as all the Country rose up against us
with so much hatred and fury, that sixteen days after we were set upon by an
Army of an hundred and twenty very great Juncks, which entreated us in that
manner for our sins, as ofthirteen ships which we had in the Port, there was
not one that was not burnt; and of five hundred Portugals which were abiding in
the Country, thirty only escaped, who had not the worth of a penny left them.
From these two sad histories, recounted by me, I infer, that it seems the
Affairs which we have now in China, and the tranquillity and confidence
wherewith we live there, (supposing that the treaties of peace which we have
with them be firm and assured) will last but til our sins shall serve for motives
to the inhabitants of the Country to mutine against us, which God of his
infinite mercy, permit not for the time to come. To return again now to my
former discourse, you must understand, that after we were arrived at the Port
of Lampacau, as I have declared before, we could not meet with any vessel that
was bound for Iapan; so that we were constrained to pass another year too in
this Port, with a design in May following, which was ten months off, to
continue our voyage as we had resolved.

Father Belquior and I perceiving that there was no hope of going to Iapan this
year, as well for that the season was past, as for other inconveniences that
fell out, we were forced to stay in this Island till the time should serve for
us to make our voyage thither. Having continued there then til the seventeenth
of Feb. following, certain news came to us from Cantan, that on the third day
of the same month the Province of Sansy had been swallowed up in the manner
ensuing. The first day of Frebruary, the earth fell a trembling from eleven til
one of the clock at night, and the next day from midnight til two in the
morning; as also the day following from one til three: During this trembling it
was a dreadful thing to hear the terrible noise which the storms and thunder
made: After all this such an horrible inundation of waters borke forth out of
the center of the earth, as in an instant, all the Country about, was swallowed
up threescore leagues round, without the saving of any living creature from
perishing, but only of one child of seven years of age, and which was for a
great wonder presented to the King of China. In the mean time this news was no
sooner come to the City of Cantan, but all the inhabitants thereof were
terrifyed with it, yea and all ours were so amazed at it, that holding it for
an unpossible thing, fourteen of our company would needs go thither to know the
truth thereof; which they immediately put in execution, and at their return
affirmed, that the matter was very certain, whereof an attestation was made,
signed by fourteen ocular witnesses, who had been upon the place; which
attestation was afterward sent by Francisco Toscano to the King of Portugal,
Don Ioano the third of glorious memory. This prodigious event so affrighted the
inhabitants of the City of Cantan, that all of them generally testified a world
of repentance; and although they were Gentiles, yet must it be acknowledged
that they confounded us Christians, who saw how far their devotion extended.
For on the first day when the news thereof arrived there, Proclamations were
made throughout all the Principal streets of the City by six men on horseback,
who in long mourning robes, and with a sad and lamentable voice, rode crying
out these words; Miserable creatures as you are, that cease not from offending
day by day, the Lord of all things: Hear, O hear, the most lamentable and
dreadful adventure that ever was; For you are to know, that for our sins God
has drawn the sword of his Divine Justice against all the people of Cuy and
Sansy, overwhelming pell mell with water, fire, and tempests from Heaven all
that great Province of China, none being saved but one only Child which is
carried to the Son of the Sun. And thereupon, they rung a little bell thrice,
which they had in their hands; Then all the people prostrating themselves on
the ground, said with fearful cries, God is Just in all that he does. After
this was past, all the inhabitants retired into their houses, which were shut
up for five days together, so that the City was so desolate, as there was not
a living creature seen stirring in it. At the end of the five days, the Chaem
and the Anchassis of the government, together with all the rest of the people
(wherein the men only were comprehended, for as for the women, they hold them
incapable of being heard of God, by reason of the disobedience of the first
sin committed by Eve) went as it were in procession, through the principal
Streets of the City, while their Priests, which were above five thousand in
number, cried with a loud voice that pierced the very skies, O mavelous and
pitiful Lord, have no regard to our wickedness; for if thou take account of
them, we shall remain dumb before thee. Whereunto all the people with an other
fearful cry, answered, Lord, we confess our faults before thee. And so the
Procession continuing, still going on, they at length arrived at a magnificent
Temple, called Nacapyrau, whom they hold for the Queen of Heaven, as I have
heretofore related. From thence they went the next day to another Temple,
called The God of Justice: and in this sort they continued fourteen days;
during which, were great Alms generally bestowed, and many prisoners freed;
also diverse Sacrifices were made of the odoriferous perfumes of Aloes and
Benjamin: There were many others too, wherein there was good store of blood
shed, and wherein many Kine, Stags and Swine were offered, which were all
distributed in alms to the poor. In pursuance whereof, during the three months
that we abode there, they continued in doing many other good works, which were
performed with so much charge and charity, as it is to be believed, that if
the Faith of Jesus Christ had been added thereunto, they would have been
acceptable unto him. We heard afterward, and this report was universal over
all the Country, that during the three days of that Earthquake at Sansy, it
had still rained blood in the City of Pequin, where the King of China's Court
was at that time, which made the most part of the inhabitants to forsake it,
and the King to fly to Nanquin, where, it was said, he gave great alms, and
set at liberty an infinite many of Slaves; amongst the which were five
Portugals, who had been retained prisoners in the Town of Pocasser above
twenty years together. When these came to Cantan, they recounted unto us diverse
mavelous things; and amongst others, they told us, that the alms which the
King had given upon this occasion, amounted to six hundred thousand Ducats,
besides the magnificent Temples which he built to appease the wrath of God;
amongst the which he made one in that very City, very sumptuous, and of great
majesty, under the title of The Love of God.

CHAP. LXXIX. Our arrival in the Kingdom of Bungo, and that which passed there.
THe season being come wherein we might continue our Voyage, we parted from
this Island of Lampacau the seventh day of May, One thousand five hundred fifty
and six, after we had imbarqued our selves in a Ship, whereof Don Francisco
de Mascarenhas, surnamed Pallia, was Captain. So we proceeded on in our
course for fourteen days together; at the end whereof we discovered the first
Islands, at the height of five and thirty degrees; and which by gradation
regard the West, North-vvest of Tanixumaa: vvhereupon, the Pilot knowing that
it was ill sailing there, steered to the South-vvest, to find out the point
of the Mountain of Minatoo: We coasted Tanoraa then, and still ran along this
coast to the Port of Finugaa. And forasmuch as in this Climate the winds are
Northerly, and that the current of the water was contrary to them, the Pilot
had a very bad opinion of his Navigation; so that when he came to know his
fault, although out of an accustomed obstinacy of Mariners, he would not
confess it, we were already past threescore leagues beyond the Port where
we meant to arrive; by reason whereof, we were fain to tack about for the
recovery of it fifteen days after, though with travel enough, for that the
vvindes were cross; and (without lying) our goods and lives were in no little
jeopardy, by reason all this Coast was risen up against the King of Bungo our
Friend, and the inhabitants, who were greatly inclined to the Law of the Lord,
which had formerly been preached unto them. At length, after that by the mercy
of God we had got to the Town of Fucheo, whereof I have oftentimes spoken,
which is the capital of the Kingdom of Bungo, where the chiefest Christians of
all Iapan do now flourish; all they of the Ship thought it requisite that I
should go to the Fortress of Osquy, where we heard the King then was: Now
though I feared to undertake this Journey, in regard the Country was all up,
yet I resolved for it, at the persuasion of them of the ship, who all in
general entreated me very earnestly unto it. Having prepared my self then, and
received a Present worth five hundred Crowns, which Don Francisco, Captain of
the Ship sent to the King, I took four of my companions with me, and so went
away. After I was landed at the Town Key, the first thing I did was to go to
the house of the Admiral of the Sea, who received me with great demonstrations
of friendship, and confirmed me against the fear I was in; whereupon, having
given him an account of the cause of my coming thither, I desired him to give
me horses and men that might conduct me to the King; which most willingly he
did, and more freely then I required. Being departed from this Town, the next
morning about nine of the clock I arrived at a place called Fingau, which might
be a quarter of a league from the Fortress of Osquy; There I sent one of those
of Iapan, which I had with me, to let the Captain of the place understand that
I was arrived, and that I had an Embassy to deliver to his Highness from the
Viceroy of the Indiaes: In which regard, I entreated him to appoint me such a
time as he pleased, that I might speak with him. Hereunto he returned me this
answer by a Son of his, That my Companions and I were very welcome, and that
the King* was in the Isle of Xequa, where he was entertaining himself in the
catching of a great Fish, whereof the name was not known, and which was come
thither from the bottom of the Sea, with a great number of many other little
fishes: and that having cooped him up in a Channel there, it was likely that he
would spend all the day in that sport, and not return till night: But that he
would howsoever immediately advertise him of my arrival. Thereupon he sent me
to repose my self in a better lodging which he gave me, where I was abundantly
furnished with all that was necessary for me; yea, and he told me by way of
Complement, that all this Country was no less the King of Portugals, then
Malaca, Cochin and Goa. Then one of his Followers, whom he had appointed to
wait on us, gave us an extraordinary good reception in a Pagode, whereof the
Bonz^s made us a very sumptuous Feast. In the mean time, the King having notice
of my arrival, dispatched away from the Island where he was catching that
great Fish, three light Galleys, and in them his Chamberlain, a great Favorite
of his, named Oretandano, who about evening came to me to the place where I
was, and having told me that by word of mouth which the King had enjoined him,
he drew forth a Letter, and having kissed it with the Ceremonies and
Complements used amongst them, he delivered it unto me, wherein I found this
written, Being at his present employed in an exercise which is very pleasing
unto me* I have been advertised of thy arrival in my Country, wherewith I am so
contented, that I protest unto thee, I would have come away presently unto
thee, had I not sworn that I would not part from hence, till I had killed a
great Fish which I hold cooped up here: Wherefore I entreat thee, as my good
Friend, since by reason thereof I cannot go to thee, that thou will come thy
self to me in this Vessel which I have sent for thee: for on thy coming, and on
the death which I hope to give to this Fish, my perfect content depends. Having
read this Letter, I instantly embarked my self in the Galley wherein Oretandono
came for me, and my followers in the other two, with the Present they carried.
And forasmuch as those Galleys were very swift, we arrived within less then an
hour at the Island, which was some two leagues and an half off. Now we came
thither at such time as the King, with above two hundred men in boats, with
darts in their hands, was pursuing a prodigious Whale, which was altogether
unknown and strange to them, as having never seen such a Fish before in all
that Country. After they had killed and drawn it to land, the King was so
pleased therewith, that to recompense all the fishermen that were employed in
the action, he exempted them from a certain Tribute which they had accustomed
to pay before: as also conferred new Honors on some Gentlemen whom he loved,
and that were there with him, and gave a thousand Taeis in silver to his Pages:
withal, he received me with a smiling count^nance, and questioned me very
exactly about many particulars; whereunto I answered the best that I could,
always adding something of mine own thereunto, as judging it necessary for the
increasing of the Portugals reputation, and of the great esteem wherein we
were at that time in the Country; for all the inhabitants held it for most
certain, that the King of Portugal was indeed the only Prince, which might
term himself the Monarch of the world, as well for the large extent of his
territories, as for his power, and mighty treasure; in regard whereof chiefly
they of these Countries made great account of our amity. These things done,
the King went from this Island toward Osquy, and about an hour within night he
arrived at his Castle, where he was received with a great deal of rejoicing,
and applaued by every one for so honorable an exploit, as that of killing the
Whale, attributing to him alone, that which all the rest had done; whereby one
may see, that this pernicious vice of flatttery raigns so absolutely in the
Courts of Princes, as it has established its felf a place even amongst the
very Gentiles and Infidels. The King having dismissed all them that had
accompanied him, went to Sup with his Wife and Daughters, and would not then
be attended on by any body, because the feast was made at his wives charge.
And whereas we were then at a Treasurers house of his, where we were
appointed to lodge, he sent for us all five, and entreated us that we should
eat in his presence after the manner of our Country, adding, that the Queen did
infinitely desire it. Then having caused a table to be covered for us, and on
it placed store of excellent good meat and well dressed, which was served up
by very fair women; we fell to eating after our manner, of all that was set
before us, vvhilest the jeasts which the Ladies broke upon us, in seeing us
feed so with our hands, gave more delight to the King and Queen, then all the
Comedies that could have been represented before them: for those people being
accustomed to feed with two little st^cks, as I have declared elsewhere,
they hold it for a great incivilitie, to touch the meat with ones hand, as we
use to do. Hereupon the Kings Daughter, a mavelous fair Princess, and not
above fourteen or fifteen years of age, craved leave of the Queen her Mother,
that she and six or seven of her companions might present a certain Play before
them concerning the subject in question; which the Queen with the Kings consent
granted her. That done, they withdrew into another room, where they stayed a
pretty while, during the which, they that remained in the place, drove away the
time at our cost, by jeering and gibing at us, who were much ashamed,
especially my ^our companions, which were but novices in the Country, and
understood not the language; for as for me, I had before seen such a like
Comedy acted at Tai^xumaa against the Portugals. As we were thus ministering
matter for the Comp^ny to laugh at us* and setting the best face on it that
possibly we could amidst these affronts, in regard of the great pleasure which
we observed the King and Queen took therein, we saw the young P^incesse come
out of the other room disguised like a Merchant, wearing a Sy^mi^er by her
side, covered all over with plates of gold; and the rest of her habit
answerable to the person which she represented. In this equipage falling down
on her knees before the King her father, with the respect she ow^d to him, Most
mighty Lord and King (said she unto him) albeit this my boldn^sse be worthy of
great chasti^ement, in regard of the inequality which it has pleased God to
put between your greatness and my baseness; yet the necessity whereunto I
find my self reduced, makes me shut my eyes against all that may happen to me
thereby; For being old as I am, and charged with many Children, which I have
had by several Wives, with whom I have been married, my extreme poverty, and
the desire I have not to leave them destitute of means, has made me have
recourse to my friends for help, which they have granted me; So that having
employed the money which they have le^t me, in a certain Commodity, which I
cannot s^ll in all Japan; I have resolved to barter it away for any other
whatsoever it be: And having complained hereof to some friends that I have at
Meacoo, they have assured me that your Highness may do me some good.
Wherefore, my Lord, I humbly beseech you, that in consideration of these white
hairs, and feeble age, as also for that I have many Children, and am poor, you
will be pleased to assist me in my need, which will be an alms very well
bestowed, and most agreeable to the Chenchicos, which are lately arrived here
in their Ship; for this commodity of mine will accommodate them better then
any other, in regard of the want they have continually thereof. Whilst this
discourse lasted, the King and Queen could not forbear laughing, to see that
this old Merchant, who had so many children, and so many incommodities, was the
Princess their Daughter, very young, and exceeding beautiful: But the King
forbearing a little from laughing, answered her with a great deal of gravity,
that she should show some samples of the Merchandise which she had, and if it
were such as would accommodate us, he would desire us to buy it. At these
words, the pretended Merchant having made a very low obeisance, retired into
the other room again. In the mean time, we were so confounded with what we
heard and saw, as we could not tell what to think, or what should be the event
of it; whilst the women which were in the room, being about three score in
number, (for there were no other men but we five there) fell to jogging one
another, and laughing at us. Hereupon, the Merchant comes in again, bringing
with her six fair young maids, richly clad, and disguised also like Merchants,
carrying samples of the Merchandise they had to sell: They had Scymiters and
Daggers by their sides all guilt, with grave countenances and high looks, being
all of them Daughters to the greatest Lords of the Kingdom, whom the Princess
had expressly chosen to act this Play with her. Each of these six Damsels bare
on her shoulder a fardle of green Taffats, and all of them together, seeming to
be Merchants sons, danced a Ball to the tune of two Harps and a Viol, and ever
and anon sung in verse with a very sweet and melodious voice, words of this
substance, High and mighty Lord, by the riches which thou possessest, we pray
thee to think of our poverty; we are miserable creatures in this strange
Country, and consequently despised by the inhabitants thereof, which exposes
us to great affronts: wherefore we beseech thee by that which thou art, be
mindful of our poverty. After that these young Merchants had finished their
Dance and Song, they fell all on their knees before the King, and then the
eldest of them having rendered him most humble thanks for the favor he did
them, in helping them away with their Merchandise, they untied all their
fardle^, and let fall in the midst of the room a great number of wooden arms
with hands, the said eldest of them saying with a very good grace, Since that
Nature for our sins has subjected us to so villainous a misery, that our hands
must of necessity smell always of flesh or fish, or of such other meat as we
eat with them, this Merchandise will greatly accommodate us, to the end that
whilst we make use of one sort of hands, the other may be washed. The King and
Queen fell heartily a laughing at this Speech; whereas in the mean time we
five were so ashamed, as the King perceiving it, desired us to take it in good
part, saying, That the Princess his Daughter had done this to no other end,
but for the better entertainment of us, whom she respected as her Brothers.
Whereunto we made answer, That we hoped God our Master would reward his
Highness for this honor and grace that he did us; which we confessed was very
great, and for such we would publish it over all the world as long as we
lived: Wherewith the King, Queen and Princess showed themselves very well
satisfied, giving us thanks with many complements after their manner: yea, and
the Princess said to us moreover, If your God would take me for his servant, I
should endeavor the best I could to please him: but I hope he will not forget
me. At these words we prostrated our selves on our knees before her, and
kissing the hem of her garment, we answered her, That we hoped no less of
her, and that in case she became a Christian, we should see her Queen of
Portugal: Whereupon the Queen her Mother and she fell a laughing. Having taken
leave then of the King, we returned to our lodging, and the next morning as
soon as it was day, he sent for us again, and questioned us very exactly about
the coming of Father Belquior, the intention of the Viceroy, the Letter which
I had brought from him; our Ship, and the goods that were in her; and many
other things, wherein we spent four hours at the least; after which he
dismissed us, saying, that within six days he would be at the Town, and that
there he would receive the Letter, see the Father, and make answer to all.

CHAP. LXXX. My reception by the King of Bungo, as Ambassador from the Viceroy
of the Indiaes.
AFter the six days were past the King parted from Osquy to go to the town of
Fucheo, accompanied with a great number of Nobility, and a guard of six
hundred foot, and two hundred horse, which made a goodly show. Being arrived
there, he was received by the people with great demonstrations of joy, with
Shows, Interludes, and many other inventions after their manner, that were
very costly; after which, he went to his Palace, an exceeding fair and
magnificent structure, whither the next day he sent for me, and bid me bring
him the Viceroys Letter, as being come for no other end but to receive it, and
that after he had read it, he would speak with Father Belquior touching the
matters that were most important. Whereupon I presently returned to my lodging,
and having made ready all that was necessary for me, about two of the clock in
the afternoon, the King sent the Captain of the town, and four other of the
chiefest men of the Court for me; who conducted me to the Palace, accompanied
with forty Portugals, which marched all on foot, because it is the custom of
the Country so to do. All the streets through which we past, were very handsomely
set forth, and there was such a world of people, as the officers had much ado
to make way for us. Three Portugals on horseback, carried each of them a piece
of the present; and a little after them followed two curious Spanish Gennets,
with rich Saddles and Trappings, and with such Arms as are used in Justs. Upon
our arrival at the first court of the Palace, we found the King there on a
scaffold, which had been erected expressly for him, accompanied with all the
Lords of the Kingdom, amongst whom, were the Ambassadors of three strange
Princes, namely the first of the King of the Lequios, the second of the King of
Chauchim, and Isle of Tosa, and the third of the Emperor of the Miacoo; and
round about as far as the court extended, there were above a thousand
harquebuziers, and four hundred men mounted on good horses, besides a multitude
of people without number. After that the forty Portugals and I were come to the
Scaffold where the King was, we performed all the ceremonies and complements
which are used to be done to him in such cases; and then approaching a little
nearer to him, I delivered him the Letter from the Viceroy, which he would not
receive but standing. Then being set down again in his place, he gave it to one
about him, that was as his Secretary who read it aloud that every one might
hear. After it was read, the King questioned me before the three strange
Ambassadors, and the great Lords with whom he was accompanied, about certain
things which he was curious to know touching our Europe; whereof one was, how
many men, armed cap-a-pe, and mounted on such horses as those were that I saw
there, the King of Portugal could bring into the field? Whereupon fearing least
I should blush if I came to tell a lie; I must confess, that I was much
troubled how to answer, which one of my companions who was near me, perceiving,
speaking for me, made answer; That he could bring an hundred or sixscore
thousand; a matter whereat the King was much abashed, and I too: But the King
taking pleasure as it seemed, in the mavelous answer, which this Portugal
gave him, bestovved above an hours time in asking him questions. In the mean
season, even the King himself, and all they that were present with him, being
exceedingly amazed to hear such great and strange things delivered, he turned
to them and said; I swear truly unto you, that I should desire nothing so much
in the world, as to see the Monarchy of this great Country, whereof I have
heard such wonderful things* as well concerning the immence treasures, and the
infinite number of ships which he has; for could I but once do this, I should
live very well contented the rest of my days. Thereupon having sent me, and
those that accompanied me, away, he said unto me, When thou shall think it a
fit time, thou may bid the Father come unto me, for he shall find me ready
here to receive him.

After I was retired to my lodging. I gave Father Belquior an account of the
Kings good reception of me, together with all that had past besides, Sect. 1.
and how desirous he was to see him; in regard whereof I held it fit, since all
the Portugals were then together, and in their best clothes, that he should go
to him out of hand, which he liked very well of. Having furnished himself then
with certain things necessary for the better setting forth of his person, he
and I went away, accompanied with forty Portugals, all very well apparrelled,
and vvearing chains of gold Scarfe-wise; and four pretty boys in cassocks,
and hats of white taffata, and silken crosses on their breasts, together with a
converted Iapanois, Christened Ioana Fernandez, to serve for Interpreter. When
we were arrived at the first Court of the Kings Palace, we found some Lords
attending us there, who with a great deal of courtesy and demonstrations of
friendship brought the Father and me up to a chamber where the King stayed for
him, who having taken him by the hand with a joyful countenance, said unto
him; Believe me, Father, this day is the only one that I can call mine, in
regard of the extreme pleasure I take to see thee before mine eyes, because, me
thinks, I see Father Xavier, to whom I wished as well as to mine own person:
Then leading him into another inner chamber, that was richlyer furnished, he
set him down by him, and made very much of the four little Boys, for that it
was a new thing to him, and never seen in that Country before. The Father
rendered him thanks conformable to the great honor he did him, and after that
manner which they are wont to use amongst themselves, and which Ioana Fernandez
had taught him. After this, he entertained him with the principal cause of his
coming, which was, that the Viceroy had sent him expressly to serve him, and to
show him the assured way of salvation; which the King seemed to like of, by his
action of bowing down of his head: The Father going on, made an holy speech
somewhat like unto a Sermon unto him, agreeable to the business in hand; and
which, he had directly studied for that purpose. Whereunto the King made this
answer, Good Father, I know not how to express the great content which I take
in seeing thee in this house, and in learning all that which my ears have heard
thee say; which I do not answer for the present, in regard the affairs of my
State are such, as thou may peradventure have heard: Wherefore, I earnestly
entreat thee, since God has brought thee hither, that thou will repose thee a
while from the travel which thou have endured for his service. And as for that
which the Viceroy has written to me, touching the business which I sent to
him about by Antonio Ferreyra, I still avow it; but the Affairs of the present
time, are reduced to that pass, as I am much afraid, if my subjects see any
change in me, that they will approve of the Bonzoes counsel; Besides, I make no
question but the Christians which are here, have told thee the great danger I
run in this Country, by reason of the mutinies that ^ave past here, during the
which, I have been in as great jeopardy as any other; so that for the safety of
my person, I have been enforced to execute in one morning thirteen of the
Principallest Lords of my Kingdom, together with sixteen thousand persons of
their faction and league, besides as many more which I have banished. Bat if it
ever happens, that God shall grant me that which my soul desires of him, I
shall hold it a small matter, to consent to what the Viceroy advises me by his
Letter. Hereunto, the Father replied, That he was greatly satisfied with his
holy resolution; but he was to remember, that his life was not in the hands of
men, because they were mortal; and that if he should chance to die before he
effected it, what would then become of his soul? To which he answered smiling,
God knows. The Father seeing that he could receive no other satisfaction from
the King at that present but good words, without making any conclusion on a
matter that was so important for him, dissembled with him, and changing
discourse, talked to him of other things, wherein he knew he took more
pleasure. So, having spent the most part of the night with the Father, in
questioning him about diverse novelties, whereunto he was much affected, he
dismissed him in very plausible terms, with hope that he would become a
Christian, but not so soon; a thing which was then well enough understood, and
that sufficiently discovered his intention. The next day about two a clock in
the afternone the Father went to see the King again, and setting aside his kind
welcoming of him, this Prince never answeed him to purpose; and within a while
after returned to his Fortress of Osquy, from whence he sent to desire him to
continue abiding where he was, and to come some times and see him, for that he
took extreme pleasure in talking with him of the great things of God, and
perfection of his Law. In the mean space, above two months and an half past
away, without giving in all that time any other fruit of himself, then certain
kind of hopes, accompanied ever and anon with some excuses, which did not much
content the Father: so that he thought it requisite for him to return to Goa,
as well for the discharging of the duty of his charge there, as for many other
reasons that moved him thereunto. Being resolved then for our departure, I went
to the Fortress of Osquy to the King, to demand an answer of the Letter I
brought him from the Viceroy of the Indiaes, which he presently gave me,
having made it ready against my coming; and in exchange of the Present he had
received, he sent him very rich Arms, together with two Scymitars garnished
with gold, an hundred Ventiloes of the Country of the Lequios. In the Letter
which he himself had written, were these words contained: Lord Viceroy of
honorable Majesty, that art seated in the Throne of those which render Justice
by the power of the Scepter: I Yaretandono, King of Bungo, give thee to
understand, that Ferdinand Mendez Pinto is come to me, with a Letter from thy
Royal Lordship* and a present of Arms, and other pieces very agreeable to my
desire, and which I very much esteem, for that they are of a Country in the
other end of the world, which we call Chenchicogim, where through the power of
great Armies, composed of diverse Nations, reigns the Crowned Lion of Portugal,
whose servant and subject I do by these presents declare my self to be:
Wherefore I pray thee, that as long as the Sun shall not swerve from the effect
for which God has created him, nor the waters of the sea cease from rising and
falling on the shoares side, thou will not forget this homage, which hereby I
make to your King, whom I acknowledge for my elder Brother; to the end, that
thereby this my obedience may remain the more honorable, as I am confident it
shall always be: And I desire thou will daign to accept of these Arms which I
send thee, as a gage and assurance of my faith. From this my Fortress of
Osquy, the ninth Mamocos of the third Moon, in the thirty and seventh year of
our age. With this Letter, and his present I returned to our ship, which rode
at anchor some two leagues off in the Port of Zequa, where I found Father
Belquior, and all the rest of our company, already imbarqued, and from thence
we set sail the day after, being the fourteenth of November, One thousand five
hundred fifty and six.

CHAP. LXXXI. What past after our departure from Zequa, till my arrival in the
Indiaes, and from thence into the Kingdom of Portugal.
FRom this Port of Zequa we continued our course with Northerly winds, which
were favorable unto us in this season, and on the fourth of December we
arrived at the Port of Lampacau, where we met with six Portugal ships,
whereof was General a certain Merchant, called Francisco Martinez, the
creature of Francisco Barreto, at that time Governor of the State of the
Indiaes in the place of Don Pedro Mascarenhas. And because that then the season
for Navigation into India was almost past, our Captain Don Francisco
Mascarenhas stayed no longer there then was necessary for providing of
victual. We departed then from this Port of Lampacau a little before
Christmasse, and arrived at Goa the seventeenth of February. The first thing I
did there was to go to Francisco Barreto, unto whom I gave an account of the
Letter which I brought from the King of Iapan: but he having referred it to the
day following, I failed not to deliver it to him the next morning, together
with the Arms, the Scymitars, and the other Presents which that Pagan King had
sent. Whereupon* after he had seen all at leisure, addressing himself unto me,
I assure you, said he unto me, that I prize these Arms which you have brought
me, as much as the Government of India: for I hope that by the means of this
Present, and this Letter from the King of Japan, I shall render my self
agreeable to the King our Sovereign Lord, that I shall be delivered from the
fortune of Lisbon, where almost all of us that govern this State, do go and
land for our sins. Then, in acknowledgment of this Voyage, and the great
expense I had been at, he made me many large offers, which I would by no means
accept of at that time: Nevertheless I was well contented to justify before
him by attestations, and acts past expressly for it, how many times I had been
made a slave for the service of the King our Master; and how many times also I
had been robbed of my Merchandise: for I imagined that this would suffice to
keep me at my return into my Country, from being refused that, which I believed
was due to me for my services; as indeed, the Viceroy past me an Act of all
these things, adding thereunto the Certificates which I presented unto him:
withal, he gave me a Letter, addressed to the King, wherein he made so
honorable a mention of me and my Services, that relying on these hopes,
grounded as they were on such apparent reasons as I had on my side, I imbarqued
my self for to return into the Kingdom of Portugal; so contented with the
Papers which I carried along with me, that I counted them the best part of my
estate; at leastwise, I believed so, because I was persuaded that I should no
sooner ask a recompense for so many services, but wont it be presently granted
me. Upon this hope being put to sea, it pleased our Lord, that I arrived safely
at the City of Lisbon, the two and twentieth day of September, in the Year One
thousand five hundred fifty and eight, at such time as the Kingdom was
governed by Madam KATHERINA, our Queen of happy memory. Having delivered her
the Letter then from the Viceroy of the Indiaes, I told her by word of mouth
all that I thought was important for the good of my business: vvhereupon she
referred me to the Minister of her State, who had the charge of dealing in her
Affairs: At first he gave me very good words, but far better hopes, as indeed I
held them for most assured, hearing what he said unto me: But in stead of
letting me see the effect thereof, he kept me these miserable papers of mine
four years and an half, at the end of which, all the fruit I reaped thereby was
no other, then the labor and pains which to no purpose I had employed in these
vain solicitations, and which had been more grievous unto me, then all the
troubles I had suffered during my voyages: Wherefore seeing of what little
profit all my past services were unto me, notwithstanding all the suit I could
make; I resolved to retire my self, and remain within the terms of my misery,
which I had brought along with me, and gotten by the means of many misfortunes,
which was all that was resting to me of the time and wealth which I had
bestowed in the service of this Kingdom, leaving the judgment of this process
to the divine Justice. I put this design of mine then in execution, not a
little grieved that I had not done it sooner, because I might thereby
peradventure have saved a good piece of money. For a conclusion, behold what the
services have been which I have done for the space of one and twenty years,
during which time, I was thirteen times a slave, and sold sixteen times, by
reason of the unlucky events of so long and painful a voyage, whereof I have
made mention amply enough in this Book. But although this be so, yet do I not
leave to believe, that the cause why I remained without the recompense
whereunto I pretented for so many services and travels, rather proceeded from
the Divine providence, which permitted it to be so for my sins, then from the
negligence and fault of him, whom the duty of his charge seemed to oblige to do
me right. For it being true, that in all the Kings of this Kingdom who are the
lively source from whence all recompense do ^low, though many times they ran
through pipes more affectionate then reasonable, there is always found an holy
and acknowledging zeal, accompanied with a very ample and great desire, not
only to recompense those which serve them, but also to confer great estates on
them which render them no service at all; whereby it is evident, that if I, and
others, have not been satisfied, the same happens by the only fault of the
pipes, and not of the source; or rather it is a work of the Divine Justice,
which cannot fail, and which disposes of all things for the best, and as i^
most necessary for us; in regard whereof* I render infinite thanks to the King
of Heaven, whose pleasure it has been, that his divine will should be this way
accomplished, and do not complain of the Kings of the earth, since my sin^ have
made me unworthy of meriting more.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page* 4. l. 17. read first Viceroy. p. 10. l. 36. r. victual and ammunition.
p. 21. l. ult. r. of a Pagan. p. 60. l. ult. r. shrewd. p 77. l. 33. r. speech.
p. 80. l. 30. r. lands aside. p. 83. l. 7. r. equalled. p. 95. l. 8. r. remorse
of conscience. l. 49. for deserved, r. demanded. p. 100. l. 28. r. poor folks.
p. 103. l. 33. for Ch^ucer r. Chau^^r. p. 104. l. 48. for as, r. us. p. 111. l.
20. r. picos o^ silver p. 121. l. 10. for levied, r. lived. p. 123. l. 8. r.
render. p. 124. l. 44. r. many light. p. 125. l. 3. r. canals. l. 12. r.
praises. p. 127. l. 1^. r. conservat^on. p. 128. l. 19. r. allegations. p. 129.
l. 1. for constrained, r. pain^ed. p. 130. l. ^. r. standish. l. 17. for ye
are, r. yea are. l. ^2. r. valuable. l. 40 r. who being able p. 132. l. ult. r.
Paquin. p. 1^3. l. 19. r. ba^^sters. p* 13^* l. 30. r. Ushers. l. 44* for
rightly r. richly. p. 136* l. 12. r. remarkable. l. 48. r. antiquity. p. 137.
l. 10. r. P^a^^aes. l. 46. r. so extravagant. p. 138. l. 5. r. Exiles: l. 9. r*
abutting on. p. 139. l. 1. r. p^enary. p. 141. l. 23. r. a^ches or vaults. p.
142. l. 15. for entertained, r. ^nfolded. p. 144. l. 25. for love, r. lone. p.
149. l. 2^ for st^atagems r. strangen^sse. p. 150. l. 21. r. breaking. p. 155.
l. 16. r. Nix^aticoo. p. 155. r* obliged to hold. p. 163. l. 13. r. at their
pleasure* p. 241. l. 1. r. Timplan. l. 46. r. this Prince. l. 47 ^. leagues in
bred^h. p. 242. l. 21. r. reputation. p. 244. l. ult. for undivided, r.
undiscovered. p. 248. l. 4^^ r. ^log^e. p. 243. r. savages.


