MEROVEUS A PRINCE OF THE Blood Royal of FRANCE. A NOVEL.

depiction of a globe

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable THE COUNTESS OF OXFORD.
THE Universal Admiration Your Ladyship has obtained in the World, having
inspired a young Prince with a Curiosity to see so many Wonders as Fame does
Your Ladyship the Justice to relate, He is come from beyond Sea with hopes not
only of having leave to satisfy the Ambition He has of paying Homage to so
many Excellencies, but likewise, if you can think fit, Madam, to allow Him a
favorable Audience, He does not question but to make appear, that his
Misfortunes are of such a Nature as both to merit and engage Your Ladyships
Pity and Protection. Both His Commission and Passport to Your Ladyship have
something in them so extraordinary, that as One has wherewith to raise
Compassion, so the Other has to create Veneration in all People. For He is
addressed, Madam, to a Lady whose Family has ever, and is still at this day
fruitful in Hero's, and who has likewise the advantage of being united to One
that has filled the Chronicles of all Ages with its Extraordinary Performances,
and miraculous Instances of a Constant Loyalty, wherein they have been so
zealously followed by the present Earl, that the Best of Subjects and Greatest
of Men may be proud of imitating his Conduct and Actions: Yet, notwithstanding
all these Invitations, this Prince does acknowledge that he was incited to this
Address more by Your Ladyships own Merit and Luster, than all these Advantages
of Extraction and Alliance: It was a Beauty, Madam, above description, a Wit
beyond all imagination, and these attended by a benign Disposition, an
Affability, a Goodness, and all and none but those Qualities which procure
Respect and Acclamation, that made him ambitious of laying himself at Your
Ladyships Feet, and to beg leave to declare the Devotion with which I am, Madam,

Your Ladyships Most humble and most obedient Servant, F. S.

MEROVEUS A PRINCE OF THE Blood Royal OF FRANCE.
THE Posterity of Clovis the Great begun to possess the Throne; Clotarius the
youngest of his Children, remaining alone of all his Brothers to settle the
rising Monarchy of the French, left for his Successors four Sons, who shared
the Crown between them. Cherebert, being the eldest, had for his part the
Kingdom of Paris, and its depencies. Gontran, that of Orleans: Chilperic, that
of Soissons; and Sigebert that of Metz.

Though that Union is something rare between persons of their Rank, those four
Princes lived a long time in a perfect intelligence in the Government of their
States, and the tendernesses of Blood were ever more powerful in their hearts,
than any sentiment of ambition and jealousy. They did not think the alliance
of any neighboring Prince, was necessary to them for the support of their
Thrones; wherefore when they resolved to leave Heirs, they sought not for Women
elsewhere than amongst their Subjects, and as merit was the only thing that
they considered, they applied themselves indifferently to Persons in whom they
found most Charms, Beauty and Wit.

Cherebert, whom Clotarius his Father had caused to marry Ingoberga against his
will, divorced himself from her to take in her place Merofleda, a Merchants
Daughter: Gontrand made the like choice in his States: Sigebert lived a long
time without any engagement; and as for Chilperick, he married Andeuera, the
truth is a Maid of mean Birth, but whom Heaven had only deprived of the
advantages of Blood, that the quickness of her Wit, the greatness of her Soul,
and the Charms of her Beauty might be the more admired: Chilperick had by her
several Children and amongst others a Prince called Meroveus. Cherebert after
having reigned six years, dyed in the Castle of Blaye in Xaintonge: he left no
male Children: Insomuch that the three Princes his Brothers shared his Kingdom
between them: but as not one of them would consent to yield Paris to an other,
it was resolved that City should remain neutral, that it should be equally to
all three, and that not one might enter it without the consent of the others,
upon pain of losing the part he had in the succession of Cherebert.

This Affair thus regulated, those Princes passed still several years in an
agreeable Society, and only made use of their Arms to repulse the attempts of
Strangers their common Enemies. But Fortune that usually takes delight in
destroying all that is not its Work, let them only so long enjoy this sweet
tranquillity that their Division might be the more sensible to them.

Prince Meroveus was seventeen years old, when one Fredegonda came into the
service of Queen Andouera. Meroveus and Fredegonda having the greatest part in
this History, it will not be out of the way to give a light Idea of them, that
they may be the better known.

It may be said that Fredegonda was one of the most capricious Works that
Nature was capable of producing: there was in her a confused heap of good and
ill Qualities, all of them extraordinary: but as her Virtues possessed but the
least part in her Soul, they ever served only to set off her Vices. That which
rendered the world sometimes prepossessed in her favor, was that what she had
best, discovered it self at first. Those who had once seen her and heard her
discourse, could hardly persuade themselves afterward that Heaven would mingle
so rare Perfections amongst so great Defects. And it must be avowed that she
knew admirable well how to set off the Talents she was Mistress of. Never was
Beauty in all its luster better managed and more ingeniously employed to its
Designs. Never did Wit with more artifice use all the graces of eloquence to
persuade; and never any heart so cunningly disposed the language of its sighs,
for the gaining the tenderness of a Prince. She thought it indifferent to
follow the course of Virtue or to stray from it, and she only sought it when
she judged it might favor her enterprises. Ambition, Revenge, and Jealousy
disposed by turns of her Soul. Love was not unknown to her, but he had never so
great an Empire over her as to betray any of these passions. The greatest
crimes raised no horror in her, she resolved of them without pain for the
satisfying her desires. Fear had little place in her heart, because that her
Policy was to prevent all those whom she believed might do her hurt, and a
light suspicion was sufficient for the sacrificing them to her safety. Her
resentments could not be softened by time. Her hatred was only extinguished in
the blood of the person from whom she imagined to have received any outrage.
Deceit, dissimulation, perfidiousness and lying, were also many Veils which
concealed from the most penetrating Eyes, all the foldings of her heart. In
fine to give her Picture with one stroke, it is sufficient to say that
self-love was the only rule she thought worthy of being embraced in the world.

Meroveus, on the contrary, was one of the most accomplished Princes that
France had yet se^h. It was to have been wished that Heaven had brought him
into the world in a less elevated degree; that not being environed with that
dazzling pomp, all his perfections might have been more nearly contemplated, and
his merit judged of by it self. It was not necessary to proceed to his Soul to
find something in him worthy of admiration. From all the Features that Nature
had printed in his Face, there resulted I know not what kind of Air which
inspired love and respect in all those who approached him. Never any Prince
gave so fair hopes, and in whose Eyes were read greater things. At so tender an
age he had already signalized himself in Arms, and the Laurels he had gathered
in several, and important, occasions, made all the world doubt if the easiness
of fighting was not rather born with him, than formed by a long habit.

It seemed that so many fair qualities ought to have subdued Fortune to the
happiness of this Prince: Yet that cruel Enemy of Virtue made it on the
contrary appear that it is in vain that Nature strives to maintain its Works,
when Fortune undertakes to attack them: It was its will that the unfortunate
Meroveus should search Posterity for a famous example of its power, as well as
injustice.

Fredegonda had not seen him twice when she became infinitely in love with him;
and as she saw that this passion was but too conformable to her ambition, she
wholly abandoned her self to it with all manner of joy. She fancied that he
being of an age that has little force to resist passions, and wherein a heart
is easily surprised by Love when it meets with a proper object, he would hardly
escape her artifices: but all her cunning and all her address was in vain:
Meroveus, after having a long time avoided her snares, at length seeing that
she one day spoke to him openly of her love, rallied her publicly for it, and
told her that to acknowledge the affection she had for him, he would marry her
to one of his Officers.

These words produced in Fredegonda's Soul a furious vexation and an immortal
hatred, which was the source of all the disgraces of Meroveus, and which led
him to his Grave. But as the force of this wicked Woman lay in artifices, she
knew so well how to dissemble in that occasion, that she smiled at the Princes
answer, and even thanked him very civily. As she knew that on the first
impressions, good or bad, that others have received from us, depend oftentimes
all the judgments that are made in the sequel; she at first affected a conduct
with Andouera, which procured her the esteem and confidence of her Mistress,
and the jealousy of her Companions. All her actions were governed by a
complaisance full of sweetness, a respectful submission to all that was exacted
from her, and an earnestness ever new to acquit her self of the least things
her devoir engaged her to.

It is an usual defect in all good Souls to judge of others by themselves: as
they are incapable of any disguise, they fancy they see in the actions of
others as much fincerity as in their own, and this imprudent goodness makes
them oftentimes take for an effusion of heart, what proceeds only from an
address of Wit.

The false and deceitful appearances of Fredegonda, so surprised all the
affections of Andouera, that this good Princess fancyed that she could not do
enough to make known to her the sense she had of her services. She proposed her
for a model to all her other Maids of Honor, she filled the Court with her
praises, and the King was especially daily importuned with them; so true it is
that we often run precipitately to our own ruin, and we become our selves the
contrivers of our own unhappiness.

Though the Princess Andouera had already spent more than eightteen years in
marriage, she was still capable of charming, and neither that long space of
time, nor her Lyings In, which are usually the destroyers of Beauty, had worn
out any thing of that surprising luster which conquers hearts. But as desires
and hopes are the only things which maintain Love, and that nothing is more
capable of making us disrelish an object than a long and peaceable possession.
Chilperick's passion for the Queen did nothing now but languish, and those
devouring flames which the first fight of that Princess had kindled in his
Heart, were as extinguished in the enjoyment of her pleasures.

The reputation of Fredegonda's Wit and Beauty gave him one day the curiosity
of considering and discoursing her attentively. It was in that occasion that
this cunning Maid neglected nothing of all she judged proper for engaging the
King. She fought for Darts in her Eyes fit to discover the way to his Heart,
and drained all the lights of her Wit to charm the Princes.

It was not necessary to employ so much address upon a man who ran to meet his
Chains, and who longed that a new passion might renew his desires. Chilperick
told Fredegonda upon his leaving her, that he was very much satisfied with her
discourse, and that he would do her some kindness in a very short time. In
effect, he sent for her some days after by his trustiest Officer, and after
having repeated to her the same thing, he added for the declaring to her his
passion, that he had found in her more Beauty and Wit than he ought to have.
desired for his repose; that it was to Love she was going to owe all the
favors he should heap upon her; but as his happiness depended on her, she
ought to contribute to it in giving him sensible and convincing marks of a
mutual tenderness; and above all, that she should carefully conceal this
Gallantry from the Queen, who would not fail to be enraged at it.

As Fredegonda changed, as she pleased, the motions of her Face, she seemed at
that moment so modest, that it helped to inflame the Kings desires. She made
him know that she desired nothing so ardently as to make appear to him the joy
she felt to see her self beloved by so great a Prince; but that he was not to
exact any thing from her that her virtue might disallow.

The King was not yet so blinded with his passion, but that he considered that
it ever becomes a Woman to make some resistance, and not to yield so soon. He
was not willing to press her more that day: he contented himself with telling
her that they would talk of it more than once, and that he would give her time
to think of it. Having spoken these words, he took out a Table Book with
Gold-Covers set with Diamonds, which he made her a Present of.

He had hardly left her, than that his imagination representing her to him yet
more fair than she was, made him sensible of new returns of Love, and was
extreme impatient to see her again; so that the next morning, while the Queen
rested, he sent his Confident to tell her he desired to speak with her, and she
immediately went to the Cabinet where he waited for her.

Fredegonda knowing better how to dive into the hearts of others than they into
hers, easily perceived that Chilperick was too much a slave to his Love, to be
able ever to master it. Wherefore, as it was Ambition that made her act, she
did not amuse her self to flatter his passion with frivoulous hopes, but had
the boldness to tell him, that if he desired she should answer it, he must
marry her; that her birth was not inferior to Andouera's; that nothing was so
common with all Princes, as divorce, that neither reasons nor pretext would be
wanting for the furthering the design; that this procedure toward Andouera,
was not unjust, that it was enough for her to have held so glorious a rank near
twenty years; that for her part when she should as long have shared his Crown,
with him, she would endeavor to comfort her self if an other took her place;
that in fine, he might assure himself, that nothing but his Faith could obtain
from her what he pretended. After these words she went out of the Cabinet, and
left the Prince in a mortal trouble.

Though it be easy for Love to become all on a sudden Master of a Heart, and
that one moment alone is sufficient for it to chase away all that opposes its
designs, yet it does not reign there soveraignly, until after several strifes,
for the rendering its Victory the more illustrious, and the more powerfully
engage reason to support its interests.

Chilperick found his mind a long time wavering between his Devoir and his new
passion: if the pleasures he hoped to enjoy in the possession of Fredegonda,
inclined him toward her; on the other side the Image of his Glory stained by
so shameful a Divorce, and the innocence of Andouera were powerful curbs to
stop the rapidity of his Vows. The great marks of Love that he had received
from that good Princess, her passionate tenderness, her ardent sighs, her
transports ever new, her application; cares and complaisance, knocked every
Moment at the Door of his Heart, to put him in mind of recovering a lawful
Empire.

But as it is much more easy to stray from our Devoir, than to return to it
when we have been once out of the way, all these objects, after having for some
time shaked Chilperick's mind, disappeared at length to let Love triumph. All
that virtue could obtain from him, was that he should do what he could to
persuade Fredogonda, before that he resolved to be divorced from Andouera.
Whereupon he besieged that imperious Mistress with all manner of Arms. He
joined to the luster of his person all the discourses of the most submissive
Lovers; and without doubt, a woman less ambitious than Fredegonda, would not
have been able to have held out against so many importunities; but that haughty
passion had too deep roots in her heart, to suffer her to be seduced by other
impressions. She was ever deaf to the Prayers of Chilperick, and after having a
long time denied him, and even refused the Presents he would have made her; She
once told him very sharply that he was very scrupulous, and very fearful, not
to dare to take that liberty to become happy, which the example of so many
Princes authorized, and which Cherebert his Brother had himself practiced.

There is no injury which so sensibly touches Kings, as the reproach of fear:
as boldness is the first mark of courage, they imagine for the better, making
appear the greatness of their Souls, they ought to give their power its full
scope, insomuch that what moves them to unlawful actions, is oftentimes only a
vain glory of making known that they are capable of undertaking all things.
Fredegonda's words had so much force upon Chilperick's heart, that they partly
determined him entirely to marry her. His pride represented to him, that to
make the impression in the mind of that Maid, and of all his People, of a
strong Idea of his independence, he ought not to defer his Divorce from
Andouera; and Love applauding the sentiments of his pride, persuaded him that
he ought no longer to balance the establishing his happiness, since it would
only cost him one crime, which the most natural of all passions had ever
rendered excusable. He told his Mistres^ that he very well foresaw, that he
must consent to what she desired, and that he would quickly make her see, that
it was not a motion of fear that had made him resist so long.

This discourse so puffed up Fredegonda's vanity, that she began from that moment
to fancy her self Crowned, and to act like a Sovereign with all people. The
Queen who was not long without perceiving it, was the most of all concerned at
this Change. As she had never found any thing but submission, and respect in
Fredegonda, the imperious Air with which she spoke to her, could not enough
surprise her. She several times made her gentle remonstrances, and seeing it
was to no purpose, she one day proceeded to threatenings.

Fredegonda, being no longer detained by any confideration, answered her
sharply, and left the Chamber, telling her, that she had no longer right to use
those terms, that her time was passed, and that others was going to begin.
These words were clear enough to explain to the Queen, Chilperick's new
engagement; but being still blinded by her easiness, they only plunged her into
a great disquiet.

As she was in these agitations, Meroveus, her Son, came to her Apartment, to
make known to her the first news of her Disgrace. Meroveus having a penetrating
Wit had a long time perceived Fredegonda's Designs; but being he had ever
believed, that the King would have no less power than he, to resist her
artifices, he had not thought fit to alarm the Queen with the recital of a
thing of little consequence, and wherein he did not foresee, that the Glory and
Love of that Princess were to be one day equally interressed.

An Officer of the Kings Bedchamber, deploring the approaching misfortune of
Andouera, having given notice to the Prince of what passed, Meroveus believed
it necessary to acquaint the Queen suddenly with it, that she might join with
him to avoid the storm that was going to powder upon her. The poor Princess
having learned Meroveus fatal discourse, fell into a swoon in his arms, and it
was to little purpose, that the Prince remained pious in this Rencounter, and
that he left her not in that oppression, being, when she came to her self, she
was the more sensible of her misfortune, and delivered her mind up to the most
cruel attacks of Grief.

They resolved to go find the King out immediately, and to remonstrate to him
the disorders this unhappy passion would produce, if he resolved to satisfy it
at the expense of his Glory. Approaching the Kings Apartment they perceived at
a distance through the Glass Windows Fredegonda holding a Table Book in her
hands.

After having stole softly to the Window, Andouera perceived it was the Kings
Table Book, in which he ever set down his most secret Designs.

At this sight the Queen was seized with a lively resentment; she commanded
Fredegonda to open to her the Door, which she refused to do, threatening she
would complain to the King if any violence was done her.

These insolent words increased the Queens vexation; and Meroveus being
transported with anger, having broken the Windows, leaped furiouslly into the
Cabinet, snatched the Table Book out of Fredegonda's hands, and went to the
Queen, who returned with him, to her Chamber to examine it. After having turned
over several Leaves without finding any thing, she read in one place these
Verses written by Chilperick's one hand, and which he had composed in the
beginning of his passion for Fredegonda: Love only pleases for a time,
At length we are weary of its Chain.
Virtue the most severe, sublime,
From a new choice cannot often restrain.


And below these Verses, Andouera found these of Fredegonda's hand writing.
When we have charmed a great and mighty King,
Must we have nothing but his pantting Heart?
His Empire ought to be our Offering,
E're we do ease his fiery raging smart;
Yes, yes, ambition is the brightest Flame,
What Woman wants it, is I Am sure to blame.


What became of her after having read these stabbing words? It was then that
this deplorable Princess took a full view of her misfortunes, and that she no
longer doubted that Chilperick was charmed with Fredegonda, but even that this
wicked Maid had already much shaken his Virtue, to engage him to marry her. She
run as distracted, accompanied by Meroveus, to the Kings Apartment. When they
came to his Chamber Door, the Guards refused to let them in, and told them they
had Orders not to let any one soever enter without acquainting the King.

After having learned that they were there, he came to them contrary to his
custom. Andouera, at the sight of Chilperick, let fall a torrent of Tears; all
the Graces painted at that time, in her Face, an eloquent Grief, capable of
moving the most barbarous heart; and without doubt Chilperick's would not have
been insensible, if he had not been full of Fredegonda's Charms, whom he had
newly quitted.

The Queen with a languishing Voice, and which was every moment interrupted by
her sighs, told the King, that the love she bore him, rather than her own
interests, engaged her to make known to him how shamefully he was going to
stain his Glory by the irregularity of his Passion. She prayed him to consider
what could be the nature of the affection that Fredegonda had for his Person,
and to judge of it by the Verses she had made upon that subject. Having spoken
these words, she presented the Table Book to the King.

That Object filled his Soul with spite and confusion, and made him fall into
furious motions of choler against the Queen. He did not permit her to speak any
more; but interrupting her, he told her angrily, that he could never have
believed, she would have been so bold as to have done violence to persons whom
he honored with his affection, even to force from them, the Testimonies he had
been willing to give them thereof; that she as well as Meroveus should pay dear
for this affront. That as for his passion for Fredegonda, if she found it was
so great a crime, it was for her herself to expiate it, since she had been the
principal cause; that he should never have conceived the least desire of
speaking to that Maid, if she had not daily stunned him with her praises; that
it was her great importunity alone that had stirred up her curiosity; that her
daily discourses repeated in favor of her Rival, had made him insensibly love
her before he had considered her; in fine, that she had no body to blame but
her self for her misfortune, since she had woven with her own hands the Bonds
which were going to break theirs.

This outraging reproach pierced the very Soul of poor Andouera: all the words
it contained were so much the more sensible to her, for that they were true,
and that she acknowledged she had been the fatal instrument of her own ruin.
The excess of grief did not leave her force enough to speak: but her eyes and
sighs declared all the just indignation with which she was seized. Meroveus was
not so moderate as she, or rather his resentment was not capable to deprive him
of the use of his voice; he told the King that since he was resolved to push
things to that extremity, he saw himself constrained to be once wanting in the
respect that he owed him as his Son and his Subject, for the preventing a
disorder that was going to fall upon all the Royal Family.

This menace inflamed Chilperick's anger; he caused the Queen and Meroveus to
be seized, commanded they should be shut up apart, and caused Guards to be set
at their Chamber doors, with express order to let no body enter. After which he
returned to the Cabinet where Fredegonda expected him. She at first affected a
false pity for Andouera, and told Chilperick that it was against her will that
she caused so much disorder in the Court; but since it was for the better
settling the happiness of her King, she did not repent it: but that it was
convenient and even necessary, suddenly to make an end of the Work, and to
remove the Queen while that people's minds were already prepared for that
rupture.

The too easy Chilperick, besotted with his passion, consented to all
Fredegonda's propositions, and would not follow any other rule than her will.
He agreed with her to send the Queen to the City of Man's. After having hastily
made her a small Equipage, he caused her to depart at two days end, without
suffering her to bid him farewell, nor even to speak with Meroveus. That
innocent and deplorable Princess went thus from Soissons, and appeared as a
wretched Victim, that her love for an unfaithful Man was going to consume by
little and little. So long as she could perceive the Walls of that City, she
eyed it, and sent it continually her sighs. But as soon as she was out of
sight, she passed over in her thoughts all that had passed at Court: she
re-called into her memory, all the Graces and Favors she had so often so
prodigally bestowed upon her Rival, and for which she had not expected so fatal
a recompense: but that which increased her pain was, that she was not allowed
at her departure to embrace the Prince her Son, whom she cherished with a
tenderness worthy of her.

When she arrived at Man's, though that Fame had already carried thither the
news of her Disgrace, all the City was in Arms to receive her, and did her all
the honors that they owed, not only to their true Queen, but as to a Person
who had ever reigned more soveraignly over all their minds by her Virtues, than
by the Title she had born.

Meroveus having learned his Mothers removal, conceived a mortal hatred against
Fredegonda, and resolved to be revenged on her, let what would come on it: but
his imprisonment not permitting him to attempt the execution of his Projects,
he was constrained to stifle them. The King not being willing to keep always
from the Eyes of the Court, a Prince upon whom all the people founded their
greatest hopes, bethought himself of an artifice to set him at liberty: but he
put him in such a posture, as not to apprehend any thing he could do against
Fredegonda: He made known to Meroveus, that if he made any attempt upon her, he
would immediately revenge himself on the Princess his Mother, and that the
least Menace that should escape from him, should be the sentence of
Andouera's's Death. It was upon these harsh Conditions that the Prince was let
out of Prison. The sight of his Enemy did every moment increase his hatred, and
he would not have been able to have forborne the abandoning himself to some
violence, if the Queens interest had not ever retained him.

In the mean time the pomp of the Kings Marriage with Fredegonda was preparing.
This ambitious Woman triumphing in her self, floated then in joy, and imagined
her self already at the point of Sovereignty. But fortune which delights in
selling her Favors dear, still exacted from her great Crimes, before it
mounted her upon the Throne.

The Huns, who placed all their glory in making Courses and Invasions upon
their Neighbors, took a resolution of seizing Austrasia. To that end they
marched out of Pannonia, and came with powerful Troops to attack King Sigebert,
who prepared to repulse them courageously: But at the same time there happened
to him other Affairs which constrained him to treat of Peace with the Huns, not
very advantageous to him, and such as his great courage would not have suffered
in another conjuncture.

Fredegonda whose ambition increased, and seeing no more obstacles to hinder
her from reigning with Chilperick, carried her desires much farther, and
believed she ought not to let so fair an occasion slip, of enlarging the bounds
of an Empire she fancied already belonged to her. She remonstrated to
Chilperick, that while the King of Austrasia was busied in defending himself
against the Huns, it would be easy for him to invade his Territories, that he
ought not to be retained by any vain scruple, and to stop at weak
considerations of Friendship and tenderness; that nothing was so glorious as
the Title of Conqueror; In fine, that it was great to be in a posture of
giving Law to others, and of making Subjects, even upon the Throne.

It was Ambition that dictated this discourse to Fredegonda, but she had
likewise other very powerful considerations to move her to it. As Policy was
the principal resort that set her mind agoing, her passion for a Scepter, did
not hinder her from foreseeing that her Marriage would not fail to displease
the Princes her Brothers, and upon their persuasion he would sooner or later be
obliged to be divorced from her; Insomuch that she had already for some time
sought means fit for the breaking the Union that was between them when this was
presented. She did not at all doubt but that Gontran King of Orleans, who loved
Peace and Justice, would ardently embrace Sigebert's Party, when be came to
know the equity of his Cause; and thus she judged that the success of this War,
let it be what it would, must needs be advantageous to her.

Chilperick, who did nothing but by Fredegonda, listened to her, took Fire, and
his Love making use of a sentiment of Ambition, for the concealing from him the
base and servile complaisance he had for a Woman, he resolved with her to
attack Sigebert, in hopes of suddenly conquering his Territories. Whereupon he
raised Forces secretly, and marched himself at their Head, accompanied by
Meroveus, toward Austrasia, after having left the administration of all
Affairs to Fredegonda.

Meroveus went not to this Expedition without regret, because he naturally
hated Injustice: and he also made appear, he only fought for Peace, and did but
show his courage for the preparing the two Kings to a Reconciliation. The Army
came in a few days to the Walls of Rheims, which after having maintained some
Assaults, was at length constrained to open its Gates, and suffer the
victorious Enemy to come in.

Sigebert was acquainted some days after with this sad News, and was obliged,
as we have already said, to make Peace with the Huns. He sent immediately to
Gontran, to give him notice of this surprise, and to desire his Aid to defend
himself against Chilperick's Treachery. He likewise sent to demand Succors of
Athanagildus, King of the Goths in Spain, to whom he had formerly given the
like against Agila, King of the Visigoths. Athanagildus, in whom services made
a great impression, did not stick to acknowledge those that Sigebert had done
him, and was willing to go succor him in person: After having settled his
Affairs, and trusted the Conduct of them in Persons he judged the most capable,
as it was a very usual thing to the Kings of that time, to carry with them
their Wives and Children, he marched out of his Territories, with a very
powerful Army, accompanied with the Queen, and the two Princesses his Daughters.

In the mean time Sigebert returned toward Rheims, in all haste, of which he
became Master in a few days: Chilperick, who was gone from thence, having left
in it but a weak Garrison. The King of Austrasia was not contented with having
recovered that place; it was his turn, he thought, to make some attempts upon
his Enemies Territories. He went and attacqued him in Fismes, where he then was
for the appeasing some Sedition that was raised there; he pressed him so
vigorously, that Chilperick quickly saw himself in a condition of imploring his
Clemency, rather than irritating his valor: Wherefore he had recourse to
Gontran, to soften him in his Favor. Gontran was arrived a little time before
in Sigebert's Camp: as Peace and Union were the only things he breathed, he
favorably heard the persons Chilperick sent him, and made such instances to
Sigebert, that he obliged him to compose with his Brother, and to that effect
to make a suspension of Arms. There was an Interview of these three Princes,
and through Gontran's intercession, the Peace was at length concluded, and
published. The truth is, it was something a shameful one for Chilperick; but
such as he merited.

In the mean time Athanagildus approaching nearer and nearer, having learned
this reconciliation, dismissed the best part of his Troops, but upon the
Princes desire he advanced toward them with his Family. They sent the
Principal Lords of their Court to meet him, and received him in the Palace with
great marks of esteem and affection. Sigebert, above all, particularly thanked
him for the part he had taken in his Interests. There were several gallant
Feasts made, of which Brunchaut and Galsuinta were ever the greatest Ornaments.
Sports, Shows and Treats reigned then in all their luster, and never did any
Court, composed of so many Kings, appear so neat and so magnificent.

While that so sweet a Calm enchanted all their minds, and that they all strove
to dissipate, in so innocent Divertisements, the troubles and alarms of War;
Love, being willing to contribute to the happiness of those Princes, fancied
that so tranquil pleasures were not touching enough, and that for the
augmenting their force, he ought to mingle with them some of his trouble.
Sigebert's indifference had always appeared to him injurious to his Glory,
insomuch that he resolved to revenge himself in that occasion, but he would
make him at the same time find that that liberty that an insensible heart does
sometimes value it self for, is but an imaginary good, and that it is necessary
to feel the effects of so fair a passion, to enjoy a perfect felicity.

Nothing can be imagined more accomplished, than this Princess was, at that
time when she was seen and heard to speak, it was not known which one ought
most to admire in her, her Beauty or her Wit. The surprising luster of her Face
did so balance the Charms of her Discourse, that a heart remained suspended
between these two Objects, and it would have been difficult to say, which made
it the soonest sigh. Sigebert at each look she fixed upon him, and at each word
she uttered, felt a flaming Dart which penetrated into his Soul, and inflamed
all his Desires. His passion was too fair, and his Vows too well placed to
dissemble them. After having assured himself of Brunchauts heart, who according
to the custom of young Women only sighed for a Throne, he spoke thereof to
Athanagildus.

The King of the Goths, who besides the singular esteem he had for the King of
Austrasia, was very glad to procure powerful Allies, hearkened to him with all
possible favor, and after having communicated it to the Queen his Wife, and to
some persons of his Council, he made him a positive answer, and gave him his
word for that Marriage.

As all these Princes were willing to return, each one to his State, the
preparations for this Nuptial pomp were made with all speed, but it was not the
less splendid; and it appeared that those who had had the managing of it, had
foreseen at first, that on one and the same day would be made a double Feast.

Gontran had learnt with a sensible displeasure Chilperick's divorce from
Andouera; and as the glory of his Blood was dear to him, he could not suffer
that Fredegonda should mount upon his Brothers Throne, by so unjust and
shameful means. Seeing that it would have been almost impossible to have
re-established Andouera, he bethought himself of another expedient, which might
in some manner repair Chilperick's Crime, which was to make him marry
Galsuinta, Brunchauts Sister, imagining that the luster of the Blood, and
likewise of the Virtues of that Princess, might deface the Stain wherewith so
unhappy a passion had newly stained his Brother. He acquainted Sigebert with
his design, and told him, that they both ought to interess themselves in this
affair, and not to let so favorable an occasion escape.

Sigebert, whose inclinations were conformable to his Brothers, was of his
opinion: they went together to find out Chilperick, and remonstrated to him
that Kings Marriages ought to be the effect of a wise Policy, and not of a
blind passion, that when he was to associate a Woman to his Throne, he ought
only to consult the good of the State, and that the heart ought not to have any
part in it, that he did not entirely blame him for having put away Andouera,
since that alliance had been very useless to him, but that he ought to make
choice, in her place, of an illustrious person, and who might bring into his
Interests the Princes of her Blood; that for the settling and cementing the
Peace they had newly sworn, it was convenient he should marry the Princess
Galsuinta; that it would be the means to stifle, by so near an union, all the
difference that might arise in the future between the two Brothers; In fine, if
he was desirous their Reconciliation should be entire, he must resolve on that
Marriage.

Chilperick being of a soft and fearful nature, durst not resist the Princes
propositions; he consented they should agree the Affair with the King of the
Goths, and promised to ratify all they should do.

Athanagildus was over-joyed with this second Alliance; but a scruple troubled
him in favor of his Daughter, and he could not defend himself against the
alarms that Chilperick's love for Fredegonda gave him: Insomuch that this
Prince was obliged to swear upon the Altars, that Galsuinta should be
hence-forward the only object of his passion, and that he would wholly stifle
the tenderness he had had for his favorite: a frivolous Oath, which he quickly
fancied Love might dispense him from.

In the mean time, Meroveus, in the midst of so much public rejoicing, had his
Soul alone delivered up to grief and sadness. The Queen his Mothers misfortune,
and Fredegonda's happiness, had rendered him incapable of any sentiments of joy:
but he was not insensible of it when he learned, that a Princess was going to
possess the place designed for his Enemy; and if a change so favorable, and so
little hoped, could not wholly extinguish his resentment, at least he received
no small comfort to see Fredegonda's designs brought to nothing, in the moment
she fancied she was above the capriciousness of fortune. He made Galsuinta
several Visits, and always made appear to her, with sincere protestations, the
desire he had to see her reign with his Father. He went also to see Brunchaut
from time to time, and had with her several particular conferences, in which he
was never wearied with admiring her Beauty, and the extraordinary Charms of her
Wit, but it was ever without trouble and emotion: the fatal hour not being yet
come, that Love would employ that fair one for the ruin of this young Prince.

These Nuptials being celebrated with all manner of magnificence, they all
returned toward their States. Athanagildus went toward Spain; Gontran toward
Orleans; Sigebert with Brunchaut took the way of Austrasia; and all the
Grandees of Chilperick's Court, obliged him to return to Soissons, to make, in
the Capital of his Kingdom, a Triumphant entry with his new Bride.

It must be avowed that Love is something very capricious, that this fierce
Tyrant of Souls is extreme jealous of his Power and his Rights.

Galsuinta had so lively and touching a Beauty, that no body could support the
luster of it without amazement; and to give a perfect Idea of her, it is
sufficient to say that she was an exact portraict of her Sister Brunchaut. But
though all the Graces should have transformed themselves into her, though
Nature should have drained it self in forming her, Chilperick had married her
without consulting Love, and this was enough to make him conceive for her
sentiments of contempt and aversion. Those sweet eagernesses which usually
follow the first days of Marriage, and which appear with so much the more
violence, in that they are often as the Tombs of Kindness, those passionate
transports, those impatient desires, those troubles ever new, those charming
disquiets, in fine, all that a heart ought to be sensible of, in the first
moments of the possession of what it loves, all this was unknown to
Chilperick's; and if he sighed near the Princess, it was for regret of not
being able to keep his word with Fredegonda. The domineering Charms of that
Maid came every moment into his imagination; they were as a Vail, which hid
from him Galsuinta's Perfections; and if it happened by chance that he
discovered some of them, they only helped to set off those of Fredegonda, and
to put that unhappy Prince in mind, that she possessed them with much more
advantage. In the midst of his Court, he seemed to be in a vast solitude, and
his vexations, and his mortal fears, were the only Objects which took up his
Soul. The more he approached Soissons, his toruble and his disquiets were the
more increased: but how horrible soever the torment was he suffered in this
cruel agitation, he could have wished to have remained eternally in it. He
already represented to himself Fredegonda, who with those imperious words which
she was used to make use of in her resentments, came to assassinate him with
reproaches, accused him of weakness, and swore to him an irreconcilable
hatred. And it must likewise be avowed, that nothing has ever equalled the
vexation of that ambitious Woman, and that as soon as she had received the news
of this Marriage, she abandoned her self to all the sentiments of rage and
despair that a woman can be capable of.

Some days before Chilperick's arrival, she pretended to be sick, that she
might not be obliged to go render respects and submissions to a person, whom
she could hardly support the sight of, without dying for grief.

In fine, that great day being come that the King entered Soissons, after having
received there, with the new Queen, all the honors that Subjects use to do
their Princes in such occasions, he retired into his Palace, where having
immediately asked for Fredegonda, he was told she was very sick. This news gave
him the more boldness to see her, but on the other side it strangely alarmed
him. He stole from Galsuinta, while that flocks of people environed her, and
ran all transported to Fredegonda's.

As soon as she perceived the King and that she had observed in his Eves and
his Face, the Empire she had still over his heart, she prevented him, and told
him that she foresaw, that the Disease she labored under would carry her to
her Grave; but that she should enter it with joy, since she was precipitated
into it by the excess of her love: that however she should have dyed more
contented, if her virtue had permitted her to have given him more sensible
marks of her passion.

Nothing is more surprising to a Lover, than to hear kind things, and
flatteries, from his Mistresses mouth, when he expected nothing but reproaches
and threatenings, neither is there any thing more capable of making him detest
his infidelity, and inspire him with more love.

This flattering and artificious discourse of Fredegonda, so moved Chilperick,
that all the powers of his Soul remained a long time in disorder. He had so
little force left, that he had recourse to his sighs, and even to some tears,
for the explaining to his Mistress the despair her illness reduced him to.
Striving at length to speak to her, he begged of her not to renounce life, and
swore to her, that if she would promise him to take care of it, he would put
her, notwithstanding the present conjuncture, in a state in a short time of
reconciling her glory with her Love. He was not willing to stay any longer with
her that day, lest all his Court should know he was still in love.

Fredegonda then recovered firm hopes of mounting upon the Throne, and as the
reputation of Galsuinta's Beauty and Merit, made her apprehend the King might
become insensibly charmed, she resolved to dispatch that Princess as soon as
possibly she could. But because she would be present her self, at that fatal
execution, for the making it the more sure, she was obliged to wait sometime,
for fear her sickness should be discovered to have been feigned, if she quitted
her Bed all of a sudden. In the Visits that the King daily made her, she
assured him that she grew better and better, and that the obliging words he had
said to her, had been more healing than all the remedies of the world.

In fine, the certainty of her recovery being spread through all the Palace,
after having prepared her self for that horrible Sacrifice, she went one day to
make the Queen a Visit; and chose the time that she was only attended by two of
her Maids of Honor. The two Guards that were placed at her Chamber Door were
Fredegonda's Creatures. Some mo^ents after her being there, a young Man to whom
she had promised great Favors, came likewise thither, and coming briskly up to
the Queen, he on a sudden plunged his Dagger into her Breast, and caused that
unfortun^te Princess to fall at his F^et. Fredegonda thereupon feigning a great
surprise, cried out like mad, that they should seize the Murderer; the two
Guards running into the Chamber seized him, and cut him to pieces, according to
the order she had given them, for fear that the Rack and remorse might make
that Wretch tell what moved him to so detestable a Parricide; so true it is,
that great Ones, who make use of other men to execute their pernicious Designs,
often resolve at the same time to sacrifice them also to themselves, that the
death of these blind Ministers may serve for a Vail and Cloud to their Designs.

The noise of this Tragical Death being spread through all the Palace, the King
run to see this pitiful Spectacle. Though he did not love Galsuinta, and that
by the irregularity of his passion, there arose in his Soul, I know not what
malign Joy, in that he saw a person so conveniently dispatched, who traversed
his happiness; however the innocence of that fair Queen, her Blood all
smoking, which came in great Floods from her Wound, her Bosom which seemed
still to heave; in fine, her Eyes which seemed to recollect their greatest
luster, before they closed for ever, objects so tender and so touching, excited
in his heart a strong pity, and a just resentment against the Assassinate.

Fredegonda would make him know that she was no less sensible than he for this
misfortune; she even shed Tears, but it was rather for joy than grief. Yet as
there is nothing more natural than to let our selves be persuaded by those we
love, Chilperick fancyed she was innocent, and that she had not had any part in
the murder.

A Tomb was erected for the Princess, and Fredegonda to take away all suspicion
was careful it should be the most glorious of all those that had yet appeared.
She affected at Galsuinta's Funeral, all the regrets that are usual to persons
really afflicted. But the clear-sighted did not fail to discover, through this
disguise, that it was she who had caused her death; and her Marriage with the
King, which was celebrated some short time after, opening the Eyes of the most
credulous, inspired in all people sentiments of hatred and indignation against
her.

Meroveus especially to whom her new Dignity, and the Death of the Princess,
were equally sensible, fell into a kind of rage against her: he resolved to be
revenged at the peril not only of his Life, but even of that of the Queen his
Mother, who still led, at Man's, a languishing and unfortunate Life.

In the mean time Fredegonda apprehending that Sigebert, doubting of the truth,
would revenge the Death of his Sister in Law, instead of Athanagildus, whom a
Fever had lately taken out of this World; wherefore she bethought her self of
preventing him. And thereupon remonstrated to the King that it was of the
utmost importance to make reflection upon the consequences that Galsuinta's
death might have that the malignity of Men made them often treat as criminal
the most innocent actions upon the least appearances; that she already foresaw
that her Marriage would establish in base minds, a firm belief, that she had
caused that attempt; that these false reports making a strong impression on the
minds of Sigebert and his Ministers, he would not fail to form the Design of
attacquing him; that the remembrance of their past differences would be a
powerful Spur to excite his vengeance; In fine, that it was policy and prudence
to prevent him and not to stay till he came and overrun their Territories with
a powerful Army.

Chilperick whose blind passion had made him forget the misfortune that
Fredegonda's councels had plunged him into, did not balance to follow her
sentiments: He caused his Council to assemble, but it was only to keep a vain
formality. The War against Sigebert was there resolved on notwithstanding the
opinions of those of best sense; and on a sudden Orders were given for the
raising Forces, and to be in a posture of marching with the soonest.

The preparations of this War being made, Fredegonda was willing to go to it in
person, for the animating the Kings courage; and to hinder him from making any
Peace with his Brother; She prayed him to leave Meroveus at Soissons.
Chilperick granted that willingly, because he knew that this young Prince had
ill intentions against his Mother-in-Law, and was likewise very willing to
confide the administration of his Affairs in a person of Name and Authority.
Wherefore he ordered his Son to be careful in his absence of the necessities of
his State, and made him in that Place Depositer of his Almightiness.

Meroveus received this Commission both with joy and displeasure. As he knew
the injustice of that War, he was very glad to see himself dispensed from going
to fight against persons whose quarrel he would have run to embrace, if nature
had not opposed: but on the other side his resentment was extreme, when he
considered that his Victim escaped him. The first consideration, joined to his
Duty, prevailed however over his resentment. He disposed himself to fill
worthily Chilperick's place, and to make appear to the people that Fate was
unjust to him in letting him be so long a Subject.

Fredegonda seeing the Army quite ready, assigned her self the day of
departure, and obliged the King to it, who sleeping in the bosom of a sweet and
soft idleness, did not quit without regret the Walls of Soissons, she mounted
with him into a Chariot, wherein magnificence and luxury made appear all that
they had most splendid. The Army, which environed this proud pomp, marched the
second time toward Rheimes.

In the mean time Sigebert was busied with making head against the Huns, who
were returned to thunder upon his Territories. He ha^ already for some time
been assured of Fredegonda's Crime, and he waited with impatience for the end
of the War, to go and demand of Chilperick, Justice for so horrid an Attempt.
But as soon as he was acquainted that he himself advanced with a great Army
against him, he could not delay any longer his vengeance, and was willing to
sacrifice part of his Glory to so just a resentment. Wherefore he once more
made Peace with the Huns, yielding up much more of his Interests than he would
have done in another juncture. He advanced with speed toward his Enemy,
followed by sixty thousand Germans. The two Armies met near Rheimes, where
there was a terrible Checque, but Fortune contrary to its custom favored the
just^st Party. She made in a little time the Victory incline on Sigebert's
side. All Chilperick's Army was put to the Rout. That wretched King having
rallied some Troops, fled with Fredegonda to Tournay, that they might not fall
into hands of the Conqueror.

Gontran having learned the fatal success of this Battle, could not forbear
having some sense of pity for Chilperick, though he had been before odious to
him for all the crimes which his Love for Fredegonda had again stained him
with. He was willing to be a second time the Mediator of a Peace betwixt his
two Brothers; wherefore he used all his efforts to make the King of Austrasia
agree to it, on whom it depended.

Sigebert whose heart was great and generous, seemed at first to incline to his
Prayers: but it is so difficult, even to the fairest Souls, to stop on a sudden
the course of their Passions, and stifle all the motions of a legitimate
vengeance, that this Prince silenced his clemency, for to exercise the severity
of his justice. He heard the cries of all his Soldiers, who could not suffer
to be stopped in the midst of their carreer; and he listened more than to the
cries of his Soldiers, to sentiments of ambition which now and then rose in
his heart. Wherefore he made known to Gontran, that he could not consent to
what he exacted from him, since that it was but too just that Chilperick should
be punished for his Treachery. He went to Paris, which opened to him its Gates,
and wherein he entered victorious and triumphing. Queen Brunchaut his Wife came
thither likewise, after which he thought of going to pursue his Enemy. The
Queen at his departure earnestly conjured him not to spare Fredegonda, which he
willingly promised her. He went immediately to encamp at Vitry, where all the
N^ustrian Lords coming to him, made Oath of Fidelity to him, acknowledged him
for their King, and Crowned him. After which he marched toward Tournay, which
he quickly brought to extremity by a pressing Siege. Chilperick, wholly
terrified, waited only for the fatal hour that was to deliver him into his
Enemies hands, when he saw himself in a moment secured from the danger that
threatened him, by a Crime worthy of Fredegonda. That cunning Woman might that
day brag she had satisfied him for all the ills she had made him suffer. She so
well knew how to gain by her promises, two Inhabitants of the City, that they
offered themselves to undertake blindly what she exacted from them. Whereupon
they found the means of going into the Besiegers Camp, where they asked to see
Sigebert, for the communicating to him a Design of great importance. The Guards
by an imprudence, which is pretty usual in such encounters, introduced them
into his Tent. As soon as the Murderers perceived that unfortunate Prince, they
fell furiously upon him, and each of them gave him two stabs with their
Daggers, of which he dyed immediately.

This Parricide was hardly executed, than that all the Besiegers, being taken
with a mortal fear, fell into an unexpressible consternation. They thought of
nothing more than the imploring the Mercy of the Besieged, and this Camp
wherein joy was so generally spread, appeared only then a fatal Stage of
despair.

Chilperick and Fredegonda, seeing their Fate changed in an instant by so
favorable a reverse, went out of the City in Triumph. They returned with all
speed toward Paris, where, upon the report of Sigebert's Death, Brunchaut had
been secured to be delivered to them. Fredegonda would have had her lost her
Life. but Chilperick once wanted that complaisance, and contented himself with
banishing that unfortunate Princess to Roan. After having caused Meroveus to
come to him, he sent him to take possession of Poitou, which made part of
Sigebert's Kingdom.

This young Prince had learned the death of the King of Austrasia, with all the
grief and all the regrets that can be expected from a person who hates
injustice. This new Empire, of which he was Heir, had not Charms enough to
flatter his trouble, he never had a thought unbecoming his Virtue and his
Glory. That which most sharpened his grief, was the Commission that the King
gave him, which would in some manner render him an Accomplice of Fredegonda's
Crimes. Wherefore he could never resolve to execute it. He had however so much
command over himself as to dissemble before Chilperick. He took leave of him to
go into Poitou: but, after having traveled some days, he left that Road to go
to Man's. He was willing once more to speak to his Mother, and enjoy before her
Death the embraces of that good Princess. The sight of Meroveus caused in her
incredible transports and ecstasies. She made them appear by her Tears and her
Sighs, that were the first discourses that she held with him. After having
entertained themselves with their misfortunes, and of what they had to do, they
were to part. As Fredegonda had the Title of Queen, Andouera thought it
unbecoming her Virtue to dispatch her by cunning and base means. She did not
believe that all the Crimes of that wicked Woman, could authorize an action
that should have any resemblance with hers. Wherefore she proposed to the
Prince to go see Brunchaut for to confer with her, and to engage, by her means,
the greatest Men of Austrasia, to demand Fredegonda of Chilperick, to sacrifice
her to their King, and upon his refusal, should make War upon him, whose
success would be perhaps more happy than it had been.

Meroveus consented with joy to this proposition, and took leave of the
Princess. It seemed at their parting, that Andouera had a secret presage of her
Son's misfortune: a great shivering went through all her Body, her fancy was
filled with fatal objects, and her tears were dried up, as too weak to express
the violence of her grief, she embraced the Prince several times, and felt her
self fixed to him by something more strong and more extraordinary than the
tendernesses of Blood. In fine, Meroveus having forced himself from her Arms,
as against her Will, he immediately left Man's to go in all speed to Roan.

It was there that Love and Fortune expected this young Prince, to make him
sensible of all that they have most cruel, and to perfect his ruin, which they
had conspired together.

In all the way he felt himself agitated with an unknown trouble, and which he
could not attribute to any of the passions he had felt. After having been
received in Roan with all the illustrious marks of honor that were due to his
quality and his merit, he would go make a visit to Brunchaut. The nearer he
approached the place where she was, the more his trouble and his agitations
increased. By a very capricious effect two contrary motions led him on and
stopped him at the same time. In fine, that secret timidity suffering him to do
his Devoir, he entered the Princesses Chamber, whom he found plunged into a deep
melancholy.

Of all the Darts of Love, there are none whose strokes we receive with less
resistance than those which issue from the misfortunes of the person we are to
love. The affection of a fair one is so touching a Charm to a generous heart,
that it is almost impossible for it to interess it self in her Fate, by the
sole sentiments of pity. The Soul softened by so sad an object, easily forgets
it self to consider it only: its desires are stirred up, its powers are in
motion, and in the midst of this disorder I know not what kind of languishing,
mingled with grief and displeasure together, penetrates all its foldings.

If it was a happiness for Brunchaut to be beloved by Meroveus, it may be said
the state she was then reduced to, was the greatest favor she had received
from Fortune. Her Eyes through Rivers of Tears which run incessantly, sent
fearful and languishing looks to the Prince, which immediately found an easy
passage to his very heart: The paleness and alteration of her Face did not
hinder the admiring still those secret Graces, which procured her as many
Adorers, as there were persons who approached her. It even seemed that Love for
the better securing his Conquest, had raised the luster of them.

Meroveus was a long time mute before her, and only answered her Tears with his
Sighs. Brunchaut took his sadness and silence for an ill augure. She fancyed
that he came to execute some fatal sentence that Chilperick, or rather
Fredegonda, had pronounced against her; that the sight and Idea of her miseries
touched the young Prince: but that his generosity and compassion, would not be
cap(...) of overcoming the obedience he owed the King his Father; insomuch
that she thought of nothing else than of preparing her self for Death. After
having strove to stop for some moments the course of her Tears, she told the
Prince, sighing, that amongst all the ills she had foreseen, she had never
expected from the utmost rigor of Fortune, what it was going to act against
her; that she perceived her fatal hour was come; that she had courage enough
not to murmur at it, and to go without regret to find out her Husband in the
Grave: But that she could not suffer without complaining, that a Prince whom
she had ever esteemed for his Virtue, should have charged himself with the care
of her Death; that she was but too well assured of it, by those marks even of
pity that he gave her, and that he made it enough known by his silence that it
was all that he could grant her.

This reproach quite oppressed Meroveus, it put him entirely out of a condition
of explaining his sentiments to Brunchaut: Nothing but his Eyes had been able
to have discovered something to her, if she had well consulted them. The new
trouble she observed in his Face confirmed her in the error she was in. She
persuaded her self that the perplexity she saw this Prince in, was a tacit
confession of all she had said to him; when she made a strong reflection upon
her misfortunes, the excess of her grief made her fall into a swoon. Her Maids
who retired out of respect, run all in at the noise they heard, and brought her
to her self again.

Meroveus received the first glances of her Eyes half open. His sighs then
permitting him to break a silence, that had been so injurious to her, he told
the Princess that she was very cruel and unjust to have such low thoughts of
him; that no design was formed against her, that the desire only of seeing her
had brought him to Roan: But though that Chilperick and Fredegonda should have
conspired her ruin, he would not balance to embrace her defense against them;
that he was not only animated to it by his Glory and his Virtue, that he found
himself tied to her by Bonds much more powerful than those of Nature, that she
ought not to attribute to his pity alone, the fatal estate her sight had
reduced him to; that nothing but so strong a passion as Love was capable of
producing so strange effects; that he was resolved to procure her her liberty,
even at the peril of his Life; that he would not force her heart to any
acknowledgment for his Services; but that if without doing violence to her
inclinations she could suffer his Vows, he prayed her to favor them, and
consent to the happiness of a Prince who might one day make her reign upon the
chiefest Throne of France.

Brunchaut was so surprised with so unexpected a discourse, that the excess of
joy made almost in her the same effect that grief had done. After having
remained a long time mute, she answered the Prince that she should be very
credulous to add faith to his words, the present juncture of affairs little
permitting them to think of such a design; but that if he would give her real
marks of his Love, he ought to endeavor her liberty, as he had newly promised
her; that they might afterward advise more at leisure, of what would be
convenient for them to do, for both their repose.

Meroveus too much respected the Princesses will to contradict it: he even
stole away from the pleasures, that he should have relished in a longer
conversation, to run and give her marks of his obedience and his zeal. He sent
for the Governor of the Castle the Princess was in, and told him that he
desired she should go out and be at liberty, that he would be responsible, the
King should not take it ill, and that he would charge himself with his Conduct.
This Officer too much respected his Kings eldest Son, not to consent to what he
demanded, he presented him with the Keys of the Castle, and told him that he
might use them as he should think fit.

A reflection which came into Meus's mind, hindered him from returning then to
the Princess. Never had any fair passion in a great heart been so violent in so
little a time as this was. It seemed as if Love had only spared him till then
for the making him feel at once all the transports that can agitate a Lover,
during several years. The possession of Brunchaut appeared to him so perfect a
happiness, that it is not to be wondered, if he thought more of securing that
than any thing else. By a motion of distrust, very usual to Lovers, he
apprehended that the Princess once released out of Prison, would immediately
vanish out of his sight; wherefore he fancyed that he ought, before all things,
employ all his efforts to get her consent to their Marriage.

Whereupon he went to see her the next day: The sight of her did not cause in
him any new increase of Love, his passion being incapable of receiving any. He
told her he had found the Captain of the Guards inflexible to his Prayers; that
that Officer durst not dispose of any thing without express Orders from Court;
but upon his having assured him, that he would publicly marry the Princess as
soon as ever she was set free, he had made known to him he would favor his
Design; that she could not then recover her liberty but at that rate; that,
since time pressed, she ought to declare her self with the soonest, and to
examine her self if it was not more advantageous for her to enter into Sacred
Bonds with a Prince, who would make it eternally all his happiness to please
her, than to languish sadly in an obscure Prison.

Though Meroveus should have dived into all the most secret thoughts of
Brunchaut, he could not more agreeably have flattered her desires. She had made
several reflections upon the first visit of this Prince. As she had apprehended
his Love was only a passing flame, which would be the more easily extinguished,
in that it had appeared at first with too much violence, she was displeased
with her self that she had not made better use of the occasion, for the deeper
engaging him, and that she had too exactly observed scrupulous decencies out of
season. She had considered that she could not find a firmer support against the
hatred of Fredegonda, her mortal Enemy; that even Chilperick could not dispense
himself from protecting her, when he saw her his Sons Wife; that her glory was
interessed in this Alliance, since it was the highest Rank she could then
aspire to. Neither was this young Prince so indifferent to her, but that Love
made her give him the tenderest of her Vows. Wherefore she told him that since
she saw her self forced to open to him all her heart, liberty was not the
greatest good she desired; that she should even consider it as the worst of
ills, if it only served to absent her from a person who could alone make her
good or ill Fortune; that she had been no less troubled at the sight of the
Prince, than he had been at hers; that in fine, the sighs of two hearts were
never so well met.

Meroveus, whom this discourse put into an ecstasy, interrupted it, to make
known to the Princess the transports of his joy, by all the terms that Love can
put into the mouth of the most passionate Lovers. After which he told her she
must hasten so longed for moments, and endeavor without ceasing the
establishment of their mutual happiness; that he was going to the Archbishop,
Pretextat, his Godfather, to obtain from him the Dispensation that was
necessary for them; that he did not believe he would refuse it him, having
already received from that Prelate, in other rencounters, several marks of a
particular affection.

After these words he left her, and run to Pretextat's house, to whom he
communicated his Designs, praying him to bring no obstacle to them.

The Prelate strangely surprised with such a piece of News, remonstrated to the
young Prince, that he better ought to command his passion and moderate his
desires; that what he demanded of him could not be done; that it would cause
too great a scandal in the world; and that it would likewise expose them both
to the Kings resentment.

This cruel refusal reduced this poor Lover to despair: he begged and threatened
by turns, but his prayers and his threatenings were equally in vain, and
Pretextat, to avoid the ill effects they might produce, left him angrily, and
run to shut himself up in the most secret place of the House, Meroveus went
away in such furious transports that he was not himself. He went to Gailan his
Confident, whom he asked what he should do in that sad case, and that if he
judged it not convenient to go seize the Pretextat cunningly, for to frighten
him, and constrain him to consent to his Marriage with Brunchaut. Gailan was a
man of a ripe and settled judgment, who rather deplored the blindness of his
Master than inclined to flatter his passion. He told him that he ought not to
act with so much precipitation, in an Affair of that importance; that he ought
to foresee the ills he would bring upon himself; that Fredegonda had already
but too much imbittered the King against him, without giving him still so just
a subject of complaint.

Meroveus, whose anger was inflamed at so free a discourse, silenced his
Confident with furious threatenings. He told him, that if he opened his heart to
him, it was to learn what way he should take to arrive at the possession of
what he loved, and not to know what consequences his Love might have; that he
had foreseen them as well as himself, but that they allarmed him but little,
that he should esteem himself too happy, let what would happen, if he once saw
himself Brunchauts Husband; that, in fine, he forbid him upon pain of Life,
never to make him the like remonstrances.

The passion of this unfortunate Prince proceeded to such an excess, that his
great Soul, which had ever been capable of embracing so many things at once,
was then wholly possessed with it, it remained in a kind of insensibility for
all other objects, and it was not known if it was still susceptible of reason
but in entertaining Brunchaut. Gailan perceiving that this Lover was not in a
condition to relish any moderate counsel, fancied that the most useful service
that he could do him, was to facilitate to him the possession of his Mistress,
since if he came to miss of her, it was to be feared his despair might carry
him to attempt something against himself. After having asked him pardon for the
boldness his zeal had made him take, he told him that the surest means to move
Pretextat, was not to use rigor and threatenings; that he ought on the contrary
renew more and more to him his prayers and submissions, and make known to him
that if he showed himself inexorable, it would infallibly cost the Princes
Life, that he only saw two objects capable of giving him repose, his Marriage
with Brunchaut, or Death.

What weaknesses is not Love capable of making a heart guilty of? And what low
sentiments does it not inspire it with?

Meroveus whom the fear of the greatest dangers, nor even death before his
Eyes, had ever been able to make him stoop to his Enemies, embraces Gailan, and
does himself beg his excuse for his passion. He returned immediately to
Pretextat's house, to whom he sent up word, that he beseeched him to hear him
yet once more, and that he needed not to apprehend any thing from him.

The Prelate loving this young Prince, was not insensible to his misfortune. He
was willing to give him the satisfaction he demanded, and expose himself once
more to his sight. He came to him, and observing in his Face a a little more
tranquillity than before, he asked him if he begun to be cured of his passion.

Meroveus viewing him with languishing Eyes, replied, that Brunchaut reigned
too soveraignly in his heart, to believe he could ever renounce her possession;
that this serenity which appeared in his Face, was rather a mark of his
despair, than of the tranquillity of his Soul; that before he abandoned himself
entirely to it, he returned to implore his goodness; that Pretextat had his
Life and his Fate in his hands, that as soon as he should have assured him that
he ought not to pretend to the marriage of the Princess, he would run to Death.

This discourse uttered with an action wholly passionate, so moved Pretextat,
that he could hardly forbear shedding tears. He begged the Prince to believe
that he shared in his grief, and that it was not without regret that he found
himself unable to grant what he desired.

At these fatal words, Meroveus, seized-with a blind fury, drew his Sword, and
would have run himself through in that Prelate's sight, if he had not been
hindered.

Pretextat, who really found by this action, that it concerned the Princes Life
to marry him to Brunchaut, told him, to re-assure him, that since he saw this
Marriage was so important to him, he would not resist it any longer; that
however as he would not do any thing against his conscience, and which might
displease the Holy See, he was willing to consult first the most understanding
Divines of Roan, and that within three days at the farthest he would give him a
positive answer.

But Meroveus, who, besides the impatience of his Love, feared with reason some
obstacle on Chilperick's and Fredegonda's part, was not satisfied with these
promises. He would not go from Pretextat's house till he had assured him he
would go that moment to consult such persons as were fit to clear his doubt.

In effect this Prelate lost not any time: He caused several Doctors to
assemble in all haste, they all told him it was their opinion, he might
celebrate the Princes Marriage without wounding his conscience.

Pretextat after having settled all on Gods side, was likewise willing to keep
peace with the King as well as he could, or at least to procure himself
Defenders against his resentment. Wherefore he proposed this Alliance to the
most considerable of the City, and told them that he would do nothing without
their advice. Fredegonda's Crimes reflecting upon Chilperick, begun to render
him as well as she an object of hatred and contempt to all his Subjects. There
was not one but looked with Eyes of pity upon Brunchaut's Captivity: Insomuch
that Pretextat agreeably surprised all those he spoke to of this Affair. Very
far from opposing it, they encouraged him to procure as soon as possible the
happiness of these Lovers, and vowed to him that they would secure him from the
King and Fredegonda's anger, or that it should cost them their Lives.

Pretextat, after so general a consent, did not balance any longer. He sought
for Meroveus to acquaint him with this favorable News. This Prince whose
passion was more and more irritated, expected with as much fear as impatience
the sentence that was to be given him. When he perceived Pretextat, he felt his
Soul agitated with new allarms, his greedy curiosity was damped on a sudden,
and he durst not ask to be informed of his Fate, imagining that he should be
too soon instructed with his misfortune. But as soon as the Prelate had assured
him that all favored his Designs, he cast himself at his Feet, and vowed he
would eternally remember the service that he disposed himself to do him: he
prayed him to appoint the next morning for his Marriage with the Princess, and
to be himself the sacred Depositor of their mutual Oaths. Pretextat easily
granted him what he demanded, insomuch that the Prince upon this assurance left
him, to go and give notice to his Mistress of what passed.

Brunchaut, who was already acquainted with the Prelates opposing Meroveus's
desires, was extremely grieved at it: but when this Lover had pronounced to her
their mutual happiness, her Tears, with which her Face was all bathed, were
dried up in a moment, her griefs vanished, and if there remained any trouble in
her Soul, it was only what Love and Joy excited there. During several hours
that the Prince stayed with her, ardent sighs and passionate looks, those
el^quent Interpreters of the sentiments of the heart, were even their principal
discourse.

Decency having at length parted these two Lovers, Meroveus returned home to
pass the rest of the night. It was then that this Prince felt more than ever in
his Soul those uneasy desires, those lively eagernesses, those impatient
transports, those sweet agitations ever blooming; In fine, all that an amourous
heart can be sensible of, when itisi suddenly to possess what it loves.

That so longed for hour being come, he returned to the Princesses House, whom
he told that it was time she should go out of Prison, and that she ought no
longer to wear any other Chains than those of Love.

Brunchaut, being willing to make the Empire she had over Merove us, to further
her Designs, viewed him with a sad Eye, and which made it apparent that there
was something wanting to her Vows.

The Prince much startled, pressed her to explain the subject of her grief.
Whereupon she made all the persons retire who were in the Chamber, and told
that Lover that since he had left her, she had made a serious reflection upon
the important Affair she was going to engage her self in; that a second
Marriage so precipitated would in some manner wound her Glory; that this might
make several believe that she had been of intelligence with Sigebert's
Murderers; that she fancyed to have heard the Voice of that Husband, who cried
Vengeance to her, and reproached her with her weakness and ingratitude.

This Lover, to whom all these Words were as so many Darts piercing his Soul,
interrupted the Princess, crying, that if she was so cruel as solely to oppose
his happiness, by considerations merely frivolous and chimerical, he would give
himself, in her sight, marks of his despair.

Brunchaut, having prayed the Prince to hear her yet one moment, added to what
she had told him, that she was too far engaged to give back, and though she
could consent to it, she found that she had not force enough over her self, to
hinder her from following the inclination of her heart; but that it was
necessary that an illustrious revenge should justify her carriage, and should
persuade all people that she would not have returned so soon to the Laws of
Marriage, but for the better performing what she owed to Sigebert's Manes; that
in fine, Victimes were required, and that before they went to the Altar, she
exacted a faithful promise from him, that he would deliver to her such as she
thought her due.

Meroveus answered Brunchaut, that her Will should be eternally the only Rule
of his Actions, because that he knew very well that in following them, he
should only follow what Glory would inspire him with, whereupon putting a Fence
to the ground, he took one of the Princesses hands, and swore he would
sacrifice to her such Victims as she should think fit, provided she always
excepted the King his Father.

She told him that she only aimed at Fredegonda and her Creatures: Insomuch
that these Lovers did easily reconcile all their sentiments. They went from the
Castle to the Great Church where the Prelate expected them. Never was Nuptial
Pomp prepared with so much haste, but one may say that it was more charming
than all that Art or Luxury had yet shown, since Love appeared in triumph there
in its greatest luster.

The crowd of people which run to see so fine a Sight, was so great, that the
Soldiers could hardly make a free passage for the Chariot that carried these
Lovers; and the joy was so generally spread in all hearts, that all places
ecchoed the Vows every one sent to Heaven for their prosperity.

That holy Ceremony being finished, the Prelate would treat the new married; he
invited them to a Feast that he had caused to be prepared, with as much
neatness and magnificence, as so short a time could permit. Several of the
chiefest persons of the City were likewise of the Feast. They strove with a
kind of emulation to compliment this Royal Pair, and to testify, especially to
Brunchaut, the extreme displeasure they had had in seeing her so unjustly
languish in a hard Captivity. The Beauty of this Princess was then in its
greatest splendor; it seemed as if all the Graces were met in her; and there
issued from her Eyes and her Face, I know not what luster, that had never been
observed before, and wherein haughtiness and sweetness made together an
agreeable mixture.

Meroveus fixed all his looks upon her, and could not be satisfied with
contemplating her; the more he saw her, the more new Charms did he discover;
and though he had already formed a strong Idea of them, he avowed in himself
that the presence of so rare an object effaced all that his imagination had
represented to him in her absence. He waited with an extreme impatience for the
end of that day, which ought to be the beginning of his happiness, when that
illustrious company was told that Chilperick and Fredegonda were entered the
City, followed by a Body of Horse, and that several Squadrons were perceived at
a distance coming on.

Meroveus, as struck with Thunder at that fatal News, remained a long time
without motion. When he had recovered his Spirits, he did not doubt but that
the King, animated by Fredegonda, would force the House in which they were, and
that his Mother-in-Law would use all her efforts to ruin Brunchaut. So that to
preserve a Life that was much more dear to him than his own, he obliged the
Princess to fly immediately away with him. These two poor Lovers run to take
refuge in the same Church, and at the Feet of the same Altars where they had
newly entered into so holy Bonds.

Chilperick, notwithstanding all that Fredegonda could say to him, durst not
draw them out by force; he was still so much the Master of his resentment, as
not to violate the Sacred Asile of all the unhappy. He sent word to those
Lovers that they might come out with all safety, that being far from doing them
any violence, he would ratify this Marriage, provided the Church consented to
it. How credulous is Love, and how easily does it fall into the Snares that are
laid for it? Brunchaut having still prudence enough to foresee what would
happen, remonstrated to Meroveus, that they ought not to rely on so suspected
and deceitful promises, and that Fredegonda's strength lay ordinarily in
Treacheries and Artifices.

But this Lover, whom his passion rendered no longer capable of any reflection,
told the Princess that this distrust would only help to irritate the King,
whose sight they could not long avoid; that he hoped Nature would be still so
strong in his Heart, as to overcome his resentment.

The too easy Princess yielded to the Prayers and Persuasions of Meroveus.
They both went to deliver themselves as unhappy Victims into the hands of their
Enemies.

When they appeared before Chilperick, it was to no purpose their Tears spoke
and raised the pity of all the People. This barbarous King, inspired by his
Wife, caused them instantly to be shut up in the Castle, but each in a Chamber
apart; Insomuch that the unfortunate Brunchaut seemed to have breathed only
some moments of liberty, to be afterward the more lively sensible of the
rigours of her Prison. These Lovers were treated with so much indignity, as
that they were even refused the persons whose service was necessary to them.
They were deprived of the consolation they might have had in communicating
their thoughts, and in learning what was resolved of against them; In fine,
such as were obliged to come into their Chambers, to carry them the necessaries
of Life, were forbidden to speak to them, and they had no other entertainment
than their Complaints.

In the mean time Chilperick caused Pretextat to be seized, whom he accused of
High Treason. For trying him he caused an Assembly of several other Prelates to
be held, of whom the most part were the blind Ministers of Fredegonda's
passions. Pretextat defended himself so courageously, and by such strong
reasons, that his Judges, acknowledging themselves his innocence, had recourse
to Artifice to condemn him. They remonstrated to him, in secret, that this
obstinacy to defend himself would but the more irritate the King, who would
have him owe his safety to hi^ Clemency, and that as soon as h^ should see in
him the marks of (...) submissive Subject, he would ceas^ to trouble him.

Pretextat suffered himself to b^ seduced by these captious Remonstrances. When
that he returne^ to the Assembly, he confessed before Chilperick the Crimes
with which he was charged, and made himself, by this imprudent avowal, the
Sentence of his Condemnation. For these words were hardly escaped from him,
than that the King demanded High Justice of the Prelates, and said that the
accused ought to be judged upon his Deposition. Whereupon this innocent Wretch
was immediately degraded, and banished to a little Desert Island, near the City
of Coutance, from whence after a long Bondage he was at length re-called, and
re-established in his Dignity. But Fredegonda not knowing what it was to forget
an injury, caused him to be at last assassinated, even as he was celebrating
Divine Service.

That wicked Woman made use of all her Addresses and Power with the King, to
oblige him to put Brunchaut and Meroveus to death. As she saw that Nature was
not yet wholly extinguished in Chilperick's heart, and that it did not permit
him to shed so unjustly his own Blood, she only demanded that of Brunchaut: But
her hatred was deceived, and her Victime escaped from her when she least
mistrusted it.

The Lords of Austrasia, who yet knew nothing of what had passed, sent Deputies
to Chilperick to redemand of him their Queen, and remonstrate to him that they
could not suffer she should be detained longer from them, without any reason;
and that they were ready to implore Succors of all the neighboring Princes,
to procure satisfaction in this point. The Affair being seriously treated of in
the Kings Council, this Demand was found so just and reasonable, that,
notwithstanding all that Fredegonda could say, it was resolved that Brunchaut
should return unto her Territories, and should depart with the Ambassadors.
Whereupon she was released out of Prison, and Meroveus likewise out of his at
the same time.

Fredegonda, in whom this departure caused transports of rage and despair, did
all that she could to moderate them by an imperfect vengeance, since that she
could not entirely exercise it. As it was impossible for her to find any
comfort, but in the unhappiness of these Lovers, she ordered they should be
released together out of the Castle; and that they should see one another once
more; this cruel pleasure she only granted them that they might be the more
lively sensible of their fatal separation, and that they might have the Idea of
it the more present.

Meroveus fixing his looks upon the Princess, met with hers, which for the last
time sought the Princes heart, to explain to it her Love and her Grief. Never
was a farewell so tender and so mourning: Several confused sighs were almost the
language that these Lovers held.

Brunchaut at length disappearing from the Eyes of Meroveus, he was shut up in
a Cloister, where, by a Capricio as fantastical as unjust, the King caused him
to be shaved, and engaged him in the Orders against his Will, believing thereby
to deprive him of all means of ever intriguing in the World. A strange and
pernicious Policy of Men! who abuse Religion even for the execution of their
Crimes, and make use of the most Sacred Mysteries, as easy Instruments for
their bringing to pass their unjust enterprises.

Chilperick, after having sent Brunchaut away, returned to Paris, with
Fredegonda, and left his Son to digest at leisure his vexations in his solitude.

It was then that the heart of this Prince was wracked by allarms much more
cruel than all those with which he had been yet seized, and that he found
himself agitated with all the other passions that are the usual effects of an
unhappy Love. When he thought how treacherously Fortune had dealt with him,
that he considered that it had only brought him near his happiness, to make his
loss of it the more sensible, he fell under his Grief. That charming Image of
the Princesses Beauty that was so deeply impressed in his heart, and which
incessantly offered it self to his Eyes, did only help to increase his ills,
and augment his regrets. But his main trouble was the uncertainty he was in of
Brunchaut's Fate, and was in a mortal fear that Fredegonda had caused her to be
assassinated upon the Way. He could not conceive this Idea without despair, and
it was however what hindered him from attempting any thing himself, because he
would not abandon his Life, without being assured of that of the Princess. It
was to no purpose he inquired News of her, all People were deaf to his Prayers,
and the continual Favors that Fredegonda bestowed upon that House, stopped the
mouths of all the Religious. He likewise tried all manner of ways to escape
from that place; but his endeavors were still fruitless, till that his Enemy
her self facilitated to him the execution of this Design to complete his ruin.

Fredegonda had lately brought forth a Son to Chilperick, whom she designed for
the Throne, and foreseeing that Meroveus, after the Kings Death, might return
from his Vows with so much the more ease, in that his heart had ever disavowed
them, she fancyed that nothing but this Princes Death could secure the Crown to
her Son: Wherefore she resolved of it, let what would happen. Of all the
Creatures she had made, the most powerful was Bozon, Lieutenant General of
Sigebert's Armies. This man since the Death of that Prince had ever remained at
Sigebert's Court, who considered him upon Fredegonda's recommendation. She one
day told this Favorite, that she must exact an important Service from him, and
that she would fully acknowledge it. Bozon assured her that he was ready to
undertake all things for her. Whereupon she communicated to him her Design of
dispatching Meroveus, and proposed to him the proper means for that end: He
approved them, and they resolved to cast so horrid a Crime upon Gailan the
Princes Confident, and to perplex him in this Affair.

Bozon went privately away from Court, taking such persons with him as he had
an absolute power over. He went to find out Gailan, to whom he said he was
resolved to attempt Meroveus's Liberty, whose misfortune he deplored, that he
had several Friends in the House he was in; that he hoped to oblige the
Religious to leave him to him, and that he would then conduct him into
Austrasia, where the Queen his Wife would be sure to receive him with joy.

Gailan's Affection for his Master was too great to refuse so fair a
Proposition. He encouraged Bozon to so fair and generous an enterprise, and
assured him that if he was happy enough to bring it to pass, the Prince would
not be ungrateful. They went together to the place where he was, and Bozon made
Gailan to expect him at the Door.

Bozon, seeing the Prince, told him that the resentment that he had of the ills
that his Enemies made him suffer so unjustly, had brought him to that place,
where, by the means of Prayers and Promises, he was suffered to come to him.

Meroveus immediately interrupted him, to ask News of Brunchaut.

Bozon assured him that she reigned peaceably in Austrasia, and renewing his
discourse, he related to the Prince that he was upon the point of returning
thither; that if he would suffer himself to be conducted by his zeal, he would
procure his liberty; that Gailan expected them twenty Paces from thence with a
Troop of trusty Men; that they would go together into that Country, where he
did not doubt but the Queen would receive him with open Arms.

Meroveus, transported with joy, at this obliging Discourse, embraced Bozon,
told him that he would follow him where ever he would lead him, and swear to
him that he would equal the recompense to the greatness of the Service.

Bozon told him that he needed only to come out, and that the Religious, who
had care of the Door, attended. Meroveus marched immediately with him, they
traversed all the Cloisters, and likewise passed the Door without any obstacle;
insomuch that this Prince then fancied that Fortune, after so many outrages,
would be at length reconciled to him. They went to Gailan and the other persons
with him. Gailan was in an ecstasy to see his Prince again, for whom he had so
tender and so sincere an affection. This little Troop, without losing any time,
marched with all speed toward Austrasia.

When they were within a League of Metor, Bozon remonstrated to the Prince,
that it was not convenient to pass further without giving the Queen notice,
because that the sight of the Prince might allarm all the Court, who would
imagine, with some appearance of reason, that it would be a new subject of War
with Chilperick; that therefore it was fit Gailan should be sent, who, being
unknown, might the more easily, and without being suspected, speak in secret to
Brunchaut.

Meroveus was loath to consent to this Proposition, because his love drew him
with too much violence toward the Princess. But he was forced at length to
yield to it, and durst not openly contradict Bozon. Gailan went from the
Prince, in hopes of doing him an important Service; In the mean time he did not
foresee, that his absence would facilitate to the Assassinates, the execution
of their detestable enterprise.

After that Meroveus had refreshed himself sometime, in a Country House, Bozon
asked him, if he would not go meet Gailan.

This Lover impatiently longing to see Brunchaut again, received this notice
with joy. They all marched hastily toward Metor, and when they were come into
a Wood which was but half a League from it, Bozon having given the signal, to
those he had chosen for this horrible Sacrifice, two of those perfidious
Wretches stabbed that unfortunate Prince with their Ponyards, and bathed them
in his Blood.

Bozon returned immediately toward Paris, to give an account to Fredegonda,
and the Assassinates according to the Order they had received, hid themselves
in the Wood, waiting for Gailan, who came some moments after. When he perceived
Meroveus in so fatal a condition, he was seized with such an horror, which
made him make a great shriek.

Meroveus at this noise opening his Eyes, and still knowing Gailan, rallied all
the Life he had left him, to ask him how the Queen did?

Gailan saw that the Prince was upon the point of dying, and that all the help
he endeavored to give him would be useless; so that he thought of nothing, but
satisfying his last desire. He drew a Letter out of his Pocket, that Brunchaut
had given him, and put into Meroveus his hands.

The Prince reassumed as much as he could his languishing looks, he fixed them
upon this Paper, and it seemed as if Love stopped the stroke of Death, to
permit this Lover to enjoy this last delight. So that he had strength enough to
read the Letter; which is as follows.

I Am extremely grieved, Sir, to see that my Authority is not yet so well
settled, as to go and receive you, with all the luster that my Devoir and my
Love require. Be pleased to come this Evening secretly to Court with your
Confident, who can introduce you to me, and We will advise together of the
means to make you known to the People, without danger. Farewell. I impatiently
long to embrace you.

BRUNCHAUT.


As soon as the Prince had read these last words, he glewed his mouth upon the
Paper, and breathed his last in a great sigh.

At the same time the Murderers thundered out of the place they were concealed
in, upon Gailan, accused him of the Princes Death; and having seized him,
returned toward Paris, and presented him to the King. It was to no purpose
this unhappy Man called Heaven to Witness his innocence, and to make Oaths that
caused astonishment and pity in all those that heard him. Fredegonda upon the
Deposition of her Creatures, judged him Criminal, and even persuaded
Chilperick, who caused his Nose and Ears, his Feet and Hands to be cut off.

When Brunchaut had learned this Tragical Death, she did not at all doubt from
what hand the Blows came. She would have invaded Chilperick's Territories, but
as the Public Interest was more considerable than her own, her Council opposed
this Design, wherein there was more to be feared than hoped. Thus all the
Devoir she could practice toward Meroveus, was reduced to the giving him her
Tears, and to nourish a long time desires, without power, to revenge his Death.

FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in Covent Garden.
THe History of the Passions, in Octavo. Plato's Apology for Socrates, in
Octavo. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry, in Octavo. Dr. Whitby of Host-Worship, in
Octavo. Dr. Whitby's Answer to Mr. Cressey. Mr. Chamberlain's Poems, in Octavo.
Moral Essays, in 2 Vol. in Twelves. A Prospect of Humane Misery, in Twelves.
Vanity of Honor, in Twelves. Bishop Andrews Devotions, in Twelves. The
Princess of Cleve, the most famed Romance, in Octavo. Memoirs of Madam Maria
Manchini, in Octavo. The Heroine Musqueteer, in 4 parts, in Twelves. The Happy
Slave, in 3 parts, in Twelves. The Disorders of Love, in Twelves. The Triumphs
of Love, in Twelves. Zelinda, A Romance, in Twelves. Count Brion; or, the
Cheating Gallant, in Twelves. The Obliging Mistress, in Twelves. Fatal
Prudence, in Twelves. Count Cabalis, in Twelves. Double Cuckold, in Twelves.
Almanzor and Almanzaida, in Twelves. The Pilgrim, A Novel, in Twelves. The
Princess of Monferrat, A Novel, in 2 parts. The Pilgrim, the 2d. Part. Homais
Queen of Tunis, A Novel. Gallant Memoires; or the Amors of a Person of
Quality, in Twelves. Amors of the French King, and Madam Lavalieur. Amors of
Madam -- and the Count de -- Meroveus, A Novel. The Extravagant Poet, A Novel.
Plays Written by John Dryden, Esquire;
Mr. Limberham, or the Kind-Keeper. Oedipus, in part. Mistaken Husband, in
part. Notes on Morocco, in part. Plays Written by Mr. Lee. Nero, A Tragedy.
Glorian, a Tragedy. The Rival Queens a Tragedy. Mythridates, a Tragedy. Caesar
Borgia, A Tragedy. Plays Written by Mr. Crown. Andromache, A Tragedy. Calisto,
A Masque at Court. Country-Wit, A Comedy. Destruction of Jerusalem, in 2 parts.
The Miseries of Civil-War. Plays Written by Mrs. Bhen. Forced Marriage, A
Tragi-Comedy. Town-Fop, A Comedy. Abdellazar, A Tragedy. Madam Fickle,
Comedies. Fond-Husband, Comedies. Virtuous Wife, Comedies. Plain-Dealer, A
Comedy, By Mr. Wicherly. All Mistaken, By Mr. Howard. English Monsieur, By Mr.
Howard. Generous Enemies, A Comedy, By Mr. Corey. Tartuff, A Comedy; By Mr.
Medburn. The Orphan, Or the Unhappy Marriage. Theodosius, Or the Force of Love.
Soldiers Fortune. Henry the Sixth, with the Murder of the good Duke of
Gloucester, in 2 parts. King Lear. Thyestes. Tamerlane the Great. Moor of
Venice. Unhappy Favorite.
French Books.
La vie and les faicts memorables de l'Evesque de Munster. Le Pelerin: Nouvelle
Curieuse. Histoire du Grand Tamerlan. Les Satyrs de Boileau. Tamerlan: ou la
mort de Bajazet. Tragedy. Bellorophon: Tragedy. Instruction moralle d'une
Pere a son fills. Silvii, Opera Medica. Les Commentaires de Caesar, par
Albancourt. La Noble Venitienne: Histoire gallante. Memoires de Pontis. 2 Vol.
Memoires sur l'origine des guerres. 2 Vol. Lacedemone antienne and nouvelle. 2
Vol. Merovee fills de France; Nouvelle historique. Memoires de Madam de Ravezan,
en 4 part. Mademoiselle de Tournon. The third Volume of the Moral Essays, in
Twelves. A Tragedy in Heroic Verse: Written by two Ladies. The Rival-Mother, a
Novel. A perfect School for the Officers of the Mouth. The Emperor and Empire
betrayed, by whom and how, The Policy of the Clergy of France to destroy poor
Protestants. Moral Essays, the fourth Volume, in the Press.

