MORAL GALLANTRY. A Discourse, Wherein the Author endeavors to prove, that
Point of Honor (abstracting from all other ties) obliges men to be Virtuous.

And that there is nothing so mean (or unworthy of a Gentleman) as Vice.

By Sir George Mackenzie.

Seneca. Though God could not know, nor men would not punish Vice, yet would I
not commit it, so mean a thing is Vice. EDINBURGH, Printed for Robert Broun,
and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the North side of
the Street, a little above the Cross, Anno Dom. 1667.

TO HIS GRACE JOHN EARL OF ROTHES, His Majesty's High Commissioner, Lord high
Chancellor, Lord President of His Majesty's Exchequer and Council, and General
of His Majesty's Forces in Scotland, etc.
May it please your Grace,
MY obligations to you are such, as may excuse real passion in a Stoic, and
seeming flatteries in a Philosopher; and my gratitude deserved not to aspire to
that name, if it should not like them want measures. But, seeing your modesty
makes you think even what is justice to your merit to be flattery, as the
greatness of your merit keeps the highest Elogies I can give you from being so;
I shall retain my respects for you in a breast, which may dispute sincerity as
to your Interests, with the first of those who pretend to it: With which I
shall the sooner rest satisfied, because no paper nor any thing else except the
heart, which sends you this, is capable to retain or express that kindness it
feels for you. In the above-written enumeration of your Titles, I have neither
designed to flatter you, or to contribute to your fame; but rather to remember
you how much you are debtor to Providence for it is kindness, and we to you for
your repeated cares, that thereby ye may be thankful to it, and we to you. In
order to which, I have presented you and my Country with these Discourses,
which by inciting both to be virtuous, will not allow either to be ungrate: and
therein if I evidence not abilities, I will at least kindness and respect;
which cannot but far out-value the other, seeing the last relate to you, and the
first respects only my self. Since then holy Altars have not disdained to offer
up Pigeons, and such like value-lesse things, which nothing but the sincerity
of the offerer could render considerable, refuse not to accept and revise
these, though unfiinsht Discourses: And if a man's last words may be believed, I
(who am to make these my last words in print, and confine my thoughts for the
future to my ordinary employment) do assure you, that they are presented with
all imaginable respect and zeal, by

Your Graces most humble Servant, George Mckenzie.

To the Nobility and Gentry.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving lighted this, though the smallest and dimmest of Virtues torches, at
Honors purest flame; I thought it unsuitable to place it under the Bushel of a
private Protection, but rather to fix it upon such a conspicuous Elevation, as
your exalted names, that Virtue might lance out from thence its glorious beams
more radiently, and the better direct these who intend to be led by it.
Narrower Souls then yours, have not room enough to lodge such vast thoughts, as
Virtue and Honor should inspire: And that which raised you to that hight,
which deserves this complement from Virtue, does deserve that ye should not,
when ye have attained to that hight, neglect its address, though sent you by
the meanest of it and your servants.

Ye may ( My Lords and Gentlemen) make your selves illustrious by your Virtue;
and which is yet nobler (because more extensive) ye may illustrat Virtue by
your Greatness, and as the Impressa of a great Prince, makes Gold more current,
though not more pure; So your Patrocinie and Example may render Virtue more
fashionable and useful then now it is. Undervalued Virtue makes then its
application to you, as to those whom, or whose Predecessors it has obliged;
And persecuted Virtue deserves your Patronage, as rewarded Virtue is worthy of
your Imitation. And seeing it did raise your families, and offers still to raise
monuments for your memory, ye do in that assistance but pay your debt, and buy
fame from succeeding ages. And as what is ingraved upon growing Trees, does
enlarge it self as the Tree rises, so Virtue will be serious to advance you,
knowing that it will receive extension accordingly as ye are promoted. Virtue
is nothing else, but the exercise of these principles which respect the
universal good of others; and therefore, Nature out of kindness to its own
productions, and mankind in favor to their own interests, have ennobled and
adored such as were strict observers of those. The only secure and noble way
then to be admired and honored, is to be virtuous; this will make you as it
did Augustus, the ornament of your age, and as it did Vespasian the delight of
mankind. This is (though to my regrate) the way to be nobly singular, and truly
great. For men follow you, when ye are vicious, in complement to their own
depraved humors, but when they shall assimulat themselves to you in your
Virtues, they will show truly their dependence, and that they follow you and
not their own inclinations. In Vice ye but follow the mode of others, but in
re-entring Virtue into the Bon-grace of the World, ye will be leaders; by this
your lives will become patterns, and your sentences Laws to posterity, who
shall enquire into your actions, not only that they may admire, but (which is
more) that they may imitat you in them. I intend not by this discourse (My
Lords and Gentlemen) that all Virtues should shrink in to the narrowness of a
Cell or Philosophers Gown. No, no, public Virtues are in their extension as
much preferable to private, as the one place is more august then the other, of
which to give you but one instance (for the Principle is too well founded to
need more) there is more Virtue in relieving the oppressed, then in abstaining
from oppression, for that comprehends this, and adds to it the nobleness of
courage, and the humanity of compassion. The one is the employment of
Philosophers, but the other of that omnipotent GOD, whom these Philosophers
with trembling adore: In the one we vanquish, but in the other we only fly
temptations. Virtue then has employment for you, Great Souls! as well as for
retired Contemplators, and though Justice, Temperance, and these Virtues
wherein none share with you, be more intrinsecally noble, then the atchieving
the greatest Victories, wherein fate soldiers and accidents challenge an
interest; Yet Virtue loves to bestow Laurels as well as Bays, and has its
Heroes, as well as Philosophers. Rouse up then your native courage, and let it
overcome all things except your clemency, and fear nothing but to stain your
innocence; undervalue your Ancestors no otherwise, then by thinking their
actions too small a Pattern for your designs; and assist your Prince, till ye
make the World (which is washed by the Sea on all quarters) that Isle which
should acknowledge his Scepter; your time makes the richest part of the
publicks treasure, and every hour ye mispend of that, is a sacrilegious theft
committed against your Country. Throw not then so much time away, (though some
be allowable) in hunting and hauking which are not the noblest exercises, seeing
they favor always the strongest, and do incline men (though surdly) to
oppression and cruelty (for which reason (I believe) Nimrod the first Tyrant,
is in Scripture observed to have been a mighty Hunter) and with Lucullus that
glorious Roman think it the noblest hunting, to pursue malefactors by Justice
in peace, and irreclaimable enemies by Armies in War. Raise siege from before
these coye Ladies (I speak no^ of the nobler sort, for to court such will
obliege you to learn Wit, Liberality, Patience and Courage) who do highten
their obstinacy of design to make you lengthen your pursuites, and lay it down
before these strong Cities, which are by no forced metaphor called the
Mistresses of the world, level their proud walls when they refuse your just
commands, with the ground whereon they stand, and leave it as a doubt to your
posterity, when they see ruins, to judge whither your fury or the thunder has
lighted there. But if ye will justify your complements to deserving beauties,
employ your courage, as well as affection in their service (for till then ye
serve them but by halfs) And as Caesar at his parting told Cleopatra, think your
selves unworthy of them, till ye have raised your own value by such exploits,
as courage has made great, and Virtue has made generous. Court them as he did
her, with no other Serenades, then the pleasant noise of your Victories; and
after ye have returned, covered not with perfumes, or tissue, but with deserved
and blossoming Laurels, then that same vertous Courage, which has forced a
passage through Walls and Ramparts (piercing where shot of Cannon languisht, or
gave back) will find an entry into the hardest heart, which if it yield not to
those gallant importunities of fate and fame, it is certainly more unworthy of
your pains then ye of its choice. But forget not amidst all your Trophies,
rather to chastise pride, then to be proud of any your plumpest successes
(which become cheats, not victories, when men are vain of them) for by so doing
you shall become Vassals to it: Whilst ye toil to enslave others to you,
endeavor rather to deserve, then to court Fame: for in the one case ye will
make it your Trumpet, whereas in the other it will become your Imperions
Mistress; and ye will thus oblige it to follow you, Whereas otherwise you may
weary your selves in following it. The noblest kind of vanity, is to do good,
not to please others, or to expect a reward from them, (and Fame is nothing
else) but do so of design, to gratify your own gallant inclinations, judging
that the having done what is good and great, is the noblest reward of both, and
scattering, like the Sun, equal light, when men look, or look not upon it. The
noblest kind of detraction, is to lessen those who rival your Virtue, not by
obscuring their light, as the dull earth eclipses the Moon; but by out-shining
it as the Sun renders all these other Stars inconspicuous, which shine, but
appear not at the same time with it. Raise your spirits by these Heroic
efforts, to so generous a pitch, that ye need not think Heaven it self too high
for you: And as if all things here below were too unworthy a reward for that
courage, to which all those things do at last stoop. Attempt Heaven (if ye will
be truly courageous) which the Scripture tells us, is taken by violence, and
the violent take it by force. And when Virtue has made you too great for this
lower World, the acclamations and plauditees of such as consider the
Heroickness and justice of your actions, shall be driven upwards with such z^^l
and ardor, that they shall (as it were) rent the Heavens, to clear an entry for
you there. Where when ye are mounted, though Caesar, or Augustus, Alexander, or
Antoninus, were adorning the Skies, transformed into Stars, as their Adorers
vainly imagined; yet ye may with pity look down upon them as spangles, which at
best do but Embroider the outside of that Canopie whereupon ye are to trample.
Ye shall there have pleasure to see our blessed Savior interceed for such as
were Virtuous, and welcome such as come there under that winning Character; and
shall from these lofty Seats, see such Terrestrial souls, as by their love to
the earth, were united, and transformed into it, burn in those flames which
took fire first from the heat of their lusts here: Which though it be an
insupportable punishment, yet ceds in horror to these checks they shall receive
from their Conscience, for having undervalued, or oppressed that Virtue which I
here recommend.

The Authors Design and Apology.
THough I can by no other Calculation then that of my sins, be found to be old;
yet in that small parcel of time which I have already transacted, I have, by my
own practice, been so Criminal, and by my example adopted so many of other men's
sins into the number of my own, that though I should spend the residue of my
allowance without one error (which is equally impossible and desirable) yet
that negative goodness being a duty in it self, it could atone my foregoing
sins no more, then the not contracting new debts, can be accounted a payment of
the old. The consideration of which prevailed with me, to endeavor to reclaim
others from their vices, by discourses of this tenor, that in their prosolited
practice I might be virtuous, as I have been vicious in the practice of such as
have followed my example; And that I might in the time they should employ well,
redeem what I my self had so misspent. In order to which, I did resolve to
address my self to the Nobility and Gentry, as to those whose reason was best
illuminated; and by prevailing with whom, the world (who imitats them as they
depend upon them) may be most compendiously gained to the profession of
Philosophy, and to such as have most leisure to reflect upon what is offered,
and fewest temptations to abstract them from obeying their own persuasions: And
as Physicians do judge their Medicaments will be most successful, when they
rather second, then force Nature. So I resolved to use the assistance of their
own inclinations in my discourses to them, laying aside an enemy, and gaining
thus a friend by one and the same task. Wherefore finding, that most of them
were either taken by an itch for honor, or a love to ease, I have fitted their
humors with two Discourses; in the one whereof, I endeavor to prove, That
nothing is so mean as Vice; and in the next I shall prove, That there is
nothing so easy as to be Virtuous. I had, I confess, some thoughts of this
Discourse, when I first undertook the defense of Solitude, but I thought it fit
to acquaint my self with writing, by writing to private persons, before I
attempted to write to such as were of a more elevated condition: And that it
was fit to invite all men first to Solitude, which I prefer as the securest
Harbor of Virtue. But if some would pursue a public life, as the more noble,
I thought it fit to demonstrate to them, That there is nothing truly Noble, but
what is sincerely Virtuous. I doubt not but some will out of mistake (I hope
few will out of malice) think that the Writing upon such foreign Subjects,
binds this double guilt upon me, That I desert my own employment, and invades
what belongs to those of another Profession: But if we number the hours that
are spent in Gaming, Drinking, or Bodily Exercises (at none of which I am
dexterous) If we consider what time is spent in Journeys, and in attending the
Tides and returns of Affairs, we will find many more vacant interluds, then are
sufficient for writing ten Sheets of Paper in two years space, especially upon
a Subject which requires no reading, and wherein no man can write happily, but
he who writes his own thoughts. With which, pardon me to think him a sober wit,
who cannot fill one sheet in three hours; by which calculation there needs go
only thirty select hours to ten sheets: And his life is most usuriously
employed, who cannot spare so many out of two years to his divertisements;
especially where the materials are such daily observations, as are thrust upon
me and all others by our living in the world, and are so orthodox and
undeniable, that an ordinary dress cannot but make them acceptable. And so few
(I may say none) have written upon the Subject, that I am not put to forge
somewhat that may be new: But what ever others judge of this or me, I find that
it is a part of my employment as a Man and Christian, to plead for Virtue,
against Vice. And really, as a Barrister, few Subjects will employ more my
Invention, or better more my unlabored Eloquence, then this can do. And I
find, that both by writing and speaking Moral Philosophy, I may contract a
kindness for Virtue, seeing such as repeat a lie with almost any frequency, do
at last really believe it. Neither is there any thing more natural, then to
have much kindness, for either these Persons, or Sciences wherewith we are
daily conversant: And by this profession and debate, I am obliged (though I
fear that I satisfy not that obligation) by a new and strong tie to be
Virtuous; lest I else be inconsequential to my own principles, and so be repute
a fool, either in not following what I commend, or in commending so much what
by my practice I declare is not worth the being followed: And therefore if I
cannot pleasure others (which is my great aim, and will yield me great
satisfaction) I will at least profit my self: Which, because it is more
independent, is therefore more noble, and so will suit best with my Subject,
though the other would suit better with my desires.

A DISCOURSE, Endeavoring to prove, That point of Honor obliges Men to be
Virtuous; And that there is nothing so mean as Vice, or so unworthy of a
Gentleman.
BY how much the more the world grows older, by so much (like such as wax old)
its light grows dimmer; and in this twilight of it is declining age, it too
frequently mistakes the colors of good and evil, and not infrequently believes
that to be the body, which is but its shadow. But amongst all its errors,
those which concern honor, are the most (because conspicuous, therefore)
dangerous; every fault being here an Original sin, and becoming, because of the
authority of the offender, an Law, rather then an Example. Some conceive
themselves obliged in honor to endeavor to be second to none, and therefore
to overturn all who are their Superiors: Others to think every thing just
whereby they may repay (though to the ruin of Public Justice) the favors
done to their private Persons, or Fortunes. Some imagine that they are in
honor bound to live at the rate, and maintain the grandour of their
Predecessors, though at the expense of their starving Creditors (obedient to
Nature in nothing ofttimes, but in this fantastic keeping of their Ranks) and
there want not many, who judge it derogatory to theirs, to acknowledge these
errors of which they stand convinced. Young Gallants likewise look upon Virtue,
as that which confines too narrowly their inclinations, judging every thing
mean which falls short of all the length, to which power or fancy can stretch
it self: And as a Gentile Wit has handsomely expressed it, they believe that

Honor is nothing but an itch of blood, A great desire to be extravagantly
good. And thus whilst every man mistakes his Fancy for his Honor, they make
Honor to be like the Wind (from which at that rate it does little differ) then
which nothing sounds higher, and yet nothing is less understood. To vindicate
Honor from these aspersions, and reclaim persons otherwise Noble from these
errors, I have undertaken this Discourse: the nobleness of whose Subject
deserves, that it had been illuminate by the victorious hand of mighty Caesar,
and to have been Writ by a Quill plucked from the Wing of a Fame. But I hope the
Readers will consider, that seeing I am able to say so much upon it, that more
sublime Wits would be able to say much more. And as in refining of Metals, the
first workmen require usually least skill; so I hope that after I have dug
up with rather pains, then Art, the first Ore, it will hereafter be refined by
some happier hand.

I have in great esteem these Honors which are derived from Ancestors (though
that be to be great by our Mothers labors, Native Honor commended.
rather then our own) and to those which Princes bestow (though that be but to
be gallant in Livery) and I believe that we may justly interpret
Nebuchadnezzars Image (whereof the Head is said to have been Gold, Dan. 2.
the Breast Silver, the Belly Brass, the Legs Iron, and the Feet Clay, to be a
Hierogliphick of this lower World, wherein Nature has impressed the several
Ranks of Mankind, with gradual advantages suitable to their respective
employments; The meaner sort falling like dregs to the bottom, whilst the more
refined Spirits do like the Cream rise above; these like sparkles flying
upward, whilst the others do like the contemned ashes lie neglected upon the
level. And seeing the Wise Former of the World, did design by its Fabric, the
manifestation of His Glory; it is most reasonable to conclude, that He would
adorn such as are most conspicuous in it, with such charms and accomplishments
as might most vigorously ravish the beholders into the admiration of that
Glorious Essence they represent. The Almighty being hereby so kind to such whom
he has deprived of the pleasure of commanding others, as to give them the
pleasure of being commanded by such as they need not be ashamed to obey, and so
just to those whom he has burdened with that command, as to fit them for it by
resembling indowments: And as by the Heroickness of these who represent him, he
magnifies his own wisdom in that choice; So by their public spiritedness, he
manifests his love to these who are to be governed. Thus as amongst the
Spheres, the higher still roll with the greatest purity: and as in natural
Bodies, the Head, is as well the highest as the noblest part of that pretty
Fabric (from being vain whereof, nothing could let us, but that, as the
Apostle says, it is given us, and is not our own workmanship) so amongst men
(each whereof is a little World, or rather a nobler draught of the greater) the
highest are ordinarily the more sublime; for such as attain by election to that
hight, must be presumed best to deserve it, such as force a passage to it,
could not do so without abilities far raised above the ordinary allowance, and
such as by their birth are accounted Noble, have ordinarily (like water) their
blood so much the more purified, by how much the further it has run from its
first Fountain: Antiquity is an abridg'd eternity, and that being one of GODS
Attributes, these do often resemble him most in his other Attributes, who can
pretend with greatest justice to this. And as in natural bodies, duration does
argue a fineness, and strength of constitution, so we cannot but acknowledge
that those Families have been most worthy, who have worn out the longest tract
of time without committing any such enorme crime, or being guilty of either
such rashness, or infrugality, as moth away these their Linages, which like
Jonahs Gourd, rather appear to salute the world, then to fix any abode in it.

Yet there is a Nobility of Extraction much raised, above what can owe its rise
to flesh or blood: and that is Virtue, which being the same in souls, that the
other is in bodies and families, must by that Analogy surpass it as far, as
the soul is to be preferred to the body, and this Moral Honor and Nobility
prizes its value so far above all other qualities, that the Stoical Satyrist
following the Dogma's of that School, is bold to say, that nothing but virtue
deserves the name of Nobility,

Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus. And in opposition to this Nobility, but
most consequentially to that Doctrine, Seneca a Partisan of the same Tribe,
does with a noble haughtiness of Spirit tell us, that licet Deus nesciret, nec
homo puniret peccatum, non tamen peccarem ob peccati vilitatem, though GOD
could not know, nor man would not punish Vice, yet I would not sin, so mean a
thing is sin. For proving of which, I shall advance and confirm these two great
truths, that men are in point of Honor obliged to be virtuous, and that there
is no Vice which is not so mean that it is unworthy of a Gentleman; and shall
lead you unto that Seraglio of private Vices, of which, though the weakest, seem
in our experience to have strength enough to conquer such who pass for great
geniouses in in the World: A Philosopher will yet find, that these defeats
given by them to noble Spirits, do not proceed from the irresistableness of
their charms, but from the inadvertance of such as are captivat, and is rather
a surprise then a conquest. For these great souls being bussied in the pursuit
of some other Project, want nothing but time to overcome these follies, or else
these vices and passions (which is a great Argumemnt of their weakness) do then
assault such Heroes, when they are become now mad with their prosperity. But if
we will strip Vice or Passion of these gaudy ornaments, which error and opinion
lends them, or advert to our own actions, we will find, that these overcome us
not, but that we by our own misapprehension of them overcome our selves, as
will appear, First, by some general reflections, to which in the second place I
shall subjoyn some particular instances, and shall by a special Induction of
the most eminent Virtues and Vices clear, that there is nothing so noble as
Virtue, nor nothing so mean as Vice.

As to the general reflections, Virtue contributes more to advancment then Vice
can do.
I shall begin with this, that if Advancment be a noble Prize, doubtless
Virtue most by this be more noble then Vice, seeing it bestows oftest that so
much desired reward. For further proving of which from reason, consider, that
no man will cabal with vicious persons (without which no project for
advancement can be promoved) for, who will hazard his life and fortune with one
whom he cannot believe? and who can believe one who is not virtuous; trust
fidelity and sincerity, being themselves Virtues? or who should expect to gain
by favors, the friendship of such as by their Vices are ingrate to GOD and
Nature? who have been to such liberal, infinitely far above humane reach (and
thus likewise vicious persons are contemptibly mean seeing they are so infinitely
ingrate) and in this appears the meannesse of Vice, that it can effectuat
nothing without counterfitting Virtue, or without its real assistance: When
Robbers associat, they entertain something Analogical to friendship and trust,
else their Vices would be but barren; and without humility showed to inferiors,
the proudest men and Tyrants would owe but little to the greatness of their
spirit: When Undertakers league together, either they trust one another,
because of their oaths or because of their interests only; If the first, they
owe their Success to Virtue; If the second, then they never fully cement, but
assist each others by halfs, reserving the other half of their force to attend
that change, which interest may bring to their Associats, and do such as fight
for hire (interest being nothing else) acquit themselves with such valor? as
those, whose courage receives edge from Duty, Charity, Religion, or any such
vertous principles? Vicious persons have many rivals, and so meet in their
rising with much opposition: The Covetous fear the promotion of him who is
such, and the Ambitious, of him who is of the same temper. But because, all
expect civility from the debonair, and money from the Liberal; They therefore
wish their preferment, as what will contribute to their own interest, and
Princes are induced to gratify such, as knowing that in so doing, they
transmit to their people what they bestow upon such Favorites, and that they
preclud the challenges of these who repine at their Favors as misplac't when
not bestowed upon themselves.

If there be any thing that is noble or desirable in fame, Virtue is more
conducive to Fame then Vice.
Virtue is the only (at least as the straightest so the nearest) road to it,
Posterity taking our actions under their review, without the byasse of
prejudice, passion, interest or flattery, and of such as Story cannonizes for
its Grandees. Alexander is not so truly glorious, for defeating the Indians, as
for refusing to force Darius fair Daughters; for in the one, a great part is
due to the courage of his soldiers, and the brutishness of his opposers,
whereas in the other he overcame the charms of such, as might have overcome all
others, and was put to combat his own youth, which had gained for him all his
Victories: the meanest of his soldiers could have forced a prisoner, but fame
reserved it as a reward worthy of Alexander in this chastity to vanquish a
monarch and to gratify a generous Lady; to displease whom, was as great a
crime as it was to ravish others. Nor was William the Conqueror more honored,
for subjecting a Warlike nation, then for pardoning Gospatrick and Eustache of
Bulleign, after so many revoltings: For in the one he conquered but these who
were less then himself, but in the other he conquered himself, who was their
Conqueror. Aristides was esteemed more noble, in under-going a patient
banishment, then these Usurpers who condemned him to it, whose names remain as
obscure as their crimes are odious, whilst his is the continual ornament of
pulpits and theaters: And all the Roman glories do not celebrat Neroes memory
to the same pitch with that of Seneca's, who did (like the Sun) then appear
greatest, when he was nearest to the setting. Alexander is only praised, when
we remember not his killing Parmenio, and the famous Hugh Capet of France ends
his glory, where we begin to talk of his usurpation: and (to dispatch) this is
one great difference betwixt Virtue and Vice, in relation to fame, That Vice
like a Charletan is applauded by the unacquainted; or like rotten Wood may
shine in the dark, but it is luster lessens at the approach of either time or
light; whereas, though Virtue may for a time ly under the oppression of malice
(which Martyrdom it suffers only when it is mistaken for Vice) yet time enobles
it, and light does not lend it splendour, but servs only to illuminat it is
beholders: and so to enable them to discover what native Excellencies it
posesses.

If Amphialaus or Orondates had been charged in these Romance, Au Argument from
Romances.
ye so dote upon with drunkenness oppression or envy, certainly it had lessened
their esteem, even with such as most admire, though they will not imitat these
Virtues. And to show how much kindness Virtue breeds for such as possesses it,
Consider, how though ye know these to but imaginary ideas of Virtue, yet ye
cannot but love them (as ye can love them for nothing else) seeing they never,
obliged you or your relations; and since abstract Virtue conciliats so much
favor, certainly Virtue in you will conciliat much more: For besides that idea
which will be common to you with them, some will be obliged thereby to love
you, as their Benefactors, and others, because they know not when ye will
become so. And at least they will honor your Virtue, as that which will secure
them against your wrongs, and which will assure them of your good wishes, if
you cannot lend them your assistance. Would not the most prostitute Ladies hate
Statira, or Parthenissa, if they had been represented under any one of these
their own Vices, whose number can find their account no where but in the
moments they live, nor excuses no where but in the madness of such as commit
them? And would not our Gallants think it ridiculous to see these Hero's
brought in by or the Authors of Cassandra, or Parthenissa glorying in having
made their Comrades brutish by drinking, or poor Maids miserable by
uncleanness, and though Whoring be cried up as one of these gentile exercises,
that are the price of so much time and pains; yet we hear of none of these, who
are so much as said to have had a Whore, beside to glory in it. But to turn the
medal, consult your own experience, and it will remember you of many hopeful
Gentlemen, whose advancement has been so far disappointed by these Vices, that
they fell so low as to become objects of pity to such as feared them once, as
their accomplished Rivals. And to let us see the folly of sin, I have known such
as hated Nigardliness so much, as that to shun it, they spent their abortive
Estates before they were full Masters of them; Brought by that excess to flee
Creditors, starve at home, walk in rags, and which is worse, beg in misery,
and so to fall into the extremity of that Vice, whose first, and most innocent
degrees they laughed at in others: And when they begged from these who were both
Authors and Companions in their Debordings, (expecting to be supplied, as well
by their justice as their compassion) did get no return but that laughter which
was a lesson taught by themselves; or at best, a thousand curses, for having
bred them in a way of living, that did naturally occasion so much mischief. If
then poverty be mean and ignoble, certainly Vice must be so too, seeing beside
sickness, infirmity and infamy, Virtue railed the Grecian and Roman Empires.
it hales on poverty upon such as intertain it.

When the world was yet so young, as to be led by sincerity, in place of that
experience, which makes our age rather witty then honest. Its Hero's, who
equally surpassed and ennobled mankind by their Virtue, were for it deified,
even by these their contemporaries, who in possessing much more both riches and
power then they, wanted nothing but this Virtue to be much greater then they
were. And thus Nimrods Kingdom could not build him Altars, though sincere
Rhadamanthus had fire kindled on his, by the heat of their zeal, who knowing
him to be mortal, could not, even in spite of his dying, but worship that
Immortal Virtue which shined in him. And as Cicero informs, these gods of the
Pagans were at first but illustrious Hero's, whose virtue, rather then their
nature rendered them immortal, and worthy to be worshipped, even in the
estimation of such undisciplined Bruts, as thought the Laws of Nature a
bondage, and the Laws of GOD a fable. We find though Licurgus in Lacedemon,
Aristides in Athens, and Epamenondas in Thebes, were not born to command, yet
their Virtue bestowed on them what their Birth denied, and both without, and
against factions, they were elected by their Citizens to that rule, which they
did not Court, and were preferred to such as both by birth and pains had fairer
pretenses to it. And whilst Greece flourished, Reges Philosophabant, and
Philosophi regebant: these Commonwealths being more numerous then their
Neighbors, in nothing but their Virtues, and stronger then they in nothing but
in the sincere exercise of Reason: And when Tyranny and pride had by wasting
these Commonwealths, made place for the Roman glory, nothing conquered so much
the confiners of that glorious State (whose Center was Virtue, and
Circumference Fame) as their Virtue. Thus the Phalerians are by Plutarch said
to have sent Ambassadors to Rome, resigning themselves over to the Roman
Government, because they found them so just and noble, as to send back their
Children who had been betrayed by a Schoolmaster: when Pirhus was advertised by
the Romans to beware of Poison from one of his own Subjects, who had offered to
dispatch him, he did then begin to fear that he should be conquered by their
Arms, who had already subdued him by their civilities. And such esteem had
their justice gained them, that they were chosen Umpires of all neighboring
Nations, and so gained one of the opposites, first to a confederacy, and then
to a dependency upon them. And Attalus King of Pergamus, did in Legacy leave
them his Kingdom, as to these whose Virtues deserved it as a reward; which
occasioned St. Augustine to fall out in this eloquent expression, Because GOD
(says he) would not bestow Heaven upon the Romans, they being Pagans, he
bestowed the Empire of the World upon them, because they were Virtuous. And
many have been raised to Empires, by no other assistance then that of their
Virtue. As Numa Pompilius, Marcus Antonius, Pertinax and Vespasian, whilst the
want of this, has in spite of all the power with which vicious Governors
have been surrounded, degraded others from the same Imperial Honors, as
Tarquinius Superbus, Domitian, Comodus. And generally there is but one Emperor
to be seen in that long Roman List, who was unfortunate, Virtue has made
Philososophers to be admi red above Princes.
being Virtuous: And not one whose Vice was not the immediate cause of ruin to
its Author.

Antiquity has also transmitted to us the memory of Socrates, Zeno, and other
Philosophers, under as obliging Elogies, as these of the most famous Emperors,
whom Virtue (to let us see that Riches and Honors are but the Instruments of
Fame, and not the Dispensers of it) has, without any assistance, raised to
this pitch, above these Princes, that they have conquered our esteem, without
the aid of Armies, Treasures, Senats, or flattering Historians; and cease not
like them to command when they ceased to live; but by their precepts and
discourses, force worthy souls yet to a more entire obedience, then the others
did whilst they were alive, by their Sanctions and penal Statutes. For Princes
govern but a short time one Nation: and by these Laws, they aw but such vicious
persons, whom it is more trouble then honor to command. But these Illustrious
Philosophers, and such as imitate their Virtue, have thereby attained to a
Sovereignty over both the Wills and Judgments of the best of all such as are
scattered amongst all the other Kingdoms of the World. And Marcus Aurelius, who
was one of the greatest Emperors, does recommend to Kings as well as Subjects,
to think, that one of these Philosophers is beholding all their actions, as a
most efficacious mean to keep men in aw, not to commit that Vice to which they
are tempted.

I have seen very great men shun to own even their beloved Vices in the
presence of such as they needed not fear for any thing but their Virtue: Vice
must Lurk, and is cowardly.
And it is most remarkable, that Nero, who exceeded all who then lived in
power, and all who shall live (I hope) in cruelty, did still judge himself
under some restraint, whilst Seneca was at Court to be a witness to his
actions. And every vicious person must flee public, and the light (which
shows the meanness and cowardliness of Vice) when he is to resign himself over
to any of these Criminal Exercises, by which likewise when committed, men
become yet more cowards; for who having spent his life at that unworthy rate,
will not (if he be master of any reason) tremble and be afraid to venture upon
such exploits? as by taking his life from him, may, and will present him before
the Tribunal of that GOD whom he has offended; and from whom (which will not a
little contribute to his cowardliness) he cannot expect that success, whereof
the expectation lessens, or hightens to its own measures, the courage of such
as are engaged.

We may easily conclude the meanness of Vice from this also, Servants equal
Masters in Vice.
that Servants, without pains or Art, equal us in them; for these can Whore,
Drink, Lie, and Oppress: But to be Temperat, Just and Compassionat, are
qualities whereby we deserve, and are by such as know us not, judged to be
Masters and well descended. And have not Servants reason to think themselves as
deserving persons as their Masters, when they find themselves able to equal, or
surpass them, in what they glory in as their great accomplishments?

Seeing what is imitated, Vice but coppies Virtue.
is still nobler then what imitats, certainly Vice must be the less Noble,
because it but copies Virtue, and owes to its mask, and our errors, what it
possesses of pleasure or advantage. Cruelty pretends to be Zeal, Liberality is
counterfeited by the Prodigal, and Lust endeavors to pass for Love.

Is there any thing more ignoble then fear, All Vices imply fear.
which does as slaves, subject us to every attempter? And have not all Vices
somewhat of that unmanly passion? In Covetousness we fear the want of Money, in
Ambition the want of Honor, in Revenge the want of Justice, in Jealousy
Rivals; and when we lie we fear to speak openly.

Is there any thing more mean then dependence? and maks not Ambition us to
depend upon such as have Honors? All Vices make us depend upon others.
Covetousness upon such as have Riches? and Lust upon the refuse of Women?
Whereas Virtue seeks no other reward, then is paid in doing what is virtuous,
and owes it is fee only to it is self, leaving Vice in the servile condition of
serving for a fee even those whom it most hates. And generally in all Vices we
betray a meannesse, because in all these we confess want and infirmities: In
Avarice, we appear either fools, in desiring what is not necessar and in
dissoblieging friends, hazarding our health, and other necessars for what is
not so it is self or else we confess that our necessities are both greater, and
more numerous, then these of others, by heaping together Riches and Money,
which serve for nothing, when they serve us not in supplying our wants. In
Ambition we confess the want of native Honor and Excellency, In Lust want of
Continency, In Anger we want Command of our selves, and in Jealousy we declare
we think not our selves worthy of that love alone, wherein we cannot fear
rivals upon any other account; and in Jealousy men likewise wrong their own
Honor, in suspecting that of their Ladies or Friends; Whereas Virtue perswads
us, that our necessities may be confined to a very small number, and that these
may be repaired, without any loss of friends, and but little of time: it
teaches us that Riches were created to serve us; And that therefore we
disparage our selves, when we subject our humor to our Servants. And from it
we learn, to rate so justly the Excellencies of that rational Soul, which is
the Image of GOD Almighty, as to expect from it, and no where else under the
Sun, any true and solid happiness: And to account nothing more noble then it,
except the Almighty GOD, whose offspring it is, and whom it represents.

There is nothing more mean then to be cheated, Virtue allows us a just value
of our selves.
and all Vices cheat us, Treason promises Honor, but leads to a Scaffold; Lust
pleasure, but leads to sickness, and Flattery cheats all such as hear it, and
such as are proud are doubly miserable, because they are both the cheaters, and
the persons cheated. Thus Vice cannot please without a crime, and these are
even then gaining the hatred and contempt of others, when they are enquiring,
or hearing from flatterers, that the people seek no where without them objects
of Love and Admiration. Whereas, Sacred Virtue allows us to admire our selves,
and which is more, to believe that all these things for which vicious men
neglect the care of their Souls, are unworthy of our re-search; and certainly
the Soul is a more noble creature then that earth, or metal, which we stain
our Souls to get: for, our Souls do censure all these things; it finds defects
in the noblest buildings, and shows by desiring more, an unsatisfiablenesse in
all extrinsick objects; It determins the price of all other creatures, and like
the Magistrate in this Commonwealth, assigns to every thing it is rate; to day it
cries up the Diamond, and to morrow it allows preference to the Rubie: these
treats, and colors, which ravish this year, pass the next for no beauty. Red
hair pleases the Italian, and our Climat hates it, and it is probable, that
this change of inclination, is not a culpable inconstancy in man, but a mark of
his Soveraignity over all his fellow creatures. Virtue teaches him not to owe
his happiness to the Stars, nor to be like some foolish Emperors, so fondly
vain, as to think that he shall have no other reward for his Virtue, then the
being transformed into one of these lesser lights, which he knows to have been
created only for a Lantern to him, or at best but to adorn, with their
numberless Associats, that firmament which was created to be one of these least
Arguments, whereby he was to be courted into a belief of, and love for that
GOD, who thinks him so excellent a Creature, that he is said to be glad at the
Conversion of a sinner, and to grieve at his obstinacy; And if we will consider
the miraculous Fabric of our bodies, which though we be but dull, yet we may
see to be all workmanship; and wherein the number of wonders, equals that of
Nervs, Sinews, Veins, Bones or Ligaments, the curious Fabric of that Brain,
which lodges (without crowd or confusion) so many thousands of different and
noble thoughts, the Artifice of those various Organs, that express so
Harmonious Airs and ravishing expressions, the charmingnesse of these Lines and
Featurs in Ladies, which like the Sun scorch as well as illuminat the
beholders. We may conclude that our Soul must be a most excellent piece, seeing
all this contexture, is appointed to be but a momentany tabernacle for it, when
it is in its lowest and unworthiest estate; And which when the Soul deserts, is
thrown out with all it is wonders, least it should by its stink trouble the
meanest of these Senses, which servs the Souls of these who are alive. Consider
how this Soul grasps in one thought all that Glob for which ambitious men
fight, and for some of whose furrows, the avaritious man does so much toil.
Consider, how it despises all that Avarice has amas'd, how it is pleased with
no external object, longer then it fully considers it, and what a great vacuity
is left in our desirs after these are thrown into them; and by all this we will
learn, that Vice disparages too much the Soul, when it imagins, that any finit
thing can bound it is thoughts, and we are but cheated when we listen to these
proffers, which Vice makes use of Honor, Pleasure or Advantage: for who can be
so mean, to think that all these faculties were bestowed upon our Souls? these
featurs upon our bodies, and so much care taken of both by Providence, for no
other end, then that we should admire that Wine which Peasants make, those
colors which prostitute Whoors wear, that we should gain fortunes, which
serve too often to corrupt these for whom they are prepared, or respect from
such, as bow not to us, but to our stations?

Having thus overrun these general Considerations, whereby men who are gallant
may be Courted to a love for Virtue; my Method leads me now to fall down to
those instances of particular Vices and Virtues, wherein I may make nearer
approaches to the actions of mankind: And seeing there is too much of ease, and
too little of cogency, in writing full and tedious essays upon these common
Theams, I shall consider them only as they relate to Gallantry, promising no
other tract of Art in all this Discourse, but that I shall pursue my design so
closely, as not to employ any Argument against Vice, nor assist Virtue with one
thought, but such as may decry the one as mean, and cry up the other as gentile
and handsome.

We owe that deference to great men, Dissimulation.
that even their Vices should have the precedence of all others, and therefore
I shall begin this invective with Dissimulation, which is peculiarly their sin,
for when the meaner sort are guilty of the same thing, it is in them called
falsehood, from which dissimulation differs nothing, but that it is the Cadet of
a Nobler Family. And this evinces what an ugly and ungentile Vice Dissimulation
is, seeing he is no Gentleman who would not choice rather to die, or starve,
then to be thought false: All Dissemblers show an inability to compass without
these pitiful shifts, what in dissembling they design, for this is the last
refuge, and by this Courage becomes unnecessary, and we often see that Cowards
dissemble best, gallant men laying that weight upon their Courage, which the
others do upon Dissimulation. And at this unworthy Game, it is not requisite to
be gallant, providing men be wicked. Dissimulation is but a Courtly
Cowardliness, and a Stately Cheat: and certainly, he is too much afraid of his
own, either Courage, or Fate, and values too much his prize above his honor,
or innocence, who can stoop to play this under-boord Game: Whereas a gallant
and generous soul, will not fear any event so much, as to leave his Road for
it; and will own what is just, with so much nobleness of resolution, that
though Fate should tumble down upon him Mountains of misfortunes, they may
perhaps overwhelm, but they shall never be able to divert him. Where are then
these gallant resolutions of our forefathers? who scorned even victories
gained by teachery, falsehood, poisons, and such other unhandsome means? Where
is the Roman fortitude? which advertised Pirhus of his Physicians offer to
poison him, though their greatest enemy, And which caused Marcus Regulus choice
to return to be a Martyr for Virtue, rather then stain the Roman Faith? Where
are these resentments of the Lie in frivolous cases, when great men magnify in
their Dissimulation what is in effect lying and treachery? To deceive one who
is not obliged to believe us, is ill; but to cheat one whom our own fair
pretenses have induced to believe us, is much worse, for this is to murder one
whom we have persuaded to lay aside his Arms. And as Dissimulation thrives
never but once, so to use it cuts off from the Dissembler that trust and
confidence which is necessary in great undertakings; for, who will depend on
these whom they cannot trust? And after Dissemblers are caught (as seldom they
escape) the abused people hate and persecute them as violators of that without
which the World cannot subsist. I appeal to the Reader, if he has not heard
enemies loved for their ingenuity; and if he has not seen these Cutthroat
Lights blown out, and end in a stinking snuff: And as if every man had escaped
a Cutpurse, if every man did not bless himself, and rejoice to see these
dissemblers fall. And I may justly say, that Dissimulation is but the Theory of
Cut-pursing, and Assasination. Consider how unpleasant any thing appears that
is crooked, and ye will find an natural argument against Dissimulation, and
though it has great Patrons, and can pretend to an old possession, and much
breeding at some Courts (though all who are Gallant there hate it) yet it is
never able to gain esteem, and can defend it self no other ways, then by a
cowardly lurking, and shunning to be discovered. Neither can there be so much
Wit in this Art as can justify its error; for Women, and the meanest Wits are
oft-times most expert in it: all can do it in some measure, and none ever used
it long without being discovered; and such only are rendered its prey, as make
it no great conquest, they being either our friends, who expected not our
invasion; or fools, who are not worthy to be gloried in, as our Trophies.

There are none of these Vices which rage amongst men, Envy and detraction.
more destructive to either their honor, or to the honor of that
Commonwealth which they compose, then Envy, and (which both follows it, and
aggravats its guilt) Detraction. Envy is mean, because it confesses that the
envyer is not so noble or excellent as the person envied: for none are envied,
but such as possess somewhat that overreaches, or excells what is possessed by
such as do envy. This Vice acknowledges, that he who uses it, wants much of
what is desirable, and which is meaner, much of what another possesses, and as
if we despaired of rising to another hight, it makes us endeavor to pull him
down to the stature of our own accomplishments. Most men essay to imitate the
actions of these whom they envy; so that in detracting from these, they leave
others to undervalue what they themselves design ardently to perform. And thus,
if these detracters be so much favored by Fate, as to atchieve any such great
action, as that is which they undervalue in others, they get but a barren
victory, and which is more insupportable, they see themselves punished by their
own Vice. And to convince us how mean Vices, Envy and Detraction are, we may
observe, that such as are victorious, judge it their honor to magnify these
who were vanquished; and men wound extremely their own honor, when they detract
from persons who are more deserving in the eyes of the world then themselves,
for they force their hearers to conclude, that the Detracters themselves must
be undeserving, seeing these who deserve better, are by their confession, cried
down as being of no merit, which remembers me of this excellent passage in
Plinius the Second, Tibi ipsi ministras in alio laudando, aut enim is quem
laudas, tibi superior-est, aut inferior; si inferior and laudandus, tu multo
magis; si superior, neque jure laudandus, tu multo minus. Thou serves thy own
interest when thou praises others, for either he whom thou praisest, is thy
inferior, and then if he deserves to be praised, much more thou, if he be thy
superior, and deserves not to be praised, much less thou. All men are either
our friends, or our enemies, or such who have not concerned themselves in our
affairs. We are base, because ingrate, when we detract from our friends, and we
assert our own folly, when by Detraction, we endeavor to lessen the worth of
those whom we have chosen for such: we lessen likewise our honor, when we
detract from our competitors, and enemies, because to contest with undeserving
persons, is ignoble, and to be vanquished by them, has little of honor in it;
Whereas, as all events are uncretain, if we be overcome by such as our
detractions have made to pass for undeserving, our overthrow will by so much
become the more despicable, and to detract from such as expected no wrong from
us, and who are strangers to us and our affairs, is not only imprudent and
unjust, but is as dishonorable and little gallant, as that is to wound one who
expects not our aggression, and whose innocence, as to us, leaves him disarmed;
and the word backbiting clears to us, that detraction is a degree of
cowardlienesse, for it assaults only such as are unprepared, or absent, which
is held dishonorable amongst the least of such as have gallantry in any
esteem. He who praises, bestows a favor, but he who detracts, commits a
Robbery, in taking from another what is justly his; and certainly to give, is
more noble then to take. Envy is also most prejudicial to great undertakings,
seeing such as are engaged, must resolve either not to act, what is necessar for
completing so great projects, or if they do, to fall under the envy of these
for whom they act them, and the undertakers do obstruct by envy their own
greatness, because they are by that Vice, persuaded to crop such as but begin
to perform in their service, attempts worthy of the being considered: How
destructive likewise this Vice is to the glory of Kingdoms, and Common Wealths,
does but too clearly appear from this; that all who are in them, are either
despicable, by not being worthy of the being envyed, or else will be destroyed
by that Vice, which levells it is murdering engines at such only, who are the
noblest Spirits, and who deserve most promotion from their Country. Carthage
was destroyed by the envy which Hanno and Bomilcar, bore to Hannibal; who by
denying him Forces, to prosecut his Italian Conquests, did involve themselves
with him in the common ruins of their Country; which shows the dishonorable
folly of envy in conspiring against it self, with these who being enemies to
both the opposits, sides first with the one, in gratifieing his envy, and then
destroys the other, whose passion it first served. Pitiful examples whereof,
our own Age affoords us, wherein many great men were by envy driven to oppose
principles, whereon they knew the public safety, and their own private
interest to depend. Flaminius the Roman General endangered Rome, and Terentus
Varro did almost loss it out of envy to Fabius Maximus; and such was the force
of envy, that it did defeat the great Scipio, and banished him from that Rome
which he had made both secure and great; and did by his example cool the zeal
of such who retained their blood in it is Veins, as in an arsenal, for no other
end then the service of their Country, as a consequence of which envy, it was
observed, that in the next Age most of Rome's Citizens declined rather to
entertain that fame, which the former courted, then to be exposed to the
cruelty of that envy, which did usually attend it. Detraction brings likewise
these great disadvantages to our reputation, that it engages both these from
whom we detract, and their friends partly out of revenge, and partly for self
defense, to enquire into our errors and frailties, and to publish such as upon
enquiry they have found, or to hatch calumnies, if truth cannot supply them:
And in that case, rate of Game obliges us to favor the Counterer, for we
defend what may be our own case, in favoring what is at present but the
defense of others. It legittimats likewise these calumnies which are vented of
us, by such as our detraction has not yet reached, who will think it their
prudence (like these who fear Invasion) to carry the War into the Territories
of such, from whom they do upon well founded suspicions expect Acts of
Hostility. If then our own Honor be dear to us, we should not invade the
Honor of others: For, Revenge, the activest of Passions (when added to that
love of Honor which is equal in us and them) will obliege them to do more
against our Honor, then we can do in it is defense.

Whoring renders men contemptible, VVhooring.
whilst it tempts them to embrace such as are not only below themselves in
every sense, but such as are scarce worthy to serve these handsomer Ladies,
whom they either do, or may lawfully enjoy. Does not this Vice persuade men to
ly in Cottages? with Sluts, or (which is worse) Strumpets, to lurk in corners,
to fear the encounter of such as know them, and to bribe and fear those
servants, who by serving them at such occasions, have by knowing their secrets,
attained to such a servile mastery over them, that I have been ashamed to hear
Gentlemen upbraided by these Slaves, in terms, which were the adequat
punishment, as well as the effect of their Vice. Men in Whoring must design
either to satisfy their own necessities, or their fancy; if their necessities,
then as Marriage is more convenient, so it is as much more noble then Whoring;
as it is more gentile for a person of honor, rather to lodge constantly in a
well appointed Palace, then to ramble up and down in blind Alehouses; in the
one a man enjoys his own, whereas in the other he only lives as Thieves do, by
purchase: If to satisfy fancy, certainly it should please more, at least it is
more honorable to be secure against rivals, then to be sure to be equaled by
them who will fancy a divided affection? and who can be sure? that she who
destroys her honor for us, will not risign the same to a second, or third? for
besides the experiment we have of her change, oaths, honor and obligations can
be no convincing evidents of, or sureties for what she promises, seeing she is
then breaking these, when she gives strangers these new assurances. And this
makes me laugh to hear Women so foolish, as to rely upon such promises as are
given by men who destroy their Nuptial Oaths, when they make them. And if Women
be such excellent persons, as to deserve that respect, and these adorations,
which are passionat enough to be paid before Altars; certainly every man
should endeavor to secure the esteem of one of these rare creatures, which is
more noble, then to rest satisfied with a tenth, or sixteenth part, like men
sharing in a Caper. And therefore, seeing fancy nor honor allow no rivals, I am
confident that no man can satisfy his fancy, or secure his honor, in
preferring a Whore to a Wise, or in using Whores when he wants one. Have not
Whores ruined the repute of some great men who entertained them? by causing
them neglect to pursue their victories, as Thais did to Alexander, and
Cleopatra to Mark Anthony? Have they not betrayed these secrets wherein their
same was most interessed, as Dalila did to Sampson? And there is nothing more
ordinary, then to hear such (like Herod) swear that they dare not refuse their
Mistrisses, what ever is within their reach; and thus, they must either prove
base, in perjuring themselves, if they think not what they say; are
contemptible slaves, both to their passions, and to these who occasion them, if
they resolve to perform what they promise: which makes likewise these to be
dangerous masters, who depend upon the humor of a woman, and so concluds them
unfit to be great. It were then a generous expiation of this Vice in such as
are oppressed by it, to use it (not it is objects) as Mahomet the Great, did his
gallant Mistress Irene, whose Life and Head he sacrificed to the repinings of
his Court, and Jannisars, who challenged him justly, for loving rather to be
conquered by one silly woman, then to conquer the World, wherein she had many,
but he no equals. It is noble to deliver Ladies out of danger, but not to draw
dangers on them, and to punish such as scoff at them, rather then to make them
ridiculous; and what thousands of dangers, are drawn upon Ladies, by being
debauched, when married, and if they be not married, are they not thereby made
the Proverb of all such as know them: And to these I recommend Tamars words,
who when Ammon offered to ly with her, told him, thou shall be as one of the
fools in Israel, and I whither shall I cause my shame to go? And after this let
them remember, that when he had satisfied his lust, then he instantly (as is
too ordinar) despised her person. And since Ladies will not stain their Honor
with this Vice, till they be married, I conceive they should much less after,
for there the obligation is doubled. From all which it follows, that lust is
equally base and ignoble, whither it discharge it self upon equals or
inferiors, betwixt which two, there is only this difference, that it is brutal
in the one case, and cruel in the other.

There is no Vice whereby gallantry is more stained, then by breach of promise,
which becoms yet more Sacrilegious, when Ladies are wronged by it. And of this,
whooring makes men likewise guilty, when it robbs from Ladies their Husbands,
robbing likewise such upon which it bestows them, both of their Honor and
Quiet. And thus, though it makes such as use it barren (GOD in this resistig
the propagation of Sin) yet it self brings forth it is faults in full clusters.
And Nathans Parable to David, proves it likewise to be so high an oppression,
that no man of Honor would commit it, if he would but seriously reflect upon
his own actions; From which Parable, this new observation may be likewise made,
that though David was guilty of murder and whooring, yet the Prophet made
choice only of this last to astonish this Warlike Monarch, and raise his
indignation against this Vice, when shaddowed out under a foreign and borrowed
representation. Though murder be so barbarous a crime in it self, that the
Barbarians did instantly conclude Paul guilty of it, when they saw the viper
fasten upon his hand. The unjustest caprice of lust is that whereby men contemn
such as become their Wives, though they admired them when they were their
Mistresses, for in this they confess, it is a meanness to be theirs; for since
that time, the neglecters thought them amiable, they, sweet creaturs have often
contracted no guilt, nor lessened the occasion of that esteem no otherwise,
then by marrying their inconstant Gallants, who seemed to have so warm a
passion for them. And it is strange, that men should admire their own
Eloquence, Courage, Estates, and all things else they possess, for no other
cause, then because they are their own; and yet should undervalue their Wives
(the noblest thing they possess) upon this and no other account.

I cannot think Nature such a Cheat, as that if Women had not been the
excellentest of Creatures, it would have beautified them with Charms, and Armed
their eyes with such piercing glances, that to resist them is the next
impossibility to the finding a Creature that is more accomplished then they; And
I confess, the love we bear them, is not only allowable in it self, as an
inclination that is of its own nature Noble and Virtuous, but likewise, because
it obliges such as are engaged in it, to despise all mean Vices, such as
Avarice, or Fear, and is incompatible with all dissingenuous Arts, such as
Dissimulation, or Flattery. And though such as are guilty of Whoring, do
justify their debordings by a love to that glorious Sex, yet by this pretext
they are yet more unjust and vicious then their former guilt made them; for by
roaving amongst so many, they intimat that they are not satisfied with their
first choice; and that not only there are some of that Sex, but that there is
none in it who deserves their entire affection. Or else, by dividing them
amongst so many, they think their kindness sufficient to make numbers of Ladies
happy; by both which errors, they wrong not only themselves by swearing
otherwise to the Ladies to whom they make love, but they wrong likewise the
innocence and amiableness of that sweet Sex, in whom no rational man can find a
blemish, besides their esteem for such persons, as these, who indeed admire
them no where but in their complements, and who are often so base, that not only
their society is scandalous, but they are ready to tempt, such as they
frequent; or if they fail in this, are often so wicked, that they, to satisfy
either their revenge, or vanity, do brag of intimacies, and allowances which
they never possessed. If then Gallants would be loved by their Mistrisses, they
must be Virtuous, seeing such love only these who are secret, many things
passing amongst even Platonicks, which should not be revealed. These who are
courageous, seeing this is appointed to be a protection to the weakness of their
Sex, and these who are constant, seeing to be relinquisht, inferrs either a want
of wit, in having chosen such as would quite them without a defect, or else
that they were abandoned because of defects, by such as the world may justly
from their first ardency, conclude, would never have abandoned them without
these: What Lady without a cheat, will be induced to love one wasted with Pox
and inconstancy? one whom Drunkenness makes an unfit Bedfellow, as well as a
friend? and though some worship the Relics of Saints, yet none but these who
are mad, as well as vicious, will worship the Relics of Sinners.

Neither is the meanness of this Vice taken off, by the greatness of these with
whom it is shared: which may be clear from this, that either affection,
interest, or ambition, are in the design of these offenders. If affection, it
should excuse no more her who is Whore to a Monarch, then her who is such to a
Gentleman; for affection respects the person, but not the condition of such as
are loved: And it is certainly then most pure, when it cannot be ascribed to,
nor needs the help of either riches to bribe, or power to recommend it. But if
riches be designed, then the committer is guilty both of Avarice and Whoring,
and she is not worthy to be a Mistress, who can stoop to a Fee like a Servant.
And she who designs honor and repute by these Princely Amors, is far
disappointed: For though she may command respect, yet esteem is not subject to
Scepters: And I am confident, that Lucretia, who choos'd rather to open her
Veins to a fatal Lance, then her Heart to the Embraces of a Sovereign, is more
admired then Thais, Poppaa, Jean Shore, and Madame Gabriel, whose obedience to
their own Kings, was a crime in them, though it was loyalty in others. Blushes
are then the noblest kind of Paint for Ladies, and Chastity is their most
charming Ornament: And if these would send out their Emissaries, to learn by
them how to reform their errors, as they often do to inform their revenge, they
would easily perceive, that loose men laugh at their kindness, virtuous men
undervalue them, and it. And when ever any Judgment is poured out upon the
Kingdom, or misfortune overtakes these Minions, then all is ascribed by
Divines, to their looseness; and it is one of the allowablest Cheats in
Devotion, to invent miraculous resentments from Heaven upon their failours.
Young Ladies, to recommend their own Chastity, are obliged, in good breeding,
at least to say they hate them* Such as are married, are bound by their
interest to decry such as may debauch their Husbands; and these who are old,
rail against them, as those who place all happiness in what, because of age,
they cannot pretend to: Whereas such as are chaste, are recommended with
magnifying praises, for patterns to such as are vicious, and are coppied as
admirable Originals, by such as are Virtuous. And I cannot omit this one
reflection, that chaste Women are more frequently tainted with Pride, then with
any other Vice; Nature, as it were, allowing to them to raise their own value
far above others, whom they have (almost) reason to contemn, as persons who
prostitute themselves (which, and the word humbling, are the lessening Epithets
of Whoring) and as such who are nasty, spotted and unclean.

Lust and obscenity in Discourse, Obscenity.
run in a Vicious Circle, and by an odious Incest beget one another; for as
lust prompts men to obscenity, so obscenity pimps men in to lust; but in this,
obscenity is more culpable then lust, that in the one, men allege a natural
advantage, and some a necessity; but in the other, they have no temptation, and
so fall under that curse, Woe unto them that sin without a cause. In the one,
men sin covertly, making by their blushes, as by a tacit confession, some
atonement for their guilt; But in the other, men divulge their sin, and by
graceing it, with what, if the subject were honest, might pass for wit, do
invite such as wish to be repute wits, first to admire, and then to imitat them
in their sinning; and the best of such as use that eloquence, become thereby
most ignoble, being in effect but Cooks, who prepare Sawces for provoking a
lustful appetite in their hearers. And I admire, that seeing Comedians are hist
off the Stage, when they attempt it, that such as are so far greater then
these, as Masters are above Buffons, should imagine they can magnify
themselves by it. This Vice may well enough be ranged under one of the species
of Sodomy, seeing such as use it, employ in their lust these members, which were
so far from being destinat for so low uses, that the Psalmist in saying, he
will praise God with his glory (which Interpreters render to be the Tongue)
does show us, that our Tongues are amongst the noblest parts of our Body. And
when I consider how melodious it is in its harmonies; how eloquent in its
expressions; how whole multitudes are reclaimed from their greatest furies by
it; and how Cicero is in spite of all his other faults, so admired for it,
that thousands sweat and toil daily, to make one in that number, wherein he is
acknowledged to be by them all, far the first. When I consider how miraculously
it expresses, with the same motion, so varying sounds, that though mankind be
innumerable, yet each in it has his distinct tone and voice, and how, with
little different positions, it signets the same Air with words so extremely
differing, that one may think that each man has a spirit speaking out of him.
I must fall out in regrates and wonders, that, and how, so excellent a faculty
is so much abused! Neither must we conclude, that because such go away
unanswered, that they owe this to the sharpness of their wit, but rather to
the depravednesse of its subject, wherewith the greatest part of accurat
spirits are so little acquainted, that some know not the terms, and others know
them only to hate them. We must not think that we admire for wits, such still,
at whom we laugh: and I believe many laugh at such as are profane, as they do
at such as they see slip and catch a fall, though never so dangerous. I regrate
in this Vice, both to see sharp men so Vicious, and so much wit so
missimployed; for though we may say here, that Materiam superabat opus, yet
such is the abjectnesse and worthlessenesse of the matter, that it is not
capable of ornament, no more then excrements are to be admired, though they
were gilded, and carved out by the most curious hand; and their wit is at least
to be charged with this error, that it choises not subjects worthy of their
pains: for whereas the quaintness of fancy does, when employed about
indifferent subjects, beget its Masters respect; and when upon excellent
admiration, all that it can do here is but to excuse the faults it makes, and
so at least is so beggarly an employment, that it is scarce able to defray its
own charges. I account him no wit, who cannot deserve that name, though he be
barred any one subject, especially such a subject as obscenity is, wherein
former Trafficquers have been so numerous, and so vacant from other
employments, that as nothing which is excellent, so little that is new can be
said upon it; and what is said, is transmitted from ear to ear, with so much of
secrecy, that as no Historian will write it, so fewer will know it, then will
know any of these witty productions of learning, or moral Philosophy, which all
men indifferently desire to read and repeat, Whereas this will be altogether
suppressed from succeeding ages, and of the present Ladies, Statesmen, Lawers,
Divines and Phisicians are not allowed to give it audience. I have heard Women,
though loose, say, that they loved none of these who published their shame,
though they satisfied their Lust; and that such did often evaporat their Lust in
these raileries, or design to supply their defects in such discourses. And I
know that Lackeys, or Bawds, will be more accurate in that kind of eloquence,
then the noblest of such as use it (if any who are Noble use it at all.) Men
must either think Women great Cheats, in loving what they weep or blush at, or
else they are very cruel, in tormenting their ears with so grating sounds. And
if Women be such excellent Creatures, as Men's Oaths and Complements make them,
certainly Obscenity must be a mean Vice, seeing of all others, such decry it
most. For compliance with whom, it is strange that these who offer to die, will
not much rather abandon a piece of imaginary wit; and which passes not even
for such, but amongst these who are scarce competent Judges. It is most
ungentle many for such as frequent Ladies, to spend so much time in studying a
kind of wit, that not only cannot be serviceable, but which cannot in any case
be acceptable, or recreative to these lovely persons, for whose divertisement
and satisfaction, even these obscene Ranters do pretend that they employ all
their time and pains, and whom they will doubtless at some occasions offend,
by slipping into one of these criminal expressions, which custom will so
familiarize, that it will be as impossible for them to abstain, as it will be
for these others to hear what is so spoke, without trouble and dissatisfaction.
Such as have their noble Souls busied about great matters, find little time to
invent expressions, or mould thoughts concerning such pitiful subjects; And I
appeal to the worst of these, if they do not abominat such as are in History
noted for Obscenity, and if they would not hate any, who would adorn their
Funeral Harangue, with no other praises, but that they were so wittily
profane, that they would force Ladies to blush, Debauchees to laugh,
Statesmen to undervalue them, and chase Divines from their Table.

Avarice is so base a Vice, Avarice and Liberality.
that the term Sordid is improperly used in Morality, when it is otherwise
applied, and by terming one a Noble Person, we intend to signify, that he is
liberal: This is that Vice, which by starving great designs, hinders them to
grow up to their full dimensions. None will carry about dismembered bodies, and
wear scarres in their service, or to gain victories for these, whose avarice
will so little reward their pains, that they oft-times refuse to supply these
necessities which were contracted in their own employments. No great man can
have both the hearts and the purses of his inferiors: And few have been famous,
or prosperous, but such as have been as ready to bestow riches upon their
friends, as they have been ready to take spoil from their enemies. Themistocles
finding himself tempted to look upon a great Treasure, blushed at his error;
and turning to his Servant, said, Take thou that Money, for thou art not
Themistocles. Rome then begun to be jealous of Cesars greatness, when he begun
to put the Army in his debt; It was said of that Noble Duke of Guise, that he
was the greatest Usurer in France, for he laid out his Estate in Obligations;
And Tacitus observes, that Vespasian had equaled the greatest of the Roman
Hero's, if his Avarice had not lessened his other Virtues: Which is the
observation made by Philip de Comines, upon Lewis the 11th of France. Perseus,
out of love to his Treasures, lost both his Kingdom and these, being as a
punishment to his Avarice, led in triumph in the company of his Coffers, by a
Roman General, who gloried, and is yet famous for having died almost a Beggar.
The World love, esteem, and follow such as are liberal; Historians celebrat
their Names; Soldiers fight their Battles, and their Beeds-men importune
Heaven for success to their Arms; but no man can have a kindness for such as
will prefer to them a little stamped earth, or value no obligations, but these
which bind to a paying of Money. And it is well concluded by the World, that no
vast soul can restrict all its thoughts to that employment, which is the Task
of Porters and Cobblers. In this Vice we make our Souls to serve our Riches,
whereas in its opposite Virtue, Riches and every thing else (whose price these
may be) are by such as are truly liberal, subjected to the meanest employment,
to which the Soul can think them conducive: And the Soul is too Noble and well
appointed an appartment, to be filled with Coffers, Baggs, and such like trash;
which even these, who value them most, hoord up in their darkest and worst
furnished Rooms: And such as are liberal, are the Masters (for it belongs to
these only to spend) whereas the Avaricious are in effect but their
Cash-keepers, who have the power to keep, but not the allowance to spend what
is under their custody. I am confident, that Zeno is more famous (and to be
rich serves for nothing else) for throwing away his Money, when it begun to
trouble his nobler thoughts, then Cresus, whose Mountainous Treasures served
only to bribe a more valiant Prince, to destroy them and it. And Marcus
Crassus, the richest Roman, was so far undervalued by Julius Caesar, that he
said he would make himself richer in one hour, then these riches could their
Master, which came accordingly to pass, when by his liberality he gained the
Roman Soldiery, and they gained for him the Empire of that World, whereof
Cresus Estate was but a small one, though his Avarice made it a great spot in
him. This Vice implies a present sense of want, and a fear of future misery, to
be hoording up what serves for nothing else, except to prevent, or supply us in
these conditions. But Noble Spirits, who design Fame and Conquests, Virtue and
Religion, raise their thoughts above this low Vice, and design not to gain
Riches, but Men, who are Masters of these; and with whom when gained, thy can
soon bring all things to their devotion: And therefore in point of Honor we
are obliged to hate Avarice, and cherish Liberality.

Though treason cheats with fair hopes of glory and advancement, Rebellion and
perfidie.
and at least this Vice pretends to have whole Woods of Laurels at its
disposal, yet the most ordinary preference it gains men, is the being first
amongst fools and vicious persons; for they are then wronging both that honor
they possess, and that to which they aspire, when they by their usurpation
learn others how sweet it is to rebel against their Superiors. And such as
employ the Commons against their Sovereign, must expect to allow them greater
liberty then suits with the honor of Governors, and must style themselves the
servants of the people; How meanly must these flatter that unreasonable crew?
Swear friendship with such as have wronged their honor, lie, dissemble, cheat,
beg, meet in dark corners with their associats, and suffer as much toil and
misery, as wants nothing but the nobleness of the quarrel to make them Martyrs.
It is not safe for any man in point of Honor, to undertake designs wherein it
is probable he will fail, and wherein if he fail, it is most certain that his
honor will suffer: And there is no crime wherein men are more like to fail,
then in this, the rabble whom they employ, being as uncertain, as they are a
furious instrument: And like the Elephant, ready still to turn head against
such as employ them in Battle; And who will trust the promise of these Leaders,
(for without large promises, Rebellion can never be effectuat) who in these
promises are betraying their own Alledgeance? and such as these employ, will
(at least may) consider, that how soon they have effectuat these treacherous
designs, they will either disdain the Instruments, as useless, or destroy them
as dangerous, and as such, who by this late experience, are abler to ruin
them, then they were their Predecessors. And when such Traitors are
disappointed of their designs, they are laughed at as fools (for nothing but
success can clear them from that imputation) and exposed to all the Ludibrie,
and thereafter to the tortures of Enemies, who cannot but be violent
Executioners, seeing their ruin was sought by the Rebellion. Is there any thing
more ignoble then ingratitude? And these Traitors are ingrate, seeing none can
pretend to these Arts but such as have been by the bounty of these, against
whom they rebel, advanced to that hight, which has made them giddy; and to
that favor with the people, upon which they bottom their hopes. And do not Men
and Story talk more advantagiously of Footmen and Slaves, who have relieved
their Masters, then of the greatest of such as have rebelled against their
Princes? all mankind being concerned to magnify that wherein their own safety
is concerned, and to decry these Arts, whereby their ruin is sought. That same
people who cut Sejanus in as many pieces as he had once favorites, did raise a
Statue to Pompey's Slave, for staying by the Carcass of his dead Master. And as
Alexander hanged Bessus, who had betrayed to him his Master Spitamenes and
Antigonus caused Massacre these Hygeraspides, who had betrayed the gallant
Eumenes: So Charles the ninth of France, did refuse to punish such as had
opposed him, when he was in Rebellion; for, said he, such as have been
faithful to the King, against me, when I was but Duke of Orleans, will be
faithful to me, when I am raised from being Duke of Orleans, to be King of
France.

Inconstancy is likewise an ignoble Vice, Inconstancy.
seeing it shows, that either men were foolish in their first choice, or, that
they were foolish in relinquishing it; it shows that men are too much subject
to the impressions of others, and small or light things are these which are
soonest blown off from their first stations: Whereas virtuous and constant
persons do show their greatness in the impossibility of their being removed.
This Vice likewise is unfit for such as design great matters, seeing no party
will care much to gain such for friends, whom they cannot retain; and when they
tell you that such are not worth their pains, they tell you how mean an esteem
they put upon inconstancy. All affairs in the World are subject to change; and
it is most certain, that some occasion, or other, will somewhat raise all
parties: To be constant then to any one, will gain him who is fixed, the honor
of being sure to his friends, which will magnify him amongst such as are
indifferent, and procure him respect even from his enemies, who will admire him
for that quality, which by ensuring their own friends to them, will advantage
their interest more then they can be prejudged by him, as their enemy, how
considerable soever he be* Augustine's greatness cannot persuade the World to
pardon him this fault, nor can Cato's severity; nor self-murder, dissuade them
from admiring that constancy, which had as much extraordinary Gallantry in it,
as may be a remission for his crime: Besides, that it made Caesar (even when his
Victories had raised him to his greatest hight and vanity) regrate the losing
an opportunity to gain so great a person.

There is amongst many others, An Invective against unconstant friendships.
one effect of inconstancy, which I hate, as mean, and unworthy of a Gentleman,
and that is, to alter friendships upon every elevation of Fortune; as if
(forsooth) men were raised so high, that they cannot from these Pinacles know
such whom they have left upon the first level: but really this implies a
weakness of sight in them, and no imperfection in their friends, upon whom they
cast down their looks, and who continue still of their first stature, though
the others eyes continue not to possess the same clearness. A generous person
should not entertain so low thoughts of himself, as to think that what is the
gift of another, can add so much to his intrinsic value, as to make him
confess in the undervaluing of his former friends, the meanness of his own
parts, and former condition: And he obstructs extremely his own greatness, who
obliges his friends to stop, and retard it, as what may be disadvantagious to
their interest, by robbing them of so rare an advantage as is a friend. Whereas
the noblest trial of power is, to be able to raise these whom men honored
formerly with that Title: For by this, others will be invited to depend upon
them, and they may thereby justify their former choice, and let the World see,
that they never entered upon any friendship that was mean, or low.

Friendship, the greatest of Commanders, has commanded us to stay by our
friend, and he who quites the Post assigned to him, is either cowardly, or a
fool; and a Gentleman should think it below his courage, as well as his
friendship, to be boasted from a station which he thought so advantageous, out
of fear of either Fate, or Interest: Which recommends much to me that gallant
Rant in Lucan, when after he had preferred Cato to other men, he, in these
words, extolls him above the gods,

Victrix causa diis placuit sed victa Catoni. The gods did the Victorious
approve, But the great Cato did the Vanquished love. But lest my tediousness
should make the constancy I plead for, seem a Vice, I shall say no more of a
Subject, whereof I can never say enough.

Drunkennels is so mean a Vice, `Drunkenness.
that I scorn to take notice of it, knowing that none will allow it, but such
as are mad; and such as are mad are not to be reclaimed by Moral Discourses.
Yet I cannot but press its meanness from this, that though Noah was a person of
the greatest authority, his once being drunk, is remarked in Scripture, to have
made him despicable in the eyes even of his own Children (whom he had also
lately obliged to a more then natural respect, by saving them from that
deludge, which drowned in their sight the remanent of mankind.) And yet he
might have excused himself, more then those of this age, as not knowing the
strength of that newfound Wine: And having been drunk but once, might have
defended himself by curiosity, which too few now can allege. It is a mean and
mad complement, to requite the kindness of such as come to visit us, with
forcing them (after the fatigue of travel) to drink to such excess, that they
commit and speak such follies, as make them return home from that strange
place, without being remarked for any thing else, then the ridiculous
expressions they vomited up with their stinking Excrements. Why are Servants
turned out of doors, and each man (which is very mean) obliged to serve
himself, when men enter upon that beastly employment? Is it not, that Servants
may not hear, or see, what extravagancies are there to be committed? And is it
not an ignoble part in persons of honor, to do resolutely what they dare not
own before the meanest who attend them? Men by this Vice bring themselves to
need their Servants Legs to walk upon, and their Eyes to see by; but which is
worse, they must be governed at that time, by the servile discretion of such
(who will be emboldned by this, to undervalue both them and their commands) and
these Masters are accounted wisest, who do most submissively follow their
directions. Judge if that exercise can be Noble, which in disabling us to serve
our friends, makes us incapable to discern the favors they do us, and measure
its disadvantages by this, that when men have their Senses benighted with the
vapors of Wine, they are thereby unfitted to lead Armies, to assist at
Councils, to sit in Judicatories, to attend Ladies, and differ nothing from the
being dead, but that they would be much more innocent if they were so. Men are
then very ready to attaque unjustly the honor of others, and most unable to
defend their own: And such as they wrong then, do with a scornful mercy pardon
their failings with the famness of disdain, which makes them forgive fools, or
furious persons: And that in my judgment should be the most touching of all
affronts. And if we esteem Roots according to the prettiness of these Flowers
they display (as if they would give a grateful account to the Sun, of what its
warmness has produced) certainly we will find drunkenness (as the Apostle
speaks of Avarice) the root of all bitterness. For this is that Vice, which
keeps men at present from attending such of their own, and of their friends
interests, as concern most their Fame: And as to the future, begets such
diseases, and indispositions, as makes their bodies unfit instruments for great
atchievments. And seeing to talk idly, is the most pardonable of its errors
(which is so unworthy a Character, that no Gentleman would suffer another to
give it of him, without hazarding his life in the revenge) it is other madness
must be beyond all remission. By this, men are brought to disgorge the deepest
buried secrets, to reveal the intimacies, or asperse the names of Ladies, to
enter upon foolish quarrels, and the next morning, either to abjure what they
said, or fight injustly their Commerads; and Victory is not in that case
rewarded with Fame, but is tainted with the aspersion of a drunken quarrel, and
is ascribed not to courage, but to necessity.

I confess, whooring is in this a more extensive Vice, then others; that it
corrupts still two at once, for no man can sin so alone, but drinking (as if it
scornd not to be the greatest Vice) does surpass it in another quality, which
is, that one vicious person can force, or tempt whole tables, and companies to
be drunk with him: and if great men should be known to love this Vice, all such
as have need to accoast them, would be in danger, either by complacency, or
interest, to plunge themselves into this miserable excess. In other Vices, men
debauch only their own rational Souls; but here men add to that, the
ingratitude of employing against GOD, and Nature, these Rents and Estates,
which were kept by providence, from more pious persons, that great men might by
that testimony of his kindness, be engaged to a religious retribution. So that
such as employ their Estates, in maintaining their Drunkenness, commit almost
the same Sacrilege with Beltshazzar, who was terrified by a miraculous hand
upon the Wall, delivering him his fatal sentence, for carousing with his Nobles
in the sacred Vessels, that were robbed from the Temple of Jerusalem.

My Employment, as well as Philosophy, Injustice.
oblidges me to implead Injustice as the worst of Vices; because it wrongs the
best of men, and the best of things; the best of men, seeing they have still the
best of Plea's. And so, Injustice can only reach them, and these will not by
Flattery, Bribing, or Cheats, conciliat the esteem of such, as have a latitude
to return them this unjust advantage; which good men neither need, nor will
accept. Injustice likewise, debauches the Law, which is the best of things; and
in affronting whereof, of all others, great men are (when guilty) most ungrate:
because, it is their Guardian, and Fence by which they exact respect and
treasures from others; and without which, such Magistrates are unjust, could not
escape these hourly massacres, which a robbed and oppressed people would pour
upon them. And though such, as are generously injust, intend thereby to
complement their friends, or repay old favors; Yet in effect, this requital,
is as base, as if one should rob a Church, to pay his particular debts. He is
not worthy of your friendship, who will expect such returns: And Virtue is not
like Vice, so penurious or poor, as that it cannot build upon any other
foundation, then the ruins of another. Such as intend by their injustice to
gain esteem, from the party advantaged thereby, are much mistaken; for though,
they should gain the esteem of one thereby, yet they would lose that of many
thousands; and he who is wronged, will disclose the injustice done him, more
then the other dare brag of the favor. And I have my self heard, even the
gainer hate and undervalue his injust Patron, loving not the traitor but the
treason: Considering, that by that precedent, himself was laid open to more
hazard, then he thereby reapt of advantage; for that same injustice, which
ensured him of his late conquest, made him unsure both of it, and all that he
had or should gain thereafter. And to be injust for a bribe, is as mean, as to
serve in the worst of employments for a fee, it is to be as base as a thief,
and less noble then a robber; and it deserves all these base reproaches, that
are due to Avarice, Lying, Flattery, Ingratitude, Treachery and Perjury: All
which, are sharers in this Caper when it prospers, and when it prospers not, it
leads to these ignoble Ports, Infamy, Poverty, the Scaffold, Pillory or Gibbets.

Though my having usurped so far upon the Readers patience, public
Spiritednesse.
makes all I can say for the future, criminal, Yet such respect I owe, and such
I bear, to the memory of these noble Patriots, who have by their public
Spiritednesse, settled for us that peace, whose native product, all our joys
are: that I cannot but recommend, that protecting Virtue to such as live now,
for the noblest ornament of a great Soul, and if our actions be specified and
measured by their objects, certainly these Souls must be accounted greatest,
which center all their cases upon the public good, scorning to wind up their
designs upon so small a bottom, as is private interest. By this, the Heathens
became Gods, and Christians do by it (which is more) resemble theirs. This is
the task of Kings and Princes; whereas private interest is the design of Churles
and Cobblers: who can so justly expect universal praise, as these who design
universal advantage? and none will grudge, that riches should be carried into
his treasurs, who keeps them but as Joseph did his corn in granaries, till
others need to have their necessities supplied. These are deservedly styled
Patres Patriae, and it is accounted moral Paricide, to wound the reputation of
such as the Commonwealth terms its Parents. And when these Treasures which
private interest have robbed from the public, shall, after they have stained
the acquirer with the names of avarice and cruelty, invite posterity to recall
them from his offspring, as not due to them; Then such as have like Providence
toiled only for the good of their Country, and Mankind, shall find their Fame
like Medals, grow still the more illustrious, by all accessions of time; and
that the new born Generations shall augment the numbers of their admirers, more
then following years can moulder away these heaps of Coin, which avaritious men
raised as a Monument for their memory. Epaminondas is more famous and admired,
then Cresus; and Fame may be better believed concerning him, seeing he left
neither Gold, nor Money, to bribe from it a suffrage. And albeit he was so
busied in raising the glory of his Country, that he had no time to gain as
much Money, as to raise the meanest for his own; Yet we find him at no loss
thereby, seeing* each Theban assisted at his Funeral, as a Mourner: And Nature
lays it as a duty upon all whom it brings to the World, to magnify him who
endeavored to resemble it, in the universalities of his favors. That glorious
Roman, who threw himself into the devouring Gulf, to avert the wrath of the
gods from his Country, did, in exchange of a few years (which he but might
have lived) add an eternity of Fame to his age; and by the gloriousness of that
action, has buried nothing in that Gulf, but his personal faults. And Brutus,
by dying for his Country, is not more justly called the last of Romans, then
he may be called the first of men. And for my part, I think that he sacrificed
Caesar, rather as a Victime to his injured Country, then to his private malice.
For as Mr. Couley well remarks, the pretext of friendship* can be no reason,
why a man should suffer without resentment, his Mother to be violated before
his eyes. Paul likewise, whom grace had raised as much above these, as reason
had raised these above others, was so zealous in this Virtue, that after he had
known the joys of Heaven more intimately, then others, who had not like him
traveled through all these starry Regions; Yet such was his affection to his*
Country, that he was content, to have his name deleted out of the Book of
Life, that room might be made for theirs. But if men will love nothing but what
will advance their private interest, they will at least, upon this score, love
their Country, because, when it becomes famous, they will share in the
advantage: As the being a Roman, was sufficient to make one terrible, when Rome
flourished. And I imagine, that it was sufficient to incite one of that
glorious Re-publick, to undertake, or suffer the hardest of things, to remember
him that he was a Roman: and at all times the unacquainted still esteem us,
according to the presumptions they can gather from our Country, Race, and
Education. For besides that a Hawk of a good nest is still preferred: We see,
that example and emulation, are the strongest motives that can either induce,
or enable men to be noble and valorous; and though some term this but a fancy,
yet, granting it were no more, it is such a fancy, as tends much to our honor,
because it hightens in others a fear of us, and lessens in us the fear of them.
I may then conclude with this, that as the Rays of the Sun are accounted a more
noble light, then any that is projected from a private Candle. And as amongst
Perfumes, these are accounted noblest, whose emanations dart to the greatest
distance; so amongst Souls, these are the most excellent, which respect most
the advantage of others.

I confess there are some Vices, Ambition is a mean, vice.
which by shrouding themselves under the appearance of good, do advance
themselves too far in ill governed esteems, as we see in ambition, and revenge;
Yet to our severer inquiries it will appear, that Ambition is ignoble, seeing
such as desire to be promoted, confess the meanness of that state they press to
leave. This Vice oblidges men to serve such as advance its designs, exchanging
its present liberty, for, but the uncertain expectation of commanding others;
and paying greater respects to Superiors for this expectation, then it will be
able to exact from those whom it designs to subject. What is advancement, but
the peoples Livery? and such as expect their happiness from them, must
acknowledge, that the Rabble is greater and nobler then themselves; and by
exchanging their natural happiness, for that which is of its bestowing, they
confess their own to be of the least value; for no man will exchange for what
is worse. A Courtier admiring the Philosopher, gathering his Herbs, told him,
that if he flattered the Emperor, he needed not gather Herbs; was answered,
that if he could satisfy himself with Herbs, he needed not flatter the
Emperor; and without doubt, flattery inferrs more dependence, then gathering of
Herbs. And in the dispute for liberty, Diogenes had the advantage of the
Stagarit, when he told him, Diogenes did dine when it pleased Diogenes, but
Aristotle not till it pleased Alexander.

Vanity is too airie a Vice to be noble, Vanity.
for it is but a thin crust of Pride, and but a pretending cadet of that
gallant sin; It is I confess, less hurtful then Pride, because it magnifies it
self, without disparraging others, (for if we admire others when compared with
our selves; we are not vain, but proud) and it is often the Spur to great
actions, being to our undertakings, what some poisons are to Medicines; which,
though they be hurtful in a dose apart, yet make the compounds they enter, more
opperative and pointed. And I have heard some defend, that Vanity was no sin,
because, in admiring our selves, at a greater rate then we deserved, we without
detracting from our Neighbor, hightned our debt to our Maker, which might be
an error, but was no fault. But Vanity, being an error in our judgment, it
cannot but be mean, as all errors are ignoble: And he is avery fool (which is
the ignoblest of names) who understands not himself. He who understands not his
own measurs, cannot govern himself, and so is unfit to govern others; and it is
the employment of a great Soul, rather to do things worthy to be admired, then
to admire what himself has done; but leaving to pursue the crowd of it is ill
effects, I shall single out some of these I judge most enemies to true
gallantry, amongst which, I scruple not to prefer inmeanesse, the being vain of
prosperity, and derived power: which shows, that we prefer, and admire more
what others can bestow, then what we possess our selves. Whereas, virtuous
persons, may justly think, that nothing can make them greater, and to be vain
of prosperity, shows we cannot bear it; and so concludes us under a weakness:
To take advantages of others, when we are more powerful then they, is as base,
as it is for an armed man to force his enemy to fight, when he has no weapon:
this is cowardlienesse, not courage, and who defers not his revenge, till his
rival be equal with him, implys a fear of grapling upon equal terms. That one
expression, of one of the Kings of France, that he scorned when he was King of
France, to remember the wrongs done to the Duke of Orleans, makes his name
grateful in history, and if great men would reflect seriously, how a word from
him they serve (though but a man who must himself yield often times to a mean
disaster) or how the least error in their own conduct, can overturn the fixtest
of their endeavors, and make them in being unfortunat, ridiculous withal,
certainly they would call this presumption, rather madness, then Vanity; and
would conclude it more gallant, to bear adversity, with a generous courage,
then to be a fool or flattered by prosperity, which vanquishes as often, these
for whom, as these against whom it fights.

Neither can I leave this Period, till I inveigh against that meannest of
Vanities; The meanness of being vain of riches and eestates.
whereby, men are vain of Estates and Territories: For, seeing Man is born Lord
of all the World, why should he retrinch his own right, by glorying in so
little a part of it, that his share will escape an exact Geographer. I wish
such would remember, that Pompey bestowed Kingdoms upon his slaves, and yet
Epictetus, who was a slave, is more admired, then he; and yet admired for
nothing, but his Virtue: and why should men be proud, of enjoying that, upon
which the meanest beggar pours out his excrements If these be vain, because
they may call it their own, what has the Master but that (as Solomon says) he
beholds it with his eyes, and at this rate, I may glory, in that the glorious
heavens are spread over me, for I may behold the one, with as impropriating
eyes, as he can do the other. And he who wants a tomb, which these have, have
the Heaven for a vault and burial place -- coelo tegitur, qui non habet urnam.

But if the answer be, that these Rents will allow them the keeping of a table
for their Grandour (which I wish, were the only excuse) that answers makes them
Servants, and burdens them with a necessity, to provide for such as they
entertain; and so they are vain of being Servants, and Servants to such, as
will rise from their table, to read and admire above them, Plato, Socrates, or
which is less, the author of a well contrived play; but to leave this folly,
these may have some pretext, for preferring their own Estates, above these of
others, but why should they admire themselves for their Estates? which is no
part of themselves, and so they should not in reason think better of themselves
then others for it. Under the same condemnation fall such, as are vain of these
Horses, Lackeys, or such like things, which is most injust, except their Horses
and they were all one.

Such as crust themselves over with embroideries, The meaness of vainity in
apparel.
and after they have divided their time, betwixt their comb and their mirrours,
are vain of these silly toys, which are the creaturs and workmanship of
Servants, must be certainly very low, and mean spirited, when they imagine to
add to their natural value, by things that have no value in them, but what our
Fancy (which is the most despicable quality of that Soul they neglect) gives
them. And do not they amongst the rest of mankind, disparage very much even
these Mistrisses upon whom they bestow these adorations? which they deny their
mighty Maker, when they imagine by such contemptible means, to scrue themselves
into their esteem. How ignobly undervalue they their own thoughts, the noble
conversation of excellent men, and accurate Books (to write some whereof,
Caesar, and the greatest of the Emperors have laid aside their Swords) when they
impend upon Ribbans, and Laces, that age of time, which would be missimployed,
though it were let out but in moments, upon such Womanly Exercises. But if
Ladies, or their Suitors, will magnify these handsome shapes and colors,
which are too often bestowed upon them, to repair the want of these noble
qualities, of which those who are Masters may be more justly vain: Why are not
they afraid? by whoring, fairding, drinking, gluttony, or macerating envy, to
blast these florid advantages upon which themselves do, and would have others
to dote.

I must here endeavor to subdue one error, Preserment is not still honorable.
which is by so much the more dangerous, that it wears the fairest mask of all
other Vices: and this is that whereby men are induced to believe, that true
honor is but an appanage of preferment, and that preferment is seldom without
honor, but honor comes never without preferment; and not only are the Lees of
the people taken with this opinion, but the gallantest of men, who are Spheared
far above those, do in this, slide easily into the sense of the Neighborhood.
Yet it remains still an error, for true honor is an innat elevation of the
Soul, whereby it scorns every thing which is more mortal then it self, and
nothing is more frail then preferment; whose paint is washed off by the least
storm, and whose being depends upon the fancy, or humor of others: Whereas
true honor is independent, and as it cannot flow from any other, so cannot
stoop to them. He is truly gallant, whose innocence fears not the jurisdiction
of men; and who looks upon Scepters, and such Gilded Trifles, as impertinent
toys, when they are not swayed by the hand of Virtue; and who would not value
power for any other end, but to be a second to these inclinations which are so
reasonable, that they should not need power to make them be obeyed? Tyrants can
bestow the tallest preferments, but they cannot make men truly honorable;
which shows that these two differ. And Heliogabulus cook was still but a base
fellow, though his Masters doting made him as great, as were his own Vices; A
Statue becomes not taller by the hight of its Basis, nor a Head more wise, or
noble, for being adorned with a shaggie Plummage. Julius Caesar, though no
Emperor, has a more lasting glory then Tiberius who was so. And Cato gloried
more in that the people asked why he was not preferred, then he would have done
in enjoying the greatest honors these had to bestow. Preferment is but the
creation of men, but true honor is of GODS own creation; and as we should
esteem this last as a Piece done by the Nobler Master, so we should love it
best, because it is more our own, then what rises from another favor.
Greatness, when most advantagiously bestowed, can but produce love, or fear; to
beget fear, is not noble, because the Devil does this most, and these who come
next to him in baseness, come nearest him in this Brutes, Savages and Madmen,
have sufficiency enough for that undertaking; but to beget love, is peculiar to
true honor: and so generous a passion is Love, that it is soonest elicit, when
least commanded. A virtuous person is likewise a greater Governor, then he who
suffers himself to be commanded by a Vicious Woman; a thirsty appetit, then
that King who suffers himself to be led by the ears with flatterers, and to be
forced by his own pride to disobey his reason, by which alone he is truly
great, and which when any man disowns absolutely, he is to be thrown into a
Dungeon, or Bedlame: Preferment leaves and obliges us to bow to others, for
satisfying our interest, so that interest is confessed by great men, to be
greater then they. But Virtue and true Honor teaches us to subject our
interest to our selves, and puts it in our own power to make our selves happy.
And what a Pilot is in the Ship, a General in an Army, the Soul in the Body,
that is a Philosopher amongst these with whom he converses. Necenim nunquam in
tantum convalescet nequitia, nunquam sic contra virtutes conjurabitur, ut non
virtutis nomen venerabile and Sacrum maneat. Sen. Epist. 14. To which purpose I
must cite Statin. Silv.

Vive Mide gazis, and Lido ditior auro, Troica and Euphrate supra diademate
foelix Quem non ambigui fasces, non mobile vulgus, Spemq^^ metumque domas,
vitio sublimior omni. Exemptus fatis. In revenge, we must use instruments, The
ignoblenesse of revenge
who exact more, and will upbraid us more then the Law will do, when it
satisfies us our wrongs. And does not the Philosopher, who denis that he can be
wronged more nobly? then he who confesses, that he is both subject to wrongs,
and has received so great a one, that he cannot but pursue it is revenge? he
who con^eals his wrongs, is only wronged in private; whilst he who revenges his
wrong, is wronged in public: and certainly, the public wrong is more ignoble.
And seeing we conceive our selves concerned in honor, to punish such as would
divulge an affront, that was smothered, as soon as given: we can not but be
said to wrong our own honor, when we in seeking revenge, proclaim such wrongs,
as had else either evanisht, or been lessened by the concealment; which
remembers me of a Story, that goes of an old man, at whose bald head, a rotten
Orange being thrown in the street, clapped his Hat upon it; and said, I shall
spill that Villans sport, who expected to see me come showing my head all
besmeared over, and complaining of the injury. It is one of the most Picquant
revenges, to undervalue our enemies so far, as not to think them worthy of our
noticeing, and we show our selves to be greater then they, when we let the
world see, that they cannot trouble us, when children and fools do us the same
things, that we fret at in others of more advanced years, we pass them without
a frown; which shows, that it is not the acts done us by our enemies, but our
own resentment, which in effect injures us; So that it is still in our power to
vex such as design to affront us, by laughing at, or undervaluing these, and
such like little endeavors as what cannot reach our happiness. He who pardons,
proclaims that by so doing, he fears not his enemies for the future; but
revenge implies a fear of what we desire upon that account to lessen. Thus
cowards, and none but they, are cruel, seeing they then only account themselves
secure, when their enemies have lost all capacity to resist. In revenge, we act
the Executioner, but we personat a Prince when we pardon; in the one, we bestow
a favor, and so are Noble, but in the other, we disclose our infirmity, which
is ignoble.

I admire Passive Courage, The gallantry of patience*
as a Virtue which deserves its Palms best of all others, because it toils most
for them, Honors and Rewards are but gifts to them, but they are conquests to
it: And it merits as much praise, as it meets with injuries. Avida est periculi
virtus, and quo tendat non quid passura sit cogitat, quoniam and quod passura
est, gloriae pars est: This Virtue has rather a greediness for, then a desire
to find dangers; and seeing its sufferings make the greatest part of its glory,
it runs out to meet them, thinking that to attend them, is a degree of
cowardliness. And if we remark narrowly, we will find that all other Virtues
owe their Gallantry to this: And have no other title to that glorious quality,
but in so far as they borrow excellencies from it. Friendship is then only
gallant, when to gratify our friends, we expose to injuries for them, either
our persons, or interest. Gratitude is then Noble, when we consider not what we
are to suffer; but what we owe, or (which is more gallant) what is requisite
for the service of such as have obliged us. Justice is always excellent, but
is then only most to be admired, when we resist temptations, and when we
resolve to suffer for having been just; the envy and rage of these, who
consider only how much they have been prejudged, but not how much the public
good has been thereby advanced.

By this it is that a virtuous person shows how great he truly is, and that
power and command were the instruments only, but not parts of his former worth.
He who yields to affliction, shows that those who inflicts it, are greater then
himself; but he who braves it, shows that it is not in the power of any thing
but of guilt, to make him tremble. It is easy for one who is assisted by power
and fate, to urge these advantages, but to dare these, shows a pitch beyond
them: And this induces me to think, that passive courage is more noble then
what is active: For one who fights gallantly in an open Field, and in the view,
or front of an Army, is assisted by the example of others, by hope of revenge,
or victory, and needs not much fear that death which he may shun, as probably
as meet: But he who in a noble quarrel, adorns that Scaffold, whereupon he is
to suffer, evinces that he can master Fate, and make danger less then his
courage, and to serve him in acquiring Fame and Honor. But this Virtue
deserves a larger room, then my present weariness will allow it in this Paper:
and therefore I will leave it for praises to its own native excellencies.

I shall (My Lords and Gentlemen) leave these reflections to your own
improvement, for I am confident that the heat of your own zeal for Virtue, will
kindle in your breasts such noble flames, as that by their blaze, ye may see
further into this subject, then I can discover: And in this essay I desire to
be esteemed no otherwise presumptuous, then a Servant is, who lights his
Master up these Stairs which himself intends to mount.

FINIS.

