A SERMON Preached before the KING, AT WHITE HALL, July 30. 1676.

By John Meriton, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of
Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star at the West End of St. Paul's.
1677.

MATTHEW. iii. 8, 9. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.

And think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father; for I
say unto you, that God is able of these stones, to raise up children unto
Abraham.


THese words were spoken to the Pharisees and Sadduces, who were the great
Zealots of the Jewish Church; especially the Pharisees, whom Saint Paul calls
(...), the most strait Sect amongst the Jews, Act. 26. 5. Which knew me from
the beginning (if they would testify) that after the most strait Sect of our
Religion, I lived a Pharisee. These were zealous and punctual in the
observation of the Law of Circumcision, and all other Rites and Ceremonies
instituted of God by Moses: under which for a time, were contained the
Mysteries of true Religion and Godliness; Heb. 9. 9, 10. which was a figure for
the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices for sin;
which could not make him that did that service perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience: Which stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings and carnal
Ordinances; imposed on them only until the time of Reformation. In which
Institutions consisted the external Profession and Form of true Religion, and
outward Communion with the visible Church, until the coming of Christ in the
Flesh: but by a blind zeal for the Form, without the Power of Godliness, the
Pharisees and Sadducees thought themselves privileged against the wrath menaced
by the Baptist; which contained a Prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, and
other great calamities then approaching to the Jews under Titus and Vespatian,
and also the terror of eternal punishment in the damnation of Hell. The
multitude came and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins: but
these righteous in their own eyes had no sins to confess, and came only to his
Baptism out of a vain curiosity to see and censure; deriding rather than
believing that wrath they were warned to flee from; reasoning (as is evident
from the Baptist's words in the Text,) We are zealous of the Law of
Circumcision, and all things enjoined us of God by Moses, and have Abraham to
our Father: Tush, God cannot destroy us, being righteous; nor according to the
Oath which he swear to Abraham and his Seed for ever: but with Ixion in the
Fable, they embraced a Cloud instead of Juno; whilst they thought they had
found the clearest and the brightest truth, it proved but a Cloud of palpable
error and darkness. For the Baptist accuses their Righteousness of
insufficiency, admonishes them to repent, and upbraids their vain oftentation,
and fruitless boasting of succession from Abraham; from whose faith and virtue
they were so far degenerated, as they were more like a brood of Vipers than his
Children. They had proceeded all this while upon a false Hypothesis, about that
Righteousness, wherein consisted the power and substance of true Religion and
Godliness; and upon which the Covenant of God in Christ was confirmed to
Abraham, four hundred and thirty years before the giving of the Law by Moses,
Gal. 3. 15, 16. So that unless they would now upon means of better information,
recant their errors, and recall their mistakes, and reform their manners;
which is indeed to repent; they could not secure themselves from being involved
in the common Miseries, then approaching their Land and Country, under Titus
and Vespatian; or for ever escape the damnation of Hell. For the Promise that
he should be Heir of the world, was not to Abraham or to his seed through the
law, but through the righteousness of faith. Romans 4. 13. Religion is not a
Complement, but a real thing; and that righteousness whereby we are righteous
in the sight of God, is not external obedience of the body to instituted
Righteousness, or positive Laws; but internal obedience of the heart, to the
Law of Moral goodness, and the Dictates of right Reason engraven upon the
conscience of every man; Romans 2. 14. Explained and made more evident by the
several Revelations of God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke
in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets; and in these last days unto us by
his Son, Heb. 1. 1. The former, which is our righteousness in the sight of men,
and but the shadow and carcass of Religion; is called a righteousness of our
own, which is according to the Law, Phil. 3. 9. As being the performance of the
letter of the Law, by the act and operation of the body, through mere natural
virtue, which is our own. But the latter, which is our righteousness in the
sight of God; is called in the same Text, The righteousness which is of God by
faith in Jesus Christ: Of which words I think my self obliged to give a
distinct and full account (and that according to the demonstration of truth to
my own Conscience in the sight of God;) they being the directions of our
present life, to a future happiness; which makes an error dangerous, and truth
to be valued in opening them: then I must give solution to these three
Particulars; 1. In what sense called the righteousness of Faith. 2. Of God. 3.
Of God by faith in Jesus Christ. 1. It is called the righteousness of Faith in
a double respect: 1. As being the most proper object of our Belief, so to
conceive of God, as is most agreeable to natural notice, and supernatural
Revelation. 2. As being the only Principle to the practice of all the Duties
and Obligations of the Will of God so revealed; Faith being the first Principle
of all Religion, both natural and revealed; Heb 11. 6. He that comes to God
must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. 2. It is called the righteousness of God, 1. As being the Copy or
Image of that righteousness, which God is in himself; of which God himself is
the Original and Perfection. 2. As being that righteousness which God only
approves, and will reward: Romans 2. 28. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly;
nor is Circumcision that which is outward in the flesh, but that which is
inward in the heart; whose praise is not of Men, but of God. 3. It is called
the Righteousness of God by Faith in Jesus Christ: 1. As to the performance of
which, we are assisted by the grace of God, obtained by faith in Jesus Christ
(in whose Name, whatsoever we ask, believing, we shall receive) and the grace
of the new Covenant consists in these three things; 1. To incline our wills to
accept the conditions. 2. Upon our acceptance, to assist our weakness. 3. To
accept our sincerity through many defects and imperfections: the integrity of
our Wills will so far commute for the deed, that is, for the perfection of
obedience to that Law of Moral Righteousness in a State of Grace; as whatever
pollutions or defilements we may have contracted through the fraud of the
Devil, the frailty of the Flesh, or temptations of the World. So long as our
Converse with bodily Objects, have not altogether sunk down our souls into a
vicious love of them, which is the dregs and feculency of sin and folly; God
will accept us upon a sincere repentance, through the Merit and Righteousness
of the Holy Jesus: the redundancy of whose righteousness is to supply the
defects of a sincere repentance. 2. As being that righteousness, in the
pursuance of which in truth, though we cannot in perfection, we can only have
confidence of acceptance with God, through Jesus Christ: though we cannot be
golden Scepters, we must be broken Reeds; though not burning and shining
Lights, we must be smoking Flaxes in his sight; who will not break the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoking flax, until judgment be brought forth unto
victory. And this is that righteousness of Faith, wherein consists the power
and substance of true Religion and Godliness; upon which, as the condition, the
Covenant of our reconciliation and happiness, was confirmed of God in Christ to
Abraham, for all Generations; who received the sign of Circumcision, but as the
Seal of the righteousness of Faith, (which is the condition of the Covenant)
which he had yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all that
believe; that righteousness might be imputed to them also, though they were not
circumcised, Romans 4. 11. So that God was in no need of Abraham's Children
according to the flesh; but could, without breach of Promise to him (upon their
Apostasy and Degeneracy from his faith and righteousness) destroy them all; and
out of the obdurate Gentile world, or the very stones, raise up a People to
himself, followers of the faith of Abraham; to whom, as such, the Promise in
Christ did as truly belong, as to the proudest Pharisee or Sadducee of them
all. Circumcision was but the sign of the Covenant, not obedience to it; but
the profession of Religion, not the practice of it: and for them only to
profess and expect the reward, was as preposterous, as if a Servant should
demand wages of his Master for wearing of his Livery, and neglecting of his
Work. The faith and righteousness of Abraham was example for their virtue, not
expiation of their sin; and they might as reasonably have expected to have
lived naturally, by virtue of what Abraham had eat and drank, without eating
and drinking for themselves, as to live eternally by virtue of that particular
act of believing, whereby Abraham wrought the works of God, which was counted
to him for righteousness; unless by the same Spirit of Faith, they should work
the works of Abraham and of God, and thereby work out their own Salvation with
fear and trembling: for Abraham's righteousness determined in himself, he could
thereby but deliver his own soul; for God respects no man for the goodness of
another, but every man in the circumstance of his own integrity: If the Stones,
the obdurate Gentiles, the Wild Olives grafted in, will believe and repent, and
do the works of Abraham upon the hearing of the Gospel; they shall be the
Children of Abraham, and Heirs according to the Promise: and if the Jews, the
Natural Branches, continue in their Hardness and Unbelief, it shall be no
privilege to them, that they are the Offspring of Abraham according to the
flesh: Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: And think not to say
within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father; for I say unto you, that God
is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

The Words thus opened, principally imply two Particulars, by way of Motive to
Repentance: 1. The Universality of the purpose of the Grace of God in the
Redemption of the world by Jesus Christ; the most proper Motive to Repentance
against Despair. 2. The Impartiality of God's Justice, in distributing Rewards
and Punishments without respect of persons; ( And think not to say within your
selves, we have Abraham to our Father) the most proper Motive to Repentance
against carnal security and presumption. God is impartially good that none may
despair, and impartially just that none may presume. 1. God is impartially
good: Though the Jews were Israelites, to whom appertained the Adoption, and
the Glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the Promises; whose
were the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, who is God
blessed for ever, Romans 9. 4. And to whom were committed the Oracles of God,
Romans 3. 2. God had not therefore cast off all care or concern for other
Nations; though he had left them for some time, to walk in their own ways,
without the direction of instituted Righteousness, or positive Laws; yet he did
not leave himself without Witness, in that he did them good, and gave them rain
from heaven, and fruitful Seasons; filling their hearts with food and gladness,
Acts 14. 17. And though the coming of Christ in the flesh, that he might
reconcile both Jew and Gentile unto God in one Body by the Cross, Ephesians. 2. 16.
And that the Gentiles should be Fellow-Heirs with the Jews of the same Body,
and partakers together of the Promises of Christ by the Gospel, was a Notion
that had been for some time buried in the dark vault of Nature's Ruins, and
long obscured under the thick veil of Moses's Law, and by the dark sayings of
the Prophets concerning Christ, so as St. Paul, in his Epistles to the
Ephesians and Colossians, Ephesians. 3. 4, 5. Coloss. 1. 26. calls it a Mystery
which has been hid from Ages and Generations: And St. Peter, the Minister of
the Circumcision and great Apostle of the Jews, was first warranted by a Vision
from Heaven, Acts 10. 28. before he would acknowledge any Grace of God to the
Gentiles; yet what was formerly drawn by a dark Coal or Pencil, is now written
with a Sunbeam; and there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek, Romans
10. 12. God can be merciful without being partial, just without being cruel,
and truly great without designing irrespectively the far greatest part of
Mankind, for the Trophies of his Power, in an eternal misery: For, as it
follows in the same Text, the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call
upon him. God is equally related unto Mankind as the same Lord, he is the God
of the spirits of all flesh, Heb. 12. 9. And has made of one Blood all Nations
of men, to dwell on all the face of the earth; and has determined the times
before appointed, and the bounds of their habitations: Acts 17. 26. His Hands
fashioned Esau as well as Jacob; and consequently obliges his love and care in
truth, though not in degree for both: so that those words, Romans 9. 13. Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated, respect not the persons of Esau and Jacob,
but their Posterities; as is evident to all unprejudiced minds, from that place
of the Prophet Malachi, 1. 1, 2, 3. referred to by the Apostle; the words are,
The burden of the Word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi; I have loved you,
says the Lord, yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's
Brother, says the Lord? yet I loved Jacob, and hated Esau; and laid his
Mountains and his Heritage waste for the Dragons of the Wilderness, etc. So
that the true meaning of the expressions, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated, is comparative and gradual with respect only to grace and favor, and
not at all to ill will or hate; and may be rendered, Jacob have I preferred in
my favor before Esau, in giving his Posterity the good Land of Canaan, and
that of Esau's the barren Mountains. And that these expressions were thus
usually understood amongst the Jews, is evident by those words of the same
Dialect of our Savior's, Luke, 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his
Father and Mother, and his own life; Where Hate cannot refer to ill will
properly, but to a less degree of love; unless we can suppose our Savior to
cancel the bonds of natural affection, and extinguish the common Principles of
Nature: And although our common relation unto God, introduce no Anabaptistical
parity or community in his favors, but Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated; yet it maintains his good will toward all, and secures every man from
being miserable, that with hearty repentance and true faith turn unto him. And
this is a representation worthy of God and Christ, worthy the infinite goodness
and grace of God, who is not straightened by saving a few or many, as if he could
save no more; who is able to save unto the utmost all that come unto him in
Jesus Christ: for he is a Fountain of Living Water, and can quench the thirst
of all men and creatures without drawing himself dry; his goodness, like the
Sun, enlightens every Star, and influences every Plant, without abatement of
his own virtue or light; he is the true Moses's Bush, that burns without waste,
warms and enlivens every thing without consuming or impairing his own heat or
beams: and it is a light thing for him (that is, an undervaluing of his Power
and Goodness) as he says by his Prophet Isaiah, to raise up the Tribes of
Jacob, and restore the preserved of Israel; therefore have I given him (that
is, Christ) that he might be for Salvation unto the ends of the Earth: and as
they do but eclipse the glory of the Sun in the Firmament, who restrain his
light and influence to some few Regions and Countries, and extend them not from
the rising, to the going down of the same; so do they the Riches of the Grace
of God, who confine it to a few, and extend it not to Mankind. It is also no
less worthy of the infinite Merit of the Satisfaction of Christ; who, by his
own Oblation of himself once offered upon the Cross, made a full, perfect and
sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction, for the sins of the whole
world; and can we deem without scandal and imputation to his Satisfaction, the
Merit of our Second Adam less powerful to redeem, than the guilt of the First
Adam was to captivate and enthral? So that as by the offense of one Judgment
came upon all men to Condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free
Gift is come upon all men to justification of life, Romans 5. 18.

And as for that Objection, Romans 9. 18. For who has resisted his Will: If
God's Will must be accomplished, and God has willed the Salvation of all men
by Jesus Christ, how comes it to pass that any perish?

Be it considered for answer hereunto, That God has willed the Salvation of
all men by Jesus Christ, through the Conditions of Faith and Repentance; and so
his Will is unresisted in all that are saved, and in all that perish. Christ
died, by the Will of God, for all that believe and repent; but all that believe
not, but remain impenitent, perish everlastingly; which is the fault of their
own impenitence and infidelity, etc. Nor can our Faith or Infidelity make the
Will of God of no effect; and such is the concurrence of God's Grace with every
man's Will, who works in us to will and to do of His own good pleasure, whereby
every man may, if he will, work out his own Salvation with fear and trembling;
nor can our acceptance or refusal of his Grace prejudice or lessen his good
Will; the neglect or contumely of the Patient, cannot justly derogate from the
kindness of the Physician, or Sovereignty of the Remedy; nor are the Riches of
God's Grace less in themselves, though multitudes continue poor only because
they will not, and despise: And God is still the Savior of all men, though
especially or actually only of them that believe, because he is not really
willing that any should perish, but rather that all should come to Repentance;
his Nature and Property is always to have mercy, and to forgive all that
believe and repent; and he is unwillingly compelled to destroy the Impenitent
and Unbelieving; and he is thirsty after no man's blood, who has granted unto
all Repentance unto Life; and his ways are equal, who leaves every man to
inherit his own Choice, and renders to every man according to his works,
without respect of persons; which is the next Particular to be discussed.

For, Although Mercy and Free Grace admitted lapsed Mankind to Conditions of
Reconciliation and Restitution by Jesus Christ; yet Justice exacts the
performance of those conditions, and accordingly distributes Rewards and
Punishments: for the Grace of God is a Covenant of Grace, and a Covenant
without a Condition, is a Contradiction; and unless the Conditions be
performed, can it reasonably be expected there should be any force or virtue in
the Obligation. And in this adequate and impartial dealing of God, he regards
not the merit of the Opus operatum, or or thing done by us, but the Equity and
Justice of his own Promise and Covenant; who has established a reward
infinitely exceeding the Merit of the Obedience required, either as congruous
or condign from the consideration of the Work wrought; which is but a just
compliance with the Will of our Lawful Sovereign, who has power of Right to
impose, and it is but our duty to obey; so that when we have done all, we are
but unprofitable Servants, because we have done no more than was our duty to
perform; and whatever is of duty, implies no reward as of Desert or Merit, but
only from that Grace which has annexed a reward to our duty, to make it our
interest to obey. So that it is a righteous thing with God, to reward and crown
our obedience to his Laws in Christ (whence called a Crown of Righteousness)
not for the Righteousness of our Work, but his own Promise; indeed, what is
there in us or our services, worthy that Eternal Happiness which he has
promised, as the reward of of his Grace to a sincere Repentance, since both the
Will and the Deed is from his Grace, who works in us to will and to do, of his
own good pleasure, Philip. 2. 13. So that after we, through God, having done
the will of God; what remains for God to reward in us, but his own Gifts and
Graces? etc. who renders to every man according to, though not for, his works;
and with him is no respect of persons. Evident with respect, 1. To the
Perfection of his Nature; who is free from all such Defects and Imperfections,
as are incident to Humane Natures; whereby Judgment is often turned into Gall,
and Righteousness into Hemlock; the Wicked are justified, and the Righteous
condemned, (both which are alike Abomination to the Lord,) and Justice
frequently impartially administered in this Life. Thus Saul spared Agag, and the
best of the Spoil of the Amalekites, when he should have destroyed them all,
out of Covetousness, or Cowardice, or both, 1 Samuel 15. 8. Thus Eli slightly
reproved his Sons, when he should have recompensed their sin with death (which
was great before the Lord) through natural sondness, 1 Samuel 2. 23. But God is
free from all such Weaknesses and Imperfections, and therefore with him is no
respect of persons: which will yet more evidently appear, with respect to the
Immutability of his Will; who is not as a Man, that he should change, or as the
Son of Man, that he should repent; God is free from all such grounds and
causes, as render Humane Wills subject to alteration, as Ignorance and
Impotence. Men often change their Wills for want of discretion to choose no
better, and for want of a present clear discerning and interview of things. Men
are often forced to After-games of Prudence, which is the proper Notion of
Repentance; but God has an Intuitive Knowledge, and sees all things as they
are and shall be in time from all Eternity.

Men frequently change their wills whether they will or no: the Rational
Faculty of the Soul is sometimes captivated through force and violence; but who
can resist his Will, who is Omnipotent, to whom all Nations are as the drop of
a Bucket, and as the small dust of the Balance? and the concurrent strength of
created Power, but as the Withs, wherewith the Philistines bound Sampson; as a
Thread of Tow, when it touches the fire, etc.

And as for that Objection which some urge against the Immutability of the
Divine Will, from such Scriptures as seem to ascribe Repentance to God; as,
Joel, 2. 14. Jonah, 3. 10. Who knows if he may repent? be it considered that
the threatenings of God are conditional; and when not expressed, are ever
employed, according to that Maxim of the Prophet Jeremy, 18. 7, 8, 9. At what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom; to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: if that Nation, against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, then I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them. So that it being the Immutable Will of God to repent of the
Evil of Punishment upon Man's repenting of the Evil of Sin; Penitere est
sententiam mutare, to repent is but to change his Sentence, but not the Will,
the Will still remaining without variableness, or shadow of turning: And the
immutability of his Will establishes the truth of his distributing Rewards and
Punishments, according to every man's work, without respect of persons; and
that he regards not the Persons of men, but the persormance of the Conditions,
upon which he has established the Covenant of our Reconciliation and Happiness
by Jesus Christ.

The proper Inferences now, from this Discourse are,

First, Encouragement; and Secondly, Caution.

First, Encouragement for every man to make good his Interest in the Common
Salvation: Indeed, who would sweat in the Exercise of Grace, and bleed in
Conflict with Sin, if after he has done the Will of God, he must remain
uncertain whether he shall inherit the Promise. This is that detains the Devils
in Impenitence, who believe and tremble, James, 2. 19. because they are
reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, to the Judgment of the Last Day,
Jude, 6. But though Christ took not on him the Nature of Angels, he has of the
Seed of Abraham; and all that do the Works of Abraham, are the Children of
Abraham, and Heirs according to the Promise. Then let no man say with those in
Jeremy, 18. 12. There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and
every man do the imagination of his evil heart: But let the Wicked forsake his
way, and the Unrighteous man his thoughts; and turn unto God, for he is
gracious; and unto our God, for he will abundantly pardon: And let every man
work out his own Salvation with fear and trembling; lest a Promise being left,
any man seem to come short of it, etc.

Secondly, Caution: 1 Pet. 1. 17. Since we call on the Father; who, without
respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, to pass the time of
our sojourning here in fear; and repose no more confidence of security from
Succession from Holy men, than as we are followers of their Faith and Virtues;
nor in the strict and zealous performance of all instituted Righteousness and
positive Laws, then as they are productive of the main end of purifying our
hearts by faith; renewing us in the Spirit of our minds, and clothing us with
that New Man, which after God, is created in Righteousness and true Holiness;
and the end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And, as it follows, the Law (that
is, Positive Law, is not for a righteous man, in whom the Law of Nature lives;
and can perform the (...), the Dictates of it, without the help of outward
Laws: for the design of all instituted Righteousness, and positive Laws, is but
to conform us to the Duties and Obligations of the Law of Moral Righteousness;
and all obedience to them is no farther acceptable, than as it is instrumental
and serviceable to that great purpose. And God is so far from being pleased
with the performance of Instituted Righteousness in the guilt of Immoralities,
as it is the great aggravation of his displeasure and indignation; Isa. 1. 11.
To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? bring no more vain
Oblations, your hands are full of blood: Isaiah, 66. 3. He that kills an Ox, is
as if he slew a Man; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's neck;
he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swine's blood; he that burns
Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; whilst they have chosen their own ways, and
their souls delight in their Abominations, etc. And whatever Veneration these
righteous men in the Text had for themselves, for tything Mint, Annice, and
Cummin; but neglecting the weightier things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and
Faith; for making clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, remaining within
full of Extortion and Excess; making long Prayers to devour Widows Houses: Our
Savior esteems no better of them than whited Sepulchers, which appear
beautiful to the eye, but within are full of rottenness and dead men's bones:
let our care be then to be really what we appear; not having a Form of
Godliness, denying the Power: and let every man that names the Name of Christ,
depart from all Iniquity; for bodily Exercise profits little, but Godliness
has the Promise of this life, and that that is to come.

This is that Law of Perfection; which it is the design of all positive Laws to
advance and propagate, as the Promulgation of the Decalogue, and the
Institution of the Gospel; which is so far from being a relaxation to Moral
Duty, as it is the greatest help and obligation to promote it, upon a twofold
account;

First, As the most clear and manifest Revelation of Truth; The Law came by
Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ: The Law was Truth in obscure Types
and Shadows, but the Gospel is Truth in its own Image and Likeness: and the
clearer and more manifestly any Law is promulged, the greater and more forcible
is its Obligation; Acts, 17. 35. The time of this ignorance God winked at, but
now he commands all men every where to repent.

Secondly, As the most clear evidence of the truth and certainty of a future
life after this, the main Argument of the Gospel being the truth and certainty
of the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, in the truth and substance of
Humane Nature, and in the Circumstances of Life and Immortality, to die no
more; 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality
to light, through the Gospel. The Summary Article of which is to confess with
our mouths the Lord Jesus, and believe in our hearts that God has raised him
from the dead, Romans 10. 10. God has been pleased to give many instances of his
Power, in raising the Dead by his Prophets under the Law, and by Christ and his
Apostles under the Gospel; which are strong Inferences of the possibility of a
Resurrection: but because all that were raised from the dead (till Christ) dyed
again, and he only lives to die no more. His being so raised is the only
assurance, as the First Fruits of a full Harvest of a future Resurrection and
Judgment; when every man shall rise again with his own Body, to receive
according to what he has done in the Flesh, whether good or evil: and the
belief of this is the most (if not only) powerful Motive to Moral Goodness; for
if there be no Resurrection, it is a Natural Inference, Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we die. But if there be a Resurrection, it is equally rational to
infer: herein let us exercise our selves continually, to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man. The Jews were
generally governed by the hope and fear of Reward and Punishment only in this
life; and generally looked for a Temporal Messiah, to deliver them from the
bondage of the Roman Tyranny, and to give them great temporal Peace and
Prosperity: and because Christ came in the weakness and poverty of a Servant,
and they expected him in the pomp and power of a Sovereign, they owned him not
for their Messiah, but to this day look for another; the which their Errors
and Mispritions, were the Genuine Off spring of their ignorance and uncertainty
of a Future State. And the Sadducees, a great and learned Party amongst them,
said there is no Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit. And though the
Gentiles (at least some of their wise men and Philosophers) asserted and
believed the Immortality of the Soul, yet they were all uncertain, if not
altogether in unbelief, of the Resurrection of the Body: that these Mola's of
flesh and blood should put on Incorruption, and be clothed with Immortality;
which is the only clear Revelation of the Gospel, and the m^st powerful
Argument to all the Duties and Obligations of Moral Righteousness, etc.

The Jews went into Captivity under Shisack King of Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babel; and at last, were desolate under Titus and Vespatian, with the
Temple of the Lord in their mouths, and the sign of Circumcision in their
flesh, and Abraham to their Father. And if God spared not the Natural Branches,
it is fair warning to the Wild Olives grafted in not to be high minded, but
fear; not to trust to the outward Privileges of the due Administration of the
Word and Sacraments, or external obedience to Instituted Righteousness, and
positive Laws, without cleansing themselves from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God; for it is not that that goes
in, but that that comes out, that defiles a man: Good and Evil properly
consists not in the external act and operation of the Body, but in the inward
habit and disposition of the mind; whence it is, that love is the fulfilling of
the Law; and consequently, Hate, the transgression of it: so that he that loves
his Neighbor as himself, is his preserver; and he that hates him in his heart,
is his murderer; though neither ever have power or opportunity actuallay
either to save or to destroy. Charity is not properly to rerelieve them that
want, but to love God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves; nor
Martyrdom every dying, but dying for the love of God and Truth; 1 Cor. 13. 3.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing: Joh. 4. 24. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth:
Optimus animus pulcherrimus Dei cultus, Seneca; He worships God best, who has
the best mind. God bears respect to Abel and to his Offering. That Holocaust
and Oblation which smokes from the Altar of a dovoted heart to God (for the
Altar sanctifies the Gift) bears our acceptable Odor, otherwise we are but
like Vaults, that sound merely from their hollowness, etc.

External Profession of the best Religion, Outward Communion with the best
Church, such as the Jewish once was, and the Christian now is; cannot secure or
privilege from the storms of Divine Vengeance, without the true belief, and
necessry practice of Truth and Holiness, etc.

And since we have the Profession of the best Religion, and live in Communion
with one of the best Churches this day in the world (which happiness God grant
us long to enjoy, under the protection, and in the long life and prosperity of
our most religious and gracious Sovereign) (and may it ever be the Blessing to
us, and our Posterities for all Generations) that therein we may effectually
save our souls from death, and hide the multitude of our sins: may it please
God so to assist us with his Grace, as that in the firm belief of all her
Principles, and in the uniform practice of all her Duties and Obligations, we
may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and Honesty; that being
holy, and humble, and undefiled, the Children of God without rebuke, we may at
last, together with all those that are departed this world in the true Faith,
and fear of God, be made partakers of the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit; three Persons, and one
God, of the same Substance, Power and Eternity; be given of us, all Angels, all
Men, and all Creatures, all possible Honor and Glory, Praise and Dominion,
Power and Thanksgiving, Fear, Adoration and Obedience, now and for ever; Amen.

FINIS.

