A MORAL ESSAY, PREFERRING SOLITUDE TO PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT, And all it is
Appanages; such as Fame, Command, Riches, Pleasures, Conversation, etc.

2 King. 4. 13. -- Would thou be spoken for to the King, or to the Captain
of the host? And she answered, I dwell among mine own people.

EDINBVRH, Printed for Robert Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Sun, on the North-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1665.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN EARL of CRAVVFORD, etc.
My LORD,
Seeing man can glory in nothing, but in that he is GOD's Image; certainly, that
must be his most glorious state wherein that Image is most clearly seen, and
this is solitude; wherein his composed soul (like the smooth face of the Ocean)
represents, with much advantage, this glorious image which the unequal risings
of stormy and aspireing waves of ambition do exceedingly conceal. The heathen
Poet Lucretius describes the great perfections of the Deity to consist in that
it is,

-- Privata dolor omni privatapericlis Ipsa suis pollens opibus -- And Cicero
upon this score confesses, that the Philosophers life was of all others most
preferable, because of all others, it approached nearest to that of the gods.
This, my Lord, invited me to write this Discourse in it is favors; which
because I intended as a bundle of rods, for whipping such as were fondly
ambitious, I did therefore strip naked of these leaves and flourishes of
Eloquence, which by making them more pleasant, could not but make them less
sharp. And if any tax me for sending this Book to public view, from that
solitude which both it and I so much commend; my answer is, That either it will
convince these who read it, and then it will gratify that solitude which it
has left; or else it will meet with censure and disdain, and then it is fate
will demonstrate how dangerous it is to gaud abroad; to press which, is another
of my great designs.

I intend not really to depreciat such by this Discourse as enjoy Honors and
Employment; that design lies as far out of my road, as it is raised above my
power: but I intend by it to congratulate with such as either undervalue them
out of inclination, or have lost them by accident; and to discipline such
unquiet humors, as like powder, do, in blowing up themselves, destroy all that
is above them, or resists their violent ascent: wherein, as I obliege
Philosophers, by complementing the object of their complacency; So I gratify
Statesmen, by reclaiming such as are the ordinary object of their fears.
Neither should any thing in this Discourse, which is picquant against those
Courtiers who have been rather great then good, displease such as are both good
and great, more then it should displease a Gentleman of noble shapes and
features, to see a Painter draw another man (though of the same species with
himself) under all the disadvantages that can be traced by a deforming Pencile.

That I should choose your Lordship for my Patron, is no act of virtue; because
your condition, as it stands circumstantiat, made you almost the only person
who deserved it at all, and altogether the person who deserved it most; for,
being the best Pattern for solitary persons, ye were the person who deserved
most to be the Patron of solitude it self: especially, having obliged it so
far, as to prefer it to that rival against which it now disputes for
precedence; and preferred it, after it is adverse party had been your old
acquaintance, and had offered to bribe you, for your suffrage, with a purse
heavy enough to have weighed down a light spirit. Fear not, my Lord, the want
of fame (which is the only thing that solitude is thought to want) For, as the
heathens resembled it to a Maid, so it has this of a coy Maid likewise, that
it courts most these who seem most to undervalue it; and rarely any person
admires his own servants so much, as it does these who are stranger* to it. And
great men have this loss, that their superiors will not admire them, as being
less then themselves; their equals will not, because they hate them; nor their
inferiors, because they envy them, and do but too often imagine that they are
oppressed for feeding their luxury. That famous rod which wrought so many
miracles for others openly in Egypt, did never it self flourish till it was
laid up in the tabernacle, (according to their opinion, who will have both
these to have been one and the same) and the Diamond ceases not to enjoy a
greater luster, though hid in the darkest corner, then these pleasing blossoms
do, which the weakest breath of a storm will command down from the highest
branch upon which they perch. Fame then shall transmit your name to posterity,
as the Jews did their embalmed bodies which they preserved perfumed and
odoriferous in secret and retired Grotts and Sepulchers; whereas it will
preserve that of more public persons, only as the Egyptians did theirs, whom
by exposing to the open Sun, they kept as mummie, but so black and parcht, as
that it had been better they had returned to their former ashes. But, though
fame should not thus gratify you, yet virtue (who has so few deserving
followers now, that it cannot but pile up pyramids of favors upon such as are)
will recommend you to succeeding ages, both to let see that she wants not her
Trophies even in this dotage of the world (wherein she is not so deformed by
age, as not to have charms strong enough to conquer such as deserve her
favor) and to engage others, by this act of gratitude, to a dependence upon
her. And amongst her admirers, you, as one of her Minions, shall have still all
deference paid you, by

Your Lordships most humble Servant.

SOLITUDE preferred to public EMPLOYMENT.
Generous CELADOR,
I Know that your advancement was to you, but as the being thrown up is to
solid bodies; from which state they cannot be so properly said to fall, as to
run with inclination to that beloved center and level, from which they were at
first raised. I know you made no other use of that height which makes others
giddie, then to take from off it is loftiest tops, a full prospect of all these
vanities which so much ravish mean spirits. And your public deportment being
thus, so exact a picture of true Virtue, I hope your retirement will be the
shadowing of that noble draught.

In the confidence of this, I send you this Elogy of solitude; not as
Physicians send Pills, with praises to their averse Patients: for, as it were
below your Stoicisme to need such; So it is above my skill, to be able to
administrat the meanest remedy, to so well a complexion'd soul as yours. But I
praise it to you, as we use to praise a Mistress to her enamoured Gallant, whose
intimacy with her, though it far exceeds the acquaintance of the praiser, yet
it breeds not in her enamorato, an unwillingness to hear what he already knows;
complacency being oftener the product of our knowledge, then the occasion of our
enquiry. In paralleling greatness and solitude, as to their moral advantages, I
shall first make some few reflections upon the ends for which both are sought,
upon the employments wherein both are exercised, and lastly upon the revenue
made upon either of these enjoyments, when fate or death shall force us to
leave both.

As to the design which men propose to themselves, Sect. 1. The motives to both
compared.
in pursuing Greatness and public Employment; all will tell you, that they
seek these, either to under-prop their falling families, (whose proud tops
begin to bow, in homage to that mortality, which will needs one day triumph
over us and ours) or else to defend themselves against some considerable enemy;
or to wipe off the stains and scarres of disloyalty or prejudice. For, when
opulent or great Persons undertake them, the very rabble have so much prudence,
as to condemn these for mad men; when Philosophers or strong Spirits embarque
in them, they say they do it to serve their Country, and not their
inclinations; and flatterers pretend, that they design in these, the pleasing
of their Prince, and not of their humor; So that as if all were ashamed of
them, all do excuse their zeal after them: whereas, solitude (like a great
beauty) is courted for it self, and not for it is portion. And such as intend
public Employments, will pretend a love and design for solitude; and when they
have attained their honors, they will still praise retirement: whereas, such
as live privately may sometimes pity, but will never seem to envy such as are in
public Employment. And not only is solitude courted for it self, and Greatness
for some remoter end; but even Greatness and public Employment are themselves
often (if not always) designed as subservient to solitude. Thus Merchants hazard
drowning, and like the Sun, reel about the world, that they may gain as much as
may afford them the convenience of a recess. For this Lawyers empty their
brains, and Soldiers open their veins; and have often nothing to sweeten their
anxieties, but the remote prospect of a solacing retirement: So that solitude
must be excellent, seeing it is enemies buy it at so dear a rate. And even Caesar
behoved to recreat himself, with an aliquando mihi licebit, mihi vivere,
esteeming that part of his life to belong to others, which was spent on other
men's employments. And seeing all aim at solitude, it must certainly be by as
much more nobler then public Emplyoment as the end is more noble then the
means: and in this it approaches very near the nature of happiness, which is
defined to be that, to which all things tend, and which it self respects
nothing yet acquireable. But yet I must condemn these, who are at all this
pains to gain Solitude, whom for this I esteem as unskilful in the art of
happiness, as these Navigators in Solomon's time, were of the art of Sailing;
who crused along so many tedious shoars for reaching the gold of Ophir, a
journey easily to be accomplished, in far less then half the time. Happiness is
not the product of such endeavors, and these are rather hindrances then helps
to Solitude. And this remembers me of that notable answer, given by Cineas the
philosopher to Pyrrhus; who when he told him that he intended to conquer
Greece, then Rome, and so all the world; asked him, why he proposed all that
toil to himself? To which Pyrrhus answering, that he would do it, to the end he
might at his return live happily and merrily with his friends the residue of
his life. Cineas tancing him most sharply, told him, that he might live so, and
do so presently, and so needed not be at so much superfluous pains.

Man is so frail a Creature, and his imperfections are so great and many, that
that can only make him be reputed excellent, which can best conceal his natural
frailties: And albeit our judgments are but shallow, yet here lies our
misfortune, that we are not able to abide the test of one another judgment.
And this is the knack, for which men who are silent and reserved, or melancholy
and dumpish, are reputed wise for we admire not what we see, but what we see
not. And yet, neither melancholy nor silence serve so to skreen out
infirmities, as solitude does; seeing such as converse in the world may be
fathomed by other means then discourse, and may, upon unexpected rencounters,
be even provoked to that likewise. Wherefore it is a virtuous imposture, and an
allowable charltanry, to design retirement; because that secures against all
the inconveniences of either of these, by abstracting us from the temptations
of the one, and from the engines of the other: and if melancholy or silence
possesses any thing in their nature, which can be thought excellent, certainly
solitude enjoys the same in a more eminent measure; for these make but parcels
of that noble state, silence being but a solitude in discourse, and melancholy
a solitude in humor: whereas solitude is more excellent then these, because in
possessing both their advantages, it wants the adust, bile and jealousness of
melancholy, and the constipation of silence.

Except some volatile Heads, whose mercurial Complexion has inclined them
rather to a restlessness, then virtuous activity, and who like the wind, are
nothing at all when they are not moving: and ye will find the residue of men so
averse from toil and employments, that they must be either bryb'd to them by
gain, or baited with honor: and the most diligent amongst active Statesmen
will wish, that their longed-for triumphs, or desired employments, were at a
period, that they might enjoy themselves (for so they term it) in a solitary
retirement; which is that Canaan of rest, which like Moses on Pisgah, they see
afar off, but without hopes of enjoyment: and so fond are these upon one moment
of it, when enjoyed, that they will disobliege for it on-waiters, neglect their
interest, and slight often great advantages. Thus then we see, that nature,
inclination and pleasure, vote all for solitude; and that public Employment is
unnatural in it is rise, and wearying in it is sequel, as it is dangerous (if not
fatal) in it is termination.

I know that there are some great persons, who like great fishes, never come to
shore till they be wounded, disasters, affronts and necessities driving them
there for shelter, rather then choice; and this makes many think, that these
encomiums given to solitude, are either contrived by Pedants, who could never
reach preferments, or by degraded Courtiers, who after they have been outed of
their public Employments, harrangue against what they have lost, to satisfy,
not their reason, but their revenge. But, to these I answer, that solitude is
by this objection proved to be an excellent state, seeing even the distressed
expect an asyle and protection there: for distress makes us run where we may
expect help; and that must be the securest harbor, to which the distrestest
vessels make their application. And I believe best these Elogies, which
solitude gets from such who know both states; and because some use this as a
Pretext, therefore it must be excellent: for the excellentest things are only
used, and can only serve as Pretexts; and that cannot but be much respected
amongst men, whose very shadow can make misery pass for virtue, and make
misfortunes be esteemed happiness. Yet, certainly, misfortunes may make men
real Philosophers, as afflictions makes real Christians: and it is very
probable, that one, who after much confidence in Court and Riches, has been
tumbled down unexpectedly, will be more really convinced of it is slipperiness
and emptiness, then such as never found the effects of so much revolution. But
there are many also, such as Dioclesian and Charles the fifth, both Emperors,
and many others, who after a complete fruition of all Courtly success and
pleasure, have taken a solemn congy of it, whilst it yet smiled upon them, and
I am confident many more would, if they did not apprehend much hazard in their
retreat, from these who thought themselves injured by them in their prosperity.

In ballancing the employments of Solitude, Sect. 2. The employments and
difficulties of both compared.
with these of greatness, because greatness will still struggle for
precedencie, I shall therefore scann first it is disadvantages; amongst which,
this is one, that either public Persons have attained to the fruition of what
they designed; and in that case, there are many ways to make them miserable,
because the substraction of any one of these many enjoyments, robs them of all
the satisfaction they can enjoy in what remains. And there are but few ways to
make them happy, because little can be added to their present possessions: or,
they have not attained to what they have projected; and then they fret more,
and suffer more disquietings, then the meanest servant whom they command, And
like that man in the Parable, consider more the one lost sheep, then the ninety
nine which yet remain. Did the conquest of all that the Sun sees, restrain,
Alexander from weeping, because he could conquer no more? No. For, Ambition is
like hunger, which though it is once satisfied, continues no longer so, then it
has for a little time preyed upon what was at first presented to it: and like
the fire, is so far from being satisfied with what is thrown into it, that it
is by that new fuel, not only enabled to destroy, but likewise forced to seek
more aliment for sustaining it is wasting rage.

These who are in public Employment, have either many dependers, or not; if
they have not, they are not satisfied: for, the scope of such is to be depended
on, and the missing of this renders them more miserable, then poverty or
sickness could a Stoic: but if they be incircled by crowds of attenders, then
are they interessed, not only in maintaining their own Posts, but likewise in
sustaining their numerous Clients; in whose fall, their reputation is, as in
their own standing, equally interessed. And when they have been at great pains
to effectuat the pretenses of these their dependers, if these pretenses
succeed, then either the pretenders whom they assist, do arrogat the success to
themselves, or their own merits: or else they think it but the price of their
attendance, and so look upon it as paid before bestowed: whereas the party with
whom these have to do, will ever thereafter carry the Patron at implacable
malice: Or, if these pretenses succeed not, then they impute it to the want of
conduct, or of gratitude in these their lofty Patrons. And if any two, or more
of these dependers, should justle amongst themselves (as ordinarily falls out
amongst such as are rivalls in favor) then the Grandee is divided in his
resolution; and as he gains no new friend by assisting the one, So he losses an
old servant by opposing the other. And when a Grandee has spawned out his
Estate amongst his Favorites, one of a thousand will not prove grateful; but
though all the thousand should prove grateful to one, the ingratitude of that
one will be more unpleasant, then can be repaired by the gratitude of all the
remanent nine hundred and ninety nine.

As to their equals, such as are in public Employment, lie under this
inconvenience, that either they please them not, and these they either find, or
make their enemies; or, if they endeavor to please all, then the task is
either impossible, or unprofitable: impossible, because after that they have
crook'd their own humor to make it fall parallel to another man's vn-even
fancy, then they may instantly loss their pains; when upon the same principle
(of pleasing all) they endeavor to obliege one, who either is, or is believed
to be, either rival, or enemy to him who was first obliged. And is there any
thing more ordinar (though nothing more unjust) then to hear, ye must either
not be my friend, or that man's enemy? This pleasing all is likewise
unprofitable, because things are not valued by advantage but by propriety: and
thus we value that friendship most, which is born to us solely, or in a greater
measure then to others. Whereby it appears clearly, that if ye carry equally to
all, ye obliege none, and if more to some then to others, ye disobliege these
to whom ye carry least; which certainly (because our love is like our selves,
most finit) must be the greatest part: and these who are disoblieged, are more
zealous in their enmity, then these who are obliged, are in their friendship.
The conclusion of all, which is, that albeit the great pleasure of public
Employment is, that thereby they may obliege many to a dependence upon them,
yet men gain by it more, and more vigorous enemies, then such as are recluse do,
albeit they profuse none of their inesteemable time upon so uncertain a
purchase.

As to their Superiors, it vexes doubtless such as are at so much toil to be
high themselves, to see any yet higher then themselves; and they count as many
crosses, as they do Superiors. If Statesmen be not at the highest pitch of
favor, they fret at the vnluckiness of their own fate, and exclaim against
their ill-faced stars: and if they attain to it, then they are often jealoused by
their promotters: And Sejanus is loaded with more contumely by his Patron
Tiberius, then ever he was with honors. And after that these ploding pates,
have raised their designs to that line, that they conceive, they may justly
admire it is noble structure, and their own skill in it is contrivance; then that
fabric, upon which, for (possibly) their whole life, they have laid out the
whole stock of their happiness and expectation, may be in one moment, blown
over by one word from their Prince, who is a man subject to his own fate, as
they are to theirs: and when they perceive that the same Prince is thereafter
forced to yield to his own destiny, they cannot but conclude, that they have
been themselves mean persons, who was so easily destroyed, by one who was so
easily destroyed himself. If Parmenio had not killed Attalus, or C^eander
Parmenio, their disobedience had been a crime; and when they obeyed, their
obedience was really a crime in them, and was hated as such by Alexander who
commanded it: so that superiors do often tie their favorites to the observance
of what is contradictory, and consequently require what is impossible.

It was nobly said, Sect. 3.
by that grand Master of Stoicisme, Seneca, that, qui multa agit, saepe se
fortunae objecit. And public persons are in this, like great Garrisons, which
by how much the greater they are, are so much the worse to be defended, and by
how much the richer they are, are so much the more stoutly assaulted. For
establishing this great truth which is unum ex mirabilibus Stoicorum, I shall
under-prop it by these two subservient conclusions; first, that seeing that is
only, in all the Schools of philosophers, defined to be morally good, which is
complete at all points; and that to be evil, which labors of the least defect:
certainly it must be a great task, not only to do good, but even not to fall
into the commission of evil. The second conclusion shall be, that as it is
almost impossible not to slip into the committing of evil, yet our escapes are
never forgot, when once committed; and not only wrong they us as to that
action, but they likewise detract from all our subsequent good actions: and
albeit it be very hard to do what is good, yet our good actions are most
unfrequently remembered; or if they be, then they are esteemed duties, and so
they bring us by that remembrance, no other advantage from men, then not to
bring a tash upon us. Marshal Biron's many victories, obtained by his valor,
for Henry the fourth, Walsteins for the Emperor, nor Essex's for Queen
Elizabeth, did not excuse their after-treason. And Balaams beast (though
otherwise an Ass) could tell it is Master, have not I ridden with thee ever
since I was thine without stumbling? and yet now thou have struck me thrice?
From all which it follows, that public employments, because they obliedge a
man to many actions, they therefore engage him in many misfortunes, and lay him
open to much detraction. Neither does man's misery stint it self here; but,
which is worse, envy, malice and mistake, blaze us for more vicious then really
we are; we commit some escapes, wherein we mistake our selves, but we are said
to commit others, wherein others do but mistake us; we commit: some, which are
really our own transgressions, but we are said to commit others, which are but
other men's imputations. Such as are in public Employments can never want
rivalls; and such as want not rivalls can never miss mis-reports; especially in
our Country, where the way to preferment is so narrow, that we imagine no man
can get by his neighbor, except he run over him. O! what a divine state then
must solitude be, wherein a virtuous in activity fortifies us against all these
inconveniences, and begets in us a tranquillity, not conceivable by such as do
not possess it?.

Have ye not, my Lord, often heard great men say, I must do this, and assent to
that, though neither the one nor the other satisfies my judgment? Have ye not
seen great men forced to abandon their most deserving friends, forced to
connive at, and often to congratulate the promotion of their greatest enemies?
will they not be sometimes oblieg'd to put on a constrained countenance, feign
an unnatural mine, and express what is diametrically opposite to their thoughts;
all which are servitudes which greatness exacts from us: for every force is a
yoke tied upon our nature; and man being more noble then brutes, because he is
more free then they are, certainly what impares his freedom, destroys his
reason: and most of these restraints, as they are against nature, in being
servitudes; So they are against virtue, in being opposite to what our reason
would (if not overpowered by interest or fancy) exact of us. And I should
think, that the same impulse, which hurries men on to desire to be great, that
they may be Masters, should, with far more reason carry them to be solitary:
for there they are emancipat from these necessities, and have none to obey but
God and nature; Masters who commands us to do nothing, but what were fit for
our selves to do, albeit we were not commanded.

As these Countries are esteemed most excellent and preferable, whose
necessities are supplied by their native commodities, pulling out of their own
bosom all that their Inhabitants require; So by the same rule, solitude must
be, by much preferable to public Employment, seeing this requires, and wants
but little, but the other needs much, and is not satisfied when it gets what it
needs. Solitude requires no avarice to maintain it is table, nor oppression to
bear up it is train; it is satisfied without Coaches, Lacquies, Treasures and
Embroideries: The solitary man is not vexed, that others must take the door of
himself, or is able to maintain a more sumptuous table then he; he is not
disquieted at the infrequency of guests, nor echoes of his equals praises. And
seeing great men are still disquieted at the advancement of others, they must
still be unfortunate; for though they were capable to receive, yet they are not
able to sustain the weight of all employments alone.

Consider these clouds which sit often upon the countenance of men in
Employments, their gate like to that of an disrudered Ship, and their discourse
dis-joynted, and blown, as it were, all to pieces by their tempestuous
passions; and ye will find such (many times) to differ but by an ace, from
these who have Keepers at Bedlam: And by these disorders ye may perceive, that
employment and madness are of too near an alliance; and if the one, certainly
both must be diseases, seeing both have the same symptoms, and the same
prognostics. And in these distempers, how often speak they things, which are
thereafter either quarre led openly, or at least are the seed-plot of continual
heart-burnings to these at whom they aimed? But to abstract from all these
accidental disadvantages, Is it not a madness for a rational Soul, for whom all
the world was created, to observe nothing in this world, but whether another
manages his Process well, with what harmony stricks another man's pulse, or how
to brigue the favor of a Minion? Acts so extrinsick to the nature of an
immaterial creature, such as the Soul, that if men got not money by these
Employments, they would themselves condemn them as ridiculous. And is there any
thing more ordinar, even amongst the herd of brutish busybodies, then to
chide their friends for attending either the persons or employments of those
who reward not such pains, and for so doing upbraid them as mad men? and so
they are indeed. By which it is most evident, that men in employment have
nothing to excuse their madness, but that they are not madd, but for money or
preferment. And is it not a shame for so noble a creature as Man, to be content
to show himself madd for any hire what soever?

Solitude has likewayes this advantage over public Employment, that there is
no vice commissable in solitude, to which men in public lie not yet more open;
whereas, there are some crimes, such as, treason, sedition, ostentation, and a
whole tribe of the like nature, which retired persons can hardly commit; and
though they could, yet hardly does that state admit of these temptations, which
are previously necessar to the commission of them. Is there any thing more
ordinar, then to hear one who is accused for deserting his friend, or party, to
answer, that his office, or present designs, occasioned and required that
defection? And are not men, for accomplishing their projects, tempted to betray
secrets, to become rivals to their friends, and assisting to their enemies?
Whereas, no Record can witness against retired persons, that they ever either
ruined their native Country, betrayed their Prince, or deserted their Friend?
At least, if any in that state have been tempted to the least degree of any
such crime, certainly they had committed more, and greater villainies, if they
had lived in public, where those wicked inclinations might have been
strengthened, by example, design, passion, revenge, or some such temptatoin. And
if our inclinations be so wild, when they are caiged up in solitude, how untame
will they become, when they are licenced to range abroad? He who would stob his
Prince, who had never the occasion to offend his remote Cell, would burn the
world, if he had a design, to which that might be subservient. Did not Nero,
Tiberius, Heliog abulus and others, enjoy the repute of noble souls, before
their mounting the Imperial Throne, brought them new vices, with new honors,
and made them as much beyond other in their debauches, as they were in the
power, which fed them in that their dissolut humor. Since then no honest
person can deny, but that it were better never to have the greatest honor,
then to be said by after-ages to have committed the least villainy: certainly
the state of public Employment is scarce to be wished for, seeing therein men
are tempted to commit the greatest of crimes; especially, seeing these their
escapes must be committed in public, where they are never concealed, and but
seldom (if ever) pardoned.

As to the periods of both, Sect. The periods of both.
certainly solitude has by much the advantage: For, look over the Callendar of
all these Heroes or Grandees who have governed Kingdoms, or were Favorites of
the first rate to such as did govern them; and ye will find most of their fates
marked with the red Letters of a violent death, or the black Letters of shame.
Ignominy overtakes, whom fate has left undestroyed; and Gleans the grapes,
after the other has cut down it is vintage: -- Sine caede, and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges and sicca morte tyranni.


It is observed, that betwixt Julius Caesar and Charlemain, thirty Roman
Emperors have been slain, and many since. And I am so ashamed of the cruelty of
those who are of the same species with my self, that I must conceal the many
other murders of King's and Grandees: and as to the disgrace of others, these
can hardly be sufficiently either numbered or regrated. And albeit others are
not detered from embracing those honors under which their first owners have
been crushed upon the account, that they imagine their Predecessors ruin to
have flowed from some personal frailty or error, against which they are
confident they can guard; yet certainly all should, even from this answer,
conclude, that greatness must be most undesirable, seeing, at least, it
discovers these frailties, or tempts men to commit these errors, which
thereafter occasions these ruins. Neither find we any such dangers to attend
solitude, either necessarily* or by accident: So that albeit these be the
misfortunes of those men, and not of the employment, yet seeing these are only
the misfortunes of men in employment, I see not why employment should be so
desirable by men who fear misfortunes. But the truth is, it is impossible to
ward against the unexpected blows which are thrust in at such, for they are so
cunningly contrived by the attacquers (because of the danger of being
discovered) that they are sooner felt then foreseen. Who could dis-appoint the
malice of those who killed these noble Princes, Henry the third, and Henry the
fourth of France? Who could have targetted Buckingham against Feltons thrust?
And all the prudence of Cesars Court could not avert his massacre in the Senate,
especially being contrived by his confident, Brutus; Et tu fili Brute said that
great Emperor. And that which renders the sudden fall of these Heroes the
more deplorable, is, that by being sudden, it not only disorders their affairs
and endangers their souls, but likewise so amazes their friends and followers,
that they are thereby incapacitate from providing against the sequels of that
fall, and are themselves (who only can help their falling friend) brought to
fall with him. I have often remarked with wonder, how ghastly the favorites of a
falling Minion do look, and how astonishingly they are looked at by their former
intimats; and which is strange, not only do the enemies of a fallen Grandee
insult over his misfortunes, but even these who were his former well-wishers,
are (to avert the jealousy of those who occasioned his fall) necessitate to
enveigh most bitterly against his memory; Dum jacet in ripa calcemus Cesaris
hostem.


Neither can I see how greatness can be defended against misfortunes; for
ordinarily these rise from such unexpected beginnings, that none see in (or
apprehend the least danger by) them: and all the world is not able, by
conjecture, to fall upon that medium by which providence intends to infer their
ruin. Who could have guessed, that Mordecay's discovering a plot to Ahasuerus
wherein Haman was not concerned, would be the mean to destroy that great
Favorite? I have often heard the friends of those who are now low, ask at such
as told them of the slipperiness of favor, how could their Patron ever be
destroyed? and it was impossible that could fall out during such a Government.
And yet I have my self seen these men outed of all their confident
expectations; a passionat expression, a rash act, a jealousy or
misinformation which could not be foreseen, because then there was no bottom
for such a conjecture, has ruined oft-times such as never expected any
alteration: and who can promise that they shall never drop one word in passion,
act any thing without a previous deliberation, or never fall under
misinformation? And which is yet worse, when mis-informations are forged
against great men: They are not acquainted by such as either gives or receives
them, and so their defense becomes imprestable. I have heard of Favorites who
have been ruined, because the Queen said they were handsome men, or the King
thought them to excel himself in any thing wherein himself pretended to a
mastership: and what plodding pate could have stav'd off, or foreseen these
misfortunes? No, no. Ludit in humanis divina prudentia rebus.


And seeing there are many who have the courage to throw away their lives upon
the revenge of a small affront, or to hazard them in an open, and yet almost a
barren robbery, why should it be thought, that to saitsfie so impetuous a
passion as Revenge, there should not be some found who will hazard death, by
giving it in the revenge of either an injury done to a Family or Nation, much
more of an affront fixed upon the undertaker himself, in his honor, or entire
fortune, as often falls out?

But albeit great men and public Ministers escape the fate of a murder or
massacre, yet how is their happiness founded? is it not either upon the humor
of a capricious people, if in a Commonwealth? and then how unsolid is that
happiness where the foundation is so fleeting? Consider Rome, which, though the
wisest of all Republics, yet, upon a jealousy or a mistake, or some times out
of wantonness, destroyed in an instant the most carressed, and most deserving
of her Favorites, Or, upon the favor of a Prince, if in a Monarchy; and then
ye must confess them oft-times subject to all the caprices of a lofty humor,
licensed by the extent of his power, to equal his power and his humor; and
enticed, by the instigation of enemies or rivals, to stretch his humor beyond
his allowed power. Why did Solomon the Magnificent, cut the throat of Ibrahim
Bassa his Confident? was it not to satisfy the fancy of a Concubine? Or
Justinian pull out the eyes of valiant Bellisarius? was it not to gratify an
insolent Wife? So that a Statesman lies open, not only to the hazard of his
Masters fancy, but to the passion of his Wife, his Concubines, his Favorites
and Fellow Servants, and even to Fate it self, which is the most comprehensive
of all dangers.

But albeit a Statesman were able to escape private revenge, and to manage,
with success, his Princes humor, and to satisfy that of his Favorites, yet he
is still obnoxious to ragione del stato, and interest of State, by which his
Prince is often (to evite the rage of a multitude) either forced to object his
Minion to their rage, as the head in a natural body defends it self by throwing
up it is hand or arm to receive the stroke, or else he may be pulled from the
kind bosom of his unwilling Master: And of this hazard our own age affords us
a lamentable instance in the person of the great Earl of Strafford, whom
popular fury did drag to the Scaffold; his Princes protection not being
sufficient for his defense; who viewing, from that deplorable Stage, the
inconstancy of Courtship and Advancement, did leave in legacy to his Son, a
strait command never to aim at higher promotion then that of a Justice of Peace
in his own County.

Consider likewayes how sometimes the satiety of a Prince produces the same
ruin of Favorites, which is at other times the product of his cruelty. And
Comines observes, that Lewis the eleventh of France used to say, that seeing
Princes did weary of Houses, Countries and other inanimat things, which could
never offend them, and which no rival or enemy was at the pains to traduce, It
was no wonder that they wearied of Favorites, who were subject to all these
inconveniences. Princes do likewise ruin their Grandees, sometimes to satisfy
their vanity, in showing that their power is able to remove those who think
they cannot fall without a miracle; and sometimes to make way to new Favorites,
thinking it injustice to entail all honors upon the same persons. And, as in
the body natural; So likewise in the politic, it is observable, that nature
has provided more diseases, then the best of Physicians can prevent by
remedies.

To conclude this period, be pleased to conclude the unluckiness of public
Employment from this, That not only amongst rivals, one of two pretenders
satisfy, by their fall, the rage of fate, but when it has assisted the one to
destroy the other, it then turns it is fury against the late victor: Thus Pompey
and Cesar's blood purpl'd equally the swords of murderers, agreeing in nothing
but their destiny. Hannibal beats the Romans; Scipio beats Hannibal, and the
Romans banish Scipio. Bellisarius makes Gilimer King of the Goths ridiculous,
leading him as a prisoner in his triumph; and Fate renders Bellisarius yet more
ridiculous, driving him to beg, with this expression, bestow but a farthing
upon Bellisarius. And it is most observable, that during our civil wars, four
most eminent persons, who did head contrary, as well as different parties, did
all loss both their heads, and their fortunes in the quarrel; whereas it might
have been expected, that at least one of the opposits, should have worn
unfadeing laurels: and really there was more hazard in the fear, of being the
one who was to be destroyed (for they might certainly have expected, that one
of themselves, should fall) then all the grandour, which the survivers, might
expect, could sufficiently requite.

And when the monarch or commonwealth, which a Statesman has long served,
intends either in compliance with their interests, or to gratify their humor,
to out their servant of his employment, or in order thereto to fix a crime upon
him: then how can he escape from that trial, or defend his right against that
persuit? for where the Judge is party, there the Law may prove Advocat. And in
these contrasto's, I remember few dicisions, amongst all who have collected
them, of any subject, who came off with honor.

Seeing as of all other things, Sect. 3. Motives to solitude from religion.
so of our thoughts the firstborn should be sacrificed to our almighty Maker;
I therefore resolved, to begin my first discourse with these reflections, which
Solitude might borrow from devotion. But, since Orators recommend the last
place in our discourse, to the strongest perswasives (as being able when placed
there to leave the freshest impressions; upon the leaving Reader) I shall
therefore in this last place, (which is, alas! the too ordinar room allowed to
devotion) recommend to you, to consider, that GOD possesses more excellencies,
and we labor under more sins, then can be fully contemplated, in the one case,
or lamented in the other, throughout the whole flux of eternity. And after that
we have evacuated our more refined spirits; in chase of these fleeing follies,
will it satisfy him to to have our dulled thoughts (the lame of the flock)
served up upon his holy Altars? And seeing he styles himself a jealouse GOD:
certainly he cannot but be jealous, that because we converss with others more
then with him; we must therefore, either love these better or expect more,
either advantage or pleasure in their society then in his.

I confess that public Employment, is lawful in it self, and necessar to the
Commonwealth, and that men may serve GOD in the intervalls of their other
public negotiations. But the question is not, what is lawful in it self; but
what is convenient for us, and seeing we run already, but too slowly that divine
race; I see not why we should slow our pace yet more by taking on the burden
of public employment. And seeing all our time is but too short, for the service
of him whom far more excellent creatures then we worship uncessantly, time
without end: I think it strange, that we should content our selves to serve him
per parenthesin, or by intervals.

To these I shall add this import consideration, that most of temptations, are
in Solitude disarmed of these charms, which renders them formidable to us in
public: love wants there the presence of an enflaming object to second it;
revenge wants the presence of the party injured to press it: and vanity when it
wants admirers, wants force. Though Moses was the meekest man upon the earth,
whilst he lived in the desert; yet the extravagancy of those whom he governed,
when providence had advanced him, made him offend his Maker, so highly, that
all his former services, could not obtain, even from the Father of mercies, a
liberty to enter into an earthly Canaan. If Naaman had lived an Hermit, he
needed not have craved the Prophet leave, to bow to the idols of his master; in
the house of Rimmon. And if David had not been governor of Israel he had wanted
the means both to humble Bath-sheba; and kill Urriah, such is the ill fate of
public Employment, that it not only affords us temptations, but the means
likewise of effectuating that to which we are tempted.

It was I confess GODS own verdict of man, that it was not good for him to be
alone, but this was when because of his congenial innocence, he needed not fear
the contamination of society; but to demonstrat what the hazard of being in
company is: even Adam could not live one day in it, and live innocent, for the
first news we hear of him, after that Eve was associat to him, is, that he had
forefeited that native purity.

I know that our Savior, was carried by Satan to the wilderness, that he might
tempt him there. But it is most observable, that after that experienced enemy,
found that his Divinity would not yield to any thing therein represented; he
thereafter (as the last and so the strongest shift left to him unessayed, did
bring him to Jerusalem; and having advanced him above the temple, he proffered
him the half of the belted world, and all it is glories; a temptation, sitted
only for such as value honor and public Employment.

When GOD Almighty intended to converse with Moses, He called him from the
populous camp, to the top of Mount Sinai. And our Savior did not disclose the
glories of his Transfiguration at Jerusalem, but upon the top of the Mount of
Olives. The Widow who intended a lodging for Elisha that great Prophet, did
build it apart upon the wall, 2 Kings 4. 10.
furnishing it only with a Stool and Candlestick: and when he asked her, if he
should speak for her to the King, or Captain of his Host, she told him,
without farther answer, that she dwelt amongst her own Friends, and in her own
Country; 2 Kings 4. 12.
intimating thereby, that there was no need of any favor Kings could bestow
upon such as enjoyed so happy a recess. I recreat my self to think I see Elijah
sitting under a juniper Tree, or in a concealed Grove, visited in that solitude
by the same GOD, who refused His presence to mighty Ahab; and to contemplat how
Ahaziah was able to find no ease upon his purpred couch, till he dispatched in
quest of it some of his chiefest Captains to court it from the same Prophet,
sitting upon the top of a mountain: By all which places and postures, the
Spirit of GOD (who losses no observation) intends doubtless to enamour us of
solitude and recess. And it is very observable, that none of these old Prophets
are found, in Scripture, at Court or in Public, but as bearded Comets appear
in the air, where they have no other earand then to denounce Judgments to the
place over which they hover.

GOD Almighty, who because he is the object as well as enjoyner of our
devotions, should, and does upon these and many other scores, best know how to
address them; has commanded us to retire into our Closets (the most solitary
of all our rooms) and to make these yet more retired, has ordained us to close
our doors behind us when we make any religious applications to him; promising,
that he who sees in secret, will reward us openly: And if we will consider
these gaudy distractions, whereby our public devotions are almost rendered no
devotion at all, and that there is more noise in the world then will suffer us
to hear that still voice which cries behind us, This is the way, walk ye in it;
certainly we may conclude, from both reason and experience, (as well as out of
obedience to divine Commands) that solitude is the true forge of the purest
devotions. When GOD did intend to discipline his beloved (though rebellious)
Israel, he chose first the wilderness of Sinai, and then the two Captivities to
be his sacred School. And, Hosea 2. 14. he tells his own people, that he will
allure her (meaning the Jewish Church) and bring her to the wilderness, and
speak comfortably unto her.

Religion has another quarrel at Advancement, which is, that it devests
oft-times it is enjoyers, not only of devotion and of friendship, which is a
moral virtue, but even of affection; which is so natural to brutes themselves,
that a man is worse then these when he wants it: and not only forget they it
upon such necessities as might at least excuse, if not justify, their so
doing, but do so likewise to satisfy their humor; a slavery which deserves to
be condemned, though it is object were in it self justifiable. No man could have
believed, if Scripture had not told it, 1 Samuel 18.
that Saul would, from being an absolute Monarch, descend to so low a baseness,
as to cast away his daughter Michael merely that he might destroy her Husband:
Or that a Prince of Midian would have prostitute his daughter Cozbi, Numb. 25.
to the promiscuous multitudes of the Israelit^sh camp, of design to tempt them
to a sin: which could not but be attended with his own infamy, as well as their
ruin. Was it not for this that Romulus cemented the first foundation of the
Roman walls with the blood of his brother Remus? And though Abel and Cain had
the division, of what tempts (I will not say) satisfies now the ambition of
many thousands to gratify their expectations; yet, was not so ample a partage
able to prevent the spilling even of a brothers blood, by one whose crime was
so much the greater that it was without president, and was to become an example
to many thousands of succeeding ages? Many whereof might, and have been thereby
not only encouraged to commit afresh this old sin, but likewayes to seek, in
the greatness of this offense, excuses, whereby to lessen their own barbarity.

But if any call in question the advantages that accrue to devotion by
solitude, let him cast back his eye upon the primitive Church, wherein the
material fabric was contrived dark, and situat in the remotest corners and
solitary Groves, both by Pagans and Christians; as if that black enamel
hightned the luster of the golden Candlesticks: and upon the infinite swarms of
such as became Moncks and Hermits, encouraged thereto by the homilies and
entreaties of the noblest Fathers; of which state the Emperor Justinian did,
after he had kept that oecumenick Council, become so enamored, that he has
registrat it is noble Elogies in the Frontis-piece of his divine codex. Whilst,
upon the other hand, the Heathens of old, and now the Mahumetans did, and do
teach, that one of the chief torments in their hell shall be, that men will
there be cast louse to to these occupations and civil employments which here
exercised them; esteeming it a torture for illuminat spirits, and such as are
defecat from sensuality, to be re-embarast with such terrestrial affairs as
busy us in this our earthly state. Pardon, my Lord, this in-road I have made
upon devotion; and learn from it, that solitude and devotion are so nearly
related, that we can hardly praise the one, and not commend the other.

I shall hear use the authority of great Hero's; who, after the fruition of
both, have by much preferred solitude, whereas (which is very strange) there is
not a single testimony to be had from such as these, in favors of public
Employment.

The first shall be of Charles the Great, Marineus lib. 18.
who, being to die, cried out to these who stood about him; O! how vain are the
thoughts of men? and how wretched are they that aspire to glory? What has my
Kingdom, or the service of so many men gained me? Much more happy had I been,
if in stead of a Scepter, I had weilded an hedging Bill; and if of a King I
should have made my self a Clown: Following in this almost the very expressions
of Alphonsus his brother: Suatocopius King of Bohemia and Moravia, having lost
a battle against the Emperor Arnold, did retire himself into a wilderness,
where, after he had lived a long time with three Hermits, he at his death told
them, that there was not any greatness preferable to the tranquillity of that
solitude. The safe sleep (said he) which we enjoy here, makes the roots
savoury, and the waters sweet; whereas the cares of a Kingdom makes all meat
and drink taste bitter. That part of my life, which, I have past with you, was
true happiness; whereas that which I led upon my royal Throne deserves more the
title of death then of life. And Giges King of Lydia, puffed up with his great
wealth and many victories, having asked the Oracle of Apollo, if there was any
man happier in the world then himself, had Agesilaus the poor Arcadian
shepherd prefered to him. And Similis, one of Adrian the Emperors chief
Captains, having retired to the Country, after all his preferments, caused
grave this Epitaph upon his own Tomb, Here lies Similis, of a very great age,
who yet lived but seven years. I might here cite Constantine, that excellent
King of Scotland; Theodatus King of the Goths; Charles the fifth; Sertorius,
and hundreds of other Princes, if I thought it not more of advantage to
solitude to say of these, that they are so many, they cannot be cited.

Seeing then reason and experience do impresse us with so pungent disswasives
from greatness, Sect. 3 ^an 6. examined.
let us a little examine what can be in it, able to preponder to so weighty
discouragements.

The first prize contended for by great persons, is Fame, a revenue payable
only to our ghosts; and to deny our selves all present satisfaction, or to
expose our selves to so much hazard for this, were as great madness as to
starve our selves, or fight desperately for food to be laid on our Tombs after
our death. Either public Ministers value much the discourses of the multitude;
and if so, they err in offending them as often as their gain or pleasure affords
them the meanest temptation, or else they value these not; and if so, why is
there so much pains, taken for Fame, which is nothing else but a collection of
their suffrages: which reflection recommends much to me, that stoical fear,
given to Hannibal by Iuvenal, -- I demens, and savas carre per Alps,
Ut pueris place as, and declamatio fias.
-- Climb over the Alps, thou mad, vain glorious fool,
That thou may children please, and be their theme at school.


For convincing us of the folly of this passion, be pleased to consider, that
either our souls, have the same period with our life, and then to talk of us
after death, is to talk, of what is not; and what advantage brings it to us
when seeing we are not, what is said o^ us, cannot affect what is not, or our
de^parted souls survive, in eternal bless. And then the loud Halelujahs of my
riads of Angels, will easily drown so the voice of Fame in our ears, that it
will not be heard by us; and our souls will be so replet with infinite joys,
that there will be no room for it is report, though it were exauceable; for
Fame, being b^ air, must yield and flee out at the access of any thing, that is
more solid, or else the souls of these, who are praised, will be damned: and
then they will not be susceptible of any pleasing impressions. And I am
confident that one of the torments of damned spirits, is that they imagine all
the world to be full of their infamy. And seeing the Fame of the greatest of
men, is not able to solace him in the fit of a fever, or gravel; Why should we
imagine that it can lessen the weight of such pressing torments, as infernal
horror, or eternal damnation? To talk of Amphialus, who never was, is the same
thing as to talk of Alexander: only Amphialus, cannot be stained with cruelty,
vanity and drunkenness as Alexander is: but albeit Fame were to be courted,
what share of it can we expect, who are scarce known beyond the line of our own
History, and but transiently in that likewise? Who amongst us would toil as we
do, to be esteemed, as Popenham or Bajard, (whom I believe very few have heard
of) and yet these acted upon the continent of the world, and did greater things
then the present state of affairs will admit us to do. And I am confident, that
there lived lately at the Court of France and Spain, hundreds of Courtiers, who
enjoyed fat taller honors then we, and who would not have embraced the honors
we grasp after; and yet Fame scorns to be at so much pains as once to mention
their names. How many know not at present, the name of that grand Vizier, who
but lately made Germany tremble? and to say that it was the grand-Visier, is to
praise his Office, and not himself. Who can name the greatest Cardinals at
Rome, or Dogi of Venice? And yet, what infinite pains is taken to gain these
employments, by such as live upon the place?

I smile to see underling pretenders, and who live in a Country, scarce
designed in the exactests maps, sweat and toil for so unmassie a reputation,
that when it is hammered out to the most stretching dimensions, will not yet
reach the nearest towns of a neighboring Country: Whereas, examine such as
have but lately returned from traveling in most floorishing Kingdoms, and
though curiosity was their greatest errand, yet ye will find that they scarce
know who is Chancellor or first President in these places; and in the exactest
Histories, we hear but few news of the famousest Pleaders, Divines or
Physicians; and by Soldiers these are under-valued as pedants, and these by
them as madcaps, and both by Philosophers as fools.

But though Fame were desirable, yet public Employment is not always attended
by it: for, either advancment is attributed to the fancy of the advancer, or to
fate and hazard. And in either of these cases, the person promoted is not
honored, but his fate; and it will be loudly proclaimed as a thing most
strange, that one of so mean merit or so rebellious principles, or tainted with
any such vice (as envy will either find or make) should be promoted to such
honors: whereas if the same person had satisfied himself with a solitary life,
his real vices had neither been discovered, nor such forged vices proclaimed;
and because people blame Minions, whilst they live for what they dare not
charge upon their Master, their envy or revenge transmits to posterity, that
character which was received to their prejudice, whilst they yet governed. Was
Perenni^^ famous, though Commodus then Emperor raised him next to the throne?
or Oliver the Barber, though Lewis 11. made him his Minion? No, for Princes can
bestow greatness, but Fame lies no more under their jurisdiction the^ the winds
do, from which it does b^^ little differ. Of all witnesses Fame^s the most
suspect, because it ordinarily flatters most these who depended most upon it,
and were at greatest to^^ to gain it is sufferage, and to depon^^ falsely against
the greatest of such (...) value not it is testimony: and as it is report, is by
law judged, to be unstable as water, So in this it resembles much the water
that it presents (like to it) the straightest objects to our sight, as crooked
and uneven. And since Fame depends upon the credulous multitude, and upon
unrestrainable accidents, who can assure himself of it is suffrage? or believe
it when it is obtained? If the Soldiers prove cowardly, and lose a battle, the
General is for ever affronted, and yet he cannot help it: or if a Servant
betray a States-mans secret, then the Masters prudence is for ever traduced.
Ignominy being like all other black spots (a tenaciousness peculiar only to
that color) which cannot be worn off, nor washed out: And the designs of
Statesmen being as latent, as the springs which do inwardly move mechanic
machins, the people (whose intelligence cannot reach these) judge of the
designs by the events: And if at any time the event answer the contrivers
expectation, then the malicious multitude ascribe this success, either to
hazard, or to their power. And, to speak seriously, power is so happy a
suffragant, that it takes off much of that repute which is due to the
contriver: for, who can be foiled having such a second? And to convince us,
that power and command conceals what strength and energie there is really in
the Governors wit, reflect but a little upon those pitiful rebels, who
governed lately this Country, and did seem most wise, whilst they were vested
with power: Of which, being now again divested, their wit falls far short of
the first cast. Like those Venetian Ladies, whose native stature rises, and
lowes in appearance, according to the height of these, socculi whereupon they
walk. But if Fame be the great prize, I see not why the Literati and Virtuosi,
or retired Curiosi, may not put in for as large a share in it, as most (if not
any) Statesman: For, if that maxim hold, that propter quod unum quodque est
tale, propter hoc, illud ipsum est majus tale: certainly it follows in true
Logic, that seeing solitary persons are the dispensers and bestowers of Fame
upon great men, they cannot miss it themselves. How had Aeneas conduct, or
Achilles valor, been forgot, had not Homer or Virgil sung their Elogies? And
after a great man has defeated Kingdoms, a pedant is (like the silly worm)
able in one night, to consume that blossoming gourd of his reputation: And
seeing the world know not what the one did, they will believe what the other
said. History (which is the grand-register of Fame) is known for the most part
only to retired persons, and these will admire most what suites most with their
own humor: And Fame it self being most obliged to such as study solitude, it
oblieges ordinarily these most, because they have obliged it. Aristotle has
proved himself, by his Syllogisms, a greater person then Alexander his famous
Scholar; Solon is more famous for his moral advice to Cresus, then Cresus, who
possessed those mountains of gold; which were the subject of his advice: and
Cicero's tongue, though pulled out of his head by Anthony, has spoke out his
praises louder, then all the acclamations of the Roman legions and echoing
artillery could proclaim that more then Monarch. And seeing that man is
happiest, who is happy whilst he is a man, such as attain to Fame by solitude,
are happier then great men, because they are happy whilst they are able to
find it, whilst the others have it only when they are not sensible of what
they have. Compare Julius Caesar (to the stature of whose repute our dwarffish
endeavors will never be able to rise) with Lucan, who wrote the story of his
wars, and ye will find Lucan the much happier: Consider Caesar, macerat often with
hunger, stiffned with unrewarded toil, jealous of his own soldiers, and
apprehensive of the Senate, tortured with the uncertain events of the war, and
terrified by the having killed his Son in law Pompey, after he was sure of the
victory. And then return your reflections upon Lucan, sitting in the bosom of
a shaddowie grove, flanckt with a crystal stream, and there creating those
noble lines, which have since carried his fame as far as Cesars actions; and
having in this the advantage of Caesar, even as to posterity, that Cesars
soldiers, Pompey's ill fate, the Senats irresolution, and the cowardliness of
their Auxiliaries, share with Caesar in the event, and really more then he;
whereas Lucan inherits the sole praise of his story now, as he did the pleasure
of having wrote it whilst he was yet alive. But to conclude the folly of Fame,
consider even this generous Lucan, falling under the sword of Nero; because
that cruel Prince was ashamed to see himself so far outdone in wit by one of
his own Subjects: and from this learn, that Fame is suspicious to its
dependers, when it bestows it is favors, and injust, when it denies them.

Next to this, Sect. 6. The pleasure of commanding others examined.
the satisfaction received in commanding others, is admired as one of the
ravishing advantages of public Employment: And the soul of man in this, seems
to have retained still a false appetite of being like to it is Maker. But seeing
this design could not be managed even by the judgment and purity of the
greatest of Angels, so as not to deserve the severest punishment, and did in
them prove also ineffectual; I find that little hopes can be entertained of our
succeeding in it. But consider seriously, that it being a congenial humor in
all mankind, to desire freedom; certainly great men must conclude, that their
dependers would not bow to such homages, If they thought not thereby to obliege
their Patrons, to the full requital of what they so highly value: And
therefore, these being debts, rather contracted by us then favors done us, I
see not why we should so highly prise them; and seeing in return to these,
protection, sallaries and Offices are expected, all which put us to real pains;
consider if these imaginary pleasures deserve to be bought at the rate of such
real vexations. The Magnifico must himself bow to his Prince, bear his
extravagancies, swear a friendship with these whom he hates, dispense with
affronts, spend all his time in attendance at Court, and in observing these
humors, which he must thereafter superstitiously obey; and all this, that he
may gain wherewith to repay salutations, flatteries, legs, congies, and such
like pitiful pleasures; and that he may scrue himself so far into the respect
of the people, that he may have hats pulled off to him, which will be likewayes
done (and for the same reason likewayes) to a lifeless chair of State or the
meanest fool, if his shoulders be strong enough to bea^ a tittle, or any other
the meanest mark of his Princes favor. And that he may be magnified by his
dependers, whom because of their interest none will believe, being bribed to
depone what they say of him, is not this satisfaction a mere act of fancy? And
is it not saifer to translate our fancy to some other object, then to moderat
it here? And who can assure himself, that when he has arrived at that pitch of
command which he presently proposes, that this shall terminat his ambition? and
is not the French King as much troubled, that he cannot command the
Grand-signior, as a french courtier is for being lower then his King. And after
that a Chancellor, has rendered his place, by any short possession familiar to
him, he then despises what he enjoys, by the same principle which invited him
to desire that employment, when it was yet above his reach. But abstracting
from these considerations, what can it advantage any man that another bows to
him? It can neither cure Gout nor Gravel: And when he is displeased at any
thing else, it is so far from being able to solace him, that that which vexes
him most, is, that any person can be found who dares displease one who is so
great as he: and if he had not been so great, that accident which now grieves
him, could not have vexed him: so that in wishing to be great, we wish that we
may be made more susceptible of affronts, then nature has already made us.

I need not tell you, Celador, that great men are oblieg'd to attend more
submissively their Superiors, then we do them: because these have more designs
then we; and design is the occasion of our dependence. So that if there be any
pleasure in liberty, we enjoy it more then these; and if there be none, why is
there so much pains taken to be great, upon expectation, that greatness sets at
liberty? A private man is not obliged to oppose his Relations, fight against
his Country, give his own Judgment the lie; all which are but the meanest
impositions that some Princeslay upon greatness: and why should men purchase,
at so dear a rate, the liberty to serve others, which is all that greatness can
bestow?

I know that society is one of these satisfactions which we rank amongst the
pleasures of the first magnitude; Se. ct 7. The satisfaction of society
examined.
and that as to the possession of this, solitariness seems to cede to public
Employments. But when we consider, that the prerogative of society stands not
in seeing one another, but in rational conversation, it will appear that the
difference is not wide. For, what pleasure can be received by talking of new
Fashions, buying and selling of Lands, advancement or ruin of Favorites,
victories or defeats of stranger Princes, which is the ordinary subject of
ordinary conversation? And really I have admired to see persons of virtue and
honor long much to be in the City, where when they come, they found nor sought
for no other divertisement then to visit one another, and there to do nothing
else then to make legs, view others habit, talk of the weather, or some such
pitiful subject: and it may be, if they made a farther inroad upon any other
affair, they did so pick one another, that it afforded them matter of eternal
quarrel; for what was at first but an indifferent subject, is by interest
adopted into the number of our own quarrels. This begets heats; heats
opprobries; opprobries revenge; and revenge leads either to fret, if we cannot
satisfy its thirst; or to ruin, if we cannot quench it. How many likewise are
in these rencounters, tempted either to betray their ignorance or malice? and
if one know not the new name of such a dish or dress, such an intrigue, or such
a quarrel or marriage, then they are esteemed block-heads. Most of men desire
to frequent their Superiors, and there men must either suffer their raillery,
or must not be suffered to continue in their society: If we converse with these
who speak with more address then our selves, then we repine equally at our own
dullness, and envy the acuteness that accomplishes the speaker; or, if we
converse with duller animals then our selves, then we weary to draw the yoke
alone, and fret at our being in ill company: But, if chance blow us in amongst
our equals, then we are so at guard to catch all advantages, and so interressed
in point d' honneur, that it rather cruciats then recreats us: How many makes
themselves cheap by these occasions, whom we had valued highly if they had
frequented us less? and how many frequent persons, who laugh at that simplicity
which the addresser admires in himself as wit, and yet both recreat themselves
with double laughters? It is remarked by Geographers, that no King alive is
worshipped by his Subjects but the King of Binon, and that he is never seen by
them* and certainly, if he were seen, he would not be worshipped. And thus these
ancient Hero's were never deifi'd, till death had, by burying themselves,
buried the memory of these infirmities, which, though they were but few in
some, and mean in others, had notwithstanding enough of allay in them to make
the committers, not only be conceived no gods, but oft-times to represent them
as frail men. Familiarity is (in the proverb) said to breed contempt; which it
does not only by that natural saciety, whereby nothing can become common and
continue (to our apprehension) good, but likewise, by laying open to conversers
these lapses and failours, which if they deserve not contempt, do, at least,
lessen that repute which was in others founded for them rather upon Idea's
which they framed of our perfections, then upon these merits which might justly
challenge them. Familiarity has likewise this prejudice in it, that it blunts
those endeavors in us, whereby repute is ordinarily acquired; and in remitting
that exactness whereby we entertain strangers, we loss that share of esteem
which exactness and politness deserves; these extraordinary parad's, made
ordinarily to our less familiars, being a holy days dress in conversation,
which though it flatters, ceases not therefore to weary us. Our Savior does
himself, and of himself, say it in holy Scriptures, that a Prophet has no
honor iu his own country; and the foolish Jews gave him ground to say so,
when they concluded that he could not work miracles, because his mother and
brethren dwelt amongst them, and because they did know him and his extraction.

But if variety be that which is admired in society, certainly our own
thoughts, or other men's Books, can in these far exceed conversation; possessing
above it this advantage, that we can never be either importuned or betrayed by
these, as is much to be feared from the other. And it is most remarkable, that
after Solomon has fixed a vanity and vexation of spirit upon all the actings of
men, and has after several times subjoyned it to public Employment, he only
says, that reading is a wearyness to the flesh, without adding it to be a
vexation of spirit. But albeit society were to be valued at the rate imagined,
yet solitary persons enjoy more ^he sweets of society then great men ^^o: for,
in all addresses to these, the addressers consider only what is sit for their
private interest, and little else is added, besides the dropping of a
flattering expression or two: and when any dis-interessed subject is fallen
upon with them, it is spoke to with so much constraint, and the speakers are so
hemmed in by discretion and respect, that the discourse is managed with much
disadvantage. And our very duty teaches us, that to speak learnedly, is
pedantry there, and to speak religiously is impertinent: So that we must either
transgress our duty, or else be mean in our conversation. But, albeit the
humor of the Grandee were so noble, as to admit of freedom in conversation;
yet few ingenuous spirits (who are the only best companions) can speak freely
in public, or to public persons: whereas, the most hide-bound Orator can pour
his conceptions into his neighbors bosom, in their natural set and fashion,
and with as little alteration as a discourse receives, by being cast off the
Press upon paper.

Reflect but upon these many thousand apologies which are carried up and down
amongst such as converse much together; and which, as they make up the greatest
part both of their employment and vexation; So are not incident to any who live
solitarly, these being the natural product of conference and rencounters: And
ye may conclude, that either these who make such apologies, are as real in
making them, as they seem passionat in having them to be believed; and then,
conversation may appear to be most dangerous, seeing these prove, that men may
easily mistake, and are so easily mistaken by such as daily frequent them, as
yet to need so solemn and so numerous apologies; or else these are but feing'd,
and then they prove conversation to be yet more dangerous; seeing, as men are
subject to mistake and be mistaken, so our own real apologies for those
mistakes will not be believed, because of the frequency of other counterfeits;
nor can we, for the same reason, discern whether such as are made to us be real
or not: what was the subject of this days conference, will be the subject of
an accusation to morrow; and that secret, which we thought we did but lately
depositate in our friends breasts, will shortly fly in our faces from the mouth
of our enemies: But though our friend were real and secret, yet his inconstancy
may make these either no virtues at all, or ineffectual and unprofitable ones;
a quality now so ordinary, that I take pleasure to see both my self and others
mistake the several interests which they knew intimatly a year ago, cabals and
intrigues moulding themselves almost every month in different shapes, according
to the humors or interests of the parties concerned: And so pestilential is
the malignity of conversation, that even Ladies fail here, and this piece of
frailty they are suffered to carry about them to keep them from being adored,,
because of their other amiable qualities: For, if their converse were not
dangerous, because that any error is there a crime, and no affront can there be
revenged, certainly there should no place else be frequented. Consider, I pray
you, how discourses are laughed at, though never so witty, if three or four
combine to represent them as ridiculous; how a slip, either in the choice or
accent of a word, becomes irreparable, by being incurred in a society where
nothing is designed but censure; and when any proves happy in that trade of
jybing, they must be gauding abroad (so tempting is this folly) though sure to
meet in these journeys the repute of slight or dishonest; and that Jearer, who
at the beginning was esteemed a wit, is, by continuing his trade (yea though he
improve in it) undervalued as a Buffoon.

It was nobly observed by Marcus Antonius, that great Emperor and Philosopher,
that a Weaver or Cobbler, would willingly sequestrat themselves from all
society, that they might prosecute their several trades; and yet man cannot
retire himself, that he may admire the creation, and exercise his own soul,
which is the great trade of a rational Creature, and of a true Philosopher. And
since gain can prevail with all so far, as to make them renounce society, and
esteem company an idle folly; certainly, if we would reflect upon the great
advantages of solitude, both as to morality and devotion, it were an easy
matter to prefer it to those which are in themselves but trifles, if not
burdens.

I have these three Arguments to persuade me, Sect 8.
that solitude, That solitude is more pleasing then public Employment.
Contemplation, or a Countrey-life, have more of pleasure in them then public
Employment. The first is, that pleasure, being in men, an act of the fancy, and
consequently of the soul; certainly these pleasures, which do more immediately
affect the soul, must needs be the most active pleasures; and such are these
which arise from contemplation: whereas sensual pleasures, and such as arise
from exterior objects, do arrive but consequentially at that immaterial agent,
and so they do move it with far less vigor. A second is, that Contemplation
does often drive our souls into ecstasies, and is so charming, that it may be
rather said to ravish then please, committing so open a rapture upon our souls,
that it pulls them almost into a state of separation: Thus those old Hermits
are the members of the ancient Church, who are oftest remark't to have become
thus nobely senseless, being as far transported out of themselves, as they had
transported themselves formerly out of the world, and lying whole weeks under
that spiritual amazement, and drunk, as it were, with those streams of
consolations which slow from those blessed Cisterns, the open wounds of our
glorious Savior. And amongst the Heathens, did not Pithagoras almost distract
with the satisfaction conceived in finding that noble and famous demonstration
mentioned in the second Book of Euclide? Was not Pliny so ravished with the
pleasure of contemplating the rarities of the hill Vesuvius, as, for further
enquiry to approach so near, that he lost himself in its flames? And was not
Archimedes so much pleased with his demonstration upon the sands of Siracuse,
that he would not lose so much time from it as wherein he might beg his life
from the rude conquerours: Whereas, besides what comes from fear or revenge, we
read nor hear of no such mighty passion in any of these who live in the
fruition of public Employments, or sophisticat satisfactions. The third
Argument is, that we find the satisfaction resulting from honor and ambition,
to ced to very mean pleasures, and to such as have nothing of satisfying in
them, besides what they owe to the corruption of our senses, and to be such as
do themselves yield easily to this energetick pleasure of contemplation.

Is not a Gallant, and even a Statesman, who is in love with a Mistress, and
sometimes with a whore, or has an unquenchable thirst for wine or
companionrie, willing to prefer the satisfaction of these passions to all
advancement, or the pleasures which he can receive by them? And this evidences,
that this desire to govern, is, of it is own nature, none of the strongest; at
least that our fancy may have other objects less dangerous, and equally
pleasing, whereupon to dote. And a Pedant, reading Pompey's actions in good
Latin, is as much enchanted with it, at least with the having written
handsomely his Epitaph, as Pompey could have been himself in the fruition of
all his glories, and the most spreading ruff of his pride. And a Country
Gentleman is as much taken with a happy chase, or a Clown with a mean hire, as
the happiest Favourit can be with the purchase of the highest office, which the
fear to lose, or new pretenses, and much anxious attendance, does lessen much
to him: But if these concessions of gain or honor occasion raptures in the
receivers, that joy brings more tickling with it, then is fit for the spirit of
man to receive; and occasions want of sleep, discomposure in discourse, and all
these other extravagancies which proceed from grief at other times: Whereas,
Solitude gives no other pleasures then what is fit for our recreation, or
suitable to our reason and stoicall indifferency; so that seeing every state has
pleasant objects provided for the enjoyers fancy, that state must be most
preferable which fancies objects the least dangerous; and such is Solitude, but
such is not public Employment.

I think the ancient Philosophers put but a mean complement upon man, when they
called him a little world: for certainly, his vast soul has in it nobler
idea's of all that is created, then the finitness of matter will allow to the
Creation it self; whose spirit is so narrow, but it can in one thought
represent larger Spears, a more vast Globe, and more boundless Seas, then all
these which were brought from the bosom of the first Chaos? And after infinite
expense has impoverished a building Prince, the meanest Peasant can in his
fancy add exceedingly to it is bulkishness; and which is more, that faculty can
mould idea's of thousands of species never yet created, that can bring forth
more monsters then Africa, and can produce more novelties then America: and as we
cannot but admire these productions, for their variety; So we cannot but love
them, because they are our own. And thus, seeing there can be no pleasure in
that variety which is to be decerned in the world, but what our fancy takes,
(for, what else is there in beholding real Castles, Navies, Courts or Cities,
but a divertising of our fancies? for nature needs none of those) certainly,
retirement has in this the start of it is rival: for there, fancy is at fuller
freedom, and roaves with less contraction then when it is limited by the
narrowness of the senses; through which wickets, certainly nothing can enter
which is angust or ample. In public we see the same men most ordinarily still
act the same things; and we our selves are so much busied with our interest,
that we regard little even the small variety which is discoverable in them. And
certainly, it is a great disparagement to the Creation to think, that there is
not variety enough there, to busy our meditation; or that there is less there
then in a City or Court: It is true that we'll see there variety of Hangings,
Cabinets, and such like toys; but if we would view the various faces of the sky
but one day, we would perceive more of variety in those, more of excellent
colors and various motions, then in ten thousand such trifles as these.
Consider but the beauty of one tulip, and it is several freckles; the motion of
one Bird, and it is several wheelings; the shapes of several worms, and their
different crawlings; and ye will find task enough, and more variety there, then
a City can afford, wherein they may represent you a painted Rose, but not it is
smell; the shape of a Foul, but not it is motion: And yet men there dot upon
that one quality of shape in pictures, more then upon ten thousand real
species in the complex of all their excellent qualities; which if ye call
fineness, I see no reason why ye may not call madness virtue. It is not then
want of variety in nature, but want of observation in us, which occasions this
error; and he understood all things infinitely better then we, who said, that
Solomon in all his glory was not like one Lily of the field. It Is reported of a
great Philosopher, that for fifty years he employed himself in the observation
of Bees, and all that time found both new task and pleasure; and never any
could say that he had observed fully all that was to be observed in flowers,
Anatomy, Astrology, or any of these Sciences, amongst which the least copius in
measuring lengths has advantage of our lives; and yet we complain. that
retirement (where these are only to be found) has not employment or
divertisement enough for us.

But if these suffice not, my dear Celador, enter into your own breast, and
there survey the several operations of your own soul, the progress of your
passions, the struglings of your appetite, the wanderings of your fancy; and ye
will find, I assure you, more variety in that one piece, then there is to be
learned in all the Courts of Christendom. Represent to your self the last age,
all the actions and interests in it, how much this person was infatuat with
zeal, that person with lust; how much one pursued honor, and another riches;
and in the next thought, draw that Scene, and represent them all turned to dust
and ashes.

The world is a Comedy, where every man acts that part which providence has
assigned him; and as it is esteemed more noble to look on then to act, So
really, I know no securer box, from which to behold it, then a safe solitude,
and it is easier to feel then to express the pleasure which may be taken in
standing aloof, and in contemplating the reelings of the multitude, the
excentrick motions of great men, and how fate recreats it self in their ruin,
as if it fed them with success, as the Romans fed their Gladiators, who served
for nothing else but in beating one another, to recreat the disinteressed
beholders. Consider how some are cartelling for not drinking of a glass, others
fretting at the promotion of their equals; one vexed that he was not safely
delivered of his prepared harrangue; another scanning every syllable of his
frowning Mistress letter: Heraclitus. Democritus. Sect. 9. Solitude enriches
more then public Employment.
And even these humors again laugh't at by some; and that laughter weept at by
others of these Virtuosi's, who pretend to a Dictatorship in moral philosophy.

Some admire public Employment, and prefer it to solitude, because the one
gains (whilst the other wastes) an opulent fortune: But these should consider,
that as these Merchant-venturers would eminently deserve to be esteemed mad,
who would hazard their Stock in a voyage, where certainly ten of a thousand
bottoms will not return unshipwrack't; So pretenders to advancement must be
mad, seeing scarce ten of a thousand prove successful in the design, so few are
the preferments which can enrich, and so many the hazards in reaching them; and
which is worse, of these ten which are preferred, scarce four will be found, who
do not prove so unhappily long-lived, as not to survive their conquests and
honors; and having got a glimpse only of happiness, En passant, do become so
much the more miserable, that they have been once happy. And as to these with
whom greatness is pleased to continue, do they not oft-times, by raising
themselves as high as their fancy, raise themselves too high for their estates,
and the one by swelling make the other to burst? How few Grandees are not
forced to eek up their spendings with contracted debts after their own revenues
are wasted? whereas such as live privately, and in a Countrey-life, transmit to
their posterity the remainders of that yearly rent which rests after all
necessities are defrayed: So that the Countryman must be rich, seeing his
necessities overcome not his fortune; and public persons must be reputed poor,
seeing they have not sufficiency for their maintenance. Is not a little man as
well clothed in his four yards of cloth, as a taler is in six? And are not
the Princes of Italy esteemed but petty Princes, because in desiring to be
such, they have made these fortunes which might have made them rich Subjects,
too small for the support of so weighty titles, as that of Sovereign? But admit
that these enjoyments continued for the enjoyers lifetime; yet GOD ordinarily
takes from the length of the duration what these added to the breadth of their
conquests: As a too hasty concoction destroys the body; So a too soon conquest
estate destroys the conquest: and what like Ionah's Gourd flourishes in one
night, loses the next these blossoms wherewith it was adorned. Hasten not to be
rich, was the counsel of a great Moralist, as well as Divine, and GOD Almighty
gave us no other task, then to gain our bread, and that with the sweat of our
brow: So that in desiring great and sudden estates, we are peccant both as to
the matter, and manner of our acquisition: And what can we propose reasonably
to our selves in thus doing? for little can defend us against our present
necessities, and nothing can defend against the future. And when these riches
are pyl'd up, they serve either to satisfy nature, and that is easy; or to
satisfy fancy, and that is impossible. When a public Minister has gained, by
either toil, oppression, or a long courted favor, a great sum, he possibly
makes a great entertainment, or buy's a great Jewel, with that or the
equivalent, and either surfets in the one, or vexes himself in losing the
other; and albeit he do not, what pleasure is there in either of these, but the
serving of our fancy, after the same manner that children do, when we laugh at
them for hugging toys and bables? Most men are as much troubled in the
spending of what they gain, as in gaining it; and thus one trouble creates
another by an alternat succession. All we gain (says Solomon) is either for
food or raiment (pomp and supersluity being no design allowed by nature) and
much or fine of either of these, serve not to defend against either cold or
hunger: And so seeing the Peasant or solitary Philosopher, attains sooner to the
true end of riches by his sobriety, then the other by his abundance; certainly
he must be the richer; and that is most excellent which attains soonest to the
end for which it was destinat: If such want money to give Lawers or Physicians,
they also want employment for these; and without employment no man desires
money: So that riches are really (though they remain) but like the manna, Exodus
16. 18
whereof he who gathered little had abundance; and he who gathered too much,
had nothing over: And if riches remain not but take the wings of the morning,
and flee away, as often they do, then consider that public Persons are most
subject to these alterations; for forfeiturs, alterations of Government, or
favor, intestine wars, luxury, gain, popular fury, or an heir confiding in
his fathers prosperity, or educat amidst many spending wanters, and such other
dissolute persons as frequent public places, will sooner drive to that
necessity, which men should only fear, then moderation or retirement can do:
And when great men are impoverish't by these accidents, they are ashamed,
because of their former state, and incapable by want of suitable breeding to
repair their losses, or satisfy their necessities by pains or frugality, as
private men can; and which is worse then all this, their former prosperity makes
want far more unsupportable to such, then to the other, to whom the greatest
hardships have been rendered familiar.

As to such who think, Sect. 10. The satisfacti of lust considered.
that public Employment and Command will afford them convenience to satisfy
their lust, I can say nothing, but that it is better to live in a sober
solitude, wherein men may so tame their lusts, that they need not satisfy
them: There is no pleasure in eating but to such as are hungry; and certainly,
it were for our advantage, rather that we could live without being hungry, then
even to have as much as might satisfy hunger when it comes: High feeding, and
want of better employment, begets this; and what impairs these extinguishes it:
Whereas, I am confident, such as are servilly subject to it, suffer more
anxiety in the purchasing of that convenience, then private men can do by the
want of bread: For they will for that purchase disobliege friends, cheat their
intimats, prove ungrate to their sweet bed-fellows, suffer themselves to be
talked of, and run a thousand other hazards, which they would not encounter for
staving off the greatest of these necessities under which mean men suffer; and
when this is gained, what brings it, but sickness, jealousies, horrors in
conscience, and reproach amongst men?

When I compare solitude with public Employment, Sect. 11. The recreations of
both compared.
as to their recreations, I find, that the one follows only such as because
nature has invented, it does therefore sweeten, and such as have no danger in
them, besides that of being too much charming; as hunting, hawking, angling,
and the like, wherein we have occasion to learn, as well as to praise, the
workmanship of our mighty Maker: And in the other, such divertisements are most
familiar, as if they have not been invented to gain money, or seed lust, yet
are not really recreations, if they look not toward these ends; and which are
attended by so much toil, fretting, sweating, swearing, lying, cheating, and
other vices, that their great pleasures are the worst of torments except their
tragic periods; of which nature, are cards, dice, tennis, danceing, drinking,
feasting and whooring, which do oftener divert men from being real Christians,
then divertise those who are really such. If great men enjoy not recreations,
they become unfit for employment, and employment becomes a burden to them; and
if they sequestrat the meanest portion of time for private recreations, they are
cursed by those thousands, whom multitude of affairs, rather then laziness, has
deferred, and who are so unreasonable as only to consider that they are put off,
but not to consider wherefore.

Though food and raiment are no constituents, Sect. 12. Both compared as to
their food and raiment
yet they are too often looked upon as considerable appanages of our more
material happiness; and these used by great men, though they cannot make the
enjoyer happy, yet serve to make the bystanders conclude themselves unhappy in
the want of them: And therefore I shall make these few reflections upon both,
whereby it will appear, that as to these, the meanest men are more happy then
the greatest Monarch.

As to Raiment, certainly, that used by private men, is most noble, most easy,
and attended by fewest inconveniences: Most noble, because in these great men
follow the mode, but mean men make their own mode, and so the one, as to that,
is a Subject, and the other a Sovereign: Great men are servants not only to the
fashion, but to such clothes as are in it, they must abstain from every thing
which may soil or disorder them, and must employ much of that time and life,
which is the only thing they pray for, and which they buy with much torture and
money from Physicians, merely in adjusting them every morning, and though it
should prejudge their health or estate, they must have these fashionable and
rich. How many shifts will be used, and other pleasures abandoned, that money
may be got to give for these; whereas a solitary person wears such as are
convenient for his health, and may be subservient to any employment; and that
his are more easy, appears from this, that great men, when they resolve to
take their ease, lay aside their robes, which served for nothing else, but make
themselves sweat, and others gaze: Jewels and Embroderies may make clothes, by
being stiff, useless and insupportable, but neither are necessary to cover our
nakedness, or entertain our natural heat. And wen the fashion changes, these
rich suits serve only either to make the owner ridiculous, if he wear them, or
to make him fret and grumble when he must lay them aside; and though they
continue fashionable, yet if another outstrip us in a more sumptuous suit or
retinue, then we repine, and by missing our design of being more gallant then
others, we likewise miss our happiness; which, because it was not placed upon
something which was in our own power, it is therefore in the power of every
other man to take from us.

As to Food, that which is used by mean men is both more natural and more
pleasant; more natural, because it is prepared with less toil, and being cooked
by nature it self, serves nature more adequatly, as to all intents and
purposes; it neither entices men to eat till they be unable for their affairs,
nor brings it sickness; it affords strength, and prolongs life; whereas, when
public Employment brings riches, and these have hired cooks, all they can do,
is to cheat the stomach into an oppression, and by fumes sent from thence,
chase away fine thoughts out of our heads to make room for vapors. Solitary
persons dine when they please, but great men when it suits with their business;
and as they are more subject to invitations, to feasts and entertainments; So
they must there sit longer, and eat more then nature requires, and they must
either dis-obliege their Host, or kill themselves. I know many, who in place
of complementing such as they invite, make them envy them; and many who are
vexed when they hear of another who lives at a nobler rate then themselves, and
who pillage the poor, that they may entertain the rich; That the Food of
private men is more pleasant, arises from this, that the stomach has, by its
fumes, depraved the taste, so that nothing can relish; or custom has
rendered the finest delicacies so ordinary, that nothing can appear pleasant; a
Peasant by fasting longer, or working more laboriously then at other times, can
thereby heighten the relish of his dish beyond all the art in the Emperors
kitchen, or Apothecaries shop. And I have heard of a Merchants wife, who being
much subject to diseases whilst her husbands trade flourished, did live very
long, and very healthfully, after he was broke. And when rich persons fall
sick, who knows but their Physician may contribute to make the disease continue
long, or the apparent air to make it end suddenly: And when the Physician is
honest, does he not forbid the use of all these delicacies, whereof greatness
boasts of as an advantage?

The greatest pretext used to excuse this zeal, Sect. 3. Object, That the
Country must be served.
after public Employment, is, that the Country must be served, and man is not
made for himself: To which my answer is, that this makes employment the object
of our duty, not of our passion, and infers it as a necessity, not as a choice,
which is all that is contended for: Who is so absurd as to deny his Country
that service, which is really but the return of it is protection? Or, who will
be so mad as not to contribute either skill or agility in saving that Ship from
sinking, wherein himself sails? And this makes me conclude such as rebel
against their Governors, to be as mad as these are, who pull down their own
houses, which defends them often against the circumambient and blustering storms;
and gives me a veneration for the persons of such as are my Superiors, to whom
nothing said here, that is disadvantagious, should be applied. But if the
serving of our Country be that impulse, which only acts us on to undertake
employments, this same design should make us wait till we be called for by our
Country: do not pretenders to employment, in desiring each to enter first,
obstruct all entry to employments? As we see, in entering at public places,
where the pressing of all hinders the entry of all; do we not upon this account
often remark, that offices are kept vacand by Princes, because of the multitude
of rivals who compet for preference, and so by their have to enter, prejudge
the Country more, then by their entry they can assist it: Whereas, if it were
for the public good that we undertook these employments, all would wait till
their rational reluctance were vanquished, with either the importunities of
their Prince, or convenience of their Country: And when that design for which
they were called, were satisfied or driven to it is designed period, they would
willingly solace themselves again, by their retreat to these
Countrey-employments, from which they were at first rather driven, then
brought. And certainly, if the public interest were that which only did invite
men to appear in public, they would not repine at their being laid aside, nor
force an entry through the very sides of their Country, making a breach in its
ramparts, because they cannot enter at it is gates, as too many pretenders daily
do.

Should not such as the State have thought fit to remove from employment, Sect.
14 It is just that there should be changes in favor.
consider, that others have an equal title by nature, to advancement with them;
and that, as if their predecessors in these offices had not been removed, they
had not been advanced? So either it was injustice to remove these, or else i^
is no injustice to remove them; and they should rather prove grateful for
having enjoyed these honors so long, then ingrate in repining, that they
retained them not still, which were as unnatural as if the Sun should
constantly dwell in one of his twelve houses (making that the only Summer House
in heaven) and should not, by successive withdrawings and returns, magnify his
presence by his absence, and by that constant change be so just, as not to
gratify all, that he may please a few. If these, who are in offices, were not
subject to alterations, they would presume too much, and such as wanted them
would certainly despair; whereas, now the fear of being degraded, makes such as
are in employment virtuous and compassionat, fearing least their practice
become their dittey; and the hope of advancement makes such as yet have not
attained to it, walk so as may deserve applause, and so as they may shun
reproach: If such alterations were not incident to great men, they would often
want occasion and time to repent of those sins which they committed in public,
either by inadvertence, having their thoughts distracted with many things; or
by extravagancie, having their thoughts raised above their just level. And if
there were not such alterations, great men should neither have time to admire
GODS many wonders, nor to review his many mercies, and it should be unknown
whether Greatness or solitude were the most Christian state.

Many noble spirits have been frighted from solitude, Sect. 15 Solitude lessens
not our vivacity of spirit.
as conceiving it to be a state wherein the soul contracts a rust, which
cankers it is own substance and makes it unpleasant to others, and that it
begets men the name of a Countrey-clown, and unfashions him as to the world.
But these should consider, that seeing the finitness of our souls allows not a
complete accomplishment, it is our wisdom to fill our narrow rooms with the
most necessar provisions, and these are, the knowledge of God, and his works;
from which will result that tranquillity of spirit which is peculiar to
Philosophy, and is the guest of solitude: So that when in exchange of
complement, courtship, knacks, reparties, and such other appanages of
conversation, we become pious, learned and moral Philosophers; I think us
losers in no other sense, then a tree is, when it is gaudy flourish ripens into
such fruit as can both please the relish, and feed the body. It may be, a
Philosopher may forget by his solitude whether to give a Lady his right or left
hand; but if in his solitude he has learned to know what is right or wrong in
her or his own actions, I think she should esteem him so much the more, and he
is by much the more happier. And if the world conclude him improven, who in
learning how to order an Army, has forgot how to order a ball; I see not why
they should account him an Apostate in breeding, who is so intent upon the
contemplation of a Deity and it is productions, as not to care to adore these
mortal goddesses, except for whom the pressers of this objection have little or
no devotion, being rather devoted servants to these, then devout servants to
the Almighty: and how can that soul rust which is in continual exercise, as
these of Philosophers are? And this is more to be feared in such, as by living
in public are still busied, and yet idle: for, may not we be busy in
soliciting for unnecessary favors to others, in receiving and paying visits,
in driving on unnecessary factions, and yet our souls contract a rust, whose
cancker may make it at last moulder away to nothing? For, what share can our
souls take in such actions, wherein it has no other concernment then such as a
man has in the motions of his enemies?

Let us then admire solitude (noble Celador) seeing to it religious persons flee
when they would seek GODS face; sick men when they would seek health: here
Statesmen find their plots, learned men their knowledge, Poets their sublime
fancies. In solitude, nestle the greatest of Saints; in public, range the
greatest of Sinners, to the one we owe the best of inventions, to the other the
worst of cheats.

Having thus raised this pitiful structure to i'ts Cape-stone, I resolve to
furnish it with these two Landskips; the one of solitude, the other of
Greatness.

When I come to represent solitude, Sect. 16 The Landscape of solitude
I must confess that it is advantages are so great, as that if any thing can
surpass them, it must be the esteem I have of them. And for contriving it is
Landscape, I represent to my self Quintus Maetius post humius, that noble Roman,
who having been brought from his plough to govern that great City, did after he
had conquered it is enemies, return to his former employment; and being ready to
leave them, called for a balance, and* by putting the falces (or marks of
Authority) in one scale, and his plough in the other, did let them see, that
these Imperial Ensigns were the far lighter. Not far from him, I represent
Timon the noble Athenian, and Gerson Chancellor of France, who starved after
they had spent their estates in complement and liberality; exclaiming against
all public persons as perfidious, and friends (as they found) to a man's
fortune, but not to himself. Here Diogenes undervalues so far all Alexanders
presents, as to prefer one sight of the Sun to all that he could command, who
commanded all that the Sun shined upon: and there Fiacre, that illustrious
Scot, refuses to return from his Hermitage to receive the Crown of his
Ancestors. Here lurks St. Ierom, laughing in the midst of his own torments at
the follies of the world: and there the great Constantine bewails with tears
the want of solitude; and the multitude of these distractions, which though
they did not extinguish, yet did disturb his devotions. Below these stands a
Countrey-gentleman, admiring the folly of a Venetian Ambassador, for being vexed
to death, because he was at a festival placed upon a stool, and not upon a
chair; and smiling to see a Russian Ambassador, who could not step (though very
sound) till he was led by two attendants; and to hear of the Emperor and Turks
Ambassadors, who at their last meeting, behooved like two Pendula's Clocks,
either to set their paces equally, or else not to be reputed just. Represent to
your self rich Valleys, where the liberal soil needs neither be bryb'd by
yearly accessions, nor courted with nice attendance, nor torn by instruments
(as in City-gardens) before it will bestow any thing upon it is Masters; but
without keeping close doors (as these do) keeps an open house to all passengers
for herbs and flowers of all tastes and liveries. Here the Nightingale is
constrained to stay without any other cage, then that of the native pleasures
of the place; and here the Sun looks from morning to night with a pleasing
countenance, upon the offspring of his own beams, neither clouded with smoke,
nor intercepted by angles of falling houses; and these, in effect, differ from
Gardens, but as Prose from Meeter, where the materials are ofttimes richer,
though the contrivance be not so artificial. Here the levelling, though
aspiring, trees, lay their heads together, to protect such as seek shelter
under their well-cloath'd branches: and the Cristal-streams run slowly and turn
many windings, as if by that and their quiet murmurings, they would express an
unwillingness to leave so pleasant a field; and in token of their thankfulness,
do in a generous manner (because without showing how) enrich freely the
neighboring Lands, and draws to their Master his picture in one instant,
without putting him to the pains of frequent or long sitting, beyond all the
skill of Vandyck or Angelo; entertaining likewise for him whole plantations of
fishes, which may afford him both aliment and recreations beyond all that the
City can boast, where water never comes, but empty, and as a prisoner, and like
all other things and persons corrupts, if it but stay a while there. Here old
age crowns, with innocence's livery, these who have innocently improven their
youth; and youth bestows strength, because it knows that the strength it
bestows is not to be revel'd away in whooring and banqueting. Here Ladies
scorn, and need not submit their native colors to fairding, and in their
blushing at the sins and impudence of City-gallants, show a scarlet far
exceeding the noblest Lillies, though Solomon and all the glory of his Court
was not to be compared to one of these. Here Complements (which, like cob-webs,
are but the artificial texture of pitiful stuff, woven by poisonous spiders)
are looked upon as unnecessar and dangerous; unnecessar, because there goes
much of time and pains to their contrivance, yet do they not persuade such as
they are addressed to, to believe them so well as Countrey-ingenuity does it is
inhabitants: and dangerous, because they are ordinarily but handsome disguises
for such cheating inclinations as are sent abroad to betray the party
concerned. Here Lovers are not like prisoners, coupled together with chains of
metal, nor joined, like Princes, in a league for civil interest. Jealousy,
that moral fever which tortures so the soul of man, as that GOD was content to
ordain a miracle for satisfying his doubts, finds no employment here: for
virtue entertains these matches which it self has made, and lengthens out
their productions to many more ages, then are able to consume thousands of
public families. And (to dispatch) here, Nature, the eldest daughter of
Providence, governs as Queen-regent, and receives so absolute a difference to
all her laws, that man may be here thought to be restored to that primitive
innocence, which he formerly forfeited by his courtship.

For framing the Land-skip of Greatness, Sect. 17 The Landscape of Greatness.
represent to your self Alexander running like a mad man up and down the world,
and killing every man who would not call him master (for certainly, we would
call any man mad, who would behave so in our streets, and yet they might as
justly do the one as he the other) and all this to gain as much as might make
him a person worthy of being poisoned; and esteeming all his greatness so
meanly, as to prefer to it is enjoyment the embraces of a whore, who would have
prostitute her self to the meanest of his attenders. Here lies Tiberius toiling
more for the title of Emperor, then a Porter would do for bread, and yet
prefering to all that Roman pomp (after he knew what it was) the pleasure of
seeing a naked Strumpet, then which no man is so mean, as not to enjoy many
greater pleasures. There stands Hanibal, as a Switz, guarding the King of
Bithinia; here Chancellor Bacon starts at liberty, and there the Duke d' Alva
starved in prison; in this bed lies a jealous Courtier, tortured with another
growing, not only greater, but even equal with him; and in another lies one
loaded with wounds, received for his Country or Prince, but not regarded by
them: not far from these lies Anthony stobbing himself, and Caesar stob'd by the
Senate. In another corner, ye may perceive a rich heir selling that rich Suit
to a frippery, wherein he had but lately spent a great Fortune at Court; and
another despairing under these wounds which he did receive, for challenging one
who took the wall of him. Here ye may see the head of a Nobleman, who to be
revenged of his Prince for complementing another, was content to hazard the
happiness both of Prince and Country, in a rebellion which at last could not
but ruin himself and his family; and there ye may see the quarters of another,
who after he had gained much more honor then he at first designed, yet was so
desirous to have more, as that to satisfy that desired super-addition, he
would hazard what he was already possessed of in jeopardies, which any man not
blinded by ambition, might have seen to be fatal. In a third corner, lies heaps
of such as Somerset, Marquess D' Ancre, Duke Murdock, Cardinal Wolsey and
others, whom nothing but their affronts have made famous, albeit they were the
greatest Ministers and Minions of their age.

In a fourth corner are represented many great men, who having left a pleasant
Country to come to a City, covered with smoke and infected with stink, are
there vexed to get money to entertain their Ladies in that luxury and fineness,
whereof the one tempts them, and the other tempts others to entertain these
amors which are dangerous, and may prove fatal; and who have likewise quit
their own families, wherein all these respects were paid them, that they are
glad to have occasion to pay at that Court, for which they exchanged their
former residence; and who, by the diseases occasioned by want of that free air
which they have left, are rendered unable to relish all the other pleasures
which they expected to enjoy in the City. And if after all this, ye will not
conclude a solitary Life to be more noble then public Employment, yet at least
ye will, with seraphick Mr. Boil, confess, that there is such a kind of
difference betwixt virtue shaded by a private, and shining in a public life,
as there is betwixt a a candle carried aloft in the open air, and enclosed in a
lantern; in the former of which situations it gives more light, but in the
latter it is in less danger to be blown out.

I shall ( Celador) in this last place, close this Discourse with the last
advantage of solitude; which is, that by abstracting 'its favorites from being
rivals to great men, and from being sharers with covetous men, it conciliats to
them that applause, which as it was due to their merit, so was obstructed by
these and the like incentives.

-- Defunctus amabitur ide^^ has been the fare of many who were persecuted
whilst they were alive; and death and solitude have this in common, that they
suffer enemies and obliege friends, to express their former esteems: fame
resembling in this a shot, where the ball is sled, before the report arrive at
our ears.

But I have spent so much of the age of this night, in ending this Letter, that
it now begins to grow gray; and the dapling twilight brings as much light as to
let me see, that I have been rather zealous, then manerly, in showing you how
much I am,

Dear Celador,

Your most humble Servant, and sincere Well-wisher.
FINIS.

