THE MEMORY Of that Servant of God, John Story, Revived. Showing,

What manner of Man he was from his Youth to his Grave, by the Testimonies of
several Friends, to whom he was well known, and by whom (for his Work sake in
the Truth) he was greatly Beloved.

To which is adjoined something written by him, etc. in his latter years,
wherein his Judgment is shown concerning some particular things; and his great
desires for Love, Unity, Concord and Peace in the Church of Christ.

A Tree is not so well known by Reports as by its Fruits.

Having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of
evildoers, they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good Conversation in
Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 16.

The Righteous shall be in everlasting Remembrance, yea his Righteousness
endures for ever: The wicked shall see it, and be grieved, he shall gnash with
his teeth and melt away: The desire of the wicked shall perish, Psalm. 112.

I am a Man of Peace, but when I speak; they are for War, Ps. 120. 7.

London, Printed by John Gain, Living in the Upper Moor-Fields, near the
Flying-Horse, M. DC. LXXXIII.

To the Reader.
ALthough nothing can now be added to, or diminished from the Eternal Happiness
of our Deceased Friend, John Story, yet since his Departure out of this World;
it came into the Hearts of some to Write something concerning him: and knowing
that a thing of this nature, has not only been expected, but long since
earnestly desired by many honest Friends in Diverse parts of this Nation: It is
now for their sakes, and others to whom it may be serviceable, made Public.
Thou have here a Relation of the Life and Death of that Faithful Servant of the
Lord, in the following Testimonys of several Friends, to whom he was very well
known; and being now at Rest from all his Labors, is blessed with them which
dye in the Lord, thus its witnessed of him; about whom many did concern
themselves, some for the better, and others for the worse; like to those, who
in the days of our Lord Christ, when some said of him he is a good Man, others
said nay, but he deceives the People and has a Devil. And this many did
through ignorance, condemn the just one. And when we consider what gainsaying,
reproaches and contradictions our dear Friend J. S. met with in his Pilgrimage,
and the Patience God endued him withal, and what Charitable constructions he
would make of Injuries offered to him, etc. it may truly be said, He was a Man
of Peace: and he had this saying often with him (viz.) That the long-suffering
of the Saints would have an end; Exhorting Friends to patience in well-doing.
We forbear (as yet) to write what many could say more particularly concerning
him; Recommending what here follows to thy serious and impartial perusal,
desiring that prejudice may not blind the eye of thy understanding, and hinder
thee from reaping that benefit intended.

A Brief Relation concerning the Life and Death of John Story, by John
Wilkinson.
JOHN STORY, descended of Christian Parents in Westmorland, and they lived
honestly, (having Land, Goods and Trade) in good repute amongst their
Neighbors; and he was well Educated in his Youth, and through his diligence
grew able in pronunciation of the English Tongue. He was never seen inclinable
to any evil Vice, but against all such things from his Youth; neither could he
endure any crooked ways, or crossness in a Family, but showed his dislike
thereof, and the Gift of God in him did so prevail, that in his Childhood he
had a wonderful sense of the Woe and Wrath that would come upon the Wicked, and
an opening of Joy and Peace to the Righteous.

In his Youth I know none in these Parts to exceed him in Godliness, for the
Fear of God had the chief Room in his Heart, and he had a great regard to keep
his Commands; and a wonderful Knowledge God gave unto him, considering his Day
and Age, still seeking more and more the Knowledge of God, and the way of his
Kingdom; his Life answered his inward Knowledge, and at the age of ten Years he
could not join with any in wanton Sports, Games and Plays, which made many to
wonder: notwithstanding that, the inward Knowledge which God gave unto him, did
so prevail with him, that not only the vanity of such things, was discovered to
him, but he was also begotten of God into an abhorrence thereof, judging it a
misspent and lost time: and when he was grown to twelve years of Age, his great
enquiry was, where to find a Place and People that sought the Lord; for the
Word of God in his Heart did powerfully quicken his Soul to Life.

And Breathing, and Praying in private and public; and when he found a People
seeking the Lord, it was great Joy to his Soul, and he was ready prepared to
join with such as had Openings by the invisible Spirit of God, namely, such as
Gervis Benson, Francis Howgil, Edward Borough, John Audland, Richard
Hubberthorn, etc. and many more in Westmorland prepared of God for the Service
of Truth, in, and unto whom God, in the Fullness of Time, revealed his Son, and
by his Spirit anointed them Ministers of the Everlasting Gospel, to Preach the
Glad-tydings of Salvation, with many more in sundry Parts of this Nation (an
unutterable Blessing to a People and Kingdom) among whom John Story also was
Anointed to Preach the Gospel. But before his Call forth into other Countries,
he was brought up in the Knowledge of Husbandry, and was skilful in that Work,
and also laborious and careful, and joined himself with Families that feared
God, and sought him with all their Hearts; he had in his young Years such a
Gift of Prayer, which the Seekers after God had a great Love unto; and his
chief Delight was in such Company: he Hungered and Thirsted after Righteousness
(a State blessed of God) who filled him with many Virtues, and made him, even
in his Youth, an Instrument of much Good, by his holy Conversation and good
Example; and God gave him the Knowledge of many weighty and glorious Things of
his Kingdom; and he had a holy Zeal to press all unto Righteousness; and
Preached in Public Assemblies in Westmoreland, and Places adjoining about the
Age of fourteen Years, and depended on the Gift of God for his Openings and
Doctrine, being of a loving Carriage to all People, beyond many that now
profess more Knowledge, and boast of high Things in these latter Days: he saw
with the Openings of God in that Day, That all Made Forms Men placed Religion
in, were not only empty and dry, without Virtue and Life, but also a Snare, and
of evil Effect: and could not join to any such; but to exercise and practice
according to inward Knowledge given of God; saying, That leads justly in a holy
manner of Life: but Embarking into made Forms, and placing Religion in them,
expecting Blessings from them; made it just with God to shut up Heaven, to hide
his Glory, and keep hid the Things of his Kingdom: But depending upon God, fits
People, and prepares for his Service, and gives the true Knowledge of what he
requires to Practice. His Saying has been, That even to him in that Estate was
the Son of God Revealed, the Great and Wonderful Power of the Almighty, the
Everlasting Day of Life, the Highest Power, the Commander and Giver of his
Word, he that appeared in the Clouds of Heaven, opening glorious Things, has
Revealed himself in Power and great Glory.

Though he was a Man, in his Life, that would not willingly miss the greatest
Seize in Truth, yet he was not ashamed of being silent, when in the
Presence of an Assembly; for the Day was, wherein he saw the King, the Lord of
Hosts, whose Majesty made him astonished, at whose Presence and Sight he was
struck silent for the space of a whole Year, because he then saw that the
Openings of God was Preached by him, judging his inward Estate and Knowledge
far short of the wonderful Knowledge and excellent Glory, when he appeared in
Fullness: and so he waited in silence many a Meeting, and thought himself unfit
to Preach his Excellency and Greatness, suffering Famine, and sitting under the
Sword (which the Word, by which all Things were made, is compared unto) in a
sense of the true Cross and right Humility that goes before true Honor,
waiting for the Movings of the Almighty, and his Spirit to demonstrate the Way
of Life; and said, He was not Condemned of God in falling short of answering
the Knowledge given unto him; but far short in declaring the greatness of his
Power and Fullness. It is not you that speak (using the words of Christ) but
the Spirit of my Father that speaks in you. This was the manner of his Life
till God gave him the Word, and called him forth; for he said, If I had sat in
Silence all my Life, I durst not go before God spoke by his Spirit in me. And
truly Gods Power and Presence was with him, and his Word and Motion plentifully
given unto him, and Wisdom from above to divide the Word aright, and God made
his way to prosper, that the People prepared of God with his invisible Spirit,
answered the Word as Face answers Face in a Glass, and many that had mist
their way to God, by seeking him without; he turned to the Light and Appearance
of Christ within; and he was confirmed in the Word through the Power and Effect
thereof, and Sealed to God in his Service, who gave him great Ability to fulfill
his Ministry. He had but a very weak Body, and traveled on foot North and
South in this Nation about the space of three years, I being his Companion, do
well know it; and great Colds, after much heat in Meetings, empaired his
Health, besides his Concern with many Opposers in the breaking forth of Truth,
causing many long and tedious Disputes; in which his Moderation in Gods Wisdom
greatly appeared, laboring in Truth to convince the Gainsayers: he had great
Skill and Ability given of God, ( Viz.) in Disputes, that his Bow still abode
in Strength, and the Contenders for their Imaginations, and against the Truth,
fell before him, he was so strengthened with the Arm of the Almighty God of
Jacob, who honored his Truth with him in the Sight of many Assemblies, the
Contenders often confessing to his Moderation and Meekness; notwithstanding, if
he got hold of Deceit and false Affirmations (from wilful Opposers) he held
such very hard to the Point, not letting them go to another thing, unless they
confessed their Error, but any Objection or Doubt through Ignorance was meekly
in Truth resolved, and he had no delight to dispute with Opposers, or high
Contenders, unless they themselves were the Cause, neither to spread in Writing
or Print, any Disputes, though often desired.

And at that time many longed to hear the Word of God, and cried, Come and have
a Meeting with us: and sometimes went to help, but even as Paul to Macedonia,
by Vision and Revelation, to Preach the Gospel to them, and visiting over and
over them to whom God sent him to Preach the Gospel.

He was faithful in Doing or in Suffering as required of the Almighty, witness
his Sufferings in Salisbury Goal, under Sentence of Praemunire, almost a whole
year, but delivered at the Kings Coronation: for before Prescriptions, Outward
Orders and Forms among some Friends were so Imposed, and carried a stress of
Religion, John Story was not judged a Flyer in Persecution, but esteemed
honorable among the Brethren; and it is plain, that because he could not
receive some Prescriptions of Men's, with all its Formalities, therefore was he
Proceeded against (by some) as one of a wrong Spirit, and out of the Unity;
though he opposed not others therein, if they were so persuaded of God: but
they would not be satisfied with that, but opposed him in Public Meetings, as
one that hated to be Reformed; Alas! Alas! his Religion was not formed with
Orders and Precepts of Men, he could not so far dishonor his God, nor judge
any Friends so weak in Understanding to make a Breach of Unity with them under
pretense of Motion, Government and Dignity: John said, He was often ashamed of
such a Degeneration: and said, if it did continue, the evil Effects would
scarcely cease. He rendered not evil for evil, by opposing his Opposers in
Meetings for Public Worship, but exhorted to Righteousness and Peace, and if
that could not be born, it be speaks (says he) a Famine of the Word. Oh he
was sound in Judgment, and not afraid that his Doctrine should come to public
view: his Candle was lighted, not to put under a Bushel: let them that have
opposed him, and endeavored to darken the light and shining thereof through
him, look to it; Repent and turn to God before it be too late, least God
suffers the same measure to be meted again, for his Ways are Equal and Just,
and Righteous altogether; and as he endeavored his Doctrine should be tried,
commending it to every man's Conscience in the Sight of God; so also his
proceeding and good Works, saying, How should Men glorify our Heavenly Father,
if our Proceedings and good Works be hid from them; and if People wait not in
the Spirit, but oppose it with Forms of Man's making, such cannot relish the
Word of Life, nor suffer Truth's Testimony in Quiet, but causes jangling with
Forms in the break of the Day, against Truth, and see not the Glory that
excels, nor the Testimonies that exalts the Light, which God commanded to
shine forth in the Face of Jesus, whom the Righteous loves, and is their Life,
in which my dear Companion, J. S. had great Delight.

He was a loving and plain Man, and greatly abhorred Feignedness, warning
People that they should not worship the Works of their own hands, nor feign
Humility, and cautioned to beware of a Spirit of Pride, and seeking Honor and
Greatness; which he saw in his day, was too much sought after. When he heard
such Doctrine, Viz. Have an Eye to the Brethren, it seemed strange and new, not
like Truth, as the proceedings about Outward Orders did; remembering the
Doctrine before, was, Look unto the Lord, and eye him: and, The Wisemans Eye is
in his Head; Spiritually meaning in Christ. However, what was meant by having
an Eye to the Brethren, they best know who have used it; but John Story in his
Life, had a great Dislike of it, doubting to what it would grow; he professed not
much discerning in making an outward show with his Eyes, but he had a pure
discerning with the Light of the Spirit in the Elect Estate in Christ; Satan
transformed into an Angel of Light, nor his Ministers appearing as the
Ministers of Righteousness, could not deceive him, nor feigned Flattery, nor
Sheeps Clothing hide the Ravening Wolf from his Sight, nor make him conclude
with Threatenings, that false Accusations and unrighteous Judgment was of the
Lamb's Nature: truly the worth of such a Minister of Truth cannot be equalled
with outward Treasure; and such sent of God is a Blessing to a Kingdom, or a
Nation, but being rejected and opposed, will surely bring a Curse; but no
Disturbers could move him, but in all his Sufferings God endued him with
Patience, though many times in great weakness of Body, and often in appearance
nigh unto Death.

But the Prophecy of the badness of his Life in 1676, is now proved as false as
Solomon Eccles Prophecy is, of the Time of his Death; for some years after
that, God gave him Strength, and carried him hundreds of Miles in his Service:
afterward he was very weak, at which time a Friend (a Doctor, George Walker)
came to visit him, and I heard him say, He was near gone to all outward
Appearance, unless God had some further Work for him to do. And indeed the
Almighty, into whose Hand he was committed, raised him up again, and carried
him South and West, Strengthening and Comforting the Brethren, till his
Testimony was finished in those Parts, whose loss is great, and Cause of
sorrowing, that they shall see his Face no more; for the Lord brought him to
Westmoreland, his Native Country, where he was received with great Gladness,
for the Lords Power and Presence was with him, to the great Refreshment of the
truly Righteous, and on a First Day at a Meeting in Kendal, cleared his
Conscience in Testimony to the Ancient Truth, in which his Doctrine was
wonderful weighty, and his Experience very great.

He was but young as to number of years, between forty and fifty, but he
fulfilled a great time, if Wisdom be Gray-hair, and undefiled Life, old Age; he
was weak of Body about two weeks, not able to go abroad, but little complained
of Sickness; the gentle Dealings of the Lord was wonderful to him, and brought
many to remember his meek Behavior; and Neighbors said, he lived well, and
was like to dye well; he was like an innocent Lamb, opened not his mouth to
complain, the merciful Dealings of God unto him at all times filled him with a
great sense of Joy and true content, having assurance to rest with him, the
Fountain of Life and Fullness, which through (but) a measure of his Spirit, such
Heavenly Joy and true Content comes. And he seeing his Testimony and Time on
Earth was finished, his great Love he signified to all Friends in Truth, while
he had Strength to speak, desiring God to preserve them in it to the End; and
lay silent a pretty while, moving his hands (as I took it, while with him) in a
sense of Rest and Heavenly Praise; after that, I had not been two hours from
him (which was on urgent occasion) till word came to me, he was Departed.

So much concerning his Innocent Life, and part of Trouble he met with, for his
Testimony to Truth, his Meekness and Content, and Assurance of Eternal
Felicity, as duly observed about the manner of his Departure, by John
Wilkingson.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have this farther to add, that John Story is gone to his Rest, whose
Testimony when God Revealed his Son in him, was given in Gods power, and would
have sitten in Silence without he Revealed the Word of Life: and to all
unprejudiced hearers that thirsted after Righteousness, and that Knowledge and
Power that leads to Happiness; his Doctrine dropped as the Rain, that
Refreshes the tender Grass, to all thristy and longing souls, to their great
refreshment and consolation; and my Counsel to all opposers of the Ministers of
Truth is, that they cease for time to come, and Repent, and let no more
slanderers have place to beget prejudice, in you, but let the Truth you profess
be your defense against it. And with your own measures savor for your selves,
least you be led in a false belief by men that love and lust to rule, under
pretense of Gods motion and unbrotherly proceedings, under pretense of Church
Power be slow in speaking without certain knowledge, especially evil of anytill
your own experence with Truth prove it to you, through your exact trial, least
you be lead by Men into a false Faith, to speak evil of true Believers and
condemn them to be of a wrong spirit whom God Justifies; and if this counsel
had been followed, and was the Doctrine of Truth in the beginning, to your own,
to your own, the difference among Friends had been kept in a narrow compass,
and but a few concerned that caused difference, and the things but Temporal,
which Spiritual Weapons would soon have conquered and overcome, and Truth,
Peace, and stablity would have abounded; then high places with spiritual
wickedness had not been assumed; but when temporal things has Religion placed
in them (which only springs form the Fountain of Life) this dishonours God who
is the Author of all true Religion) And makes it a shelter for the greatest
Hypocrites and even a Cage for all unclean Birds to Chatter against the
Righteous that receive the Word of Truth, and both live, and practice as their
Measures of God Requires, and agreeable to the Scriptures of holy Men who are
gone to their Rest, where neither false Witness nor unrighteous Judgment can
take away their Inheritance.

I. W.



Something taken out of a Letter from George Dodgson (to a friend) bearing date
the twenty seventh of the ninth Month, 1681. concerning the departure of John
Story.
THat which I have to communicate to thee and Friends, and which is to the
Sadening and Sorrow of many hearts, is the departure of our Dear Brother I. S.
who in much peace and quiet departed this Life the last third day, having no
sense of Pain upon him, to the apprehension of Friends but even as though he
had Slumbered very Quietly, breathed his last. He had been out of health about
fourteen days before, but not very likely for Death till about four days
before he dyed, when the Distemper and Weakness seized more fully upon him: He
was Intrerred very honorably, a great many People being there present, both of
Friends and of the Neighborhood: And as he in his Life time, was of a grave
and reverent Deportment, even so was he accompanied to his Grave, People
generally bemoning his death, but the Hearts of Friends was generally filled
with sorrow, and their Eyes with Tears, by reason of that inward affection
they bare unto him, as also the great sense of the great Loss they sustained in
his Death, who has been a living example of Righteousness amongst us, both in
Life and Doctrine, even in a manner from his Childhood, as if he had been
Chosen from the Womb, and Sanctified for a Vessel of honor and as he often
exhorted others, to continue walking in the way of Truth, that in the latter
end they might attain and come more fully to possess the Joys of the
everlasting Kingdom, where all the Troubles and Sorrows of this present Life
shall be wiped away, and come to an end. So Doubtless he is now entered into the
full fruition of those never-fading Joys wherein all the sorrow and sighing
and Troubles of this present Life is come to an end, and is Ascended out of the
reach of wicked Tongues and Pens: But what can be said, Doubtless God endued
him with Divine Wisdom to a large degree, and accompanied him with his Devine
Power and Presence, in Declaring the way of Life, and opening the Mysteries of
the Kingdom to the comfort and Consolation of many who now mourn in Secret for
his absence; and I fear that time to come may know the want of such, and I also
fear that many in this present time have also rendered themselves unworthy of
such: but I desire we may make a good use of these things, and that we look to
our own standing, and that we may walk according to the exhortations and
counsel delivered unto us both by him, and other his faithful Companions, which
have answered the Truth in our own hearts.

There was a very good opportunity for J. W. and others to bear a Testimony to
Truth, and the People gave very Diligent attention while he exhorted and
Counseled to follow those things that make for peace and brings to rest in the
latter end, clearly Demonstrating the way thereunto; with such things further
as opened in him, suitable upon that occasion.

G. D.

The Testimony of John Jennings, by way of Preface, to the following
Testimonies of several Friends in Wiltshire.
Courteous and Friendly Readers,
BE It known unto you, that what is here written by way of Lamentation and
Testimony of our Deceased Friend John Story, is not to draw forth the Minds of
any for to admire him or any other Instrument that the Lord may make use of for
the good of any Person or People, but that which is here written, is truly to
certify all friendly People, unto whom it may come, what manner of Life,
Doctrine and Conversation, this our deceased Friend did Live, and Declare
whilst he was amongst us; and if any through envy or prejudice, either against
him or any of us, does or shall endeavor to gainsay, oppose or invalidate this
our Testimony concerning him, we doubt not but that by Gods assistance we shall
be thoroughly enabled for to Vindicate the same against any Opposers hereof; for
we know that what is here written of him, is what is true, and according to the
best of our knowledge; and indeed we had rather come short of commending any
Person, rather than to praise or commend any beyond their due deserts. But
forasmuch as it has so happened that this worthy Man, and Servant of God, has
been by some too much abused in his Christian Reputation, and misrepresented
as an Apostate, or Dark and Creeping Spirit, it was so much the more on some of
our Spirits for to give, forth this following Testmony, that as friends might
truly know what he was amongst us, and what Just Cause we had truly to love and
esteem him as a servant of Christ even unto the last, and truly as the power
and presence of God was with him in his Ministry in former years, when he was
generally well spoken of by most or all that did love the Truth in these parts,
So we can truly say that at the last Meeting which he had in this Country the
Lord did appear by him and through him as in former times unto the Edifieing
and Comforting of his People and we had a very good and comfortable Meeting,
and therefore if any have let in any Prejudice or hard thoughts against him,
because they may have heard an evil report of him; we do advise such to be more
carful how they do receive Reports, and let in prejudice against any of Gods
servants, least they do there by hurt themselves and break their own Inward
Peace: and as concerning others, who have villified this servant of God either
by their hard speeches or Writings against him, it is with us to advise such
for to Repent of what they have already done, and to learn to do so no more,
least they are found fighters against God and his faithful servants, and in
thus doing we have thus far cleared our Consciences toward all such and shall
leave the effect thereof unto God, and desire all those that Read the following
Testimony for to Read it without Prejudice or Carping at what is written, but
to read it as in Gods fear, and with a serious and considerate mind, that so
they may the better understand what they read, and consider of it.

If any sober and moderate Inquirer that is yet Ignorant of the matter should
ask or inquire of us what was the ground or cause wherefore the said J. S. have
been so misrepresented as an Apoastate and a dark and creeping spirit, if he
was such an honest man as you seem to signify? To this we shall give in short
this Answer: That as far as we could yet ever understand the Real ground and
cause of it was, because he did not so far conform and submit unto the seting
up, and establishing of some outward Orders and Ceremonys amongst Friends and
as some that did, (or yet does) profess the Truth would have had him to have
done: and if any should yet inquire, why he did not submit unto others for
Unities sake. To this we Answer, that this Question might more properly have
been proposed unto him in his Life time, and if it had been so Proposed,
doubtless he would have given a sound and proper Answer thereunto: yet
forasmuch as he is gone and cannot now Answer for himself, we do believe that
we may truly give this Answer on his behalf ( viz.) That it was for conscience
sake that he could not, or did not Conform and submit unto the setting up such
Orders and Ceremonies as others would have had him to have don and douptless he
thought them to be superfluous and more then was Really needful, for to be so
strictly practiced amongst Gods People, and that this was the Real ground and
Cause wherefore he has been so Callumniated and misrepresented, we have case
to believe for these following Reasons.

First. Because he was always owned and esteemed as a servant of Christ and a
true Minister of the Gospel, by such as did profess the Truth, as far as ever
we did understand: until such time as he did object against or dislike with the
setting up of such outward Orders and Ceremonies as aforesaid.

2dly. Because that since that time he did mislike such things as aforesaid we
have found that there has been endeavors by some to undervalue him, and his
Testimony, and occasions sought against him, to render him as unworthy and
contemplible as possible they could.

3ly. Because some of us concerned in the following Testimonies have often
asked of those who have been Opposers, at least Dislikers of him, what they had
against him of evil, either in his Life, Conversation or Doctrine, to lay to
his charge: and it has been said unto such, that if they could make any thing
of evil appear in him either in Life, Conversation, or Doctrine, that then we
would disown him: But instead of proving any thing of evil against him, it has
been oftentimes answered after this manner, That as to his Life and
Conversation it was honest, or they had nothing against him for that; and as to
his Doctrine, it was good Words, but that they did not come from a Right
Spirit. Or to that effect.

And therefore since his Opposers did not prove any thing of this nature
against him while he was Living, we shall think our selves, or any others, not
much obliged to believe any thing of evil Report that others may say of, or
concerning him now he is Removed from amongst Men: and if any shall endeavor
to defame him in his Christian Reputation now he is gone, doubtless it will
rather seem to us, or any sober and moderate People, to savor of a Spirit of
Malice and Prejudice, than of the Spirit of Christianity or common Civility:
but if any of his Opposers should think, that out of fear we do, as it were,
bespeak their Silence, we do say to such, let them do as they please, for we
fear them not.

We further say, we have observed, That not one Man we know of, who has a
Public Testimony, and does not Conform unto Orders and Ceremonies, as
aforesaid, that is now owned or accounted of as formerly, by those who have
appeared against him, or are Hot and Zealous for the Orders, etc. And although
such Nonconformists are as blameless in their Lives and Conversations, and as
Sound in their Doctrine and Testimonies as formerly, yet we find that they are
either publicly Disowned, or else privately Calumniated and Disliked withal.
And on the other hand we have likewise observed, That if others who are
Conformable, and Preach up the Orders, etc. are guilty of such things as in
Truth cannot be justifiable, yet such Persons are either Owned, or at leastwise
not publicly reproved, that we know of. And therefore we do say unto such, as
do thus turn Justice and true Judgment backwards, and endeavor to smother over
the Errors (either in Doctrine or Life and Conversation) of the Guilty, and to
Condemn the Innocent, because of their Nonconformity; beware, least you provoke
the Lord to Wrath, and he does break forth amongst you in his sore Displeasure.

And if any Friendly Reader should suppose that the Publication of this Preface
and following Testimonies may give occasion for a further Contention, because
some things therein may seem to reflect somewhat hard in General on such as
were Opposers or Dislikers of him, and so for that reason the Reader (who loves
to be quiet, and desires that all Contentions amongst Friends were at an end)
does dislike the Publication hereof.

To which it may be answered, That after the Decease of J. S. it rested on the
Spirits of several Friends (in several Places and Countries where he had
Ministered and been Serviceable) to write something concerning him, and what
Service he had done for the Lord amongst them in his Day and Time: and among
the rest, it came upon some of us in Wiltshire, to publish a Testimony after
this manner, by way of Lamentation for the Loss of so able a Preacher of Gods
Truth, as he was in his Day and Time, and also to give some account of what he
was amongst us, and what he did stand for and against, that so those who had
heard of him, and not known him by face, might be truly informed of his
Doctrine, Life and Conversation among us who were well acquainted with him for
many years, and so have had the more Experience thereof. But forasmuch as
several Friends who were Conscientiously concerned to Write, did live (some of
them) far distant one from the other, it has been the more trouble to collect
their several Testimonies, and so that has caused some obstruction in the
Publication hereof: for some were written long since, and still did rest on the
Spirits of many to Write, which at first was not expected by us; and now at
length is made Public, not to Reflect on others for what is past (if possibly
it could be avoided) but to clear our Consciences in the Sight of God, and for
the true Information of the Upright in Heart, who do love the Truth more than a
bare Notion of it, and cannot at all times either Sail with the Wind, nor Swim
with the Tide; but keep in mind that good Advice ( Viz.) To try all things
(with the Truth) and hold fast that which is Good.

But for a further Answer to the Objection aforesaid, We judge it is in vain
for any to expect, that the most moderate Testimony that can be given, on
behalf of him, should escape without the severe Censures or Calumniations of
some of his Opposers; because we have often found by Experience, that some of
his Opposers have at some times been so filled with Prejudice against him, that
they could hardly with Patience endure to hear him well spoken of, and account
the Party so speaking in his Commendation; to be either a Leavened or Bad
Spirit: and therefore we cannot, in our present apprehension, expect, but that
his Opposers will endeavor to invalidate our Testimony: which if they do in
public, it may bring a Concern upon some of us, to be more particular and
plain (if occasion be given for it) as to naming of some particular Persons,
than now we are free to do on this Occasion; although (as we said before) for
any to think, that a Testimony for him can be given, and not in some sort to
reflect on some of his Opposers Actions, or Doctrines, it is in vain for any so
to suppose. But this we may assure the tender Reader, that we have been as
sparing as with clearness of Conscience we could; and if any are offended at us
for this plain and honest Testimony for the Truth, and concerning our Deceased
Friend: Let all such know that we do account it more true Wisdom, and better
for us to endeavor to please the Almighty and unchangeable God, than to
endeavor to please Corrupt and Changeable Men, whose Breath is in their
Nostrils, and who must go from hence and be no more seen.

The Testimony of J. J. John Fry, Thomas Crabb, Sen. John Sealy, William
Colman, John Rogers, Benjamin Laurence.
IF the holy Ancients in the Days of old did mourn and Iament at the Death of
their natural Friends and Relations, or because of the want of them, whose
Company, Counsel, and good Advice, Labor and Fellowship they had formerly
enjoyed, unto their Edification and Benefit: why should it be thought any way
unbeseeming Christianity or the People of God now, to mourn and take up a great
and solemn Lamentation for the Loss (or taking away) of Dear John Story, who
was very serviceable, and his Company pleasant, and his Advice very good unto
us: Did not Abraham mourn for Sarah his Wife, and Joseph and his Brethren for
Jacob their Father. And it is Recorded in the Scriptures, 1 Samuel 25. 1. That
Samuel Dyed, and all the Israelites were gathered together, and Lamented for
him. And has it not run like a natural Stream through all Ages, for People
that have true natural Affections to Lament the Loss of their Friends, and more
especially for worthy men of their time, who had been very helpful and
serviceable unto them? Therefore, why may not the Friends of John Story Lament
for him? Seeing there are many yet living who do indeed know that he was a good
Instrument in the Lords hand, for their Good, demonstrating the Way of Life
unto them; and others can testify that he was very helpful unto them in his
Ministry, and by his good Advice and Counsel toward the confirming them in the
Truth, in which they had believed.

And if any should enquire of us, Why we do Lament for him who was so much
vilified, and in his latter Days so much disesteemed by some who formerly were
then accounted his Friends, and perhaps would then have said (if they had been
asked) that he was also an Instrument of Good unto them in the Lords Hand?

Answer. We do not thus Lament for him because we are sensible of any Evil he
has done unto any of those who have of late so much disesteemed, vilisied and
rejected him and his Testimony; neither because we are sensible of any Sin or
Trespass that he has now of late (or indeed, ever in his Life, that we know
of, more than what has commonly or in general happened unto all men; forasmuch
as all have sinned, and fallen short of the Glory of God) committed against
God, his Truth, or People, whereby the Lord should be displeased, and take him
away in his Wrath and Displeasure; nay, we do indeed believe (having good
ground for what we say) that he was a Man greatly beloved of God, who endued
him with a large Portion of Divine and Heavenly Wisdom beyond many of his
Fellow Servants, and do not in the least doubt of his everlasting Well-being;
but do indeed believe that his Immortal Soul is entered into that Kingdom of
Peace and Glory which shall never end; because we are inwardly persuaded, that
he walked in his Day and Time, in that Strait and Narrow Way which leads
thereunto; and that he did honestly Serve the Most High God with an upright
Heart, according to that degree of Grace and Divine Understanding that was
given unto him to profit withal. So that we do not Lament for him as a People
without hope, or doubting of his Rest and endless Peace and Joy in Gods
Kingdom: But the cause of this our Lamentation; is, because that by his
removal, or being taken away from amongst Men, we are thereby deprived of the
Enjoyment of his good Company, who has been unto some of us, both like a
Loving Father, or an Elder Brother in Christ, and as a Wise Counselour unto
others. And we can truly say, That his Conversation amongst us, was such as did
well become a Minister of the Gospel, both in Doctrine and in Practice; for his
Doctrine was Sound, and his Conversation Honest. Oh! how wise and prudent was
his Behavior and Carriage amongst his Friends, and others where he came? How
Grave and Solid would he be in all weighty Matters or Discourse, and yet at
some other times modestly pleasant among his Friends: and how Devout and
Zealous in his Supplications unto the Most High, and in his Declaration amongst
Gods People; So that we have Cause to Lament for him, as for the Loss of an
able Preacher of Gods Truth: and although we might grant, that some others
might be more Eloquent and taking with the Affectionate Part in some Weak
Hearers, by their Declaration, yet we know of none more sound in Doctrine, nor
more Innocent and Blameless in their Conversations, than J. S. and his Faithful
Companion J. W.

And if any should Object against what is said of J. S. his Zeal, because he
did not of late Years Travel so much, or keep so many Meetings as some others
may; to that we say, That we do believe that there were but very few, who were
truly sensible of his great Weakness and Indisposition of Body that he was
afflicted withal for many years, insomuch that when he did Declare something
largely in a Meeting, he was most times very sick at night; or sometimes very
ill two or three Days after: but considering his weakness of Body, it is
admirable unto us how he has been carried forth in his Service in Meetings,
time after time, beyond the Expectation of many.

2dly. We may Lament for him, as for the loss of one who had a great gift, both
to discern, and Detect Eronious Doctrines and practices: and in defending the
Doctrines of Truth that he or his fellow Ministers held forth; if at any time
the Priests or Professors did oppose the same: Oh! how did the Ancient Friends
praise him in that respect, and account him as one of the worthys of Gods
Israel: he was a good Pattern and Example in Life and conversation amongst men,
for how blamless and innocent was it, in great Wisdom and prudence amongst the
families where he came, giving good advice and counsel, at seasonable
opportunities to Parents and Children and Servants for he had a good
understanding in the things of God, and well experienced in the way of Life,
and knew how to speak a word in season unto the weak, or such as through an
inward exercise were, through the enemies Tempatations and Affaults, ready to
faint in their minds and turn out of the way; we do believe he had great skill
to inform such that were ready to despair, and that he was endued with an
excellent gift of Wisdom, and had of the deep things of God, and Mistries of
Life opened unto him, so that although his Doctrine was generally sound and
weighty, plain and easy to be understood by mean capacities yet some of us do
believe, that he was more sound and knowing inwardly in the things of God then
some by his outward Declaration might esteem him to be; and through that gift
and wisdom that was bestowed upon him he knew how to behave himself aright in
the Assemblies of Gods People, and amongst his fellow servants, and could give
very good counsel and advice unto such as were but young in the work and
se^vice of the Ministry: but indeed in this respect he had not that opportunity
to manifest very much of that gift of Wisdom that God had endued him with,
because too many of late years did to much Disesteem, Slight and Reject his
Counsel and good Advise: for he was a true honest-man, and so was his
Conversation among men even from his young years unto his latter end; nor ever
was, as we could understand, addicted to any Vice from his Childhood unto his
dying day, neither was he subject to Flatter or Dessemble with any for his own
ends; But we believe that he abhored deceit and flattery from the bottom of his
heart: and Doubtless he did not any way deserve those vilyfying terms of a Dark
or Creeping Spirit, for we never knew him to creep after, or dissemble with any
for his own self-Intrest, neither did he ever, that we know off, by flattery
seek after the favor of any Great or Rich Men, that so he might gain thereby:
but as a true Minister of Christ, and an able Preacher of the Gospel, that
sought not after his own profit or applause, Coveting no man's Silver nor Gold,
but the real Good, Benefit and Welfare of Souls: And as he had freely received
a Dispensation of the Gospel from the Lord, so did he freely Minister of it
unto others, as the Lord did order him, being (as we said before) an able and
sound Preacher, dividing the Word aright, and was very Intelligible and plain
unto mean Capacities, Demonstrating the way of Life, and exhorting all to walk
therein: and we believe that he did not in the least preach for filthy Lucres
sake, but of a ready and willing mind, according to the requirings of Gods holy
and blessed Spirit; yea doubtless in this respect he might surley have said as
Samuel did, whose Ox or Ass did he take, or whose Gold or Silver, or Riches, or
Land did he seek or covet after.

He was a good Pastor, who had a tender regard and care of the Flock of God,
where the Lord did order his service, and especially among such where he had
labored much in gathering and confirming of them, his care was great that they
might be truly Instructed in the way of Life and gathered unto the gift, and
grace, of God in themselves, and that in it all might wait upon God to recevie
a Divine and Heavenly understanding, and come to be truly Centered and
Established upon the Rock of Ages and in the Truth and way of God.

And it was his Care and Labor that none might walk disorderly unto the
dishonor of God, but that such might be Reproved, Advised and Admonished, as
Friends did either feel Drawings in themselves so to do, or as there was a
seasonable Opportunity wherein Friends might do it in love and tenderness in a
more general way, as they saw it their places, that if possible, none might go
astray.

Likewise on the other hand, it was his care that Friends might not be Imposed
on, or over much driven into the Ceremonial part of Religion, having an
Understanding given him, to discern how apt People have been to be led, and to
run into Imitations, and the practice of Outward Things, which some others have
practiced, and so by that means have not taken that regard unto their own
measures of the Spirit of God in themselves, as they ought to have done: But
have (through a kind of Zealous Mistake) sometimes cried up and esteemed the
Traditions and Inventions of Men as Ordinances of God, and such have been very
forward in Judging and Condemning of others who were of a better Understanding,
and did see further than themselves.

And forasmuch as our dear Friend J. S. was, by some who profess the Truth,
misrepresented unto many Friends (that did not know him) as a Person that was
against good Order in the Church; and as if he was a Man of a Loose and
Libertine Spirit, or that he did countenance others in their Failings, etc. It
is with us to testify, that as it was our Lot to be well acquainted with him
(as any in these parts, to our Knowledge were) for many years, yet we did never
know him to oppose any good Order, which any of Gods People did believe was
their Duty to perform, either Male or Female, because Gods People are, and
ought to be a free and willing People, and what they do, as unto God, it ought
to be from a willing Mind, and not by Man's Constraint; ( Mark) it was against
the Imposing of it, and so not against any good Order in it self, which Friends
might be in the practice of; for we do know that he did love to see good Order
among Friends, and that things might be done decently; but he was not for
laying the Stress of Salvation upon any Outward Things or Methods that were, or
might be practiced among Gods People; for that would be an Idolizing of it, and
Hippocrites may come into an Outward Conformity or Uniformity with Outward
Orders or Methods, when they are neither Heirs of Salvation, nor Members of
that Church which is in God, of which Jesus Christ is Head: for he would say,
That it was an incumbant Duty on Christians to be Charitable to the Poor, and
to relieve their Necessities. But after what Manner or Method they did extend
their Charity, so that the end was answered, he thought it indifferent.

For we read in History, the Church at Jerusalem did Collect every First Day,
or once a Week, but the Church of the Gentiles once a Month, and doubtless they
did not fall out or differ about their Method while they stood in Gods Counsel.
And as to Liberty: that as he did abhor taking any Liberty in Unrighteousness;
so on the other hand, he was one that did stand much for that Christian Liberty
which is in Christ Jesus, and he did both spend, and was spent for the Gospel,
of the Kingdom, which does not consist in the strict Observance of any Outward
Observations, or Traditions, or Inventions of Men, but to wait upon God, and
serve him according to the Manifestation of his own Spirit, that he has given
to Man to profit withal, and then, If the Truth does make us free, are we free
indeed; we say it was this ChristianLiberty, that stands in Truth and
Righteousness, that J. S. did stand for (and so do we) and that all may know
the Spirit of Truth to be their Leader in the Things that they do and perform
as unto God, that so none may act in those things from another Measure, but
from the measure of Gods Grace in themselves, without being Judged one, of, or
by another about their Christian Liberty and Freedom in the Truth.

And further we have to say for our Deceased Friend J. S. that he was one whom
the Lord had endued with many Spiritual Gifts and precious Christian Virtues,
which were as so many Ornaments unto him: and if any should ask what those
Gifts and Virtues were, and how, and which way they did appear, and might be
demonstrated to be in him? To this we may answer,

First, His Moderation and Temperance did much appear in the many Debates and
Discourses had with him about Religious Matters, wherein he did usually carry
himself very moderate, when reasoning about the Things of God, and as to his
Temperance, it did much appear in his Life and Conversation.

Secondly, He was endued with the Gift and Virtue of Patlence, which did much
appear in him, by his patient bearing of those severe and bitter Reflections
and Oppositions that of late years he met withal, as also with many false and
untrue Reports of him.

Thirdly, Also he did very patiently bear that great and long Weakness and
Infirmity of Body, that he was very much attended withal, and afflicted with
very sore and grievous Pains, as well as weakness in Body, which he underwent
with much Patience and Content.

Fourthly, He had an excellent Gift of Christian Fortitude and Constancy in his
Testimony, so that notwithstanding he met with very much Opposition, and
sometimes with flattering Persuasions, yet he persevered in the Way, Work and
Testimony that God had called him unto; and in this respect it may in some
measure be said of him as Jacob said of Joseph, Genesis 49. 23, 24. The Archers
have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, but his Bow abode in
Strength, and the Arms of his Hands were made strong, by the Hands of the
Almighty God of Jacob: from thence is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel.

Fifthly, He was endued with a large portion of Christian Charity, which the
Apostle reckons as one of the most excellent Gifts. And if any should ask how
that did appear, or was manifest in him? We say, it did not only appear in him,
in that he was not of a Rash and Rigid Spirit toward others that might differ
from him in Things Indifferent; but was also very Charitable toward such in
whom he found any true tenderness toward God, and was not apt to Judge so
harshly and Censoriously of such, as some have been too apt to do, but was
willing to inform the understanding, when under mistake, and also to persuade
them that opposed themselves, to embrace the Truth. If we consider the Fruit of
true Charity, spoken of by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. we may indeed say, that
Charity did largely manifest it self in him, because it brought forth, or did
manifest the same Fruits and Effects in and through him as is there spoken of
by the Apostle.

And as these and other Christian Virtues did appear and were manifested in him
while he was amongst us; so we are credibly informed by some Friends of
Westmoreland (that were with him in the time of his last Sickness) that he gave
very good Counsel and Advice to Friends that were with him, and that he being
very weak in Body, but not in much pain, as was supposed by those who were
about him, he very gently breathed his last, and laid down his Head in much
Peace and Quietness of Mind and Spirit.

Given forth at Sutton on the 1st. Day of the 11th. Month 1682. and Subscribed
by us, on the behalf of our selves and many more Friends of Wiltshire, that are
concerned and consented unto the Publishing hereof. John Jennings. John Fry.
Thomas Crabb, Sen. John Sealy. William Colman. John Rogers. Benjamin Lawrance.


The Testimony of John Metrevers.
A Short Testimony Concerning John Story, that worthy Servant of the Living
God, though dead, yet the Seal of his Ministry and Service for God in his Day
and Age, lives in the Remembrance, and has an Impression on the Hearts of many
in these Parts: and forasmuch as the Unchangeable Truth remains the same as
ever; we cannot forget those worthy Messengers, who in the Days of our young
and tender Years came amongst us in the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power
of Almighty God, not only to proclaim a Day of Vengence from God upon that Part
or Nature in Man that has transgressed his Law, but also with a Message of
Peace and Glad-tidings unto our Souls. And now as for my Dear Friend John Story
in particular, concerning whom I have a few words, which at this time rest upon
my Spirit, to treat about. I have this to say, and that not by here-say, or to
boast in another Man's Words, but according to that true and Experimental
Knowledge which I have had of him for these seven or eight and twenty years
past, it being about the Year 1654, or 1655 (as near as I can remember) that
this worthy Servant of the Almighty God came amongst us (into Wiltshire) at
which time for my own part, I was about fourteen years of Age, notwithstanding
which, what shall I say, it is even with me at this time to signify, That had
I the Tongue of an Orator, or the Pen of a Ready Writer, I could not
demonstrate the Sense that now lives and remains upon my Spirit, of the Mighty
Power of God that appeared in, and through that Man, both in Life and Doctrine,
whereby I was at that time (though but young in years) often sweetly Refreshed
and Comforted in his Company, by that Eternal Power that dwelt with and ran
through him. Oh! What shall I say, my Heart at this time is even melted in the
Consideration thereof: his Message then was, to direct all to turn inward from
the Lo here, and the Lo there, to the Grace, Light, or Spirit within, which
according to Measure, was given to all, assuring all unto whom he gave the Word
of Exhortation, that it being obeyed and followed in all its Requirings, was
that only means, and that in which the sufficiency for Salvation of the Soul
consisted; this Doctrine was received by many, by the Mighty Power of God,
which accompanied and manifested it self through that Man, many brought to the
Faith; and so as the Lord made way, he traveled from Place to Place,
appointing Meetings up and down among Friends, directing all as above
mentioned, and unfolding the Scriptures by way of Parables, and opening to the
Edification of the Hearer, many hard Sayings, both to the Convincing of those
that received it, and Admiration of many that received it not, insomuch that my
Ears have heard it acknowledged and confessed unto, that the Doctrine so
Preached through the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit, as then it was,
would never fail while the Water keeps its Course; his Work was also very much
among the Priests and Professors of that Age, who then like Gog and Magog,
joined together against the Lord and his Anointed: but the Lords Power and
Presence being with him, and always giving of him both Mouth and Wisdom, he was
thereby furnished to speak a word in due season, both to the Strengthening and
Comforting the Weak and Feeble of the Flock, whom he had Labored and Traveled
for; and also to the stopping the Mouths of all Gainsayers, whose Opposition at
that day was very great. Much could I speak, and that within the compass of my
own knowledge, to the particulars of many Sufferings by way of Imprisonment,
and other Dangers and Jeopardies that he was often in, in his Masters Work and
Service, which I shall here omit, and that because I would rather straiten my
self than be tedious to the Reader; when that is said, I have this further to
add, which I cannot be clear to omit, or pass by, Viz. That he was always a
very plain hearted Man, in plainness speaking the Truth to the Face, and never
could endure, either in himself or others, Whispering or Backbiting, but would
sharply reprove it wherever he found it; and furthermore all Outward Shows,
Formalities, Jestures, or Deportments whatsoever, that was by the Creature
brought forth in the Likeness or Imitation of the true Power, without the
Powers bringing forth thereof, his Righteous Soul always abhorred: And for the
Confirmation thereof, one thing amongst many I well remember; that whereas
there was a Day of shaking the Outward Body by the stirrings of the true Power,
some in imitation thereof, as I have observed in his Presence, in their own
Strength have imitated the like, which he would in the Integrity of his Soul
Judge, saying, Away with Deceit: and such like words, exhorting and advising
all to be plain hearted, and that they should be what they appeared to be by
the Grace of God, and not otherwise. And so remaining from time to time, as a
Man not subject to change his way, holding forth his Testimony in Faithfulness
to God, not only against profane and sinful Actions, but also against all
Formalities set up by Man, though under pretense of the Motion of the true
Power, advising the Creature to be inward to God, and there to wait, to know
the true Power it self to bring forth a Form through every man, whereby they
might have the certain Sense and Knowledge how to do and perform the thing well
pleasing to their heavenly Father, that thereby they might in the end be
accepted of him; he was not a Man of Shadows, but for the Substantial Part of
Religion: and to his last, I very well remember, his Discourse run much after
this manner, That they were the only Blessed People, and for evermore happy,
who had received the Knowledge of the right Spirit, if so be they continued to
wait and walk therein to the end of their Days, because it is they that remain
in well doing unto the end that shall be Crowned. Unto which End it is my Faith
and Belief in God, he has attained, and is now entered into the Joys of that
Heavenly Kingdom, out of the reach of all envious and clamorous Tongues, where
the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary be at rest, there the Prisoners
rest together, they hear not the voice of the Oppressor, the Small and great
are there, and the Servant is free from his Master.

And he having been serviceable in the Hand of the Lord, and Instrumental to
Convert many Souls to God, does, and must shine as a Star in the Firmament of
God. So having eased my Mind by writing these few Lines before expressed,
concerning this my dear Friend, of whom, I do assure the Reader, I had as
certain a knowledge, as the very import of the words will bear: and forasmuch
as the Harvest yet remains great, and the true Laborers therein are but few,
what further shall I say, but with this to conclude, Viz. Let us cry mightily
to the great Lord of the Harvest to pour forth a double portion of his Spirit
upon some worthy Instrument, as he did upon Elisha, to Succeed him in that Work
and Service.

J. M.

The Testimony of Robert Arch.
FRiends, unto all you do I write, who have in any measure secretly or openly
vilifyed and reproached that Servant of the Lord, J. S. or have had any hand in
the hindering of him in his bearing a faithful Testimony to the Truth, of which
he was an Able Minister, in publishing the Gospel of Christ, and have
endeavored to the utmost of your Power, to stop and hinder him in his
Declaration and Travel amongst the People of God, by evil Surmisings and false
Reports and Accusations, have raised a Prejudice in the Hearts of People
against him, without any just Cause on his part given, that I know of.
Consider, O Friends, What is the Cause that ye have so done? Have ye known him
to be a Man of an ill Life, or a bad Conversation? Or has he committed any
Evil, or Sinned or Transgressed against God, his Truth or People, that ye have
so hated him? Or has he been one that has Preached any False Doctrine, or
held any Principles contrary to Truth? Or did he bring in any Innovations
amongst the People of God, or build again any of those things that he has by
his Ministry destroyed in others? If he has done none of those things, nor
committed any Personal Trespass against you, as some of you have confessed,
what then was the cause of your Envy and hating of him? Was it because he would
not bow down, nor Worship any other God than the God of Israel? Or was it
because he would not submit to some Outward Orders, Prescriptions, or Rules
prescribed by Fallen Man? If this be the Cause, then do not you Condemn your
selves in Judging of him? For what People in this latter Age have labored and
Traveled more than some of you have done, to bring People out of the Practice
and Observation of Outward Things, which they called, The Ordinances of Christ,
some of which the Saints in Times past did Practice, and perform for a Time, as
the Scripture makes mention, and also from the many Forms, Decrees and Orders
that the Professors have been jangling about, and Persecuting one another,
counting it all but Dung and Dross in comparison of the Grace of God, or Light
of Christ, which was held forth to be sufficient to lead unto Salvation: and in
the Light we were directed to wait upon God to know his Mind and Will, to act
and do in Outward Things as God should direct us by his Good Spirit. And have
you not looked upon all those Outward Orders, Prescriptions and Ordinances, as
the Outward Court of the Temple that was given unto the Gentiles to tread under
Foot: and yet now after all these large Declarations and Testimonies against
those Outward Things, for you to encourage the Setting up such Things; and not
only so, but to Judge and Condemn others for not Conforming unto your Outward
Orders, Censuring Friends out of Unity that do not practice them, which is the
greatest Penalty that you can inflict, for want of Outward Power: as if the
Saints Unity stood in the Practice and Performance of those Outward Orders. Oh!
Friends, consider of these Things, and lay it to heart; for this is not doing
as you would have others do unto you: and do not think that the Saints Unity
stands in those Things, but in the Spirit and Truth. Therefore Friends, I do
exhort and admonish you all to repent of the Evil you have done against the
abovesaid Servant of the Lord J. S. or against any other of his Faithful
Friends and Brethren; and beware in time to come, and watch in the Light of the
Son of God against that Spirit in you that Lusts to Envy, or to Hate, Oppose or
Persecute your Brethren: And remember what the Apostle John said, He that says
he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness, and walks in
Darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because the Darkness has blinded
his Eyes. So let this be a Warning unto you all, that you may not in time to
come stop or hinder any of the the Servants of the Lord in the Work of the
Ministry, that so you may avoid that Sentence of, Go ye Cursed: and which will
be the Portion of all those that are found smiting their Fellow Servants.

R. A.

Leonard Coal's Testimony.
DEar John Story, whom the Lord made an Instrument in his Hand, and filled with
Heavenly Treasure, and gave him his Word to Declare, which he often did, in the
Counsel and Wisdom received of God, dispensing it aright to the Capacities and
Understandings of the Hearers, for the opening thereof, and did reach to Gods
Witness in many: he was well known to me, and I had (through the Goodness of
the Lord) opportunity to accompany him of late in some of his Travels; in which
time, and ever since I knew him, which was about twenty years, he always
behaved himself as a Pattern of Righteousness, which answered the Good in all.

He was always ready to give Advice to the Weak, and Instruction to those who
were enquiring the Way to Gods Kingdom, and through the Operation of Gods
Spirit, could direct them to distinguish between the Im^ginacions of the
Enemies deceitful working, and Imaginations of their own Hearts, and the true
Mo^ions of Gods Spirit: which Motion I am fully persuaded, he knew right well,
he much desired and prayed for Quietness and Unity in the One Spirit of God,
and that all Friends might know it, and follow the Leadings and Guidance of it
in all things that relate to Gods Worship and Service, and that they might not
act by Imitation on that account: and that People might come to know the way to
Gods Kingdom, and walk in it: he often desired God to forgive those that spoke
evil of him, and that they might repent of their Slanderous and Lying Reports,
and False Prophesies of him. And now the Lord has taken him to himself, out of
the reach of them all: he is gone to his Rest, where no Sorrow nor Tears are, I
am fully persuaded: And it is my earnest Desire, that the Lord would be pleased
to raise up more such Instruments for his own Work and Service, as it pleases
him.

L. C.

Benjamin Coal's Testimony.
SInce I heard of the Decease of dear John Story, there has been a Testimony
in my Heart to give forth concerning him, whom I dearly loved for the Truths
sake, in which I have been often Comforted and truly Refreshed through him: It
is now toward twenty years since I came acquainted with him; and our long
Imprisonment in the heat of Persecution of Friends in Reading, he came several
times to Visit us in Prison, and many precious opportunities we had with him in
Prison, and were thereby wuch comforted and strengthened in our Suffering
condition, and many Hearts were tendered and sweetly consolated, at that time,
in a real sense of the living presence of the Lord God, which was with us; and
some that came into the Prison were Convinced of the Truth; since which he has
often Visited us in our Meetings; also I have from time to time been in his
company, both in Public and Private, and taken many serious Observations of
his Deportment, which has been Grave and as a Servant of Christ; yea, it was
such, that from the first to to the last time I saw him (which was not many
Months since) I never had acquaintance with any that exceeded him in a good
Life and Conversation: And the Lord endued him with a Gift beyond many in
declaring the Truth, and many were Convinced and turned to God by him; He had a
divine Understanding given him, to divide the Word aright, he was able and
ready to inform Peoples Understandings, to give Counsel and good Advice to
Sion's Travellors, who were at any time in a bewildred condition, whereby many
were often relieved and comforted, that have been in trouble under the
temptations of the Enemy of man's Peace. He was of a loving kind Temper to all,
and his Company was very comfortable to me, when Trials and Sufferings have
attended Friends, upon any account, for a Testimony to the Truth, he has been
an Encourager and Strengthener to many therein: and I never knew him to speak
slightingly, or account it an Indifferent thing to be faithful to God in that
respect, or in any other good Work and Service, wherein we might serve the Lord
and one another; but frequently exhorted and counseled Friends, to be Zealous
and Dilligent in wairing upon the Lord to know and answer his Requirings, both
by Doing, Suffering, and bearing Testimony for his Name and Truth upon Earth,
that so they might Honor the Lord, and come to rest in Peace for ever.

And notwithstanding he met with many Exercises and Troubles among men, yet the
Lord was pleased to give him much Patience, and when he has been grieved and
abused by any, he manifested much of a Spirit of Forgiveness and Longsuffering
toward his Opposers, not rendering Even for Evil.

I have often heard him speak much in Commendation of many Ancient Brethren
which are Deceased, whom the Lord raised up to Preach and Publish the
Everlasting Gospel in the beginning, and how precious and acceptable the
Visitation of the Lord was to many that were in Distress and Mourned in
solitary Places, for want of the Saving Knowledge of God, which is Life to the
Soul.

And in a godly Care for the Honor and Propagation of Truth, and the good of
Souls, I know he was often very deeply concerned and bowed in Spirit; and was
a man of Sorrows, often with much fervent Zeal praying for the Prosperity of
the Lords Work, and that all that which was of a hurtful nature might be
utterly destroyed from among the Lords People, and that Love unfeigned with the
increase of Righteousness, which brings everlasting Peace might abound amongst
us; For this was his soul often in supplication and Prayers unto the Lord God,
both in Public and Private amongst Friends. Oh! What shall I say, for my heart
is filled at this time, and often tendered in the remembrance of the Lords Love,
and those sweet and seasonable Opportunities which I have had with this my dear
Friend, in which I have often admired the goodness of God, who afforded us such
good Opportunities wherein my heart has many times been overcome and rejoiced,
in a sense of the feeling of the dissolving and tendering Power and living
Presence of the Lord God, who assisted him with his heavenly wisdom and
strength, and the testimony of Truth often opened through him, reaching and
extending unto many states and conditions, even as the still Sowres that
descended upon the tender Grass in its due season; for which my Soul has
blessed the Lord on his behalf many a season, and which was and is the only
ground and cause of my Love to him and all the Lords faithful Servants, whom I
cannot but truly esteem for the Truths sake, and account worthy of double
Honor; and I have often thought, that if we should not truly love and esteem
of such in the Truth, it might be just with the Lord to let us know the want of
them, and to Suffer a Famine of the Word and a Cloud of Ignorance and Darkness
again to overspread the Earth, which I desire the Lord may in his Mercy
prevent, and that more faithful Instruments and living Witnesses for his
blessed Name and Truth, in the room and stead of them that are gone to their
Rest, may yet be raised up, and that many may yet be gathered unto God, for the
Comfort and Encouragement of the Lords People, in this Age and the Ages to come.

Much more I might say concerning this faithful Servant of God, according to my
knowledge, but herein I have satisfaction, believing he is now at Rest, and out
of all his Troubles and Exercises which in this world he had his share of, and
through Death has obtained a Crown and Kingdom that is Everlasting, where all
Tears are wiped away, and Sorrow and Sighing comes to an End.

Oh that we who are left behind may not content our selves that this our dear
Friend live well, and is entered into everlasting felicity, but may follow the
Example of this and all the rest of our dear Brethren which are gone before, in
all faithfulness and circumspect walking, serving the Lord in sincerity and
holy Conversation, keeping to the Word of his Grace and Truth, through which we
may overcome all Corruptions, receive and possess the Recompense of endless
Peace, Joy and Happiness when time in this fading World comes to an end; that
God over all may be glorified, who alone is worthy to be Feared and Praised for
ever and evermore.

B. C.
Reading, the 15th. of the 10th. Month, 8681.
Leonard Keep's Testimony.
SInce I heard there would be something Printed concerning our dear Friend J.
S. it was with me this 15 th. of the 12 th. Month 1682, to give in this short
Testimony concerning him. He was a Man of Peace and instrumental in the Hand of
the Lord for the turning many to Righteousness: he desired the good of all
People, and I believe is now entered into Rest and Peace with the Lord, where
all Tears will be wiped away, and Longsuffering come to an end, notwithstanding
Blindness has happned to many in this Age, that they could not see him to be
so by reason of the Enmity and Prejudice that have entered their minds, more
through the Instigation I believe of others, than from any deportment that
appeared by him. I have been in his Company often both in Meetings and out of
Meetings, and am an Eye and Earwitness of what is here writ, I have often heard
him put a more favorable Construction upon his Opposers actions, than I
believe they could put themselves. I have heard him openly opposed and charged
falsely, and when he has called for Proof of what has been said, there has
nothing been made appear, but at the last shift have referred Friends to the 44
Articles of London. M. C. may remember this: And I have heard him spoke over,
when he has had a concern to the Meeting (and had begun to speak first, as
many may remember) which I must needs say was not practiced amongst us in the
beginning, nor was it so in the Primitive times, for then all might speak one
by one, that had any thing upon them as a concern to the People: but these
things has happened amongst us in these latter times, since some have been apt
to pin their Faith on other folks Sleeves, and then may speak words as they
would have them, or else their own, and it has been said it is the Word of the
Lord, when time has manifested it to be otherwise. So many are kindling a fire
of their own, and warming themselves by the sparks thereof, whose Portion will
be such as they had formerly that were so doing, unless they repent, they must
lie down in sorrow. God Almighty, if it be thy will, give to all that have been
Opposers of him, a sight of what they have been and are yet a doing, that so
they may say as it was once said, Let the time past be sufficient, and that for
time to come they may do so no more. And whatever any may think I have nothing
but good will to all men.

L. K.

Thomas Curtis's Testimony, who at some time was his Companion in his Travels.
AS it was said by David concerning Jonathan after his Death, so can I in Truth
say touching my ancient Friend and Brother in the Truth, John Story: Viz. Very
pleasant have thou been unto me; and dear John, although thy Body be turned to
the Dust, yet thy Name lives now thou art dead, and the memorial of thy
Faithfulness remains amongst thy Brethren; thy Portion is with the Righteous,
who shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance, and shall continue (as an
everlasting Foundation) time shall declare the Meekness of thy Nature, and that
Gentleness that was in thee toward the Flock of God; for in the Lamb-like
Nature did thou come amongst us, and as a Lamb among Wolves, so was thy
Carriage: Wisdom went before thee, and Understanding was thy Guide: So that
when first I saw thy Face, thou wast to me a Messenger of God, and though thou
met with many under various Forms, opposing each other, yet how carefully did
thou instruct them, and with great diligence helped their Weakness; and such
was thy Carriage after a sweet manner, that I soon saw a Door of Hope opened by
the Lord for the Relief of many: and although thou wast but a Lad, because of
thy tender Years, yet such Gravity did appear in thee, as made both Old and
Young to love thee; and thy Testimony was not from Man, neither wast thou sent
by any Born after the Flesh, but thy Testimony was from Heaven, and it did
accomplish the Work that the Lord sent thee for; and thy Doctrine dropped as the
Dew upon the Tenderhearted: and surely the Spirit of the Lord was upon thee,
and the Meek and Quiet Spirit was in thee, which ever was, and still is of
great price with the Lord; and thou did Preach the Glad-tyding of Salvation
unto many that were far from the Almighty, bearing a Faithful Testimony unto
Christ Jesus; the true Light, that inwardly enlightens every Man, and to the
Word nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, to the Anointing within, and (unto the
universality of that Grace which brings Salvation) of its Appearing to all
Mankind, and to the Manifestation of the Spirit of Truth that is is given unto
all to profit with; laboring to undeceive all, and to bring from the Outside
Forms, Beggarly Elements, Traditions, Rudiments, and Inventions of Men (wherein
many had been kept in Bondage) to Christ Jesus, the Living Way, the Truth and
Life, the true Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, in his Light to wait for
Counsel and Directions, in all things to be Led, Guided and Governed by him
alone, who was, and is the Lawgiver, and unto whom all Power in Heaven and
Earth is committed, whose Kingdom is not of this World, who alone has power
over the Conscience, and over the Inward Man; this is his Glory, which he never
did, nor never will give unto another, and in this thou wast a Faithful
Messenger and Minister, turning many from Darkness to Light, and from the Power
of Satan unto God; and so taught many the way through Judgment unto Life, that
their Hearts did burn within them, whilst in their Hearts they did learn
Righteousness, which made many to confess, to the Glory of God, That thou wast
sent of God, to show the way unto the Rest that God had prepared for the
Upright Hearted. And truly such a Power went with thee, that not I alone, but
many of the Land came to hear the joyful Sound, and were turned to the true
Light, and the God of Heaven was with thee, and a true Ambassador of Christ
Jesus wast thou, beseeching Men to be reconciled unto the Lord; assuring of us,
That God had sent his Son to Redeem our Souls, by changing of our Natures, and
to bless us, by turning every one of us from our Evil Doings. And having a
Convincing Ministry committed to thee of God, thou became an Instrument in his
hand to the opening of our Understandings, and to the building us up in the
Living Faith, which made us bless the Lord for thy coming in his Name; and for
the Change that in due time was wrought in us; and God gave us a Witness in our
own Bosoms, That thou wast an Apostle of the True and Heavenly Profession, and
that thou, by the assistance of the Power of God accompanying thee, directed
our Feet into the Way of Peace. For which, my Soul, Praise thou the Lord, and
all that is within me shall bless his Name, with many more, who can set to
their Seals, that thou wast an Instrument in the hand of God, of their
Conversion, and a Man through whom the Way of Life was demonstrated amongst us)
and many became Witnesses, That the Earth was rent asunder, and the
Stout-hearted bowed, and the Strong did fall before thee; Thou valluedst
neither Riches nor Glory, neither did any of those Things overtake thee; but as
an Armed Man, and a Champion indeed, thy Warefare was against Spiritual
Wickedness, and thy Travel was, That the Ax of God might be laid to the Root of
the Corrupt Three, that no untimely Fruit might grow amongst us; and thou
sought not the Treasures of the Earth, nor to be great amongst thy Brethren,
but to do the Will of thy Master was thy delight, thou wast a true Traveller in
thy Day, and thy Journying was much on foot (several years) the Rain abstructed
thee not in the Morning, neither could the Scorching Sun at Noonday hinder thy
Progress (for thy Feet were shod with the Preparation of the Gospel) and a true
Traveller wast thou in the Work of the Lord, for thy Bow did abide in its full
Strength, and the Opposers were made to fall, and the Wicked fled before thee,
thou did not turn thy Back, but often encounteredst Gainsayers on many
Occasions, and never wast worsted, (as ever I could hear) in any of thy
Assaults; for thou was not only experienced in the Work thou undertook'st, but
very well read in that excellent Book, the Holy Scriptures) and an aptness was
in thee to perceive the Weakness of thy Opposers, and having gotten hold of thy
Adversaries, no Flattery could prevail, nor Enchantment pervert thee, until
thou made him confess unto the Truth, for the God of the whole Earth was with
thee, and the Slain of the Lord were many; and such Divine Counsel did attend
thy Habitation, that no Profession was able, in Truth to withstand thy
Testimony; and thou wast plentifully endued with the Spirit of the Lord,
whereby thou appearedst as his Battle* Ax, and the Stroke thereof made the
Rocks give way, and the Mountains cleft in funder, insomuch as the Wisdom of
the Wisemen failed them, and the Counsel of the Prudent was not found amongst
them, for their Learning could not hide them, nor the Logician's Subtilty could
not preserve them, but over all their Baits thou trampled'st, and many times
caught them in their own Snare: and all this Conquest was not gotten by Outward
Bow or Spear, but by the Spirit of the Living God; and to speak the truth of
thee, It was thy Meat and thy Drink to do the Will of thy Master; thy Care was
great in visiting the Mountains, where many the Sheep of Gods Pasture, were
scattered, and what wrestling with the Power of Darkness thou had, to recover
the Lost Sheep of the House of Israel; the North can tell the deep Exercises of
that Day, and the continual Burden that was then with thee to visit the Dark
Corners that were full of Cruelty, and what haste thou made then then to visit
the Steeple-house, forgetting thy ordinary Food, until thy Master Christ Jesus
his Work was accomplished. But O the hardship that sometimes thou met with:
Were not the Cudgels sometimes laid on about thy Head by Ungodly Men? And did
not they in great fury dash thee in the face with their Clouted Shoes until the
Blood has gushed out of thy Mouth in a large measure? Doubtless such like
Treatment thou have embraced, that the Oppressed might be recovered, and the
Prisoner brought out of the horrible Pit, in which there was no Water: and thy
Legs did not fail thee in this Travel, because the Lord was with thee, neither
did thy Strength depart from thee, because the Bread from Heaven was thy
Delight, and often Honey out of the Rock did the Lord bestow on thee: Springs
can tell the Joy they often administered* and the Comfort that they often
bestowed on thee in that Day, when the Bowels of the Earth feemed to be shut
up, and all other Outward Comforts departed from thee, and this from one Week
to another was thy Travel, so that the North sounds out thy Praise, and the
West do tell of thee; many in the South besides my self cannot but rejoice in
the Lord, and be glad that God prepared our Hearts, and made thee as a sharp
Instrument in his hand, to dash all our Formal Professions to pieces, that the
Brokenhearted might be bound up, and that we might be created anew unto his
Glory: and when we come truly to know the Lord, and to help to fill up the
Measures of the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, that was behind for us to
fill up, and were Prisoners for Conscience fake; what Care was upon thee in
that Day, that we might be Visited: And, Oh! the precious Opportunities and
often Visitations that then thou gave us, Fear did not surprise thee, nor the
Prison daunt thee, from administering to us the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, for
we were the Prisoners of the Lord, and the wrath of men was turned upon us, but
thou comforted'st our hearts with this testimony (agreeable to our one Faith)
that the Wrath of Man would turn to the Praise of God, and the rest God would
restrain: Thy many Visitations are not forgotten, although thy Silver Cord be
loosed and thy Golden Boule be broken; neither art thou out of our Remembrance,
although thou art Departed from us, and though many have a great loss, yet my
loss is far greater, because of my often Journying with thee, being in such my
Travels, a pertaker with thee of the Breasts of Consolation, and of the Milk of
the Word of Life: Thou wast not willing to eat thy Morsel alone, but that
others might partake of the same Table, and come to the Enjoyment of the Feast
of Fat things and though sometimes I have met with hard speeches, and been
Rendered as a dark Spirit, and gone under many Reproaches, and my ways
endeavored to be hedged up, (as in Ireland and some other parts) and called to
an account about thy deportment, because of matters laid to thy Charge, yet
proving them false, the Reporters have confessed (and to the Glory of the Lord)
that thou wast not the man: But thou art ascended above the strife of Tongues,
and we may come to thee, but thou shall never return to us: yet Days shall
speak of the loss of such a Prophet, because, precious in the Sight of the Lord
is the death of his Saints; and now in thy latter day when, thou have spent thy
strength in the Service of the Lord, notwithstanding great weakness of Body was
upon thee, yet thou planted, a Vineyard, and then eat of the Fruit, thou
feedest the Flock, and eat of the Milk thereof, at which some were angry, and
either knew not, or willingly forgot thy former Travels for the Gospel-sake,
when thou spared not thy Flesh, and sometimes thy Blood to show them that were
distressed, the way to the Kingdom; yet how evilly have some spoken of thee, as
if thou were negligent in the Lord's service, when to the utmost thou did, what
thou wast able, and when thy Legs would not perform the service of thy mind,
thou then Rode up and down according to thine ability that then was given thee;
and we often looked for thy change, many years before thy Departure, but what
hard hap had the Prophet to be a Fool, and the Spiritual man to be mad, to
Prophecy in the Name of the Lord, that thou John Story should that year dye;
when neither did the Lord send him, now his Prophecy came to pass; but the God
of Heaven made manifest his kindness to thee, kept thee alive beyond many of
our expectations, and made the foolish Prophet to confess (as I have been
Informed to this purpose) that it was an Imagination of his own brain, and not
the Word of the Lord. And thus his Words became his Burden in his Life time;
and seeing he is also gone to the Earth, we must leave him to the Lord; and
this I mentioned the rather, because I was an Eye and Ear Witness of the
Declaration of that false Prophecy: But Oh! the weakness of Body that then
appeared in thee, thou did not much controvert with him, but said, time would
soon manifest it, thy years being almost at an end; and so committed the cause
to God; the Judge of all, for thou wast no^striver, neither did Contention
dwell with thee in that matter, but in much Patience thou heardst his words:
and as thy Beginning was, so was thy End, in the Lamb's War, with the Lamb's
Nature: thou wentest from the South to the West, taking thy leave of thy
Friends, and then returned into the North; where, in the weakness of Body thou
visitedst the People of the Lord, and having completed thy Masters Business,
thou encounteredst with Death, and overcame it, and quietly yielded up thy self
into the Arms of the Almighty, left the World, and art gone unto God, where,
out of the reach of all thy Adversaries thou art, in that Mansion that Jesus
Christ has prepared for his People, where no Destroyer shall ever come.

T. C.

An ELEGY of John Story by John Raunce.
IN Peace with God he now is gone to Rest,
Out of this World, in which he was Oppressed.
Having ill Usage met from his Brethren:
Nothing would do with some, like wilful Men
So set themselves, that they would not believe
That he spoke Truth, this did him sorely grive;
Oppressing Sorrows did his Body pine,
Rending his Soul with Grief from time to time;
Yet in all this the Lord he always found;
Yea Help from God did still to him abound;
Yea and Amen his Grace to him was Free
Yea to the End his Grace has Saved thee;
Yea now he does possess Jerusalem,
Yea now Christ is his only Requiem.
More in Remembrance of John Story.
THy Lot was like Good Prophets gone before,
With Lamb like Nature thou as they did bear
The frowns of Friends and Enemies much more,
Whilst Envy did of thee sore things declare:
Oh happy thou, who did with Meekness then
Preach Christ the Way, the Truth, and Life in all,
With Holiness thy Doctrine Sounds to Men,
That they might know and live in Gods great Call,
Thy Work is done, and thou art now at Rest,
And all thy Labor in this World does cease:
The Wise in Heart will say that thou art Blessed,
And pray to God such Prophets may increase,
With blameless Life thou did Truth's Cause maintain,
And out of that which might defile did live,
As Blessed Man, did Holiness retain,
And unto God all Honor thou did give.
The Lord who does the Saved People Bless,
He was thy Peace, thy Comfort and thy All,
Much was the Gift Christ gave thee to possess,
Which thou did use as he for it did Call.
Much could I say, if I to Write were free,
Of many things which did attend thy Life,
But Silence shall Apologize for me,
As one that loves and lives above all Strife.
John Raunce.
The 20th. Day of the last Month in the Year 1682.
Something added by another Friend, of that Ancient in Israel, J. S. Deceased.
IN Christ that is the Alpha, all in all,
O mega the Last, from Death to Life does call.
How Holy, Harmless, Sweet then is that Man,
Naught but thy Lord give Satisfaction can:
Some things both Old and New they are but vain,
Truth against Tradition well thou did maintain;
Of Innovation thou Prophetic saw,
Rules made by Men last turned into Law,
Yet Truth resist's hence Church Divisions grow,
Hence Persecutions flow,
Hence Gospel Teachings put a stop unto.
J. C.

Charles Harris his Testimony.
AS for John Story, he bore the Countenance of a Man of God, and was a Preacher
of Righteousness in his Day, both in Doctrine and Conversation, and as such was
esteemed by thousands for many years: yet he went not to his Grave under that
Sentence, Viz. Woe to you when all Men speak well of you. For he met with such
Exercise as Holy Paul did, from some that could once have pulled out their Eyes
to Serve him, afterward became his Enemies, saying, his Speech was
Centemptible, seeking a Proof of Christ speaking in him: and he had some share
with that Beloved Disciple, that says in his Epistle to Gaius on this wise,
Viz. I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have the
Pre-eminence among them, Receives us not, prating against us with malicious
Words; and not content therewith; neither does he himself Receive the Brethren,
and forbids them that would, and casts them out of the Church (or declared
out of Unity) or thrust out of the Congregation: I have known him for many
years, and never found but that he was a Man of Peace: it has been frequently
reported he was a Tyth-Payer: Let the Reader observe, he never stood in such a
Capacity all his Days, never Keeping House, or Occupying any Land (being a
Single Man) and as to his Judgment concerning Tithes, it may be seen in what
follows, under his own hand: So whether it be better to Judge of a Man by his
own Words and Deeds, or by ones own Imaginations called Sense, let the
Charitable Reader Judge.

He has also been termed, Of a Dividing Spirit. Let his Epistle speak for
himself; some say his Ministry was dead; which I say, if they had lived in that
time that the Disciple John was led to the Church, and said not much more, but,
Little Children, love one another: it may be they would have said he was Dead
and Formal. It is to be observed J. S. was much spent before his Departure,
having been a Preacher from his Youth, so had not strength of Voice to utter
himself as formerly, but still what he said was of this tendency, Viz. That if
Friends did believe in and wait upon God, in the Manifestation of our Lord
Christ, he would in due time answer all the Immortal Longings of their Souls,
and preserve them to his Glory and Kingdom. And indeed to them that loved him,
he was in their Eye the same Man to his death that he had been all along, still
growing in the same Truth.

And as for the Divisions that sprang up both North and South; it is well known
that it was not he that caused them: I well remember how it was Westward, till
some Persons went that way, and stirred up the People into Parties; one Day
they will feel the Burden of it.

In what follows there are two Queries proposed to Friends at Drawell., with
their Answers. If all would but keep to it accordingly, there would be no
Strife: and as for that way that is taken by some to defame every man, by
endeavoring to take away his Good Name, both as a Man and Christian, that is
not Conformable to some new sort of Church Government and Discipline (so
called) Though for a time they may seem to Reign as Kings upon Earth, they
shall dye like Men; and it shall be known in the end, that the Peace of the
Church, and Love to Brethren, is of more value than all Sounding Brass or
Tincling Cymbals.

So blessed are all such true Preachers that look upwards for their Reward in
that World that is to come. Amen.

C. H.
As to what follows, if thou can believe that Men mean as they speak, Read
on, if not, stay till thou have Charity.
Two Questions proposed by J. W. and J. S. to Friends of the Meeting at
Drawell; and their Answers, Viz.
Question I.
WHether or no, we, and all Gods People ought not to be left, in all Matters of
Faith and Discipline (so far as Discipline may become Matter of Faith) to the
Manifestation of Gods Spirit and Truth in our own Hearts, and to speak and act
therein as we are thereby Instructed and Persuaded, and not otherwise?

Question II.
2dly. Since there are Diversities of Talents and Gifts given by the Spirit of
God, and received by Men: Whether the Judgment of Truth it self given forth
through a Part of the Members of Christ's Body, can become a Bond upon any
other Part of the said Body, further than their Understandings are illuminated
thereby?

Answer.
To the first Question we say, Yea; and Nay to the second Question, with that
true and simple Sense that the Words import, and Friends have been used to
understand them: but not to strengthen Prejudiced Spirits, who have made that
their Plea for their Separation, and against Truths Authority in our Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings; nor yet to Justify any that are Ignorant, through
their own Sloth and Unfaithfulness; or to excuse them, that would not be
accounted Weak, but Strong, Wise, and as Pillars.

The Judgment of J. W. and J. S. concerning the Five Heads on which the 44
Articles exhibited against them, were grounded, which was publicly read in the
Meeting at Drawell, as follows.
ON the whole Matter, in the Fear and Presence of the Almighty God we declare,
That we do approve of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings for the necessary Service
of the Truth; so we farther say, that as those, or any other Meetings of
Friends in Truth, shall be continued to answer those Services; we believe, that
as it now is, it also will become our Duty to be at Unity with our Brethren in
the Services thereof; and that though one of us, Viz. J. W. did condescend to
Subscribe to a Paper, for the Erecting a Womans-Meeting in the Country, to
answer the ends the Paper proposed; which he testifies he then did in
singleness of Heart, for Unity-Sake; yet according to that inward sense we now
have, there appears to us no absolute necessity to continue Womens-Meetings, in
the Country distinct and separate from the Men; and therefore do
Conscientiously forbear to assent or Encourage any to lay the Intents of
Marriages before them; yet that Inward Sense and Heavenly Understanding we have
received from God, has, and yet does confirm us in this Judgment, that it is
not agreeable with the Line of Truth, to oppose others in the Exercise and
appointed Service of the said Meetings as heretofore, and now are settled and
agreed upon, who being Conscientious therein, are otherwise Minded than we are:
and if any of our Words or Actions have had any tendency to oppose, etc. which
we are not Conscious of, but if we were, would readily confess; and we say, the
Truth in us would readily have condemned it, even as it now does; and if it
shall please the Lord to manifest unto us a Service in those Meetings in the
Country, as well as City, the same Integrity toward God which has dwelt in us
these many years past, we believe will become a Bond on us to join Hand and
Heart with others our Brethren and Sisters therein; but till then, our desires
are, that this may not become an Occasion of straitness in Spirit each toward
the other, but that embracing the wholesome Counsel of the Apostle in another
Case, ( If in any thing ye are otherwise Minded, wait till God reveal it) we
may walk together in that pure undefiled Love of our God, which thinks no
Evil.

2dly. That though many of our Brethren see a Service in Recording
Condemnations, and leaving them upon Record to Posterity: yet from that inward
Sense and Heavenly Understanding we have, we see no necessity to leave them
upon Record to Posterity, or retain them when the Sin is blotted out and
remitted by the Lord, neither to be extended farther than the Offense is known,
nor yet to continue longer than the memory of the Offense abides; but if any
see meet from an inward sense of the Truth in themselves, to leave such a
Testimony relating to themselves to Posterity, we have therewith Unity. That
this our sense may be no occasion of straitness of Spirit each toward the
other, is the earnest desire of our Souls, who desire the Prosperity of Truth
and Peace amongst all the Churches of God.

3dly. As to Tithes, we can in truth say, 'twas never so much as in our
thoughts to speak any words whatsoever, with the least intent to strengthen any
in the Payment thereof, nor yet to weaken the Faith of any, having a testimony
in our hearts, that Tithes as at this Day paid, are Antichristian.

4thly. That as Groanings, Sighings, Soundings and Singings may proceed from
Deceitful Spirits, so also we declare, Groanings, Sighings, Soundings, and
Singing may be the Fruit of the Spirit of the Lord among Gods People: and that
as the first is discouraged, the second ought to be encouraged: and the earnest
Desire of our soul is, that as to these things, nothing but the Spirit of Truth
and Sound Judgment may appear, either to reprove or Encourage; and though we
are accused as if we were Opposers of such Groanings, etc. which the Truth
approved, yet God is our Witness, we know it not.

5thly. That though we have been represented as Persons encouraging Flying in
time of Persecution: We say, we are not Conscious to our selves of so doing:
for we believe those who stand not to their Testimony, but flies therefrom in
the Day of Persecution, may truly be counted, either weak in Faith, or departed
from the Faith.

And thus having given our Inward Sense, according to the Uprightness and
Integrity of our Hearts, concerning these five General Heads, from whence all
the 44 Articles do arise: We shall with this conclude, That the God of Heaven
is our Witness, our Desires are to approve our selves Men of Peace, in the
Abhorrency of all Fleshly Liberty and Looseness, to follow after Truth and
Righteousness, that the Reign of the Power of the Eternal God may be over all;
so will the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his
Christ.

As to the two Questions answered by the Friends and Brethren, met on this
Occasion, we in the Fear of the Lord say, We in the proposing thereof, had not
the least thought to obtain your Yea and Nay, with intent thereby to strengthen
such who may be accounted our Party, in any thing that is contrary to Truth,
nor to encourage Looseness or Bad Spirits, but Conscientiously to remove the
Scruples of some: and further we say, we are better satisfied with your
Explication therein, than with your bear Yea and Nay; for we, as well as you,
are sensible Apostates and Bad Spirits, seekinga Fleshly Liberty, have made use
of Arguments deducible from such Principles of Truth, to oppose the Power of
God it self, and the Practice af Gods People in the Power.

John Wilkinson John Story,


John Story's Epistle to Friends in the North, in which is signified his
Desires for true Unity and Reconciliation.
Friends,
IN the Love of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, which is Holy and Unchangeable
for ever, do I Salute you. The Occasion of my Writing at this time is to let
you know, that my Soul has been deeply exercised from day to day, in the
inward Considerations that have been with me for some time: how the Holy Name
of God is Blasphemed, and the Profession of his Truth dishonored among
Unbelievers, by the Reports that are spread abroad amongst them of the
Divisions that are amongst us, who have in scorn been called Quakers, and also
for the hurt and havoc that I perceive is at this day made amongst the
Heritage of God, through this secret and subtle working of the Ancient Enemy of
Mankind, who at this day, as in days past, hunts to and fro, seeking whom he
may destroy.

Now forasmuch as there has been great Discourses amongst Friends touching a
Separate Spirit and Meeting in the North; meaning thereby, a Spirit and Meeting
that is Separate from the Truth, and that I have been a strength to such a
Spirit and Meeting. I have this to say, that the Searcher of all hearts knows I
own no such Spirit or Meeting that is Separate from the Truth, neither have I
ever been a Setter up or Actor in any such Meeting; for though I am accused,
that the Subscription of my Name to a Paper amongst others, entitules me to be
a Setter up of a Separate Meeting: yet I am not in my Conscience convinced
there is any one Word therein which justly entitles me to be a Setter up of the
Meeting called, a Separate Meeting. For the Paper of Proposals I Signed, was
intended to Reunite that Meeting; and I am persuaded, all Understanding Men
that Signed, did it for that End; and if any thing therein had seemed to them
too strait, why did not they to whom it was sent desire a loving Discourse
about it, that they might have understood our meaning before they had either
replied or sent it abroad, in which we should have been ready to have given our
sense more fully, which several have already done; and though I have been by
some abusively called a Captain; the Lord is my Witness, my desire neither has
been, nor is, to be a Captain over any, to the Praise of the Lord I speak it; I
have learned the Truth of our Lord Jesus better than so; for I know him that is
the Captain of our Salvation ought to be the alone Leader of his People: and
the earnest breathing of my Soul is, that as for many years past I have
approved my self to the Friends of Truth the Lords Servant; so I may to the end
of my days, and that for Christ's sake; and therefore can I with boldness
appeal to Gods Witness in all Consciences, whether an Insinuation into the
Breasts of any, that I am a Strenth to such a Spirit and Meeting as aforesaid,
be not the Work of the Old Enemy.

And since it is so, that I have been credibly informed, that you who formerly
Assembled together in one Meeting to manage the Outward Concerns of Truth
relating to the Poor, etc. have, for some time past, Assembled for the
aforesaid Service in two distinct Meetings, and that this is accounted an
Occasion of Stubling to some. I have a Concern on my Spirit thus to write unto
you.

First, I am satisfied in my Conscience from sufficent Knowledge or Evidence,
that the Day was, wherein you met together in a Sweet Union and Fellowship, to
manage the Outward Concerns of Truth relating to the Poor, etc.

Secondly, That such your Union and Fellowship had acceptance with the Lord,
and was owned by his Presence amongst you.

Thirdly, That during such your Fellowship, every one concerned in that
Service, acted from a ready and willing Mind, according to that Persuasion and
Manifestation which was given of God, without being Imposed upon by any Man or
Men, or endeavoring to Impose each on other, contrary to what the Lord
Evidenced by his Spirit in your Consciences.

Fourthly, That though it was so, that particular Persons, in persuance of the
Counsel of diverse Ancient and Honorable Brethren (some of whom are fallen
asleep) were chosen for that Service of the Poor, etc. out of the particular
Meetings held for the Worship of God, yet I never understood that any designed
to exclude any Member or Members of the Church of Christ, (who had, or might
have a Concern upon their Spirits) from Sitting or Acting amongst them, whilst
any such Member or Members (though not chozen) behaved themselves Men of Peace,
good Order, and in Unity with the Faithful Friends chozen for the Management of
the Affairs of the Truth relating to the Poor, etc. in such Meeting; and as in
Charity I dare not reflect on these Ancient Brethren in whose Advice for the
holding such Meetings, there seems to be room for Cavelling Spirits to call
them Narrow-Spirited, in advising to those certain Persons for that Service,
which seems a kind of Limitation: yet I am also satisfied that those Ancient
Brethren, who first advised to choose Faithful Brethren for the aforesaid
Service, would have endeavored an exclusion of all such (if any such had then
been) who should from time to time have appeared as disorderly Troublers of
Israel, and Imposers on Tender Consciences.

Fifthly, That though it has been reported, that those of you who are by some
called a Separate Meeting, have been so Narrow Spirited, as that you will not
join with the Brethren in the aforesaid Service, etc. unless they will assent
that others not formerly chozen, may be excluded from acting with you, or if
they have ought to offer to the Meeting, then to be admitted to offer the same,
and so depart: which Report, as it is said, is grounded on a Paper Subscribed
by several of you, and my self, and is by some accounted the Foundation of the
aforesaid Meeting, called the Seprate Meeting; yet I always understood that it
was not intended by any of the Subscribers, to exclude any from Sitting amongst
you, or Joining with you in the Common Service of Truth, usually transacted
amongst you in the Spirit of Love and Unity, who in the same Spirit of Love and
Unity would accompany you, and had a Concern to add a helping hand: and this
sense I do now solemnly declare to be my sense, and that at the time I Signed
the Paper aforesaid, it was my sense; neither am I yet convicted, that if the
Subscribers of the said Paper interpret for themselves (which of right they
have the liberty to do) there is any thing therein contained which does oppose
the same sense.

Now Friends, I have this further to say, that I have more than ordinary ground
either to know, or at least believe, that this my sense in the aforesaid five
Particulars, is the real and true State of the Case, but do certainly know,
that it contains in some measure, the State of Truth, as it ought to have been
amongst you; and therefore my Counsel and Exhortation to you is, laying aside
all vain Janglings and Repititions of former Things, that have tended to Strife
and Debate, contrary to the Truth, ye be Reconciled each unto the other in the
Lord, saying in your Hearts before the Lord, and in his Fear, Let the Time past
be sufficient, and for time to come let us study Peace, and Assemble together
in the Ancient Christian Love, Union and Fellowship which was amongst us before
the Occasion or Offenses were either given or taken, and that you Unite and
Meet together to manage the Outward Concerns of Truth relating to the Poor,
etc. With this Godly Unanimous Intention of Heart, that if for the future any
shall come in amongst you, and appear as disorderly Troublers of Israel,
contentious Persons in Matters not approved by you, and the Assemblies of Gods
People amongst you, or Imposers upon tender Consciences contrary to what has
been Received, Believed and Owned by you and the Assemblies of Gods People
amongst you, when you and they were preserved in a sweet Union and Fellowship
in the Truth; you then declare that such Persons are not worthy to sit among
you to act in the Affairs of Truth, and that upon a serious and godly
acknowledgment unto this Sound and Certain Truth, That all Gods People ought to
be left, in all Matters of Faith and Discipline, so far as the Discipline
becomes Matter of Faith, to the Manifestation of Gods Spirit and Truth in their
own Hearts, and to speak and act therein as they shall be thereby Instructed
and Persuaded, and not otherwise; because since there are diversities of
Talents and Gifts given by the Spirit of God, and received by Men, the Judgment
of Truth it self given forth through a part of the Members of Christ's Body,
cannot become a Bond upon any other part of the said Body, further than their
Understandings come to be Illuminated thereby.

This Sound and Certain Truth, unto which I exhort your serious and godly
Acknowledgment, I and many, if not all of you do know, was at the Meeting at
Drawell fully assented to, to be Truth, and that by an Answer to two Questions,
wherein it was fully Stated, and rightly Answered; and therefore since I am
truly sensible, that the Cause of your Differences has sprung from that which
has led from this Sound and certain Truth; I may reasonably expect that my
Counsel to Reunite may have place with you.

Thus it is with me to write unto you, and that the more freely too, because
there are some do apprehend that I am more capable to Reunite you, than some
others are, who now may see my Endeavors are not wanting, and that as I have
approved my self a Man of Peace, so my Desires are, that the Peace of God in
the Love and Unity of the Truth, may abound amongst you.

And now Friends, I shall leave it to the Righteous God to Judge, whether what
is now proposed be not according to the Spirit of Truth, which by its
appearance in every Member of the Church of Christ at this day, is become the
only Lawgiver in every such Member in Matters that relate to the World to come,
for by it we are instructed in our Heavenly Duties to God, Viz. How to
Sacrifice, to Worship, and Serve him acceptably by Obedience to all his
Requirings; and through the same are the Lords People led into such Methods or
Outward Practices wherein they are helpful and Serviceable each to other in
their Generation, for the Lord alone ought to be eyed in, and beyond Outward
Forms, though his Presence has been, and still is with his People in those
Forms he leads into; and so to him let us look, who was before all Time and
Days of this Fading World, and is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginner and
Finisher of the Work of our Redemption, which was, and which is, and which is
to come, the Almighty, who alone ought to be minded beyond all visible Things,
and unto him in all our Exercises, whether Inward or Outward, my Soul desires
we may all be kept, even in that Spiritual Appearance of our Lord and Savior,
which is that acceptable Day which shines in the Inward Man, through which God
has made me, amongst many other of his Servants, partaker of that Heavenly
Religion which is unspotted: many of you know our Beginning was in his Holy
Spirit and Power, through which Death is, and shall be more fully abolished,
and Life and Immortality brought to Light, in and through which Power alone the
Saints have, and shall be thoroughly Sanctified and Perfected for ever; and
through it, are the Heirs of that Eternal Inheritance and Heavenly Kingdom
which outlasts all Outward Things, and never fades away, where all the
Longings, Earnings, and Desires of the Righteous shall be fully Answered and
Satisfied for evermore, with the full Enjoyment of that Life and Immortality,
over which the Second Death has no Dominion; and then may it be truly said of
such, That they are entered in and do take their Possessions. Now into this
Life, in which the Heavenly Brotherhood and Fellowship of Saints stand, the
Lord gather you all more and more, that whatever has appeared in any contrary
thereto, may by his Word of Life be broken down, subdued, and rise no more,
that into the Bond of Peace and Union in the Truth ye may be again United, and
become Co-workers together, as Gods Heavenly Family in the Love, even in that
Love which thinks no Evil; for the Desire of my Soul is, that ye may be
cemented and Established together upon that Everlasting Rock and Foundation
which the Gates of Hell and Death can never prevail against.

I shall now conclude with those wholesome words of the Apostle, of our Lord
and Savior: Put on therefore as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved, Bowels of
Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-Suffering, Forbearing one
another: if any Man have a Quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you,
even so do ye; and above all these Things put on Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfectness; and let the Peace of God Rule in your Hearts, to the which you are
called. Col. 3. 12. So in the Desire to the Lord God, that these things may
truly be weighed, and have place with you. I rest,

Your Servant in the Work and Labor of the Gospel John Story.
POSTSCRIPT.
LET this Epistle be read in an Assembly to be appointed for both Meetings,
Viz. that called Quarterly, and that called Separate, in or near Kendal, for my
earnest Desire is, that it should be so Read, because, as I said before, I have
a Concern upon my Spirit thus to write unto you both; the things therein
Contained I Recommend to Gods Witness in all your Consciences, not desiring to
Impose on any; I knowing this, that where it is awakened, there will be an
Answer to the Spirit of Peace and Truth in which 'twas wrote; and though some
have given forth their false Censures, and false Prophesies concerning me, and
others laid various Temptations before me, which I look upon to be the Work of
the Common Enemy, that so I might have Stumbled and Fallen (though those in
whom it has so wrought, may not have an Eye open to see it) yet my Joy and
Rejoicing in the Lord is, that they have not yet removed me from the hope of
the Gospel, Blessed be the Name of God for ever more, for to his Praise and
Glory, and in his Fear (which hitherto has Preserved me) I speak it, my Cries
the Lord has heard, and he has given me a certain Knowledge of his Way,
otherwise I might have been in great Danger to have sunk into the Pit of
Confusion, and never risen more: but his Love is unchangeable, his Mercy never
fails them that put their Trust in him; this by long Experience can I now
Speak; therefore I exhort and entreat you all to turn your Minds to his Inward
Appearance, through which his Love, which is stronger than Death, will be shed
abroad in your Hearts, and his Power be felt, which will remove that which has
been the Cause of your Breach, that you may come again to walk together in that
Heavenly Charity, through which no former Miscarriage will be remembered, and so
come to Serve him with one Heart, in that way of Life which he has made known
unto us in these latter Days: and thus you may finish your Course with Joy, and
leave this World in Peace and Enjoyment of Immortality, and take your
Possessions in that Kingdom, in which the Fullness of Joy that ever shall be, is
Inherited, and where, through the Earnest and Assurance of the Heavenly
Kingdom, the last End of the Righteous is Crowned with Honor; and in that Day
the many Temptations that have, and do attend Gods People in this Fading Life,
shall cease, and never be again.

J. S.
Calne, the last of the 7th. Month, 1677.


And at present, for a Conclusion, we Thus End.
NOw as to all such that have, or yet may think to defame us, by saying in a
proud scoffing manner, These are Storians, or of Story' s Spirit: we know
nothing that he either held or practiced (on a Religious Account) but what was
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, and the Testimony of Gods Spirit, as received
amongst us in the Beginning, so he is gone to his Grave, no Sect-Master, but a
Follower of Christ: and we never desire to follow him, nor any Man, but in the
Steps and Way of that Stable Truth that shall outlast all New Inventions, and
Envious NickNames.

And although for a time the multitude of Israel did give their Earrings, or
Jewels of Prey to Giddion to make a Golden Ephod, and said, he should Rule over
them; the Evil Snare and Shame it afterward brought upon them and him, might
be a Warning to others. Giddions Beginning was Glorious and wonderful; but
when the Hearts of that People began to turn from the Lord, they tempted
Giddion, and they were suffered to be a Snare to one another.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. Line last but 2, for of trouble, read, of the trouble. p. 11. l. 22.
f. as Friends, r. all Friends. p. 12. l. 16. f. and as some, r. as some. l. 39.
f. Opposers at, r. Opposers of or at. p. 13. l. 29. f. amongst you, r. against
you. p. 19. l. 15. f. are we, r. we are. p. 26. l. 33. f even r. evil: p. 28.
l. 1. f. Keep's r. Keys. and the Folio to be made 28. p. 32. l. 3. f. one, r.
own. l. 33. f. now r. nor. l. 43. f. thy years, r. the year.


