SOME REMARQUES Upon a late Popular Piece of Nonsense CALLED Julian the
Apostate, etc.

TOGETHER, With a Particular VINDICATION OF HIS Royal Highness THE DUKE of YORK.

By some Bold TRUTHS in Answer to a great many Impudent Calumnies raised
against HIM, by the Foolish Arguments, False Reasonings and Suppositions,
imposed upon the Public from several Scandalous and Seditious Pamphlets;
Especially from one more Notorious and generally Virulent than the rest,
sometime since Published under the Title of A TORY PLOT, etc.

By a Lover of Truth, Virtue, and Justice.

Si fractus Illabatur Orbis
Impa^idum ferient Ruinae:
Horat. Lib. 3. Ode 3. LONDON, Printed for T. Davies, 1682.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Pamphlet called A Tory Plot, coming sometime since to my Hands when I was
far distant from London, and at a Quiet Retirement, did very much surprise me;
and gave me in the midst of my dear Shades and Meadows, often very Melancholy
wayward Thoughts. When I read the Matter it contained, Considered the End it
aimed it, and reflected on what sort of Creature might probably be the Author
of it; I could not forbear Condemning in my self the Vice I know not sometimes
how to get rid of, called Ambition: for when I reflected that half a score
sheets of Paper, so weakly furnished as I found that Trifle to be, carried
popular force enough to shake the Affections of a People toward a Prince, whom
they Owe so much to as this Thankless Nation does to the Heroic Virtue,
Valor, and Sufferings of His Royal Highness; I could not but in some measure
prize my own poor Condition, which Fate had placed too low to be worth the
Malice of Knaves, and yet in a happiness too finely wrapped up, and couched for
the Envy of Fools to find it. I waited much, and expected long an Answer to a
Libel, which Reflected so notoriously as that did upon the Government, and
struck so impudently at the very being of it. I thought it impossible that in
so glorious a Metropolis as that of London, the Center of all the Arts and
Learning of this flourishing Kingdom; so Good and Gracious a King, as our
present Just and Merciful Sovereign; so Gallant a Prince, so Unfailing a
Friend, and so Kind a Master as his Generous Brother; could ever want Servants,
able and ready to take in hand so glorious a Cause, and not suffer so lewd and
barefaced an Affront as that, to the Dignity and Prerogatives of the Crown, as
well as the Rights of the Royal Family, to go uncorrected: I thought all this,
but I was much deceived: In just Indignation then ^o the Ingratitude or
Ignorance of Unprofitable Servants, and in honor to the Authority and
Character of that Glorious Monarch, whom it is my greatest Pride that I was
born to live a Subject under: I thought it my Duty as an Englishman, and an
Honest man, to exert what little Abitities I have (if I have any at all) to do
his Cause (either as he is personally or relatively concerned in that saucy
Libel) the Justice it deserves. I was ashamed to think that Men who live by the
Service and Favor of a Prince, and whose Well-being does, or ought to depend
entirely upon his; should, when their Bellies are filled every day with his
Bread, and their Purses with his Bounty, lay their hands upon their Mouths, or
keep them in their Pockets, and neither say or do any thing for his Vindication
and Service; but are rather apt to cringe, and bend the Knee to the most
insolent of his Enemies; and when they falsely tell him they are his Friends,
whisper it in his Ear, for fear some Acquaintance spy whom they know to be in
the Train, should hear it. Of this sort are those, who come and bow at his
rising in the Morning, and then go to some Rebel Clubb, and tell the Secrets of
the Bedchamber for a Dinner. Of this sort are those, who get Preferments, in
the best and most profitable Offices of a Court, and employ the credit of their
Master's Service against his Interest in the Country: And of this sort are
those, that often divert a Princes Encouragements and Favor from his Friends,
and when the stream of his Goodness is running the right way, turn it aside
from the Merit it was aimed at, to flow upon Tools like themselves, whose
Bribes have corrupted them; unable and unfit to be Employed, and too unfaithful
to be Trusted.

After having therefore vainly expected some Months an Answer to the
abovementioned Pamphlet; I took it in hand though late, most for my own
Satisfaction, and in Compliance to the desires of some private Friends, that
often mourn with me for the Calamities of their afflicted Native Country. And
after having finished it, and pleased them (with something they found in it)
more than my self; I laid it by, thinking it too late to make it Public, in
regard the Credit of the Paper it Corrected seemed to be blown over, and the
noise of it utterly forgotten. Besides being in hopes, by the daily Success of
the King's Affairs, that some lucid Intervals were coming to ease the Public
Madness: I thought it would not be proper to disturb the tender Peace that was
brooding over us, by stirring up anew the unruly Storm, that seemed at present
to decline to some Calmness.

But in the midst of these soothing hopes, I was alarmed afresh with another
gust from the Old unquiet Corner; and that was the stinking blast of a Deacon,
that had long been grip't and in pain with the Business, till out it came
rattling with the Title of Julian the Apostate: I read it over, and laid it
by, for the use I thought it only deserved; 'till being accidentally one day at
Court, for as little Bus ness as I believe Forty more had there, who seemed
nevertheless Fifty times busier than I did; up comes me two mere Motions, with
their Politic faces on, a little Worm wriggling behind them, impatient of an
approaching Knighthood; near trimmed they were, and their shoes very clean;
Sedate their Countenances, and soft their aspect: till one of them of a sudden
(gathering his brows over his eyes) cried, How! Julian the Apostate! Ay, says
his Companion (with the same dull Grimace) Julian the Apostate: A shrewd
Fellow, I Will warrant him! an unanswerable Piece! Things as they stand will
never do: Measures must be altered: Bless us, thought I, surely I am in a
Trance! and this is one of Don Quevedo's Visions. Can this Fellow be fit to
serve in the Palace of a King? Administer in Office to the Mighty Ruler of
Three great Kingdoms, and talk at this wretched rate! So I bit my Lip, turned
aside, went home, entered my Closet; and taking Pen, Ink, and Paper, resolved
for once to convince a Politician (if by chance he can read) that the Author of
Julian the Apostate is not so dreadful a Bugbear, but that a Man of Moderate
gifts may answer him, without breaking his Brains, or falling into a
Consumption.

And so having made the following Remarks upon it, and putting of them into
such style and order as I thought the Author and the Argument of his Work
deserved; it came into my Head that it would not be improper (since it lay
useless by me, and that his Royal Highness's Interest and Honor were concerned
in one as well as the other,) to Publish the following Vindication of that
Prince, which I had written before, in Answer to the Tory Plot, with this
Chastisement of an Apostate Deacon, the Author of Julian.

And I rather chose to call the Answer to the Tory Plot, A Vindication of his
Royal Highness, etc. because I found in it, summed up all the Popular and most
Current Arguments, that have passed with prejudiced or misinformed People to
his disadvantage: and if I have done him and his Cause any Justice, I have my
end and reward in it; if I have not, I am sure he is so good and gracious a
Prince to forgive my failings, and accept of my good wishes, however
ineffectual may prove my Endeavors.

I am sensible I shall undergo many Censures bitter enough: But let those that
think hardly of me for this, first Consider, That I write according to my
Conscience: and hope that those who contend so much for Liberty of Conscience
themselves, will not be scandalized at the freedom of mine.

But what will they say? May be they will say I hope for a Pension; with all my
Soul: I should be glad if I had one; or may be they will say, that I look for
other Preferment: If they do, they may be in the right still, but may be I am
in the wrong; for when I see sometimes how Matters go, and who are in my way,
were I to write for Preferment at Court, for ought I know, I have not taken the
right side. In a word, as Pilate said when he was mealy-mouthed, and did not
think fitting to explain himself to some impertinent Critical Jews, that meant
him no good by their Inquisitiveness: What I have written I have written. All
honest Men I am sure will make the best of it, and let others make their most
of it.

Farewell.
SOME REMARQUES Upon a late Popular Piece of Nonsense CALLED Julian the
Apostate, etc.
HAving taken the following Pamphlet of a Tory Plot in hand late for the
Reasons be forementioned in the Preface, no sooner had I discomfited that
Giant, but up rose another, and a terrible one, a man would think him indeed by
his Title, Julian the Apostate in the Devil's Name; Being a short Account of
his Life, the Sense of the Primitive Christians about his Succession, and their
Behavior toward him; together with a Comparison of Popery and Paganism. Bless
us thought I! What will become of us now! Immediately upon Enquiry, finding him
an Enemy, I began to examine how I might Attack him, when to terrify me the
more, I find him entrenched within a Preface Six or Eight and twenty Pages deep
at least: Now to break in upon this Goliath, overthrow his Bulwark, and make a
Rascal of him, would be an Exploit indeed. This I trust may be done, and thus I
begin with him.

The Author of the abovementioned Treatise, it is reasonably to be supposed
would have the World believe that he has taken a great deal of pains to
overthrow the Duke of Tork's Right to Succession; and that he has acquitted
himself particularly in it, by exposing a Figure of his own making, which he
calls the Picture of Julian the Apostate; and setting it out with an
Inscription at the Bottom, which he styles, A Parallel between Paganism, and
Popery. An Inscription, truly as much to the purpose, as Sir Patience Ward's
Narrative round the Monument: For as that positively Charges the Papists with
the Firing of London in Sixty Six, when in the Original Inscription on the West
side of it, the whole is Attributed to the Just Judgment of God for their Sins:
So this Fellow pretends in the first Part of his Book, by Comparison to throw
as much Odium as his Ignorance is capable of, upon an Injured Suffering Prince,
by Pleading the Cause of Protestancy against Popery and Paganism, when the
whole Tenure and Bulk of his Book is nothing else but an absolute Panegyric
upon Julian, and an Apology for Apostasy.

This may at first, it is possible, seem something strange to the Reader that
has not Perused the Book now under consideration so cautiously as I have done;
But to prove how much a Friend our Author is to Apostasy, be pleased to take
him flying in the face of Truth, in this his very Bulwark of a Preface, where
he charges many of our late Addressers for offering their Lives and Fortunes,
and the last drop of their Blood in the Defense of His Majesty, and the
Religion now Established by Law; and by and by promising the same over again to
a Popish Successor. This is flying in the face of Truth, and commonly known in
speech by the Name of a Lie; for if there be any such thing as a Popish
Successor mentioned in one of those Addresses he is so angry withal, I will
renounce all Loyalty and Religion in the World, and be as true a Friend to
Apostasy and Paganism, as our Author is.

For he is indeed an Author of an extraordinary Cut, abounding in much popular
Nonsense, fain would Scribble to persuade, but it is not his Talent, has taken
up abundance of Knotty pieces of Learning upon Trust, by the help of Indexes,
but wants Sense and common Principles of Literature to distinguish and dispose
them to any purpose; Pretends to top a Generation of People upon us for
Primitive Christians, which there is not a Deacon in England but can tell him
lived in a very latter Century corrupted by Arianism, and instead of the
faithful Quotations of History, which ought to have been his Proofs of Matter
of fact so long ago Transacted, he foists upon us the outrageous Rhetoric of
particular Men's Invectives, that were angry for loss of their Ecclesiastical
Dignities. Would it not be a worthy Author hereafter that should quote
Hickeringell against Bishops, if there once were Occasion, and persuade
Posterity to believe, that because he flew in the face of his Diocesan, that
all the Clergy in England were by general consent for throwing off Episcopacy;
Because that profligate Fellow took the opportunity of a Licentious Press to
Publish his Invectives against the Reverend Fathers that found it convenient to
censure and restrain the looseness of his Manners, that so scandalized his
Character. But to return to our Preface.

Says he, All the Sober Men that I have met with, who remain unsatisfied as to
a Bill of Exclusion, do nevertheless acknowledge, that a Popish Successor will
be a heavy Judgment of God to this Nation, to which we must patiently submit,
as we do to all other Calamities: But in the name of Madness, what is all this
to us? what have we to do with the noise and buz of Popish Successor, if our
Author will needs Dispute with us about the convenience or inconveniency of
one, let him first prove his Principle, let him first show us his Popish
Successor, and convince us demonstratively (as in all Matters of Fact we ought
to be) that he is One; and when that is allowed once, we are content to join
issue with him; but in the mean time, though apprehending the worst, let us at
the utmost but Pray against it, not Rebel upon the pretense of it.

How foolishly a little farther has he thought himself very shrewd in citing
the Example of a Man infected with the Plague? how they are imprisoned and put
under a very close Confinement when they have committed no Fault; This indeed,
where an unhappy Man comes to be so Infected, ought to be done for the good of
the Town or Village; But he is a very vile Christian, That will give his
Neighbor an ill Name, and scandalize him with a dangerous Disease, only on
purpose to have his House shut up, and a Mark set on him to make him odious to
his fellow Citizens, when at Bottom, twenty to one, but he is an honester
founder Man, and fairer Dealer than his Accuser. And that this has been the
foul Practice used against the Duke of Tork, no Man that reads our Author and
his Brethren Pamphletteers of the same slamp, but may be sufficiently
satisfied: How has he been Hunted and Halloo'd about the World by the cry of
Villains roaring out against him, Popery, Plot, Subversion of Government, when
their very top Rascal, the Salamanchite himself, swore upon his first
Discovery, That his Highness knew nothing of the Matter, but if he could not be
drawn over, was to suffer the same Fate with his Brother: Yet as Matters grew
riper, and riper, Bills of Recusancy were to be preferred against him, and the
aforesaid Villain could swear through a Keyhole that was never transparent.
But how much greater Villains must they be that can basely unspirit themselves
to Rake in the foul Excrements of Perjury, for dirt to throw continually upon
the Innocence of a Prince that may be half of them never saw, and I am sure none
of 'em were ever injured by. What a shame it is that every Prossigate Rogue,
whose ill manners, and lewd life have made a Vagabond, should be permitted with
Impunity to arraign the Honor and precious Fame of a Prince that has Virtues
enough to Atone for all the Sins of his Enemies; nay, and to do it
nonsensically too, fulsomly, dully; with hardly true English, and no manner of
right reasoning; this is a grievance intolerable. Let me, if I must be
defamed, suffer by the Tongue or Pen of a Rascal that has at least some Common
sense, that may please me in some measure by his Wit, when he offers at my ruin
with his Falsehood, let not my Reputation be choakt up with the foul, muddy
defluxions of an undistinguishing crudeheaded Blockhead's Brains that shall
make me sick with his Nonsense, and only that way disable me from answering his
Calumny.

In short as to our Author in hand, it is very palpable from his Book, that he
is either according to vulgar Expression, Very much a Knave, or very much a
Fool; and truly upon considering his Writings, I cannot well judge which of
those qualities have the Predominancy, for they are both very Powerful in his
works, the Records of his Virtues. But I intend fairly to give the World an
account what I have observed of those two Excellencies in him, and leave the
Reader to judge which Title he has best pretense to.

To proceed then, Would any but a Knave of the highest form, so far betray his
Cause as to call those Primitive Christians, who lived as I mentioned before in
a very latter Century, and had already the Heresy of Arrianism crept in
amongst 'em? or as he has done afterward, would boast of his Quotations, that
he had not impoverished the Subject, when he has falsely corrupted it, with
Fictions of his own, and added such silly Falsehoods as no honest Man durst have
done, and any Scholar would have scorned. This I shall prove in what is to
follow.

Again, Who, but as very a Knave would have wrote thus. I cannot own my belief
of this as a first Principle, that the Laws of a Man's Country are the
measures of all Civil Obedience. I would fain be Informed (might I be so bold
as to offer the Question, what it is our Author would obey, if not the Laws of
his Country? How vilely does he Cant afterward upon the Interpretation of
Passive Obedience, insinuating as if it were ever taught without regards to
Laws: for, there is no Obedience understood in the World, but what is Obedience
to some Law or another, All Obedience is to Authority: But Power indeed and
Authority may be abstracted, and are in signification abstracted from each
other, Power in it self is despotick and unlimitable; but when Law is added to
it, then it is softened into Authority, and the yielding to it so qualified, we
call Civil Obedience: but the yielding to the force of Power is not understood
by the term of Obedience, but that of Submission, and we only submit when we no
longer can resist, but we obey when we no longer ought to do it; Passive
Submission is an Effect of Necessity, but Passive Obedience is the Effect of
Duty. His example therefore of St. Paul is falsely instanced, where he says, he
was not for Passive Obedience, in that he pleaded and stood upon his
Birthright; for if it were his Birthright he stood upon, that was the Law, and
by that Plea he referred and absolutely threw himself upon the Law, which was as
much Passive Obedience as the most Patient man could show: It Is an endless
Drudgery to answer the confused Cant of an ignorant mischievous Fool, though we
are bound to it in Charity to the Public Tranquillity.

Again, How foolishly has he taken the opportunity to tell us a Story of a
Pursuivant, sent illegally to Arrest the Body of a Man to appear before the
Judges of an Assize, which Pursuivant was killed in the Action; and says he,
The Arrest afterward was adjudged Tortius, and by consequence the killing of
the Pursuivant proved afterward no Murder: Now all I have to urge in answer to
this is, Let my Friend Mr. Topham have a care hereafter how he ventures too
boldly into the Country, to dragg up honest Gentlemen upon Arbitrary Votes,
that have no Authority out of the house they are made in.

What in the name of Nonsense does he mean by telling us in this place an
Impertinent Story, how the Church of England divides her Reverence betwixt the
Ancient Fathers, and the first Reformers of the Church? What, or who does he
mean by those first Reformers! I fear upon inquiring into the History of our
Reformation, (I mean, not that Written by a Noble Doctor that shall be
Nameless: but) I mean, That excellent History Written by a Nobleman of Honor
(viz. The Lord Herbert of Cherbury) we shall find the first Causes of our
Reformation not so Religiously and Conscientiously grounded, how good soever
the Effect proved, as it is convenient for us to believe they were: I love and
adhere to the Reformation as it is Established by Law withal my heart; but I
hate an Ignorant Fellow should with his slovenly Fingers once touch so pure, so
nice, and so delicate a piece of Discipline and Gospel Perfection.

In the next place, let us examine to what purpose he recites to us the Example
of Mary Queen of Scots, There are, says he, Worthies enough that were Excluders
with a Witness. Rhetorical Numphs! Excluders with a Witness, what an Expression
is here? This Grubstreet Vermin is a worthy Offe to write Comparisons of Popery
and Paganism, truly. But let us see what Excluders with a Witness were they?
Oh, says he, such as were for Excluding Mary Queen of Scots, not only from the
Succession, but out of the World. I Will warrant him he thinks he has nickt it
here. What relation has that Queens Case to ours? She was under an Accusation
of a Conspiracy against the Queen and the Government; nor was ever such thing
as a Bill of Exclusion against her thought of: But this Case of hers has been a
standing false Argument with all our Blockheadly Pamphletteers to this purpose
these Three years: And our present Author who loves Common places so well as to
make a whole Book of them, certainly could never miss this, though I must beg
leave to take notice to what purpose: Not only from the Succession, but out of
the World! How villainously would he here insinuate the Necessity of shedding
more Royal Blood, when this miserable Kingdom smells too rank of it already:
And for the Case even of that unhappy Queen, It appeared to the eyes of all the
World so horrid and profane a Violation of the Rights of Majesty, that the
Memory of it is an Odium upon us all over Christendom to this very day.

And for the musty Piece of a Journal, which he is pleased to quote for the
necessity of Cruelty and Bloodshed, of a Writing as he styles it, Entitled,
Reasons to prove the Queens Majesty bound in Conscience to proceed with
Severity in this Case of the late Queen of Scots. By his good leave, I think it
no Argument at all to the present purpose, but the Writing it self Sir Sim.
d'Ewes Journ.
in the quality of its matter Unchristian, and in its manner boyish and
frivolous; foolishly Sophistical, without any foundness of Reasoning, or
strength in Law: It says in the first place, Every good Prince ought by God's
Commandment to punish even with Death, all such as seek to seduce the People of
God, from his true Worship unto Superstition and Idolatry; For that offense God
has always most grievously punished, as committed against the first Table; and
to prove this, they cite a Text of Scripture of Deuteronomy. 13. Now to make that Text
of Scripture valid and of force to what we have in hand, we must First have a
Law of the Kingdom for the Punishment of Death in that Case. Secondly, That Law
of the Kingdom must explain what this Idolatry is. Thirdly, After all, it must
be such an Idolatry as that Text of Scripture has expressed, or else the
Chapter is quoted to no purpose. As to the first, concerning a Law of the
Kingdom for Punishment of Death in that Case, I believe upon Examination we
shall find none; for as our Author has justly observed in another place, that
Law de Haeretico Comburendo is taken away: Besides, granting there were a
Capital Law against the Idolatry mentioned in that Chapter, I question yet (to
put the worst of the Case) whether it would reach Popery or no: for if we
examine Verse the 6th. of that Chapter, we shall find the Idolatry there
mentioned to be explained, for the turning aside to serve other Gods which we
have not known, we nor our Fathers. Now I never heard but that the Church of
Rome served and adored the very same God that we do, in the Trinity of Persons,
and Unity of the Godhead: So that of this sort of Idolatry, at least she does
not appear to be guilty. What other Kind (for certainly there are different
Kinds) may be laid to her Charge, I could wish some Ingenuous, Conscientious,
and Honorable Divine would for the true Information of all honest and truly
Religious Children of the Church of England, fairly, and heartily lay down and
determine. I am sure the canting, falsifying, and mis-interpretation of
Scripture, which such Fellows as the Author of this Libel and his Companions
use to serve their Malice or other Ends in Seducing and Imposing upon the
Ignorance of the Vulgar, tend rather to the bringing Popery in Credit again,
than any thing else; and if the Author of The Growth of Popery were alive, to
add to that Treatise, I know not where he could raise a better Argument for his
Theme, than from those Scriblers, that are suffered to pretend the defense of
the best and truest Religion in the World, by the falsest and worst Arguments,
that their Ignorance or Immorality can furnish them withal.

To be short, this Libel against the Christian Religion; this Julian the
Apostate, which has made so much noise in the World, I mean, amongst the
Ignorant since its Publication, is so far from being what it would pretend to
be, viz. An Argument against the D's Right of Succession, that it is nothing
but a downright Alarm to Rebellion; for as an Alarm in War is nothing but a
confused Noise and Rattling upon a Drum without any measure, method, or
distinction; so this Whole Book from one end to the other, is only an
indistinguishable lump of Sedition, thrown out in a confused heap, to amuze and
glut the Vulgar withal, without any Arguments raised from any principle, or
tending to any end except that of provoking our Swords into one another
Bowels, drowning our Fields in blood, and overwhelming of our Peace for ever.

How foolishly does he tugg and heave at an Argument which his Brains want
strength to set a going against that Popular one, as he calls it of our
Allegiance sworn to the King, and his Lawful Heirs and Successors; by telling
us what some Lawyers (that is to say of his own Set) think of the Matter, No
Man can have an Heir while he himself is alive: Which though I think I have
confuted in the following Answer to the Tory Plot, yet to come a little nearer
him here, If no Man can have an Heir while he himself is alive, how came that
distinction to be once urged in Parliament, betwixt Heir Apparent, and Heir
Presumptive? The Noble Gentleman that made it understood Law, and I hope, good
Mr. Author, you will not accuse so great an Oracle as he has been to your Party
of Nonsense; For, if the King can have no Heir while he himselflives, that
telling the Duke how he was not Heir Apparent, but Heir Presumptive, was a
Nonsensical Distinction to make the best of it, for he ought not according to
your Argumment to have allowed that the Duke was so much as Heir Presumptive,
but ought to have declared, That the King till he was dead could have no Heir
at all; but I suppose he knew where he was, and was wiser. What stuff too is
this which follows against another Argument, which he says he has heard fetched
from the Common Prayer, (viz.) That no Church of England Man can with a good
Conscience be for a Bill of Exclusion, which they say is to the Prejudice of
His Royal Highness, because we there Pray, that God would prosper him with all
Happiness both here and hereafter.

To answer which, says he, it would be a Curse either in the mouth or heart of
any Protestant, under the name of Happiness; to wish him the Opportunity,
invincible Temptation, and a kind of Necessity to Extirpate the best Religion
in the World.

Now does not this Fellow deserve to be pelted and hollowed out of every
Society that had but Common Sense? Kind of Necessity! In the Devil's Name, what
Conjuration's this! What does he mean by Kind of Necessity? Is not all
Necessity the same? Are there any kinds of it? Thou Noddle full of unutterable
Nonsense, there are several kinds of Convenience indeed, but I never heard of
kinds of Necessity before, as for Example, I could propose several kinds of
Conveniences for our Author, viz. It were convenient for him to learn Grammar;
It were convenient for him to turn an Honest Man; It were convenient for him to
get a good Parsonage, etc. But for the First, it may be he is too old or too
dull; For the Second, I am afraid he has no Seeds of it in his Nature; For the
Third, I am informed he has behaved himself so scandalously in one post
already, that he will hardly be trusted in have with another (I know not what a
new Patron may do for him) But it is absolutely necessary for him to Eat in
this World; Bread he must have, and he finding that playing the Knave and the
Fool is the most agreeable way to his Nature of getting it, has very fairly set
up his Trade with a Julian the Apostate. This I take to be an illustrative
destinction of Necessity and Convenience.

But why, my dear Author (should he ever succeed which may be, I hope, as much
as you, that he will not, for I hope the King may outlive him.) But why will
he have a Necessity upon him to Extirpate the best Religion in the World? I am
afraid my little Mephistophilus may have a Quirk in this, for if by the best
Religion in the World, thou meanest Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism,
Brownism, Quakerism, etc. all blended together as they are already in a
Faction, or either of them separated from the rest as it is probable thou
may, my dear Author: verily, I am of thy Opinion. For I think it so
absolutely necessary for the too merciful Prince, who possesses the Throne
already to do it, That I am afraid and persuaded, They will never let him Rule
in Peace so long as there is one of their Priests of Baal left to blow the
Trumpets of Sedition, affront the Authority of the Government, and vex the
Quiet, and the Peace of his Kingdoms. To Extirpate these false Religions, I
think there is a kind of Necessity, as thou call it; But how the D. should
he succeed will have by that a Necessity to Extirpate the Church of England, as
by the Law it is Established, is a Riddle I would fain see interpreted; I
believe he would find it absolutely necessary for him to do otherwise, I
believe he may find it necessary for him to Preserve, maintain, and Indulge
that Religion, so essential to the Royal Authority it self, that That, and the
Best King fell together: and what sort of Church succeeded, ask Mr. Baxter. The
Church of England is a Religion whose interest is so mixed and interwoven, on
one hand with the Prerogatives, Authority and Safety of the King; on the other,
with the Liberty, Property, Quiet and Ease of the Subject; in short, so much
the Golden Chain that ties the Interest of Rule and Obedience together, that I
dare pronounce no King can be Happy in England, that does not in all its
Interests and nicest Points support it. Nor will it for all the Preface to
Julian the Apostate be necessary for any Successor to suffer its Diminution or
its least Impair, much less to extirpate and destroy it.

All this Virulence and bitterness he has expressed in his Preface against the
Duke of York. But when he comes to speak of Julian, I desire but the Reader to
take notice how favorably he handles him.

There was, says he, a Law, and an Ancient Law of the Empire (and so great
stress was laid upon it, that the breach of it was looked upon as an Offense
against the Government and the Empire) that every one should Honor and Worship
the Emperors Statues and Pictures which were set up for that end in Public
places. Now ( says he) He (meaning his Friend Julian) took advantage of that
Law to ensnare them unawares in Heathenish Worship, for he added the Figures of
the Heathen Gods to his own Picture, and as Gregory 's words are (this fellow
has a great honor for Gregory, as we shall see hereafter) mingled Poison with
their meat, abusing their Loyalty to the purposes of Idolatry. Now let us
Construe this Gibberish, and see what it signifies.

If there were a Law of the Empire for the worshipping of the Emperors Statues
and Pictures, then was Idolatry established by Law, for worshipping Statues is
no better, and what a Libel has he made upon Christianity; nay, and quoted
Gregory for his Author, in telling us, That the Christians thought themselves
bound in Loyalty to obey that Law: Or how (though the Pictures of the Heathen
Gods were added to the Emperors) was their Loyalty in Danger of being abused?
for if those Christians could dispense in Conscience with adoring and
worshipping the Emperors Statues, they might easily have separated their
adoration from the Images of the Heathen Gods, and kept their Loyalty as found
as ever it was; what stuff is this to be Published in Print! I am afraid the
Press has got a Contagion of Nonsense, and will never vent wholesome Sense and
sound Reasoning again; for I am fain to write almost as bad Nonsense as he to
answer him: as some sort of Poisons are only to be expelled by another.

But to enquire a little farther, who were they that refused this? why he
refers us to St. Gregory again, who he says tells us, Some of the Wiser and more
Conscientious found out the Fraud, but they paid for their Sagacity, the
Pretense was, that they offended against the Honor of the Emperor; but the
Truth was, they came into Danger for the sake of the true King. Was there ever
a Libel against Christianity, and an Apology for an Apostate better couched?
Here he accuses those Christians of no less than Idolatry and Rebellion at
once; of Idolatry, in that they made no scruple of worshipping the Statue of
Emperor and of Rebellion in making a foolish evasion to disobey the Law in
boggling at Images of the Heathen Gods being present, which they need not have
taken any notice of. But at the same time to Compliment Julian, says, They were
punished yet in no appearance, for not worshipping the Heathen Images, but for
offending the honor of the Emperor; Nevertheless to gloss and varnish over
the Business, he calls it indeed a Pretense; and says the truth was, That they
came in Danger for the sake of the true King: And what does he mean by the true
King now? I Will warrant you no less than King Jesus. Were Venner alive at the
Head of his Fifty Madmen once more, each Warrior whereof was to slay his Ten
Thousand; this Fellow, I fancy, would make a very good Chaplain to the Troop.

But the end and scope of all this is, as I find a little after, to shoulder in
a Parallel as he thinks of some body else; For, Now, says he, If a Prince puts
a Border of Popery (which some say is ten times worse than a Border of
Paganism) about his Picture, which we fain would Honor and Reverence, and once
did before we saw that unhappy Accident: What shall we say! or what can we do!

Was there ever any thing so witty as this now? Does not this Fellow deserve to
be a Lord's Chaplain? a Character I hear he is lately preferred to for this very
Piece. Was there ever any thing so newly Rhetorical! Border of Popery! Put
prithee my Dear Deacon under the Rose; why a Border of Popery after all? would
it not have sounded as well to have said a Girdle of Popery, or a Shoulder Belt
of Popery? besides, it would have been a more lively Image of the thing, if the
Shoulder Belt had been Embroidered into the Bargain, as it might have been with
Triple Crowns, Beads, Crucifixes, Sir Edmondbury Godfreye's Murders, all the
Hieroglyphics of the Raree Show, and at last Arbitrary Power in Capital
Letters, at the bottom of all upon the dreadful hangers; this upon reading
might have darted dreadful Imaginat^ons into our heads indeed, but Border of
Popery! Fie, fie, it is mean and little, a Tailor would have made as noble a
Metaphor. Then too after all, to finish thy Period with what shall we say! what
can we do! 's life, it puts me in mind of Shirley's Part in the Rehearsal, viz.
Heigho: Heigh day! I have no more to do, nor more to say! Though if the Laws
shall once (as in due time my dear Friend it is possible) put a true Protestant
English Halter, or a Border of a Pillory about thy Neck: I know very well what
the Executioner will do, and all Honest Men will be furnished with something to
say.

I thought here to have done with his Preface, but upon farther Consideration,
beg leave to remark upon one Passage more of it, and then go forward with the
Bulk of his Libel.

Speaking of the Divisions of the Church at this time, says this worthy
Reverend Author, Now what did the Christians do? Did the Orthodox go and side
with Julian to revenge the Injuries which they had received from the Arrians in
Constantius's time! Or make use of Julian's favor which he showed in restoring
them to crush their Brethren, which differed from them!

Now let us examine the Matter, and Judge what credit ought to be given to any
thing this Fellow says hereafter: First, he here declares Constantius a
favourer of Arrianism, one that had Persecuted and Banished the Orthodox
Christians; yet afterward makes him the Hero of his Romance, owns Julian the
Favourer, Patron and Restorer of those Orthodox Christians from Banishment, yet
would make us believe his Book intentionally Published to his Prejudice, when
it will appear upon the whole Matter he has done all that is possible to give
Julian a Character of the most Moral and (setting aside his Defection from the
Faith) the more merciful Emperor to the Christians of the two; nay, and has the
Impudence moreover to slur the Professors in those times of that most damnable
Heresy of Arrianism upon us for Primitive Christians.

Thus much for the Preface. Thus much for the Bulwark, now for the Giant lodged
within, and thus it begins: Julian the Apostate, Chapter the First. A short
Account of Julian 's Life; Let it come then in the Name of God, (as a great Man
said once of a Hare,) I fear it not.

This Chapter being a short Account of Julian's Life, we may reasonably
suppose, since it is written by one that pretends not to praise him for his
Virtues, we shall in it find Matters against him heinous enough to correspond
with the odious Title it seems to bear. But if through this whole Chapter we
find nothing (saving his Apostasy) laid to his Charge, but what the best and
most merciful Prince in Moral Prudence might, nay, ought to have done; I hope
the World will be of my Opinion in some measure at least that our Author is not
so much his Enemy as in his Preface he pretends to be.

The first thing then that he says against him, (nay, and he quotes Theodoret
for it too) Page the Fourth is, That having a Mind to the Scepter, and seeking,
Fortune Tellers to know whether he should obtain his desire, he met with a Man
that promised to foretell him these things, who led him into an Idol Temple, and
there initiated him; so that the desire of a Kingdom, stripped this thrice
wretched Person of his Piety; and yet the very next Line to prove his Friend
Theodoret a Liar, if possible, he calls Gregory to witness, That he had no
Piety at that time to lose. Is not this as Friendly an Office as possible to
Julian to bring two such Eminent Writers against him as Gregory and Theodoret,
contradicting one another in Matter of Fact, and even in very Terms? And to
proceed says he, (quoting Gregory still) even before that he was a concealed
Pagan, and Disputed with his Brother in favor of the Heathens; when
immediately to confound all truth that might hence be urged in this case
against his Friend the Apostate, he tells us the very next Page, That
nevertheless, the Fathers all agree, that the occasion of Julian 's Revolt from
Christianity was from a thirst of Empire, and from consulting his heathenish
Gadburies about it. So that in the first place, we have here Theodoret saying,
That by his following Soothsayers, his desire of a Kingdom stripped him of his
Piety. Then Gregory telling us, He had at that time no Piety to lose, being a
concealed Pagan before; but to close the Dispute at last the consent of the
Fathers, that the Occasion of his Revolt from Christianity for all that, was
from a thirst of Empire, and consulting his Heathen Gadburies: Now if one
should object after all this, That the Fathers never knew or heard of such a
Name as Gadbury; why, may be our Author will answer, It is a fine thing to be
florid, with all my heart, but has not our Author to his Power afterward
justified Julian's relyance on Astrology, by telling us how St. Austin has
fully expressed the Matter in few words, saying, That the same God who gave the
Empire to a good Emperor, gave it likewise to Julian; so that for any thing I
see, the Gadburies were very Honest Gadburies, and told him the truth at least,
how ill use soever he made of it. I am sure he has proved Julian did not Usurp
it as is said afterward, but that God gave it him.

Now to sum up this which we have examined, all that I can find it visibly
amount to, is, That our Author having a mind nothing should be credited of what
he says in his Book against Julian the Apostate, has taken the first
opportunity to prove Gregory a Liar, and overthrow his Testimony, that all the
Quotations out of him, (which are almost the only, or at least the most
material ones he makes use of in the whole) might be esteemed by the Reader of
no force, as coming from a prejudiced hand, and one that in the very beginning
had forfeited the Truth. I think no man under a kind of Necessity (as our
Author has it) to write against Julian in Public, could have treated him
underhand more like a Friend.

Nay, He almost dares barefaced undertake it; for after all this, as if he
feared we might believe there was something in the Matter: to confute the
whole, he declares the very next Paragraph, That the World knew nothing of
this, no, nor the Emperor himself: Just as if he would put it into our mouths
to ask then, how Theodoret, Gregory, and the Fathers came by the Story? or did
Julian trust them with it being Errant Christians, and his particular Friends,
and so they kept it as a secret from the World and the Emperor, lest it might
spoil his Succession? This will not agree with the following Chapter, as we
shall see by and by farther. In short, Matters as to this Point are much in the
dark, and I am almost at our Author's own pass, of what shall we do? or what
can we say? All that I can think of it is, that Nonsense, Incoherency, and a
mired understanding are a just Judgment upon a Scribbling Varlet, that has no
more Grace than to write against his Conscience.

The next Account we have of Julian is, That being made Caesar by the Emperor,
and sent with an Army against some Northern Barbarians who had invaded France,
he proved very successful and routed the Enemy; upon which, having got the
hearts of the Common Soldiers by giving them Money, they declared hi^
Emperor: Now in all reasonable Conjecture, those Soldiers might make him
Emperor even against his Will, or at least without his seeking. For
Constantius being a favourer of Arrianism, and having Banished the Orthodox,
these Soldiers being (as our Author plainly acknowledges, Page the 8th.) Men
Principled in the true Religion might do it for the Interest of that Truth, in
hopes he might recall the Orthodox, as he afterward did. Nevertheless, do but
observe how he uses Gregory again upon this occasion, for, having done his best
to prove him a Liar before, here he is resolved to make him little better than a
Fool too: For, says he, Julian Marching with his Army toward Constantinople.
Gregory tells us, (Alas poor Gregory!) That his pretense was, he came to excuse
his being made Emperor; but the truth was, to wrest the Empire out of
Constantius 's hands, who thereupon waved his Persian Expedition, and advanced
with his Army to meet him, but died by the way: else Julian had paid for his
Folly. Now what is this, but Covertly to insinuate to us how far Gregory was
behind hand in the account of Common sense, to think that so great a Captain as
Julian was, would venture to March with a new usurped Authority, uncertain of
the hearts of his Army (which he says afterward he found much difficulty to
gain) against a Potent Emperor confirmed in his Authority, beloved by his
People, and secure in the midst of the strength of his Empire. What is this,
but secretly to call Gregory an Ass to think so, and confirm the Sincerity of
Julian's Obedience, in that he came purposely, as he indeed pretended, to
deliver up the Authority which he thought he could not hold without Dishonor;
what greater Panegyric can a Parson make upon an Apostate?

Next, says our Author, Page the 8th. Julian having called home the Orthodox
Bishops whom Constantius Banished, and thus settled himself in his Throne, and
made the Army sure to him, he began to discover his Malice against the
Christians: Well, but how? (I dare venture to loose odds, if this
double-dealing Deacon does not bring his Friend the Apostate off again
presently:) Vous avez, Page the 9th. He charged the People, That they should
Injure none of the Christians, nor reproach them, nor draw them to Sacrifice
against their wills. Was there ever so impudent a Fellow as this Chaplain of my
Lord's!

Nay, so very tender is he of Julian's Reputation in this Point, that when he
comes to speak of any ill usage which the Christians received, He does all that
possibly can be done to let us understand Julian had not any hand in the
Business: As for instances, The Heathens, says he, ran about the streets, and
abused the Saints with Scurrility and Mockery, and omitted no sort of
reproachful and abusive Language.

Now this, as our Author has ordered the matter, is so far from reflecting upon
Julian, that it utterly clears him of the thing: For he had before charged his
People not to reproach them, etc. Nor will his pretense of telling us Julian
connived at it serve his turn; for it is well known Kings, and Emperors in
those times did not use so to trifle with their Government as to Command their
People one thing, and then suffer their Subjects to fly in the face of their
Authority, and commit Riots in spite of them.

But upon enquiry, we shall find this worthy Author had a farther drift, which
was to expose Gregory for a Mad man, as he had done before for a Fool and a
Liar. And he goes about it thus:

After having told us a Story, how the Heathens and Christians used to rail at
one another in Streets, much like the Scolding of our Watermen upon the Thames,
till at last they came to blows, in which the Christians came by the worst of
it, he proceeds to tell us a Story of one Cyril, a Deacon that was killed for
being a hotheaded over Zealous Fool at Heliopolis, and breaking down many of
the Images which were there worshipped: Now I think the Deacon deserved to have
his addled Brains beat out as they were for letting his Zeal transport him to
the breach of the public Peace and the Laws, I am at this high noon of
Christianity for hanging up all zealous disturbers of the public, I am for
hanging up those zealous true Protestants of an adjacent County, that lately
broke open a Church, threw down the Communion Table, and defaced the Altar
because they thought it an abomination, nay afterward defiled the public
Vessel of Baptism, and tore the Bible the blessed word of God, for the shameful
use that followed.

But to what we proposed, this story of Cynril is followed by another Page the
11th.
of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, who had thrown down a Temple that belonged to
the Heathens and built a Christian Church in the stead of it, upon which the
people of Arethusa demanding of him to rebuild their Temple, or pay a certain
Sum of Money equivalent, he refused and was killed for his pains; nay our
Author tells us, they would have compounded with him for one piece of Gold, but
he said no.

Now if this be true, I do not think that this Bishop of Arethusa behaved
himself like a conscientious or a wise Bishop. For in the first place he had no
right that empowered him to throw down the Temple at all, and might Twenty to
one have found many as convenient places to have built his Christian Church in
as that was, and have done the public property no Injury neither: Now it may
be 'twill be objected, that it was the impulse of his Zeal; to which I answer,
I am not for that Zeal that blows up Houses and demolishes Temples, let the
pretense be as plausible as it will, we have had enough of such Zeal in England
already to our sorrow and our shame: This story our Author urges as instance of
the persecution Christianity lay under at that time, where I desire only the
Reader to observe he has taken care not to make Julian appear in it at all, he
is all along very tenderly careful of Julians reputation and will rather make
one of his Primitive Christian Bishops (as he calls 'em) appear a Fool or a
Madman then urge any thing that may reflect too closely upon his favorite
Apostate; But for his old acquaintance, Gregory to make him as I said before as
much a Madman as is possible: though he cites this instance of Marcus for an
example of cruelty and injustice, he tells us Page the 12th. Gregory was of
opinion (and he calls it a sharp saying of him) that Marcus justly suffered all
this, and deserved to have suffered a great deal more for that he once saved
Julian: Methinks now Gregory had a very odd Notion of Justice according to this
Argument: but the truth of the matter is, that he is mightily beholding to our
Author through his whole book upon all occasions. But now to close this short
account which he gives us of the Life of Julian, I desire the Reader to observe
if any thing could be more elaborate to raise an Argument in his praise then
our Author has been. For whereas he urges (and Quotes one Socrates for it too)
how Julian by a Law commanded that the Children of Christians should have no
Schooling or Education, lest by this advantage they might be better able to
oppose the disputants of the Gentiles, Page the 14th. To oppose and utterly
refute this Charge against him he cites Julian Page the 14th.
himself declaring (Juliani Ep. 42.) It would be an unjust thing to bar
Children which knew not which way to turn themselves, from the right way, and
saying expressly, that their Children were not prohibited: But mark the subtilty
of the Man how craftily he couches this Apology for Julian, by saying, who
would send their Children to Heathen Masters, where they should be principled
in Heathenism? And that this Liberty forsooth was one of Julians Traps wherein
consisted the true spirit of his persecution. Now durst our Author have spoken
out I fancy he would have told us -- Ah, Beloved Julian it is true was an
Apostate, but indeed a moral man, and a very merciful Prince, he persecuted the
Christians it is true; but how! Ah Beloved, not with Constables and Militia-men
disturbing their Conventicles, not by a Statute of the 35th of Elizabeth, he
persecuted them by Indulgency, by Liberty of Conscience; My Beloved, 'twas in
that consisted the true spirit of Julians persecution, Julian was a merciful
Persecutor but etc. Nothing is plainer if meaning be to be gathered out of
words then that this was our Authors drift in what he delivers us concerning
the Apostate, how wide soever he pretends to fly and squeek from the matter,
the Lapwings Nest is not where the noise is made; yet he has not so closely
covered his cheat neither but that a discerning eye may easily discover what I
observed before in the beginning of these remarkes, that his whole book from
one end to the other, is but a defense of Paganism, and an Apology for Apostasy.

Thus I have done with this short account of Julians life, wherein I think I
have sufficiently discovered and made appear that our Author has been much his
friend, and recoun^d nothing that Julian has done (setting aside his Apostasy)
to render his Character odious to any charitable Reader, or to charge him with
the least persecution of Christianity through his whole Government, though I
should not have taken this way of answering such a Book, or perhaps not meddled
with it at all, But that the vile, seditious design and villainous of it
provoked me to expose the Ignorance, and Folly of an Arrogant Dunce that would
needs be wasting Ink and Paper, without a common portion of Logic to argue
from any principle, or raise (though we should be so civil to grant what he
knows not how to propose) the least reasonable consequence. The whole Book
being but a few chewed scraps, and mammocks of Gregory's choleric invectives,
which perhaps he had better have set alone then ever published, and certainly
would have done so had he foreseen, what a ridiculous use such a little
greecling as this Scribler would have made of them.

But because the little peevish insect would fain by its buzz, insinuate into
the world that this Impertinent Collection may in some measure bear a Parallel
with the present case of a Prince, whom I will not dishonor so much as to
name, upon an occasion so unworthy his meanest consideration, I have taken upon
me for the rectifying and disabusing of the understandings of a great many poor
deluded people, that I am informed have been led away by the speciousness of
the pretense, without considering the weight of the argument, to wash off the
Guelt from this shining piece of Nonsense show the vile unvaluable dross it is
composed of, and let them see what a Knave they have to deal with, for putting
such false Metal upon them, and what a Fool he was too, that could counterfeit
the Stamp and Coin of sense and honesty no better.

And to this end, I shall proceed in the Examination of his Second Chapter,
which he calls the sense of the Primitive Christians about Page t^ 18th.
Julians Succession.

Now in a discourse under these contents, A Man would reasonably imagine we
were to be treated (considering the end our Author drives at) with an account
of some public Acts and Endeavors of the Christians, to obstruct and cut off
the Succession of this Julian, we might expect here some president for an Act
of Exclusion, warranted from a practice of so ancient a standing as that of the
Primitive Christians, as our Author calls them, in Constantius's time, tho they
were indeed Arrians, but instead of that in the very beginning of this Chapter
we are told we cannot expect, to read of any endeavors used to prevent this
Succession, and to fore-close him upon the score of his Religion. And why?
Because says our Author, Julians coming to the Crown a Pagan was a perfect
surprise to the World: so that instead of giving us here a President for an Act
of Exclusion even in the like case, all he informs us of is, That it was the
sense of the Primitive Christians not to fore close, as he calls it, any one
upon the score of his Religion, at least before they knew of his defection. Now
here is a neat way of arguing this Fellow has, when he would compare and make
Parallels, is it not? All I say from hence is, if it were the opinion of the
Primitives, I think it ought to be the sense of us that are Christians too, if
Religion and Justice be not growing into contempt among us, not to fore-close
any man upon the score of his Religion, till we are sure at least (from better
Arguments then the malicious insinuations of his Enemies, (whom he has a spirit
too Royal and too great to bow to) and the Oaths of perjured profligate
Villains) that he has left it.

But to come as near to the business he would foist upon us as is possible,
which is to tell us the sense of the Christians at that time (I Will put the case
modestly for him) concerning Julians Succession, The first thing he does in
this Chapter, (after a merry frisk or two by way of bob to Addressers in the
beginning merely to show the nimble disposition of his parts) is, to give us
the most accurate account he can of Julians undoubted and indisputable right to
the Empire; and truly to do him Justice it is the only methodical, reasonable
and well joined story or discourse in his whole Book. After he has shown us
this, bless us! how he seems to extend and raise himself for the force of the
blow that is to follow; but let us see how we can bear it.

After he had summed up the short History of Julians right to the Empire, he
has pleased to express himself thus. If this will not Page the 11th.
do, I know not what measures of divine right (speaking you must know very
despicably of the Assertors of any such right) will serve their turn, unless
they would have a Crown drop from the Clouds. And yet says he, The Fathers had
the conscience to set aside such a Title as this: Well, we desire to see how,
and that is but reasonable. Why says he, Gregory after Julian was dead, (he
very much given to Gregory,) in the very beginning of an Invective calls after
Constantius in Heaven, and expostulates the matter with him there. That is to
say, after Julian was dead, Gregory calls Page the ^2d.
after Constantius who dyed before him, to pass a Bill of Exclusion and set
aside the Apostates Title to the Throne; is it not so? Risum teneatis amici!
Now says our worshipful Author at the end of this Quotation, Page the 24th,
here is enough to show that Constantius would never have made Julian Caesar,
etc. Now I think this as neat a Conclusion as the Argument will bear, I think
the point of Succession as handsomely settled, as any serupulous man could in
conscience desire: I think our Author has satisfied us, That the Fathers would
have set aside Julians Title to secure their Religion, for Gregory says he,
called after Constantius about it, when they were both dead and told him, the
Apostate ought not to succeed: and that was as well as if all the Fathers had
remonstrated to him in his life time. Gregory good man, honest Gregory did all
he could in the business he was for shutting the Stable Door according to the
Proverb: his wisdom truly was great, but it was something Phrygian.

Now either the Fathers would have remonstrated to Constantius in his life time
against Julians Succession, and forgot to tell us so, or under the Rose our
Author does prevaricate, which in plain English is little better then Lying, or
else they deputed Gregory to do it for them, and he like a false Brother,
Father, writ invectives in his own name, and got all the honor of
Expostulating against Julians Succession, after he was dead to himself. But to
be serious a little, if upon this occasion it be possible.

And under a great trial of my patience I speak it, This Monster of an Author
is so unconscionably dull, and has so little mercy on those that fall under the
Condemnation of reading him, that after having thus Quoted Gregory like a
Coxcomb to a purpose for which every body that peruses it with the least
attention must laugh at and despise him, he cannot forbear glutting us with
more Impertinency still, and telling us that the same Father will give us
better measure in another place, now this other place is, but another piece of
the old Gregorian Invective, As our Author has translated him; yet I will take
pains to transcribe a little of it. I would give our Author, and his friend
Gregory as fair play as I can, and thus it runs.

What have you done, O Divinest Emperor and greatest love of Christ, (for I am
fallen to reprehending you, as if you were present ^ark it ^entle Rea^er I
be^ech ye.
and in hearing, although I know you to be much above my reproof, being placed
with God, and inheriting the glory which is there, and are only gone from hence
to Exchange your Kingdom) what strange kind of Council is this which you have
taken, who did far excel all other Kings in wisdom and understanding! Thus has
our Author Translated it; now I desire the Reader to accept of my Translation
upon this Translation, and see if it serve not as well to the purpose. As thus
then:

Hubbubbeo!

Vat ast dou don noow dou diveenest Imperour and in Creat favourship vid The
Irish houl in this manner over their dead friends Graves and much to this
purpose.
Creest gra. for I must make expostulation upon dee as if dou did hear me do
dou do not hear me indeed neider vy voudst dou die I pridee now and leave die
Cousin Julian all die Land and Possessions dou voo had so much Visdom and
Solidity St. Patrick be vid die shweet shoule vy did dou make dye amongst us!
This really to me sounds as reasonably and as much to the purpose as the very
other; yet such stuff as this dares this dull Miscreant quote for Arguments,
that the Fathers would in Conscience have set aside Julian's Title for the sake
of Religion, when he cites nothing to prove his Assertion but two or three
scraps of a railing Invective; Published perhaps not unseasonably after
Julian's Death as a piece of Ecclesiastical Policy, but signifies nothing to
the present use he would make of it: Nor can there indeed be given to the very
Tenure of it in general any credit at all: For whereas he says before, That
Constantius would not have made Julian Caesar, nor have set up an Enemy of
Christ over the Christians, if he had known him to have been such; yet he tells
us not three leaves afterward, Page the 29th. (nay, and he quotes Grogory
again for that too) That Constantius made his Excuse both to God and Man for
his kindness to Julian, and repented him of it at his last breath: Now if
Constantius knew not Julian to be an Apostate, he had no reason for this
Repentance; if he did know him to be such, he might perhaps have hindered his
Succession, but he did not; which plainly overthrows the use our Author makes
of his Friend Gregorie's Invective, which he says Page the 24th, was enough to
show that Constantius never would have made Julian Caesar, etc. as I recited
before. In short, this Fellow had got a few Notions in his Head which his watery
Brains were too cold to digest, so there they lay heavy till they infected him
with that Epidemical Disease which rages of late so fatally amongst us called
Pruritus scribendi (i. e.) Scabies soeculi.

For what Apology can there possibly be made for a Fellow that talks at the
rate he does in another place, viz. Page the 27th. where he says (and calls it
a Remarque of his own wise Noddle too) that the making of Julian a Caesar, was
a rash, foolish, inconsiderate, cruel, inhumane action, and fit only for some
Devil to advise; when but a little before, Page the 24th. he brings in Gregory
Complimenting Constantius, who did that Action, by the glorious Appellations of
Divinest Emperor, and greatest Love of Christ. But as I have observed before,
he never designed Gregorie's advantage as to this business in the least; if he
did, I am sure he has spoiled it, as bad as the Patron did him, who removed him
from his Reader-ship in Coventgarden, to a Rector-ship in Essex, or any where
else.

Now to what purpose our Author has written this Chapter concerning the sense
of the Primitive Christian's about Julian's Succession, and how far he has
proved the Fathers in Conscience would have set aside his Title, I leave to the
Judgment of any unbyassed and reasonable understanding, and so beg leave to
proceed to his Third Chapter, being an Account of the Christian's behavior
toward Julian in words.

Well, Now let us see then how they really did use him in their words, Page the
33d.
Why says our Author, instead of Julianus, they called him Idolianus, that is
to say, they Quibbled upon him; was there ever such stuff as this published
before! Nay, says he farther, They called him Pisaeus, and Adonaeus from his
worshipping of Jupiter and Adonis: yet this Boyish stuff the foolish Fellow
that writes it in the next Page, calls being smart upon Julian, I have an
honor for a Jolt headed Deacon that is good at a Jest with all my heart.

And to show us more and more how he bears a Brain (as some old Page the 35th.
Women call it) to convince us thoroughly how bitter the Christians were upon
all occasions against this Emperor in their words and speeches, indeed he
quotes us out of Ammianus Marcellinus, how that when he went to the Campaign,
some of them wished him a happy Expedition, and a glorious Return (bitter
railing, this is very bitter railing!) Now has not this Scribler ordered this
Chapter to as good purpose as he did the last! This is being very severe in
their words and speeches. This is being very smart upon him truly.

Well, but now let us see how Julian revenged himself, and persecuted them for
this Treatment, and for it take this Story, Page the 36th. of a Nobleman of
Berea.

This Nobleman, says our Author, having disinherited his Son for Warping Page
the 36th and 37th.
toward the false Religion. This persecuting Julian promising the Youth to
reconcile his Father to him, invited the Magistrates and Chief men of Berea to
a Feast, among the rest this young Man and his Father, whom he ordered to sit
next himself (very horrid Persecution indeed!) well but what followed: Why
about middle of Dinner Julian says to the Father, In my mind it is not Just to
force a Man's Judgment against his will: Therefore do not you force your Son
against his mind to follow your Opinion; for neither do I force you to follow
mine; so that here is Liberty of Conscience still, the true spirit of Julian's
Persecution, as our Author observed before. Well, but what said the old
Gentleman to all this? why, the Father sharpening his discourse answered, O
King, do you speak of this Villain who is hated of God, and has preferred a Lie
before the true Religion? Now certainly a Tyrant, and Persecutor, could do no
otherwise than command him to be Hanged, Burned or Racked for this at least.
Well, what did he do? why says our Author, he put on a Vizard of Meekness, and
only replied, Friend leave Railing. Now would not any one that reads this,
fairly conclude that the reciter of it was more Julian's Friend than the
Nobleman's, and has given a better Character of the Apostate, than the
Christian?

He tells us indeed another blind Story of a Blind Bishop of Chalcedon, Page
the 38th.
who was very foul mouthed toward Julian, for which he says, he persecuted him
grievously afterward; but the manner he leaves us to find out as well as we
can, he being as I think I have justly observed all along, too much a
will-wisher to Julian, to deliver any thing that shall not make rather for his
Praise, than his Dishonor: And this is really what his Third Chapter amounts
to, in an account of what the Christians behavior was toward Julian in Words;
we now come to consider the next, namely the Fourth Chapter, and in that their
Actions.

The first Story whereof is that of Valentinian, which if it redound not as
much to Julian's honor, both for his Prudence, Temperance, Justice, Page the
39th.
and yet Mercy too, there is no credit to be given to Theodoret, or our
Author's quotation of him: But the Reader may please to observe, That
Theodoret's Reputation was cleared at the beginning of these Remarks by the
consent of the Fathers; though honest Gregorie's evidence to speak modestly,
was not altogether so clear as the Sun.

And if this Story do prove so much to Julian's advantage, according as it is
delivered by our Author, I hope our Author will be so ingenuous the next time
he has occasion to appear in Print upon the behalf of Paganism, as fairly to
throw off the Hypocrites Cloak, declare to us freely how much he is an
Apostates humble Servant, and tell us whose Chaplain he is: And thus it begins.

Valentinian, being a concealed Christian Colonel of Horse under the Apostate
Julian, and waiting upon his Master once in a Procession to the Temple of Page
the 39th.
Fortune: The Chaplains stood on both sides of the Doors, cleansing with
sprinklings those that entered in. But when Colonel Valentinian saw this Holy
Water coming near his Clothes, he struck the Chaplain with his Fist, Page the
40th.
saying, It would not cleanse, but defile him: Now all I can discover out of
this first part of the Story is, that Valentinian may be was a very spruce
Colonel, and did not love to have his Embroidered Coat used too familiarly:
For example, suppose even at home here in our little England, nay, at
Whitehall, an Officer newly having bought his Place, going upon his Duty, with
a fine Beaver Hat, and a dainty unfully'd white Feather in it, this Hat cockt
too a la Francois, and under it a Perruque essenced and Curled in defiance to
the smell of Match behind him, under his Chin an exquisite Crevat, made up as
dext'rously, as if he had done it himself by his own great Rules of
Fortification, adorned moreover with a strutting String, that shows the exact
Diameter of the Hero's Physiognomy. Upon his Martial Body, a more Martial Coat:
Round his fine Wast a heavy Scarff, that loads his feeble bending Loins, and by
his doughty, jetting, strutting Side, a little pretty short Sword, that would
not hurt a Worm. Suppose him thus with all his fierte about him, Marching in
Querpo for the defense of the Court, and the terror of its slovenly Enemies;
and grant some Brewer's Dray just rumbling by; the frothy matter working from
the Bungholes of the Barrels, and at every jolt, squirting as wonderfully as
Sir S's Engine; grant too, that some of it by accident might Contaminate the
outside, and better part of this Noble Commander: ought not a well-drest
Centurion upon this occasion to exert himself, show his Indignation of new Ale,
and Value for new Clothes? Oh, but our Author will tell me there is difference
between the sprinklings of holy Water, and spoutings of Yeast: If he does, I
confess he will be in the right, and Valentinian was but an impudent unmannerly
fellow to offer such an act of Violence in the presence of his Emperor, and
against the Sacred Person (for so the Government then esteemed them) of a
Priest in the Performance of his Office: But to proceed, what said Julian to
all this? Why, Julian seeing what passed, sent him away to a Garrison lying by
a Desert, or as our Author quotes St. Austin for the purpose, turned him out of
the Guards. Now all I can discover out of this second Part of the Story is,
that when this saucy Companion had flown in his Master's face, Page the 41st.
he turned him fairly out of his place; but gave him no leave to sell: So that
making Money of ill Manners was not in fashion at Julian's Court.

Nor can Valentinian's being a Christian, and Zealous against the Idolatry of
the Pagans in any manner excuse him, for if his Conscience was too squeamish
for his Employment, he ought honestly to have quitted his Command, and so have
avoided the occasion of either consenting to those Superstitious Idolatrous
Ceremonies, or committing a rude Irreverent act in the Presence, and against
the Dignity of his Prince, his known Pleasure, and his Laws. For it is false
which our Author in several places of his Book endeavors to insinuate, That
Christianity at that time was the Established Religion of the Empire: For the
Empire at that time being Universal, and of all the World, it cannot be
imagined that Christianity then but in it is Infancy, could already have
prevailed so far as to be confirmed by the general Law of the World, when even
in these our times so many Ages since, it has much ado to keep the little
ground it has gotten within the narrow bounds of Europe, the least fourth Part
of that Empire which he says it was Established in. Nay if we look but
backward to the 8th page in the first Chapter, we shall find our Author himself
Acknowledging, (and still Quoting Gregory for it too) that of all this
Established Religion, there was indeed above 7000 left that did not bow the
Knee to Baal. A Mighty Number to Establish the Religion of the World withal!
No, I am afraid the Religion according to Law at that time, was the Religion of
the Emperor; and when Valentinian Broke the Laws by affronting of it, Julian
(according to our observation in the beginning of this Chapter) did like a Just
Prince to punish him, Yet like a Merciful Prince to punish him so mildly. Like
a Prudent Prince never farther to Employ or Trust him, Yet like a Temperate
Ruler too to Qualify the Passions that probably so great a provocation might
raise in him, with knowing well how to apply the Virtue, and Authority of his
Laws. And this Praise I think our Author has taken a great deal of pains to
give him, by telling the World the Story of Valentinian.

The next Instance is, how old Gregory of Nazianzum, our Author's Friend,
Gregory's Father, denied Entrance to a Captain of Archers, sent by Page the
41st.
the Emperor to take possession of a Church: upon which the Officer withdrew,
I suppose according to his Orders too. Now all I can gather from hence is; The
old Bishop being refractory, the Emperor in pity proceeded with no farther
Violence against him; for it cannot be supposed, that Julian could want force
(had he pleased) to have taken the Fortress. Oh but, says our Author) Examine
Gregory 's Funeral Speech upon his Father's Death, and you shall find, that had
not Julian got out of the Old Gentleman's way, he might have gone away Kicked;
Tho this, if truly Quoted, sounds to me rather like a Braggadochio of Gregory
for the honor of his Father, then any thing else. (For I cannot believe that
an Emperor would go himself in person to storm a poor old doting decrepit
Bishop out of a little Parish Church;) yet our Author is very positive in the
point, and says, He had much a do to refrain making Soloecisms in the Greek,
to avoid the greater Soloecism of An Emperor of the World awed and terrified
with the fear of a Kicking. This we are to understand is a merry Page the 43d.
Conceit; But our Author, who loves to be sure, gives us a Comment of a certain
Metropolitan of Crete upon the place, which being too long to recite here, the
Reader at his leisure may peruse, where he will find mention of the Captain of
those Archers indeed; but if Julian be named in it, I desire to forfeit my
Credit with him for ever. Well but (says our Author) this Metropolitan was a
better Grecian than ever I expect to be; But by this he gives us room to
observe that he expects to be a Metropolitan, though at least, and surely he
deserves it, for writing so noble a History of Primitive Christianity.

And now says our Author, page the 44th, I know no more then the Pope of Rome
what to make of all this, what they meant by it, or upon what Principles these
men proceeded, (this is a familiar way of expressing himself, but o my
Conscience the man speaks truth.) whether, says he, Old Gregory distinguished,
and did not resist Julian, but only the Devil which his Son so often tells us
was in him. Ah Friend of mine have a care there; These sorts of distinctions
may stand You in ill stead one day: for should you by these distinctions cheat
your self into a share in such a Rebellion, as theirs was who said they fought
not against the King but his ill Ministers about him, and then should be hanged
for your Logic, what an Advocate would Paganism lose, and what a Chaplain his
Lordship!

But if ever the Deacon our Author were drunk in his life, (which is not a
thing impossible, For there is very good Ale in Essex) certainly he had Chap.
5. Page the 45th.
taken a Cup, when he wrote the succeeding Chapter concerning the Devotions of
his Primitive Arrian Christians about this business. For (says he) when they
go to Church and enter upon holy ground, there one may expect to see the
flights of their self-denying and suffering Religion; There one may expect they
should lay aside all their animosities, and pray for Julian though he were
their enemy. Yes (says he) and so they do the wrong way. (Witty Varlet!) They
cannot sing a Psalm but they make his Confusion the burden of it: The Burden of
a Psalm is indeed a new expression by which we may perceive our Author is
deeply read in Ballad, and what does a man's Learning signify, if he may not
have the liberty to show it? But now according to the preparations for the
raising of our expectation, we might imagine to find something very
extraordinary indeed; As how they met in large Congregations, and with one
Heart and Voice Invoked the Fall and Ruin of this Cruel Persecuter; How the
whole Church kept Solemn, and at least Weekly, Fasts to humble themselves
before the Throne of Mercy, that the Miseries and grievous Sufferings they lay
under, might in some measure of time be taken from 'em, But as I have observed
before, it is not the Method of this Worthy Author, to perform any thing that
he would make us believe: The contents of his Chapters are high and threatening
like the Huffings of Cowards; But his Chapters themselves like the fighting of
Cowards too as much at a distance from the point as is possible. But instead of
all this, this Bankrupt-Brain'd Fellow when he has run into our debt almost a
whole History, would Compound with us for two ridiculous Stories of a Company
of Mad Fellows not unlike our Modern Muggletonians, and a foolish Old Woman
that had made her self Head of a Female Consort of sweet Singers. The Stories
run thus: Page the 46th.
Julian having given the Christians Leave to remove the Bones of one Babylas a
Martyr from the place where Apollo's Temple stood: The People that setched the
Cossin went dancing before it and singing David's Psalms, repeating after every
Verse, Confounded be all they that Worship graven Images; Upon which Julian
Commanded the Leaders of this Dance to be apprehended. Now to examine the
meaning of this a little,

And we shall find it palpably no more, then a Libel upon the Ingratitude of
these Christians: for what can be gathered from hence, but that our Author
intended to represent Julian a Merciful and Indulgent Prince, and one that
proceeded much rather like a Cherisher af Christianity then a destroyer of it:
for a Merciless, and Inhumane Persecutor might have Commanded Ministers of his
Fury to have dug up the Carcass of the Martyr out of it is Quiet grave, and
Exposed it with Disgrace and Contumely to the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts
of the Field, etc. Instead of this we find him here Commended to us as One that
practiced Methods much milder, and let the Christians themselves remove the
relics of their dead Brother, that all Decent and Pious Ceremony might be
used in the performance of it. Well, and how did the Christians thank him for
this Indulgence? Why (says our Author) They wished God Confound him for his
pains: This is the true Exposition of the Text, this is the plain English of
the Story; and if this be not a Satyr against Christianity, and a Panegyric
upon the Apostate, I know not what can be.

The other Story is this of an Old Woman, one Madam Publia, who had Page the
48th.
under her Command a Company of Virgins forsooth (now our Author may call this
reverend Lady by what title he pleases, whether a Lady Abbess or Mother of the
Maids, no matter, but an old Woman's keeping a Company of Virgins will bear a
great many Interpretations.) Well, but in short, according to Theodoret, this
ancient Gentlewoman, and her Young Ladies were always singing Praises to God,
that is certain; but when the Emperor passed by, they sung their Psalms the
louder, accounting him fit to be despised and derided: now which the relative
Him, here relates to, whether God or the Emperor (for ought I can guess by his
Writings,) may puzzle a Better Grecian or Grammarian than our Author to
determine: and if so, the old Woman for all this may be a very wicked old
Woman. But to make the best of the case, it seems as often as Julian passed by
they Left off the devotion of singing meekly to the Praises of their Creator,
and fell a roaring and bawling to affront and provoke the Emperor.

This seems not very unlike a Nest of Hornets that hum and buzz mighty
Musically while they are busy with their harmless honey; but if any thing pass
by, though it never disturb them, they increase their notes to a hideous cry,
and all swarm out to sting and vex it: Though for the credit of her Profession,
I hope this old Woman's Ladies were not every way like Hornets; that is, I hope
they had no stings in their Tayls, how sharp soever their Tongues were. But to
return to the matter. What return did Julian make for these Indignities?

Why as to the first: A Leader of the Dance, One Theodorus, being apprehended
and put to rack; (and here we have our true Protestant Author clenching his
Nayl with a Popish Miracle) being asked if he felt any pain? answered, he felt
a little: but there stood by him a certain Youth, who all the while wiped off
his sweat with a very white linen cloth, and often poured cold water upon him
which so delighted him, that he was sorry when he was taken off from the Rack;
Quis haec recitando, temperet a Risu? Now all I say to this is, that one
Miracle may be as good as another; and if this be true, I know not why we
should doubt of St. Dennis's Carrying his head so far as it is said he did
after it was cut quite off; or a great many others which (when ever they fit
his humor of scribbling) I suppose our Author will not boggle at delivering for
Orthodox, for all his Comparison between Popery and Paganism.

As for Old Mrs. Publia when she received chastisement for her insolence to the
Emperor, Odds fish she showed her self a Woman of spirit, and Page the 49th.
gave him as good as he brought, ay marry did she; she shot at him, says our
Author: Well, but how did she shoot at him? why, she plied him with her small
shot of Spiritual Songs, as she used to do.

And this is a very hopeful account of our Author's Fifth Chapter, concerning
the Devotions of the Christians; namely, how a few Madmen and an Old Woman
turned the Praises of God into Curses upon the Emperor: For which indeed we
are told a Story of one Theodorus's being racked for it, but with a Popish Lie
tack't to the end of it, that we might be sure not to believe it; for it is the
only instance of Julian's Cruelty we have hitherto met with through the whole
Book; and our Author had spoiled his main Viz. The Apology for his Apostare.
design, if he had not seasoned it with an improbability which he was morally
certain no body could give credit to.

And thus in the next place we shall survey his Sixth Chapter, and what he
says concerning their Prayers and Tears.

And truly upon the strictest Enquiry I could make, I cannot find that Page the
52d.
he says any thing of them at all. He recites indeed several fragments of
Devotions penned in the Plural number, as if they had been the Prayers of Page
the 53d.
Congregations; but tells us afterward how Gregory says they were his former
Thoughts and Cries to God: So that (says our Author himself) it is possible
they were his own private Devotions: but concludes however very Learnedly from
thence, That it is evident the public Devotions of the Christians ran in the
same strain. Now how it is evident because they were Gregory's private
Devotions, that therefore they must be the Public Prayers of the Church too, I
cannot for my heart discover: But the Scribler has all along a particular way
of arguing which I perceive satisfies himself, how much soever in the dark it
leaves his Readers. And all that I can find for my life that this Chapter
amounts to, is, that it was thought to be much for old Gregory's honor that he
helped to Pray Julian to death; whence all the conclusion I can raise is, That
our Author has done his utmost to make Page the 40th.
Gregory's Prayers no other then like the Enchantments of a Witch; for Praying
People to death is at best but a holyer kind of Witchcraft; and if our Author
thinks to bring that Practice into fashion in these our days of Devotion, I
would not give him nine pence for his Project; for I am confident the secret of
it is Quite lost, and irrecoverable; And dare swear (referring my self, were it
possible, to all the Bills of Mortality for these 600 Years and upwards) that
there has not been one man Prayed to death since the Conquest: This perhaps
some men may think a bold Proposition, but I Will stand to it. And more then
that, upon examining the Seventh Chapter how Julian came by his End, I Will hold
an even wager he was not Prayed to death neither.

For says our Author in the very first Paragraph of this Chapter, After Julian
had Reigned about Nineteen Months being in Persia, and his Army Page the 56th.
suddenly attaqued by the Enemy, he made such have from place to place to
Relieve those Troops which were most hotly Engaged, that he forgot his Armor;
and while he thus exposed himself, was struck with a Horseman's Spear which
pierced his side, and stuck in the bottom of his Liver, of which Wound about
Midnight he dyed. So that by this it is apparent he was not Prayed to death,
whatever our Author was pleased to say before, but is very remarkable through
the whole Book, that he generally has a way of changing his Opinion with his
Chapter; neither do we find in any Histories mention made that Julian vomited
any crooked Pins or Needles, or Balls of hair before he dyed; which if old
Gregory and Madam Publia had bewitched and prayed him to death, he must
certainly have done. Yet let not any one think that I too forcibly detort and
wrest the sense of our Author here, for he says himself Page the 66th, That
these Christians sometimes said all their Prayers backward to fetch down
Vengeance upon his head. Which according to the Opinion of Learned Writers upon
that Subject, is a great part and ceremony used in the Enchantments of Witches.
But are we sure after all this, that Julian was killed by the Dart of a
Persian? No, for says our Author, One Callistus who was then in Julian 's Page
the 59th.
Service, and has given us the History of that War, says it was a Demon that
did it. Now this I must Confess is apt to lead ones opinion back again, and
make a man believe there was a little Incantation and Sorcery used in the
business; but I am resolved to the Contrary, and let our Author do his Worst,
he shall never root it in my faith, that two such Eminent Primitive Christians
as Old Gregory of Nazianzum, and Publia the Mother of an Antiochian Bishop,
would give their Souls to the Devil for the destruction of any Body. Besides,
the Prince of Darkness (our Author may know I believe) is a Politic Prince,
and would not easily be wheadled withal to destroy one who was in a way of
doing him such Service, as Julian might have done, by utterly extirpating the
Religion of Salvation, and giving Hell title to all the Souls of Mankind.

In few words, as to this Chapter concerning Julian's death, I defy any any
body who is not otherwise satisfied of the matter, to make any right judgment
out of it what manner of death he died, or whether indeed he ever died at all:
for first Mr. Author tells us he was killed by a Dart from a Persian Horseman;
then he tells us that it was not a Persian who did it, but a certain Devil
incognito that rode Volunteer in the Army of purpose: And last of all, to
Confound and Entangle the matter utterly, tells us, how one Libanius a Sophist
Insinuates in his Writings, That Page the 60th.
he who killed Julian was a Christian. Now according to the common weight of
reports, the main of the thing it self, upon the whole matter may be a Lie: for
commonly when we hear a Story delivered so many several ways, we suspend our
belief, and give no credit to it in General, at all; so that for ought we know,
Julian the Apostate may be living to this very hour, nay Conversant (as
Nebuchadnezzar once among the Beasts,) with many worthy true Protestants and
others here in England, where having forgot the past glories of his Empire, and
contenting himself with the solitary pleasures of Brandy and Mundungus, (still
preserving his name) has Condescended to the humble office of transcribing and
publishing dull Libels and Lampoons, for worse fools to own, then the
blockheads that make them.

In the next place as to the usage of Julian's memory: this precious Author has
thought Convenient to write a whole Chapter, how they (that is to say, by
Gregory their representative in an Invective) called him Herod, Page the 63d.
Judas, Traitor, Murderer, etc. till after all, they Lodged him in Hell, and
there they left him: which I say was very charitably done, and so farewell poor
Julian: Only I must desire to remind our Author of a mighty mistake he has made
in matter of truth; for whereas toward the beginning of his Book, page the
14th, in the short account of Julian's Life, he says that some of the Fathers
write, that he would suffer no Christian Masters to teach; but make no mention
at all of his forbidding the Youth to learn. In this (viz.) the 7th Chapter,
and Page the 56th, rather then lose the credit of a Miracle, as he calls it, he
makes bold to give all those Fathers the Lie, and declares, That the News of
Julian 's Death was Conveyed Page the 56th, and 57th.
to some of the Christians by Miracle; for there was a Christian Schoolmaster
at that time at Antioch, and he being asked in derision what the Carpenter's
Son was doing, being, filled with Divine Grace, says our Author, Another
Popish Miracle of our true Protestant Authors.
replied, He is making a Coffin. A very heavenly Speech, truly: and the
Schoolmaster was a Wagg I Will warrant him, as well as a Schoolmaster.

This is the Sum total of the Account our Author has given us of the Sense of
the Primitive Christians about Julian's Succession, and their behavior toward
him; where I think it is sufficiently Evident, That his whole drift and design
has been (as much as in him lay) to strike at the very root of Christianity, by
exposing the weakness, false dealing, and ingratitude of a few intemperate
Zealots, under the name and title of Primitive Christians: and cha^ging other
principal Members of the Church, at that time, with no less Crimes then
Witchcraft, and Murder; While Julian all along, is represented the most
Indulgent, forbearing, temperate and patient Prince, that ever wink't and
turned aside at the Effrontive Insolences of an unruly people whom his heart
pitied; and that this was his drift, will more largely appear in the following
Chapter, Being our Authors own reflections upon the behavior of these
Christians: and here indeed (speaking for himself, and not having occasion to
Quote Gregory fo often,) we may more particularly distinguish the spirit of the
Man; for he cannot help showing us his thoughts fairly and Page the 65th.
clearly upon the matter; but says in the very first line of this Chapter,
(and so onward for a whole leaf together, which I shall epitomize as well as I
can,) That Julian's persecution was but a Flea-biting to what the Christians
formerly had felt, that the case of the discarded Schoolmasters, Physicians,
and Soldiers, was the greatest severity of all Julian's Edicts: that Julian,
to speak properly, was rather a Tempter then a Persecutor; and one who wrought
upon Men's Covetousness and Ambition more then their fear; and that whatsoever
he ever designed against the Christians, was far short of what other Emperors
had executed. Is not this an Apology for Julian now! is not this making Page
the 66th.
him the most equally dealing and Indulgent Prince that ever reigned! if the
Reader is not so satisfied, let him but carry his Eyes a very little farther,
and observe how he treats and justifies those Christians and their proceedings.
For yet says he, (notwithstanding all this) how do the Christians Treat this
Emperor! One would take them Page Ib.
to be the Apostates, one while reproaching him, ruffling with him, and vexing
every vein in his Royal heart; another while saying all their Prayers backward,
and calling down vengeance upon his head; After that, dancing and leaping for
joy at his death, and insulting over his memory: but for the name of
Christians, he had better have fallen amongst Barbarians, And yet (says our
Author farther) he often would mildly put them in mind of their christianity
too: But they call him by the bloodiest names of the Devil, for taking
advantages of the Christian doctrine in this particular, which says, we must
not avenge our Page the 67th.
selves, nor render evil for evil, etc. Now let any unprejudiced Readers but
peruse these two Characters seriously (Viz. that first of Julian, and this
after it of the Christians) and thence Judge who set this noble Author to work,
and the cause he writes for, Judge which he has done the best service to, by
the feats of his triumphing Pen; whether Christianity or Apostasy, God or the
Devil.

Nor ought his telling us, that christianity was then the Established Religion
of the Empire, at all, to prevail upon our belief, till he bring better
Arguments for it then those I before observed, of the mighty number of Seven
Thousand, that did not bow the Knee to Baal: Christianity was indeed a
Tolerated Religion of the Empire, increased and got strength under the
Patronage and Protection of those Christian Emperors before Julian: but that it
was ever Constituted or Commanded by their Laws, to be received as the
universal Religion of their Dominions, is a secret, which I am afraid our
Author's Learning will hardly yet a while, from any Histories discover to the
World. For though those Emperors were Christians themselves, we do not find,
(from any thing at least that our Author informs us except we will take his own
bare word for the matter) that they ever began a general tirpation of
Heathenism, or Commanded universal Baptism over all their World: They made no
Laws for bringing Nations under the same Discipline of one Christian Church,
which had it been a Religion established by Law, must and would certainly have
been done: But whether it were, or were not, signifies little, or nothing to my
present purpose, it being only my design in these Remarques, to let the World
see, how falsely they are dealt withal by a Scribler, that pretends to write a
Satyr upon an Apostate, when he has taken all the care that is possible, to
vindicate and defend him: which as he has done sufficiently in contradicting
the truth, so has he been as Industrious for it in contadicting himself too:
for when he comes, as he Page the 71st.
calls it, to sum up all in a word, he tells us, that the first Christians
suffered indeed according to the Laws of their Country; whereas those under
Julian were persecuted contrary to Law, who did not fairly enact sanguinary
Laws against them, but put them to death upon Shams and pretended Crimcs. Now
how this agrees with what our Author told us before, in Page the 66th, let the
Reader look back, and he will soon be satisfied: for there he tells us Julian's
persecution was but a Flea-biting to what the Christians formerly felt; That he
good man wrought upon men's covetousness more then their fear: yet here, Page
the 71st he was a Cruel Murderer and putter to death. Nay upon pretended Crimes
too, what credit ought to be given to so impudent a Fellow as this, who will
rather give himself the Lie, then use the memory of an Enemy to God, and a
reviler of his Blessed Son, as it deserves! yet this is he whom a true
Protestant party (as they call themselves) cry up for a Libel written against
their Christianity; and a most Religious Zealous Pious Lord has chosen for his
Chaplain.

And these indeed are the reflections of our Author upon the behavior of the
Christians against Julian; with this Title had he charged his dreadful
Murdering piece of all the Ninth Chapter. But finding that it would not go off
so, has primed it with a new one of passive obedience, which may more properly
be called, an Appendix to his Preface: for it is a solution of the case, how
far we ought to be obedient to a Popish Prince.

Now though it be palpable enough at what head he Aims his odious Title; And
though I own my self a naturally devoted Servant, to that Illustrious Heroic
Virtuous Sufferer, whom I never could be convinced (by any proof or the
strickest enquiry I could yet make, (barring public suspicion) deserved that
denomination: yet here, Abstracting the case from the Person, I am contented
for once to take the frivolous discourse in hand, as this trifling Author has
stated it, and see what damage according to his Arguments, are likely to
accrue from a Popish Prince, (granting there could be such a thing) to the
Established Religion of these Kingdoms.

After which (allowing the esteem our Authors party have for the service he has
done them) if it appear from his own Arguments to the contrary, that our
Religion, according to its Establishment, in its inward perfect purity of
doctrine, and it is outward defense and bulwark of the Law, be so confirmed,
that (if it forsake not its own strength) nothing at home can shake or disturb
it, much less persecute it: I think it were but Reason, (if Peace and Truth,
(according to their pretensions) be the things they so much labor for:) that
they henceforth return into the Arms of the Church, the obedience to the Law,
renounce their Pharisaical pride of separation, and let the People of England
be once more fellow Christians and fellow Subjects.

If then (as our Author says, Page 73d.) We have our Religion settled by Page
the 73d.
such Laws as cannot be altered without our own Consent, what need he in the
next page have asked the foolish Question, Whether or no we are to go to Mass
to Morrow or have our Throats out? If, as he says, there can be no Page the
75th.
need of passive obedience for our Religion, but by our own Treachery to it, in
parting with those good Laws which protect it, and in agreeing to such as shall
destroy it; why all these noises and clamors? why these alarums among us? why
these outcries of approaching Persecution and imminent Popery? If the Laws of
the Kingdom absolutely and entirely tend (as certainly they do) to the
maintenance of the established Church, and the rooting out the Superstitious
Religion of Rome, and if there be no power in England Civil or Military, but
what merely depends upon the Authority of those Laws, and cannot move without
it, where are those dangers we so foolishly affright our selves withal? or
whence can they arise? From within our selves I am sure they cannot, except
Popery be to grow upon us out of the Earth, like Mushrooms in a Night, or
gather over our heads like a thick Cloud in the Air, and rain down a shower of
Armed Papists in ready Rank and File, to overrun and destroy us er'e we can
think of our defense.

Popish black bills, it is true, have been sent to a Rendezvous by the Post, but
never more heard of: An Army of Pilgrims too were Landed, but to no purpose
neither; Yet these things were in a time, when we had a dangerous Plot ready to
discharge it self among us, but now the Play Master of the Imaginary Army to be
raised for the use of that Plot, is gone into another World, the rest of the
Principal Officers under a close Imprisonment, and like to lie there; Nay all
their Commissions lost too, and not so much as one Cipher of Father Oliva's to
show for the business; What grounds are there for our Fears now? Are not all
the Popish Nobility in the Kingdom excluded from their Votes in the House of
Lords? Or can any Man be a Member of the Lower House who does not take the
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, Test, and Sacrament according to the Church of
England? And are not these Two Houses the great Council of the Kingdom, who are
to prepare by Votes all manner of Instruments, for the preservation of our
Safety and Religion, and Confirmation of our Rights, to be passed into Laws by
the Royal Assent? And can there in a Government and Church thus Established,
thus Fortified, be fears of Popery or Persecution from it self! No, were there
but another Test to pass through the Kingdom against Separation and Schism, as
there is against Popery, I think then even our own Treachery to our Religion
were impossible to be supposed, in parting with those good Laws which should
protect it: I believe then the 35th of Elizabeth would no more be struck at,
but put in due Execution; Rebels, and Mutineers reduced and made obedient to
the Government and Laws; Mechanics kept to their Shops, and not suffered to
turn their Warehouses into Nurseries of false Doctrine, Profaneness,
Blasphemy and Rebellion. And since as our Author says, it would be Treachery to
part with those good Laws which protect our Religion, They who would Abolish
this Law are not, it is to be feared, so true Sons of the Church as they ought
to be, by Leaving so wide a gap for all manner of Confusion to enter in at, and
rend the peaceful Bowels of their Mother. No, Let us banish those needless
Fears, that serve for nothing but to perplex the sweetest Peace, that ever a
happy Nation was blessed withal; and avoid those Enemies of our Prosperity that
would promote them. Let all true Sons of the Established Church resolve by
Loyalty to their Prince, Obedience to his Authority, Mutual Love, Charity, and
entire Union, amongst and toward one another; to maintain, and defend it:
resolve to stand by and preserve the Laws that support it, from the annoyance
both of its right, and left hand Enemies; let us resolve this and be Quiet: and
if we do so, we shall be Quiet, to the Confusion of our Author, and those
mischievous creeping Caterpillars his Party.

Nay since there are good Laws for the protecting of our Religion against its
Enemies, the Schismatical Phanaticks, as well as Papists and Others; the best
way certainly of protecting it, is, by putting those good Laws in Execution,
nay to the utmost Extent, and improvement of them if possible: and for this
too, (to give our Author one Quotation for his whole Book-ful) let Bracton be
my security, Nay the very place too where Mr. Deacon is pleased to Quote him
himself upon this occasion: (viz. Libro 1. Cap. 2.) in these words; Leges cum
fuerint approbatae consensu utentium, et Sacramento Regum Confirmatae, Mutari
non possunt, nec destrui, sine communi consensu and consilio eorum omnia,
Quorum Consilio and consensu fuerunt promulgatae. That is to say, that since
the Laws have been approved by the consent of those for whose use and benefit
they were made, and Confirmed by our Kings; They cannot be changed, nor
destroyed, without the Common consent and advice of all those, by whose Advice
and Consent they were first set forth: So far our Author. But had he pleased to
have carried his Eye a line farther, he might have found this added; Quod in
melius tamen converti possunt, etiam sine eorum Consensu, Quia non destruitur
quod in melius Commutatur; i. e. That for all this, nevertheless they may be
improved at the discretion of the Prince, even without such Consent, since
nothing can be said to be destroyed, which is changed for the better. Which all
makes good my aforementioned Assertion, That for the preservation of our
Religion, the Laws ought to be put in Execution, with the utmost Rigor, and
(when the King shall think fitting) in so good a Cause, they ought, if
possible, to be stretched and improved too: For Laws being the Instruments, put
into the hands and power of a^ing, wherewith to Govern and Protect his People;
those Instruments are to be used at his own discretion certainly; And a good
Father of his Country cannot but think himself obliged, to give them their
utmost and severest reach for the suppressing and reducing of Contumacious
stubborn impudent Mutineers and Rebels; as well as sometimes in Goodness to
abate their Rigor, when he finds an object that may deserve his Mercy.

Our Author might have found out this as well as I now: But I suppose he may be
one of those that are for clipping the King's Prerogative, and for that end
would serve all those Authors so too that defend and assert it. And indeed I
observe in all their Writings, that it is much the practice of the Advocates
for that Party, (whenever they have an Occasion to show their Reading, and
Quote a poor Author that never intended them any Kindness,) to snip, pare and
shave him down just to their purpose, so clap him upon the Margent of their
Pamphlet, in hopes to Cobble up their false Arguments with defaced and mangled
truth, and make them pass for Veritable Doctrine.

And indeed I cannot tell all along what to make of this giddy-headed Author I
am to handle: He turns, and shifts, and dodges, and never keeps one Course: He
pretends to treat of passive Obedience, but never tells us what passive
Obedience is: discourses from no principle in the world; nor gives us any
definition of his Theme: and indeed upon due consideration it were unreasonable
to expect it of him, for had he ever read Ethics, he would have learned more
honesty then to have published such a Book He first tells us in a word, That we
are secured so well by our Page the 75th.
Laws, that passive Obedience must (except by our own treachery) be for ever
unpracticable amongst us: yet wastes Twenty or Thirty Pages more to scare us
with the dangers of its doctrine, which he says, It Is true can never Page the
78th.
discover its malignity under his Majesty's gracious Reign, which God prolong
and prosper, who has been pleased to give the Nation the security of his
Coronation Oath, etc. But in case we should fall under a Popish Successor, then
this Bloody Doctrine will have the Opportunity to show its self in its own
Colors, and we may then see, and it may be feel the sting of it.

Now here really it is very hard to forbear laughing most outragiously at this
Fellow and his Canting, but that I correct and keep my spleen under in a pure
principle of charity, for fear lest I mistake his frenzy for his folly. The
King has been pleased to give us the security of his Coronation Oath, Quotha!
but in case we should fall under a Popish Successor! -- Well, what then? Must
not he give us the Security of his Coronation Oath too? Yes, my dear Author,
that he must, and I believe Thou may be satisfied it will be his Interest to
keep it too, except thou can think him so blind to his own good, as to hazard
the involving of his Nation in blood, shaking and endangering of his Throne for
ever, and all for the great advantage he may propose to himself, of bringing in
the Power of a Tyrannical Clergy, to Impoverish his People, lessen his
Revenues, and weaken his Authority.

Oh but (says our Author) I suppose that a Popish Successor being in
possession, and so a lawful Magistrate, will persecute Protestants. Page the
79th.


To which I answer; I desire to know, which way he will persecute Protestants:
will he persecute them with the Laws? No. They are of the Protestant side. If
he will raise a Popish Army and bring in Popery with Drum and Trumpet, I humbly
desire to know where he will beat up his Drums for them, and how the Popish
Officers will make their Interests in the Country when they are to raise them:
or what Popish Towns will give 'em Quarters till they come to their Rendezvous:
Or which way this Popish Successor will get a Popish Parliament, to give him
Protestant Money, to pay this Popish Army: all these things will be necessary:
For let the Romish Religion be never so much in the matter, your Musketeers
and Pikemen will have a certain Protestant principle of point d' Argent, point
de Swisse: Though after all it would be a damnable surprise at last, if our
Author should have a Project at the end of all this, to conceal his Politics
till this Popish Successor Comes, and so prefer himself to his Privy Council by
a trick he has in the bottom of his Budget, for the bringing in Popery in a
peaceable way, and enslaving the Nation without a farthings Cost or a moments
trouble: that I must confess would be something new, and not unpretty. Marry
but (says the Page Ib.
Gentleman farther) if he does not persecute Heretics with fire and sword, he
lies at the Popes Mercy to have his Kingdom taken away from him: Indeed Mr.
Author, and that is a very weighty Consideration; But do you think in your
Conscience that he will part with it so! Truly a deep foresight into politic
Consequences is a great blessing to one that is to write much upon Supposes;
Though if a man might be so bold as to put in a word with you, really it seems
unto me, (Noble Sir Poll.) that you do please to speak of more then need be
done: for if you dare to Engage this Popish Successor (after you have
established your Interest by your project from bringing in his Religion) to let
us poor Protestants live in Peace and Quietness, as I believe you may; I Will
Engage the Pope shall be very favorable to him, and for a very small Quit-Rent
let him keep the Copyhold of his Kingdom: Bless us, how things will be managed
when the Reader of Covent Garden comes to be a primiere Minister, and I
Ambassador Extraordinary to his Holiness! but till that time comes I can
foresee no fear of a Popish Persecution, nor very great danger of the Popes
disposing of these Three Kingdoms.

Well, but what are we to think now, if, as our Author says, into the Page Ib.
bargain, that besides the danger of being dethroned by the Pope if he does not
persecute Protestants, he runs also the hazard of being served as the Two Henry
's of France were? Why truly nothing is Impossible: but we hope it is not
altogether so probable, that a King should be stabbed in a Protestant Country,
for not persecuting its Religion: let him keep the Enemies of the Church from
hurting the Protestants, and certainly the Protestants will be able to keep
their Enemies from hurting of him; or the Pope from taking away his Kingdom
either: 100000 Protestants will be too hard for all the Pope's Bulls in
Christendom. This Policy I believe Any Successor (let his private Persuasion be
what it will) may find very necessary in England, and Twenty to One be wise
enough to practice it too: for Henry the Fourth of France, it is very
observable, was not Killed by Ravillac till he left the Protestant Religion,
and encouraged Popery; had he kept it under still, and Established the Reformed
above it, it is an even wager but he might have died in his Bed, and been
gathered to his Fathers in Peace. Besides, it is not absurd to imagine, that it
was not so much an Ecclesiastical as a Temporal Policy, which sent the
Villainous Dagger to that Brave Prince's Heart.

But our Author has indeed a most extraordinary Rule of Policy of his own, and
we may perceive it plainly enough by that which follows: For, says he, Let
things fall as they will, though some persons may be so happy as to think he
will not persecute, yet every body must grant that he may persecute, that the
thing is Possible.

Now from this hour, Thou most Confounded Author, do I declare Immortal enmity
with thee; nor will ever be Ambassador to the Pope, nor shall thou be ever a
Minister of State. It is possible in the Devil's name that a Popish Successor
may persecute! And is this the Mouse that thy Mountain of a Book has brought
forth at last? and ought a Bill of Exclusion to pass for this, because Thou
say it is possible that a Popish Successor may persecute? had Thou stuck
to thy first Argument, That our Religion can never be in a condition of
Persecution, but by our own Treachery to it, in parting with those good Laws
which protect it, and in agreeing to such as shall destroy it; had Thou kept
to that Foundation, thou might indeed have raised some discourse of Reason:
but that the possibility that an evil may happen, is sufficient for any
reasonable men to raise their fears of it upon; or a lawful cause to use
unnatural and unequal means to prevent it, is an opinion I would gladly see
thee put in practice; It is not impossible, but that thou may come to be a
Slave in the Turkish Galleys one day, and compelled to live a wretched painful
life for several miserable years together: why do thou not generously hang
thy self for a remedy against it! for such an accident may happen to thee, the
thing is possible. Or if since it is possible that a Popish Successor may
persecute, that it would be therefore just and reasonable to exclude him, why
thou vile blunderer, it is possible too (if that be all) that a Protestant
Successor may persecute as well as a Popish one: that a Protestant Successor
may turn Papist: it is possible that the best Prince may change his Nature and
turn a Tyrant, neither of these accidents but are possible in Nature, and so by
thy Argument all Heirs to the Crown ought to be therefore Excluded, and no more
Kings reign over us because it is possible they may one way or other prove
persecutors: and I am very much afraid indeed that is the vile false consequence
thou would dispute for: But to come closer to thee in thy rule of
possibility, it is not impossible but that such a Parliament may come as to
Vote a Bill for the rooting out of our Religion, and Establishing Popery or a
Worse in its place: were it therefore reasonable to pass a Law that never any
more Parliaments should Sit in England, nay as thou have stated it, it really
carries the more specious pretense of danger of the two: for it being
impossible, that our Religion in its lawful Establishment, can be peaceably
altered, (if any way) by any other means then an Act of Parliament; the King
too being but one man, and the Parliament many, it is more reasonable that the
opinions of the many, should sway the will or inclination of one, then that the
will of one should overruled the opinions and inclinations of the many: since
therefore it is impossible, that any Successor can lawfully violate the
Protestant Religion, but by the concurrence and consent of a Parliament; All
thy Argument amounts to, is, Take away Parliaments, and our Religion in law is
safe. For ever the Nation is beholding to thee for thy parts: and by the
service thou art fit to do the State by thy Policy, we may guess what the
Church may hope from thy Divinity.

Well, but after all says our Author, Since it is possible that a Popish
Successor may persecute, it is even high time that we look about us, and see
what we have to trust to. The Gospel does not so much as allow any means when
we cannot escape by Flight, betwixt denying and dying for the Earth: Well, but
by what Law must we dye? By none, says our Author, that I know, but Parasites,
Sycophants and Murderers may.

Now I dare venture to hold this Author of ours Fifty pound to a shilling, that
amongst all his Noble acquaintaince, there is not one Parasite, Sycopham, or
Murderer, that knows any more Law for it, then he does himself. But Rhetoric
is a fine thing, and a man that has the gift of it, can no more stop a Trope
when its coming, then a Dutchman a belch; it is a great case now and then to a
writer, and ought to be allowed him.

But now I must beg leave to be a little more serious with my worthy Author,
and take him to task with a severe scrutiny. What have we here, Page the 82d!
There is no Authority upon Earth above the Law! Page the 82d.
If our Author means by this, that the King is subject to the Law, I know not
what they may amount to; and think it were but fit that he should explain
himself. But to take the words in their bare, and unprejudiced signification: I
say there is an Authority in the King, which is an Authority above the Law: And
I think too it will be easy naturally to prove it. For whatsoever derives it is
virtue from another Authority, is Inferior to that Authority whence it is
derived; and therefore the Law being the Kings Creature, made and informed with
that force which it bears, by the Kings proper Fiat, and Royal Stamp: the
Authority of such a Law is but derivative, a Child begotten by the parent power
natu^urally in the King, and consequently inferior and subject to that first
power, as much as a Child is naturally to a Father. Besides the Law being (as I
said before) no other then an Instrument in the hands of the King, wherewith he
is to govern and protect his people; certainly the weapon is not equal to the
Arm that weilds it. For as a Sword is but a dead thing of its self, its edge
and point of no use at all, but as it is enforced and directed by the hand of
him that bears it: so equally the Law, can exercise no Authority merely of it
self at all, but as it is managed and put in motion, by the preeminent and
superintendent power in the King: so that there is certainly an orignal
Fountain of Natural Authority in the King, above the mechanical instrumental
Authority of the Laws.

Nor will it be sufficient that our Author Quotes Bracton's Opinion in the
case, to make his Argument irrefragable at all; For though Bracton Page the 83d.
indeed was a very good Lawyer, we are not by any means to allow him
infallible: especially in a case which is evidently false. For whereas he says
indeed (as our Author has cited him) that Rex debet esse sub lege Quia lex
facit Regem, I cannot by any means allow of his Proposition; since the Law does
not make the King, but the King the Laws. For if we look back to the original
power of our Kings, as it is derived from the Norman Conquest, we shall find
that Conqueror was not made King by the Law, but by the Sword; nay after he
had Vanquished us, imposed too his own Norman Laws in a great measure upon us:
as is sufficiently probable from the absolete French Language which they are to
this day written in. So that Bracton is in the wrong to say the Law makes the
King, for the Race of our present Monarch is derived from that very Conqueror,
who cut out his way to his Throne with his Sword, and by that Power set up such
Laws, as he himself thought sitting; and what Laws have passed since, have been
made Laws by the succeeding Kings after him, and not the Kings made by the
Laws. For our Kings reign, and hold their Crowns by the right of that Conquest
still, which cannot be altered till they themselves willingly resign it, and
take up a new Royalty upon new Conditions, and then indeed (as Bracton says)
The Law may make the King, and the King ought to be under the Law.

Yet this does not hinder, but that (as our Author says) Page the Page the
84th.
84th, a Popish Successor can have no Authority to exercise any illegal cruelty
upon Protestants. And if so, certainly there is therefore much the less fear of
him: By much less therefore ought we wilfully to rend and tear the present
happiness we now may live in, and be blessed withal; by seperating our selves
into unreasonable Factions, for fear of a danger which is but wildly possible,
and (in all consideration of our present condition as we are fenced and
defended by the best constituted Laws in the World, except our own Treachery or
folly destroy them) utterly improbable: for if (as our Author says after) that
bad Princes are hardly ever known to stoop so low as to be Executioners
themselves of their own cruelty; if we are out of our pain (as he says) as to
that difficulty, I cannot by Page the 85th.
any means admit of his second scruple, that under a Popish Successor the lives
of all Protestants shall lie at the mercy of every Justice of Peace, Constable,
or Tything-man, who shall have Catholic Zeal enough to destroy them. For this
my dear Poll is filthy prevaricating: let us still keep our ground, and be true
to our Laws, this of all absurdities is impossible to happen. For the Law has
provided, that no man shall henceforth bear any of those offices, but approved
and known Protestants, such as must take the Sacrament, Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and the Test to enable them for their employments, and till those
good preserving Laws are abrogated by our own Treachery, it is in our own
choice to be as happy as we would be, even under the very reign of a Popish
Successor.

And whereas our Author (to show what a Courageous Author he is) rouses
himself, and setting his Arms a Cymbo, cries, Page the 87th, That though we
cannot hinder Papists from being Idolaters. we will endeavor to keep them from
being our Murderers: I must beg leave to tell him as a friend, he might have
spared his Breath, to cool his Pottage; for the Page the 88th.
Laws will do that business well enough, without his help. Nor can there be any
petty Popish Officers (as he does his weak endeavor maliciously to insinuate)
under a Popish Successor, to be absolute Emperors, and have the power of life
and death; for as I observed before, the Law has taken care, that no Papist
shall henceforth bear Office in this Kingdom; And this Scribler, before he had
entangled himself in this Argument, should have found out a flaw where our Laws
were liable to be invaded and broken, if he intended to have persuaded us we
were not safe under their shelter. In short I am weary of moyling in the heavy
road of his Nonsense; long to get rid of him and shake my self clean: least by
farther endeavoring to answer a Fool according to his folly, I become like
unto him. For he pretends to write History, which he is able to bring to no
definite Conclusion: and strains at a discourse, yet lays us down no
principles. Sometimes indeed he has a great disposition to a jest: but performs
it as Awkardly, as I have seen a Jack-pudding show feats of Activity: who when
you would think his heels were charged with a miracle, comes squobb upon his
breech, and looks like the Author of Julian the Apostate. And thus I have done
with this Ninth Chapter, being Reflections upon the Behavior of his Primitive
Arrian Christians, and his opinion of passive Obedience.

And now his next Chapter being, as he styles it, a Comparison of Popery and
Paganism: If the Reader expect I should say any thing to that, I must fairly
tell him the truth. I was so worryed with the foregoing part of the Book, that
I could find in my heart to read but two leaves of it: wherein if our Author
would resolve me two scruples, I should take it as a favor first; That whereas
he says, Page the 100, That Bishop Ridley said the Church of Rome was a
Babilonical Beast, and Whore, a devilish Drab, and a stinking Strumpet: I
desire to be satisfied how the Reverend Father came to know, whether a Strumpet
stunk or no: Secondly, That he having Quoted part of a Homily in the next page
to prove, that the Scripture calls the Romish Church a harlot, I humbly beg to
be satisfied, how she could be harlot when the Scripture was written, and when
yet it is evident she had not lost her maidenhead?

But whether he has done Paganism right, or Popery wrong in this Chapter, is
not my business to Examine: who am not concerned for the honor of either of
them, being born and educated in the Church of England as it is Established by
Law, and in that Church hope to dye; and yet fear not Martyrdom for it neither,
under the Reign of any Popish Successor.

FINIS.
Semper ego Auditor tantum? OR A VINDICATION OF HIS Royal Highness THE Duke of
YORK, etc.
ONe might in Charity have thought, That those Peaceable People as they call
themselves, and Whigs as every Body else calls 'em, after so many Defeats as
their Seditious Projects, and Models of Rebellion have met withal after it was
almost Visible, that the particular care of Providence had guarded our Gracious
King and the best part of his Loyal Subjects, from being Murdered and Enslaved
by them, and the Heads of their Faction; for the Design was no better. A man
might at least have reasonably imagined they would in Policy for a season have
been Quiet; But they are a Generation of People that no Condescension or
Indulgence of a Prince can oblige, nor no warning from God, but Plague,
Pestilence, or Famine, reform. For not being content privately to have drawn a
horrid Scheme of Seizing, Deposing, or Murdering of our Good and Gracious
Sovereign, (whom God for ever Protect from their Bloody and Rebellious hands)
for the enslaving every Loyal and true Subject to the Monarchical Government,
under the Tyranny of a second Rump Parliament, chopped out into several
Committees for the Sequestration of Honest men's Estates into their own Pockets;
but now they have the Impudence fairly to tell the World what it was they
meant, couching it under the specious Title of a Tory Plot; which foolish,
sawey, and very dull, though malicious Pamphlet, I the rather think fit in this
place to take notice of, because it has so much the resemblance of another
called, No Protestant Plot; That by the deformity and weakness of the Ricketty
Brats, their old debilitated ^ather must be the same.

And the best way of examining that Pamphlet, as I conceive, is to take it as
it lies before us in its Natural confusion, so fairly to work with it in the
lump together, see what it weighs, and leave it afterward to the World to
judge what it is worth.

This Pamphlet then in the first place is composed of about Six Sheets of
Paper, filled with a morly conceited Preface, and a familiar Treatise
concerning the Rise, Growth, and Discovery of a Popish Plot; from thence, the
Legality, Equity, and Expediency of a Bill of Exclusion; a Cursory and
Plausible Account of the Parliaments Proceedings at Oxford; a saucy Censure of
His Majesty's Declaration after the Dissolution of that Parliament, and the
Addresses of the whole Kingdom in Loyal and Dutiful Thanks for that
condescending and fatherly Declaration; and to wind up the Business at last, a
short Apology for the Doctrines of Calvin, compared with those of Ignatius
Loyola; a Vindication of St. Stephen College, the true Protestant Joyner; a
Justification of the late Treasonable Association, and the Ignoramus Juries
that would not find it so, grounded upon that passed into an Act in the Reign
of Q. Elizabeth; and a Protestation at the bottom of all, who it is that shall
not Reign over the mighty, Author of this doughty Pamphlet.

To proceed therefore with all the Cand^^r and fairness imaginable, I shall in
the first place enquire how far by his own Arguments he has proved the Rise,
Growth, and Discovery of a Popish Plot, the Legality, Equity, and Expediency of
a Bill of Exclusion, how far the Parliaments Proceedings at Oxford stand by him
Justified, or His Majesty's Dissolution of it, and Declaration after it
Condemned; I shall Compare the Doctrines of Calvin and his Followers, with
those of Ignatius Loyola, and leave the World to Judge whose are the Lest; then
enquire how far St. College ought to be Vindicated; the late Treasonable
Association and Ignoramus Jurymen justified in relation to that passed into an
Act in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, and upon his Protestation who shall not
hereafter Reign over him, make as fair a Conclusion as I can, what sort of
Prince and Government he desires to be a Subject under.

This done, I shall beg leave to offer some reasonable Conjectures to Public
consideration, whether or no our Author has, as he calls it, discovered a Tory
Plot, or has not Positively and most Learnedly Confirmed the truth and
certainty of a Whiggist Conspiracy, carried on for these many years together,
and couched under the most plausible Pretenses of maintaining the Protestant
Religion, our Property and Privileges, and securing the Subject from Arbitrary
Government, etc. when upon the whole Matter, nothing has been aimed at but the
Dissolution of the Monarchy, the Destruction of our Excellent Religion, as now
Established by Law; the rending and ruining of our Properties, and leaving us
no Privileges at all, and instead of securing good Subjects from Arbitrary
Government, the bringing of us under the most odious and insupportable Tyranny
that ever Athens knew, or Rome groun'd under. It Is time now to speak Truth or
never; I will do it, and the Devil and Rebels bear the shame of it.

In the first place then for his Merry Preface, which I had almost forgot; He
tells us there, that It is the undoubted Privilege of Parliament, That none
should be questioned out of it, for any thing spoken or transacted in it:
That Is false: For should any man say in Parliament he would Kill the King, he
shall be questioned for it out of it, and I hope Hanged too; and all, I humbly
conceive no breach of Privilege neither: But our Noble Author to show how fit
an Advocate he is for his Party, will needs be at it, and Juggle in his very
Preface, which should be his Apology: None shall be questioned out of
Parliament, for any thing spoken or transacted in it! That is, None shall be
liable to the Law for what he says in Parliament, provided he keep the bounds
of Privilege, which I humbly conceive is limited, notwithstanding the late new
started Doctrines, That they are the only Judges of it themselves; why else do
they desire the Continuation of their Privileges every new Sessions by their
Speaker? The King is the Judge of those Provileges then, for how can any Man
grant what is fitting, that is not supposed the Judge what is so? Though
therefore none be liable to the Law for what he says in Parliament, provided he
keep the bounds of Privilege; yet I hope any Corporation that sends up a
Member to Serve for them in Parliament, being sensible that that Member has
abused or not discharged his Trust, by proceeding unwarrantably in his Station,
running into a faction to do nothing the King desires of them, to vex him with
Bills for Dis-inheriting a dearest Brother, with a thousand other Contrivances
to perplex the good of the Kingdom, and Embroil rather than Settle it: I hope
such a Corporation, in an honest sense how they have been misrepresented by the
Servant, that they have sent to the King, may have liberty to censure the
Proceedings of such an unfaithful Servant, and to Vindicate themselves too by
any humble Address to His Majesty, to assert their constant and loyal Adherence
to his Government; and if need be, Abhorrence of any Transactions either of
their own Servant, or any else, that would grow their Master, tending to the
Disturbance or Dissolution of it.

Oh, But have a care, says the Preface a little farther, when His Majesty shall
say to those dry Bones, Live, and they shall stand upon their feet, they will
be the fittest to declare their resentments, etc.

Now do but mark this facetious Gentleman, rather than lose his Jest, what will
he not do? Just now he was Pleading the reverence and deference due to the
Memory of the Parliament, and here he scurrilously calls ^^m a Company of dry
Bones, can there be any thing more Profane than that! the dry Bones of a dead
Carcass commonly stink in the Nostrils of the living, a very civil Metaphor.
and a great Complement to the Representatives of a Nation truly: Oh but look to
it, they will be fittest to declare their resentments. I hope it will never
come to that, that we of the Country, who send up Members to Serve for us in
the great Convocation of the Kingdom shall stand in awe of the Power we trust
'em withal: I hope they are to sit there for our good and our peace, not for
our terror: But more of this hereafter. And now

To the first part of his Pamphlet, let us see how far he has proved the rise,
growth and discovery of a Popish Plot: Have at it.

He says, If the declaration of the common or public Judgment be not a
competent ground for us to settle our belief upon, he knows not what can be
supposed to be; for if ever the King be infallible, he would the readiliest
expect him to be so when he has the concurrent Advice and Consent of the whole
Nation. Nay he says there is infinitely greater cause for conforming our
belief to the Opinion of the King, Lords and Commons in a matter of fact
thoroughly examined, then to obey the Laws they make.

To this I answer: That King, Lords and Commons are not nor can be infallible.
As they are Men, they are liable to errors, and may be deceived in matters of
Opinion, by the imperfections of their humane Nature in matters of fact, by the
false Informations of Perjured and profligate Villains who are to swear for
bread, and have no longer hopes to eat, then their Evidence is useful: For
could any Government or Authority upon Earth be Infallible, one might as well
as another, and Consequently our Author would make a good Argument for the
Church of Rome: and the Pope in Cathedra may with as much reason pretend to be
Infallible, as any Prince in Christendom in his Senate: I hope our Pamphleteer
is a better Protestant then this Argument amounts to. Granting then that King,
Lords and Commons are not Infallible, he has not yet by his argument proved the
rise, growth and discovery of a Popish Plott. But now he comes to supposing;
well, let us see what he supposes.

Supposing, says he, that the aforesaid Resolves and Proclamations were not
made nor issued without the maturest deliberation and fullest assurance of the
truth of those Testimonies and Evidence that occasioned them, it cannot be
reputed too great credulity to believe that Popery was to be introduced by
those Means and Methods that the Discoverers of the Plott attested: very good.

Here he supposes that the aforesaid Resolves and Proclamations were not
without the fullest assurance of the truth of the Evidence: and yet not three
lines farther he tells us, that as to Scotland and Ireland in which the Design
was laid as well as in England, Affairs have been so managed, that it is still
as to us kept in a great manner secret. Was then that Vote of the House of
Commons that there was a Popish Plott in Ireland as well as here, made upon the
maturest deliberation and fullest assurance, when affairs have been so managed
that it is yet a Secret? why was this Fellow trusted with Pen and Ink!

Well, but now look to it, now let us look about us. He has been but tuning his
Instrument all this while, now he is resolved to tickle it away indeed: as for
Example; Old sturdy England being, as he says, a Nation always Jealous of
their Rights and Liberties, it was despaired, that she would be wheedled to put
on the Roman Yoke, and therefore there was no hopes of bringing that about but
by force (The Author of this Book must be some Jesuited bewhiggify'd and privy
to all their Councels, he could never give so round an account what they
thought else.) And now, says he, there wanted a plausible pretense to get up
an Army, (Politic Worm!) and therefore (that we may Epitomize his long-winded
Impertinent story) he tells us, there was a Sham War proposed with the French,
and the Parliament induc't to comply with the design; (he makes a very Worthy
Parliament of it the mean while; For if a Sham-War were to be imposed upon the
Nation, he makes the Parliaments as guilty of the Imposture as any Minister of
State he would pretend to blacken;) Then he goes on, how An Army of 30000 men
was appointed to be raised, and a Tax levied for their Pay. Well, and they were
paid as far as the Tax would go, and what harm done?

Oh but a Peace being Concluded at Nimeguen, this Army that was got together by
one Sessions of Parliament, was hardly got dissolved by two; And all things
rightly examined, was not that One Sessions too soon? for presently after the
Disbanding of that Army, it is very memorable and observable what Rebellion
broke out in Scotland, and how it was timed; and as for the many Papists which
he would insinuate were thrust into that Army, it is a most notorious Lie; for
those Papists that were in it, were only some few Officers that came home upon
the King's Proclamation with the Duke of Monmouth's Regiment out of France; and
they too were cashiered their Commands long before the Peace made, or the
Disbanding of the Army was thought of; and how this Army, as he suggests, was
probably to be made use of in carrying on of the Popish Plot, may be gathered,
if I mistake not, from an Information Oats once gave in, That the Officers of
it were all to be Murdered in a Night by the Popish Party, to render the Army
useless for any Service against them. Then besides this Open Force, says he,
there was Listed underhand a greater, of which Oats 's Narrative acquaints us
with the chief Officers. So the Noble Dr. did with Commissions too, but the
Devil a one was ever yet produced for us to see; nor, as I have been told, did
the Dr. himself know one of these principal Officers he has made bold to
mention (viz. My Lord Arundel of Warder) when he very lately did see him; but
that worthy Divine is something apt to be troubled with dimness of sight, when
over-strain'd with swearing, as some Privy Counselors in being can bear him
witness.

In the next place to his Malicious and Impudent Suggestion, That the
succeeding Parliament after the Long Parliament, were by their sudden
Dissolution prevented from bringing those to their Trials which the Former had
committed.

I answer, and the whole Kingdom must testify with me, It is most scandalously
false. For had they so intended, they sat time enough to have brought six
times the Number to their Trial. No, the face of things began to look then
another way; The Popish Plott seemed like a Card turned up Trumps, only to be
played upon a hard Push when any Trick they aimed at was like to be lost. As
for Example; When the King would not give up the E. of D. to be torn in pieces,
trump with the Popish Plot, that will fetch it or nothing immediately; New
Dangers of Popery are Apprehended, and there is a Young Plot in the Belly of
the Old One. But at last when that Lord had rendered up himself, and desired a
speedy Trial, difficulties and perplexities were started about Joining Issue:
then immediately there arises a squobble about Privileges, An Endless confused
Riddle which no body e're yet could tell the meaning of; but not a grain of
Justice weighed out all this while, but the course of it stopped, and the Nation
kept in suspense, terror and perplexity with almost every man's hand at his
Neighbors Throat, and all for a punctilio: Justice, I doubt, was not what the
prevailing Faction at that time Aimed at: For (as I promised before) I will
speak Truth, A prevailing and a dangerous Faction were in that Parliament, and
will be in every Parliament, it is to be feared, so long as Schismatics and
Make-bates are tolerated in their Insolences by Wilful blindness or
scarfulness of Magistrates that should suppress them, and enabled to carry so
great a sway in Elections, as to return frequently so many Old Rebels against
the last King, to sit in the House of Commons, only to rail and bandy Factions
for the Ruin of this. No, the Popish Lords in the Tower were to be well
husbanded, and that Parliament was Dissolved, not that they should not bring
those Lords to Trial, but because they would not.

Having shot this Bolt, Now he runs on his Story to several Worthy Peers
Petitioning for the Sitting of a Third Parliament: whereof by the way, let us
take notice, the E. of Hunt. was One, who having since discovered the foulness
of the main design at the bottom, has avoided the Infection, returned home into
the Favor and Service of his King, and Safety of his Honor.

And as that Petition was followed by Others of a more tumultuous nature, so
the reflections our Author makes upon 'em, are, to deal plainly, as Impertinent
as they were: for he says, That his Majesty was possessed by some about him,
that such Petitioning was tumultuous, and that at the same time little
Emissaries were ordered to discourage it; amongst the rest, Sir George
Jeoffries here in the City. Prithee, Brother Pamphletteer, why little
Emissaries? Sir George Jeoffries is a Gentleman, and was at that time Recorder
of London, and, as I conceive, under that character not so very unproper to
advise the City how far in Loyalty, Obedience to the Law and good Manners they
ought to preserve their Duty, Respect and Deference to their Sovereign and his
Commands: and for all that quoted scrap of the Parliaments Address against him,
wherein they accuse him for Informing the City of London, that such manner of
Proceedings might hazard the Forfeiture of their Charter; I suppose it had been
never the Worse for that Wise City to have taken his Counsel, and have saved
perhaps the trouble, which a small Instrument, Entitled, Quo Warranto, lately
got amongst them, may put them to. But it is the way of hireling Scriblers for
that Party now-a-dayes to Quote Votes, Resolves and Addresses of the House of
Commons for Laws, forsooth, as if we were no longer to respect the Statutes of
the Realm for our Guide, but buy a pennyworth of Votes every day, and consult
out of them how far we are to yield Obedience to Edicts of so great an
Authority as a Kings, who is over us in all Causes, next under God, the Supreme
Head and Governor.

For he is at the same rate again as to the Anti-Petitions, as he calls emor
Abhorrencies, that were by many of the Loyal part of the Kingdom presented to
his Majesty in a just resentment and detestation of the former Undutiful and
Irreverent Proceedings of their fellow Subjects; which as it was at that time
the most seasonable and honestest course that good Subjects could take to clear
and signalize their Respect and Fidelity to a Prince nosed and affronted by the
Insolent and Vile behavior of a dangerous and unruly Faction: So I cannot but
with Horror remember the Tyrannical and Oppressive Authority which the House
of Commons durst usurp afterward over their Fellow Subjects; how many of us
were persecuted by their Ban-dogs and Pursuivants? how many, that knew not so
well the Charter of their Liberty, were forced to yield obedience to their
Unwarrantable and Peremptory Votes, Led in Captivity shamefully several Miles
through their Native Countries up to London, committed to Illegal and
Chargeable Prisons, harrass'd with Arbitrary Fines or Censures, brought on
their Knees, forced to undergo the basest forms of Submission unworthy the
honor of the English Liberty; and all by an Usurping Unwarrantable power whom
they had never offended, and against whom no offense lay! I hope we shall feel
the scourge of such a Tyranny no more.

But to return to our Author, who after having recited part of an Address made
by the House of Commons against that Honorable, Wise and never to be forgotten
Patriot the Earl of Hallifax (for the Fellow loves a scrap of Parliament
business better then a dull Pedant ends of Latin) resolves to come to the
Point, as he calls it in his Preface, And now, says He, the Parliament
according to direction of his Majesty, Vigorously Prosecute the Plot; That Is
good News indeed; Let us see how: Why he tells us, First as for themselves,
they by way of Address declare their Resolution to Preserve and Support the
King's Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion. Well, how did they
keep their words? Why, the Author gives us to understand, that As to the Plot,
they appoint a Committee to take an abstract of the Journals of both Houses as
to matters relating to it, upon which they resolve that the D. of York 's being
a Papist, etc. has given the greatest Encouragement to the present Designs and
Conspiracies against the King and Protestant Religion; that is, according to
the King's Directions to prosecute the Plot, they resolve to persecute his
Brother. For methinks it is but an odd way of proceeding, to resolve any Man is
a Papist, before they know whether it be so or no: at this rate they might have
resolved all the City was blown up, though we did see one house tumble: for the
Cases are parallel; and in spite of all Calumnies thrown on that most
Illustrious Prince and Dutifullest of Subjects, it was never proved that he was
reconciled to the Church of Rome yet; nor does the absenting himself from our
Church at all evince it: for by that Argument he may be as well a Protestant
Dissenter, for ought they know, as any thing else. But as to the latter part of
their Resolve, (viz.) That the presumption of his being so, has given the
greatest Encouragement to the present Designs against the King and Protestant
Religion. I agree with 'em: for it is visible enough it is upon that Basis the
Schismatic and Phanatical Party have grounded all their hopes of spoiling the
King of his most Essential Prerogatives, of destroying the whole Beauty and
Order of the Established Church, of collecting together a Treasonable and
Rebellious Association for fettering up the Power of the King, raising an Army
to be Commanded by Creatures of their Own, and to obey their Authority for the
Enslaving the Kingdom, rooting out of the Monarchy, and setting up Confusion.
Now let all Reasonable Men observe how far our Scribe has proved the Rise,
Growth and Discovery of a Popish Plot; I will not deny that such a Plot might
have been; but for all our Sophister's arguments, it is at best but a Plot
presumptive, and no Plot apparent.

But upon this Resolve our Author is pleased to remind us of a Bill of
Exclusion brought in, which the Lords thought fit to reject; upon which, says
he, a Committee of the whole House make two more Resolves, First, That so long
as the Papists have any Hopes of the D. of York 's succeeding to the Crown;
King, Religion and all are in an apparent danger of being destroyed. The
second, That the House for Bringing in a Bill of Association for the King's
Defense, and for general Safety, And for preventing the Duke of York or any
Papist from succeeding to the Crown, this is called prosecuting the Plot. And
here by the way it will not be amiss in a word or two, to take notice of the
latter part of this second Resolve, (viz.) Or any Papist from succeeding to the
Crown: Whence I observe, Either this Resolve was Impertinent, or it was
necessary: If there were no reason after the Exclusion of the Duke to fear any
Popish Successor, this Resolve was Impertinent: If it were necessary, there
must be reason to apprehend such a Successor. Now who could this be! The Prince
of Orange! Is he a Papist? No, but if need be, there may rise up an Evidence or
two to swear him one. For it is to be proved by very Unquestionable Witnesses,
That Dr. Oats once upon a time in great freedom of speech, and arguing very
hotly for the Bill of Exclusion, being interrogated, If that should pass, Who
he thought fit to succeed, Whether the P. of Orange, or not; was pleased to
express him No; he was a Canary-Bird, he would have no Orange: but if the Duke
were once Excluded, he had half a Dozen sheets of Paper to present to the
Consideration of the Parliament for settling of the Government, or to that
purpose. A very pretty Condition we were at that time running into: at this
rate his Reverence need but have sworn all the Royal Line out of their
Pretensions, and the business had been done. Methinks it would not have been
Unworthy the Wisdom of a Parliament, if once they that had taken the Succession
off from one hinge, to have sixth it upon another at least, and not have left
the Door open for all manner of Confusion to have been let in upon us at the
discretion of a swearing Salamancha Dr. and as many Disciples as he could have
picked up out of Jayles and Reggary to have born record with him: And this
granted, let us in the next place examine how far our Author has evinced the
Legality, Equity, and Expediency of a Bill of Exclusion.

And this I shall do with the strictest yet most sincere and impartial scrutiny
that I can: As first, Our Author says, For the Legality of it, he could never
hear of more then two things opposed; The one, That Kings holding their Crowns
by right of Primogeniture, it is against the Law of Nature to put by the next
Heir. The other, That it is against the Oath of Allegiance.

To which I answer, That I must beg the Gentleman's Pardon, if I cannot in this
point believe him; for I am apt to be persuaded he may have heard that it is
against the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, against the express Law and Word of
God in his Scripture; that it is against the common Pact or Covenant whereby we
live in Peace and Unity with one another, whereby we Originally consented and
mutually obliged our selves to that Excellent Form of Government we are Ruled
by and Preserved under against that Principal and Sacred Rule by which every
Man's Meum and Tuum is distinguished. I am persuaded our Author may have heard
all this; and that it is so, I am persuaded it will not be very difficult to
prove neither.

For that it is against the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, will appear in that
it is against the Public Safety, which I take to be the Fundamental Law: and
it is against the public Safety, in that it is against the very Being of the
Government. Now by the Being of the Government, I understand the Ancient
Hereditary Monarchy; and whatsoever tends to the dissolution of that, is
against the Being of the Government: any Bill or Act therefore for excluding a
next Heir, tends absolutely to the dissolution of the Ancient Hereditary
Monarchy, in that it puts it in a mere state of Election: for the very Act of
Excluding one Heir, imports the Election of another. As for example, when an
Act of Parliament is passed for the dis-inheriting the Heir of an Entailed
Estate, it is not made an Act for the Excluding such or such an Heir; But for
cutting off the original Entail: And the passing a Law for dis-inheriting the
Heir to the Crown, cannot be made an Act of Exclusion; for Magna Charta says
no Heir shall be spoiled of his Inheritance, but it must be made an Act of
Dissolution and cutting off the Entail of the Crown, the very Law by which the
Heir holds his Right of Inheritance; which would be utterly destructive of the
Being of the Government, and consequently Public Safety: for should an Act be
made to dis-inherit the Heir of an Entailed Estate without cutting off the
original Entail, the Act would be void in it self and of no force, because
against the Fundamental Statute of Magna Charta: But the cutting off the Entail
removes all manner of Right to Inheritance, and leaves the present Possessor at
liberty of choosing what and how many Heirs he shall think fitting. I hope the
Ancient Inheritance of the Imperial Crown of England shall never be so Violated.

It is also against the Express Word of God in his Scriptures, which says,
speaking of the Law of Inheritances, thus, If a man dye and have Numb. Cap. 27.
Verse. 8.
no Son, then shall ye cause his Inheritance to pass unto his Daughter; And if
he have no Daughter, then ye shall ye give his Inheritance unto his Brethren;
And if he have no Brethren, then ye shall give his Inheritance unto his Fathers
Brethren; And if his Father have no Brethren, then shall ye give his
Inheritance unto his Kinsman that is next to him of his Family, and he shall
possess it, and it shall be unto the Children of Israel a Statute of Judgment.
Can there be any thing more positive then this? Here we have the absolute
Command of God for the Lineal Successions of one Heir in default of another
down through a whole Generation; nay, He calls it too a Statute of Judgment, an
unalterable Statute, a Statute upon no conditions to be Violated: and surely we
are not Wiser or Juster then the Almighty Author of both Wisdom and Justice.

Moreover, in another place of speaking the Rights of the Firstborn, it is
said, that When it shall be that a Father makes his Sons to inherit that Deuteronomy.
Chapter 21. Verse. 16.
which he has, that he may not make the Son of the beloved, firstborn, before
the Son of the hated, which is indeed the Firstborn: But he shall acknowledge
the Son of the hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all
that he has; for he is the beginning of his strength, the right of the
firstborn is his. So that however merry our noble Author be pleased to make
himself with the Right of Primogeniture, it was a Sacred Law pronounced from
the Oracle of God, and by no succeeding Ordinance that ever I read or heard of
yet repealed. But let us Examine in the next place those Arguments he produces
against the Right of Primogeniture.

He has indeed upon this occasion proceeded in a most extraordinary way of
Argumentation, which is by asking of Questions; which to oblige him, I will
recapitulate here and answer as well as I can by Questions too, and leave the
Reader to Judge whose are most reasonable. As first then says he against the
Right of Primogeniture:

Quest. In how many Kingdoms has Force and Violence, and the longest Sword
settled an Absolute Monarchy?

Answ. Must therefore we go together by the Ears to Unsettle this Excellent One?

Quest. How often has that York been shook off, and the Government turned into a
Free State?

Answ. Must therefore we Rebel again, as we did about 40 Years ago, to become
Slaves to the Tyranny of our Fellow Subjects, and at last the Rod of an Usurper?

Quest. How many different Models of both Monarchies and States are there at
this day in the World? etc.

Answ. Must therefore we never rest contented with the Best of Governments,
because there are so many Worse in the World to make choice of?

And yet, says he, none of these Governments, but are or ought to be submitted
to for the Lords sake.

To which I answer, That therefore it is a Sin to alter or endeavor in any
point to Violate such a Government. Now the Alteration of Succession would be a
great Violation of the Rights of this present Ancient and Established Monarchy,
consequently against the Constitution of the Government, and therefore sinful,
in that it ought to be submitted to for the Lords sake, as our Author has been
pleased to remind us. But to our Questions again, (viz.)

Quest. What shall we say of Gods giving the Kingdom of Israel to Saul of the
Tribe of Benjamin the Youngest of Jacob 's Sons, or to David, the Youngest of
his Fathers Sons, and of the Tribe of Judah, while none of Reuben's offspring
ever sat upon the Throne?

Answ. To which I answer: Though God had promised Abraham to make of him a
great Nation, that was not yet accomplished at the death of his Grandson Jacob,
who was at best but as a private man, dyed in Egypt, where his Posterity
afterward remained in Captivity, and under that Bondage multiplied to a People
till they were led out of it by Moses, who established them into a Nation, and
was their Lawgiver: besides, when Jacob dyed and blessed his Sons, He
upbraided Reuben of the Sin he had committed, and told him, Unstable as water,
thou shall not excel, because thou wentest up to thy Fathers bed, then
defiledst thou it. Besides, as I said Genesis Chapter 49. 1. 4.
before, Israel were not then a Nation till God brought 'em by the hand of
Moses out of Egypt; but when the Miracles were begun for the redeeming of the
chosen People from Bondage, then the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron in the
Land of Egypt, and the Passover was instituted; then they began to be a Nation
of Men, and Modeled into Government, Marched and Encamped under the Command of
Moses, till they were led through the Red Sea into the Wilderness, then they
fought with Amalek and vanquished: After which Moses harkening to the advice of
Jethro his Father-in-Law, Chose able Men out of Israel who Judged the People at
all seasons; the hard Causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter
they Judged themselves; so that Moses was their Supreme Judge and Lawgiver,
till he Led them out of the Plains of Moab, to the Top of Pisgah, where the
Lord showed him all the Land of Gilead unto Dan, and all Nepthali and the Land
of Ephraim, etc. And said unto him, This is the Land which I swear unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy seed; but
Moses was not suffered to go over thither, but dyed in the Land of Moab. Moses
thus dead, Joshua, by the appointment of God, succeeded him as Judge over
Israel. After Joshua's death we read, that they forsook the Lord and served
Baal, and that the Anger of God was hot against Israel; nevertheless the Lord
raised up Judges and was with the Judge, and delivered them out of the hands of
their Enemies; but when the Judge was dead, they returned to Corruption again,
till the Lord left them to be proved by the 5. Lords of the Philistims, and all
the Canaanites, etc. among whom they dwelt, and who were to prove Israel, to
know whether they would hearken to the Commandments of the Lord; but they did
Evil, and were sold into the hand of the King of Mesopotamia, whom they served
Eight Years: but upon their Cry to God, he raised up a Deliverer one Othneil,
who governed them 40 years; to him succeeded Ehud; after him was Shamgar, till
renewing their sins they again were sold to Jabin King of Canaan; delivered
afterward and restored by Deborah, under whom they had rest 40 years: After
her God raised up Gideon or Jerubbaal, who delivered them from the Midianites;
after him his Son Abimelech was made by them King. Abimelech being dead, there
rose up to defend Israel, Jola; after him Jair, and in this manner were they
governed by Judges till the time of Samuel; And he in his age made his Sons
Judges over Israel, who walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
took Bribes and perverted Judgment, upon which the Elders gathered together,
and demanded a King of Samuel to govern them like other Nations.

This King was Saul, Chosen by God himself: there was the absolute Command of
God for the Anointing him King over Israel; Neither was there any Succession
cut off, for Reuben had no right ever of it: and the original of Kingly Power
in Israel by Gods appointment began in Saul. So that Kingly Power (as much a
jest as they make of the matter, appears plainly by this to be originally Jure
Divino.) Were Power grounded in the People, Abimelech's race who before was
chosen King by the People must have succeeded, but it did not; and the first
Successive Monarchy that ever was Established in Israel was Jure Divino by
God's own Law, and confirmed by Promise to David, but our Author desires to
know, How came David afterward to Reign? How came the Crown translated from
Benjamin to Judah? Why was it not continued in the Tribe?

Would our Author give himself to read the Scripture sometimes, he would write
honester Pamphlets, and ask more pertinent Questions, for the Kingdom was never
Established upon Saul, for having transgressed the Commandment of God by a
profane Sacrifice; Samuel told him he had done foolishly, for he had not kept
the Commandment of God, for God would have established his Kingdom else upon
Israel for ever, but that now he had sought a man after his own heart, which
was David: So by this it appears, that though Saul himself was King, the
Kingdom was never confirmed or promised to his Seed. And therefore the
translating of it to David of the Tribe of Judah, is no Argument for the
cutting off a Succession established for so many Ages as this Ancient Monarchy
of England has been. But here is arisen another Question

Quest. How came David to put Adonijah by the Throne, and seat Solomon in it?

Asnw. Why, did Adonijah Rebel and usurp the Kingdom from his Father while he
was yet alive? Did the Duke of York ever Rebel; nay, did he ever murmur against
the King his Brother? Have not the King's Commands been always Sacred to him?
what Dangers has he refused? what Exile not chosen when the King gave his
Decree for it? though had it been in his Nature, he might like a rebellious
Absalom, have stood upon terms of Privilege too; but while one chose rather to
be a stiff-neck't Duke, than a beloved Son, He chose rather to be a dutiful
Brother than a stubborn Subject. Neither was the Right of Succession to the
Throne of David by any Law settled upon the Elder, and besides the Rebellious
Usurpation of Adonijah, David had before sworn that Solomon should Reign after
him, and sit upon the Throne in his stead; so that in the first place, here was
no Entail of Succession violated, though Rebellion (if any thing) might have
warranted it. But in our Law even in case the Heir to the Crown should Rebel,
though he should be attainted of Treason to incapacitate him of Succession,
this would not do if his Head stood upon his Shoulders neither; for the Descent
of the Crown upon that, cures even an Attainder. But a Bill of Exclusion is a
new-sangled thing, that never was heard of before, inconsistent in it self,
tending both in Law and Reason to nothing else but embroyling us into general
Confusion, and utterly exterminating the very foundation of the Monarchy. Thus
far I hope we have sufficiently overthrown the legality of a Bill of Exclusion;
insomuch that no such thing can be passed in Law without taking the whole frame
of the Government to pieces, and setting up a new one: But the Arguments our
Author urges, which such a Bill is not against the Oath of Allegiance, and the
Consequences he deduces from them, are indeed very considerable. First, He
tells it is Nonsense to affirm, that any one is a Man's Heir or Successor while
himself lives. Then I say, the Oath of Allegiance is against common sense; and
by Sir F. W's Argument in the House against Expedients Void therefore in it
self, and of no force; for if an Act of Parliament against common sense be in
it self Void, certainly any Oath against common sense instituted by Act of
Parliament is so too: But why is it Nonsense to affirm, That any one is a Man's
Heir or Successor while himself lives! Because, says he, the Successor
Commences such only at his Predecessor's Death: which by the way, seems to me
much the more Nonsense of the two; for every Successor to the Crown, at the
instant of his Predecessor's Death, De Jure, becomes no longer Successor, but
very Possessor, though not confirmed so De facto till his Coronation; so that
to do the Oath of Allegiance Justice, it is no Nonsensical Oath, for all our
Author's Nonsensical Argument; but an Oath that obliges every true Subject to
Adhere to the King and his Lawful Successors, and whosoever go about by any
unlawful Act (as we have proved one of Exclusion must be) to deprive the Duke
of York of his Right to Succession, does it against the Oath of Allegiance, and
is no better than perjured. But now all the Question is, says our Scribler,
whether such a particular man has so unalterable right to such a ones Heir,
that no crime Can forfeit that Right, nor no Power annul it: To which I answer,
as he himself has taught me; Force and Violence, and the longest Sword may
annul any thing; but the Business he would bring in here, is the forfeiting
Crime, which what it is in our present case, we should better have known; He
says, If the hasty Dissolution of so many Parliaments, and a Noli Prosequi had
not hindered; and so he proceeds to make a Fiction of Case (and indeed it is a
Substantial Fiction) by his old way of supposing. Now let us once more see what
he supposes; for by this suppose, he pretends to resolve the Query, what the
forfeiting Crime is in our present Case. Very good, Suppose, says he, him that
expects to be Heir, perverted from the Protestant to the Popish Religion; Now
out of this Suppose, we are if we think fit to suppose again, that he means the
Duke of York, and then we are to let him know, it is but a malicious at best,
and no charitable Supposition, and till there are better grounds than any the
Public have been informed of yet to six it upon, I shall grant no such
Supposition at all, In the next place, says he, Suppose his Principal Servant,
and greatest Confident, bragging of the apparent likelihood of rooting out this
^estilent Northern Heresy, and of the Zeal of his Master in the Cause, etc.
Now we are sure, and need not suppose that by this Servant and Confident is
signified Coleman; and therefore I must tell, he is pleased to suppose what I
believe himself and almost every body else knows to be a false thing; for
Coleman was none of his Principal Servant or Confident, but Cashiered the
Service of his Highness's Family many years since; and I have been told, the
reason why he was discharged the Office of Secretary to the Duchess, was for
that he stood suspected even then of being too busy with Matters of an ill
kind, though they were not particularized or proved against him; and if so,
good Mr. Pamphletteer, what becomes of your Suppose? But to proceed, Supposing
all this says he, We can hardly imagine a Crime to be blacker. Then what? Then
a suspicion of designing the Subversion of the Established Religion, and in it
of the Government; A very pretty point our Author has brought his Business to:
He has proved the Lawfulness of the Bill of Exclusion, because he is pleased to
suppose, and suspect that the Duke may design the Subversion of the Religion
and Government; is any man to suffer by the Law of England for Suspicion?
Surely no: Then certainly the Excluding the Duke from his Inheritance upon bare
Suspicion, is not altogether so legal as our Author would have the World think
it is. But the man is a little reasonable for all that; for about four Lines
afterward, says he, Now let us consider, (in troth and I think it is time of
all Conscience) well, but what shall we consider! Let us consider, says he,
whether a Parliament have not Power to inflict such a Punishment on such
Offenses: with all my heart: It is, says he, from the Laws Enacted by
Parliament, that such an Act has such a Punishment awarded to it: This, as he
has expressed it is Nonsense, and as he means it is false, for no Laws are
Enacted by Parliament, all Laws are Enacted by the King in Parliament; and
though he go on to tell us, that Felonies are by the Law Punished by Death, as
well as Murder; yet till he show us a Law that any man shall be Hanged for
Suspicion of Felony or Murder, he seems to have considered to very little
purpose, and his Suppose is in as bad a condition as ever it was. It Is very well
worth any man's observation how the Champions for this Cause manage Matters,
they write incessantly, but such crude and indigested stuff comes daily from,
as visibly discovers what an unhealthful condition it is in. Now is our Author
vomiting up a lump of confused Notions for the Mobile to lap at, and that is
forsooth what a Parliament can do: and first indeed he is a little civil, and
will vouchsafe to join the King with them, and pray let us see to what purpose:
They, says he, can Attaint any man, or take off the Attainder, as they see
good: I hope though, good Mr. Author, it must be for sufficient cause shown
that they shall proceed to Attaint any Man, or else by your leave they violate
the Great Charter of England, and whatsoever does so, is Destructive of the
Being of the Government, Destructive of Public Safety, Destructive of the
general Liberty; either let the great Charter be the Rule and Standard our
Parliaments are to govern their Votes and Acts by, or let us burn and cancel it
for ever: Our Law says, It is unalterable, and whoever Votes or Consents to any
thing against the tenure and holding of that Charter, I may presume to say is
little better than a betrayer of the Public Good, and an Enemy to the Kingdom:
The People of England hold their Liberties and Properties by virtue of Magna
Charta, nothing can alter it, and whatsoever does so, call it an Act of
Parliament, or what you please may be imposed upon our Obedience by Power, but
it is Void of it self, Tyrannical, and against the great and Sacred Right
delivered us down through so many Ages, by our Fathers from one Generation to
another. It would argue as much impertinence as he is guilty of himself, to
recount the many absurdities he has urged on this occasion; as the instances of
Legitimation and Illegitimation of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, both which
were made in their turns Illegitimate, and yet both were Legitimate when they
came to succeed, and would not any Body that reads this judge our Author
deserved a blew Coat and a Muckinder for urging their Cases as Instances what
the Parliament can do in such Cases, when neither of the Acts passed against
those Princesses stood good. But what he says afterward, deserves Sugar Plumbs
or nothing, now we are beholden to him or never; for he comes to the Point and
says in a word, That the two Houses have an absolute Dominion over the Lives,
Liberties and Estates of any Subject in the Kingdom; why now we see what the
Gentleman would be at, here he speaks home, The two Houses abstractedly have an
Absolute Dominion, etc. Tush, no matter for the King, he is no body God knows,
when our Author would show his Law: We have had instances (says he) of Queens
being Beheaded, and who is nearlier related to the King than she that is one
with him (Oh brave Boys) who nearer allied to the Privileges of the Crown than
she that has had it set upon her head? Why this is hearty now, And if such a
one (says he further) may be brought to the Scaffold, and dye the deserved
Death of a Traitor, no man can argue the High Court that condemned her to dye,
of Injustice. This is as plain as the Nose in ones face, it would have cost
Thee but a little more Ink and Paper Friend to have told us we have had an
instance too of a Blessed King brought to the Scaffold, Condemned by a High
Court to a High Court of Justice, as they called themselves: Thou might have
urged this as well as hinted it so plausibly, the Parallel was indeed finely
spun, we might easily see what it Tally'd to: but thou might to show the
boldness of thy Skill have steered a little nearer the Quicksand, just raised
upon the Surface of it: 'twould have shown thee a fit Fellow indeed to
Vindicate the Disheriting an Heir to the Crown, Overthrowing a Monarchy, and
confounding the Safety of thy Fellow Creatures and Subjects. Thus has our
Author taken a great deal of pains to overthrow the Right of Primogeniture by
Arguments that overthrow themselves, To justify an Act of Exclusion would be
no Violation of our Oath of Allegiance, when it is absolutely against the
tenure, express words and meaning of it, asked Questions to as little purpose
as he has raised Arguments; and so much as he says for the Legality of the Fact.

Now as to the Equity of it, never was any thing more profoundly dull than he:
It is, says he, an Act of the greatest Equity and Justice in the World. One
would think now after so Dogmatical a Proposition he would do us reason, and
make his words good, and he goes about it very learnedly truly; for he is at
his If's and Supposes again in a trice: If (says he) he that pretends to the
Succession be a Person that is already engaged in a Design to alter the
Government, that by the accursed tie of his deluded Conscience, and the
destructive Principles of his Religion has given certain notice that he thinks
himself obliged to Extirpate the Religion Established, and to persecute the
resolved Adherers to it to the Death; what in the whole World is more
equitable, and moderately Just, then that this Person should be incapacitated
from doing all this evil, by preventing his Accession to the Throne, which he
will thus Defile with Blood, and Profane with damnable Heresy? Which I answer
thus: If he that pretends to the Succession be a Person that never was engaged
in any Design to alter the Government, but has through the whole course of his
life to this day endeavored by the hazard of his life for the public Service
when ever called to it, by the most absolute Obedience and patient Sufferings
of the best Patriot and dutifullest Subject contributed to Defense and
Preservation of the Government from ruin, if from the testimony of a good and
tender Conscience he has given certain assurance that he will ever to his Power
maintain the Religion Established and defend the Adherers to it; (as the Letter
from Scotland to the Archbishop of Canterbury sufficiently testifies the Duke
of York has done) what in the whole World more unequal or impiously unjust,
then that this Person should be incapacitated from doing all this good, by
cutting off his Succession to a Throne, which he may in all likelihood adorn
with so much Mercy and Honor, with the Defense of the best Religion (I mean
the Church of England as now Established) in the World. And so much for the
equity of the Fact.

And as to the expediency of it, he is driven very hard, for he is forced to
quote the Saying, as he is himself pleased to term it, of a bad Man, (viz.) It
is expedient that one man die for the People. Where by the way, I cannot but
take notice, that to the best of my remembrance I have read a Printed Sermon
Preached upon this very Text just before the Murder of the late King, it is an
unlucky Observation, but our Author must Pardon me: and now he subjoyns that he
would not blaspheme his Savior with comparing the Person now under
consideration to him, nor would I have the Person now under consideration be
Condemned by an Injustice equal to that used against our Savior neither; that
is, by the Testimonies of false Witnesses, and the Outcrys of a Jewish Rabble,
when there is no fault found in him: But this Point of Expediency our Author
thinks not fit to insist much upon, but refers us with a Complement to the
Character of a Popish Successor, whose pretended Author under favor, may in
time, as it is humbly supposed, for that noble Treatise, and some other
freedoms of Speeches he has taken in Taverns, and elsewhere, come to leave his
foul Ears upon a Pillory: And now, I think, we have done with the main part of
our Pamphlet, (viz.) The Legality, Equity, and Expediency of a Bill of
Exclusion. I shall now proceed to examine what Justice our Author has done the
Cause he espouses, how far the Proceedings of the two last Parliaments stand by
him justified, or His Majesty's Dissolution of them, and Declaration after it,
Condemned. And so forward.

As to the First, I have in some measure spoken already, but since our Scribler
has thought fit to stir up the Embers yet farther, I cannot but take notice.
And here all the World are desired to observe too with what impudent Falsehood
he has recited the Business and Case of Fitz-Harris: First, he says of that
Libel, That it was a Sham-Plot contrived in the Name of the Non-Conformists,
and was to be Printed and sent about by the Penny Post to the Protesting Lords,
and the leading Men of the House of Commons, etc. who were to be taken up as
soon as they had it, upon hopes that upon search it might be found about 'em:
In answer to this, it is impossible not to speak the truth; and in short the
truth is thus: The Authority and Credit of a Popish Plot beginning in the
Opinion of all reasonable, and equally judging men to decline: I mean in the
horrid Circumstances of it, as of Pistolling, Stabbing, Poisoning of the King
(no body knows which,) and Massacring the People: With the credit of this
declined likewise the Interest and Authority of a Faction who had raised
themselves at this Conjuncture under the Name of true Protestants forsooth
(casting by that a slight of Corruption upon the Established Church) to a
condition of capitulating for whatsoever their Destructive Principles, and
desire of change persuaded them was for their Advantage, toward the overthrow
of Monarchy and Episcopacy, for setting up Presbytery and Anarchy. It appeared
by this, that the credit of the King's Danger of being assassinated by the
Papists, and the Interest of the Republican Faction were Equilibrious, and
depended merely upon the weight of each other; that is to say, the Credit of
the Plot could not subsist, but as it was to be fomented by the Authority of
the Republican Faction, nor the Authority of that Faction maintain it self,
except the credit of the Popish Plot were in every of its parts supported, this
was the Case then, and upon this Principle they proceeded: No sooner was the
(...) Discovery of the Popish Plot made, by an Instrument of their own, a
Renegado Deacon, that since has usurpt the Title of Dr. the Offspring of a
Notorious Anabaptist, and himself at this present under most Vile Suspicions of
wanting the Blessed Sacrament of Baptism, a Fellow that has renounced the
Church of England, and has since been a Professor of Popery it self, and almost
all the Heresies in the World besides; I say, no sooner was this (...)
Discovery thus made, but immediately renouncing all manner of Obedience to the
Laws Ecclesiastical or Civil: The Trumpets of Sedition were blown aloud in all
Quarters of the Kingdom by Rascally, Canting, Whining, Bawling Hypocrites, that
call themselves Preachers of the Word, I warrant you: Not an empty Cask could
be set out for sweetning at a Tavern Door, but whip it was spirited away to
some adjacent Meeting House or other to make a Pulpit of; where it vented worse
Sophisticated Doctrine than ever it had done Wine before: Nothing was heard in
those Assemblies, but Tribulation, Martyrdom, Persecution, and Popery, Popery.
Immediately upon this and the Calling of a New Parliament, the Zealous Sisters
were tongued with Guinneys at Elections to keep their Cuckolds true to The Good
Old Cause, and its Interest; not an old Rebel or Son of one hardly in any
County, but perk't up for a Member, and Preached in some Market-house or
another, to draw in Knaves and Fools to choose him their Representative. As many
of this Gang as could be were thus foisted in, and made Members of the House,
whereas it is too apparent they became (to use our Author's own terms) Leading
Men (I cannot stifle the Truth, for it will out) Nor is it at all to be
wondered, that at the first starting of such a Discovery, the thoughts of
Murdering the best, most merciful, and justest of Kings; the Destruction of the
most Christian and best Disciplined Church in the World; the Subversion of the
equallest and best constituted Government that ever a happy People lived under;
it is not, I say, to be admired that such thoughts as these should have very
deep Impressions upon the Souls of the honest loyal Subjects, and true
Englishmen, as doubtless the best part of that Parliament were, and therefore
more easily to be led away, as I doubt not but a great many of them have since
found themselves to have been by the specious pretenses, how corrupt soever the
ends were of those Leading Men: For Immediately the Game was started, and all
the cry was presently, Ill Ministers, Arbitrary Council, and fear of Arbitrary
Power; the Army then on foot must with all speed be Disbanded, though there
never appeared to be more need of one, if all the Dangers that were Sworn and
Voted had been true; yet no sooner was this Army gone, but instead of a Popish
Insurrection in England, we had a Whiggs Rebellion in Scotland, and Swords were
once more drawn for Presbytery and the Covenant. That over, and the Moors
appearing with a formidable Army before Tangier, when a Supply was Demanded for
the Preservation of that Garrison, the great Security of our Mediterranean
Trade, none could be granted till Grievances were Redressed forsooth; and what
was the Redressing of those Grievances, but cutting off the Duke of York from
the Succession; turning out all Officers of Trust about the King, and putting
in such in their Places as the Parliament should approve of, Reforming the
Militia, and as Sir W. C. was telling us plainly if his Mouth had not been
stopped, the Fleet too; and putting both into such hands as a Committee, I
suppose to be appointed by the Leading Men at that time for that purpose should
have thought fitting, very fine! and this was all called Prosecuting of the
Popish Plot, though not one, except Coleman, was ever brought to Justice all
this while for the Conspiracy, but a few tattered wandering Priests, that were
hunted, caught and Hanged up to flesh the Rabble withal: We were fed up and
kept in heart indeed by strange Reports of mighty Discoveries made by the
Committee of Secrecy, who had Power given 'em to Examine Persons, Papers, and
Records, sat for two years and upwards, brooding over the Business till it was
boasted, That if Oats and all his Brother Evidences were Dead and Rotten, they
had proof enough to Condemn all the Lords in the Tower, and the rest of the
Papists then in Custody for the Plot, though when all came to all, no Lord was
brought to his Trial but the Lord Stafford, and he too (had not Turbervil (by
what means I shall not here enquire) been found out long after for a Witness)
for ought I perceive by the Printed Trial, might have had his Head upon his
Shoulders to this day: In short, the Popish Plot was never heartily Prosecuted
by the Parliament. The Leading Men at that time seemed to have other business;
The Evidences a pack of Profligate Fellows raked out of Goals and Dungeons,
boasted some of them they had Plot enough yet to hold these Seven years: The
King instead of being secured from the Danger of his Enemies, was only teized
with Addresses to Pass an Act for the Dis-inheriting of his Dearest Brother,
was tugged and almost every day wrestled with for some Limb of his Prerogative
or another, and no Money was to be given him for Defraying the necessary
Charges of the Government till he would consent to such unreasonable Demands as
the Leading Men, I mean, the Faction thought fit at that Conjuncture to make
him. And all this was still called, Prosecuting of the Popish Plot. Nay, so
very high ran this Presumptuous Tide, that in an Address made by the Commons in
Answer to the King's Message concerning Tangier, it almost came to Threats; for
as I remember toward the latter end of that Address, mention was made of
Endangering the very Being of the Monarchy it self; as who should say, Sir,
Give us what we Ask, or in plain terms we'll Rebel. This was still Prosecuting
of the Popish Plot, till at the last, when all their hopes lay in the King's,
and they were resolved, but upon their own terms, not to supply them, out comes
a Paper of Votes, one whereof was, That whosoever should offer to raise any
Money by way of Loan upon the King's Revenues or otherwise, should be deemed a
Betrayer of the Public Safety, and I know not what other furious madness to
this purpose; as if the King were to be Voted into a worse condition than any
Subject he has, and not be able to borrow, if any of his Loyal People think fit
to lend it him. This, and some other Proceedings much of the same Nature,
awakened the sleepy Understandings of a great many, who by the Public Buz had
been charmed almost to a Lethargy, the Popish Plot began to appear little
better than a stalking Horse for the Faction to poach by: The Arbitrary
Proceedings of the House of Commons over the Liberties of their Fellow
Subjects, grew Intolerable unreasonable, illegal, and burdensome: Immediately
the Mischiefs hatched in 41 began to be revived in the Mouths and Memories of a
great many People, who to this day felt the smart of them, and dreaded the like
Tyranny and Oppression again, till every day the credit of the Popish began
more and more to break away, and the Workings of the Faction seen through it,
something plainly. This too as they are a wary Generation, they themselves
perceived, and therefore thought it high time to new vamp up the decaying Plot,
and the Meal Tub Stratagem, which brought in Dangerfield, having succeeded so
well, Since a new Evidence was wanting, nothing so plausible as a design of the
like Nature to introduce Mr. Fitz-Harris. Thus then they lay their Heads
together, and this is agreed upon. The King must be Libel'd right or wrong:
why! because it is Ad Populum; for the vilest Natures are always best taken
with Slander and Scandal, and apt to believe the worst things of those which
are above them; so the Foundation of the Business is laid, viz. the Libel; but
now to build upon this Foundation, that is, to six this Libel upon the Loyal
Party, (for by this time the Guelphs and the Gibelines began to be
distinguished) there lay the difficulty, and a difficult Point indeed it
proved; for when it was brought to that, that Mr. Fitz-Harris, who was to be
the Discoverer, asked his Pardon, His Majesty was better advised than to give
it him, except he would desire it by telling honest Truths, which was not in
the Gentleman's Instructions at that time; so he went to Newgate, and the
Design was all entangled: But when the hopes of the Godly Party was got into
Limbo, Bless us how they busled! how was he visited by Sir R. C. and Sir G. T.
to take his Examination as they called it; but whether they came to inform
themselves, or him, that is yet a Question; for Matters were carried very
privately. This worthy Gentleman or Captain being brought to Westminster
toward his Trial, for you know all our Discoverers are or should be Doctors or
Captains, as Dr. Oats, Dr. Tongue, Dr. Lower, Capt. Bedlow, Capt. Dangerfield,
Capt. Wilkinson, and so forth; this Captain then, as I said, being brought to
Westminster in order to his Trial, it was just like the roasting of a Cat
alive; for as upon that occasion, all the Cats in the Neighborhood will come
and squale, bristle, and scratch for the rescue of their Companion; so all the
Evidences were alarmed here. The Dr. of Salamancha, like a great Boar Puss came
in the Van, and roared most hideously, the rest ran about the place, whether
with their tails an end, I know not, sputtering, wawing and spitting too
abominably. Then and by these his Brethren was put into his hand his Plea, of
standing Impeached by the House of Commons, and ought not therefore to be tried
by any Inferior Jurisdiction, which Impeachment by this appears in all Moral
probability hastened, as it was by the Leading Men, to have been made much
rather to obstruct the safety of the King, in not permitting a Traitor to be
brought to Justice, than any thing else; a Vote having passed the Lower House,
upon the Lords refusing to receive the said Impeachment, That to try Mr.
Fitz-Harris in any Inferior Court, was a Violation of their Privilege, and
against the Constitution of Parliaments; and this too was Prosecuting of the
Popish Plot, this was bringing Traitors to Justice; upon which let us reason a
little.

If Mr. Fitz-Harris were Guilty of the highest Treason in the World, as
certainly he was, and by such apparent Proofs, that it was impossible he could
escape Justice in any Court in England, what need was there at that time for
his being Impeached in Parliament who had so much business already of a higher
Nature before them, as the farther Enquiry into the Popish Plot, as to which
the greatest part of the Kingdom are yet in the dark, the bringing of those
Lords Impeached already to their Trials who had laid so long under a close and
burdensome Imprisonment, that it is a shame to the English Liberty we so much
boast of all over the World? What Necessity was there for the House of Commons
to engage themselves in such a Tedious Business as a Parliamentary Process must
be, against so inconsiderable a Creature as Fitz-Harris, who was already a
Prisoner by Warrant from the Council, and looked for every day to be brought to
Trial by the ordinary course of Justice? There must be something in this
business more than ordinary: and what this something was, easily appears by the
many Tricks and Circumventions used at his Trial to Impede the Proceedings; as
first his own Plea, upon the Vote abovementioned, tried and in Law overruled,
so as it is apparent from thence, that Vote was Illegal and against Justice:
Secondly, the endeavoring to save him, by setting him up (even at the time
that he stood Arraigned for the basest Traitor) for a new Evidence. For this we
may thank that worthy Grand Jury, who immediately upon his single Deposition in
those shameful Circumstances, thought fit at a venture to find a Bill of Murder
against the Earl of Danby, and yet upon the hearing of several unquestionable
Witnesses, one of the same stamp, resumed Ignoramus upon Colledge's Indictment.
From this I say it is apparent (whatever the meaning of the business was) that
the Impeaching this Fellow in Parliament, tended naturally rather to obstruct
the Safety of the King, in not permitting such a Traitor to be brought to the
speediest Justice, than any thing else; and by what Hands, what Party the
Treason he Died for was set on foot, is sufficiently evident from his last
dying Confession, written by his own Hand, and delivered to Dr. Hawkins the
worthy Minister of the Tower, and to the said Doctor's farther Relation of it
delivered to the World in Print, I refer the Reader.

Next as to His Majesty's Declaration after Dissolving of the Parliament,
which sticks so much in our Gentleman's Stomach, Wherein he gave assurance that
he would call frequent Parliaments, etc. by our Author's good leave, according
to a late distinction of a Brother Block-head of his, they are not the many,
but the few that long for the performance of the first promise: The many and
best part of the People rest well assured of the performance, do not long nor
are clamorous for it: They are satisfied the King may keep his word of using
frequent Parliaments, without the calling a New one once a Quarter; it is
convenient as matters go, that the King so time his Affairs, as to get a
Parliament that will mind his and his Peoples Interest, and not be carried away
by the Factious Designs and Intrigues of Leading Men any more: I am ashamed so
Great and Honorable Assembly as an English House of Commons, should not be so
Wise too as not suffer any such Name as a Leading Man amongst 'em: One would
Imagine that in such a high Convention chosen out the whole Kingdom, every one
should have Wisdom and Reason enough of his own to guide his Opinion by, and
not run and Baa like a silly Sheep after the Low-Bell of another's Cant. And
this arises most commonly from the choosing Men to be our Representatives in
Parliament, that are hardly of years of Discretion to take care of themselves,
sending Boys that have not yet worn the School-brand out of their Buttocks, to
sit and consult upon the good of the Nation (allow Things of 18 or 19 to make
Speeches in a Senate House, before they know how to make a Theme, what a Shame
is this? Methinks we ought to choose for the great Convocation of the Kingdom,
Men qualified with the best Brains as well as best Estates among us; Men of the
best Understanding and Experience, and those too fortified with Principles of
Honor and Virtue, not giddyheaded Boys unable yet to look after their own
Estates, and therefore very unfit Guardians of the Properties of their
Neighbors, who when they come into the House, for want of Judgment to
distinguish betwixt Good and Evil, hunt with the loudest Cry, add to the Noise,
and by Noise carry the Business; I mean such Business as the Leading Men think
fit to set on foot, and that is commonly Faction: Now by the Leading Men, I
understand either those gray Foxes who are well skilled in the ways and
Methods that brought on our late Confusions, and hope by the same means for
their own private ends to Imbroyl us again; or discontented Spirits, who (by
the ill Example of others that have gained their Point by the same means) hope
by running against the King, and broaching Popular Grievances to be bought off
by Preferments: These are for the most part Practicing Lawyers, which in Reason
however Custom has prevailed, ought no more to be admitted into Parliaments,
than Butchers into Juries. For, Can it be reasonably supposed those should
endeavor the making good Laws in the Parliament House, that are to live by the
breaches of 'em in Westminster Hall? No, they will be sure not to work strong
in one place for fear of spoiling their Trading in another; I would indeed have
good Lawyers, that is, Men who understand the Constitution of the Government,
sit in the House with all my heart, but methinks, they should be such as had
left off the Practice of Law, were to preserve the Estates they had already
gotten by compiling sound Laws, and not such as were to raise themselves
Fortunes by by picking flawes in brittle ones.

For my part so long as I live, I will never give my Voice for the Election of
a Practicing Lawyer, for it is to the sway with such and their Accomplices who
aim at Disorder have born in the late Parliaments, that we owe for the most
part our present Differences and Distempers: upon the cursed hopes whereof was
raised that never to be forgotten mischief which threatened us, I mean, a
Treasonable Association, the form of which was lately found in the E. of Sh.
Closet, and of which almost the whole Kingdom have Loyally professed their
Detestation and Abhorrence.

As for the censure our silly Pamphletteer has passed upon those Abhorrers, I
think it not worth the wasting of Ink and Paper to remark upon it, he having
been only very dully Pert upon the occasion, recited part of a great many
honest Addresses, and railed most foolishly upon the Tenure of them, to as much
purpose, as if one should expose the beautifullest Picture in the World, and
ask the Company if they ever saw any thing so ugly? would not that be a notable
Jest? Just such a merry Monster is our Author.

But as to his qualifying of this abovementioned horrid Association, by
comparing it to that Passed into an Act in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it is
so obvious, so notorious a piece of Falsehood, that it would be a Jest to go
about to confute it, his being much troubled any one should prefer Ignatius's
Doctrine before Calvin's, I think indeed reasonable; for they are so very much
alike, they ought never to be distinguished. But having overthrown the Bulk of
his Pamphlet, I think it not worth my while to rake in the Rubbish, but beg
leave to make one concluding Observation, (viz.) To what end was there such
striving and struggling to get the Bill of Exclusion? Is there so very great a
disproportion in the Age of the King and his Brother, that His Majesty must
necessarily dye first? I think, and I hope not: Methinks there arises in Mora^
Conjecture a very ill-natured Consequence upon this, that is to say* The eager
pursuit of a Bill of Exclusion, looks not so honestly as (...) was pretended to
be done. For considering a Vote once Passed the House, That if His Majesty
shall come by any Violent Death, which Go^ forbid, they will revenge it to the
utmost upon the Papist. Methinks (...) looks as if the Bill had been Passed,
His Majesty might easily ha^ been taken off, and the whole Design turned upon
the Unfortuna^^ Duke, which the Multitude would easily have swallowed in
Supposition of his being a Papist, and he too that way, have been made
Sacrifice to the general fury in this broyl; what Government, what Usurpation
might not have been broacht? And this I observe one of the probable Effects
that might have followed a Bill for his Exclusion. Secondly, That whereas we
have heretofore been Alarmed with mighty Noises of French Pensioners. I think
it would be very seasonable (considering the late vast Returns of Money from
France) to enquire who those French Pensioners have been or are; whether such
as have fomented our Differences at home, which is certainly the Interest of
our Enemies abroad; or those that have endeavored to Preserve the Government
and Kingdom in Peace and Tranquillity; whether the Party who in all their
Intelligences and Pamphlets, are now courting the French King for a hopeful
true Protestant one, likeliest to adhere to him when ever he thinks fit to cast
an Eye this way; or those who would once have made War upon him, and obstructed
the Growth of his formidable greatness, could Money have been granted for
maintaining the Honor and Charges of such a War; but this is a Point will most
properly be enquired into, when the Natural History of our present Divisions
shall come to be Written, and then too we may give perhaps a guess at what sort
of Prince or Government this our Author and his Party desire to be Subjects
under; whether or no it be our Present, Good, Gracious, Merciful, Just,
Long-suffering King, whom Heaven in its Mercy for ever Preserve from the Cursed
Bloody Hands of Hypocrites his Enemies.

Amen.
FINIS.

