LICENSED,

March 12. 1690. Rob. Midgley.

THE MORAL HISTORY OF FRUGALITY With its opposite VICES, Covetousness,
Niggardliness, Prodigality, and Luxury.

Written by the Honorable Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, Late Lord Advocate of Scotland.

LONDON: Printed for J. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1691.

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
FInding such various Opinions concerning the first and fundamental Rules of
Justice, urged with great Animosity, and that the Laws of Nations were alleged
by all sides: I resolved, after having studied the Roman Laws and the Municipal
Law of our own Nation forty years, to spend some time in enquiring seriously
into the Laws of Nations. For this end I retired into your Famous University,
whose Library the Learned and Curious Seldom has enriched with Books on these
Subjects, beyond what is to be found in any other in Europe; nor could it be
thought that any thing could have been added to his excellent Collection, if
your extraordinary Care, and this last Age, had not furnished you with many
Books which either had escaped him, or he could not know: but after I had with
all the diligence I could, instructed my self as far as I thought was possible,
I clearly found that these Debates were not so much occasioned by the Laws of
Nations, as fed by Luxury and Avarice, which of late have given Authority to
that which some Men think a more obliging Law, called Convenience: and
therefore I resolved to Attack likewise this powerful Enemy of Law and Justice,
and I now present my Undertaking to you, not only because it was first formed
within your University, but because I know that you of all Men, with greatest
Reason, think your selves rather Stewards than Proprietors of benefits, being
you reckon the Wants of those who are in Distress amongst your principal Debts,
and because that to supply these is the greatest Convenience a self-doomed and
illuminated Christian ought to study: and after I had calculated what you have
of late bestowed upon the Exiled French. Protestants, the Fugitive Irish, and
the Starving Clergy of your own Profession in Scotland; besides the particular
Briefs poured in daily upon you for Alms to your own Countrymen, whom Accidents
have ruined, I could not but admire how even Frugality it self could have made
you live with that neatness I observed among you. I am to lay up the other
marks of esteem I have for your Learning, and that Floge which is due to your
Libraries, whereof each of your Colleges has one, which might almost supply the
want of a Bodleian any where else, until I complete, by the helps I found
amongst you, the Observations I am now writing upon the Digests, and some
illustrious Questions which have in this last Age employed and divided the best
Lawyers and Statesmen in Europe, but especially in Britain. And who, residing
among you, could see in your Libraries the fame of learned Men of all Nations
still so fresh, or could converse with many of your own now living, who have
made profound Learning even useful and witty, without being forced by a noble
Emulation to leave all other Pleasures, that he might retire unto your
Libraries, or his own Closet, there to purchase some share of that improvement
which every private Man's Breast concurs with the World to esteem. I am

Your most obliged and humble Servant, Geo. Mackenzie.

The Copy of a Letter sent together with the Dedication.
Mr. Hindmarsh,
I Have sent you the Dedication to the University of Oxford, which the Author
of the History of Moral Frugality, now deceased, designed for that Book: if
there be any thing in it unworthy of that Society, or the Author, it must be
imputed to the fatal distemper of Body which he languished under, when he wrote
it; and though it falls far below what that University might have justly
expected from him, and he was inclined to have said of them; yet as it is I
allow you to Print it, because the World may thereby know the high and just
esteem that Sir George Mackenzie retained, even to his dying day, of that
famous Society.

London, May 16. 1691. Sir, Your Servant Arch. Cockburn.

THE MORAL HISTORY OF FRUGALITY With its opposite Vices, Covetousness,
Niggardliness, Prodigality, and Luxury.
DISCOURSE I.
WHEN I consider how many Sect. I. The occasion of writing these Discourses.
have had their Affections warmed by pious Sermons, how many Moral Philosophers
have convinced those who have read them, and yet how few have been reformed by
either; I begin to think, that there must lie some strange hidden Engine in the
Heart of Man, which is able to pull back even thinking Men from improving these
impressions: and that which seems to be one of the chief occasions of this, is
that men are become so poor, by the general Avarice and Luxury which now
unreasonably tyrannize over the World, that they are tempted to be Wicked to
satisfy their Imaginary fantastic Necessities. Thus we are uncharitable,
because we want money for our Imaginary wants: We are disloyal to get it by
Rebellion, for supplying these men betray their Country, King, Friends and
Masters to get Employments whereon to live, and then betray their Trust in
these Employments, that they may be able to live without them. And thus Luxury
and Avarice offer not only the Temptations, but furnish the Excuses when they
persuade us to yield to them, they tell us that Charity must begin at home,
that we must prefer our selves to our friends, and that Necessity is exempted
from Law. And whilst Preachers, Philosophers and Friends are arguing from the
Principles of Religion, Reason and Honor, they by an influence as latent, but
stronger than that of the Stars, draw men's attention from considering the force
of these Arguments to consider what Charms are in Riches, and the Ease which
Riches procure, and so men are not Proselytes, because they are not Hearers.

Therefore to secure us against this reigning Distraction, and those
Temptations, let us embrace ancient Frugality, under whose Empire Vice was of
old curbed with great success, and which by freeing us from Poverty, secures us
against all the Snares which it occasions. For if I can once bring my self to
live on a little, and to enjoy that little with as great pleasure as others
follow their Recreations, why should I ruin my Soul or Mankind, that I may get
what Frugality will persuade me to be superfluous? And if I once be convinced
by this faithful Counselor, that a great Estate is a great snare, I will not
pay down for it my Honor and Quiet as a competent price. I heard a Dutch
Ambassador tell King Charles the Second, That he had spent only a hundred
Gilders in Meat and Drink in Holland, during a whole Year after he had been
Ambassador in most Courts, nor had he ever been in better Health, or Company.
And when the King asked why he had done so unusual a thing? He answered, To let
his Countrymen see, that one needed not betray or injure their Native Country
to get whereon to live; which, as it was the Design of this his Conduct, is now
the Design of my Book.

This friendly, wise, and convenient Virtue Sect. II. The Extremes of Frugality.
of Frugality has two Capital Enemies, Avarice, and Luxury; the one whereof
surfeits it, and the other starves it. The one cheats us by representing a
great Estate as too little, and the other by representing a little Estate as
too great. But if these Idols, Avarice and Luxury, were once thrown down in the
High places, we should no more see Churchmen sacrificing to them their
Religion, Judges the Laws, Statesmen their Honor: and most men their quiet and
tranquillity. And since Interest has got such an Ascendant over Mankind, that
it has brought Law and Virtue within its Power, and under its Dominion, nothing
now seeming reasonable or legal, but what it recommends; It Is fit by this
Method I now propose, to make it consistent with Virtue; and I hope so to
manage my Theme, as to render it subservient to that Virtue with which it has
seemed to be so long at variance.

It may seem that some grains of Avarice and Luxury, are mixed oft-times by the
great Physician with Virtue, as Poison is with the best Medicaments, to make
them active and useful; and as some Pride heightens true Courage, and some
Jealousy makes Prudence more cautious, so without Avarice Merchants would not
toil to bring us Necessaries, nor Soldiers desend even the justest Quarrels,
and a little Luxury is now requisite to diffuse Riches among the indigent: But
when these Vices exceed their allowance, and set up for themselves; then is
Virtue obliged to curb them, who having been called in as Auxiliaries, design
to turn Conquerors; yet I cannot allow my self this way of thinking, for beside
that it does too much honor to Vice, we cannot justly say, that Luxury and
Avarice are requisite to excite Virtue; for when they tend to what is good,
they change their Nature with their Design. But to set this Thought in its true
light, we may say that Frugality has all the Activity by which Avarice deceives
us, and can give all the true pleasure and ease by which Luxury recommends it
self, and it is not to be less esteemed than Prodigality, because it does not
dazzle us with a false* Magnificence, as that does, no more than true Courage is
to be less valued, than Bragging, or Eloquence than bombast Floridness.

To enable us to understand the better Sect. III. God's design to maintain the
World by Frugality.
how much Frugality is founded upon the Principles of Religion and Reason, and
how weak Enemies Avarice and Luxury are upon due Examination, it is fit to
trace them from the very Creation. And thus we will find that God Almighty
having created the World, to the end men might live, admiring his Providence,
and tasting his Goodness: It was just that all whom he brought to it, should be
supplied in it, and that men being to him as our Families are to us, it was
unjust for any of the Family to hoard, or eat up the Portion of many others;
and incredible, that he would suffer any of them to want. In order to the
better maintaining this his great Design, he did limit our Natural Necessities
within very narrow bounds: We need little Meat, few Clothes, and he made all
our Generous inclinations point outward toward the sharing with our
Neighbors, what should be convenient for them. Liberality was given man, that
he might supply the want of Meat and Drink in his Neighbors; Courage, that he
might thereby supply their want of Power; Compassion, that he might in their
Miseries afford them Consolation; Justice, that they-might defend one another
against the Oppression of those who desired too much, etc. His Divine Wisdom
has for the same End imprinted an abhorrence upon our Minds against Avarice,
Niggardliness, Prodigality, and Luxury, as Pirates, and the common Enemies of
this just and equal distribution, and has enamoured us of Frugality, as its
Protector and Bulwark. For this same End also God at first made all things
common, and they continued so, till Mankind multiplying upon the Earth, it was
fit that Propriety should by a division be introduced, to the end the Earth
might be the better cultivated, and so made the more useful for many; but lest
the Proprietor should think that by this division all others were to be
excluded from any share in it, the same Divine Providence made him need the
help of very many others, to the end they might be also provided for, and made
him see, by the Uncertainty of humane Affairs, that this Propriety was so ill
secured, that it was necessary for him to accustom himself to live upon that
little, to which he might probably be reduced; and that it was fit to supply
others, because he might need one day to be supplied by others; and lest some
should be unmindful of this Uncertainty, he made Glory and even Prodigality and
Luxury useful to draw superfluous Riches from those who would not other ways
have parted with them, and he made it as a Duty upon Man to believe himself
only a Steward.

To the end also that Man might be the more sensible, that this equal
distribution was his general design in all the Creation, he let him see
instances of it every where, and even in Brutes, who are guided merely by
Instinct, and have not that luminous, and generous Guide of right Reason. The
Lion and Vulture; the most ravenous of all Beasts, have no Storehouses; and
tho the Ants have, yet that proceeds from unability to travel in Winter, and
not from a desire to leave any remnant beyond the Year. Thus God has given to
the Beasts of the Field, that moderation by Instinct, which Man, created to
adore him, is to beg from him, in these words, Give us this day our daily
bread. So that Frugality is the true Mathematick of Christian Morality, and
there can be nothing more against Nature, than Avarice and Luxury.

Nothing can recommend this Frugality Sect. IV. That Frugality was the Basis of
all Virtue and Government amongst the Jews.
more, than that in the Commonwealth of the Jews, of which God Almighty was
Contriver and Governor for many years, Frugality seems to have been its chief
Basis, and to this end God multiplied them to a vast multitude, and pent them
up in very narrow bounds; They used no Tailors, Cooks, nor Pastry-men. Abraham,
who had rather an Army than Family of Servants, makes his Wife bake bread for
his Guests, Genesis 18. 6. Each Family furnished it self all sorts of Tradesmen,
and in place of Lordships, each contained himself within his field, in which
the Judges, and even the first Kings, labored. Gideon was threshing in his
Barn, when the Angel called him to deliver the People, Judge. 6. 11. When Saul
got the News of the Invasion on Jubes Gilead, he (tho a King) was leading two
Oxen, 1 Samuel 11. 5. Thus their Servants did not encourage their laziness, but
assist their industry. The simplicity of their Diet appears from Esau's being
tempted with a dish of Pottage, Abraham's feasting the very Angels, by bringing
himself a Kid from the Flock, Genesis 18. 6. at one time; and a Calf at another,
with bread baked under the ashes. Boaz treated his Mistress Ruth (who was
gleaning) by allowing her to dip her bread with the Servants in the Vinegar;
and tho Rebecca feasted Isaac with well seasoned Venison, yet that was only one
dish, made for a Prince, on a great Design, and when his great Age required
somewhat to recover rather a lost Appetite, than pamper a strong one. Their
chief Pleasures were, that Innocence, which grew from Frugality, and that
Health which is the natural Effect of a simple Diet. Their assiduity in
Laboring excluded House games, and well labored Fields allowed no Hunting,
Hawking, or other Field Eexercises. We read of no Feasts among them, save those
that were rather Rewards of their Industry, than the Contrivances of their
Luxury. Such as those which they had at their Reaping, Vintage, etc. And the
only Feast we read of, made by David's Children, even after he was exalted to
be King, was at their Sheepshearing.

Nor did God, under the New Testament, leave off his great Design of
instructing men Sect. V. Our Savior made it a Standard and Bulwark in his
Gospel.
to live soberly; but on the contrary, Luxury and Avarice having grown up
amongst the Jews, as Tares amongst the Wheat, after the Almighty himself had
left off to cultivate them by his own immediate hand: He thought it again
necessary to repress and root out these Weeds, and to sow amongst them new and
fresh Seeds of Sobriety and Moderation. In order whereunto* he sent his Son to
be born in the house of a frugal Artisan, and to work with him at his Trade
until he thought fit himself to come abroad to work out the Work of our
Salvation. That Idleness might want a Pattern in our great Master he chose also
for his Disciples and Courtiers men as poor as a Trade could suffer them to be.
He commanded them, and all others to pray only for their daily Bread, excluding
in the word Daily, the covetous wishes of those, who lengthen their desires,
beyond those plain Necessities that are inconsistent with Luxury, and so great
a desire had he to secure man against these two great Tyrants, that he not only
by his Example and Doctrine discredits and forbids them, but he descends from
being a Legislator, to reason with Mankind against them; And he reasons upon no
Subject more frequently, nor strongly than against avaritious Anxiety. If you
be (says our Savior) the Children of God, will he not care for his own
Children? since you who are wicked care for yours. God clothes the Lilies and
Flowers of the Field, more glorious than Solomon, tho they are to be cut down
the next day, and feeds the Fowls of the Air, adding, Are you not better than
they? He shows in the Parable of the five Loaves and two Fishes, how easy it
is for him to provide for his own Family: His Omnipotency being a sufficient
Granary for those that depend upon him. By teaching us that we are Stewards,
not Proprietors. He shows how miserable those are that lay up their Treasures
where the Moth can eat, or Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21.
the Thief break through, and steal* And by that terrible Sentence, O! thou
Fool, this night thy Soul shall be taken from thee. He has left a dreadful
impression of the uncertainty of those Riches, which are too often preferred to
the Heaven that is lost for them. Stop here, O my Soul, and read with
astonishment, that dreadful Sentence pronounced by the infallible Judge, and
join to it another, wherein these who preferred their Riches to the distressed
Members of Jesus Christ, are condemned to Torments which shall endure as long
as they could have wished their Riches to have done; When I was hungry, you did
not feed me, etc.

The Blessed Apostles sufficiently illuminated Sect. VI. This Doctrine was
continued by the Apostles and Primitive Church.
by the Divine Power and Goodness, for so great a Work as the Conversion of the
World, continued to preach this excellent Doctrine, calling Avarice Idolatry,
and in that one word comprehending a greater Satyr against it, than all that
ever the Philosophers taught, but very consequentially to the Doctrine of their
great Master, who assured his Disciples, that they could not both serve God and
Mammon. In them also we find that judicious Lesson, to use the World as if we
used it not, not foolishly throwing away Riches as the Philosophers did, lest
they might be thereby tempted; nor hoarding them up as Misers do; but suffering
them to flow on gently, and in their natural Course for the good of others, and
keeping a loose hand on them, lest our hearts being too much united to them,
should not be united by Love to God Almighty, who declares himself
irreconcilable with Mammon: And to make this great Doctrine go the more easily
down, and give it a more pleasant relish, they assure us, that the chief
Ornaments of reasonable Creatures are mercifulness, Patience, Innocence,
Charity, and not large Territories, swelling Treasures, splendid Titles, fine
Clothes, nor those other gaudy Trappings, which are no part of us, and
consequently cannot be the Standard by which we are to be measured.

The World having been debauched by the Roman Luxury, as that was fed by their
Spoils, Mankind was under Nero, Heliogabalus, and some other of the Roman
Emperors, depraved beyond what we can believe. And even at that time, when all
their Philosophers could gain very few Proselytes to Virtue; The Apostles and
their Disciples were able to make many thousands to Christianity, and to refine
them to a degree of Moderation, Sobriety, and Innocence, which these
Philosophers themselves admired far more than others did them; and certainly
those numerous and entire Conversions were infallible Proofs of the Verity of
that Religion which they taught, and the Primitive Christians were as great
Miracles themselves as any that were wrought amongst them. If we propose then
those admirable Patterns to our selves, we shall find that most of the rich
among them did work with their own hands, to avoid thereby that Idleness which
brings on Luxury, Curiosity, Backbiting, and many other Vices, which are
inconsistent with the Christian Cass. de Sp. Aced. c. 7. Constitut. Apostol. 1.
4.
Religion; and all the Poor were commanded to work, that they might thereby
have to pay their debts, and do works of Charity, they subdued their Bodies by
Fasting, and their Spirits by Humility; nor would they Tertul. Apol. c. 3, 7.
have been Soldiers, but because the Severity of Military Discipline among the
Romans at that time, did oblige them to the Sobriety and Activity which
overcame Avarice and Luxury as well as their Enemies; they did seldom eat save
once a day, but then never fed upon what Luxury prepared, nor diverted
themselves with what it invented; they valued not Health it self, but that they
might serve God with it, nor Riches, but because they might be useful to the
Poor.

Never any man wished more earnestly to be rich than I, to have lived in those
glorious Times, and to have seen those great Triumphs over Luxury and Avarice.
But we may correct the useless Wish, by the just Remedy of reading and
meditating much upon what they have left, for our Instruction in their
excellent Writings, and above all, by living as they did; for without doubt,
the most pleasant, and most comfortable Prospect of Virtue, would be to see it
in our Actions; and the most joyful Image of Innocence, would be to see it
graven upon our Hearts.

Those Commonwealths, or Societies of Sect. VI. How the other Commonwealths
were founded on Frugality, as Lacedaemon, Rome, Holland.
Men, which grew up from Consent, and were not the Product of popular Faction,
and Fury, did found themselves upon Sobriety, as their true Basis; that being
the kindly Nurse of Equality, and nothing con tributing more to make the common
Treasure rich for the public Safety, than that private Citizens should
satisfy themselves with what was necessary. They justly concluded. That as the
Body Natural must perish, if the Blood does not circulate; so also the Riches
of the Commonwealth become useless, or rather corrupted, when they stagnate by
being hoarded in the buried Treasury of private men. They made also many Laws
against Luxury, and the Severity of their Military Discipline and Censures
exceeded yet those Laws. Cato was more celebrated for his frugal Severity, than
Caesar or Pompey for their Conquests; the Roman Poets and Historians vie one
with another in their expressions of Esteem of him, and Lucan gives this
Character both of Frugality and him.

-- Hi mores, haec duri immota Catonis
Secta fuit, servare modum, finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi, patrioeque impendere vitam
Nec sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo.
Huic epuloe vicisse famem, magnique penates
Summovisse hiemem tecto, pretiosaque vestis
Hirtam membra super Romani more Quiritis
Induxisse togam, Venerisque huic maximus usus,
Progenies: Urbi pater est, urbique maritus:
Iustitiae cultor, rigidi servator honesti:
In commune bonus, nullosque Catonis in actus
Subrepfit, partemque tusit sibi nata voluptas.
Which May has translated thus.

These were his Manners, this four Cato's Sect,
To keep a Mean, hold fast the End, and make
Nature his Guide, die for his Countries sake,
For all the world, not him, his Life was lent,
He thinks; his Feasts but Hungers banishment;
His choicest Buildings were but fence from cold:
His best Attire rough Gowns, such as of old
Was Roman Wear; and nothing but desire
Of Progeny in him warmed Venus fire.
Father and Husband both to Rome was he,
Servant to Justice and strict Honesty:
For the public Good; in none of Cato's Acts
Creeps self-born Pleasure, or her share exacts.
But I read not of any Laws made against Avarice since the tenth Law in the
Decalogue, of which the Reason may seem to be, That the great irregularity of
Covetousness arises from the inordinate Love to Riches, which being a latent
Act of the Mind, can be known to none save God, and therefore it can be
punishable by no Laws, but those which are made by him who is the Searcher of
Hearts; and the Contempt which follows Avarice, is in it self a sufficient
Temporal Punishment.

To understand the progress of Frugality, and its opposite Vices in the other
unhallowed Nations, we must recur to the more ancient Histories of the World,
where we'll find that Nature endeavored to please those who were situated in
desert Countries, such as the Scythians, with the thoughts of their being
secure by their Frugality against the Invasions of those who were tempted to
Robberies by the expectation of Spoil, and thus their Ambassadors diverted
Alexander from the hopes of conquering them, telling him, That he could gain
nothing but blows by invading them, who had no pleasure in any thing but in
defending their Native Country, and whose Courage had never been effeminated by
Luxury, nor stained by Rapine. In other Nations, where Plenty was capable to
corrupt, their Lawgivers did most industriously turn all the edge of their Laws
against Luxury, making Frugality the Fundamental Law of their Government; as we
see in Lacedemon, which Rome afterward did imitate, and Rome has in this of
late been imitated by Hloland. But I find this difference between the Frugality
of Lacedemon, Rome and Holland, that the great design of Lycurgus in Lacedemon,
was to wean his ambitious and factious Countrymen from too ardent a desire of
coming into the Government, that thereby they might enrich themselves; and
therefore he did allow no Salary to Statesmen save Fame, and preferred none to
be such, but they who showed a contempt of Riches. The Romans recommended
Frugality and the contempt of Riches, because they found nothing was so
necessary for a warlike Nation, as the Love of Glory, and nothing was so great
a Rival, or rather an Enemy to Glory as Avarice: They also considered justly,
that Frugality hardened men into a temper of being Soldiers. The Hollanders
practiced at first Frugality, rather through Necessity than Choice; but finding
thereafter that it was probable they might enlarge their Territories by
Commerce, as the Romans did by Conquest, they recommended Frugality as that
which could best enlarge their Trade; and thus they by sailing their Ships with
fewer men, and feeding these men, and their Manufacturers too, less sumptuously
than other Nations do, have been able to out-sell them; Their Merchants and
Tradesmen likewise living less prodigally than other Merchants, are able to lay
out more of their Stock in Trade, and to sell at easier Rates: Nor do so many
of them break as elsewhere, and the breaking of one Merchant, who has lived
sumptuously, endangers twenty. By this Frugality likewise they are able to
contribute, and do contribute more freely to the paying of Taxes, than any
other Nation; for men part freely with that without which they may live. So
that Frugality is amongst them, not only a Nurse to their Trade, but a Bulwark
to their Country: Yet I cannot but blame them for making Frugality, not only
the chief of their Virtues, but a sharer in their Religion; they having few
Merchants or Tradesmen, who do not sell and work freely on the Sunday, and one
of them excused it to me, by telling that he was worse than an Infidel who
provides not for his Family, and from this Politic has arisen possibly that
great Faction in Holland, who oppose the Morality of the Sabbath.

As to the Management of Public Employment, Holland and Venice have always
thought it unjust to defraud those who are able to serve the Public, of
necessary Subsistence: for sometimes the abler Statesmen have not whereupon to
live; but on the other hand the greatest Men among them, have very mean
Salaries, which are neither able to feed their Luxury, nor raise their Avarice.
They laugh at Monarchies, and say, they bestow so large Salaries upon their
Ministers that they are generally diverted from the Public Affairs, by
following those Pleasures, with which vast Salaries do daily tempt them; and
thus they use the Public, as those Coach-men do, who otherwise skilful enough,
yet if they too much good Liquor, they overturn their Masters in the plainest
ways.

MAHOMET designed to found a New Empire as well as Religion, and made his
Religion subservient to his Empire, teaching his Mussul-men or Believers, that
they should be saved accordingly as they showed Zeal for enlarging his Kingdom,
and by an entire and blind Obedience to the Emperor's Command, they might save
their Souls in sending their Heads. In recompense of which severe Obedience he
allowed them plurality of Wives here, and promised them new Scenes of carnal
Pleasures for ever hereafter; so that he seemed (contrary to all other
Institutions) to found his upon Luxury; but yet no Society is obliged to study
the contempt of Riches so much as they: for to the end that their Treasury
might only be rich, Mahomet obliged them to believe that all belonged to the
Emperor, and that no private Man had Property, persuading them, that when the
Treasury was rich, all private Men were secure; and that by extending the
Limits of the Empire, every man who was vigorous and active in the Conquest,
had the opportunity thereby of making himself great and rich. Which has made
me very often admire how humane Nature could allow Men to believe a Point that
was so stretched: but Mahomet owed his Success in this more to the brutality of
his Followers, than to the solidity of his own Reason. And if we consider more
narrowly his Principles, we will find that he did not chiefly design to
gratify their Luxury, but to teach what was useful to his own Interest: For he
allowed them plurality of Wives only to compensate, and make them insensible,
by this impious Liberty, of the great Prejudice he had done them in robbing
from them their Liberty and Property, but he discharged them the use of their
delicious Wines, because it might disable them at any time from going about
their public Employments. It appears at first difficult to reconcile their
being so avaritious with the want of Property; for Reason teaches us to value
little that of which we cannot be secure: But we must consider, that no Vice
looks further than the present time; thus Avarice is every where unsecure of
its prey as well as among the Turks; and this Instance of the Turks is enough
to prove, how far Avarice makes us toil beyond what we ought to do, however it
wants not its own colors there; for it persuades them, that it is good once to
be in possession of Riches, that none can take them away save the Emperor, and
that he can have no temptation to take them from any, save such as are
Factious, and Traitors.

To return to my former Design, I continue to observe, that men having no
defense against these Vices, save the use of their Reason, as soon as this
Reason was bribed by Avarice, or made drunk by Luxury, it ranged it self on the
side of those Vices, and then frail man was soon overcome by his own
Auxiliaries, which a more refined sort of men called the Philosophers
perceiving, they run to the assistance of Reason, and they gained indeed many
Proselytes, though they could not gain entire Countries. And after others had
made a great progress in Greece, Pythagoras made one in Italy, and his
recommendation and esteem of Frugality retains yet great vigor amongst the
Brachmans in India, as Confucius's has done amongst the Chinese for many Ages;
And the same Doctrine was transmitted by them to the Druides, the joint Priests
and Philosophers of our Northern Regions; who made Silence and Frugality the
Nurses and Supports of all Virtue. Lycurgus discharged the use of all Gold and
Money, and made his Iron Coin so unpleasant and unportable, that (as he
thought) no man would be covetous of it. He ordered all Men to eat in common
and publicly, that none might live more deliciously, than others. The Roman
sumptuary Laws set limits to Extravagancy, and their severe Censors' were
esteemed in their Magistracy according as they punished the transgressors of
these Laws. Some of the Philosophers threw away their Riches lest they should
be tempted by them; and others of them did in their Cynick way not only bark
against Riches, but vainly glory in fordid and nasty Poverty. By which Laws and
Philosophy the less attentive part of Mankind may think themselves better
guarded against these Vices, than by the Precepts of either the Old or New
Testament. But these Lawgivers not knowing the heart of Man so well as he who
made it, framed Laws that were inconsistent with true Natural Reason, or at
least subdued Nature only for a time, but could not reform it. They gained few
Proselytes but either by the Novelty of their Doctrine, or by a love to
Singularity, or from a hid design of making the People believe that if they
were brought into the Government, they would not rob and squeeze the Riches of
their Subjects.

The Heroes who condemned Avarice and Sect. VII. The Ancient Heroes and
Philosophers were admired for this Virtue.
laughed at Luxury never failed of being universally admired; and having their
memories celebrated, (the great and peculiar reward of Virtue.) We find that
Epaminondas the Thebane, by being buried at the public Expense (after he had
been Master of all the Substance of the Commonwealth, and not having wherewith
to bury himself) was more esteemed, than those who had all the Riches in the
City. Nor does the Roman History remember with so much applause the Triumph of
any of their Generals, as it does the Generosity of Fabritius, who when he was
tempted by Pyrrhus King of Epirus to betray his native Country, overballanc'd
that Kings Gold by his own more solid Virtue. I shall not contend much for the
sincerity of the Heathen Philosophers, but sure I am, that their professing
Enmity to Riches and Prodigality, does fully evince that the most Ambitious
mind can find nothing worthier of its Imitation; nor could Nature teach the
Vulgar any Thing that they could more easily believe than that he deserved most
to be admired, who valued himself least upon his Riches. We have many Sects of
those Philosophers, who put Virtue under the tuition of Sobriety, such as the
Pythagoreans, Stoics, and even Epicurus himself taught, that he who could live
upon Bread, and Water, was equal to Jupiter; and he expressed so much joy in
his Sobriety, that it burst forth into Raptures. They do all in their
Discourses against Avarice and Luxury overflow, as Rivers do, when they are
swelled with too great abundance. And in those Passions expressed themselves
with a natural force and zeal, which was thought inimitable by Hypocrisy. And
their refusing the Employments and Riches which they cried out against, was
concluded to be a very probable Argument of their Sincerity. They admired the
wise Gallantry of one of the Athenian Philosophers, who when he was reproached
as railing only at Riches, because he could not command them; left his
Philosophy for some time and turning Merchant, enhansed the whole Trade of the
City: but then divided what he gained most Generously betwixt the Commonwealth
and the Poor, designing to gain nothing by his Trade, but the Belief that he
was in earnest a Philosopher. Nor can I forget Phocion's generous Answer to the
Ambassadors of Alexander, who having brought him a great sum of Money, he
asked, Why Alexander sent him that vast sum of Money? And when they had
answered, that he had sent it to show his Esteem of his great Virtue; He
replied, That he hoped Alexander would suffer him to enjoy that Virtue, for
which he esteemed him, and which he had never gained by Riches. And tho the
Philosophers were very excessive in their contempt of Riches, and contradicted
thereby Nature, as well as the Multitude; (which made them in the end as
Ridiculous, as the Vices truly were which they contemned:) Yet certainly God
did think fit to send these Philosophers into the World a little before his
Son, to convince Men, that the Vices which he was to curb by his Gospel, were
abhorred by those whom they Honored with the names of Wise Men, and Lovers of
the Truth.

COVETOUSNESS. DISCOURSE II.
WHEN Nature began first to yield to Sect. I. The first rise of Covetousness
and how Men were tempted to it by the convenience of Property.
Vice, and to be misled by blind Appetites, it yielded to Ambition in the
Angels, to Vanity in Eve, and to Revenge in Cain; but it did cost Vice many
Ages before it could prevail so far as to persuade Men to toil and sweat beyond
Necessity, or to believe that to be necessary which was superfluous; so far
were these contrary to Nature, nor had it ever been able to corrupt reasonable
men without disguising its Designs; and therefore it first represented to them
that men growing numerous and unjust, it was fit to divide that Land which they
inhabited, pretending that the Earth which God had given them would be daily
beautified by those to whom each portion should fall, and every man remaining
content with his own share should want all pretext of oppressing his Neighbor.
This Property became afterward so charming, and Men were so pleased with what
they had, that by a fatal mistake they concluded the more they had, they would
be the more pleased, and so that which was designed to bound our Appetites, did
enlarge them,

Thus Avarice was the first of the two Extremes which attacqued Frugality, and
as the number of Men increased upon the face of the Earth, it increased with
them; for its pretenses grew thereby much stronger, because it was so much the
abler to persuade Men, that by how much the multitude of sharers grew, the
shares must lessen by the same measure: and that they would not be able to
supply their Necessities without making laborious provisions for them. And when
men grew very numerous, Avarice thought it time to suggest to them, that if
they multiplied by the proportions formerly observed; the Earth which was
already scarce able to supply them would shortly become absolutely
insufficient. Tho Avarice had thus got some footing in the World, yet because
Commerce was then only entertained by Exchange, it could make no considerable
progress till men for their own destruction had dug up Gold and Silver,
those Metals which have destroyed more than Iron or Steel, and then it getting
something that was durable, and might be hoarded up, toiled to Excess; but even
that Money it laid up being thereby barren was so much the less desirable,
therefore it suggested to Men the taking Bonds and Obligations with eating
Usury. And thus Avarice grew up to its full Perfection.

Avarice in the next place borrowed New Sect. II. The disguise under which
Avarice insinuates it self, such as its promises to gratify men's Passions, and
supply their Necessities.
Forces from the Experience of Mankind; for as time run on, 'twas easy to
observe that Favor and Security were to be bought by Money; and from this it
suggested that it was inculpata Tutela, and one of the wisest Duties of
Self-defence to hoard up Riches as the means whereby men could ransom
themselves from all Dangers. It borrowed also assistance from all the Passions,
and when it found any man too strong for it by his innate Reason, it
transformed it self into the likeness of his favorite Inclinations, and did
like the Ivy with the Oak creep up to a height to which it could not naturally
have risen. And thus when it found a man incline to Ambition, it endeavored to
persuade him, that without Money all his generous Thoughts would turn Crimes,
that it only could raise him Soldiers, because men must venture their Lives for
that without which they cannot support them. That this would hire them New
Counselors by making his Interest theirs, and that the making of Peace and
War was more its Prerogative, than of Kings and Princes, who though they vainly
founded their Power upon their Right of Blood and the Justice of their Laws,
yet they owed it only to their Treasures; nor had the faces of Emperors so
much influence any where as upon their Coins. And thus Avarice like the smoke
which it truly resembles, raised it self amidst the touring flames of Ambition.

We see Riches prove the most successful of all Gallantries: for let whining
Lovers talk what they please of their Chains, the strongest ones are made of
Gold, and Jupiter himself could not otherways win Danae, than by descending on
her in a Golden Shower; what can not be expected from the force of Gold? when
it not only becomes the best of all the Paints and Beauty-Patches that Ladies
can use, but is miraculously able in our Matches to make the crooked straight,
and the blind see. In vain is Blood pretended to, except this make it
circulate; and men's parts are looked on as aerie Notions when a Competitor
appears, who has such solid advantages as Lands and Riches. I have with
Contempt and Disdain considered the Omnipotency of Mammon, in commanding the
most beautiful and haughty Ladies to humble themselves to the Sons of those who
had got their Estates by Insamy, and had themselves Souls that were unworthy of
any other Bodies, than those deformed ones, which every one abhorred, but the
bought Bride, and her bribed Relations.

If any Man design to pursue his Revenge, Money will furnish him a Murderer,
or if he resolve to improve himself in Arts and Sciences, he must owe his
Education, Travels, Books, and Instruments to his Riches, and possibly he may
buy a Poem, Play, or other Book which may afterward make the Stock of his
Reputation. He who wants Children must adopt Riches in their Place, and after
he has comforted himself against the miseries of old Age by being Courted by
all who either expect Succession, or Legacies, He at last thinks he can
perpetuate more his Name by leaving a great Estate, than by leaving a Son
though recommended by the best Parts and Education, having observed in the long
course of his life, that a great Estate is more esteemed than generous
Qualities. I have known Avarice insinuate it self with some, as 'twere only a
pleasant effect of the love of Proportion and Harmony; and thus he who wants
only two or three hundred Pounds of ten thousand a Year, or he who has a whole
Barony, except some few Acres belonging to a poor Neighbor, can be as little
at ease till he get these, as he whose fine Lodging wants some Rooms to
complete its Symmetry: which false Color did tempt King Achab to covet that
Vineyard which he got to the destruction of his Queen and Kingdom. It
insinuates it self on Gamesters as an Innocent Love of Divertisement, and
persuades them that their Anger for losing proceeds not from an Esteem of the
Money they have lost, but from the shame of being overcome. It persuades the
Lazy, that if they come once to an Estate they need not be afraid of losing any
thing by their Slothfulness. And thus it promises to be a Hedge to that soft and
nice Humor. It persuades those who are in Debt, that any thing is lawful which
may pay it: I was pleased once to hear a Lady say, that she abhorred
Privateering so much, as a kind of public Robbery, that she would no way
suffer the Money arising from the Prizes, in which she had Interest, to enter
into her Pack, that is to say, she would buy no Land with it for her Heir, but
designed with it only to clear her Debts. A nice way indeed of reconciling
Covetousness with Honor, Law and Conscience. Yet I could not but regret to
hear another Lady whom I esteemed much more say, Oh, that my Debts were paid;
to the end I might have the great pleasure of doing works of Charity: To which
my answer was, Madam, Sell a little of the Land you lately bought and pay those
Debts, and yet ye shall have remaining thrice as much Land as ever you expected.

Avarice borrows sometimes a Mask from Sect. III. It gets assistance from Men's
different Temperaments.
a Man's Temperament, it persuades easily the Melancholy, that he may starve,
and that in laying up Riches he only provides for Nature; without which he is
as much a Self-murderer as if he should cut his own Throat; Nam qui alimenta
negat, Necat. And for the same Reason we see the older men grow, they grow the
more Covetous, because the more Melancholy; for not being able to gain as they
did when they were Young, they think they should supply this by Niggardliness
and Avarice, and resolve to gain Esteem by it, since they can by no way else.
Upon which Considerations the Eloquent Apostle, Heb. 12. 1. designs Avarice by
these words, And the sin which does so easily beset us; for the Greek words,
(...) may be better translated the well Circumstantiated Sin, or the Sin which
has the fair pretenses, and in this Avarice is the most dangerous of all Sins,
that others occasion Remorse by their heinousness, but Avarice precludes it,
for few or none are ever convinced that it is a Sin, and so cannot repent for
it.

Though these be the Disguises under which it oft-times recommends it self to
us, as the product of Reason. Yet it is too well known, that Avarice is
sometimes so absurd that it seems to have more of a Disease than a Vice in it,
and to be rather a total want of Reason than a corruption of it. But alas! it
is such a Disease as comes not by fits, as other Vices do; for the Drunkard may
be quenched, and the Leacher is soon drained, but the Miser and covetous Man is
always tortured. And in this it differs from other Diseases, that those who are
sick of it, desire never to be Cured, and therefore it resembles more a
Madness, which makes men admire and value themselves, even in that wherein all
men else see they are distracted. For there are Men truly mad, who talk
reasonably enough on all Subjects, save in that one, in which they are
distempered, not unlike an Excellent Lute, having all its strings well tuned,
save one, but the least defect is sufficient to disconcert all the Harmony. Nor
does Bedlam it self lodge greater varieties of Madmen, than Avarice produces;
for some will be so mad as to starve themselves, and the very Heir to whom they
are to leave their plentiful Estate. And some have past by their starving
Relations, to leave it to one who had no recommending Qualities, save that he
would succeed him in his Humor, as well as his Estate, and keep together the
beloved Treasure: And some who would not leave six pence to the poor, have left
their whole Estate to Persons who have bribed them out of it, by inconsiderable
Presents (for Bribing is the only Flattery that can prevail on the Avaritious)
and though they would not give a shilling for an Eloquent Panegyric, have yet
left it all to such insipid Flatterers, and have suffered their Estates to be
taken away by Processes, or exposed to public Enemies, rather than secure them
by a timely and prudent Expense against either. I have also admired to find,
that men who are sure of no Property, as in Turkey, and it may be nearer,
should of all men be most Avaritious, though it is probable that they toil for
their Tyrants, rather than Heirs, and yet the counterfeit Happiness of griping,
is irresistible. So that Avarice seems only to sport it self with its Votaries,
and to use them as the Devil does Witches.

Avarice having thus corrupted the Reason Sect. IV. It is propagated by
Imitation and Example.
of Mankind, this Corruption propagates it self by Imitation and Example; for
as Avarice arises often from a distempered Judgment, like to the Hemlock
springing out of Mud; so it is sometimes copied by Imitation, as a Picture is
drawn by a Face. And I must here observe, that Parents have a most special
Obligation to be virtuous beyond others, for Children whilst young, do easily
like soft Wax, receive impressions from their Example, because of the Respect
they have to them, and their being constantly in their Company. So that Parents
share in their Childrens Crimes without lessening the Childrens guilt, by
bearing this share. The being likewise meanly bred, does oft-times by a fixed
Habit draw over some men's Inclinations to this bias, and though they rescue
themselves from Poverty, they are not able to recover from that vicious Habit.

There are likewise some Countries, in which Sect. V. It is assisted by the
respective Countries where Men live.
by general custom Vice seems to be authorized, as Drunkenness in Germany,
Revenge and Jealousy in Italy: The Industry of Holland inclines Men somewhat
to Avarice; The Pride of Scotland to Prodigality, and the Plenty of England to
Luxury, in which Cases Reason is rather prevented than corrupted or persuaded.
Nor durst either Prodigality or Avarice undertake to corrupt Nature, and Reason
so highly, if they had not the assistance of General Example, to which men by a
false Modesty think they are in Reason obliged to submit, and ofttimes a
general Custom passes for Nature, in such as understand not, or have no mind to
understand the difference, and to examine wherein the Copy differs from the
Original. I confess that Rich and Trading Nations, such as England, may be
allowed greater scope to Sumptuousness, as men who have great Revenues, without
the least imputation of Luxury, do live proportionably to what they possess,
without being censured by any reasonable man for so doing.

THE Church has also concurred to its Assistance, Sect. VI. Its last Essay was
to tempt Churchmen, and how.
and Avarice having gained even some Churchmen, to be its Chaplains (who love
Ease, and concluding Riches necessary for procuring it) that they might more
easily convey them into their own Channel, have endeavored to make Riches as
necessary for other men's Salvation, as they thought they were for their own
Ease. And though we poor Mortals think them only Snares, yet they have of late
become the best Antidote against Sin, and a Man may as well by them purchase a
place in Heaven as in Earth, and as easily free himself from Purgatory as
Poverty; or if any Man designs to ruin the State by raising Factions and
Rebellions, Money alone can furnish him from the Altar, with the best Trumpeter
of Sedition. It is no wonder we Laics accuse Church men of Avarice, since they
tax one another with this Vice. Those who separated from the Church of Rome,
objected that Avarice had kindled the fire of Purgatory, invented Masses to
save men by Money from its flames; had wrought false Miracles, etc. Those who
separated from the Episcopal Churches, pretended that Bishops had Arrogated
that Superiority, to make thereby great Benefices necessary. Those who
subdivided from Presbytery, cried out against Soul-selling Stipends, and all
those Churches may probably conjecture that those Dissenters cry down Stipends,
out of a design to excuse themselves from the Payment of them. Nor is
Covetousness able to debauch private Churchmen, and set particular Sects at
Variance with one another; but it is subtle enough in some collective and
reformed Meetings of the Clergy, to influence the decision of General Cases of
Conscience, though (I confess) with a Delicacy peculiar to it self: It will
suggest that the Clergy are to be rescued from Contempt, and ought to have
wherewith to maintain, not only themselves, but Hospitality, and Foundations of
Charity: From which humbler thoughts Cardinal Palavicino in his History of the
Council of Trent, rises by an insolent flight to defend all the Magnificence of
the Church of Rome, under pretense that Mankind is governed by Sense, as well
asby Reason: and therefore they must see in the Church and its Ministers what
may draw respect from the Outward, as well as from the Inward Man. It passes
for pure Devotion in that Church to hook into its Patrimony all they can
(though by as palpably forged Donations as Constantines was) and it would be
judged Sacriledg to quit what is once acquired. Nor shall you find in all your
travels any more Covetous, and thereby greater Oppressors, than some who having
left the World to retire to Religious Houses, are made by them their
Procurators. But though these considerations may sufficiently justify the
Liberal, but suitable Provisions which have been bestowed on the Church of
England for promoting Charity and Learning, yet they can never with Palivicino
vindicate the excessive sums brought in by those indulgences to the Treasures
of the Romish Church which occasioned the dreadful Wars of Germany; and they
extremely condemn those. Impropriators who have made not only the Preachers,
but the Gospel it self, contemptible by denying a Competency to them who serve
at the Altar.

At which inconsistency of Designs, occasioned by the Natural force of
Covetousness (which can be disguised but never mortified) I have frequently
been astonished. In Secular Meetings also, it can persuade not only the
Hearers, but the Speakers themselves to go along with whatever it dictates: and
it will insinuate it self at last so far, that a man will really believe
himself publick-spirited, when at the bottom his chief Inclinations arise from
private Interest, which we now by a kind and gentle word, call Convenience,
which is in effect a Combination of Luxury and Avarice, each whereof finding
themselves too weak a part to encounter the strength of Reason, have most
remarkably in this Age joined their Forces together and assumed the insinuating
common name of Convenience. Oh! Happy Orator! Teach me thy Art of Persuasion,
and bestow thy Bags upon those who delight to trudge under them; But if I could
persuade as thou can, I would endeavor to rescue Mankind from thy Tyranny;
for if thou bewitching Convenience be made the Standard, farewell for ever to
the Glory of Martyrdom, to the Loyalty of Subjects, to the Dutifulness
Children, and to the Ties of Friendship.

Having thus seen Avarice condemned by Nature, by the great Author of it, by
all the great and wise Societies of Mankind, and by that same general agreement
of Men, which has taught us that our Souls are Immortal.

Having seen the Original and Progress of Frugality and Avarice, and the
several Masks under which Avarice has cheated us: It will be fit to proceed to
consider the Remedies and Arguments whereby we may secure our selves against
its Influence.

The true way to wean us from Avarice, Sect. VII. Arguments and Remedies
against Avarice.
is first to find out, what does in our Breast incline us to it. And if it be
that we may be esteemed, we shall easily find this but a Cheat, because none
but the Avaritious themselves esteem other men for being Rich; and we may be as
well in love with Cheating, because those who value that Craft and Subtilty are
pleased with such as are Masters in it: But if We can once persuade our selves
that Riches are not to be Admired, and are rather given to men for Ease than
for Esteem, we shall be clearly convinced, that this is but a faint color to
excuse it: and when men in Trade or Employments die very Rich, the generality
of Mankind concludes that they have taken a Latitude of gaining by any means,
or are guilty of the folly of having defrauded themselves of Necessaries, to
lay up so much as might corrupt their Heirs by Luxury. It has been frequently
observed, that the Children of Avaritious men, have proved more Luxurious or
Prodigal, than others; which proceeds either from their abhorring of Avarice,
because they found themselves, when they were young oppressed by it, or because
finding their Parents much reproached with it, they thought themselves obliged
in Honor to shun that Vice which occasioned this Reproach: or else having
conceived an opinion when they were young, that their Parents were very Rich,
as all Avaritious men are thought to be, they concluded they might allow
themselves to spend the more freely. But upon the whole matter, I must conclude
that Indian wise who laughed at the Europeans who toil excessively to make
their Children excessively Lazy.

I doubt not but some men have been desirous to gain Money by their Employment,
because the want of Practice is looked upon as want of Parts: But I have
observed few who deserving to be esteemed for Parts, have missed it from the
Wiser sort, because they wanted Practice: and those, and not the multitude, are
the true Judges. Nor is that Wit and Learning which gains Money the true
measure of Esteem; being rather the Mechanic part of true Sense, given by
Nature to us for maintaining our Bodies, than the sublime part bestowed by
Heaven for adorning our Souls. We have few Monuments at this day of the rich
Lawyers among the Romans, that gained great Estates, but we retain still great
Esteem for those who contemned them. And have we not seen some rich Men among
our selves, who having gained even to Envy, died more neglected, and scorned,
than they whom Poverty had starved, and who now are remembered for nothing but
as Instances of Folly and Madness. That can never pass for Wit, nor deserve
Esteem among reasonable men, which naturally tends so far to debase our Reason:
nor did the Illustrious Turene (to instance likewise the Brave) want that
Esteem which the greatest Misers in the World would have coveted, tho he never
valued that Money which they admire, having died without being Master of fifty
Pound, though he could have been Master of far more than those Misers durst
have wished. Fame is the heritage of the Virtuous, and Esteem is a Rent that
all men must pay them. Such as think that by Riches they can secure themselves
against Danger, have certainly forgot how many Avarice has made a Prey; nor did
ever any ravenous Creature choose to devour the Lean. Men look on the
Avaritious as Pirates, against whom Interest arms all Mankind, and tho Drunkards
love Drunkards, yet the Avaritious hate all who are so, as men do those Rivals
who are preferred by their Mistress. Money may indeed supply the want of
Innocence, when men are accused: but few Tyrants, or Robbers are content with a
part when they may have the whole, and when Darius offered to Alexander, all on
this side of Euphrates, Alexander laughed at it, and desired him to offer
something to him which he could not take. Tyrants also and Statesmen are
invited to rob Avaritious Wretches, because they can commit this Crime with the
applause of the far greater part of Mankind, who are glad to see those robbed,
who robbed them: or who at least hindered Riches to circulate for the supply of
the Poor, and needy. But the Knaves whom Money defends are those only, whom the
love of it has made Knaves; And it were better not to be tempted to the Crimes
that Avarice occasions, than to be defended by the Treasure which it lays up,
since it may, and oft-times does fail to defend, and at best but secure some
few against the many Evils which it occasions.

The best Plea that Avarice can make, is that it provides against those
Necessities which otherwise would make us miserable; but the love of Money
deserves not the name of Avarice, whilst it proceeds no farther. And it is then
only to be abhorred; when it cheats, and abuses us, by making us believe that
our necessities are greater than they are. In which it treats us as Fools, and
makes us Slaves: but it is indeed most Ridiculous in this, that oft-times after
it has persuaded men that a great Estate is necessary, it does not allow them
to make use of any suitable proportion of what they have gained; and since
nothing can be called Necessary but what we need to use, all that is laid up
cannot be said to be laid up for Necessity. And so this Argument may have some
weight when it is pressed by Luxury; but it is Ridiculous when it is alleged by
Avarice.

I have therefore oft-times admired, how a Person that thought it Luxury to
spend two hundred Pound, toiled as a Slave to get four hundred a Year for his
Heir; Either he thought, an honest and Virtuous Man should not exceed two
hundred Pound in his Expense, or not; if he thought he should not, why did he
bribe his Heir to be Luxurious by leaving him more? If he thought his Heir
could not live upon so little, why should he who gained it, defraud himself of
the true Use?

I know some who preserve themselves against Avarice, by arguing often with
their own heart, that they have twice as much as they Expected: and more than
others who they think live very Contentedly, and who did bound their Designs in
the beginning with moderate Hopes, and refuse obstinately to Enlarge, lest they
should thus Launch out into an Ocean that has no Shore.

To meditate much upon the Folly of others who are remarkable for this Vice
will help somewhat to limit it. And to railly him who is Ridiculous for it, may
influence him and others to Contemn it. I must here beg Rich and Avaritious
Men's leave, to Laugh as much at their Folly, as I could do at a Shepherd who
would weep, and grieve, because his Master would give him no more Beasts to
herd: or at a Steward, because his Lord gave him no more Servants to feed. Nor
can I think a man who having gained a great Estate is afraid to live
comfortably upon it, less ridiculous than I would do him, who having built a
convenient, or it may be a stately House, should choose to walk in the Rain or
expose himself to Storms, lest he should defile and profane the floor of his
almost Idolized Rooms. They who think that they are obliged to live as well as
others of the same rank, do not consider that every man is only obliged to live
according to his present Estate. And therefore this Necessity will also grow
with our Estates, and this Temptation rather makes our Necessities endless,
than provides against them. And he who having a paternal Estate of an hundred
Pound a year will not be satisfied to live according to it, will meet with the
same difficulty, when he comes to an Estate of ten thousand Pound, and like the
wounded Deer, he flees not from the Dart, but carries it along with him. We are
but Stewards, and the Steward should not be angry that he has not more to
manage; but should be careful to bestow what he has, and if he do so, neither
his Master nor the World can blame him.

The next Cure against Avarice, is, to consider Sect. VIII. The Cruelty of
Covetousness.
what abominable and dreadful Effects it produces in the World, how like the
evil Spirit that possessed the poor wretch spoken of in the Gospel, it draggs
him up and down through Deserts and Mountains, throwing him sometimes into the
Fire, and sometimes into the Water. No Climate so Hot, nor Cold, no Sea so
Boisterous, nor Shore so Rocky, but the Avaritious Man must venture upon it.
And after he has gained something at the Price of so much Toil and Slavery, it
barbarously starves, and tyrannously denies him the Use of his own. As if God
designed to punish those Sinners so; That he will let all the World see them
want the Use of that for which they have damned themselves. There can be
nothing more Inhumane than Avarice, when it persuades men to enter into Plots
and Factions, that they may augment their Estates; and yet will not allow them
to bestow such a Portion of these upon their Design, as may secure themselves
by making the Villainy successful: And we have seen of late men of vast
Fortunes, forfeit them, and their Lives too, rather than contribute what was
inconsiderable; but absolutely necessary for the Success of their Enterprise.
Many also are persuaded, as it were, to Bury themselves alive in Mines, and
Coal-pits, or to Sacrifice many of their Years, by living in such places as
Scanderoon, exchanging Life it self, which is most desirable, for Money, that
tyrannous Idol. Envy, that cruel Torturer of the Soul, deserves a place amongst
the Executioners which attend Avarice. For most men's Avarice proceeding from
comparing themselves with others; this must necessarily beget Envy, and Envy
forces men to toil till they be as rich as those they envy. I confess that
Ambition raises also Envy, but in the ambitious, it refines itself into a noble
Emulation, and forces those who are possessed with it, to do what may exalt them
to an equal height with others. And this requires Liberality, Clemency, etc.
but the Envy of the Avaritious, depresses the Spirit to that Earth, with which
he is, by a Love to it, united; and makes him starve the Poor, bribe, cheat,
and oppress; that he may be as rich as those who occasioned this Passion. The
Envy that arises from Ambition, cannot always keep a man on the Rack, for the
Occasion fails, tho the Inclination remain: But in this also, Avarice is the
most disquieting of all Vices, and Passions, that every thing that it sees, or
hears, both kindles and feeds its Flame.

In vain do we expect Justice, if Judges weigh Money against Arguments, or if
Witnesses value Gain more than an Oath. In vain do Kings and Commonwealths
fortify their Towns, if Avarice govern them. Nothing is secret that can be
bought, nor is Religion it self secure at the Altar, if its Priests can be
bribed.

Such as would shun Covetousness, should shun the aspiring to great Dignities,
which seem to make Avarice rather a Debt, than a Vice; And persuade men, that
the Robbing others to maintain their Grandeur, is a Duty, not a Sin; And that
he who maintains not his Honor, forfeits it. And thus men support Avarice by
Pride, and vanish it with the deceiving Luster of Generosity.

It contributes not a little to our being Avaritious, that when Children we are
bred to an esteem of Money, before we can understand any thing. And therefore
this Impression lasts with them, even after their Understanding is gone. For we
see that men in Bedlam, are always asking Money, and that when Avaritious men
are on their Deathbed, past the sense of every thing else; yet they still grasp
at their Money, and Bonds. Parents should likewise carefully consider in
breeding their Children, what their Genius or Temper is. For there are some
Trades which incline more to one Vice than another. As for instance, the being
a Lawyer is thought to incline them to Avarice, because in that Employment men
are always treating, and contending about Riches; and are oft-times by
defending unjust Acquisitions, tempted to think the Guilt contracted by them
very small. Familiarity lessening always Guilt on such occasions: And therefore
if a man find his Child inclined to love Money, he should breed him to no Trade,
that can inflame his Desires; and a Lawyer engaged once in the Employment,
should, and I am sure some do, balance this Inconveniency, by the high esteem
they have for Justice, whereby they can only secure Fame, and Property, the two
most desirable of all things; and the great experience they have above others
of the Uncertainty of Riches, and Estates, should convince them, most of all
men, of the Folly as well as Guilt of this Vice. Soldiers are generally
inclined to Luxury, because they are not frequently in Business relating to
Estates, and Commerce. And in the interludes of their dangers, they are
inclined to recreate themselves even to Excess, to compensate the Toil they
have suffered, and the Risques they have run. On the other hand, a Child
inclined to Luxury should rather be bred a Lawyer; and though this be not the
proper place of speaking against Luxury, yet the Contingency of the matter
obliges me to say, that Soldiers of all men should shun most Luxury, for it
softens too much, makes men too Lazy, and succeeding dangers the more
intolerable. The proper Sanctuary against both these Vices, should be the
Employment of Churchmen; and we should fly for protection against these to the
Horns of the Altar. Yet as I have formerly observed, the World is much inclined
to be jealous of their Avarice, though they of all men should, and I hope do
shun it most; for he who preaches against Avarice, and yet acts it, is no more
a Preacher, but a Mountebank; nor can his Discourse convince, whose Example
disswades; most men being more led by Sense than by Reason. By this Vice also
Churchmen fall under that Contempt, which over-turns their Church, and in
Consequence takes away their Benefice. And this Vice cannot but doubly augment
their Torments to all Eternity.

Upon the whole matter then, Men should consider most of all things the
Education of their Children, as the only way to make them happy, which is all
the Avaritious designs. And this is not to be done by Providing too much, but
by making them to be Content with every thing: One who is bred up in solid
Virtue, will not probably speak, or do what may forfeit his Estate, as he will
not endanger it, or his Health by Women, and Drinking; He will think the
little, that is left him, enough, and his Frugality will make it so, if it do
not find it so.

We need no Eloquence, but solid Reason, to charge the Avaritious man with
Theft in stealing from the Common wealth the true use of those Riches which are
necessary for the support of the Common Treasure, the Necessities of the Poor,
and the increase of Commerce; which made Timandridas the Lacedemonian chide his
Son, who valued himself for having spent nothing, as having thereby defrauded
his Country, his Neighbors and the Poor; We may likewise charge him with
Murder (as I formerly instanced,) for he takes away the Life of the Poor, who
refuses the means of supporting it, and men feel too much, not to find that
Avarice tempts its Slaves to invade their Neighours in time of War, Killing all
those who intercept their Prey, and murdering in time of Peace, by Processes
those from whom they can expect any Estate* I^ makes men at last Atheists, by
persuading them that God is not able to supply their Necessities, and they are
really so, when they trust it, and not him. Idolaters, they also are, because
they worship Riches as their only Deity.

To raise our Thoughts higher than those Sect. IX. Devotion affords the
strongest and best Remedies against Avarice.
Moral Arguments: We may easily discern how much stronger Helps Christianity
affords us, than we can expect from the Heathens or those Thoughts which Nature
suggests, for we have immediate Promises from an Omnipotent God, that those who
depend on him shall never want. And to assure them the more of his Care, He
calls the Poor his Children, his Family; and has wrought Miracles to relieve
their Necessities, by which advantage no Heathen Philosopher could have secured
men against the fear of Want, which is a strong temptation to Avarice. And
against which the Apostle very wisely guards us, Heb. 13. 5. Let your
Conversation be without Govetousness, and be content with such things as you
have; for He has said I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And because
this immoderate Care stretches itself to our Posterity, That same God has
desired us to leave our Fatherless Children upon him, and declares himself the
Father of the fatherless, and Husband of the Widow.

WE may also see by Christianity, the Sect. X. The Christian and Pagan
Philosophy compared, as to their Remedies.
Purity that is required in its Believers, beyond what the most spiritual
Heathens could imagine. For they condemned only the outward effects of
Covetousness, when they prevailed against a man's Reason, and proceeded so far
as to wrong the Society in which he lived, or the Neighbors whom he injured,
by Theft, Robbery or Oppression. But Christianity designing to make the Heart a
Temple for the holy Ghost, and Man an Hsir of Heaven, it did therefore Command
him to keep his heart pure from that Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which
polluted, or disordered the Inclination, without wronging any else, save the
Persons in whom these Desires were raised. And thus he who desires to have a
great Estate without desiring any other man's, or who wishes that his Neighbors
Lands or Movables were his, even for a Price, is condemned by Christianity, as
guilty of Covetousness, and Concupiscence; and as one who has not learned that
noble Lesson, To be content with his own Condition whatever it be. An
accomplishment which the great Judge of all things requires in those whom he
will own for his Servants. And for our better understanding the heart of Man,
it will be fit to distinguish three degrees in this Irregularity: The first is,
that whereby the exterior and sensible Object, entering in by the Sense, unto
the Fancy, does so suddenly move the Appetite, that the Judgment has no leisure
to perceive, much less to make Reflections upon it. And there can be no
Irregularity in this degree, except we have failed, to accustom our Judgment,
and Reason to be watchful, as it ought to be, over the very first motions of
our Appetite, and to observe continually as a good Sentinel, what enters in by
the Ports of our external Senses. The second degree is, when the Object makes
its Impression upon the Appetite, and raises Commotions, whereby the Judgment
takes a wrong view of the Object, though afterward the Judgment overcomes, yet
this Disorder deserves the name of a Vicious, or irregular Affection; not
unlike to that Disorder a Rider is put in, when his Horse boggles at any sudden
Object, with which the Beast is surprised, and which, though his Rider overcome
without difficulty, yet it shows that he has not sufficiently managed the Horse
he has taken in charge. The third is, When this Commotion in the Appetite lasts
so* long, and prevails so much, that it makes the Judgment doubt which Party it
should take: and becomes like to a Rider, who keeps his Saddle, but with
Difficulty. In this Degree, Saint Paul represents Man's Reason and his
Covetousness wrestling against one another. I confess, that Aristotle
acknowledges that there are some Appetites in a man repugnant to Reason, which
indeed he blames. And that Plato before him taught in his Eloquent way, that
the Chariot of Reason was drawn by two Horses, whereof one was black, and
resty, disobeying the Reins of him who governed them. Seneca also numbers those
Appetites which oppose our Reason among the culpable Passions, but none of them
discovered the Irregularity of the first two Degrees, and the best of them saw
only the Irregularity of the third with so dim an Eye, and through so thick
Clouds, that St. Paul had reason to assert, that if the Law (meaning the Moral
Law of God) had not said, thou shall not Covet, Man had not perceived the sin
that lies in Simple Concupiscence. And whereas the Heathens did only forbid
these immoderate Cares as inconvenient, our holy Religion goes higher, not only
in its Purity, but in its Penalty; for all Anxiety as to our selves, or
Covetousness, either relating to our selves, or Neighbors are forbid upon pain
of displeasing a kind Father and an infinite God, and becomes uneasy by the
cutting and severe reproach of a terrified Conscience: Whereas among most
Heathens the Conscience did take no notice, nor thunder out its Terrors upon
such spiritual and inward Delinquencies.

PARSIMONY AND NIGGARDLINESS. DISCOURSE III.
THERE is I confess a difference betwixt Sect. I. The Origin and progress of
Parsimony or Niggardliness.
Avarice, and excessive Parsimony or Niggardliness, that wrings from others
what is theirs; this only exceeds in sparing too much what is ones own; the one
rises purely from a fear of Want, and therefore in the first Ages of the World
it was scarce known; the other from a desire to heap up the uselesly; the one
is a kind of Self-defence, the other an Invasion, and therefore the one is the
worst, the other amongst the best of Neighbors; for as the Miser checks us
when we exceed in our expense, so he is most unwilling to wrong us, lest he
thereby encourage others to wrong him. The Niggard is, generally speaking, a
better Subject than the Avaritious, for he is afraid to lose what he has,
whereas the Avaritious loving more what he wants, than what he has, hazards the
present in expectation of a greater advantage.

Niggardliness oft-times grows up rather from Education than any vicious
Inclination, and I have seen some become Parsimonious by living near Prodigals,
having occasion daily to abhor their Extravagancies, and to be terrified at the
Miseries to which they have seen them reduced by these Extravagancies. Men
express their abhorrence of this Vice in calling such as are mastered by it,
Misers; as il they were the most miserable of all Men: but yet they must have
some Pleasure in it, else they would not be so assiduous and diligent about it;
certainly they think to spare, is to gain; and therefore they wonder why others
who take such pains to gain, should laugh at them for taking pains to spare.
Nor do they see that they want any of these things, for providing of which
others take pains to heap up money, or that they should toil to get money to
entertain others; and upon these grounds it is that we find the Parsimonious to
be generally proud, thinking they shall never need to depend upon any. But yet
Parsimony is to be pitied since it exceeds, for it must proceed from a too high
value of Riches, and so argues a blindness in our Reason. And it employs too
much of that time which might be better bestowed, starving both Charity and
Friendship, the greater Duties, as well as Comforts of our Life: Yet it may
seem a more excusable Vice than Avarice, for Avarice still promises to employ
the money that it tempts us anxiously to seek, in the service of Charity and
Generosity; but after we have got the money, Parsimony will not allow Men to
employ it, no not on their own Necessities, though the Niggard (God knows) is
himself a great object of Charity, which made Horace account it a Madness
rather than a Vice. Parcus ob haeredis curam nimiumque severus
Assidet insano --


The Scripture assures us that Riches take Sect. II. Some expressions of
Scripture compared with the Poets upon this Subject.
the wings of the morning and fly away. They do not wait till others come and
take them from us, but they naturally tend to fly about, and therefore they run
away with so much have, as deserves to be called taking of Wings, and they
leave us so soon that this have is called the Wings of the Morning, and when
they have taken wings, I imagine I see them looking back with contempt, and
laughing at those who thought to have secured them and kept them Prisoners. Let
us then endeavor with the wise Apostle to learn to be content in all
conditions, expecting more permanent Riches and Treasures: Imitated in this by
Horace, who reflecting on the instability of Fortune, had the same thought from
his Fountain, as most of the Heathens borrow from the Scripture, Fortuna saevo
laet a negotio, and
Ludum insolentem ludere pertinax,
Transmutat incertos honores,
Nunc mihi, nunc alio benigna,
Laudo manentem: si celeres quatit
Pennas, resigno quae dedit; and mea
Virtute me involvo, probamque
Panperiem sine dote quaero.
I must remark by the way the different Genius of Virgil and Horace, which
appears in this, as well as with relation to all Morality. Virgil loves Virtue
as a part of Devotion, Aude hospes contemnere opes, and te quoque dignum,
Finge Deo. --
Horace loves it as conducing to his Ease, as we see in this and many other
passages in his Satyrs condemns it easily. -- Juvenal in his, rails at it
bitterly, and troubles himself almost as mueh in writing against it, as
Covetousness could have vexed him; like Seneca who grows angry in writing
against Anger.

The Scripture speaking against Covetousness compares it to an evil Eye, which
makes the body dark. Matthew. 6. And Horace tells us that an honest Man, Oculo
irretorto spectat acervos.
The Scripture calls Avarice Idolatry. And the Poets alluding to this, say:
Praese^temque semper possidet area Deum.


One of the chief Pleasures and Arts of Sect. III. That the special bumours in
Morality, and their various mixture, are not yet fully enquired into, an
instance whereof is given on this Subject.
Moral Philosophy lies in considering the various mixture of Passions and Vices
with one another, as to which Plutarch himself has not been special enough,
contenting himself with observing who were Covetous, who Prodigal, etc. but to
give some glances of this, upon which I will possibly bestow an Essay apart. It
is observable that many in the late Civil Wars who were known Niggards,
bestowed frankly their Estates in the service of King Charles I. Many who would
not bestow a hundred pound in the Education of their Heir, do bestow with
delight many thousands in building the House they are to leave him; and that
beautiful young Lady who allowed a favor to a rich old niggardly Excise-man in
France to get money to preserve her Fathers life, has left it dubious what name
this transgression deserved. The different and contrary effects produced by the
same Vice or Passion are proofs of this: as for instance, a mere Niggaid
starves his Cause; for he dares not bestow so much as one Shilling upon Hope it
self, whereas if Niggardliness be quickened by some degress of Avarice, no Man
is a franker Client than the Niggard; for he knows Money is a better Fee, than
the good Dinner the Luxurious thinks a sufficient reward. It is ordinarily
observed that a Niggards Feast is the greatest, and the reason seems to be,
that they design thereby to convince the World that their Parsimony proceeds
not from their over-valuing Money. But in my Opinion they as Painters not used
to Paint, mistake Proportions more than others do, or it may be they seldom
Treat without design of gain, and so their Entertainments are Bribes and not
Feasts.

LUXURY. DISCOURSE IV.
ONE might reasonably have thought, Sect. I. The Rise and Progress of Luxury.
that as the World grew older, Luxury would have been more shunned. For the
more Men multiplied, and the greater their dangers grew, they should have been
the more easily induced to shun all expense, that they might the more
successfully provide against those inconveniences. But yet it proved
otherwise, and Luxury was the last of all Vices that prevailed over Mankind,
for after Riches had been hoarded up, they rotted as it were unto Luxury, and
after that Tyranny and Ambition had robbed many poor Innocents, Luxury more
cruel than they, was made use of by Providence, to revenge their quarrel: and
so triumphed over the Conquerors. Thus when Rome had by Wit, and Courage
subdued the World, it was drowned in that inundation of Riches, which these
brought upon it.

This Vice has its own Masks and Disguises Sect. II. The disguises under which
Luxury insinuates it self.
too, for it transforms itself into Virtue, whilst like that it runs faster
from Avarice, and laughs more loudly at it than Liberality it self does, and to
that height that it seems to be angry at Liberality, as being only a kind of
Niggardliness. It pretends to keep open Table to those who Starve, and to have
an open Purse always for Men of Merit. Beauty and Learning are its Pensioners,
and all manner of Divertisements are still in is retinue. It obliges the
peaceable to favor it, as an enemy to every thing that is uneasy* and it
ingages Men of Parts to speak for it, because whilst it lavishes the Treasures
others have hoarded up; it feeds the hope, and expectations of such as were
provided by Nature of nothing, but a stock of Wit. And there being seldom other
marches betwixt Liberality and Prodigality, but such as are to be measured by
exact reflections upon the Estates of the Spenders, it sometimes praises that
as Liberality, which ought to be condemned as Luxury. And even where the
transgression may be discerned, the bribed and interested Multitude will not
acknowledge, that Liberality by exceeding its bounds has lost its name. Some
also from the same principle authorize this Vice, by the pretext of Law, crying
out that every Man should have liberty to dispose of his own, as he pleases,
and by the good of Commerce, saying with a serious Face, that Frugality would
ruin all Trade, and if no Man spend beyond his Measure, Riches should not
Circulate; nor should virtuous, laborious, or witty Men find in this
Circulation, occasions to excite or reward their Industry. And from this
probably; flows the Law of Englands not interdicting Prodigals, denying him the
administration of his own Estate, as the Laws of all other Nations do.

I know also some very devout Men, who Sect. III. Some Devout and Virtuous
People think Luxury now necessary to supply the decay of Charity.
would persuade us, that it is not fit to decry Luxury too much in this Age,
because it entertains, and feeds so many poor Artisans, and others who would
starve without its assistance, having no other Trade, but the making Perfumes,
Laces, Embroideries, and such things which Frugality contemns as Baubles, or
abhors as Poisons. And though when Charity had in the youth of Christianity
Vigor enough to persuade Men to entertain the Poor as Members of the same Body
with them: Yet God seems now to permit Luxury to throw away that money amongst
the Poor, which Charity cannot persuade them to give. Others again recommend
Luxury as that which occasions the sharpning of Wit, and the beautifying of the
Universe, for those who have Wit, study Painting, Architecture, Sculpture; and
by these the Rich adorn the World, and make it a more glorious instance of his
excellent Skill, who first formed it, and bestowed those excellent Talents on
Men for improving it. That same God also has made Jewels, Perfumes, and many
other things which he must allow to be used by Luxury, since Frugality knows no
use for them. But the great Advocate for Luxury, is Self-Love, that Orator
which never fails to persuade. And it suggests to us, that the greatest of our
Concerns should be for ourselves, and that a reasonable Man should think all
thrown away, which he spends not to please himself. And which he can no way do
so well as by gratifying all his own Appetites, and Inclinations with the full
enjoyment of all they can desire, the Public Good, and Charity being mere
Notions invented by Philosophers and Divines, to make us share with them that
money which when they have once got, they laugh at us for parting with.

I confess, that all the Arguments that plead for Avarice seem to conclude at
last in favor of Luxury; for to what purpose, should a Man lay up money, except
he use it? And Nature would not allow one to toil much for it, if it were not,
that he promised to himself to live one day softly, and pleasantly, on the
fruits of these Labors: and on the other hand, Luxury never approves any
Argument or Design that Avarice can bring; for it is so much taken up with the
present pleasure of using what it has, that it will allow it self no time to
foresee, or toil for what it may want.

Many who have been very Prodigal, and Luxurious, have afterward turned very
Avaritious, whereas they never gained one Proselyte from Avarice. And I have
known some who have spent a very prodigal and luxurious Youth, throwing away
the little they had, who so soon as they grew Rich, became so fond of it, that
they could not part with what was sufficient to supply their Necessity. And
when I asked them why they run from one extreme to another, in spite both of
Reason and Custom: They answered, that what formerly they had was not worth
their Care, and therefore they spent it in hopes thereby to gain more. In which
we may see a new and different view of the genius of Avarice and Luxury, and
the motives whence they rise.

As Avarice differs from Parsimony, so Sect. IV. The difference betwixt
Prodigality and Luxury.
does Prodigality from Luxury, for Prodigality is a profuse spending on others,
but Luxury upon ones self. In Prodigality a Man seems to value every Man more
than himself, because he prefers them, defrauding himself of Necessaries, to
bestow upon them. In Luxury a Man prefers himself to all others, robbing and
cheating them by all arts and devices, to get thereby superfluities, to feed
himself and his Lusts. For which Reason, and since also the Scripture speaks so
much against Luxury, and not against Prodigality, it may seem strange, why the
Laws are so severe to Prodigals in interdicting and forbidding them the
Administration of their own Estates, without putting any restraint upon the
Luxurious: whereas it seems that the Prodigal is less an Enemy to the
Commonwealth, than the Luxurious. Seeing he is ready to prefer his
fellow-Citizens to himself, and generally they who get the Prodigals means have
more Wit than he, and can make better use of what they get from him; and so
should by the Laws be preferred to him. But I think the reason of this is, that
the Law fears, that after he has dissipated his own, he may fall a burden on
the Society: and therefore it confiders him as a generous kind of Idiot, and so
puts him under Tuition, as it does an Idiot. And thus it cares for him more
than for the Luxurious; and it were to be wished that by the same compassion it
provided also Tutors for the Niggard, who is in greater danger to be ruined by
himself, than the Prodigal by others. To which nothing can be answered, but
that the Law thinks this Churl unworthy of its care, and that the Commonwealth
would lose little, though he should starve himself.

Since Self-Love is man's chief Counselor, it seems that Men are more naturally
inclined to Luxury than Prodigality: as they are inclined to love themselves
better than their Neighbors. But yet on a more serious Reflection it will
appear that even Prodigality has Self* Love to plead for it, because Ambition,
which is a more violent Passion than Sensuality, drives a Man to Prodigality,
as that whereby he may raise his Reputation by buying that Fame, of which only
he is greedy.

The great Arguments that weigh with me against Luxury, are first, That Luxury
Sect. V. Arguments against Luxury, as first, That it is inconsistent with that
egual distribution whereby God supports the World.
disorders, confounds, and is inconsistent with that just and equal Economy,
whereby God governs the World as his own Family, in which all Men are but
Children, or Servants; for as the Avaritious hoards up for one, that which
should be distributed among many; so in Luxury one vicious Man spends upon
himself what should maintain many hundreds: and he surfeits to make them
starve. This is not to be a Steward, but Master. Nor can we think that the wise
and just Judge of all things, will suffer in his beautiful World, what the most
negligent, and imprudent amongst us, could not suffer in his private Family.

The second Argument is, That Nature should be Man's chief Rule in things
relating to this World; and Reason his great Director under God in making use
of that Rule, and the Eyes (as it were) by which we are to see how to follow
it. By this Nature teaches us how to proportion the means to the end, and not
to employ all the Instruments whereby such an end may be procured, but only
such as* are necessary, and suitable for the procuring of it: which proportion
Luxury neither understands, nor follows; and therefore we must conclude it
unnatural and unreasonable, and that Frugality is the true Mathematics of
Moral Philosophy: and by this we may condemn not only such as Senecio was in
the Roman History, who delighted to have his Clothes; and his Shoes, twice as
large as were fit for his Body, and Feet; which the Luxurious laughed at, with
others: but even such as keep twice as great Tables, build twice as great
Houses, pay twice as many Servants as are fit for them, are as mad as he. For
though that disproportion be not so very perceptible as the other, because the
bulk of a Man's Estate is not so easily measured and known as that of his
Person; and because there are twice as many Fools of this kind, as there are of
the other. So that Reason is out-voted, though it cannot be answered; yet the
folly is the same every where, and in this it is more dangerous, that Senecio
wronged only himself, whilst they oft-times wrong and ruin both their Posterity
and Neighbors. To convince us that Luxury is a great defect in our Reason; we
shall ordinarily find* that young Men, Fools, and Women, are most given to it.
Thus I have seen a Man, otherwise judicious enough, much surprised, when it was
represented, that his Building (though it seemed to him, and many others, to
carry no great disproportion to his Estate) yet would in forty four years
(which is but a short time) equal his Estate, allowing the Interest of his Money
to equal the Capital sum in the space of eleven years and an half, which it
did by Law; for 100 l. forborne for forty eight years at 6 per cent. compound
Interest amounts to 8635 l. 5 s. 4 d. and how many may forbear 100 l. and this
sum in ten years, which is but a very short time, will amount to 86330 l. by
simple Multiplication without compound Interest: and very few consider the
extravagancy of this Age, in which Houses and Furniture go out of Fashion, as
Hats or Shoes do. Nor does the expense of building contain it self within the
Walls; for it obliges a Man to a suitable way of living, there being nothing
more ridiculous, than to see one who lived in a Palace at home, Travel and
Lodge abroad with such Equipage, and in such Inns, as Men who live in ordinary
Houses do. We should therefore be very proportionable in our Expense, for that
which widens a Man's fancy in any one thing, makes it Extravagant in all things.
As they who use their Stomachs to too much of any one Meat, will make it
craving as to all others. Whereas on the other hand, that which should enamour
Men of Frugality, is, that it accustoms us to Reasoning, and Proportion;
observing exactly the least perceptible Proportions, and the smallest
Consequences. Which makes me call to mind the remarkable Story of the Holland
Merchant, who having married his Daughter to a Luxurious rich Citizen, to the
great dissatisfaction of his Wife, she came the next day to the Bride and
Bridegroom, and offered them the Egg of a Turkey Hen, For that Egg might produce
a Turkey, which might multiply into many: and the price of these might purchase
Swine, Cows, etc.
and desired her Daughter to use herself in exactly looking to the product of
that Egg, to consider the great things which Frugality can do in other matters.
But her Husband and she having laughed at the Lesson, the Mother improved so
far the Egg, that within twenty years the advantage of it, and the Luxury of
that married couple grew so fast, that they needed the meanest assistance, and
the product of the Egg afforded a comfortable one, for with the considerable
sum that was gathered by it, they stocked themselves anew, and by the help of
the (formerly slighted) Lesson of not despising the meanest things, raised
themselves again to a very considerable Estate. And if any Man will but
consider yearly, what he superfluously spends, and how much that would multiply
in process of time, he will easily perceive that what he spends in the
Consequence, is vastly greater than appears to him in the first Calculation: as
for instance if a Man who may spend 500 l. per annum does spend 600, this small
error of a 100 l. a year will amount in 44 years at 6 per cent. to thesumm of
1373 l. 6 s. and odd pence. And tho a Man thinks it scarce worth his pains, to
manage so as to preserve a 100 l. he must be very Luxurious, who thinks it not
worth his pains to gain the sum of 1373 l. And it is a great defect in our
Reason, that those ills which follow by necessary Consequence are despised as
mean, because the Consequences themselves are remote. And as that is the best
Eye, so that is likewise the best Reason, which sees clearly at a great
distance. Another great Error that Luxury tempts us to, by not reasoning
exactly, is, that it makes us Calculate our Estates with deducing what is
p^^^able out of them to the Poor, to the King, and to Creditors, before we
proportion our expense; whereas we should spend only what is truly our own, and
the Law to prevent Luxury tells us that, id tantum nostrum est quod deductis
debitis, apud no^ remanet. That is only ours which remains with us, after our
Debts are deduced. Nor will a proportional part of our Estates answer the
equivalent of our Debts. For if I owe a 100 l. a year, no part of my Estate
that pays me a 100 l. a year will pay it, for many accidents may hinder me to
get my own Rent, but no accident will procure an abatement of my Debt. And this
leads me to consider that Frugality numbers always the Accidents that may
intervene amongst other Creditors; and the wise Hollander observes, that a Man
should divide his Estate in three parts, upon one third he should live, another
third he should lay up for his Children, and the last he should lay by for
Accidents. There are few Men who do not in their Experience find, that their
whole life being balanced together, they have lost a third part always of
their Revenue by Accidents. And most Families are destroyed by having the
Childrens Provision left as a Debt upon them. So that a Man should at least
endeavor to live upon the one half; and leave the other half for his Children.

The next Argument that discredits Luxury Sect. VI. The other Argument is, that
Luxury is most inconvenient for the Luxurious Man himself and the Society
wherein he lives.
with me, is, that it occasions many and great inconveniences both to him who
labors under it, and to the Commonwealth under which he lives.

The Luxurious Man oppresses that Nature which should be the Foundation of his
Joy, and by false reasoning he is made by this Vice to believe, that because
some Ease and Aliments are pleasant, therefore the more he takes of them, the
more he will be pleased. And the first proofs by which he is convinced, that he
is cheated in this, are those Gouts, Gravels, and other Diseases, into which
those Vices, when they are swelled, overflow, and destroy that Ground, which a
gentle watering would have refreshed. Then he begins to understand that
Mediocrity is the golden Rule, and that Proportion is to be observed in all the
course of our Life.

Luxury also makes a Man so soft, that it is hard to please him, and easy to
trouble him. So that his pleasures at last become his burden. Luxury is a nice
Master, hard to be pleased, res est severa voluptas; said he who knew it best:
whereas the frugal, and temperate Man, can by fasting till a convenient time,
make any Food pleasant: and is by traveling, when it is convenient, hardened
sufficiently not to be troubled, by any ordinary Accidents. The Luxurious must
at last owe to this Temperance, that Health and Ease which his false Pleasures
have robbed him of; he must abstain from his Wines, Feastings, and Fruits,
until Temperance has cured him; and I have known many, who after they have been
tortured by the Tyranny of Luxury, whilst they had Riches in abundance to feed
it; became very healthful and strong, when they fell into that Poverty which
they had so abhorred. Some whereof have confessed to me, that they never
thought themselves so happy, and that they were never so well pleased, as since
they had escaped the temptations of that dangerous Vice. Luxury does not more
ruin a man's Body than it debases his Mind, for it makes him servilely drudg
under those who support his Luxury. In pimping to all their Vices, flattering
all their Extravagancies, and executing the most dreadful of their Commands. I
have ofttimes remarked with great pleasure, that in Commonwealths, where to be
Free was accounted the greatest glory, nothing reigned save Frugality, and
nothing was rich save the common Treasure. But under those Monarchies, which
have degenerated into Tyranny, care is taken to have those who get the public
pay, spend it Luxuriously, to the end, that those they employ may still want,
and so may be obliged to that contemptible slavery, to which none would bow, if
they could otherwise live. It is also very observable, that those who dwell in
the richest Countries, which incline Men to Luxury, such as Greece, and Italy,
are poor, and slaves: whereas the hard Rocks of Switzerland breed Men who think
themselves rich and happy. I heard that a Churchman called that the best
Religion which was able to entertain a Coach and six Horses; but I am sure,
that if the Master who was in it, knew that he had made himself a Rascal to get
the Coach, he could not be so easy in it, as if he walked on foot with his
Innocence. I like well his Reply, who being tempted to comply with what his
Conscience could not digest, said to him who tempted him, I can contentedly
walk on foot, but you cannot live without a Coach; I will be advised by my
Innocence, consult you with your Grandeur. Rulers can bestow Treasures, but
Virtue only can bestow Esteem; and all the respect that is bestowed upon a
vicious Man, is no more, to be valued, and is as ridiculous as a Copy of
Verses, writ for money, in praise of a Coward. Nor can either fine Houses or
Gardens, large Territories, or pleasant Fields delight him, who when he walks
in them, must remember that they were purchased at the rate of the Curse of
God, and his own Infamy.

From all which we may easily see, that the Luxurious are not only useless, but
enemies to the Commonwealth wherein they live, useless because they become
effeminate and soft; unable to defend and improve their Native Country, Enemies
because they debauch the Innocent, and assist the guilty. Whereas the Frugal
Man takes more pleasure in being a good Example to the Youth, and in opposing
the Lusts of Tyrants, than the Luxurious can do in feeding upon what their
Cooks prepare, or in dallying with the Prostitute whom his Money can buy. The
pleasure of sin lasts but for a moment, but a good Conscience is a continual
Feast. The one pleases only those corrupted Flatterers, whom the Luxurious
himself contemns: Whilst the other pleases the Heroic, the Wise, and the
Virtuous, whom the Vicious must admire in spite of his Corruption. And even
many thousands, who though they are not virtuous themselves, yet are by
Conviction, or Interest forced to appear as such.

I shall close these few Arguments against Luxury, in observing that it appears
from all that has been said; how unsatiable both Avarice and Luxury are, both
of them are acted by Imagination which can never be satisfied, nor bounded; the
one seeks Money only, that he may have the Pleasure to have it lying by him, and
the other that he may please his Fancy in spending it. And yet I think that
Avarice is a more severe Master than Luxury. For the Luxurious Man proposes
only what he may spend, but the Avaritious Man covets every thing; the one is
satisfied sometimes in enjoying what is got, but the other gets no sooner any
one thing, than he presently runs after another, and when he has reaped the
Fruit of his Pains he is made poor again by Possession.

From these Reflections also may arise Remedies Sect. VII. Remedies against
Luxury.
against Luxury, to any thinking Man, for tho when we consider the Luxurious as
they shine at Courts, live in sumptuous Palaces, saluted in the Streets,
adorned with Panegyricks; it is probable that most Men will think, that
Philosophers and Divines have only writ against Luxury, because they could not
attain to the Riches that are necessary for maintaining it: Yet to balance
this, let us consider the vast numbers of those whom it has drowned in
Pleasures, others whom it has sent to starve in Prisons, and dragged to
Scaffolds by its temptations. I have oft-times seen the Luxurious railed at
with much Malice, by those they sumptuously Entertained, who envied the
Entertainer for being able to Treat them so highly; and for living so far above
their own Condition. Concluding that they were rather called to be Witnesses of
the Entertainers abundance, than sharers in his Bounty. And though some think
to make an Atonement for their Oppression, by living sumptuously upon its
Spoils, yet no Wise Man will pardon a Robber, because he gives back a small
share of the great Riches he has taken. Some think Riches necessary for keeping
great Tables, and excuse this by the hopes they have of good Company. And a
Great Man told me he wished such a Man's Estate, that he might keep us all about
him: but my answer was, that the Luxurious gathered about them ordinarily the
worst of Company; and worthy Men valued more virtuous Conversation, than
sumptuous Diet, which they rather shunned than followed. I believe there are
few so Prodigal of their Money but that they have often some regrets for having
spent it, from which the Frugal Man is exempted by the assurance he has from
his Virtue, that he can live happily upon the little he has, and can with
Pleasure find that he is neither oppressed by the weight of Riches, nor
terrified by the fear of Want, breeding up his Posterity not to need these
great Patrimonies, which he cannot give. I know that some think they are never
to be charged with Prodigal and useless spending, if they take exact account of
their Servants of what they spend; but our Inclinations may cheat us as much as
our Servants, and therefore I am very well pleased with the answer of that
Father, though Miser, who having seen his Son very busy in taking in his
Accounts, told him Son, Son, spend nothing you can spare, but after it is once
spent, think not you can make it up by keeping an exact account your self, or
taking in such accounts from your Servants. I am so far from thinking that
Luxury is useful, because it sustains many poor Artisans, that I think there
would be no Poor were it not for Luxury and Avarice: for all would have
somewhat, and none would have too much. The Commonwealth of the Jews
Instituted by God Almighty, proves most Artisans to be unnecessary, and though
a present Innovation in this Point may starve some, yet it would not starve so
many, as might be easily entertained upon what the Luxurious and Avaritious
possess beyond a due measure: and in a little time all these Artisans who now
drudge to please Luxury, would follow other Trades, whereby they might please
God Almighty much better; whose Service is the chief end of Man, and to please
whom is his chief happiness. And these Arts neither provide Meat nor Drink, as
the Husbandman does: from which it follows clearly, that Husbandry, and not
these Trades sustains the World. And there would be need of no such Arts to
draw Money from the Rich for the supply of the Poor, since this would bring Men
to a greater equality as to Riches and Poverty: It is very observable, that
many of these Tradesmen starve, whereas few Husbandmen do, and it is also
observable that Prodigality and Luxury entertain always the worst of Men, for
they are ordinarily such who Trade in things that please the Vicious: Men being
either by Force, or Custom, easily induced to imitate the Masters on whom they
depend, and to esteem those whom they serve, whereas the Frugal Man not only
chooses fit occasions on which to spend his Money, but persons worthy of his
Employment. And yet if Men do bestow their Money upon Perfumes, Pictures and
such other Baubles with design to let it fall unto Hands which need it, their
sincerity in this design will certainly rescue them from the severity of a
Censure which they would otherwise deserve.

This Discourse tends not to forbid the Sect. VIII. This Discourse is not
designed against true, but immoderate Pleasures.
use of all Pleasure, nor even the pleasing our Senses; for it is not to be
imagined, that God Almighty brought Man into the World, to admire his
Greatness, and taste his Goodness without allowing him to rejoice in these
things which he sees, and receives. The best way to admire an Artist, is to be
highly pleased with what he has made, and a Benefactor is ill rewarded, when
the receiver is not pleased with what is bestowed: his Joy being the justest
Measure, and Standard of his esteem. We find that in Eden the tasting of all
the sweet and delicious Fruits was allowed, save only that of the Tree of
Knowledge: and why should all these Fruits have been made so pleasant to the
Eye, and so delicious to the Taste, if it had not been to make Man, his beloved
Guest happy there? And I really think that the Eye has got the quality of not
being satisfied long with any Object, nor the Ear with hearing any Sound, to
the end that they might by this Curiosity, be obliged to seek after that
Variety in which they may every moment discover new Proofs of their Masters
Greatness, and Goodness. But I condemn the pleasing of the Senses only, where
more pains is taken, and more time is spent in gratifying them, than is due to
those inferior or less noble parts of the Reasonable Creature. The Soul being
the Nobler and more Sublime part, our chief care should be laid out in pleasing
it, as a wise Subject should take more care in pleasing the King, than his
Ministers, and the Master than his Servants. The true and allowable Luxury of
the Soul consists in Contemplation, and Thinking, or else in the practice of
Virtue, whereby we may employ our time in being useful to others: albeit when
our Senses, and other inferior Faculties have served the Soul in these great
Employments, they ought to be gratified as good Servants: but not so as to make
them wild Masters as Luxury does, when it rather oppresses than refreshes them.
I do also think that our chief Pleasure should not be expected from the Senses;
because they are too dull, and unactive to please a thinking Man, they are only
capable to enjoy a little, and are soon blunted by Enjoyment: whereas Religion,
and Virtue, do by the ravishing hopes of what we are to expect, or the pleasant
remembering of what we have done, afford constantly new Scenes of Joy, and
which are justly augmented by the concurring Testimonies of the best of
Mankind, who applaud our Virtuous Actions, and decry the Vicious. So that the
Virtuous Man is by as many degrees pleased beyond the Vicious, as the past, and
future, exceed the single moment of the present time, or as many suffrages
exceed one. Nor doubt I, but these who have relieved a starving Family by their
Charity, have feasted more upon the little which they have bestowed with Joy,
than ever Lucullus, or Apicius did, in all the delicacies their Cooks could
invent. I am convinced, that any generous Gentleman would be much more troubled
to think, that his poor Tenants who toil for him, are served up to some degrees
that look too like Oppression, than he could be pleased with any Delicacies
which that superplus of Rent could buy for him: and that he who has rescued a
poor innocent Creature from the Jaws of a ravenous Oppressor, finds a greater
Joy irradiated on his Spirit, by the great and just Judge; than any General
does in that night, wherein he has defeated his Enemies merely for his glory.
We remember to this day with veneration, and esteem, John the Baptists Locusts
and Wild Honey, but the deliciousness of Herod's Feasts lasted no longer than the
Taste: and even the Pleasure of the present moment, which the Luxurious only
enjoy, is much lessened, by the prevailing Conviction, which arises from that
small remaining force, which is still left in the reasonable Faculty of the
most corrupted Men: and which can never be so blinded, as not to have some
glimmerings, whereby it can discover the ugliness and deformity of Vice. It may
surprise a serious Man to see that Men immediately after being at the Sacrament
of Baptism, or about the Celebration of Marriage (which all acknowledge to be
of Divine Institution, and which many own to be a Sacrament also) they should
run out immediately into such Luxurious Extravagancies, as may make lookers on
rather conclude, that they acknowledge no God; than that they are obliged to
him for those great Mercies, or that they hope by their Gratitude, to improve
them into Blessings.

Whether Avarice, Prodigality, or Luxury Sect. IX. Whether Avarice,
Prodigality, or Luxury, be the more Dangerous.
be the more dangerous and polluting Vice, is less worth our care than the a
voiding of all three. But however, it seems that Avarice lies under more
disadvantages, than any of the two. For Prodigality and Luxury are useful to
many, Avarice to none. These are ordinarily the Extravagancies of Youth, and
are cured by Age; but the other grows stronger by it. Interest and
Self-Preservation may contribute much to cure these, but both do argue most
frequently to the advantage of Avarice. These have a great deal of Liberality
in their Composition, and Prodigality has all that Liberality has, except its
Moderation; whereas Avarice has nothing of Virtue in it. Luxury wants many
things, but Avarice all things. Luxury may seem the more desirable quality in a
Governor, because they who love to please themselves, are observed to desire
all may be pleased about them, or at least they are so busy in pleasing
themselves, that they are not employed about those new Projects, which
Avaritious Rulers are ever inventing. The Luxurious also are more easily
influenced, and more exorable, because they will not endure the torture of
opposing the importunity of the Miserable. But I have heard it asserted, that
the Luxurious make the worst Soldiers, because that Vice effeminates and
softens: whereas Avarice makes Men Hard and Laborious: and the love of Pay and
Preferment will make the very noise of Cannons become melodious. However Agur
thought it worthy, not only of his wish, but of his Prayer, that God would give
him neither poverty nor riches, but would feed him with food convenient for
him: and as the Life is compared to a Lamp, so like a Lamp it burns longest and
clearest, when it is neither oppressed with too much Oil, nor starved for want of
it: and in this likewise we have occasion of admiring the Wisdom, and Goodness
of God, who when we break all Squares, forces us even by our Vices to balance
one another: and makes things return to that just Proportion, which he at first
designed. Thus he not only opens every wise Man's Eyes, to see that it is his
Interest to hold the Scales equal, betwixt Riches and Poverty: but when any
Vicious Man runs to an Extreme in any of the two, all others, though as Vicious
as he, find it their Interest to lie heavy upon the other Scale. If any affect
an Universal Monarchy, all Princes who are not Fools, or guided by Fools, or
Knaves, combine against him; if a private Neighbor do Avaritiously incline to
oppress, he will join, even those who were Enemies before, in a firm design of
bounding his Violence: and the Avaritious, and Luxurious, are in a constant
enmity against one another. So that while each endeavors to draw that which is
contended for to his own side, it must necessarily remain in the middle: and
whilst the Frugal and Virtuous Man, is going about his Affairs, he is secured
by Vicious Men's being Spies upon one another: and the very seeing them run to
an excess, is a new obligation on such as are Wise, to Pray with Agur, that God
would give them neither Poverty nor Riches. Every single Man also has the same
balance within himself, and thus though the excessive love of Money, incline a
Man to Oppress, yet the fear of being oppressed, stops his Carier: and many
would pollute themselves, and others by Adultery, Gluttony, etc. if Avarice
would allow them to go to the price: he who is fondest of Pleasure, is forced
by the fear of Law, and the love of Health, and Self-Preservation, to imitate
that Moderation, which he would otherways neglect: for if he have enjoyed too
much at any time, he is cloyed with his own excess, and is forced to commend
the Temperate whom he formerly scorned.

The chief thing that can recommend A pleasant view of what effects Frugality
would produce in the World.
Frugality to all Men, but especially to Magistrates, is that it employs every
thing to the use for which it was ordained. If Men were enamoured with it, and
made it their chief care, we should shortly see bloody Wars cease every where,
since (let Men talk now what they please of Glory) the great design of the War,
is rather to gain Land, than Reputation: of which this is a convincing Proof,
that those who talk of Glory, take more pains to gain Towns and Countries by
Bribes, and Cheats, than by exposing their own Persons to Danger, or observing
Capitulations. Nor should we see Monarchs betrayed by their Ministers, nor
Commonwealths by their Rulers; as now most frequently they are; Statesmen
would not ruin their Native Country, and consequently their own Posterity, that
they might get superfluous Riches; nor would such as are under their care be
tempted to Rebel against their Sovereign, to be free from their Oppression, and
to enter into Combinations against those Rulers; but Reason would make all our
Laws, and Duty would make us obey them.

If Frugality prevailed, it would open Sect. X. How happy the World would be if
Men would be Moderate in their Expense and Pleasures.
the Storehouses of Charity, the Poor would be Fed, the Sick would be taken
Care for, and the Prisoner would be Relieved. This would restore Men to their
sleep, which is now oft-times broke by the fear of Want, or the oppression of
Abundance. This would prevent the Melancholy caused by the one, and the many
Diseases occasioned by the other. And we should have a satisfied mind in a
sound Body: a Frugal Woman's staying within doors, would prevent the jealousies
of her Husband, and the Husband by minding his business, would thereby secure
her against the infecting Diseases which he contracts in his idleness: and
Parents living thus regularly, would not have Children, who will prove rather
Crosses than Comforts, wishing either their Parents dead, through Avarice: or
making them Beggars during their life by Luxury.

Frugality would enable every Man to live so well, that the Servant needed not
cheat his Master, nor the Tenant the Landlord, but on the contrary, every Man
would take as great Pleasure to help his Neighbor, when he needed his
assistance, as Men do now in Hunting and Hawking: and certainly there must be
more delight in helping a reasonable Creature, bearing the Image of God, that
is in distress; than in rising Early, and sitting up Late, and giving our
selves far more toil and vexation than Frugality requires, merely to kill poor
innocent Creatures that never offended us. I know that it is hard to Reform a
World, wherein that which is wanting cannot be numbered; and that which is
Crooked cannot be made Straight. And it seems that such Devils as Avarice, and
Luxury, cannot be cast out without Fasting and Prayer, but yet the opposing of
these, is so much every Man's Interest, and is so suitable to Nature (from which
Men will get all possible assistance) that if Kings, and Governors would concur
with God and Nature; the Task would be Easy, as the Effects would be Pleasant.
I cannot but commend most Cordially the Quakers, who have let us clearly see
that if Men please they may emancipate themselves from the Tyranny of Custom in
this particular; and this one excellent Endeavor, does not only give them much
Tranquillity, and enables them to help all those of their Persuasion to a
degree, that is to be admired and commended, but it really makes them
acceptable in the Neighborhood: and Atones very much for the other
irregularities with which they are charged: and they may convince us, (...)
least in this one Point, that if such as (...) much Power and Reason should
concur together, they would easily make Mankind Happy, by making them Frugal.

FINIS.
This Elogy was written under the Authors Picture, by Tho. Glegg M. D. in
Dundee.
PIngere vis qua front Cato titubante Senatu,
Asseruit patriae jura Verenda suae?
Pingere vis magnus quo Tullius ore solebat
Dirigere attoniti linguam animamque fori?
Pingere vis quanta Maro majestate canebat,
Et quali tetigit pollice Flaccus Ebur?
Pinge Makenzaeum Pictor, namque altera non est,
Quae referat tantos, una tabella viros.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
THE Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland fort^ Cleared and Defended,
against the Exceptions (...) offered by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Vindication
of (...) Bishop of S. Asaph. By Sir George Mackenzie, his Majesty's Advocate
for the Kingdom of Scotland.

A Memorial for his Highness the Prince of Orange, in Relation to the Affairs
of Scotland: together with the Address of the Presbyterian Party in that
Kingdom to his Highness; and some Observations on that Address. By two Persons
of Quality.

An account of the present Persecution of the Church in Scotland, in several
Letters.

The Case of the present Afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly Represented. To
which is added for Probation, the Attestation of many unexceptionable Witnesses
to every Particular; and all the Public Acts and Proclamations of the
Convention and Parliament relating to the Clergy. By a Lover of the Church and
his Country.

An Historical Relation of the late Presbyterian General Assembly, held at
Edinburgh, from October 16. to November 13. In the Year 1690. In a Letter from
a Person in Edinburgh, to his friend in London.


