Vindiciae Foederis: OR A Vindication of the INTEREST that the Children of
Believers, as such, have in the Covenant of Grace, with their Parents; under
the GOSPEL DISPENSATION BEING The Substance of Two Sermons, with Addition,
Preached to a Congregation in Wapping.

ALSO Some seasonable Reflections upon various unsound, and Cruel Passages

Taken forth of two Furious Books of Mr. H. Collins, Printed against

Infants Baptism,

By FRAN. MENCE, some time of Pembroke College in Oxford, now an unworthy
Pastor of a Church of Christ in Wapping near London.

Magna est veritas, and praevalebit.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by John Lawrence at the
Angel in the Poultrey, by Mrs. Mary Gurnel in Wapping-street near Bell Alley,
and Mr. William Wingod in King Street in Wapping, 1694.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To a Church of Christ in Wapping near London; Grace, Mercy and Peace be
Multiplied.
I Could not (dearly beloved) but judge it my Duty, to Dedicate these Sermons
unto you: partly, because you are my peculiar Care and Charge in the Lord, unto
whom I do ow my Labor and Pains; and also by reason of that joint Request you
were pleased to Attack me withal, viz. that they might be made Public; giving
me good assurance that they might be of great use for the good of Christians in
this place. I have here (though it be against my own inclination) answered your
desire; Let this undertaking be attended with your serious and solemn Prayer,
that your hopes of good may be accomplished. What I have wrote in my Epistle to
the Readers, many of you can testify, you well know what a long time of
Silence I have had; how desirous I was to live in peace; that always being
esteemed a Jewel of great price with me, hoping that the dust that has been
raised to the darkening of the Air among us, might have fallen without any
attempt of mine to suppress it; but the violent effort of the Pulpit, and the
furious Reports of the Press, have something awakened me from that ease and
quiet, I should have been glad longer to have solaced my self withal: But alas
it was time to be something alarmed, when the flames were inkindled about us,
and our little Field in danger of being consumed, here is one that has put
this place even into a Conflagration. I shall (I doubt not) fall under the lash
of many censuring Tongues, for this small endeavor, to vindicate this one
exploded (though precious) Truth of Christ. You have had experience of my
spirit and deportment, and cannot from the strictest observations you have made
of me, but say, that so far as may be, I have been willing to live in peace
with all men, and what care I have taken to preserve peace in the midst of and
round about you. It would be matter of much comfort to me, may this little
Essay be instrumental to reduce this place into somewhat a more sedate and calm
temper: My Practice (ever since the Lord was plased to call me amongst you)
has been to give perpetual demonstrations that I live, and can walk with all
that are sound in the Faith, and of an unblameable Conversation. I found you
fixed upon that Noble, Evangelical Foundation, which I have endeavored to
build upon. Your laudable Principle is, that Union with Christ, is the great
ground of our Communion one with another; let us magnify God, for what we have
found of his Gracious Presence and Blessing, since we came together, and stand
in that relation as we do one to the other. I do with much importunity request
your Prayers, that I may daily have a remembrance from you at the Throne of
rich Grace: Watch against all designs of men that lie in wait to deceive, and
to disturb our peace: Study much the Covenant of Grace, blessed be the Lord
that he has not only ingrafted you, but also your Seed into it. You that have
Children, plead the Promises of the Covenant with God for them: Take heed of
such Principles, that do inevitably exclude your dear Babes out of the Kingdom
of God, and render their Salvation (provided they expire in their infancy) not
only improbable, but in any ordinary way impossible. Beg the Lord to put a
stop, and to give a Check to that lying malicious spirit, that like a spiteful
Ghost walks in this poor disturbed spot. I doubt not, but what I have here
transmitted from the Press, will be attended with the same opprobrious Censure
it met withal from the Pulpit; many ignorant and rash hotheaded Professors did
severely judge me, and my Sermons, that never heard them; and so I do expect
many will that shall never read them, pour out their profound invectives
against them. I must expect no better quarter, than honest Mr. Giles Shute, who
by many was cast and condemned, that never read his Books, neither were able to
pass a right Judgment upon them. I do heartily wish, that a greater number of
my Anabaptist Neighbors, would labor more after the life and power of
Religion; and Study to know their own hearts better: then I promise my self
they would not be so prompt, and ready to undervalue and condemn others, as
they be. I cannot but admire to see what a change is upon their spirits, words,
and actions: in our late times of restraint they could be glad (many of them)
to partake of my poor pains, and sometime since; but I do not so much wonder at
them, as at their Teacher, who ever since the last breaking forth of our
Liberty, has so much inveighed against all that are not of his opinion, and
has laid so much stress and weight upon his Notion, about Baptism, that has
distilled such bitterness into the spirit of many, that they be turned very
sour and morose, to those that cannot imbibe their Sentiments. I bless the
Lord, that I can say, I have not been the Incendiary among us; I lay still Six
or Seven years till all was (from Pulpit and Press by Mr. Collins) put into
Flames about us: It is next to a wonder to me that any should be so impudent,
as to accuse me to be the Author of all the trouble that does annoy us,
notwithstanding my long silence, and that little opposition that yet I have
made against a turbulent spirit: that he might discover the uttermost of his
bitterness, I must have him several times, to pronounce in his Pulpit before
all his Congregation, an open Challenge against me. I do expect that so soon as
these Sermons, shall have an access to his hands, that we shall hear
sufficiently of his tumultuous spirit: I have made a few remarks (as you may
see) upon his bold and undigested Doctrine, rashly and ignorantly thrust forth
into the World; giving you but a few Gleanings, to that Harvest, I may (if
occasion be offered) present you withal. I make no question, but my challenger
will quickly fill our Ears with his Answers, be it so, the Lord (I hope) will
enable us to make our reply: I desire that he would remember, the nature of his
Challenge, that it was a single Duel, without propounding any Seconds, that he
has engaged me in. Stand fast in the Lord (my dearly beloved) as ye have
received the Lord Jesus, so walk ye in him, as ye have received how ye ought to
walk, so walk at all times, and abound yet more and more; while some, and that
not a few, are crying up an Opinion not necessary to Salvation; let your Zeal
run out after those Truths of the Gospel in the believing, and practicing
whereof, you may obtain Salvation, and greatly rejoice in the day of our Lord
Jesus. Love one another; pity and pray one for the other; live in peace and
love; and the God of Love and Peace shall dwell with you. Finally, my Brethren,
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; I commend you to God, and
the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified; that he in order thereunto,
would be pleased to fulfill all the good pleasure of his Goodness within you,
and the work of Faith with power, is the hearty desire of him, that is

Your Servant for Christ's sake, Fran. Mence.

The EPISTLE To the Candid and Impartial READERS, Especially those unto whom
the following Sermons were Preached.
WE live in a day, and Age of Wonders, in which the Divine Providence,
produces many strange things; behold here is presented unto your eyes, the
substance of two poor Sermons with considerable enlargement, that are exposed
(through great importunity) to the open light in the World. I have been very
averse to contribute to the grieved and groaning Press, that is overcharged by
such Writings, which were only fit (after they have been uttered in the Pulpit)
to be adjudg'd to the perpetual Grave of Oblivion; such I readily confess are
these Sermons, and deserve no better Censure: It is a Prodigy to my self, that
I should be prevailed upon, to suffer these Papers to appear with an open face,
and to be exposed to the view of many. I sensibly, and feelingly find cause
every day, more and more, to bewail, and to blush at my own ignorance and
incapacity, for the work of the Ministry, though I have not been vacant of many
Solicitations, accompanied with the Tears of serious Christians, that I would
admit some of my Labors to be Printed: But at the same time a cold damp has
seized my Spirits, from a deep conviction of my insufficiency for such an
undertaking; judging it to be my Duty, to be like the Deaf Adder, not to
hearken to such Charms, but to be inexorable: You may then demand, how comes it
to pass, that these two Sermons have obtained more than all the rest ever could?

I have not only considered the Importunity of dear friends, (I did formerly
withstand) which of it self could never have prevailed; but am fallen under a
Conviction, that the providential Call of my Lord and Master does oblige me, by
reason of the great dishonor, that is brought to his most sacred and pure
Name, from various infamous Doctrines, that have been divulged amongst us; and
that with such heat and fervor, that we are upon this little spot in an
Inflammation, yea near unto a Conflagration; insomuch that out of consciousness
of Duty, and the importunity of those whose hearts do bleed within them, I
could forbear no longer, but went unto the Sanctuary, to fill my shallow
Bucket, with some of the cooling and quenching waters, that issue from under
the Threshold thereof. Oh! that there might be a blessing attending this my
Essay; we are so set on fire round about us, (by a man of a vehement Spirit)
that seems to threaten all about him, opposite to his Principle, quickly to be
consumed and reduced to ashes; God be pleased, graciously to allay his heat,
and quench his false fiery Zeal.

It is well known, that for six or seven years, I have born with his
unparalleled Confidence, in his frequent inveighing against Infants Baptism,
with many insufferable reflections upon us that are in judgment and practice
different from him. He has, (besides his frequent Excursions) an anniversary
day, (ex proposito) to batter us with his Rams to the ground. A long time we
have made no resistance against him, (as many of you that attend upon my
Ministry well know) but have patiently received the furious fire of his
Broadsides: Good Christians have repaired unto me, begging me to lift up the
Standard of Gods Word against him; but my reply to them was, Wisdom should rest
in the Bosom of some, and that I knew not how short-lived (considering the
various Threatenings of a Divine Providence, for a multitude of crying Sins that
abound among us; particularly the animosities and dissentions of the Professors
of the Gospel) our present enjoyments might be; adding, that I judged the Will
of my Lord was, that I should improve that little Talent he has pleased to
entrust me withal, (to the utmost of my power) in preaching upon the weighty
and most necessary Truths of the Gospel, whereby (through Grace) I might save
my self, and those that hear me, 1 Timothy 4.16. Some of his followers waxed bold,
looking upon what he delivered, to proceed out of the mouth of an infallible
Oracle, crying out of me, why does he not answer Mr. C. and preach up his
sprinkling of Infants; if he had any thing to say, he would not be silent. Yea,
some have been so impudent, as to say, that what he does, as to the baptizing
of Infants, is against the light of his own Conscience: To such bold Accusers
and Boasters, I shall only return in the words of the Apostle, Romans 14.4. Who
art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls.

It is common amongst us, for those that understand not the right hand from the
left in any great point of the things of God, to judge and condemn the most
judicious and pious, that are not of their Measures about Baptism; let but a
man renounce his Baby sprinkling (as they scornfully call it) and pass under
the Water, he is an excellent Christian. If some of their Preachers be never so
raw, crude and illiterate, and can lay about them with abundance of Confidence,
though mingled with a great quantity of Nonsense, yet they are admired by them
being for dipping, without which what is all the Learning, Experience, Piety,
Pains, and sincere endeavors of faithful Ministers in serving souls? It may
grieve any one that has a serious consideration of the worth of Souls, and the
weightiness of the work of the Ministry upon his Heart, to hear, how all that
those deliver, that decry the Baptizing of Infants, is magnified, as flowing
from the Spirit of the Lord, though much that is vented, is but the apparent
(proles) or offspring of Pride, Ignorance and Confidence. Oh! let not my soul
enter into their Secrets: who is sufficient for these things? I wish that there
be not only contempt heaped upon the Word of the Lord and his Ministry, but
also blasphemy upon the Spirit: Let men take heed of being too bold in
fathering their passionate Sallies, and Invectives against their Betters, upon
the Holy Ghost; Oh! that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for these things!

To complete all, the high place in the Congregation is not sufficient to
discharge the conception of the stomach against us, but the Press must also
groan to bring forth, that there may nothing appear but dung and filth upon our
faces, and all the beauty of Religion, and Evangelical Order of the Gospel we
walk in, may be totally defaced. From the Press has been sent into the midst
of us, two Pamphlets, like unto Sampson's Foxes that were joined in the Tail
with firebrarnds betwixt them to burn down all our Field; as if nothing less
than the total destruction of our Vineyard could suffice. With what care must
these Prints immediately be dispersed into all quarters? not only at the public
Meeting House, the Booksellers Shops, but some of them must be sent up and down
in blank Papers to several Persons by the Penny-Post, and others carried to
Coffee-Houses, and openly laid upon the Tables, that every one that comes to
take a Pipe and drink a Dish, might feast upon and admire this nonesuch
Author, and not only the sober, but the wet Drinkers should be baptized into
his opinion. These Books (such as they are) must be diligently in all places
scattered, that if it be possible every hand might be furnished with a tool and
weapon to beat and cut us all into pieces: what a spirit is this man possessed
withal, as if he would be a common troublesome. Ghost; to haunt every house and
heart, near unto him? Surely we are greatly engaged, for our peace, and quiet,
(by all lawful means) to do all that we can to lay him; for it is he that has
been the great troubles of our Israel, I do sincerely desire him in the cool
time of his spirit, provided, when his eyes are opened, he does ever enjoy such
a season, solemnly to consider the description that the wisest of men does give
of a public annoyer, Prove. 26.18. When I first cast mine eyes upon his. Books,
I could not but admire them for Pride, Ignorance and Confidence, never yet saw
I any thing since I was able to hold a book in my hand for these qualifications
so excellent; this has been the opinion of many, that have been much more able
to judge, than ever he will be to write.

I shall briefly tell you, what was my vehement provocation and prevailing
inducement to preach the following Sermons, vid. his audacious cruelty in his
Book, offered to our Children, to the Seed of all that have the singular
privilege of being in Covenant with the Lord. He could not in his writings
content himself (as many of his Brethren do) only to exclude them from their
right to Baptism, but must proceed upon such ways, and means, that do
inevitably shut them out of the Kingdom of Heaven, if so be they expire in
their infancy, Hinc illae Lachrymae! What pious and tender Parent, that has a
serious concernment upon his heart, for the eternal state of his Child, can
hear such Doctrine, and his ears not to tingle, and his heart not to tremble?

I confess, to have such wild and cruel Doctrine to be not only delivered, but
licked up and admired amongst us (as if it was one of the choicest Truths of
Grace, that our Lord and Master sends his Ambassadors to proclaim) did cause a
little zeal for Truth to wax warm within me, and engaged me to draw up some
cautions against, and make some mild reflections upon, such Infant-destroying
matter: therefore when I preached (as the Lord did enable me) concerning a
sound and saving knowledge of Christ in the use of this truth; I did blame some
that were chiefly concerned about other knowledge, little respecting this;
adding, That there was such a knowledge of Christ, as to the object of it, but
was not that which was most necessary to Salvation, as for instance, that of
Baptism, as to the subject of it. Thus I gently delivered my self, saying, that
there be some Pulpits that reek with a blind Zeal against Infant Baptism; but
pray take notice, that what I am going to speak is neither for, nor against the
baptizing of Infants, only I cannot but take notice of a Pamphlet, lately risen
up in the midst of us, that in its decrying Infants Baptism, does proceed upon
such Mediums, that must unavoidably shut those that dye in their Infancy out of
Heaven, and so a terrible sentence of condemnation is denounced against them
all: this bold Writer does presume to lay it down as one of his infallible
positions, that no Infants are in Covenant with their Parents that are
Believers, nor capable of habitual Faith, one great branch of Sanctification,
and the new Creature, indispensably necessary to Salvation. This he is so
confident of, that in a scornful way, he does rank that odious Doctrine of
Antichrist, Transubstantiation, with Infants being in Covenant with their
Parents, and their being capable of habitual Faith; it seems they be all of the
same import with him: He being sensible what a foundation he has laid to build
the perdition of Infants upon, that he might lick this illshapen Monster into
some pleasing shape, acquaints us, that he has found out a way to save
Children notwithstanding: One would wonder what this curious invention should
be, it is this, vid. those Children that shall be saved, shall so be by an
imputed righteousness; thus we see, what it is to be a sagacious Divine. I
believe all the brains of the dull Schoolmen, could never find out such an
exquisite notion, as this topping Preacher has not only to send our poor
Infants by swarms to Hell, but also can recall them and reverse the doom that
he has denounced against them; as if the power of Life and Death were in his
hands: The worst of it is, here is nothing to prevail upon us to imbibe his new
invented way, but his own Authority; his ipse dixit, will not satisfy thinking
men, though it may go smoothly down with his own admirers.

That Caution given to us about false Teachers, Gal. 1.8. cannot but stick with
me; I am certain here is another Gospel, and that in a substantial point of our
Religion, and Articles of Faith. I confess (in the hearing of many of you) I
did say upon this unscriptural Notion, what I see no reason as yet to retract
that to talk of an imputed Righteousness, without a Covenant of Grace, and
without an imparted Righteousness, was but Mountebank Divinity. I understand it
to be the judgment of all our Divines, that Justification, and Sanctification,
though different in their Nature and use yet are never separate as to their
subject; for those whom God does justify, them also he does sanctify, neither
do I understand how without a Covenant of Grace, we can be made partakers of
either of them: but here is an incomparable man, that can divide these great
blessings, and can make Infants happy with one, though they are not capable of
the other; ay, and that notwithstanding they be not in the Covenant of Grace
with their Parents. I wonder where my good neighbor learnt this Doctrine; he
is such a Professor of Divinity, as that he has made a Catechism, which he
has dispersed among his Disciples I have not yet seen it, but fear, when I
shall obtain a sight of it (as now I do intend) I shall scarce find him more
excellent, and sound, than what was the product of that judicious Assembly that
sat at Westminster; alas they could find out no such way as here is presented
unto us, of condemning and absolving Infants: to mention this Mountebank
Divinity with caution and tenderness, was all that I did presume to do for many
years; I thought at this, no well tempered and sober mind could suffer a
recoil, considering my long and many provocations. But what a noise did this
make? What a dust did this raise? Nay, into what a frisk did this put our
admired Author? How was he nettled? that any of his Doctrine should, (that was
much admired by such that were just as able to judge, as he to write) be called
into question: Notwithstanding all that was said, neither his venerable name,
nor either of his Books was so much as mentioned, that which was spoke, did not
carry any direct opposition to his Believers Baptism (as he calls it;) yet he
(as if he was the only Sovereign upon this Spot, and was invested with a
despotick power, taking upon him to rule as with an absolute Authority) was put
into a terrible commotion and convulsion; and many of his Devotaries were
prejudicially possessed, as if some great Treason had been committed against
their Ruler and Guide: Why, but what is the matter? A poor man that lay buried
for six or seven years in the Grave of patience and silence, upon whom they had
long trampled, and over whom they had long insulted, the top-mould of his Grave
did a little discernibly move, and what shall we do, provided there should be a
Resurrection? Oh! how were all hands (tongues) called to help? How must the
mouth of the grave be diligently watched that he creep not forth? lest our
tottering foundation be disquieted, our hightower'd magnificent Structure be
shaken, our direful Principles about dying Infants be detected and disproved,
and the fatal Sentence that we have pronounced be reversed; Little can any one
suppose or conceive what a tumult was raised from so small an alarm, all must
be upon the defense; but with what Weapons must that be made? Out of what Porge
or Mint must they come? Surely out of that Infernal One of Hell; that which I
must be accosted withal at the first Onset must be Lies, as if nothing else was
their Armor of Proof, and Weapons of Desence. It is wonderful that so many of
those, that would be thought the most Excellent, if not the only People of God
amongst us, should themselves give us their true Erymology, and discover what
Lineage and Stock they be of, the Lord help them to consider, who is the Father
of Liars, and whose Children they are that make Lies; Is this consonant with
the description that is given of Gods Children? Isa. 63.8. For he said, Surely
they are my people, children that will not lie. Let those that would be thought
the greatest Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem, and to have their Names wrote in
the Lamb's Book of Life, be careful they do not deceive and expose themselves
by this Sin to a fearful Exclusion, Rev. 21.27. I have a Black Catalogue of
Lies committed to Writing, which I had thought at this Time to have presented
you withal, but forbear till another season. I should have been very glad not
to have been concerned in this controversy, but since I have suffered such a
violent arrest out of my grave of durance and silence, where I should have been
glad to have rested all my days, and finding my Pillow to be extremely
uneasy, being stufft with piercing and pricking thorns; I could not but offer
this little Testimony for the Truth I am contending for. When I did discourse
in my Pulpit about the Covenant state of Infants with their Parents, I did not
intend that what was delivered should ever fall under the weight of the Press;
what has been spoken has not been altogether destitute of a Blessing (through
grace) unto many that heard it: the next Sabbath after my undertaking in this
affair, my good neighbor (that he might show the rancour of his Spirit)
produced in his Pulpit a Paper against me, which he read in his Congregation,
at the tail of which he discovered his sting, which was an open challenge that
he pronounced against me, to dispute me openly, either in his, or my Meeting
House; thus the Gantlet (I do not say the Club) was cast; the same week he did
disperse abroad that upon the next Lords day, he would preach upon my Text, and
confute me. I had thought to have acquainted you what an excellent confitter he
is (having his confutation Sermons by me taken from his mouth, by the Pen of a
ready Writer:) but upon second thoughts, I shall suspend that until another
occasion be offered. This Champion that he might triumph, in his most
triumphant and stately Chariot, has published another Challenge against me in
his Pulpit, after he had (as he judged) confuted my Doctrine about the
Covenant. If it had been any of my Brethren that he had thus confuted and
challenged, I should have wondered what manner of Spirit this Man had been of;
one would have thought that if he had had any True Call to the Ministry, (which
many question) the consideration of his Education might have something
suppressed the proud Elation of his Mind, which in these Things does eminently
and too apparently discover it self, and that he might not have thought himself
to have been a Star of the First Magnitude. I remember I have read of a King
that was advanced to the Throne from a mean Descent and Calling, being a Potter
by Trade, that the Canker of Pride might not approach nor corrupt the Royal
Diadem, would have all his Provisions for his Table served with Earthen
Vessels, that so he might frequently have such an Object in his Eye, that might
keep him humble. I shall leave my good Friend and Antagonist to make the
Application. I have oftentimes thought in my grieved and sorrowful silence,
that if it had pleased the Divine Providence to have placed some of my
Anabaptist Brethren (whom my Soul loves dearly) in this Man's Post; we might
have dwelt like Brethren, might have taken sweet Counsel, and have walked unto
the House of God together, yea, might have carried on the Work of the Lord with
one Hand, one Shoulder, and one Heart. I can (Christian Readers) truly say,
that what I have here put into your Hands to read in the following Sermons is
wrote and designed for the Honor of God, the Grace of his Covenant, to
interpose a little between our poor Children and Little Ones, and that
Soul-amazing Doom that is pronounced against them, to reprove the rash and
furious Zeal of our Adversary, to Answer the vehement Importunities and longing
Expectations of many of my good Friends, to commode all that hear me, in
instructing them in this great and comfortable Truth of the Gospel that I
contend for, to give a check to that Lying Spirit that is got loose among us,
to satisfy any that are stumbling and doubting about Baptism, and to reduce
(if the God of Peace shall see good) this poor troubled Place to a peaceable
tranquil Composure. Oh! cry to God, that this my Undertaking, sincerely
prostituted to the good of Souls, may meet with some suitable Blessing
thereunto, and that all my poor Labors in the Work of the Gospel, may obtain
good success. The Lord be with you, and bless you, and cause his gracious Face
to shine upon you, guiding you into the Way of Truth, and conducting you to his
Eternal Glory: My Hearts desire and prayer for you all is, that you may be
saved. I am

Your Affectionate Servant in Christ, Fran. Mence.

A Vindication of the Interest of the Children of Believers in the Covenant of
Grace, etc.
ACTS ii. 39. For the promise is to you, and to your children.


IN this Chapter we have one of the first Sermons that was preached after the
Ascension of Christ. The very first that we read of, unless we take Peter his
divine Oration in the Chapter before concerning the apostasy of Judas, and the
choosing of another in his room to fill up the Number of the Disciples, to be
the first. This indeed is a most excellent Sermon, and of divine inspiration,
in which the holy Scriptures refering to that case, were elegantly, and
opportunely explicated, and applied; and the Auditory that he directed himself
unto sweetly composed, and instructed in the Election of another Apostle, to
fill up the room of him that betrayed his Lord and Master, who through the
insufferable anguish of his own Conscience, was a most execrable Executioner of
himself, and by the just judgment of God had his bowels burst out, Acts 1.15,
etc. We come unto the Chapter which my Text is part of, in which we may observe
four general parts.

First, The Mission of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, who according to the
promise and command of Christ were to wait at Jerusalem, for the accomplishment
of that rare and necessary blessing, to fit them for that great and difficult
undertaking of preaching and planting the Gospel they were commissionated unto,
who were to go together and not enter upon this great work, until the Spirit
did rest upon them. Ver. 1: etc. we have their obedience to their Lords
command, chap. 1.13, 14. There is one thing very observable, that when the
Apostles, and those that were with them, were with one accord waiting for the
fulfilling of the promise, they did not sit dumb, and silent together; but they
did pour out prayer, and supplications to God, they did not keep such a silent
meeting, waiting for the Spirit, as the Quakers pretend to do: They were not
only waiting but praying, it may be well supposed, that they were making
supplications to God, for the obtaining that promised mercy they were under the
expectation of.

Secondly, The Sermon that Peter (by divine assistance) did deliver to the
Congregation that was about him. His Auditory was very great; no wonder it was
so, partly because of the time of it: Here was a great Season that might
contract a numerous Assembly, it was in the time of Penlecost, when there was a
great resort of people from many places; and also because of that wonder that
was then wrought in the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, which
enabled them to speak in various languages, ver. 4, 5. When this extraordinary
thing was noised abroad, it brought the Multitude together, some were
confounded, others were amazed, and there were those that mocked; they thought
the Apostles were full of New Wine, as if their speaking through the Gift of
the holy Spirit so miraculously poured upon them, was only the fruit and effect
of their excessive drinking. Thus we may observe how Satan does instigate those
that be under his conduct and influence, to blaspheme the most wonderful and
obvious Works of God, ver. 6, 7, 8, etc. In this Sermon the Apostle Peter
undertakes two things.

1. To wipe off that foul Aspersion, that was cast upon them, of being filled
with New Wine. It was very needful for him so to do, otherwise this might be a
means to obstruct the good success of his Sermon: We may see in many Verses the
way the Apostle takes to clear them of this Diabolical Accusation, from ver.
14, to 22.

2. He comes to the peculiar Subject the Spirit of Christ did lead him unto,
viz. To set home upon the Consciences of the Jews, their great and sanguinary
Sin in their cruel and malicious crucifying and murdering the Lord Jesus, the
Prince of life, the only Messiah and Savior of the World. Many of those that
heard him were guilty of it, as we may see by the round and positive charge, he
draws up against and fastens upon them, verse 22, 23. Here we may apprehend,
how fully and emphatically the Apostle does fix this Crime upon his Hearers, as
to him that was barbarously murdered and crucified; therefore he called him
Jesus of Nazareth, to show that he was the true Messiah, promised by all the
Prophets, and that they might readily understand that he spoke of that very
Jesus, whom they in scorn and contempt called Jesus of Nazareth, and upon whose
Cross they fixed that Title; the Apostle to make the charge the more full, he
adds that it was that Jesus of Nazareth, that was a Man approved of God among
them by Miracles, Wonders and Signs, which God did by him, and that in the
midst of them, as they themselves well knew: It was him that they did take, and
by wicked hands did crucify and slay. It is to be observed, that this terrible
Accusation is exhibited against all the Auditory of Peter, when he says unto
all that heard him, Ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain, he might deliver himself thus unto them all, because in so great a
company, many were present that actually poured out the blood of Christ:
Moreover the whole People cried out at the Tribunal, crucify him, crucify
him, and imprecated, that his blood might be upon them, and their posterity,
viz. the guilt of his blood, and the direful fruits of it.

What a wonderful Spirit of Zeal and Courage, was the Lord pleased to fill this
Apostle withal? Even him, who out of fear sometime before had denied his Lord
and Master; he was now full of the Spirit of the Lord, which is a Spirit of
might and strength, that did animate and support him. One would think that this
bloody Congress, that were skilful in, and scarce cool from the effusion of
blood, yea of the best of blood, would immediately have dispatched him and
emptied his Veins.

That the Apostle might fasten their execrable sin upon their consciences, in
murdering the Messiah, he does (from the Word of God) prove him to be so. He
did not only propound his assertion, but he proved it, that so he might involve
his hearers, into a full and through conviction. This does evidently instruct
those, that take upon them to preach the truths of Christ, to prove them, and
to be able to defend them.

The Suitable mediums and arguments, the Apostle insists upon to prove this his
Doctrine, concerning Christ, as how God raised him from the dead, and
concerning David a tipe of him, I must not stand to show, but must come to the
next general part I observe in this Chapter.

Thirdly, The good effects and gracious fruits of this the Apostles Sermon.
After he had fixed the charge he drew up against the Jews for murdering the
Messiah, whom he proved to be so, then he comes with a sharp arrow of
application, and strikes it deep (by the efficacy of the holy Spirit) into the
hearts of his sinful Auditors, ver. 36. therefore let all the house of Israel
know assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both
Lord and Christ: He told them how eminently he was exalted by God, whom they
had vilified and abased unto the greatest contempt and shame, and had put him
to the most painful, shameful and cursed death, that ever could be.

Oh! to deal thus with the Son of God, the Lord of all, the only Messiah so
highly exalted at the right hand of the Majesty on high, and made both Lord and
Christ, what a cut might this be to those that heard the Apostle, being guilty
of so great sin, of such Scarlet impieties? Tunc ingens est stimulus, quo
Petrus mira liberate et sinceritate, pupugit corda Judaeorum. See and behold,
what wickedness ye have committed, the guilt of what blood you have contracted:
what maliciously and cruelly to murder the Lord Jesus, the Savior of the
world, who is the Lord of all, who is over all, God blessed for over!

This had by the blessing of the most high gracious effects and fruits upon
those that heard him.

First, They were pricked at the heart, they were troubled and grieved at their
heart, because of their horrid sin they had committed in their detestable
murder of Christ. Doluerunt animis, quod crucifixissent Christum. Pisca. Ver.
37.

Secondly, They ask Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, what they should do?
ver. 37. Now they were brought into a miserable plunge, the bloody color of
their sin, and their Consciences boiling hot within them, pronouncing fiery
Sentences against them, the very sting of the damned was crucifying them; this
might well make them as amazed, and confounded rebels to cry out, what shall we
do? what course shall we take, to get free from the charge of this crying sin?
no sooner were these poor wretches convinced, and begged council of the
Apostles as to their escaping that dreadful wrath that was due unto them for
their greatly meritorious sin; but Peter gives them suitable advice, directing
them how they might obtain eternal Salvation, by the blood of him whom they had
wickedly crucified and slain, as in ver. 38. he does exhort and direct them, to
repent, to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, that they might receive
remission of sin, and the gift of the holy Ghost; then they may be well
assured, that through him whom they crucified, they should obtain a discharge
from their foul-confounding guilt, and eternal Salvation. I shall proceed no
further in the parts of this Chapter, neither shall I add any thing more as to
the happy effects and events of the Apostle's most excellent Sermon, in the
hearts, and lives of these wonderful converts, that heard him, who though never
so wicked before, were the prinitiae evangelij, showing the glorious efficacy
of the sufferings of Christ, that those that were his inveterate enemies, and
did so insatiably thirst for his pure and spotless blood, that nothing could
satisfy, but their washing their hands in the same by a violent effusion,
should partake of the first fruits of it.

The Apostle discerning, what a miserable condition they saw themselves to be
in, and into what a direful abiss of divine wrath they apprehended themselves
to be swallowed up, he does not only nakedly call upon them to repent and turn
to God, and to fly unto him for mercy; but gives unto them one of the most
gracious Motives and encouragements thereunto, telling them the promise is unto
them, and their Children. He did well understand, that their horrible sin did
not only extend unto them, but also unto their offspring; for they had not only
poured out the sacred blood of Christ themselves, but also had involved their
Children in the guilt of it, Mat. 27.25. When Pilate had said I am innocent of
the blood of this Person, see ye to it, then answered all the people, and said,
his blood be on us, and our Children. Surely a lively sense of this, made a
deep wound in their Consciences. To relieve and support them in this miserable
plunge, when they could not but see the wrath of a just revenging God, ready to
invade both them, and their Children, they could not but be in a deplorable
case, saying, we have eternally destroyed and ruined both our selves and
posterity: The Apostle presents them with a Plaster broad enough for their
Sore; q. d. well though your sin be so grievous and damnable as to your selves
and little ones, yet repent, and turn to God, and it shall be happy both with
you, and your Children also: for said he, the promise is to both, and will
reach you, and your dying infants; you shall not be cast out of Covenant, but
you, and your little ones shall continue in the same, that you were in before
the actual exhibition, and death of your Savior, whom ye did impiously
crucify and slay. Oh what a full breast of consolation was here, from the
infinite grace of God exposed for these miserable creatures to suck and hang
upon! the very marrow and quintessence of the Gospel is proposed to them, for
their effectual inducement to repent and believe. Here was the fountain opened
for sin and for uncleanness, in which these poor trembling sinners might wash
and bathe their guilty and filthy Souls; these were those that now look upon
him whom they had pierced, and did mourn over him, as one mourns for his only
Son, and they were in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
first born, Zech. 12.10. Peter gave them such a Cordial, that could not but
greatly refresh and comfort them; here he was like to his blessed Lord and
Master, the good Samaritan that had compassion on him that fell among thieves,
and was wounded, who went to him, and bound up his wounds pouring in oil and
wine, that so he might both cleanse and cure.

Now we come to fix upon the words of our Text: That we may see clearly, what
is intended in them, let us observe a few particulars by way of general
division that are comprehended in them.

First, To whom this is spoken; it was to the Jews, who were then met together
out of many Nations at the Feast of Pentecost, ver. 5. and there were dwelling
at Jerusalem Jews, devout men out of every nation under heaven. Some of these,
nay many of them, were effectually touched at the heart by the penetrating
Sermon of Peter, or rather by the irresistible compunction of the Spirit of
God, cooperating with the preaching of Peter, as it was at another time, when
this excellent Apostle was preaching, Acts 10.44. While Peter yet spoke these
words, the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. When the holy Ghost
does fall upon the heart, and into the heart of those that hear; the word then
(the power and authority of it) shall be found, and that by the most perverse
and obstinate sinner: it is he that makes the word to be quick, and powerful,
and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and to be a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.

Secondly, By whom they were spoken; Viz. by Peter, in the name of all the rest
of the Apostles. It pleased the Lord at this time, and upon this occasion, to
constitute him to be the mouth of all, he was great in utterance, it is very
probable the rest of the Apostles might be willing to choose him to be their
Spokesman. However the Spirit of the Lord did order it, that it should be so,
that Peter should be the man, that should preach this excellent Sermon, all the
Apostles were concerned in it, and did even speak in and with him, ver. 14. But
Peter standing up, with the Eleven, lift up his voice, and said unto them, ye
men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and
hearken to my words, etc. Peter spoke in the company, and in the authority of
the rest: those awakened sinners judged that in the speaking of Peter, all were
concerned, therefore when they were pricked to the heart, they said not only to
Peter, but to the rest of the Apostles, men, and brethren what shall we do? One
Minister of Christ, that speaks the word of God, preaches in the same
authority, that all the Ministers of the Gospel do.

Thirdly, Why these words in the text were spoken and affirmed; It was by way
of Motive to press on the exhortation, we have in ver. 38. the Jews had lived
under the former administration of the Covenant of grace, in the which the
Messiah, that was to come, was exhibited in the promise, and shadowed in many
Types, and Figures, by which they were taught to expect, and to look for the
coming of the Messiah in Person. At last in the time appointed, he is come to
bring, and to establish a new and a more glorious administration, not to
dissolve the Covenant (as some would have it) but to establish it under a more
eminent, and excellent dispensation, than ever it was before his incarnation,
suffering, and ascension. But because he came not with external pomp and state,
That the carnal Jews expected him in, he was by them despised, rejected, and
persecuted to death, which the infinitely wise God did overule to the
accomplishment of his eternal purpose, as to the Salvation of the elect; yet
their sin and wickedness was never the less, who took the blessed Son of God,
the only Messiah, and by wicked hands, did crucify and slay him, though he was
delivered by the determinate council of God: the eternal purpose and council of
the everlasting, and infinitely wise God, took place in the Jews perpetrating
their enmity and malice upon our blessed redeemer, Acts 4.27, 28. For of a
truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed both Herod, and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered
together, for to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy council determined before to
be done. Though all was managed, by the adored wisdom of the eternally wise
Jehovah, who brought his Son into the world, and delivered him up to be
crucified; yet the wickedness of his implacable murdrers was never the less.
The Apostle finding some of their hearts to be bleeding, relenting, and greatly
affected at their amazing impiety, he labors to set conviction home upon their
Consciences, to drive the nail up to the head, he persuades them to repentance,
and to submit to Christ his dispensation of the Gospel, and to declare their
submission, by their being baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, we are to consider, what is here affirmed, this is the matter that
we are most to be concerned about, viz. this promise is to you, and your
children. What this promise is, imports the Emphasis of this text; there are
two acceptations, I find to be of these words, I will mention, both of them.

1. Some would have the Article (...), to point at the Promise
beforementioned, cited out of the Prophet Joel, ver. 16, 17. But this is that
which was spoken by the prophet Joel, and it shall come to pass in the last
days, (says God) I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons,
and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams. This (say some) does relate to the
extraordinary effusion of the Spirit of God, that some should enjoy. But I
find, that there are Expositors, that incline not to this. I shall lay down two
or three Reasons, why I judge, that the Promise in this Text does not refer to
that of the pouring out of the Spirit in great measure.

1. The interposition of a large discourse, between the mention of that
promise, and the Text, seems to break off all connection, between the discourse
concerning the Counsel of God in giving up Christ to death, and then to give
him a Glorious resurrection revealed at large in the Psalms, which had been now
accomplished by them, though with wicked intentions: This interposeth; so that
here, the Apostle seems to be upon a new matter, altogether distinct from that
promise of the extraordinary, and plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost.

2. Because they that did believe, and were baptized, did not receive these
extraordinary gifts; therefore it is not to be supposed, that the Apostle would
deceive, and delude them, in making such a promise unto them, which was not to
be performed, and never to be imparted unto them. The holy Preacher did only
induce, and sweetly entice them with a promise, which upon their accepting of
his counsel, they might be certain to enjoy: It was indeed a most gracious
promise, such an one, that would make them eternally happy, and more necessary
than the gifts of Miracles.

3. Because the promise here meant, is of a perpetual duration, at least to be
in force in all Ages; for it is extended to as many, as the Lord shall call,
which does reach to all Ages, and Generations, and so is a promise that is not
limited and restrained to some Ages, and to some Christians, but touches and
belongs unto all: Wheresoever God shall be pleased to call any, the promise
shall be extended to them, and their children; this laid down as a groundwork
for the proceedings of grace, in encouraging to believe, and repent, to the end
of times, even unto the calling in of all the Elect.

2. There is another acceptance of the Words, which I shall take up withal,
such a one that I think is built upon better grounds; let us observe well the
Article (...), that is set before the word promise, and that may give us a
clear light herein, (...).

This must denote some great and eminent promise, that was made to the Jews,
and such a promise that they were well acquainted withal: The promise is to
you, and to your children, the promise that was made to you, and that is well
known to you. This can be looked upon as nothing less, then the Covenant of
Grace, or one of the uppermost or top-branches of it; for to them did pertain
the Covenant of promise, Romans 9.4. Who are Israelites; to whom pertains the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving the law, and the
service of God, and the promises. Let us see what they be called in Acts 3.25.
Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with
our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindred of the
earth be blessed. But what was that say you, or what Covenant was that? You may
see it in Genesis 17.4, 7. As for me, my covenant is with thee, and thou shall be
the father of many nations; or as the words may be read, of multitudes of
Nations. He was then but the Father of one Nation, I but God does here promise
unto him, that he shall be a Father of a multitude of Nations. This must needs
look unto the Gentiles, and the many Nations of them, after the Incarnation,
Suffering, and Ascension of the Messiah, when the Wall of partition was to be
broken down, and the Covenant of Abraham carried over unto them. And I will
establish my covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their
generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee. This is the Covenant-promise the Apostle urges upon these
convinced and awakened Sinners, that he might overcome them to repent, and
accept of the new administration of the Covenant; for the promise was to them,
and to their Children. Quod illis filios adjungit, pendet ex verbis
promissionis; ero Deus tuus, and seminis tui post te, Genesis 17.17. Vbi Deus
filios patribus accenset in adoptionis gratia, Says a Learned Expositor, and
he adds, Hic locus abunde refellit Anabaptistas, qui infantes ex fidelibus
genitos a baptismo arcent, quasi non sint Ecclesiae membra: This place (says
he) does abundantly confute the Anabaptists, who drive away the Infants born of
godly Parents, as if they were not Members of the Church.

2. The Promise here spoke of, must be such an one, which gives remission of
sins, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost; such an one, that to drooping
disconsolate Souls, assures of pardoning and sanctifying Grace: Ver. 38. Then
Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. This is
that Promise, that he tells them does appertain to them, and not to them only,
but to their Children also. The same Promise we have, Jer. 31.33, 34, and Ezekiel.
36.25, 26, 27. It must be such a Promise, as carries in the womb of it, the
offer of pardoning and sanctifying Mercy, which is in the Covenant of Grace.

3. The Scope of the Apostle is to show, what an Obligation there was lying
upon them, to accept of and to believe in Christ freely offered unto them, and
not to stand out, and be shy of coming under his new administration: From hence
he argues, for the promise is to you, and your children. We may sum it up thus,
q. d. You are the Posterity of such, whom God accepted, and took into Covenant
with himself, promising to be a God to them, and their Seed, to whom he also
promised, to send his Son, by whom this Blessing should be confirmed;
accordingly this promised Seed, the great Promise of the Covenant, is come for
this very end, Romans 15.8. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of the
circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promise made unto the
fathers: To confirm the Covenant, not to dissolve it; confirm it, to whom? To
the Jews, and also to the Gentiles. I but, how is this confirmed by Christ, if
the Children must since the coming of Christ be shut out of the Covenant? Oh!
what a sweet allurement was here, to hasten their acceptance of the Apostles
Exhortation: Oh! (said he) do not you by your infidelity, and distrust of the
Grace and Mercy of God, deprive your selves of such an inconceivable and
inestimable Blessing and Privilege: Thus says an Excellent Author.

So that the Apostle lays before them a good encouragement to come to Christ,
and a firm bottom of hope to found pardon upon their Repentance; because in
their Church Estate, which was going also to be carried over unto the Gentiles,
they and their Children were under, being in covenant with God, and stood
firmly possessed of the same, which God would make good to them, and confirm
them in; if by their unbelief they did not cut themselves and their children
off. So the Promise is the Covenant of Grace, made to Abraham, and his Seed,
continued hitherto to them, and their Children. Here we may evidently see, that
the Apostle does not undertake to dissolve the Covenant, nor to cut off the
gracious Entail thereof as to the Children, nor shut them out of this great
Blessing, he would establish them in; but acquaints these vile, and trembling
Sinners, that the Promise is to them, and their Children.

2. Quest. What is meant by Children?

Answ. By Children is meant the natural Seed, Children after the Flesh, for the
Covenant here is the Covenant made with Abraham, and his natural Seed. This is
that Covenant the Apostle mentions when he says, The promise is to you, and
your children: Viz. That Covenant which they were well acquainted withal, and
valued themselves highly from. Our Brethren the Anabaptists affirm, That
Abraham's natural Seed had only a Covenant of temporal Promises, that the
natural Seed had no part in the Covenant of Grace, but only the Spiritual, the
Followers of Abraham's Faith.

But we affirm, That by Children here are meant the natural Seed, (...) -- Such
as were begotten of you, and did spring and proceed from your Loins: As when
the Covenant was renewed at first with Abraham, God would be a God to him, and
to his Seed, that Seed that was to be circumcised; so the terms of the same
Covenant are here repeated by the Apostle, The promise is to you, and your
children: Christ would make good his Promise to all Believers: This is that
which (I hope) I shall evidently prove in its proper place.

3. Quest. But if the natural Seed be here meant, as having an Interest in the
Covenant with their Pa^^^ts, whether is not their Right and Title limited, and
restrained by the following Expression; The time of their calling, as many as
the Lord our God shall call, and none but such, and never till then?

Answ. There have been so many Learned Divines, that have gone before with such
clearness of Light in this Controversy, that little can be added, or need to
be spoken; something consonant to what they have said, and agreeable to their
Answers I shall offer.

We are to distinguish about Calling, for Calling is either effectual and
saving, or only external Calling.

1. There is an effectual and saving Calling, that which appertains to the
Elect of God, by which (by the external Call of the Word, and the inward
efficacy of the Spirit) they be thoroughly Called out of all Sin unto God. To
urge a necessity of this, without which, no Benefits of the blessed Covenant of
Promise, can be obtained or challenged, is a palpable Error, against which
there may be many Clouds of Witnesses produced to testify. In every Age of the
Church, and propagation of the Covenant, there have been many Hypocrites, and
formal Professors, that have had a standing in the Church, which is a
Privilege of the Covenant, yet had no effectual Calling; so it is now, and
will be at the coming of Christ, when he shall find amongst the Virgins, as
many foolish, as wise: Mat. 8.12. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast
out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Isa.
33.14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Hypocrites that are in the Church, and
externally in Covenant, shall possess the hottest place in Hell. Will our
Adversaries that apply the Seal, and take into Covenant their way, be so bold,
as to say, that all those they admit to Baptism are true Believers, and
Gospel-penitents? Do not many of them prove Apostates? And are not many of them
cast out of their Churches, and delivered over to Satan? And may they not have
cunning Hypocrites among them that enjoy many Privileges with them, and such
as they thought to be effectually Called?

2. If they say that an outward Call be urged, as necessary to the obtaining an
Interest in the Promise, then the natural Seed of Believers enjoy this Calling
virtually in and with their Parents, with whom they are confederate, which they
are Called to do, as Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Where we have a solemn way of the
People visibly standing before the Lord, to enter into Covenant with him, and
they had their little ones with them, as confederates with their Parents, and
so part of those that were separated and Called to be the distinct People of
the Lord, Members of the Church in covenant with him.

2. Answ. And what I judge the fullest: That that Restriction, As many as the
Lord shall call, pertains only to those that are afar off, and has no respect
to these here spoken unto, or to their children: If we consider, the Apostle
does add this, partly to discover the glorious Intention of the Grace of God in
carrying over the Promise and the Covenant of Grace under the new
administration unto the Gentiles, who were accounted afar off, and also to give
those he spoke unto the greater, and the more ample encouragement, to accept
of, and close in with his Exhortation, to repent and to believe. As thus, If
God will be so gracious to them that are afar off, as upon their repentance to
admit them, and their children, into covenant with him; why do ye doubt and
fear? Both you and your children are in covenant with him already. They that
trouble us with the Dust of their false Glosses, to blind the Eyes of the
Simple, and to darken clear Scriptures by all means, would have that Clause to
be applied to all the three Subjects, viz. They, their children, and those afar
off when Called, then the Promise is theirs; but that the Apostle means and
restrains this only to those that are afar off, I shall evince by several
Reasons, which if ponderously thought upon, may give good satisfaction herein.

1. Calling of Persons supposes such that are at a distance off; therefore it
must peculiarly and only belong to them that were afar off, (...) -- In this
Channel runs the Stream of Expositors, those that be afar off, they mean the
Gentiles in opposition to the Jews that were nigh. Thus the Scripture does
distinguish between the Jews, and the Gentiles, Isa. 57.19. I create the fruit
of the lips; peace, peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is near:
Here is a blessed Promise of the Grace of God, in reference unto the Calling of
the Gentiles, that were said to be afar off, in opposition to the Jews that
were nigh. They were nigh to God, and they and their children were in covenant:
I but said the Lord, I will create the fruit of the lips; peace to those that
are afar off, viz. the Gentiles. Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13, 17. Wherefore remember that
ye being in time passed uncircumcision by that which is called the circumcision
in the flesh made by hands; that at that time ye were without Christ, being
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of
promise, and without God in the world: But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were
sometimes far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. This was the state of
the Gentiles, they were far off; I but the Jews at that time were nigh. And
came, and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were
nigh, viz. the Jews, Children of the Covenant, God was their God, and the God
of their Children: I but the Gentiles were Strangers from the Commonwealth of
Israel, not in covenant with God, and afar off; they be called, as we see in
the Scripture, those that be remote and distant, and must be meant in this Text.

2. What rational account can be assigned, or can any give why the Apostle
should here mention the Children, if children here, the Seed of the faithful
that be in Covenant, should not be meant of the Gentiles. Those two Members of
the distinction, you that are nigh, and those that are afar off, would take in
all persons in the world; and frustra sit per plura, etc. the Children of these
would be found either afar off, or nigh, one of those terms, would have
involved them all; the mentioning of the Children must be an impertinency, if
it were not for some other reason. There are some I know for a shift (this
bearing hard upon them) will urge that imprecation, Mat. 27.25. but it is
improbable, that all that were the hearers of this Sermon, did join in that
dreadful wish, for many of them were strangers, and lived remote from
Jerusalem. However the Apostle presses them all alike to repent, and to yield
subjection to Christ, by an argument from the Covenant, which carries weight
enough with it, though they had never been guilty of that horrid imprecation.
This argument of the Covenant has been pressed at another time to prevail upon
the Jews to the same duty of repentance, Acts 3.19, 20, 25. Repent ye
therefore, and be converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus
Christ which before was preached unto you. In this verse he does encourage them
from a promise, and observe the rare Motive, ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant, which God made with our fathers, saying unto
Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the kindred of the earth be blessed. This
extends to them that were afar off, not only the kindred of the Jews, but also
the kindred of the Gentiles, should partake of the blessing of Abraham, viz. of
the Covenant made with Abraham. Gal. 3.14. That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles, (the blessing of Abraham's Covenant through Jesus Christ)
whose blood was the blood of the Covenant.

3. The Apostle does here fix his argument, in the benefit that will redound
unto them, and to their posterity by their submission to the Gospel
Administration; by this he does Emphatically press them to it. Oh! what an
encouraging and cogent Argument does this Apostle (by a divine instinct) urge
them withal, such a one, that poor awakened souls, ready to sink into
desperation could not tell how to reject or withstand. This seems to be the
genuine sense of it, you are greatly troubled for sin, in general, and some of
you have been guilty of that dreadful sin, of a malicious pouring out of the
incorruptible and sacred blood of the Son of God, and crucifying the Lord of
Glory, therefore have highly deserved that his blood should be upon your heads,
and upon the heads of your Children for ever; and since you have instead of
reverencing, killed the Lord of the Vineyard, you have dreadfully provoked God
to turn you out of it for ever; but if after all, you will but submit to him
that you have crucified, it shall not be so, your deserts though never so great
and crying, shall never be given unto you; but you shall still be to the Lord a
chosen and a peculiar People, the Church and the People of God; to you and your
Children the Promise shall still continue, and all under a better
Administration than ever; because there is now abundance more of grace, and of
the Spirit to be poured out, you and your Children shall have the first
experience of it. Oh how sweetly does the Apostle here entice and allure them
to accept of the Seasonable offer made unto them.

4. That interpretation certainly that renders this Argument of the Apostle, to
the Jews (to prevail upon them to the duty exhorted unto) to be a
discouragement unto them, and to dishearten them in their submitting to the
Gospel-Administration, rather than an encouragement, is not to be admitted.
That which does contradict, or at leastwise greatly impede, and obstruct the
design of the Apostle, must not be entertained. What was the design of the
Apostle, but to persuade these poor lost creatures to accept of Christ, and his
Administration that was taking place. Therefore that he might obtain his end
(said he) the Promise is to you, and your Children, for both were concerned in
the blood of Christ; and we may rationally suppose, these weeping bleeding
sinners were not only concerned for themselves, but for their Children also.
They might well deliberate in themselves thus, what will become of us, I and of
our miserable offspring too? Why says the Apostle, here is that that may
allay all the amazing and confounding tumult of your self-condemning hearts,
the Promise is to you, and your Children. The Apostle did see that their
Soul-disease, had so sunk their Spirits, and they were so ready to faint, that
they wanted the highest Cordial that could be poured into them, and without
this ingredient of their Children, it could never have revived them. This was
the opening of a comfortable door of hope, in their pinching and affrighting
valley of Achor.

I have wondered sometimes, how our Friends the Anabaptists can support their
minds, when they behold their dear dying Infants, ready to expire and to give
up the ghost; to restrain the interest of the Children of these Jews in the
Promise, to the time of their calling, could not but be a considerable
discouragement unto them from coming under this Administration, rather than an
encouragement. That it would have been so I shall give two Reasons to prove it.

1 This would make their exchange to be for the worse, and not the better; for
the Covenant under which they were before, did run to them, and their Seed, but
this runs otherwise to the great disadvantages of the Children, and the great
discouragement of the Parents. Children by this way of Interpretation are
excluded and dismissed the Covenant till their call. This could not but have a
deep regret upon the hearts of these Parents, that were well instructed into
their Childrens Covenant-right with them, and did so strongly depend upon it as
they did.

2. This would put their Children into the same condition, with those afar off,
the restriction equally taking hold of the Children of the Jews, with the
Gentiles and Heathens yet afar off, which would sound harshly in the Ears of
the Jews.

If it were so, of what import must the Argument be but of this, Viz. If ye
will now, ye awakened trembling Jews believe in Christ, and come under his
Administration, the Promise shall continue unto you, but your Children shall be
cut off and turned out of this privilege, they shall be in the same condition
of the rest of the Pagan world; when they hereafter, and any of the Heathen
shall be called, then they may have a part in the same Promise too, and not
till then. This being contained in that Interpretation, whether it would not in
the nature of the Argument, rather drive them off, then draw them on, let any
impartial person judge. Was this a probable way to comfort and support, these
self-condemned finners, to deliver such a heavy message unto them, as to wrest
from out of their bosoms, and to rend all their Children out of the Covenant of
grace, and turn them into the herd of those that are afar off, that were out of
Covenant, without God and having (remaining in that condition) no hope in the
world? Ephesians. 2.12. This would be but to add affliction to the afflicted, and to
cast a wonderful stumbling Block in the way of these Jews.

But the true and sound Interpretation gives them choice relief, and removes
all impediments out of their way, leaving them no remora to obstruct or retard
the Apostles exhortation unto them. The Promise is already to you, and to your
Children, as you are Jews, which Promise shall be confirmed to you and your
Children if you now believe. I the Apostle, that he might give them the highest
encouragements, tells them furthermore, that the Promise shall be extended to
those that are afar off, even to so many as the Lord in any part of the world
shall call, and they, and their Children shall partake of the Covenant made
with them. Here is the full breast of the Gospel laid open for to hang upon to
suck and be satisfied; here is the fountain opened, and not only the Parents,
but the Children also invited unto it.

It is a good observation, that a learned Man here observes (says he) hic enim
Judaei aliis praeferuntur, quia sunt velut primogeniti in Dei familia, imo
singulari privilegio Segregati, tunc erant a reliquis omnibus; ergo legitimum
ordinem Petrus observat, quin Judaeis assignat priores honoris parts: Quod
illis filios adjungit, pendet ex verbis promissionis, Ero Deus tuus, et seminis
tui post te. Genesis 17.17.

Having spoke thus much to clear up my way for a Doctrine, I come to propound
that great truth, that is obviously comprehended in this text for our comfort
and improvement. There be indeed two eminet doctrines in the text, I shall name
both, but fix only upon one.

First Doctrine, That the Children of believing Parents, as such, are taken
into Covenant with God with their Parents.

Second Doctrine, the Covenant being made with Believers and their Children, is
a very great obligation and inducement; to repent and to accept of the new
Administration of the Covenant. This the Apostle does strongly and aptly urge,
upon the convinced Jews unto this great duty. But I shall not stand upon this
truth, my business is with the other.

This is the Doctrine I would by the help of God treat of.

That the Children of believing Parents, as such, are taken into Covenant with
their Parents. This the Apostle positively and comfortably asserts, the
Covenant of Promise that is to the Parent, is also to the children; they be
both involved in one and the same gracious Covenant. God does not take in the
Parent, and exclude the child; but he admits both into this blessed holding, by
the golden rod of his grace. This inheritance has a grant with an irrepealable
Intaile, upon the Seed and offspring. Believers and their Seed are in the
Covenant of grace with God, by this the Child holds in capite from him from
whom he does descend. This is a Doctrine that is violently opposed by those
that venture something boldly to contract, and restrain the Covenant into a
narrower compass, than ever the Grace of God in constituting of it intended, by
turning (what they can) covenanted Infants into the same miserable Wild Field,
with the Seed of Infidels and Pagans. But this is very plain to every Eye that
will observe the Scriptures, that when ever the Lord was pleased to enter into
a Covenant of Grace with the Parents, he did also with the Children, Genesis 12.1,
2, 3. Now the Lord said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy
kindred, and from thy fathers house, into a land that I shall show thee. And I
will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name
great; and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and
curse them that curse thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be
blessed. Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my covenant betwixt me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant; to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. This is not to last for a time, or
for an Age only, but for ever, even to the utmost point of time, until the
Mediator (in whose hands this Covenant is) shall perfectly accomplish his Work.
Ver. 19. And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou
shall call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him. Acts 3.25. Ye are the
children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers,
saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the children of the earth be
blessed: viz. All Nations. here we see, He was not to be a Covenant-Father only
to the Nation of the Jews, but also to those of the Gentiles; all of them that
should be called, and converted unto God, by the preaching of the Gospel, they
were to be impaled in Abraham's Covenant, and he was to be their Father, Romans
11.17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
olive tree, were graffed in among them, and with them partakest of the root and
fatness of the olive tree. Here must be a graffing in, suitable to the casting
out or breaking off; that cannot be, unless the Gentiles and their Children
(their Spriggs) be graffed in, as the Jews and their Children were broken off,
Gal. 3.14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles (through
Jesus Christ;) that we might receive the promise of the Spirit: Viz. The
Blessing of Abraham in his Covenant might through Christ be brought over unto
the Gentiles.

The Lord Jesus was the great Seed of the Covenant, and the Mediator of it, and
through the offusion of his Blood this Covenant is conferred upon the Gentiles,
according to many Evangelical Promises, made before the Actual Exhibition and
Incarnation of the Son of God, our Emmanuel, God with us. These are a few of
that Cloud of Witnesses, that might have been brought to prove this Doctrine;
let them suffice for the present, many more will occur in our Discourse.

In the handling of this Point I would do these things.

I. Open the Doctrine something more. II. Lay down the Demonstrations of it to
prove it. III. Give some Reasons of it. IV. Make a little suitable Use of it.
The First General Particular, The opening the Doctrine: To do this, I shall
propound some Questions, and give the Answers unto them. This may tend very
much to clear up this Important and Evangelical Proposition.

1. Quest. What Covenant are we here to understand to be the Covenant made with
Abraham, that Believers, and their Seed, are enclosed in together?

Answ. It is the Covenant of Grace: This is the Promise, or Covenant, in our
Text, that refers to that in Genesis 17.7. It is not a Covenant of Works, (as some
would have it to be.) Our Brethren the Anabaptists, would by all means have
this to be a Covenant of Works, or a Covenant only relating to carnal and
outward Mercies and Blessings, and that, because should this be granted to be a
Covenant of Grace, then we have gained the Point, as to the Seal of the
Covenant, pertaining to Infants. Our great Champion has lately labored
extremely to violate this Text, and to pull down that blessed Foundation God
has laid for us to build upon, as to our selves and little ones; by his so
doing, he offered bold attempts to subvert many of the choice Texts, that
appertain to this. To promote his Error, and Confidence, he would have this in
substance to be the same Covenant of Works which the Lord made with Adam; but I
shall have occasion (though but a poor Pismire) to meet with this great Goliath
that has given me several Challenges in his public Pulpit, in the hearing of
his Magnifying Auditory.

Methinks, if Men did but with a serious and impartial Eye, view that Text that
mine refers unto, such is the nature, the tenor, frame, and circumstances of
it, that they durst not call this into question: But how ready are Men to shut
their Eyes against that Light, that would discover unto them something, that
they are too tenacious of. It is sad to see how some good Men, that would be
thought great Admirers of the Grace of God, and yet do set themselves in this
place against this high Expression of his Grace in his Covenant. This is the
same Covenant of Grace, for the substance of it, that is now on foot in the New
Testament, (since Christ came, and has sent down his Holy Spirit to enlighten
us into the knowledge of his Grace, which runs through the Covenant, whose
Blood was the Blood of the Covenant,) made with those Fathers according to the
Flesh, of whom Christ came, who is blessed for ever.

Here because my furious Adversary (right or wrong) will have this to be but a
Covenant of Works, or of outward Blessings, and will not suffer one Drop of the
pure, and special Grace of God in a Covenant-way, provided for the Salvation of
the Elect, nor any Emanation of Gods Love to be through this Channel
transmitted into the World: I shall endeavor to prove by several things, that
this is a Covenant of Grace; if we can out make good this, (I judge) we shall
gain a good Point, and drive our Opponent out of one of his strongest Posts,
and shall take that, which he runs to as his impregnable Fort. The Lord open
our Eyes to see the Truth in this great Affair, with this I think a great deal
of Building will stand or fall.

I shall briefly lay down some Reasons, that to me do carry the Matter beyond
all doubt, that the Covenant in Genesis 17.7. was a Covenant of Grace.

1. Reason May be taken from Abraham, the Person chosen out from the rest of
the World, to partake of this distinguishing Privilege. God did appear to him,
and did call him to such a great Favor: Thus to take him and his Children, and
his Family, into covenant with himself, and to make him the Father of the
Faithful in all Ages and Generations; What could move the Lord to this, but his
naked Love, Mercy, and Grace? This is that which God did do for him, Infinite
Grace did single him out, for this blessed Covenant-work, calling him out from
the midst of a wicked and idolatrous People, and Generation, Acts 7.2, 3. And
he said, Men, brethren, and fathers hearken, The God of glory appeared unto our
father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, And
said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into
the land which I shall show thee. Here we have the Lord selecting (through
discriminating Grace and Goodness) this Father from the rest of the ignorant
blind World where he was, and it was that he might confer this honor upon him,
and his, in making this Everlasting Covenant of Grace with them. He that called
him out of Grace did it much for this end, and purpose, that he might make and
establish this Covenant of Grace with him.

2. Reason. Because of the quality of the Persons, betwixt whom this Covenant
was made, let us but consider the state of Man, when this Covenant was made,
and then we may easily see the quality of those, between whom was made this
happy Covenant. Man was not now in his perfect Station, in the which he was set
down, as he came out of the pure Mint, with a perfect Draught and Impression of
the Divine Image upon him; but in an apostate sinful state, and Abraham though
called, and sanctified, in an imperfect state. Therefore this Covenant must be
made between God and Abraham, not as God is a Creator, and as Men are
innocent; thus it was in the Covenant of Works made with Adam. But God as
gracious, merciful, pardoning Sin through the Blood of the Covenant, and Men as
sinful, vile, indebted to Divine Justice, and obnoxious to the Wrath of God. If
Abraham had been as perfect as Adam was, when the Lord made a Covenant of Works
with him, then we should have some ground to give heed to those, that would
have this to be a Covenant of Works. I demand of my Opponent, where God made a
Covenant of Works with his Redeemed People, since the Fall of Man? As God ever
dealt with his People in a Covenant-way, since the Fall, so they are capable of
no other way, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6, 8. None eye pitied thee, to do any of these things
unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but when thou wast cast out in the
open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born. And
when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, I said unto thee
when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy
blood, Live. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time
was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness: yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, thou
becamest mine. What Covenant can it be, but a Covenant of Grace, that such
polluted Creatures can be taken into? And thus it was with Abraham, when God
found, called him, appeared unto, and entered into Covenant with him.

3. Reason. Because of the matter promised here unto Abraham in this Covenant;
God does promise to be a God to him, and to his Seed after him for ever. Oh!
this is the great matter promised on Gods part; this holds forth more than a
Legal Covenant; Is there a more gracious, and a more comprehensive Promise, and
fuller of the Grace of God, in all the Book of God, than this? Here the Lord
does give, and make over himself, yea all his glorious Attributes, Names,
Titles, Grace, Love, all Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal Blessings; here God
does give himself, the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, the whole Nature of
God, and all the Persons, the Godhead with all the Attributes of that Nature,
and all the Offices of those Persons: Thus says Judicious Cotton in his
Treatise upon the Covenant, The Lord through this Covenant gives himself, and
all his, to his covenanted People through all the Generations of the World. I
would willingly understand what may be the reason (if there can be any given)
when this Excellent Promise is repeated in many other places of Scripture, that
it is allowed to be of Grace, and not here, notwithstanding (if I mistake not)
when this Promise is inserted in other places, it is often taken from this,
Jer. 24.7. and 31.33. and 32.38. Ezekiel. 11.20. and 34.24, 31. and 36.38. and
37.27. Here we have the same Promise, and full of Grace, and why not in Genesis
17.7. Oh! there would be great ground of fear, should this be granted; for then
the Seal of the Covenant must follow, as we shall see in the close of this
Discourse. This is that Covenant that Believers and their Seed be under, since
the Ascension of the Messiah, and that we may clearly discern it, God is
pleased to use the old Phrase and Form of the Promise, 2 Cor. 6.18. Heb. 8.10.
The same Language and Dialect, we have speaking of the New Jerusalem
Privileges and Glorious State, Rev. 21.3. And I heard a voice out of heaven,
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be
their God.

There is the other Branch of the Promise here, that we must by the Rule of
Relatives understand. If God does give himself to Abraham and his Seed, then he
takes them, and chooses them to be his People, and Portion for ever; when the
Lord is pleased to say, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, this must
reeds be involved, thou and thy seed shall be my people for ever; and so it is
relatively expressed often in the Covenant-Language: Now I pray, is not all this
of pure Grace?

4. Reason. This is a Covenant made in the Hands of Christ the Mediator, and
it was confirmed in him, the great Seed of the Covenant, and the Head and
Foundation of all those that God does take into Covenant with him. This
Covenant was ratified and confirmed by the Efficacy and Blood of the Mediator,
otherwise neither Abraham nor Isaac could have been saved; and hence the Blood
of Christ is called the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. Now the
God of peace who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great
sheperd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, etc. God
in making this Covenant had respect to the efficacious and meritorious Blood of
his Son, otherwise he could never have made such a Promise here, of being such
a gracious God to Abraham, and his Seed for ever. It is judiciously said of a
Learned Author, that in this Covenant the Lord takes the chiefest of the Seed
of Abraham ( viz. the Lord Jesus Christ) to be the Mediator and Surety of it,
and so through him are all the Promises and Blessings of the Covenant conveyed
unto Abraham and his Seed, (his faithful Seed) all the World over; therefore he
is called the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. and 8.6. And as it was
made with Abraham and his Seed in the Hands of Christ, so when it was
translated unto the Gentiles, it was by, and through him, and confirmed unto
them by him, Gal. 3.14. That the blessing of Abraham may come on the Gentiles
(through Jesus Christ;) that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith. The Blessing of Abraham, viz. the Covenant of Abraham: Romans 15.8. Now I
say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God,
to confirm the promises made unto the fathers. He was the Minister of
Circumcision, the great Instructor of the Jews, and did first confirm the
Covenant to them, and then to the Gentiles. Ver. 9. And that the Gentiles might
glorify God for his mercy; viz. for the Mercy of God through Christ, by and
through whom, the blessed Covenant was confirmed unto them. So that we may see,
that Christ was the Mediator of this Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed;
witness those many Types of Christ which were annexed unto it, viz. Their
expiatory and propitiatory Sacrifices injoined the whole Congregation in case
of Sin; also the two Goats, one for a Sin-offering for the whole Congregation,
and the other the Scapegoat, over which all the Sins of the Children of Israel
were to be confessed by the Priests, etc.

5. Reason. Because this is a Covenant that freely holds out, and offers pardon
of Sin without Works; therefore then it cannot be a Covenant of Works. It holds
out pardon of Sin freely, by believing in Christ. The Covenant of Works (we
know) holds forth no pardon of Sin, no Mercy to Transgressors that violate and
break the smallest point of it, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. I, but this Covenant
does, it holds out pardon of Sin to the vilest and worst of Sinners, to those
that did barbarously and maliciously pour out the Blood of the Mediator of this
Covenant, Exodus 2.37, 38, 39. This is a Covenant that did freely offer
remission and pardon of Sin, without the Works of the Law. Abraham himself
through this Covenant, by believing in the Mediator and Testator of it, was
justified and pardoned; read Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. That must surely be a
Covenant of Grace, that brings in remission of Sin, and Justification by
Christ, through Faith: God did promise to be a God to him, and his Seed, a God
to pardon.

6. Reason. Because of that Seal the Lord did command to be affixed to this
Covenant, which was Circumcision; Who can deny, but that the Lord did command
this Seal, Sign, or Token, to be set to the Covenant to confirm and establish
it? Genesis 17.10. This is my covenant, which ye shall keep between me, and you,
and thy seed after thee; Every man-child among you shall be circumcised. This
God did Institute, as the Initiating Ordinance; by this they were to enter, as
visible Persons into this Covenant, or to be visibly discovered, and owned such
that were in covenant with God, and in a covenant way devoted and given up unto
him. Let me here ask this Question, Did not this Seal of the Covenant denote,
that that Covenant it did appertain unto, to be a Covenant of Grace? It is next
to a Prodigy to me, that any should Assert, that the Covenant that God made
with Abraham, was a Covenant of Works, and yet Circumcision was the Seal of it,
for so it is expressly commanded of God to be, as we have seen. Did we ever read
of this Seal amx'd to the Covenant of Works? No; in the perfect state that Man
was in, when God entered into a Covenant of Works, there was no need of, nor
occasion for this Sacrament or Seal.

Let us but a little consider the Uses and Words of this Seal, and we may see,
that that must be a Covenant of Grace, to which it is affixed as a Seal; for
either it holds forth our need of Grace, or the merciful provision of Grace
prepared for us. I shall only mention a very few Particulars.

1. This does intimate unto us, that vile polluted State of Sin, that we were
conceived and transmitted into the World in. This may give us the knowledge of
our undone State by Nature, how God may loath, and abhor us for ever. The
cutting off of the Foreskin of the Flesh, discovers the filthiness of our
Flesh, and how by Sin we have forfeited our selves, and all into the hands of
Justice, that we be filthy and guilty Sinners.

2. This sets forth the gracious Purposes and Intentions of a merciful God, to
wash, and to cleanse, and to sanctify us by his Grace, and by the Blood of
Sprinkling: The Blood that did follow the circumcising Instrument did clearly
signify, that therefore cleansing and sanctification are set forth by
Spiritual Circumcision. When God does graciously promise to wash and to
sanctify, he does promise to circumcise the Heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord
thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Col.
2.11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands,
in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of
Christ: viz. By the Sanctification of the Blood and Spirit of Christ. Phil.
3.3. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit: We have the
inward Spiritual Circumcision of the Heart, which was graciously signified by
that Seal of the Grace of God belonging to that Covenant of Grace, the Lord was
pleased to make with Abraham and his Seed.

3. To denote, and set forth, the need we have of the Blood of Christ to
justify us, and that God would justify us through his Blood. And this Abraham
had a special eye unto, and his Faith was firmly fixed upon, after God had made
this Covenant with him and his Seed, and fixed this significant Seal unto it.
This might be evidenced by many Scriptures, Romans 14.1, 2. In many Verses in
that Chapter; therefore it is that Circumcision is called, a seal of the
righteousness of faith, of that righteousness that is apprehended, received,
and applied by faith; certainly then that Covenant that has such a significant
gracious Seal added unto it, can be nothing less, or else, than a Covenant of
Grace.

7. Reason. To prove that this was a Covenant of Grace may be the great Result
and Period of it, which is no less than Heaven; this is obviously implied, in
the comprehensiveness of this Promise we have here, Genesis 17.7. I will be a God
unto thee; and unto thy seed after thee; I will be a God unto thee, and all
thine Elect Seed for ever; I will be a God to love thee, to provide for thee,
to be with thee, and with my self eternally to reward thee. How vain, and
frivolous is our Challenger, in Asserting that this Covenant made with Abraham,
was not a Covenant of Grace? Because the great Promises of it were outward
Blessings, and the greatest of all was the Land of Promise, (Canaan.) What, is
not that a greater Promise, for God to promise himself to be a God to Abraham,
and his Seed? Is not an Infinitely Glorious, and Blessed God, better than
Canaan, than all the Canaans and Paradises in the World, yea, than thousands of
Worlds? But further to see the ignorance of this Man in the Scripture, and in
such Expressions, which denote a higher good intended by God, than what they
themselves may import; as this Promise is explained in the New Testament: When
God did make the Promise of an Earthly Canaan to Abraham and his Seed, he did
ultimately intend a better Land than this, viz. an Heavenly one; when the Lord
does promise this Canaan; he does promise Heaven, which this was a Type of; the
main thing and good, that the Lord designed for his People, by this Promise,
was Heaven, and that they should be eternally saved. Abraham did so understand
it, and others of the Fathers, and so set their Hearts upon, and raised up an
Expectation of that blessed City and Country that was above; that what they had
here were but dark Shadows, and cloudy Representations of what was to come,
Heb. 11.10, 13, 14, 15, 16.

8. Reason. To prove that the Covenant made here with Abraham, was a Covenant
of Grace, is viz. Because of that Obedience, the Lord did both require and
accept at the hands of Abraham, in this Covenant. There was Obedience, and
there was Service, that the Lord did command, and expected from Abraham; this
will determine, whether this be a Covenant of Works, or of Grace. If it be a
Covenant of Works, it requires nothing less than perfect Obedience, nothing
short of it will or can be accepted therein, as it was in the Covenant made
with Adam; Do this and live. I, but now here in Abraham's Covenant, the Lord
does call for, and accept of sincere and upright Obedience, as in Genesis 17.1, 2.
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to him, and
said, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect. ( viz. right
or sincere.) And I will make my covenant betwixt me and thee. Every one knows,
that though Abraham for Grace, and walking with and obeying God, was an
excellent Man; yet he was not a sinless, perfect Man; he had the perfection of
sincerity, but not a sinless perfection, such an one as Adam had in Innocence.
In this Covenant, Abraham did walk before God, he did please God, and he was
accepted by God in virtue of this Covenant, which could never have been, had it
not been a Covenant of Grace, that had Christ to be the Mediator of it, in
whom he believed and found acceptance.

Thus Beloved, I promise my self, that I have given you such Reasons, to prove
that this Covenant was of Grace, (which the Lord made with Abraham, and his
Seed for an Everlasting Covenant,) as cannot well be denied.

2. Quest. Whether some only, or all the Children of Believers, are in this
Covenant of Grace, with their Parents? Whether this Covenant does enclose, and
impale them all or not.

Answ. All they that are the Seed of the Faithful, the Lord takes into this
Covenant with their Parents: God does not take some, or many, but all; they be
all in Covenant with the Lord, until they eject themselves. When the Lord made
this Covenant, and took Abraham into it, he took all his Seed with him. Cain
was in covenant as well as Abel, and Ishmael as well as Isaac, though some have
from Electing Love, and Special Grace, a greater Blessing from the Covenant
than others, as you will see presently. This Covenant runs to Abraham, and his
Seed, and to his Seeds Seed. Let not us curtail, and contract Gods Covenant,
and confine it to narrower bounds than ever the Lord designed. There be some
Men that talk great Words of the Grace of God, and yet in the mean time, are
great Enemies to the copiousness, and amplitude of it largely expressed in his
Covenant.

3. Quest. Some may say, How can that he, that the natural Seed of such that be
in covenant, should be in covenant too? Do not we see by sad experience, that
many of the Children of pious Parents, prove very profane, and wicked? What do
you hold falling from Grace? Here is a Rock that many mistaken Persons do split
themselves upon, in respect of falling into Error in this Affair, and many
through ignorance do stumble upon.

Answ. More generally we must know, that as to the Posterity of Abraham, there
are two sorts of them, though both in corenant. There is a Seed according to
the Flesh, a carnal Offspring and Generation; and they were the Seed of
Abraham, and did highly value themselves upon this, and boasted much upon it,
Mat. 3.9. And think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to be our
father. Bear not too much upon this; think not that this will excuse you, you
may be the Seed of Abraham, and yet Enemies to the Messiah; for it was the Seed
of Abraham, that did hate, persecute, crucify, and slay him, Acts 2. So there
is a Seed after the Spirit, that be pious and holy, and walk in the Steps of
Abraham, and in the Paths of the Faith of Abraham.

There is a double Paternity, there is the begetting Abraham, and a believing
Abraham; so there is a twofold Sonship, Children according to the Flesh, and
Heirs according to the Promise, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Not as though the word of God
had taken none effect. For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel:
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called. That is, They which are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are
counted for the seed. Viz. In short, though all that be in covenant are
Children in a proper sense, yet all are not the Spiritual Seed; for we see
here, that the Carnal and Spiritual are called the Seed of Abraham, ver. 7. yet
do not all walk in the Steps of Abraham, nor partake of the special Grace that
Abraham did. The Apostle does here tell us, that we must not think, that the
word of God had taken no effect, because not all, nay not (compacatively) many
that are the Seed, the natural Seed of Abraham, did believe, and embrace it;
therefore he does distinguish of the Seed of Abraham, them that be under the
Purpose of God to Salvation, and are chosen to Eternal Life, they do, and shall
believe, and become the holy, the spiritual, and peculiar Seed. Abraham had two
Sons, Ishmact and Isaac, and both taken into covenant; I, but the Line of
Election was to run through the Lines of Isaac.

That we may something more fully open this Matter to your satisfactions, and
that you may rightly understand, how any may be said to be in this Covenant of
Grace, and yet in a State of Nature, and in the First Adam; I shall distinguish
herein, this well understood would contribute greatly to put an end to this
Controversy. Some may say the Covenant is full of gracious Promises, and what
right can any have unto the same, that be but the natural Seed? Are they
Promises of saving Grace, or outward Privileges, or temporal Mercies? Or what
are they? How is this to be understood, that the Promise is to the Children of
those that are in covenant, if by Children are meant the natural Seed?

Answ. By Promise, I understand the Covenant of Grace (as I have said) called
also the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. and because of this, they that be in
it are called the Children of the Promises: Now the Promise, or the Covenant,
is taken two ways; and so there are two ways of being in the Covenant.

1. Strictly, And that which Divines call Foedus Internum, or Pars Foederis
Interna, the Internal Covenant, or the spiritual part of the Covenant, that
which does contain Promises of spiritual Blessings, and saving Graces, such as
Justification, Reconciliation; Regeneration, Adoption, Persevetance, and
Glorification, or Eternal Life; and hence we read, that God will give a new
Heart, that he will take away the Stony Heart out of the Flesh, and will give a
Heart of Flesh, that he will circumeise the Heart to love, and fear him, that
he will write his Law in their Hearts, and they shall never depart from him,
that he will sprinke clean Water upon them, and they shall be clean, and from
all their filthiness and Idols will he cleanse them, that he will blot out all
their Iniquities, and cast their Sins into the depth of the Sea, and remember
them no more. This is the Internal, and spiritual part of the Covenant. These
be the Excellent Promises of Special Grace, that God will accomplish and fulfill
to all the Elect, both Adult, and Infants that die in their Infancy.

2. Sometimes it is taken more largely, which Divines call Foedus Externum, or
Pars Foederis Externa, the External Covenant, or the External part of the
Covenant, they being both in truth, but Branches of one and the same Covenant.
This External Part contains Promises of many choice Mercies, and Privileges,
which God out of the bounty of his Grace, bestows upon People that be in
covenant with him, which he does not bestow upon the rest of the World, which
be not taken into covenant with him. One may be in covenant, and partake of
many precious and eminent Promises; and yet have no saving and special Grace,
or Interest in God. So it was with a Multitude of the Jews, yea, with the
greatest part of them, and that when our Lord and Savior himself was amongst,
and conversed with them, Romans 2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew, that is one
outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: But he
is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. Viz. He
is not internally, and savingly a Jew, he is but only an external one,
partaking of the external Blessings of the Covenant, enjoying the circumcision
of the Flesh, not that of the Spirit. When our Lord and Savior was in the
Flesh, he had much to do with such Jews, that boasted themselves of their
outward Privileges, which were great; but neglected the internal part of the
Covenant, which he did caution them against; but did not shut them out of the
Covenant, but left them as he found them.

This I know is a distinction though never so solid and sound; yet the
Anabaptists will not take it down: Notwithstanding, I know not how they
themselves can subsist without it, in their Covenant-way. They take into the
Covenant, and affix the Seal of the Covenant to those that be Adult, profess
their Faith in, and Obedience to Christ, and their repentance and renouncing
their Infantbaptism, if they have had any. I, but here is the Question, Are all
that do so, internally and savingly in covenant with the Lord? Dare they be so
bold as to say so? If they dare, I shall offer two things unto them.

1. This is against the plain and evident Truth of the Word of God. Is not the
Visible Church otherwise represented in the Scriptures unto us? what are all
their Israel of the peculiar Seed of Isaac? Is this agreeable to the Parables
of the Tares, of the Net, of the Wedding, of the Virgins, and of the variety of
the Vessels in the Church Visible, and in the House of God? These things are so
well known to all that read, and consider what they read, that I need not stand
upon them. The Lord Jesus in his little Church, and Family, had one Devil: They
be happy Churches indeed, in whom there are no Hypocrites; and from which never
any do fall off, and prove Apostates. Oh how many out of the purest Churches
shall increase the number of the Damned!

2. This is against too great experiences. How many have we seen to turn out of
the way of Truth into Error? Many that after they have seemed to be washed from
their Sins, and have escaped the Pollutions that are in the World through Lust,
by the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are again entangled, and
turned with the Dog unto the Vomit, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. How many be there,
that the unclean Spirit does but go out of, and after returns again, and takes
a greater possession than ever? So that the last end is worse than the
beginning, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Let me apply my self unto you, my Brethren of
the Anabaptist Persuasion; Have you no Revolters among you? None that fall from
Truth to Error, from Strictness to Looseness, from an outward holy
Conversation to Profaneness? Have you never any occasion to exert your
Authority in Excommunication? Have you never any rotten Members to cut off? I
am misinformed, if my good Neighbor be not something good and frequent at this
Work, after he has laid his Hands upon his Converts, and rebaptized
Proselytes, no wonder when we consider his numerous and easy Admissions. But
what I do speak of one, that is but the Head of an overgrown Schism, (his
Church, as it is called,) declared to be so, not only by Congegrational, but
also by Anabaptistical Elders. When the Anti-paedobaptists admit any to the
Seals of Church, and Covenant-Fellowship, is it not possible that some false
Brethren may creep in unawares? Jude 4. Some Wolves get into Sheeps-cloathing,
and they be looked upon to be the Vovenant People of God; this is undeniable,
and their revolt proves themselves to have none of the saving special Gifts and
Graces of the same; but at best were only externally in covenant. You will not
pretend to put Seals to Blanks; but you will say, They did appear to us to be
so, and so, and to be in the Covenant of Grace. For my part, I must say, though
I desire to be very careful in my Admissions, yet I have as great a hope, and
as much confidence, about the Salvation of Infants in covenant with God, dying
in their Infancy, as I have in any that I do admit. Here I may reto^^ upon my
Brethren, (because many of your Members that you have taken into covenant, unto
whom you have affixed the Seal, do fall off.) Do you hold falling from Grace?
So that this may be as well objected against you, in your Adult Persons; as
against us in our Infants.

4. Quest. If it be granted, That Children with their Parents be taken into
covenant, even the natural Seed of believing Parents; yet you say, they are but
External Privileges, and Benefits, that many of them do partake of, and a
great number of them fall short of the Spiritual and Eternal Advantages of the
same: Therefore, what do they obtain thereby, seeing he is not a Jew that is
one outwardly, etc.? What profit did Cain reap by being circumcised, or
Ishmael? For (as the Apostle says) circumcision verily profits, if thou keep
the law; but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision, Romans 2.25. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will
punish all them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised, Isa. 9.25.

Answ. They have great Advantages more than others have, that are not so much
as externally in covenant; I will refer you to the Apostle, who propounded and
answered this Question for us, Romans 3.1, 2, etc. He had said in the close of
the Chapter before, to cut off the vain confidence of those that did securely
repose themselves in their External Privileges, that he was not a Jew, that
was one outwardly, etc. He was very sensible what Objection some would make at
that time, therefore he propounds this Question, and returns a free Answer,
What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? I
Answer with the Apostle, first generally, Much every way; and then
particularly, chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles of God,
etc. Thus say some, You stand stiffly to this, that Children be in covenant with
their Parents, and God has taken them into covenant with them, but what are
they the better for it? What advantage does accrue unto them from thence? I
Answer, Much every way. Methinks the Spirit of God foreseeing how the Covenant,
and the Infant-right in it, would be infringed, and invaded in the Times of the
Gospel, did inspire the Apostle here to contradict, and oppose those bold
Usurpers, that should attempt to make Breaches upon the Lords sacred Enclosure.
I could show in many particulars the wonderful advantage that those have, that
are but externally in covenant, above those that are not, and what an
inestimable Favor and Blessing it is to be within the Pale of the Covenant. I
shall mention some of the chief Privileges that such do enjoy.

1. They have the Excellent Oracles of God reposited among them, and committed
unto them; this was the Privilege of the Jews in propatulo, and their great
advantage, which did distinguish them from the rest of the World, and
represented them to all Nations to be a peculiarly happy and dignified People,
Romans 3.2. Much every way: chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles
of God. This the Lord himself declares to be one of their singular
Prerogatives, Deuteronomy. 4.8. And what nation is there so great, that has statutes
and judgments so righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day?
Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments
unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation: as for his judgments, they
have not known them. Therefore from the sense of this wonderful Blessing, the
Psalmist cries out, Praise ye the Lord. To have the custody of Gods Ordinances,
and the use of them, the Word, Sacraments, Worship, Ministry, Pastors after
Gods own Heart, and all the Service of God. Who can express or declare, how
happy the People are, that have such Depositions, and are so distinguished, and
magnified, as to have the Means of Grace, in and by which they may come to know
and learn the Mind of God; to have Ordinances, wherein they may draw nigh to
God; to have a Membership and visible Standing in that Society, where Salvation
is ordinarily dispensed, John 4.22. For salvation is of the Jews. There were
the Means, and no where else, not among the Samaritans; hence the Law was
called the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33.4. Certainly
those that understand in any competent measure, the Excellency of this
Privilege, cannot but adore, and admire God in it, and magnify his Name for
it.

2. Such that be but outwardly in covenant are part of, and go to make up the
Vineyard of the Lord, they be planted in the Lords Vineyard, they be part of
the Garden of the Lord, hedged in, and separated from the rest of the World,
and God does own them to be so. It is no small benefit to be within the Pale of
the Church, and to have a fixed Standing in Zion, Isa. 5.7. For the vineyard of
the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant
plant.

3. They have the Proposals and the Offers of the highest Mercy, they live
under the Overtures of the richest Grace, they be in the Kingdom, and are the
Children of the Kingdom; therefore have the highest Tenders, and the choicest
Invitations to the best of Mercies. They are in the Kingdom, and Salvation is
nigh unto them, the Bosom and the Arms of Grace and Love are always before
their Eyes, and ready to receive and embrace them. After the Days of the
Messiah, the Jews being in covenant with God, their happy Estate was not to be
overlooked, but to be honorably respected, therefore they had the first offer
of Life, and Salvation by Christ after his Ascension. So it was in Acts 2. and
in other places, Acts 3.25, 26. Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the
covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed
shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto you first, God having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of
you from his iniquities. They were yet in covenant, and the Lords Vineyard, and
had this precious Tender of Christ, and Salvation by him, sent unto them to
bring them to Faith and Repentance, before it was sent unto the poor outcast
Gentiles, Acts 13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was
necessary that the word of God should have first been spoken unto you: but
seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Paul the great Apostle of the Gentiles did not
betake himself to them, till his Embassy was rejected by the Jews, unto whom he
was to make his Application. Our gracious Lord when he gave Commission to his
Apostles; to Preach Repentance, and Remission of Sins in his Name, directed
that they should begin at Jerusalem. Oh! how was his Heart upon his
Vovenant People, and how unwilling was he, that their Covenant-State should
expire; therefore he waited upon them to the utmost period of the time, set for
the Patience of God to attend them. Oh! Go, said he, break up, and execute your
Commission in that bloody City, see if they will Repent and Believe, that I may
not lay them wast. The Jews (as is well observed by one) had a double
Privilege before Christ came; they were [Soli,] they were alone, they were the
only Church and People of the Lord and enclosed from all the Nations of the
World; there was a Partition Wall erected between them, and the spurious part
of the World. And at the Ascension of Christ, and the Tenders and Exhibitions
of the Grace of Life, and Salvation, they were [Primi,] they had the first
Effort of Mercy sent and directed unto them.

4. Such have their dwelling, and residence, where the gracious and peculiar
Presence of the Lord is to be enjoyed; such have an Habitation where God has
fixed his Throne of Grace, and where are his delightful Walks, the gracious
presence of the Lord is with his Church and People; those that are his
Covenant-Ones, they have the Signs, and the Symbols of his residence in the
midst of them. His general Presence by a glorious Extension diffuseth and
disposes it self every where; but This is the alone Happiness of his select
People to enjoy, Deuteronomy. 4.7. For what nation is there so great, who has God so
nigh unto them? Great, because nigh. Psalm. 76.1, 2. In Judah is God known: his
name is great in Israel. In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his
dewlling place in Zion. Viz. His peculiar place of residence, Rev. 21.3. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God. Where the Tabernacle of God is,
himself is, and there he will dwell. How happy are they that dwell where God in
a distinct manner does dwell! And this is the Happiness of all those that dwell
within the Bounds of the Covenant.

5. Those that be in covenant, and are Members of the Church, are always
comprehended in, and have the benefit of having a share in the Prayers that are
continually ascending up unto God for all Israel. As it is the Duty of every
sincere and true Believer to make Supplications for himself, and to offer up
this Sacrifice to God with the public Assembly; so to be sure to be very
mindful of Zion, and to be very importunate with the Lord for all the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.6, 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. There is a
continual Cloud of Prayers going up to Heaven for those that are the Lords
Enclosure, for all that are the Dwellers therein; every one, that is internally
in covenant, will be sure to pray for all that are any way in Federal Relation
to God, Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth. There is a continual Stock of Prayer treasuring up for the Church of
God, in which the Infant Seed of Believers have no small Share. What an
unspeakable Benefit is this? To have an Interest in the many Thousands, that
dwell at the Throne of Grace, always putting God in mind of, and pleading with
him the Covenant, Day and Night, for all those that are within the compass of
it.

6. The Election of Grace, does eminently run among, and through the Lords
Covenant-Ones; God has his Election eminently amongst them; the Golden Veins
of Election are chiefly laid and disposed in the Visible Church; there be some
to gather in, and some to build up, when the Lord has gathered up and called
in his Elect in any Place, or among any People, he will cast away the rest:
When all the Mine of Election is spent, then God departs, and transplants his
Gospel, and pitcheth his Tabernacle elsewhere, he knows where the secret Veins
(of those that are eternally chose by him) are to be found: He forsook the
Places where the Seven Churches of Asia had their residence, when he had
brought forth all his Elect: The Jews were not to be rejected, till all the
Remnant of Gods Choice were secured, Ro^ 11.5, 7. Even so then at this present
time also th^^^ is a remnant according to the election of grace. Wh^^ then?
Israel has not obtained that which he seeke^^ for; but the election has
obtained it, and the (...) were blinded. John 4.22. -- salvation is of t^^
Jews. Till God did pluck up the Boundarie^ the Election of Grace did ordinarily
run in t^^ Jewish Channel, though now and then in a ve^^parsimonious manner,
one from without might (...)brought in, as Job, the Eunuch, etc.

7. The Privilege of a General Adoption a^ pertains to those that be in
covenant; there is (...) Special, and there is a General Adoption; and (...) is
a great Favor to have a Standing where ther^ is a General Adoption: This is so
reckoned by the Apostle, Romans 9.14. Who are Israelites; to who^ pertains the
adoption, and the covenants. This is Blessing always attending the Covenant;
hence (...) is that all such have such Names given to them that set out, and
signify their Adopting-relatio^ unto God, their Great and Glorious Father. Le^
us a little consider what Terms of Filiation the Scripture does cloth and
adorn them with, which does demonstrate that great Advancement that (...)
conferred upon them thereby. Nothing ought t^ be of a slight and extenuated
Estimation with us that is greatly magnified and advanced in Divine Writ. The
Body of those, that be in covenan^ with the Lord, though many, far remote and
distant from any peculiar, Special and Internal Fruition, are called

(1.) The Sons of God. He is pleased to accept of the Title of a Father unto
them, Genesis 6.1^. -- the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were
fair. Thus we see how early (because of Covenant Relation) they bore this
Denomination*

(2.) They be called the Children of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Ye are the children
of the Lord your God. They were brought forth in a Foederal Bond, therefore the
whole Mass and Body of them obtained this Appellation: The most Holy, and the
most High God admitted them unto this tall Pinnacle of Honor, of being his
Children.

(3.) Hence it is that all Israel God does call his Son, intimating how
distinguishingly the Lord does assume and appropriate him to himself in this
near Relation, Exodus 4.22. And thou shall say unto Pharaoh, Thus says the
Lord, Israel is my son, even my firstborn. This was to be used as a powerful
Motive to prevail upon Pharaoh, to set Israel free from his cruel Bondage, he
was the Lords. Ver. 23. And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve
me: Will thou be so bold, as to detain in bondage him, that I the Great and
Terrible God do own, and declare to be my Son?

(4.) Hence Ephraim is called Gods dear Son. Covenant Relation is very near,
and so very dear unto God: All those that are in covenant with him, are very
near, and very dear unto him. Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a
pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him. Here is not only Relation, but
Bowels of Affections: Ephraim is not only the Lords dear Bon, but dearly and
deeply beloved of God.

(5.) They be from hence called the Children of the Promise, viz. the Children
of the Covenant. Those that have such an Interest and Title to the Promise, as
to be called the Children of the Promise, being born within the Pale of the
Covenant, they are the Heirs of the Promise descending of such Parents, that do
convey the precious Inheritance unto them.

(6.) They be also called the Children of the Kingdom, born within the
Covenant, and so brought forth in the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Christ in
the World, where he as the great King and Mediator rules, and swayes the
Scepter, Mat. 8.12. We see that those here tha^ shall for want of special
grace, be cast out for ever, yet that does not hinder their being in Covenant,
they are the Children of the Kingdom I might add to all these particulars that
have (...) touched upon under this head, that because of this Covenant Relation,
we read of Childrens bread* Them that are in Covenant, and in the Kingdom of
God, they are the Children, and all the provisions of the Kingdom, in respect
of the precious means of grace, are called Childrens bread; being most
immediately and directly provided by their heavenly Father for them, Mat.
15.26. But he answered and said, it is not meet to take the Children bread, and
to cast it to dogs. These that were not in the Compass of the Covenant, were
called dogs; the Jews were the Children, they being within; the Gentiles in
comparison of them, were like unto dogs being without.

(8.) Those that be in Covenant are honored with high and glorious Titles; and
if we consider what is the nature and dignity of them, we may see that they are
not purely Titular, but are such that do import some rare and renowned
Privilege; I shall name some of these Titles that be ascribed unto them. (1.)
Holy, those that be in Covenant (although but externally so) are called holy,
Deuteronomy. 14.2. For thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God, a people separated
to God from the rest of the World, the Covenant is holy, and those that are
enclosed within it are a holy People, they are the Lords holy, separated ones.
This we have translated into the new Testament upon the new Administration of
the Covenant. 1 Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the
Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband: else were your
Children unclean, but now are they holy. Strange violence is offered to this
Text, to destroy that federal holiness that shines forth in it. The Anabaptists
(one would think) are put greatly to their shifts, in shifting off the force of
this Text from them; when all that they will allow Believers from this Text is,
that if one Parent be but a Believer, then they will free their Children from
the foul charge, and scandalous imputation of being Bastards: Thus they comment
upon the words else were your Children Bastards, but now they be Legitimate,
lawfully begotten; what must be the consequence of this, but that the Children
of those Parents neither of which is a Believer must, though they be never so
lawfully Married, and live never so chastely together, be Bastards; what a
multitude of the offspring of this our Nation, must after this interpretation
be illegitimate, and a spurious bastardly Brood: This has been so often
confuted, that I will say no more to it, the very naming of it may be a
sufficient confutation of it. (2.) A peculiar people, a people set a part from
others; the Covenant is for an enclosure, and so for a separation of some from
the rest of the World, to be distinct, and peculiar from others, Deuteronomy. 14.2.
For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen
thee to be a peculiar people unto himself above all the nations that are upon
the earth. The Lord has a visible people that are to him a peculiar people,
they are his Church, those that are in a peculiar Covenant-appropriation unto
Him. We have this Title and that before of Holy ascribed to those that are
under the Administration of the Covenant in new Testament times. 1 Pet. 2.9.
But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
people. (3) They be called Gods Household or Family: the worship of God, and the
blessing of the Covenant first took place in Families, and those were the
Families of the Lord; since the more open, public and diffusive dispencing of
the Covenant, those that are the Lords Covenant ones, retain still the Title of
a Family and Household, and so this is brought down unto the time of the Gospel,
Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith, Viz. Gods
Covenant-houshold, Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore we are no more strangers and
foreiners, but fellow Citizens, and of the household of God; those Gentiles that
were not in Covenant, and so not of the Household of God. Now says the Apostle,
you are made partakers of the Covenant, which was the peculiar Blessing of the
Jews, and ye are become now of the Household of Faith, and of God, or of the
Household of Faith, and so of God; you are grafted into the Olive, and this is
some of the sweet and precious fat and juice of it. (4.) Such be called Gods
Vineyard, or the garden of the Lords, surely it is a Singular Privilege to be
planted in the Lords Vineyard, and not to have a standing without in the
Wilderness of the World, which the Lord has little regard for, or care of,
Isa. 5.1, 7. Now I will sing to my well beloved, a song of my beloved touching
his Vineyard: My well beloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill; For the
Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his
pleasant plant. The Church of God in Covenant with Him is by the Lord Jesus,
the Husband and Bridegroom of it delightfully called a garden, it being the
sweetest, the most pleasant and fertilest spot in all the World, Cant. 4.12,
16. A garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse; Awake, Oh northwind, and come
thou south, and blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.
Cant. 5.1. I am come into my garden, my Sister, my Spouse, Cant. 6.2. My
beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the
gardens, and to gather Lilies. Thus was the Church of the Jews that was the
Lords Covenant-inclosure styled, Zach. 2.5. Therefor particular Churches that
make up the Church Catholic, are called golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20. The
mystery of the seven Stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the seven
golden Candlesticks, are the seven Churches: The Lord Jesus walks in the midst
of them, they are the place of his feet, and his delightful walks, Rev. 2.1. He
walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, to show his delight that
he has in them, the peculiar watch of his Providence about them, and his
plentiful and his inexhaustible supplying of them. Oh how good is it to dwell
where Christ has his continual residence, and his perpetual walks: it is a
comfortable thing to have the Lord of infinite grace, to walk constantly to,
and fro, by ones door; how soon may he open the door and come in, and bring his
Blessed retinue of peace, mercy, grace, and love along with him. (6.) The
Church of Christ involved in this Covenant, is called Heaven, this is Heaven
upon Earth, where the Throne of the blessed God is fixed; when the Lord takes
Believers and their Children into Covenant with himself, he takes them into
Heaven; those that be out of Covenant do inhabit such darkness, as to represent
those that are even in Hell. I, but the Church of God that has the light of
the Word, and grace of God, shining upon it, is Gods heaven below, Rev. 12.1.
And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun.
This wonder was seen in the Church of God below, I, but here called Heaven for
her trampling upon the World, having the righteousness of Christ begirt about
her, and living in the Starry Region of Evangelical and Divine light.

Thus I have in some Particulars endeavored, to discover something of the
Privileges of those, that be in Covenant with the Lord from this head.

I come to another Privilege which is this, that many of them that are thus in
Covenant shall be saved, a multitude of them are Elected, for here chiefly lies
the secret Mine of Election, where many shall be called, and Effectually
brought home to God; the great Bulk and Mass of the Elect are taken, and dug
out of the Loins of Believers, that are brought under Covenant, many of those
that be in Covenant shall be sure be to saved; therefore surely it is a great
privilege to have a standing among those that shall be saved; how is it the
duty of those that do enjoy this mercy to bless the Lord for it, and to improve
it for their own Childrens advantage: It Is good to have a footing and dwelling
in that Body, out of which the Lord does call many to saving grace and glory,
to be in the best capacity and the most hopeful disposition as to Externals for
life and Salvation. The Sovereign Grace of God calls whom he pleases; but most
frequently the lot of Salvation, falls upon the Children of Covenant Ones, they
are the most hopeful to partake of that great blessing of the Covenant of
effectual calling, and of having the Law of God to be engraven upon their
hearts, Isa. 54.13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. Those
that are not in Covenant with the Lord, as they do not regard, so neither are
they under such a hopeful expectation of the accomplishment of such a promise,
as those are, that are themselves the Children of the Promise, who have good
right to approach unto the gracious Throne, and plead such a promise with him
that sits there with the Rainbow of the Covenant about his head.

10. This is the great ground, that is administered unto pious Parents, greatly
concerned about the external good of the Souls of their little Ones, to build
their hopes upon; godly Parents, would cast out the Anchor of hope upon a firm
ground, such that may hold; and this is the great, if not the only one, those
the Lord is pleased to bereave them of, and demand out of their tender bosoms,
this may quiet their hearts about their death, and their eternal State. So that
upon this account, a Parent may say more then what one said of a dead Child,
Ego in illo puero nihil habeo praeter dilectum, he may compose, and sedate his
Spirit with David, who while his Child was sick, did fast, and weep, refusing
to eat; I, but when the pleasure of the Lord was signified by his death, he
could arise, wash and eat, and go to the house of the Lord, and calmly pour out
his sincere devotions unto the most high, saying unto them that were struck
into stupendous admiration of his great change, I shall go to him, but he shall
not return to me. Surely David had a further prospect than the grave that
prevailed upon him to this Sedate composure, and Serenity of mind, he did
intimate that his heart was at rest as to his felicity above; that his Soul
(that he was most concerned about) had made its escape from the sick and
painful Body, into Abraham's bosom: the great Covenant Father, he having this
heart-supporting promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: This is
Gospel and a man interested in this promise may, nay is bound to lay hold upon
it, and to cast himself upon the promise, as well for his little Ones, as for
himself. Wherefore has the Lord, as an Instance of his unsearchable grace,
given such a promise, if not in our great and close afflictions to be choice,
and suitable food, for our faith? (...) but this can support Parents when they
see their tender Infants in the bitter bonds of death, reclining their heads
upon their dissolving Pillows, and having their Bowels to be sounding and
yearning within them. Now this, I would humbly demand, what they can build
their hopes upon, to make them readily to comply with Divine Pleasure? When the
Souls of their Little Ones sit upon their Lips, to take their flight into an
Eternal Ocean, that exclude^ them out of that Covenant, they be confident they
themselves be in, and upon which they bottom and center all their trust and
confidence as to their own Salvation; for the ordinary way of Salvation is by
and through the Covenant.

11. Those that be in covenant thus have many great and temporal Blessings
bestowed upon them, which others fall short of; they share in the peculiar
Providential Care, and Watch of God; there is the general Providential Care of
God, which as he is an Omnipresent Majesty, filling all Places, Persons, and
Things, with his Essential Presence, out of which there can be no departing, or
absconding, he does extend unto all, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. But moreover there
is the peculiar Transmission of the Providential Care, Observation and Tuition
of God, and this is that which every Moment does environ and encircle the
Church and Covenant-Ones round about, and all that are interested in the same
stand possessed with the free fruition of, they are the proper Objects of the
peculiar and special Providential Watch of God, Psalm. 121.4. Behold, he that
keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. This denotes the careful and
the diligent keeping of the Church, the Lord is ever in the exercise of, as one
says, Curam, solicitudinem and diligentiam connot at, nec dormit nec dormitat,
He neither sleeps nor slumbers. The Lord sets a peculiar Fence about his
Church, Isa. 5.^2* And he fenced it, -- After he planted it, he set the Fence
of his peculiar Providence round about it, to preserve it, Isa. 27.3. I the
Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it
night and day. Thus we see what a peculiar Vigilance the Divine Eye does
exhibit unto the Vovenant People: This is no small Privilege, to have a Place
with those that are thus beautified. I might have added, that such have many
outward Favors of Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, and that People, Places, and
Nations, do enjoy many rare Mercies for their sake; the Old World sped the
better for Noah's sake, Sodom for Lot's, Pharaoh for Joseph's, as Obed-edom for
the Arks sake, and Laban was greatly blessed for the sake of Jacob. A Nation
speeds the better for the Gospels sake; most fare the better for the Elect, the
greatest Body of which descend from Covenant-Ones: Temporal Blessings are the
Appendices of that Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. where the Land of
Promise was inserted, though a far greater in that was intended, as has been
shown. More Privileges might have been convened unto these; but let what has
been said suffice, and I think what has been insisted upon may satisfy as to
this Question. We have seen that those that are in covenant have advantage, and
that much every way.

But before we dismiss this, let us a little distinctly apply the Matter
suitable to the distinction that I have laid down concerning the way of being
in covenant, as to those that be Externally, and those that be Internally in it.

Observe heedfully here, that the same Promises that are to the Parents, are to
the Children, I will be their God, and the God of thy Seed. Those that the Lord
is pleased to take into covenant with himself, some are Elect, and some not
Elect; so amongst the Children, some are Elect, and some not Elect; and here I
chiefly mean those that arrive unto the Years of the Adult.

1. Those that be the Elect of the Natural Seed, they do partake both of the
external, and internal part of the Covenant; for they do partake of the Promise
in the extent of it, such peculiar salvificable Blessings, as Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, etc. and Eternal Glorification; in a Word, they do
partake of Temporal, Spiritual, and External Privileges.

2. The Non-elect they do partake of the external part of the Promises, and of
the Covenant-Priviledges (as have been mentioned) which be exceeding great,
though not saving; therefore not to be relied and rested upon. I shall here lay
down Two Positions, that shall conclude this present Matter in hand.

(1.) That as God by the Election of Grace does make the distinction among the
Natural Seed of Covenanters with God, accordingly is their Childrens
participation of the Promise. The Elect have the Promise in the extent, the
other in the external part only, which in it self is a Privilege and a great
Advantage. There might have been given great Instances of this in Abraham's
Family, and others, but I forbear, and shall not need to stand upon it. There
is the Elect Isaac, the Covenant was established with him in all its Spiritual
and External parts; and Ishmael the Son of a Bondwoman in covenant, and must
be circumcised too, and participate of the Seal, and become a great Nation, and
have a Standing till his time come to be cast out.

(2.) That there is great ground, and very good foundation, for a Parent in
covenant with God, to pray, and to hope for the accomplishment of the Covenant
in the extent of it. Pious Parents in covenant with God, should labor to lay
hold upon the gracious Promises thereof, and put them daily in suit at the
Throne of Grace, pleading of them for their poor Children with God; Ay, and
this should be done with a great deal of hope, and that partly, because the
Purpose of God is secret, and not to be the Rule of our Covenant-Duties, and
the Promise is open in the full and ample Extent of it; and also because Gods
gracious Promise is so full, copious, and comprehensive, as to be the God of
the Seed of those Parents he has highly gratified, and graced, in taking them
into covenant with himself; which Faith ought in the largest sense to take hold
upon, and swallow down, and to be warmly, and comfortably exercised about the
inward, spiritual, and eternal Blessings of the Covenant for Children. But
somewhat more of this, if the Lord please, in the Use of this Doctrine. Thus
much for the first General Thing, Viz. The opening of this Point: Now we come
unto the

II. General Head proposed in my Method, which is to offer some Demonstrations,
to Evince the Truth of my Doctrine, and so we shall insist upon the (...) of
this Great Truth.

1. This has ever been Gods way in covenanting with his People; this way God
has observed ever since the Fall, yea, this was the way that he took in the
first Covenant that ever was concluded between him and Man, viz. The Covenant
of Works that he made with Adam in innocence, in his perfect State; Adam and
all his Posterity were strictly included in that Covenant; so that as it fared
with him, it was to be with all, that were to descend from his Loins, or all
his Seed, he falling, all fell in him, and with him. Upon his Fall, the blessed
Covenant of Grace (that was eternally provided through Christ the great Channel
of the Grace of God) took place and was published with Gods own Lips, Genesis
3.15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Here we
have the Seed immediately comprehended; this I take to be the very same
Covenant for substance, that was made, and more fully explicated, confirmed,
and established with Abraham; where was the first emanation and springing forth
of the inexhaustible Fountain of Grace, through a Covenant for apostate and
trembling Adam; who was capable of no other Covenant in that his miserable
State: It was only naked, and pure Grace that could support him from sinking
into eternal desperation, and destruction. Ever since the Fall of Man, God has
been pleased to gather a Church and People to himself by covenant, and he
evermore has taken in the Children with the Parents; when ever he has made a
Covenant with a Family, with a People, and with a Nation, he never excluded,
and shut out the Children, and Seed, accounting the Children to be of that
Family, People, or Kingdom: This might be abundantly proved, were it needful.
We have fully seen it in the Lords covenanting with Abraham, taking in all his
Natural Seed with him; a famous and obvious Instance hereof we have in Deuteronomy.
29.9, 10, 11, 12. One would think, that this should for ever silence the
Opposers of this Truth. Here we have the Adult, and all their Little Ones,
standing before the Lord, to enter into covenant with him; the Little Ones were
confederate with their Parents, and entered into covenant in, and with them;
thus when the Covenant was carried over to the Gentiles, Children were still
involved, as in our Text, Acts 2.39. For the promise is to you, and your
children: And so it shall be unto all that are afar off, when they shall be
called, and brought home unto God, they shall come with their Children with
them, and enter into covenant with the Lord, Romans 11.17, 19. If here Children
of the Gentiles be not taken into the Covenant with the Jews, in the place of
those that were broken off, then there would be no Analogy, or Proportion,
between the rejection of one, and the acceptance of the other.

2. Demonst. This has been Gods way in his conveying all saving Good unto the
Elect; this is Gods ordinary way of communicating unto the Salvation of the
Infants of Believers, they being actually in the Visible Church, and in
covenant with God, out of which ordinarily no Salvation can be expected, and
hoped for. All the Promises that be made to Infants of any Spiritual Blessing,
conducting to their Eternal Happiness, are lodged in the Covenant; and the
Promises are the Instruments of the Spirit of God, in its great Covenant-work
of distilling, and infusing Grace into the Hearts of the Elect dying Infants.
Even before the World began, God ordained and instituted all Good to be
conveyed to us in a way, and by virtue of a Covenant; therefore it is called the
everlasting covenant, and the everlasting gospel, Heb. 13.20. Now the God of
peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of
the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant. Rev. 14.6. And I saw
another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to
preach unto them that dwell upon the earth, and to every nation, and kindred,
and tongue, and people. This everlasting gospel I think may here be (though not
exclusively, yet eminently) meant the Everlasting Covenant of Grace, through
which in the preaching of it, is transmitted all saving Good to all the Elect,
in all the Nations, Kingdoms, Kindreds, and Languages in the World. Nay, Christ
himself, that unspeakable Gift, is all the Elects, both Infants, and Adult, in
a way of a Covenant, Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness,
and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of
the people, and for a light of the Gentiles. His Blood is the Blood of the
everlasting covenant, and there can be no Interest in it, nor in himself, but
by way of Covenant; as there can be no Redemption, no Reconciliation, no
Justification, no Sanctification, nor Salvation, but by and through his Blood;
and that Blood is the Blood of the everlasting covenant, Zech. 9.11. As for
thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of
the pit, where there is no water. Some do understand this of a temporal
deliverance out of some great and grievous Affliction, which the Lord did
deliver his People; if so, then certainly it must be by the blood of the
covenant; by and through which the Elect are delivered out of all their Pits,
and Miseries, into which their Sins have cast them. The Lord Jesus Christ is
the Mediator of the New Covenant, and if Infants be not in this Covenant, they
can have no Interest in him, as Mediator; for he is no Mediator, but of such
a Covenant: His great Business is to confirm a Covenant, to all such, to whom
he is a Mediator. Therefore to deny Infants being in covenant, is to shut them
out of all hopes of partaking of one Drop of the Precious Blood of Christ,
which is Covenant-Blood. And thus here is a dreadful Rock in the midst of that
Ocean of Misery, that Sin has brought them in, which poor Infants dying in
their Infancy must unavoidably split upon for ever; moreover here we may see
them all to have suffered Shipwreck, without the least part of a Wreck left
them to swim to shore on. If it be so, that the Infints of Believers are
excluded from Right in the Covenant, and the Promise of the Holy Ghost, and
Remission of Sin, unless they do personally profess their Faith and Repentance,
as our Challenger would have it, then they are out of all the ordinary way of
Salvation, and desperately exposed to be lost for ever.

3. Demonst. This has been the way, that a holy and just God has observed in
ejecting, and casting out of the Covenant. When Parents by their sin have been
disinherited, and cast out; their Children also have been turned out with them,
we read of the breaking and taking in, Romans 11.17, 19. The one must expound the
other, and one must be commensurate and responsible to the other: otherwise the
parallel, of the Holy Ghost, and the harmony of the matter will be broke. They
which were broken off, were called natural branches; they and their natural
Seed did grow upon this root, and both were broken off, not only the Parents,
but the Children; God wrote upon them and their Children a Loammi. So when the
Lord (through rich grace) did fill up their vacancy, and inserted the Gentiles in
their Room, in graffing them into the same Stock, making of them to partake of
the root, and fatness of the Olive tree; it was they, the adult Parents that
did believe, and all their Sprigs, their Children, that sprang from them, that
were graffed in. Here we must observe a meet Similitude in the rejection of the
Jews, and the implantation of the Gentiles; look how the One was by unbelief
broken off, so the others were taken in by Faith: but the one both Parents and
Children were broken off through the stubborn rejection of the Covenant, not
submitting to the new Administration of it, when it was offered by the Apostles
after the ascension of the Messiah, which was expressed by the Parents only;
therefore the Gentiles are inserted with their Children, notwithstanding the
Parents only express a Beleiving embracement of the Covenant, and the Promises
thereof.

4. Demonst. Children are Members of the visible Church, where their Parents be
in Covenant with God, they be initiated by Baptism, and admitted into visible
Membership; the breaking off was the casting out of a visible Church, Mat.
19.14. But Jesus said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them
not: for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Our great Champion, will not have
these to be little, in respect of the smalness of their growth, or littleness
of their age, though it be never so ridiculous, and absurd to deny it; what will
not rash men obtrude upon, to uphold their crude indigested notions. Observe a
little here these be not only called Children, but little Children, Luke calls
them Infants, Chap. 18.15. And they brought unto him also Infants that he would
touch them, viz. that he would bless them; they were such that were brought, or
born to Christ, they could not come themselves: then were there brought unto
him little Children, nay, they were so small, and little that the Disciples
that attended upon their Lord, thought that they could only be a trouble to
him, therefore they rebuked them that brought them; yea, and further it is said
that Jesus took them up into his arms, when he laid his hands upon them, and
blessed them; he took them out of their Parents arms, or the arms of them that
brought them, when he blessed them, Mar. 10.16. Yea one thing more fully to
prove that Children are to be taken literally, and not allegorically, and that
from the Greek word, that the Evangelist Luke makes use of, where it is said,
that they brought unto him (...), the word (...), signifies a very little child
Infants, puer recens natus, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born Babes desire the sincere
milk of the word, that they may grow thereby: The very same word we have for a
Babe, yet unborn, and not enjoying any habitation but the Womb, Luke. 1, 41.
And it came to pass, that when Elizabeth heard the Salutation of Mary, the Babe
leaped in her womb, and so ver. 44. the Babe leaped for joy! Oh how did our
Neighbor lately abuse this precious Text, in his endeavoring to prove that
which Christ will never thank him for, Viz. that Children are not capable of
Habitual Faith: He would be thought a very great Scholar, though we well
understand what University he was brought up in; but had he, or could he but
have consulted the Original text, he would scarce have been so bold with
Christ, as to have attempted to destroy his Love to Infants, and to have vented
his cruelty to those, that he took up into his arms, to bless those that did
hang upon the Breast, and were also brought in the arms of godly Mothers, that
brought them forth unto Christ, to receive some Spiritual blessing. I do prefer
the judgment of Learned and Critical Beza, before a thousand such Doctors as
ours is: I will give you his sense of the words in Luke chapter 18.5. and how he
opens the words. There he tells us what these Infants are, these are his words,
Teneri nimirum et adhuc ab uberibus pendentes pueruli, very little Children
that hang upon the Breast, sucking Babes, which are carried in the arms. Beza
adds something more and says thus, Est enim adversus hosts Paedo-baptismi
servanda propria significatio verbi (...) et nominis (...), the proper
signification of the words Infants, and that they were carried to Christ, and
also that he took them into his arms, when he blessed them, must be kept. But I
may have an opportunity to meet with my Adversary in a more suitable place:
Thus we see what little things the Seed of Believers be, that are Members of
the Church visible; for by Kingdom of Heaven is (by all judicious Divines)
taken to be the visible Church: Now because they be declared by Christ himself
to be such Members with their Parents, they must also with them be in Covenant
with God.

5. Demonst. The Parents by Covenant do engage themselves, and their Children
unto God. When Parents do enter into Covenant with the Lord, they do by the
Bonds of the same, oblige themselves, and theirs unto the Lord, and to be the
Lords for ever. Every Covenant-Parent does oblige himself, and his Seed to God,
to walk according to the Covenant of Grace, to which the Initiating Seal of the
Covenant is annexed; and God does promise to be his God, and the God of his
Seed, Genesis 17.7. Parents when they do dedicate their Children to God, by the
Seal of the Covenant, then they do engage to the utmost of their power, that
they shall observe the Duties of the same: So Children when they are Adult,
ought by Faith to lay a firm hold upon the Covenant, and answer the Obligation
of their Parents. In a Federal Consideration, when Parents do engage for their
Children; this (as it has always been) is accounted among the Judicious the
Act of the Children, in, and by their Parents, and they are obliged strictly to
the performance of the same. That Parents have thus engaged for their Children
in covenant with God, might be easily proved, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. In which place
Parents and their children are comprehended, as is more fully and specifically
expressed in Chap. 29.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. There we have the little ones
expressed, which are involved with their Parents in the former place. Some that
are Adversaries herein, pretend to wonder how this can be; but what is more
common among Men? In a Man's Covenant, do not Men put their Childrens Names in
their Writings Obligatory? And their Little Ones, and those unborn, shall stand
firmly obliged thereby; and the Law does take it as firm, as if the Child had
actually bound himself. A little to Illustrate and Invigorate this; We are to
consider that the Children when grown up, and prove sinful, walking contrary to
the Covenant, yea, and those that never did receive the Token of the Covenant
by Circumcision, stand accused of the high Charge of breaking the Covenant,
which is an Evident Proof of their being (when but Infants) in covenant;
otherwise this Charge could not be so clearly exhibited against them, Deuteronomy.
29.25. The men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord
God of their fathers; Viz. the Covenant which the Lord God made with their
Fathers. This you have but a few Verses before, to demonstrate that it was that
Covenant the Lord made with the Parents and their Little Ones that stood before
him, to covenant with him, 1 Kings 19.10, 14. You may see what Covenant this
was, 2 Kings 13.23. And the Lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on
them, and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence:
Yet they had broken this Covenant, and for the Covenant's sake, they descending
from the Fathers, and being the Seed of those, with whom he had made this
Covenant, he would not enter upon them for the breach they made upon it, to
extinguish or to destroy them, as yet. It was the Covenant that did bind up and
restrain the Hands of Justice from casting off the Jews, the Children of the
Fathers, and of the Covenant; therefore the Lord is said, Psalm. 111.5. -- He
will ever be mindful of his covenant. Genesis 17.14. And the uncircumcised
manchild whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be
cut off from his people: he has broken my covenant. Surely if the Seed of
Parents in covenant are accused for the breaking of the Covenant, they
themselves must be in covenant, and obliged by their Parents to keep it.

6. Demonst. Such as God is pleased to account and accept as holy, are in
covenant. Those that have a Foederal Holiness must be Foederates, and such that
be in covenant with the Lord; but this is the great Blessing of those that are
the Children of believing Parents; there is a Holiness attributed to them, that
is not to the Seed of Pagans, and Infidels, and it is a Covenant-Holiness;
therefore it must follow by undeniable consequence, That they are in covenant
with their Parents. What makes Israel, and his Seed, more holy than the
Egyptians, or Canaanites, and their Seed, but God's taking one into covenant,
and not the other? Thus Israel and his Seed are said to be holy, Deuteronomy. 14.2.
For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. If but one Parent be in
covenant, the Children be accepted as holy with the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.14. Because
of this, the Children are not unclean as the Canaanites, but holy like the
Israelites. I have spoke something to this in the Explication of this Point,
therefore shall hasten over it; it would be to small purpose to enter into the
Miry Labyrinth, wherein some have lodged this precious Scripture: I shall only
say this (with an Acute Person,) That commonly Reasons of Positions are brought
a notiori, to prove a thing doubtful by a thing known, yielded, or confessed;
this I judge to be a granted and a well-known Truth, as one of the Jews Divine
Axioms: But that none but Believers Children are Legitimate, and that none but
Believers have a lawful use of their Children, which are the two usual
Expositions of the Adversaries on that Text, which to me seems very jeiune, and
spurious; those will hardly pass for unquestionable Truths among the wisest of
Men: And to make the Apostle argue thence to prove the lawful continuance of
the Believer, in conjugal Society with the Unbeliever, would make the Apostle
guilty of proving obscurum per obscurius, an obscure thing by that which is
more dark and obscure: But to take Holiness there, for that which is Foederal,
that is a clear Medium to prove that; and whosoever shall stand up and oppose
it, there is the Dispensation of the Covenant with Isaac all along, and that
continued in the Christian Churches to prove it. Your Children are holy, Viz.
Heirs to the Covenant, a known Truth, then granted and allowed by all, even
like unto our Text, That the Covenant was to the Parents, and their Children.
How can the Children of Believers be said to be holy, if they be not in
covenant with their Parents? From whence all the Seed of Believers do receive
the denomination, Romans 11.16. For if the first-fruit be holy, the lump is also
holy: and if the root be holy, so are the branches. The Root is Abraham, and
the Fathers, and they may be said to be the First Fruits, because they were
first consecrated to God; and the Branches are denominated from the Root, Exodus
19.6. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. Here
the whole Nation was called holy: How could it be called so? Not because all
the Individuals of the Nation were personally holy, partaking of a saving Work
of Holiness upon their Hearts: There were but a few such: But because as a
Nation the Adult, and Children were in covenant with the Lord; for the Children
were no small part of the Nation. We have this very Phrase conferred upon the
Christian Church, in the Times of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people. Believing
Gentiles, with their Seed, were ingrafted into the same Place from whence the
Jews were broken off, and are become a holy nation unto God.

7. Demonst. Those unto whom the Promises of the Covenant are made, and do
appertain; they are in Covenant with the Lord: Some time the Covenant is
expressed by the Promise as in our Text, and the Covenant of Promise, the
gracious promises of the word are the branches of the Covenant of grace: Some
do style the Covenant a Collection or bundle of Promises which God has bound
up, and conferred (through Christ) upon his People, unto which there are annexed
the duties of the Covenant, unto the performance: Of which there is provision
made in the same Covenant of grace, and divine assistance: But the promises of
the Covenant are made to the Children of those, that are themselves in
Covenant, as well as to the parents; it seems to be very cruel and irrational
to turn those out of the Covenant, unto whom are assured the gracious promises
of it, not only Temporal and external, but Spiritual and eternal blessings are
promised unto the Children of Believers. Those that are the opposers of this
truth, must first Obliterate all the Promises that are comprehended in the
Covenant, as the inheritance of the Seed of the Parents that themselves are in
Covenant with the Lord. As to any common ordinary rule appointed to us,
belonging to our duties and hopes concerning our offspring; we have nothing
(as I know) to build upon, but Covenant promises: What an) excellent one is our
Text unto pious Parents, as to their Children; and in this it is founded, for
the Promise is to you, and your Children. To illustrate and amplify this, I
shall in several particulars show you some of the Ranks of Covenant-Promises,
that are extended unto such little Ones, that are the undoubted Proprietors of
them.

(1.) That great and Capital promise, of the Lords being their God, this
comprehends all the rest, and is instar omnium. Is not this Promise, made to
the Seed, of Believers, wrote in Capital Letters in many places, in the word of
God? This is Gods great record in the Covenant of grace; and the great
foundation the Church of God is built upon, (viz.) this of Gods promising to be
the God of his people, and of their Seed in every age, and generation of time,
yea, to the end of the World, usque ad consummationem omnium, unto the
completing and fulfilling of all things. Thus the blessed constitution, and
promulgation of the Covenant has always run; this is wrote with a Noverint
universi. That which every one under the sound of the Gospel should know and
understand; yea, even those that are but raw, and rudely instructed in the very
Principles and Rudiments of Religion. This gracious promise, is the golden
Frontis-piece of this Covenant. The heart of God was so full of grace and love,
to the Seed of the faithful, that when he called Abraham to establish his
Covenant, the fountain of his grace, did immediately emit this sacred, sweet,
and most refreshing Stream, Viz. That I will be thy God and the God of thy
Seed; and that in all Successions and periods of time, unto the utmost bound
and period of all, read the Scriptures following, Genesis 17.7. Jer. 24.7. and
31.33. and 32.38. Ezekiel. 11.20. and 34.24, 31. Chap. 36.28. Chap. 37.27. Mat.
22.27. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. These rare promises must be expunged out of the Book of
God, before I can, (unless left by God to fall into error;) put this Article
out of my Creed, that the Children of Believers naturally Springing from their
Loins are in the Covenant with them. I have spoke much already to prove that
the Covenant in Genesis 17.7. made unto Abraham, did refer to the Covenant of
Grace. Some may be making of some Query, about that; because they see, what
must be the Consequence of granting of it. Wherefore I would desire them to
return back unto what has been said upon that Point: Only I will add one or
two things here. (1.) In this form run the promises (which are acknowledged by
all, that know any thing) of the Gospel Covenant, or Covenant of grace; let all
the places of Scripture, immediately here before mentioned, be examined as to
the Phrase of them, I will be a God to you, or your God; and you my people,
which includes Believers and their Seed: Now in as much as this in the 17. of
Genesis runs in the same Phrase of the Covenant of grace that we see in other
places that are allowed to be such, we may conclude, that such is this also.
Doctor Ames says thus against Bellar. Omnia illa quae spectant ad novum foedus
eadem phrasi summatim explicantur. So that when we are challenged to prove the
Covenant with Abraham, to be a Covenant of grace, and Circumcision to be a Seal
of the Covenant of grace; Note that in this Point we have to do with our old
Adversaries the Papists, though marching forth under the banner of a People of
another Denomination; for their Doctrine as to the Covenant made with Abraham,
in the place mentioned, is thus, that it was a Covenant of outward blessings,
this is indeed the Doctrine of the worst of them, thus says Bellar. Legimus
Deum promisisse Abrahamo, quando illi injunxit Circumcisionem, terrena tantum
ad literam, i. e. propagationem posteritatis, and terram palestinae. Again,
Illis verbis, ero Deus tuus, significat totum promissum peculiaris
protectionis. Thus we may see, that our great disputant does sweetly lick up
the Doctrine of this great Doctor of the Church of Rome, though to give him his
due, I believe he is not overmuch versed in him; to which Doctor Ames answers,
Legimus benedictionem illam Abrahamo promissionem fuisse plane eandem cum illa,
qua jam fideles ex gentibus justificabantur. Gal. 3. Now when the Holy Ghost
testifies in Scripture every where, that the Gospel Covenant runs in that form;
why should we fall in with the Papists, and take their word for it, that that
is no Gospel Covenant? But let us hearken to Christ, the best Expositor and
applyer of Scripture, who is the Substance and infallible Oracle of all divine
truths, Mat. 22.31, 32. But (says he) touching the Resurrection of the dead,
have ye not read, what was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the
dead, but the God of the living; where our Savior affirms, that the present
glorification of Abraham's, Isaac's and Jacob's Spirits and the future
Resurrection of their bodies, to live with God, both Soul and body for ever, to
be included in that Promise, and the very accomplishment of that promise, I am
the God of Abraham, etc. Hence this clearly appears to be a Covenant of grace,
of Spiritual and eternal Blessings.

(2.) The promise of the Spirit is made to the Children of those Parents, that
be in Covenant; therefore they must be also in Covenant. Such unto whom God
promises his own Spirit, their's is the promise and Covenant of grace; for
that is a Covenant of promise, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a
new Spirit will I put within you, ver. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my ways. The promise of the Spirit is one of the most
gracious promises that the Covenant of grace is enriched withal. Christ and
the Spirit are the two Emphatical promises. When Christ was upon the earth, and
hastening toward his ascension, this was the great promise that he made to be
left behind him; and this is the promise that by the gracious gift of God does
appertain to the Children of those that are in Covenant with the Lord, Isa.
44.3. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground, I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my blessing upon thy
offspring; Little Children that spring like little twigs from their parents,
that be graffed into the Covenant: Chap. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant
with them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. Here is a blessed Promise to the Parents, and the
Children, of this rare Privilege of the Spirit, with a perpetual Entail, Acts.
2.38, 39. Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord
Jesus, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children; Viz. The Promise of
Remission of Sin, and of the Holy Ghost. The Truth is, Dying Infants without
this promise could never be saved.

(3.) The Promise of Regeneration belongs to such Children. Such to whom the
Lord promises Regeneration, and Renovation, must needs be in covenant, to them
does belong the Promise and Covenant of Grace, for that is a Blessing of the
Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give unto you, and a
new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. This does expressly set forth
the Work of the Holy Spirit, in renewing, and sanctifying, and regenerating the
Hearts of the Elect; this is that which is promised to the Offspring of those
in covenant with the Lord; therefore they themselves must also be in covenant,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of
thy seed to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul. The
Seal of Circumcision, the Token of the Covenant, did eminently signify, and
Assure this to all the Elect Infants that were in covenant; therefore
Regeneration and Sanctification are oftentimes set forth by Circumcision, and
when the Lord calls for them, he does it under the Name and Notion of
Circumcision: This might have been evidenced by many place(...) Without this
Promise, and the accomplishment of it in the Hearts of dying Infants, they can
never be saved; for those Scriptures that exclude all unsanctified Persons out
of the Kingdom of Heaven, are as applicable to the young Children, as to those
that are the most Adult. I need not stand to call in here any of those many
Scriptures that have set an unmovable Bar before the Gate of Heaven, against
all unsanctified Sinners.

(4.) The Promise of being taught of God is an Excellent Promise of the
Covenant of Grace; those that do partake of a Standing in this Covenant, this
is one of the Evangelical Promises that they are entitled unto, those shall
have a greater Teacher than Man, viz. they shall be taught of God, and by his
Spirit. This is the Promise that is made with such Infants, that are in
covenant with their Parents, though some do scornfully say, What can they
learn? Or what are they capable to be taught? Let such know, that they have
reasonable Souls; and God by his Spirit can easily teach them, and they be
under the promise of being taught of God, Jer. 31.34. And they shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord:
for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest. God can
teach the least Infant to know him, Isa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be
taught of the Lord. Let us consider can any but those that be taught of God be
admitted unto the Eternal Enjoyment of God: He will take no ignorant Sinner
into the company of the Glorified. It is said of Timothy, that from a Child he
knew the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. Every one of you (I presume) will
readily grant, that his Knowledge was saving, and that he was effectually
taught of God; and I must tell you, that he was very little when first he was
taught, and this will appear, if we consider the Word in the Text, And that
from a child thou have known the holy scriptures (...) -- from his infancy.
Some that be learned and critical do tell us (...) the Word does signify the
very Embryo (...) the Womb. God is able to teach and to sanctify there --
proprie dicitur de partu recens edito, a Child so soon as brought forth of the
Womb. It is an easy matter for God to fulfill the Excellent Promises of the
Covenant, and to cause the Babe that falls out of the Womb, to fall into the
Arms of Grace, and he that sucks on the Breast to draw in the Heavenly
Knowledge of Christ; otherwise how can many be taken from the Breast and the
Womb to Heaven, as doubtless a Multitude of Coverant-Babes are?

(5.) The Promise of Justification, and the Remission of Sin, is an Excellent
Promise of the Covenant of Grace: The Blood of Christ is assured in this
Foederal Mercy, not only to wash away the Filth, but also to remove the guilt
of Sin. Pardon of Sin is one of the most desirable Branches of this Covenant,
there can be no obtaining the pardon of one Sin without it; all the Promises of
pardon are founded upon the Grace of God, and satisfaction made to Divine
Justice by the Blood of the Son of God, whose Blood is the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant. I shall not stand to mind you of the many Promises that
we have of Remission; the Word of God does abound with them, and wheresoever
you find any of them, you may conclude, that they do relate to the Covenant of
Grace. Now the Covenant-Seed of those that be Believing Parents, have a share
in those Promises that hold out a Free and Full pardon of Sin, Acts 2.38, 39.
Repent, and be baptized every one, etc. for the remission of sins, For the
promise is to you, and your Seed, Viz. That Promise and Covenant that has made
provision for the Remission of your Sin, and the Sin of your Children; for they
had involved their Children into the guilt of their Sin, but in the Covenant
there is pardon for both, Isa. 45.24, 25. Surely, shall one say, In the Lord
have I righteousness and strength. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified, and glory. The rich Provisions of the Covenant of Grace have laid up
for the Justification and Remission for the Seed of Israel.

(6.) Such to whom God is pleased to promise Blessedness, theirs is the
Promise, and the Covenant of Grace: But the Children of those that are in
covenant, are promised Blessedness. Such that be under such a Promise as this
is, have right to be looked upon to be in the Covenant of Grace. In the Covenant
of Works, there are the terrible Cursings of a Just and Righteously angry God:
But in the Covenant of Grace, there you may hear the Soul-comforting Voice,
that pronounces all Blessings, yea Blessedness it self; and this Blessed Voice
is sounded out to the Little Ones of those Parents that are in covenant, Psalm.
37.25, 26. I have been young and now am old: yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. He is ever merciful, and lends: and his
seed shall be blessed. What Blessedness is there which is not in, and from that
Covenant, Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon
thy people. Thus I have done with this Demonstration of the Doctrine, by which
I have endeavored to show that the Seed of those that are in covenant must be
so, because the precious Promises do belong unto them.

8. Demonst. To Evidence the Truth of this Point, those from whom God demands
Covenant-Duty, and does challenge the same from them; to them the Promise, and
the Covenant does appertain: The same Covenant that says, You shall be my
people, says, I will be your God. Now the Covenant requires of the Children of
Gods People, that they be Gods People too, therefore they be in covenant. Look
as the Parents do covenant for their Children, in their Infancy, so it is their
Duty (so soon as may be) to counsel, and to instruct them, as Covenant-children
to know, to love, to fear, to serve and obey God. These are
Covenant-Obligations: Those that the Lord is pleased to take into
Foederal-relation with himself, to be his People; it is that they may be found
in the constant and persevering discharge of Relative Duties: Thou shall be my
people, What only to partake of Privilege? No; but also to perform Duty.
Abraham was very sensible of this, and therefore did command and oblige all of
his, what he could, to be conversant in all necessary and incumbent Covenant
Duties. See what observation the Lord did make of him, and what a Commendation
he fastens upon him, Genesis 18.19. For I know him, that he will command his
children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do justice and judgment. All Parents in covenant ought to see to this; they
are engaged in covenant with, and for their Children, and are under an
indispensable Obligation to see that their Children walk and act suitably to
the Privileges, and Duties of it. God expects a Revenue of Honor from
covenant Children, therefore he does command their Parents to bring them up in
the Fear and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. And ye fathers, provoke not your
children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
Thus Timothy was educated and brought up from a little child. Children are to
be dedicated unto God by the Seal of the Covenant, by which they be bound to
fear God, to serve, to obey him, to keep his Word, and to walk in his Way; as
Abraham did instruct and command his to do. Believers Children must be under
Gods discipline, bound to Gods Worship, kept in Gods Way; they be the Lords
People. Must this be, and no Covenant-priviledge belong unto them, and be what
Pagans and Heathens only be? This is the Covenant-Dispensation, first
Privilege, and then Duty; therefore Children that are in covenant with the
Lord are called Disciples, Acts 15.10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a
yoke upon the neck of the disciples, -- They are in a peculiar manner to be
instructed, and taught as those from whom God expects early Service.

9. Demonst. The same Covenant is transferred unto the Times of the Gospel,
since the Actual Exhibition and Ascension of the Messiah; the same for Essence,
and Substance, though in the Administration of it, it may vary in some
circumstances; the believing; and the covenanted Gentiles, stand in the very
same Condition by Faith, and in the very same Kingdom-state for the Essentials
of it, out of which the Jews, through unbelief, were broken and cast off; for
they were graffed, (...), in the place and room of those broken Branches, as
Beza has it, Romans 11.17. And it has its first rise from that seasonable and
never-failing Promise, Genesis 3.15. which will run through all the Ages of the
World, wheresoever God has his Elect, by the preaching of the Gospel to call
into, and to enclose within the limits of the Covenant. It was the Saying of a
great Man, that Adam and Eve, when they entered upon a new Covenant bottom, were
seminally a Visible Church; for by them, the World, as well as the Church, as
to be built. Here when the Lord did reveal his Grace, and gracious Covenant, he
took in the Seed also, in the very downing and first dayspring of the Gospel,
God takes in the Seed of the Woman, so afterward to Abraham, and so all along
until the Time of the calling of the Gentiles. Now in the Times of the Gospel,
those that be called, be the Children of Abraham, they, and their Seed, have a
happy admittance into the Covenant of Abraham, and are Heirs according to
promise, and blessed with that ever-living Father. The New Testament does
abundantly testify of this; in many Scriptures we have the Old Testament
Phrase and Way, Mat. 8.11. Many shall come from the east and from the west, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. By the
Faith of the Centurion Christ takes an occasion to touch by way of prediction
of the calling of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews, and the bringing
of the Gentiles into the Covenant made with those Fathers, and Patriarchs. I do
not know how to forbear the inserting of an excellent Observation that a
Judicious Man makes upon this Text, thus, Quare non sine admiratione hoc
additum fuit domesticos regni Dei, and haeredes fore, qui tunc extranei erant,
neque id solum, sed foedus salutis mox publicandum esse, ut totus orbis in unum
Ecclesiae corpus coalesceret, dum Gentiles qui ad fidem accedunt ejusdem cum
Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, salutis participes fore dicit. Luke 19.9. And Jesus
said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also
is the son of Abraham. Here our Lord Jesus did preach the Covenant, and upon
the Faith of this good Man, Abraham's Covenant entered into his House, himself,
and whole Family were taken into covenant, Exodus 16.31, 32, 33. This was the
happy State of this Man, so soon as he did believe, God took him into covenant
and his whole House, and all of them in the same Hour of the Night, did partake
of the Seal of the Covenant, after this Example we practice, v. 14, 15. This
was the case of Lydia, upon her believing, she, and all her House were
Baptized, It Is strange if that in all these houses, there might not be one
Child, there might be children in several of them; however children be a part,
and a choice part of households. So that here is a Rule for us to walk by, that
when the Master or head of the house does embrace the Faith, that was never
Baptized before, both he, and his, are to receive the token of the Covenant, as
upon their believing, they do enter into it with God. This is the right way to
be observed, that Parents entertaining the Gospel, that were never under the
bond of the Covenant, neither partakers of the Seal of it, must be baptized;
and their Children, that are Foederally received with them by God, must be also
with them, Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to
the end the promise or the Covenant might be sure to all the seed, not to that
only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham,
who is the father of us all, Viz. He is the Father of all that do believe, both
Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were
far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ: For he is our peace, who has
made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition. Now by the
blood of Christ the parting Wall that was between the Jew and the Gentile is
taken away, and both of them that believe are enclosed in one Covenant. The
Gentile that was afar off being out of Covenant, and the Jew that was nigh
being in Covenant. Now in the New Covenant all our Spiritual and Eternal
blessings come swimming to us upon the blood of Christ, which blood for ever
runs through the Covenant. We have no other way of remission of Sin, of
renovation and Regeneration, or of Eternal life, then Abraham had in the Old
Testament, John 8.56. Neither does the Lord require any other obedience from
us, then he did from Abraham, therefore we are to walk in the steps of our
Father Abraham.

10. Demonst. God does challenge the Children of his people, that be in
Covenant with him, to be his Children. There is a special Interest and
propriety, that God lays claim to have in the Seed of his, they be more his
children, then their's; they are brought forth for him, and by the Seal of the
Covenant are, and ought to be devoted and dedicated to God, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.
Moreover thou have taken thy Sons, and thy Daughters, whom thou have born unto
me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured: That thou have
slain my children. This is brought in, as a great aggravation of their sin, in
their cruel and wicked Idolatry; because their Children were those that God had
a propriety in, though they were their Parents children by generation; yet they
were his by Adoption, and Federal assumption. To offer any Creature to an Idol,
is a great sin, but to offer Children is far worse, and to offer Gods Children,
that is worst of all. What greater Sacrilege can there be, than this, to rob
God of his Covenant-Seed, brought forth unto him, and to cast them away upon
Idols? May not they be said to rob God that endeavor to rend, and tear his
Children out of the Covenant, and refuse by the Administration of the Seal to
give them up unto God?

11. Demonst. Shall be taken from many gross, (I wish I might not say wicked)
absurdities, that follow the denying Infants interest in the Covenant of grace
with their Parents. That Doctrine cannot be of God, that is clothed with, or
attended upon with many absurdities. I do find that those that are great
zealots in casting Children out of their hold, which the great Lord Proprietor
has given them in the Covenant, are not apprehensive what absurd things do
attend them. The Livery of this Doctrine discovers it to be of no good Family;
its retinue may render it very questionable, yea, very unsound. The truths of
Christ admit of no absurdities, of no gross Inferences; you can infer nothing
from any Doctrine of the Gospel, but what is pure, and precious: Men to support
their Errors, may endeavor to extort, and wrest the holy Scriptures, to speak
their filthy Language, and to give countenance to their odious Tenants. This is
one of the Worst abuses and hellish Rapes that can be offered to the word of
God. Satan himself has an exquisite skill herein, and he has taught many of
his Disciples a dextrous knack in this black Art. Did but the Adversaries of
this my Doctrine consider into what absurdities they chase their Game; and how
the pretended beautiful face of their opinion is scratcht and torn, it would
make them a little more modest and moderate in their assertions and
conclusions. I shall touch upon some few of that multitude of absurdities that
do inevitably follow shutting Infants out of the Covenant of grace, they are
included in with their Parents.

1. This does impose a great restraint upon the blessed Covenant, contracting
the large and copious grace of God, that is involved in it. This clips the
wings of the love, grace and mercy of God, that does dilate and amplify
themselves in a Covenant way. Men may boast and vaunt that they are the great
admirers, and promoters of the riches of Divine grace, but so long as they do
Eclipse, and obscure the glory, and the brightness of it in the Covenant; so
long they are but empty Pretenders, like unto sounding Brass, and a tinkling
Cymbal. The great way that the fountain of Grace has always taken to diffuse
and to convey it self, ever since the miserable state of Man stood in need of
it, has been through the Covenant of grace; out of which to exclude Infants, is
the ready way to contract, abbreviate and to confine it in straighter Channels
then ever God intended it for. What a wonderful restraint is here fixed upon the
grace of God, when Parents must only be taken in, and all their Infants must be
thrust out; when Parents must be the Children of the Covenant and of the
Promise, and their Seed must be the Children of the Pagans and Heathens, and in
no better a capacity as to any Spiritual privileges then they; when much of
the Lustration and admired beauty of it is (by every unprejudiced Eye) clearly
to be seen from the gracious extent of it, to the Seed of those that are taken
into it. Thus with Abraham, and all along, and thus in our Text, the Promise is
to you, and your Seed. Nay, this is to make an essential violation upon, and
alteration of the Covenant, without any color of pretense, or shadow of reason
in the least: For we never read since the institution of it, that ever Children
were shut out.

2. This makes the case and condition of Children far worse than they were
before the Incarnation and ascension of Christ; and it makes the Covenant-State
of believing Parents to be worse: for before they were not only themselves in
the happy compass of the Covenant, but they had their Children with them also,
[to thee, and to thy seed.] Here ran the Glory, the Grace, and the Promises of
the Covenant, to encourage the convinced Jews to believe, and repent. The
Apostle in my Text does assure them, that the Promise is not only to them, but
to their Children likewise. Methinks what a bloody Knife is here at the Throat
of all the gracious Covenant-promises made to Infants, or poor Children. By
this opinion they have small ground of rejoicing at the appearance of Christ in
the flesh, that did immediately abandon them out of the Covenant. We read Mat.
21.15. of Children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of
David: But this Doctrine of shutting them out of the Covenant gives them but
little ground of those acclamations. But their sounding out of the praises of
the Redeemer, is a clear Indication that it was for their sake, that he was
come to impart unto, and to enrich them with all the redemption-blessings wrapped
up in the Covenant. Doubtless their amazing Hosannah's they poured out to their
Mediator of that Covenant they did partake of, were by a Supernatural instinct
and influence, Mat. 21.16. Have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes, and
sucklings thou have perfected praise? The Lord Jesus never came into the World
to contract, but to enlarge the Covenant; he was so far from turning Children
out of the Covenant, as that he has extended it unto the Gentiles, and all the
nations of the World, and their Seed, upon their believing.

3. This shuts out, and deprives them of the ordinary way of Salvation; as to
extraordinary ways, we have no Rule to walk by, what a prejudice is here
offered to Infants? And what a Soul-destructive Tenent is that, which deprives
little ones of all ordinary ways and means of eternal Salvation? They have as
precious Souls as any; and by nature (through the guilt and filth of sin) as
miserable and obnoxious to Divine wrath as others. They have equal necessity of
the grace of God, and the blood of Christ with their first Parents they
descended from: And I know no ordinary appointed way for their help, relief and
recovery, but by and through the Covenant of grace. How slenderly do many
consider of this cruel absurdity, that they cannot free their opinion from? How
helpless does this reader all children of pious Parents to be? I might
illustrate and amplify this by many particulars, some of which I shall just
propound.

(1.) This does deprive them of being Members of the visible Church of Christ;
for this Church is enclosed within the Covenant; to shut them out of this
enclosure, is directly opposite to Christ's own and open assertion, Mat. 19.14.
Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven. So that to exclude Believers Infants, being part of th
visible Church in general, is to exclude them from any ordinary State and way
of Salvation; this has been a long received saying, that extra Ecclesiam non
est salus, no Salvation in an ordinary way. To exclude all Infants of Believers
from a notion of Abraham's Spiritual Seed, from a Covenant and Church State, is
to put them into the same State of the Children of Infidels and Pagan Gentiles,
who are strangers from the Promise and Covenants, and in a godless, Christless
and hopeless State, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. This the Apostle sets out to be the
deplorable condition of all such, making no distinction of potentia remota, aut
propinqua, let this be well considered.

(2.) They cannot be judged to be the Elect of God to Eternal life; all that
shall saved, are the chosen to Salvation before all time, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love: Having predestined
us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. But
we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren beloved of the
Lord; because God has from the beginning, chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the truth. The line of Election
does usually, and for the most part runs through the Lines of the inchurched
incovenanted Parents; there the greatest part of the golden Veins are placed.
So it was amongst the Jews in the duration of their Church and Covenant-State,
Romans 11.5. Even so then at this present time also, there is a remnant according
to the election of grace. Now for men to turn them out of the Covenant of
Grace, is to render them in a very unpromising Station of the Election of God,
to appertain unto them. This is as to Gods eternal choice to make them
altogether as hopeless as the Seed of Pagans and Infidels. Though I readly grant
that secret things belong unto God; yet from what is revealed, we have little
ground to judge that any considerable quantity of the Elect are to be concluded
to be amongst the Heathen world; where the Covenant is not on foot, where
Christ is neither preached or known, where Souls be not converted nor called,
nor any saving signs by the fruits and effects of Election discovered nor
Demonstrated.

(3.) Such cannot be supposed (by any ordinary prospect) to be any of them,
that God has eternally given to Christ to Save; those that are saved in time,
are such that are given to Christ before all time: When Christ came into the
World, to suffer, to lay down his precious life, he openly declared, that it
was for his sheep, for those the Father had given him, and for none beside,
John 10.11, 15, 17. and 17.6, 9. There was an eternal Covenant of Redemption
concluded between the Father and the Son; in the which the Son did engage to
satisfy Divine justice, by being a Propitiation in his blood, for the
Redemption of those that were given him: And the Father promised all grace
here, and everlasting glory hereafter unto them as the fruit of his own grace,
and the purchase of their Mediator that offered up himself as an offering, and
Oblation of a sweet smelling savor, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. And all this is
conveyed and transmitted to them by, and through an Evangelical Covenant of grace
made unto believing Parents and their Elect Seed: For this is the great Sluice,
through which all the blessings of the Covenant of Redemption do run. Now to
banish Infants out of this Covenant, what foundation can we descry to build any
hopes upon, that they be any of those, that be eternally given by the Father,
to the Son to bring into a State of grace here, and mansions of glory
hereafter, Psalm. 89.28. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my
covenant shall stand fast with him, Viz. with Jesus Christ.

(4.) We cannot look upon any of the Seed of Believers to be loved by God from
the beginning, (if they be excluded that gracious compact they be in with their
Parents,) Gods love to his Elect before all time is manifested to them in time;
the establishing of a Covenant of Grace, is the great effort and emanation of
the love of God to the eternally, designed and determinated Subjects of the
same God did single out Abraham, and his Seed, from the rest of the World, to
make an open patefaction, and discovery of the hidden, and secret purposes, and
intentions of his grace, and love to them; therefore he entered into a Covenant
of Grace with them, not only with Abraham, but also with his Seed, that being
the great conveyance of all unto them. Eternal grace, and love streams through it
from the fountain of grace and love: So that if they be thrust out of this,
they be diverted from the usual current of all gracious designs and purposes;
and this must of necessity render their condition to be very dangerous and
desperate.

(5.) Neither can they be hopefully looked upon to be redeemed, and purchased by
Christ and his meritorious blood: That which gives believing Parents any good
assurance of hopes, that Christ extended his mediatory undertakings and
sufferings for their Children, is the Covenant Interest their Children have
obtained with them. Take away this Anchor-hold, and the Anchor that is cast
out, will come home, and Hope will languish, and quickly grow very faint. But
here in my Doctrine is a good bottom for Faith and Hope, in our wrestling with
God by Faith in Prayer, for the glorious Fruits and gracious Effects of the
Effusion of the Blood of the Lamb of God, that gave up himself unto death for
us. The Lord Jesus Christ himself came through the Covenant, and was the great
Seed of the Promise; therefore he has this Attribute given to him, That he is
the Mediator of the Covenant, Heb. 8.6. All his Mediation is promoted and
transacted through this gracious Covenant, therefore also he is called Jesus,
the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. And also his Blood is called the
blood of the Everlasting Covenant; it comes swimming unto us through the
Everlasting Covenant: So that to shut the Seed of the Faithful forth of this
Covenant, you do (as much as you can) carry them besides the usual passage of
this Covenant-Blood.

(6.) Neither can they be capable of Remission and pardon of Sin. Infants as
well all others be Sinners, guilty Sinners, and have an indispenfable necessity
of the pardon of Sin, as well as the Adult; they be born with the guilt of
Adam, Sin lying at their door, which is a strong Bar to keep them out of
Heaven, unless it be by pardoning Grace removed: They come into the World, and
can never go to Heaven, though they be never so few Moments in it, without
pardoning Mercy. But where is Forgiveness sealed? Is it not in the Covenant of
Grace? Are not the Free and Gracious Promises great Branches of, yea Essential
Parts of the Covenant? And are not the Promises of Remission, some of the
Promises of it? Therefore we may see that all those that are or shall be
pardoned, it must be by and through this Covenant; and if so, where are the
Hopes placed for the pardon of the Sins of our dying Infants, that are shut out
of it? I need not (I hope) stand to prove by several Scriptures; that pardoning
Mercy is Covenant Mercy, and is assured by the Promises of it; indeed there is
not one Promise of this, but what is a Covenant one. Oh! then let us have a
care what we do, that we do not dare to disinherit the Children of Believers,
in that which gives the greatest hopes of their pardon of sin.

(7.) They cannot be the Lords Adopted Children, without this Covenant of
Grace: Adoption is a Covenant Blessing, take it in a general and in an especial
acceptance; there cannot be so much as a general Adoption without this
Covenant, as I have shown you, because of this all Israel was called Gods Son
and his Children; this I have proved by many Scriptures which do abound with
it: much less can there be any special and peculiar Adoption without a Covenant
of Grace, this being one of the prime blessings of it. Gracious Parents are
greatly concerned that their Children should be the Lords, that they should be
the Adopted Children of the Heavenly Father, and Heirs according to promise:
but this is the peculiar favor and privilege of such, that are concluded
within the compass and bounds of the Covenant, Act. 3.25. Ye are the children
of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our Fathers, etc. It
is by Covenant that ye become Children, and do partake of the Adoption; for
unto Covenant-ones does the Adoption appertain, Romans 9.4. Who are Israelites,
to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants. Here we see
that the Adoption, and the Covenant go together; he that is shut out of one,
cannot be a Partaker of the other.

(8.) They cannot be sanctified nor washed from their Sins; turn them out of the
Covenant, and you drive them from the Laver of Regeneration and Sanctification;
nay, you send them away from the very Fountain of Grace, that is opened for Sin
and for Uncleanness, Zech. 12.10. Infants, yea those of the most pious and
sanctified Parents, were shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin, Psalm. 51.5.
Those that spring from corrupt Parents cannot be clean, Job 14.4. Who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. and 15.14. What is man, that he
should be clean? and he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
It is impossible that he should; Parents by propagation can only convey Sin to
their Posterity, not Grace; but all the hope that they can have of their
Sanctification is lodged in a Covenant of Grace, where there are Provisions of
cleansing and Sanctification treasured up; and unless Infants be sanctified,
they cannot be saved, nor inherit the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5.5. But the
Covenant of Grace is eminently adorned with excellent Promises of cleansing and
Purification. And for this our Lord Jesus poured out his Immaculate Blood,
which is the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant; this he did for his Church,
which Children are a numerous part of, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. And all the washing
and cleansing of Souls is promised in, and transmitted through the Covenant; so
that for Children to be excluded from it, they must be bereaved and deprived of
all this great Covenant blessing, without which they must be lost eternally,
and be concluded with the abominable and filthy, to be the Fuel of
inextinguishable Flames of Revenging Wrath. But Parents may encourage
themselves, from the good Inducements that are administered to them, in
reference to their little Children, from this Heart-supporting, and
Soul-reviving Covenant, Jer. 31.33. Viz. This is one great Branch and Blessing
of my Covenant: Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye
shall be clean (...) from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I
cleanse you. Infants must be included in these Promises, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the
Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul. This is a blessed
Encouragement vouchsaft by the Covenant of Grace, but deny Infants a Title to
this, and then you have no room left to expect (in an ordinary way) their
Purification and Holiness. So that still it appears to be dangerous to exclude
them this Covenant.

(9.) They cannot enjoy the Lords gracious Presence without partaking of the
Covenant; it is his Covenant-Presence that is his peculiar and gracious
Presence, that he does enrich his People withal. The Church, and the
Vovenant People of the Lord, did partake of this Presence, before Christ came
it was with them, and with their Children, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell with them,
and walk with them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: Viz.
My peculiar, and my Vovenant People; for unto such does this Special Presence
appertain; God pitcheth his Tabernacle, and fixes his Presence, and Residence,
among his that are in this Happy Compact with him, Lev. 26.11, 12. And I will
set my tabernacle amongst you: and I will walk among you, and ye shall be my
people. To turn Children out of this Covenant, is the next way to send them
from all the Beatifical Shines of this Mercy, and to dismiss them from the
gracious Presence of the Lord, and to make them wandering and perpetually
exposed Vagabonds, like unto Cain; yea, this is the way to bring the Children
of Believers under that direful Imprecation, Psalm. 109.10. Let his children be
continually vagabonds, -- The worst Vagabonds in the World are those that be
stigmatized with the infamous Brand of being Excluded the Covenant, and the
gracious Presence of the Lord. We see then, that Men had need be careful how
(in respect of the Covenant) they deal with poor Infants.

(10.) They cannot be gathered to Christ, nor brought under the Wings of his
Mercy. It is an Excellent Promise of Christ, That the gathering of the People,
viz. of all the Elect, shall be unto him, Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come,
viz. Christ, and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. But still the
gathering of Christ is a Covenant-gathering, Psalm. 50.5. Gather my saints
together, that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. The Wings of Christ,
underneath which the gathering must be, are lifted up in this Covenant; though
his gracious Wings be never so receptive, and large, yet the only way to creep
under them, is by getting within the Bond of the Covenant. Those that be not
within the Enclosure of it, are not said to be gathered, but to be remote, and
distant from Christ, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. That at that time ye were without Christ,
being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world: But now in Christ
Jesus, ye that were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. You be
called and brought into the Covenant, though you were afar off, yet now are
brought nigh by the Blood of the Covenant; so that all that are not in the
Covenant, are still afar off, and remote from Christ. This is the condition
that Children of pious Parents must be unavoidably cast into, that are banished
the Covenant of grace, by which a people are brought nigh and gathered into and
unto Christ.

(11.) They be by this way of dealing shut out of (in a word) all
Covenant-Blessings, and Privileges; and so are represented to be in a most
deplorable and miserable condition, this strips them naked of all the
covenant-blessings, they be clothed and invested with. It is the promise of
the Lord, and it is a promise full of grace, that he will show mercy to
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Viz. To many
generations of their Seed, and posterity. I shall here enlarge no further.
Thus, by what has been said, you may see that by excluding Infants out of the
Covenant of grace, they be shut out of all the ordinary ways and means of
Salvation. For a full confirmation of all these particulars, we see our
friends, the Anabaptists deny to the Infant Seed of Believers, the token of the
Covenant, which Seals up all the Covenant-mercys that God has promised and
graciously provided: For it is to be observed, that when the Lord did establish
his Covenant with Abraham, and his Seed, Genesis 17.7. in the 10. ver. He
instituted and appointed Circumcision the Seal of the Covenant to assure
Abraham of the performance of all the gracious promises of it is. To deny the
Seal then, is to break the Covenant, and (as far as man can) to deprive the
Seed of all privileges, and benefits of it.

4. The next absurdity from the Doctrine of turning Infants out of Covenant is
this, It does not only hinder them, from being Members of Christ; but makes
them the miserable offspring and Members of Satan. Those that deny Childrens
Covenantship, by which they be Foederally holy, pretend some kindness unto
them; in as much as they would not have them to be bastards, they would not
have them to be the product and Children of harlots, and whoremongers; but they
indeavuor to make them the Children of the Devil, they cannot be the Members of
the Body of Christ, if not in Covenant; because all that are his he receives
them by, injoys them in, and communicates to them through a Covenant: Does he
pardon them? Does he Adopt them? Does he sanctify them? Does he preserve them?
All is through a blessed Covenant, without which they must be plunged into a
miserable condition; God is not their God and Father, Christ is not their
Redeemer and Advocate, they be remote and far distant from God, they be in the
Tents of the Egyptians, of the Synagogue of Satan and his Children, if they be
not in the Covenant of Grace, they cannot be in the Kingdom of God, but must be
in the Kingdom of Satan, the God of the World, and the Prince of Darkness, that
rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience. Until the converted
Ephesians were called out of Sin, they were without the Covenant, and without a
Promise, yea, without God and Christ, and all hope in the World, both for
themselves and Children also.

5. This takes from, and defeats godly Parents of all ground of hope,
concerning the Eternal Happiness of their dying Babes, Children and Little
Ones. A Pagan, an Infidel may by this Doctrine have as good a Foundation to
build their Hopes of Happiness upon, as to their deceased Little Ones, as the
most holy Saints of God in the World: For what is that, which can give any one
great hopes of another, but a visible Covenant-State, where all Salvation is
lodged and founded? To turn Infants out of the Covenant, and to make them
Strangers thereby to all the salvificable Promises thereof, is the way to leave
them no hope, nor their Parents for them. I wonder what hopes in an ordinary
manner (and we must not build upon extraordinary things) they can have
concerning their Departed Infants, who before they were dismissed out of the
World, were by them dismissed out of the Covenant. For my part, I do comfortably
profess, that the hopes that I have of the Salvation of my dear Young Ones,
that are out of the Body, is purely built upon the Grace of God in this
Covenant, which I would not be without for Ten Thousand Worlds. Oh! Christians,
Christians let not this Hold of Mercy go, as ever you would encourage your
selves to hope, that your dear Expired Babes are in the Bosom of Christ.

6. And by consequence, according to this Doctrine of our Adversaries, we can
have no hope of seeing our buried Infants again in comfort, when we dye, or at
the Blessed Coming and the Glorious Appearance of the Lord Jesus in the last
and ultimate Day. What hopes can we have that our deceased Infants are fallen
asleep in the Arms of Christ, and that he will bring them again with him, and
you shall enjoy them eternally? If they be not enclosed and intrencht in the
Covenant of Grace, vain are the hopes of all in this matter without it. But
whereas the Lord in covenant, has in a most gracious manner proclaimed himself
thus, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob, and of their Seed for ever;
this is sufficient ground to comfort our selves that we shall have a blessed
fresh View, and a glorious Enjoyment of our little absent Ones, and that for
ever. There can be no ground of a happy Resurrection to Eternal Life for our
selves, or Infants, but by and through a Covenant; without this, Parents can
have no warrantable, nor comfortable expectation of seeing their Infants at the
Right hand of Christ, in the Great Day, but on the Left, among them that were
never in covenant, but lived and died afar off from Christ, and so without all
hope. What can we expect to hear of our Little Ones, when Christ shall judge
the World in Righteousness, if they be then found without the Pale of the
Covenant, but a formidable, though a righteous, Doom pronounced against them,
to inhabit the Flames of Eternal Burnings?

Thus I have insisted upon some of the gross Absurdities, that do fall in with
their cruel and unwarrantable turning the Children of Believers out of the
Blessed Covenant of Abraham, the Father of us all. I wish that all that have
heard me may seriously, and impartially without all prejudice, ponder upon
these things. I persuade my self, did but Christians thoroughly consider these
Matters, it would not be that many durst be so prompt, and bold, to
disfranchise Infants of this Covenant Charter, as they are. Many make nothing
to make Breaches upon the Lords gracious Enclosure, that they may turn the
Lambs forth into the Herds of the Goats and Wolves. Thus I have done with the
Second General Head, propounded to be observed in the Method of this my
Discourse, and so I proceed.

III. To the Third General Head, the (...) of this Matter, which is to give
some Reasons to show, why it is so, why the Lord does take Insants into
covenant with their Parents. Many good Reasons might be given for this: But I
have been large upon the immediate preceding Head, that was in this
Controversy chiefly to be insisted upon; insomuch, that I design much brevity
in this; but however, I judge it very suitable to give you a few Reasons of
this good and precious Point of Gospel Truth.

1. Reason Shall be taken from the Rich and abundant Grace of God; that is the
inward moving Cause of all this Covenant, is all of pure Grace; and it is a
great Birth from the Infinite Womb of Grace. Here is an unconceivable Instance
of the Riches of the Grace of God to Sinners. Oh! what but unsearchable Grace
did the Lord manifest in calling Abraham out of an idolatrous place and Nation,
and to establish his Covenant with him, and his Seed for ever, and make him to
be the Father of many Nations, Kindreds and Tongues? Away with that pitiful
Notion of a Covenant of Works, and outward Blessings made with Abraham and his
Seed, in Genesis 17. whereas the very Tenor of that Covenant represents it to be
a Sparkling Constellation of the Shining Refulgency of the Grace of God. The
God of Grace takes whom he will, and impales in this Covenant; first he was
pleased to take the Jews into it, and leave out all the World besides, to enter
into covenant with them, and to be their God; then Grace took the Gentiles in
among the Jews, and into the place from which some through unbelief were broken
off, Romans 11.17. The casting away of some of the Jews was the reconciling of
the World; God would show his Goodness and his Severity to whom he pleased, and
who can say unto him, What do thou? -- he gives no account of his matters,
Job 33.13. Grace has accepted of the Gentiles, and of their Seed to be holy,
under the Administration of the Gospel. Is Grace less abounding, giving out
less Privileges now, under the New, than under the Old Testament? Has Grace
contracted the Covenant more now than before? Has Grace no Covenant-Blessings
for the Children of Believers now? And must their poor Offspring suffer a
cutting off of the Entail of the Covenant? Has Jacob carried away all the
Blessing, and none left for the Children of the inchurched and incovenanted
Gentiles? Surely Grace is not now straightened. Our dear Lord and Savior has the
same Bowels of Mercy to poor tender Babes that ever he had, and as he had then,
when he said, Suffer them to come unto me, and forbid them not, and declared
that of such are the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.13, 14. He took them up into
his Arms, and put them into his Bosom, as we may well suppose, when he laid his
Hands upon them and blessed them: Has not Grace the same effects as to
Children, as when he sent his Apostle to tell the poor awakened and bleeding
Sinners, that the Promise was to them, and their children? As when it graffed
in the Gentiles among the Jews, to partake with them of the Juice and Fatness
of the Olive Tree, it has not spent all its Fatness upon them; but if there be
any Fatness, Nourishment, Satisfaction, and Comfort, to have hope in God from
the Covenant for poor Little Ones, we have it, and the Apostle comforts
trembling Creatures in our Text with it, and so the Apostle Paul in telling the
Gentiles, that they be inserted in this Covenant among the Jews, and are
Partakers of the same Fatness with them. This therefore does Answer them, that
demand and question How natural generation can entitle a Man to
Covenant-Priviledges? I demand, How does natural generation entitle a Man to
the Curse? A corrupt Man under the Curse of the First Covenant begets a Child
in his own likeness as corrupt, and as accursed as himself; How comes this to
pass, but through the Justice of God, in imputing to Children the Curse of that
Covenant, under which they were born? So e contra, a Believer under the
Covenant of Grace, begets a Child, though corrupt as from him, yet by virtue of
the Grace of the New Covenant, under which he is born, he has a Foederal
Holiness, and is a Partaker of the Privileges of the same Covenant. So Grace
in the appointed time, shall reassume the Jews that be cast out, and graff
them again into their Old Stock, and they shall be a Glorious People.

2. Reason, Shall be taken from the final Cause, there is a double final Cause
of it.

1. That the Lord may have and reap the Glory of his Grace, of this high
expression, and signification of his grace, Viz. in taking Infants into
Covenant with their Parents; which they do rob him of, that deny this grace to
Infants, they do greatly abbreviate, extenuate and vail the grace of God, that
will only admit the Adult believing, and repenting* Parent into Covenant; but
by no means will their Seed and Little Ones: This is the way to congeal the
divine bowels that be full of inward yearnings to enclosed Little Ones. That
the Apostle in my Text might administer the best, and so the most expedient
Cordial to the broken and afflicted Jews; who were greatly concerned not only
about their own, but the safety and Salvation of their Children; tells them,
That the promise was to them, and their children: The belief and exercise of
faith about this matter, is the ready way to promote, an excellent Revenue of
praise and honor for the grace of God: What wrong and indignity is offered to
the grace of God, by shutting of poor Infants that cannot plead for themselves,
for whom the grace of God and blood of the Covenant of the eternal Son will
effectually plead, out of this Covenant? Let men talk what they will of the
Spiritual Seed, of the grace of God in Christ, yet so long as they labor to
abandon an innumerable multitude of the Subjects of it, they are great
Prevaricators from, and perverters of that grace; and so become grand
obstructers of that Crop and harvest of praise and honor, that he expects from
his Covenant-transactions of grace with Parents and their Children.

2. That so by this means he might allure and graciously intiee men and women
to accept of, and to come under this Covenant: This is indeed a sweet decoy,
that a gracious God is pleased to make us of in this affair; this is to
insinuate the minds of men into a well liking of, and acceptance of the
Covenant, and the Gospel administration of it: This is the scope of the Apostle
in my Text. Here the Apostle was alluring his pensive and weeping Auditory to
accept of this; therefore he milks out of this breast of Consolation that which
might taste sweet upon the Palates of them, whose Sins were now bitter as
Wormwood and Gall, and were under Soul-sinking fears about their own and their
Childrens eternal welfare and condition. Well said the Apostle, I discern your
trembling and aching hearts, your overwhelming doubts and fears; but be still,
sedate, and compose your minds and thoughts, accept of the Gospel dispensation,
and for your comprehensive encouragement and complete satisfaction, I say unto
you, The promise is to you, and your children. Oh! methinks, how did this
revive their disconsolate and dejected hearts, and drooping sinking spirits,
quickly melting their wills into a ready compliance with the Apostles
Exhortation, as we find presently after our Text. If this privilege were cut
off, the Jews would have little encouragement to leave Moses to follow Christ;
to forsake the Old, and to cleave to the New Dispensation of the Covenant which
was then setting on foot, and which they were exhorted unto. They well knew
before, that they themselves, and also their Children, were in Covenant with
God; and the Apostle speaks unto them as so instructed and established;
therefore said he, The promise is to you, and your children. As if he had said,
I know that this is an Article of your Faith, that which all the Jews do very
tenaciously adhere unto, and this shall be continued unto you. This the Apostle
does firmly assure them of, to win them over; telling them that they should be
no losers by coming under this Dispensation; seeing the privilege of having
the Promise to them, and their Children, should not be taken from, but
confirmed unto them. This removed all impediments out of their way, and so they
did readily and unanimously fall in with the Apostles Exhortation.

3. Reason. Because the Lord would discover his peculiar love to, and care of
the Children of his own People. This is a peculiar privilege, and it is to
demonstrate peculiar love and affection: It is also (as I shall show you
presently) that the Lord may discover his peculiar love to the believing
Parents. Here is the distinguishing love and kindness of God to them both. God
has such a love for pious Parents and their Children, that he has not for the
rest of the World; therefore he takes them both into Covenant with himself.
Covenant Love is always expressed in the Scriptures to be peculiar Love, that
God might show even to the face of all the World; that distinct and special
Love, which out of infinite and special Grace and Favor he had lodged in his
heart to Abraham and his Seed; he was pleased to take them both into Covenant
with himself; and so they came under a blessed Marriage Bond, which does not
only denote a near Relation, but also Conjugal Affection. God has a peculiar
Love for them, will make them his Church and People, therefore brings them
under a Covenant Bond, and Compact, and Engagement; Deuteronomy. 4.37. And because he
loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them. This has been the
way of the Lord, to express his peculiar love that he has to and care over a
People to enter into Covenant with them, which is of a distinguishing and of a
discriminating nature from the rest of the World and their Seed; Ezekiel. 16.8. I
entered into covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. Mine and Covenant do
always go together.

4. Reason. Because the Lord may lay a good and sure foundation for the hope,
comfort and joy of pious Parents concerning their Children. God knows how much
the hearts of good men are concerned about their little ones the Lord is
pleased to bestow upon them; how much and how deeply they be taken up in their
considerate and studious minds about their Eternal State. Religious Parents
know what immortal and never dying Souls their Children are inspired withal,
that must be everlastingly happy or miserable; that must live with Saints and
Angels, or Devils for ever; they know not how soon it may please the Lord to
demand them back again from them, and consign them to an unalterable station;
they know that they have conveyed and communicated to them a sinful Nature, and
as they are descended from them, they be plunged in the filthy labyrinth of
Sin, and that they be born under the guilt of Sin, by Nature Children of Wrath:
These, and such like matters cannot but oftentimes sink and overwhelm the
thoughts of good Parents, and occasion pensive meditations about their little
ones: Now for them to sit down and contemplate what grounds of hope God has
been pleased to give them, in relation to the Souls of their Children; oh how
comfortable is it? And they find that all their hopes must center in this
blessed Covenant, which the Lord has been graciously pleased to make with
Parents and their Children. A Covenant abundantly enriched with all Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal Blessings and Privileges, which may give full solace,
and acquiescing content and satisfaction to godly Parents that are thus
concerned about their Children. There is enough in that promise of the
Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. By reason of the Covenant
of Grace, Believers may look upon their Children to be the gracious gifts of
God unto them: So did Jacob, Genesis 33.5. said he unto Esau, These are the
children which God has graciously given thy servant; and by reason of this
Covenant they may hope and believe, that God will graciously take care of and
provide for them. If Parents did believe that their Children were not in
Covenant with the Lord, and that the promises and privileges did no more
appertain unto them, than unto the Children of Pagans and Infidels, as some do
too impiously assert; I know not what joy and comfort they can conceive in
their minds about their Children, nor what can feed their Faith in crying unto
and wrestling with God for them: What comfort can poor grieved Parents take
concerning that miserable state they receive their Children into the World in?
unless they find sweet and comfortable support and relief from the
everlastingly gracious Covenant; which does wonderfully magnify the Grace of
God to Parents, in that he has taken their Children with them into it, and
makes abundantly for their peace and consolation. This was that which
satisfied, and even ravished the heart of David with joy, concerning his Family
and Children; 2 Samuel 12.23. when his Child was dead, he was greatly comforted
and satisfied, saying, I shall go to him, but he shall not come to me; which
words, as I apprehend, denote the good hopes that quieted his mind, through the
thoughts he had of the eternal happiness of his Child, and that he should
shortly go to him, and enjoy the same happiness with him. This good man David
did meet with great disappointment in his House and Family; but from the
consideration of the Covenant, he had a never-failing spring of joy and
comfort, which did exhilarate his Spirits in their depressing sinkings; 2 Samuel
23.5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. This is a full
breast of consolation, upon which all godly Parents may hang, and suck, and
draw a fullness of peace and comfort for themselves and Family in their most
discouraging and dying dispensations.

5. Reason. Because by this means the Lord may provide for a perpetual and an
uninterrupted succession for his Church and Kingdom in the World. That God will
have a Church unto the end of the World is founded upon his Eternal Purpose,
the Mediatory Transactions of his ever blessed Son, and upon the infallible
Promises of the neverfailing Word: But this is the way and expedient, that he
is pleased to pitch and fix upon, for the preservation and perpetual
propagation of it; he has taken his Church into Covenant with himself, the
Parents and their Children, the latter of which are to promote and to provide
for its continual succession; that so when Parents have finished the work of
their generation, and shall descend the stage of the World, their Children may
take place, and fill up the vacancy in the Church of God. This was one great
reason why the Lord did take Adam, Noah, Abraham; Isaac and Jacob into Covenant
with their Children, that out of their Loins might issue a Seed to populate,
and to secure the Church as to a perpetual succession in Gods Family, House and
Kingdom: So the Covenant in the new Dispensation of it takes in the Parents and
their Seed, for the same end, and purpose. For the great built of the Elect,
and body for the future provision of the Church, are provided from the Covenan^
Seed: Therefore as it has before been proved that Children are Members of the
Kingdom and Church of God, this is one great end why the Lord has instituted
Marriage for Covenant Parents, that he might provide a constant Seed for his
Church. The Metaphors by which the Church is illustrated, described and lively
represented do abundantly demonstrate this; sometimes the Church is compared to
a Vineyard, sometimes to an Orchard, and sometimes to a Garden; see Cant. 4.13.
Psalm. 80.15. Isa. 5.1, 7. Matthew 21.33. Cant. 4.12, 16. and 5.1. and 6.2, 11.
now we know that those that have the care of Orchards, Vineyards and Gardens,
one principal thing that they have in their eye and endeavor, is a succession,
either of Trees, Plants, Herbs or Flowers, therefore they have their Nurseries
and their Seeds. Oh! so it is here, the great God that takes care of his
Orchard, Vineyard or Garden, has a curious regard of, and respect to a
constant succession; and the Infants and Children of his enclosed and impaled
Covenant ones, are his Nursery and his Seed to secure a perpetual supply for
all vacancies, that frequently by Death are incident to his Church and Kingdom:
though the Lord does not so confine himself, but that he does sometimes take a
wild Plant, and set in his Garden, such a one as he may find in the Wilderness
or Forest of the World; but we speak of his usual way of provision in this
matter; and because of this, Parents in Covenant with the Lord, must be careful
in their educating and admonishing of their Children, which are the Lords
Nursery, that they may be a visible and hopeful provision for a succession in
the Church of God. For this very end they ought to have a singular respect
unto, and a careful and diligent compliance with that holy command, Ephesians. 6.4.
And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; bu^ bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord: Thus they must endeavor to do that; and
when they shall have finished their work and course in the World, that then
their Children may stand up in their room and place, as the immediate
successors to them in the Church, in the work and service of the Lord in their
Generation. So much for the Third General Head propounded in my Discourse, and
for the Doctrinal part of it; now we approach unto the Use of this Point, which
is the last thing I promised and propounded in this matter.

IV. The Fourth General Thing to conclude this Point, is to make some useful
improvement of it by way of Application. I did not, neither do I intend to be
large in this particular, only I thought it was pity that such a Truth should
be wholly overlooked without some, though but little Application.

1. Use, By way of Information. This Doctrine does inform us of many precious
Truths; it is a Field out of which we may gather most rare and excellent
Flowers; it is a full Fountain, from whence does issue variety of Streams: Some
of those things that may be deduced and inferred from it, I shall set before
you.

1. This does inform us of the exceeding Riches of the Grace of God, both as to
Believers and their Seed. The Grace of God has always been expressed in a
Covenant way; here is Grace abounding and running over to Parents, those that
God has taken into Covenant with himself; here it is intended to all sorts and
degrees of the Children of Men; here is help to the poor helpless Infant, even
to him that sucketh upon the breast, and a ground of hope administered to
tender and concerned Parents to their dying Little Ones. In this Covenant is
lodged a blessed plethory of Grace, a full provision made for the smallest as
well as for the greatest, not only for electing, but for calling, justifying
and sanctifying Mercies; here is that which is sufficient to supply the least
twig with liquor, to fill all sorts of vessels: There was a fullness of Oil
poured out in a Covenant way upon the head of our great High Priest, that ran
down and extended it self to the uttermost skirts of the garments, Psalm. 133.2.
It was of wonderful Grace, that God was pleased to single out Abraham, to
establish his Covenant with; and that it might appear in its clearest beauty,
and be most transparent, it did comprehend his Seed for ever. So in our Text,
when the Apostle would give his awakened and almost succumbing Hearers the most
suitable and supporting relief, he opens the bosom of Grace in the Covenant
extent of it, telling them, The promise is to them and their children.

2. This does instruct us into the high honor that the Lord is pleased to
confer upon his People. It was not only an Act of Grace, but also of Honor,
that God was pleased to admit Abraham unto, when he took him and his Seed into
this Covenant with him: This is that which made the Nation of the Jews so
honorable, as it was above all the Nations of the World besides, they and
theirs were the Lords enclosure and Covenant People; and so were discriminated
and distinguished from all the rest of the World: I may allude to that place,
Psalm. 149.9. This honor have all the saints; praise ye the Lord. Oh I
Christians, you that do enjoy this high preferment, though you have never so
small a proportion of the matters of the World, yet God has gratified you with
greater honor than if your Families had appertained to Crowned Heads, and
Sceptred Hands; Ezekiel. 16.8. And I entered into covenant with thee, says the
Lord God: Then did the Lord deck her with all manner of rich and noble
Ornaments; and ver. 14. it is said, Thy renown went forth among the heathens,
for thy beauty was perfect, through my comeliness which I put upon thee.

3. This does inform us of the great mistake of those that deny the Children of
Believers, as such, to have any interest in the Covenant of Grace. This is the
Doctrine of our Friends the Anabaptists; but we have (I hope) sufficiently
proved, that God is so gracious as to take them into Covenant with their
Parents: They be not left out, till they be so adult as to make profession of
their Faith, Repentance and Obedience, and until then to be looked upon as the
miserable offspring of Heathens, Infidels and Pagans. They that oppose this
Truth, shut out the Natural and talk of a Spiritual Seed, and so out of a
pretense to magnify the Grace of God, they do greatly eclipse and restrain it.
I might have insisted upon the many evils, and the dangers of this, but I must
not enlarge or distinctly stand upon particulars; I might have told you, and
proved;

(1.) That our Adversaries herein make another Covenant than what the Lord has
made, a Covenant of Grace, excluding all the Children of those that are taken
into it. It would be easy to show that from the Lords making of a Covenant at
first, and so all along, both in the Old and New Testament, he never made one
leaving out of the Children.

(2.) That by this means there is very great and apparent wrong done unto the
Infant Children, which are the Seed and Embryo of the Church of God. It Is sad
for those that take upon them the power and exercise of the Keys, to exclude
and shut them all out together. Into what a miserable state and condition must
they be east into? Our great Champion and Challenger has labored extremely in
this matter; but how poorly and weakly is easy to be apprehended by any
competently endowed with Covenant-Knowledge.

(3.) That by this means the ordinary way and dispensation of conveying and
communicating the Fruits of Christ's Death to Children, even to all the Infant
part of his Church, is cut off. How can they partake of the Blood of Christ for
their renewing, cleansing, sanctification, justification and remission of Sins?
These be some of the great and singular Blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
through which the Blood of Christ, which is the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, does in an ordinary way run.

(4.) By this means Men do undermine and labor to destroy the validity and
efficacy of all that God has been pleased graciously to determine, and has
done in a Covenant for Babes: Indeed the foundation of God stands sure, and God
knows who are his: Though Men may labor to cut off the Seed of Gods People
from the Covenant, yet the Lord is more merciful to them than men are. I make
no question but the infinite Grace of God does (through a Covenant) save many
of those poor Children that their cruel Parents do endeavor to shut out.

(5.) This cuts off the hopes that Parents from this Covenant may and ought to
have concerning their dying Children, this being the ground for their anchor
hope to be cast out into; and this cuts off their hopes as to the
Sanctification and Regeneration of those that are living.

(6.) This is the way to render the Prayers of Parents, and of the Church of
God for Little Ones, to be altogether insignificant and vain; this does pass a
Sentence of condemnation upon them all. There ought always to be poured out a
Flood of Prayers for the Seed of the Church. It is a very dangerous thing to
condemn the Prayers of pious Parents, and of the whole Church, daily poured out
upon this account, for those Children of the Covenant that have passed under
the Seal of it, and by the same have been devoted and dedicated in a solemn
manner unto God. Let some think as contemptuously of it as they please, and
reproach it with never so much scurrility and contempt; I would humbly advise
such, to consider what is said, Rev. 13.6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven; viz. them that dwell in the Church. Infants they dwell in the Church,
they be a Multitude of the blessed Inhabitants of it.

(7.) By this means how do Men undermine all the Churches of Christ, that
adhere to this Doctrine of Infants, and for their Baptism. Many of the
Anabaptists do Found their Churches in renouncing Infant Baptism; accounting it
no better than Antichristian, and imposing another Baptism, which they make to
be an essential part of the Foundation that their Church Structure is built
upon, and the only Door to admit into the same; nay, many of them do say, that
ours are no True Churches of Christ, and all because we differ with them as to
the Subject of Baptism, and that we are but as Heaps or Herds of uncircumcised
Philistines.

(8.) By this means there is a great Stumbling Block laid in the way of the
Jews, in coming over unto the Messiah, and accepting of the New and
Gospel-Administration of the Covenant: They ( viz. the Jews) are for the Old
Testament in the latitude, and full extent of it; therefore they are for the
Seal of the Covenant to be fixed still unto the Infant; which accordingly in
their way, they do strictly observe and practice to this very day; but to
Assert another Covenant, which excludes, all their Infant Seed, this will never
go down with them, neither would it with these here in the Text, had the
Apostle mentioned to them a Covenant without their Children. This would have
been but faint and cold Encouragement to them, to have accepted of the Apostles
Exhortation, Thoughts of the Exclusion of their Children would have made them
to hang back.

(9.) This makes the Case of the Jews worse, since the owning of the Messiah,
than it was before; and this in the Days of the Gospel, greatly contracts and
narrows the Grace of God, as to Believers.

(10.) This bereaves the Church of God of a Multitude of its Members; for
Children are the declared Members of the Visible Church, by Christ himself, as
I have shown. Oh! what a cruelty is here offered to, and an Invasion made upon
the Church of God? If Infants be not in this Covenant, they cannot be in the
Church; this is to make such a Church that God never planted, one that is only
constituted, and made up with Adult Members. I am apt to believe, that the
greatest number of the Church is comprehended in the Infant Seed of it: The
Body of Christ is but small respectively, but this is the way to make it small
indeed. Many more things might have been here added; but I have said something
before in this Affair, and shall therefore at present say no more.

4. This Doctrine does inform us, how cruel they may be looked upon to be, that
exclude themselves and Children out of this great Privilege; I mean all wicked
and ungodly Parents; for by their sin and wickedness they deprive themselves
and Children of the Blessings of the Covenant, the only ordinary way of their
Welfare and Happiness. Wicked and ungodly Parents do not only labor to ruin
themselves, but also their Children, by cutting off themselves and Little Ones
(so far as they can) by their Sins, from all the Grace and Mercy of the
Covenant. It may well be said of such, They are not Parents, sed Peremptores,
they have not the Love, the Bowels, and Care of Parents, that they may be
Instruments of their Childrens Salvation, which they are bound by all Bonds and
Obligations unto; but they labor to destroy themselves and theirs for ever.
Ungodly Parents are more savage and cruel to their Little Ones than the most
unnatural and cruel Brutes, or Beasts in the World: All that they do in their
wicked ways and practices, has not only a tendency to their own, but also to
their Childrens eternal misery and destruction; such declare, that they
themselves are not in covenant with God, and they endeavor by this means to
exclude their Children for ever.

5. This informs us of the great Sin of those that were the Seed of the Godly,
and are become Adult, but do not walk in the Steps of their Parents, nor
observe the Covenant-Obligations, that they be under to serve, to fear, to
honor, and to walk with God, that do not observe their dedication to the Lord,
and to be the Lords by their baptismal Vow. What Parents did engage to
endeavor that they should do, they have no regard of, or respect unto; but
violate the Sacred Bonds of the Covenant by a wilful perpetrating of, and a
voluntary giving up of themselves unto all Sin and Impieties; all that they do
is effectually to accomplish their Exclusion by the just Procedure of God
against them, even their utter Exclusion out of the Covenant. How sad will it
be with such, when God shall reckon with them, and avenge the Quarrel of his
Covenant! This is a Sin that a Jealous God does resent with great complaint,
and with high displeasure, Psalm. 78.37. For their heart was not right with him,
neither were they steadfast in his covenant: Ezekiel. 44.7. Isa. 24.5. The earth
also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof: because they have transgressed
the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Jer. 31.32.
Not according to the covenant I made with their fathers in the day that I took
them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which covenant they
brake, though I was a husband unto them. How unkindly did God take this of
them, in breaking such a Covenant, in which the Lord stood in the gracious
relation unto them of a husband, which should have obliged them to Honor,
Chastity, and Obedience for ever.

6. This does inform us of one great ground that we have, and proceed upon for
the baptizing of the Infants of believing Parents, that be in covenant with
God; because their Children are in covenant with them. This is very evident in
our Text, Acts 2.39. Those the Apostle had here to deal withal, he does exhort
them to repent, and be baptized, and so to enter into the then Establishing
Administration of the Covenant, they and their Children also, for the Promise
was to both. Children that are taken into covenant with their believing
Parents, ought to partake of this Seal of the Covenant with them, for the
Covenant is to the Children, as well as unto them. If Children be Foederati,
then they ought to be Signati, there is a necessary connection between the
Covenant and the Seal; when the Lord was pleased to take Abraham and his Seed
into covenant with himself, the Seal of the Covenant was (upon strict command)
to be Administered unto the Infant Seed, Genesis 17.10. The neglect of which was
very displeasing to God. To talk of being in covenant, and to deny the Seal to
such that are, is very absurd; for this is to cross and contradict the Express
Command and Institution of God. Therefore our Friends the Anabaptists, being
very apprehensive of this, endeavor to evade the Stroke of this Blow by their
miserable Shifts, and fruitless Attempts, to prove that that Covenant in Genesis
17. made with Abraham, was a Covenant of Works; herein they have labored in
the Fire, altogether in vain, for the Tenor and Circumstances of that Covenant
do loudly proclaim it to be a Covenant of Grace, and the natural Language of
it, if it be sincerely hearkened unto, will be Grace, Grace. Abraham's Natural
Seed were in covenant with God, therefore had the Seal of the Covenant, which
was Circumcision enjoined them, as a Singular Privilege: So in proportion
thereunto in Gospel-days, the Seed of Believers in covenant with God, ought to
have, and to enjoy the Seal of it, which is Baptism. It Is brought in as a great
Objection against Infant Baptism, That there is no Command for it; but if Men
will but lay aside all prejudice, and make use of the Reason that God has
furnished them withal, they may here see a clear Command for it, (though it be
by consequence,) Was it not the manifest Will of God, that they to whom the
Covenant belonged should partake of the Seal of the Covenant? Therefore the
Seal is called the Covenant, Genesis 17.10. as if to have the Seal was to have the
Covenant, or to be in it, there is such an inseparable communion and connection
between them; nay, we may carry it home here, we may easily see a clear Command
for it; for it was the obvious and the undoubted Command of God that those in
covenant should have the Seal of the Covenant, though the Seal be altered, as to
the Instrument, yet not as to the Substance, and the Command for the affixing
of it remains inviolable: As in the Sabbath, though the Day of it be changed,
yet the Command for it remains untouched, not in the least abrogated. If we
renounce the baptizing of Infants upon a presumption, that it can only be
proved by consequential Commands, then we shall involve our selves into an
inextricable plunge, and intanglement of other great Truths of the Gospel,
which can chiefly be proved this way; that the Administration of the Lords
Supper must continue to the End of the World, must be drawn consequentially
from such places as Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.26. So when it is said, As often
as ye do this, our Divines do infer a Command that it ought often to be done,
and not once, or twice, or thrice a Year, as the manner of some is. What Rule
can we have of dealing with Women, and censuring them, in case they offend, but
by the way of consequence, for the Rule is expressy, If a Brother does offend
thee, etc. Nor is a Brother of the common Gender, Mat. 18.15. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
Here I might make mention of some great Things in matters of Faith, That Great
Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, that was something sparingly, and
darkly expressed in the Old Testament, our Lord and Savior proves by
undeniable consequence to the Learned Sadducees, that were vehement Deniers of
it, Mat. 22.31, 32. But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not
read that which was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living. Mark, this is founded by way of consequence upon that place, Exodus
3.6. Thus the Fathers proved against the Arrians that denied Christ to be
Essentially one with the Father, they held him out to be (...), consubstantial,
or co-essential with the Father: This is a great Point of Divinity, and a great
Article of our Faith; yet there is no direct Scripture to prove it. This is the
way that is taken in Reasoning with those that deny and dispute against the
Deity of the Holy Ghost; How can it be proved, but by infallible consequence of
the Scripture, that there are Three distinct Persons in One Divine Essence, or
Godhead, or that there is in our Blessed Mediator but one Person, and yet Two
distinct Natures Essentially distinguished? Thus, also we may read in Matters
of Fact, where the same Rule does hold, and must be strictly observed, as for
Instance, where it is said, Acts 4.4. Howbeit, many of them which heard the
word, believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand. What were
there no Women among them, none of their Wives? The word here is not the common
Gender that might comprehend the Woman, for it is (...) not (...). It is
strange if here should be no Woman, that did at this time believe, and were
baptized. I persuade my self the Anabaptists will yield that here might be some
Women; Ay, but that must be drawn by consequence. Certainly we must not doubt,
but that in the Churches of Ephesus; Philippi, Coloss, and all the Churches of
Asia had Baptism among them, yet this must be concluded by consequences, or no
way as I understand. According to the Analogy of Faith, Evangelical Duties are
not always grounded upon Express Commands, either in Old or New Testament, but
from consequences drawn from either; as the Duties of praying Morning and
Evening in the Family, and also in the Closet alone, daily reading of the
Scriptures, and prefixed time of Meditation, setting apart a Time or Day to
seek God by Prayer, in a more than ordinary manner. Many more things might have
been mentioned and improved in this Affair; How can any Man that is so prove
himself to be a Minister of Christ? Or any serious and pious Christian, that he
has an Interest in Christ, that he has Saving and Special Grace, and is an
Heir of Heaven, but by consequence? How many Arguments do the Anabaptists found
upon consequences to prove their Believers Baptism? When they make for them,
then they can cleave to them, and make the utmost Improvement, but when they
make against them, then they be of no use or validity, but they cry out, Give
us plain and positive Proofs, and an absolute Command for such
Infant-sprinkling, (as reproachfully they phrase it,) which my Antagonist is
wonderfully subject to. One great Reason why many well-minded Christians run
away with their Notion of rejecting Infants Baptism is their not wisely
considering, and pondering upon what I have (though in much weakness) said of
the Covenant, and of the new Administration of it in the Times of the Gospel:
An Excellent Specimen we have of it in our Text, where the Gospel that never
was before, in its recent Administration is preached and believed by those that
never were before baptized, there the Adult do enter into covenant, with their
Children, and both ought to be baptized, and afterward this is confirmed by
whole Families that were so. Alas: it follows not that because we read that
those that were never under the Gospel Administration were never baptized
before, but many were Heathens and Gentiles, and were upon their Faith and
Repentance admitted into covenant, and received the Seal of it, that therefore
their Children that enter into the same Covenant must be excluded the same
Token or Seal of the Covenant, but the quite contrary is true, for still the
Promise runs to you and your Children.

7. This Doctrine does inform us that Children are capable of sundry Blessings
of Baptism, and that because they are with their Parents graciously taken into
Covenant; most certainly the God of Grace would never have conferred this
privilege in vain; this Seal is not for blanks, God has great Grace and Mercy
to bestow upon them, therefore he is pleased to impale them in this enclosure,
that he may be gracious unto them. I need not stand upon this, for I have
largely discovered to you what singular Blessings of the Covenant they be
capable of, and what exceeding great and precious Promises are made unto them;
of which if they are not capable then God has promised in vain, and deluded
the faith and hopes of good Parents that are built upon them: But who dare be
so bold as thus to accuse God? I have shown you, how that to Infants God has
made Promises of the Gift of the Holy Ghost, of Remission of Sin, of Renovation
and Regeneration, of being taught of God, of having the Law of God wrote in
their Hearts; though they be not capable of Man's teaching, yet what cannot the
Lord do for them? He can as easily by his Spirit frame and fashion the New
Creature in them, as he could curiously form and fashion them in their Mothers
Womb; and so it must be, otherwise dying Infants can never be saved. We have a
late confident Writer Mr. H. C. who has transmitted such things into the
World, that plainly declare that Infants are not capable of the Blessings of
this Ordinance, and so by consequence not of the Kingdom of Heaven. I will give
a few of his bold Sayings, very fatal to poor Infants: He says, This Ordinance
(speaking of Baptism) cannot concern Infants, but Believers, because it is a
testisication of the Remission of Sins, and Salvation to the worthy Receiver,
and Subject of it. What does he mean by his testification but a Sign and Seal
of it? then it must inevitably follow, that Children are not capable of
Habitual Faith, nor of the Pardon of Sin; for here Believers and Remission of
Sin are set in opposition to Infants (if what he says should be true) as not
capable of either. Again he says; That Baptism is a lively representation of
Regeneration, therefore can only affect Believers, (meaning adult Believers,
that he is pleading for, to be the only subject of Baptism): The Apostle (said
he) alludes to Baptism, when he speaks of the washing of Regeneration, Tit.
3.5. his meaning is, that the Ordinance is a lively body, symbol and sign of
Regeneration: It is very true, it is so; but mark how this is brought in, and
upon what account it is; viz. to prove that Believers (that is adult ones) that
profess their Faith, Baptism can only affect them, it is such a sign, body and
symbol of Regeneration, and the New Birth only: So that here Infants are shut
out of Regeneration and the New Birth; they must not be Baptized, because they
are not capable of them, which is the unavoidable consequence of this desperate
Doctrine. Again he tells us, that in Luke 18. where we read of Infants that
were brought to Christ; which he took up into his Arms and blessed; that the
Greek word signifies, a Child capable of teaching. Surely if he,
notwithstanding his flourish of Learning, had been able to have examined the
Greek word, he would not have been so confident as to have spoke thus: It is
great pride for Men to pretend to have such Learning they never had any
Education, nor Opportunity to attain unto. I have showed before the proper and
true meaning of the Greek word in that place, and that from good Authority,
unto which I refer you, and the same that we have in Timothy: Let this Man talk
of his Learning among those that are not acquainted with his Education, and
from what his immediate access was to the Pulpit. Again he says, If it be
their Duty who believe to be Baptized, then I infer, that those that are not
capable of this Grace of Faith are under no Divine Obligation, nor their
Parents neither, to Baptize them, it is only a piece of Will Worship which God
never required. He speaks of the Grace of Faith in general, and denies that any
Infants are capable of it, no not so much as Habitual Faith; if so, then I
understand no hopes given to their Parents of their Union with Christ,
Justification, Remission and Salvation. Again he says, That Infants Baptized
are not tanght of God, nor made Disciples of Christ. This is directly against
the express Word of God, Isa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of
the Lord: Is not this giving God the lie? so in saying, They be not the
Disciples of Christ, is also directly opposite to the Word of God; Acts 15.10.
Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples;
which Disciples are evidently Children: Here still you may see what fatal
Doctrine this bold Asserter delivers about poor Infants; can they be saved
without their being taught of God? Though they be not capable of the teaching
of Men, yet they are of Gods, and must be taught of him, otherwise I understand
not how there can be any possibility of their Salvation. Thus I have given you
a few hints of many, that might be brought out of this Authors Works. I think
such sanguine sayings as these are, about Infants in Covenant with God, do
loudly call for trembling from me, and Repentance from him.

8. This Doctrine does inform us, that a great part of the Scripture was
written for the good and sake of Children; God did greatly design and intend
them in the choicest part of his Word. The Covenant of Grace does comprehend
the most precious and gracious part of the Word of God; though our late Author,
and my Confuter tells us, That they were writ for the Adult, and not for the
Infants: His Reason (I suppose) is, because of their present ignorance. This is
some of this excellent Divines New Doctrine. We may as well say, that their
Mothers Womb and Breasts, that the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Elements;
that Meat, Drink and Raiment, do not belong unto them; that Eating, Drinking
and Sleeping, do not belong unto them: But we may ascend a great deal higher;
if the Scripture was not wrote for their sakes, what will become of these poor
Creatures for ever? Can God, can Christ, can any special Grace be theirs? What
are the Scriptures relating to the Covenant, the Blood of it, and the gracious
Promises of Remission, Union with Christ, Adoption and Sanctification, not
appertaining to them? Were not the Scriptures wrote for their sake? when there
are so many Directions and Commands abounding concerning their Parents Duty to
them in all things, and all for the good of them, and to demonstrate the great
concernedness of a gracious God for them, and the value he has of them. Surely
if we do but confider, what is wrote of Children in the Word, we may easily see
that God did greatly intend them, in writing of it. I will name a few places;
Psalm. 78.6. That the generation to come might know him, even the children which
shall be born. Psalm. 127.3. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the
fruit of the womb is his reward. Prove. 20.7. The just man walks in his
integrity, his children are blessed after him. Deuteronomy. 4.37. And because he loved
their fathers, he chose their seed after them. Isa. 61.9. Psalm. 18.50. A
multitude of Scriptures might be brought to show, how that in many Predictions
and Promises, and other ways, the Scripture was eminently wrote for the sake
of Infants and Children, and the Seed of Gods People. What does not those
precious Scriptures of Christ, taking little children up into his arms, and
blessing of them, appertain unto Children? Is it not left upon Divine Record
for their sake? But that which is beyond all may make us all to be amazed,
which is this; If the Scriptures were not wrote for the sake of Infants, what
shall we say of all those Blessed Scriptures that were wrote about the Holy
Child Jesus, of his Conception, Birth and Infancy? If it be as this bold
Asserter would have it, then all Scriptures relating to the same, must not be
the subject matter of our Faith and Hope, but all of them should be expunged
out of the Word of God, or stand upon its record as idle insignificant Stories.
It is clear, that if the Scriptures were not wrote for the sake of Infants,
then our Lord Jesus Christ must come in for a share in this Doctrine, which
well may be called the Doctrine of Devils. This Man is greatly skilled in
propounding such Doctrine, that has a direct tendency to exclude poor Children
and Infants out of the Kingdom of God; not only out of the Kingdom of Grace
here, but also the Kingdom of Glory hereafter. If the Scripture be not wrote
for their sake, I know not the Duties that are incumbent upon Parents
concerning them, neither any hopes of any good here and hereafter can be
conceived about them: But one would think the very naming of this, should be
more than sufficient to baffle it, and its Author, from the stage of his
Presumption and Confidence.

2. Use, of the Doctrine; and all that furthermore I shall make of it, shall be
of solemn and serious Exhortation, and that to those Pious and Godly Parents,
who are enriched and honored with this transcendent privilege of being in
Covenant with God, they and their Children also: As your Mercy is great, so
those Duties that do refult from hence are very great. God has bestowed much
upon you, and he does expect much from you: Where much is given, from thence
much is expected: The Lord has done more for you than he has for others,
therefore he does expect more from you than he does from others. A few of these
many Duties that this Covenant, and your Interest in it, do call for from you,
I would set before you, and exhort you to a diligent observation and practice
of.

1. Make a great account of the privilege of this Covenant State; esteem it
very high, though some, and that too many reproach and trample upon it; yet let
it be a matter of wonderful valuation with you. God has revealed much unto
you, if he has but revealed unto you a right understanding of his Covenant;
Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will
show them his covenant; or he will make them to know, to understand the
Covenant in its Nature and Latitude, this is a secret that God reveals. All
those that enjoy this Blessing, had need to esteem it very highly. What a
blessed entail is here upon your Children? Those look upon themselves to be
very happy, that be the Heirs of great Estates in the World, though they have
not a present possession; yet there is a sure and certain entail upon them and
theirs: But what is this to the entail of the Covenant? and unto the being
Heirs to the Promise? How glad would some be, should they be assured, that such
a great Lordship was continued to them and their Children? Ay, but here is the
incomparable and for ever to be esteemed dignity, viz. The promise is to you
and your children. Some good Parents when they shall come to dye, are like to
have but little of the World to leave their Children; but this is their great
Comfort, they being in Covenant, that they can cast them upon the Promise. How
much better is it to leave them possessed with the Covenant, than with the
greatest Kingdoms in the World? I marvel with what Peace and Comfort they can
leave their Children, when they come to dye, that shut them out of the
Covenant: Next to a Man's own interest in the Covenant, must be the interest of
his Children in it. I know not what a good Man should prize more than the
Covenant for himself and Family. How should this be valuable to a pious Parent?
When he cannot say, I can leave my Children in the enjoyment, or an assurance
of any great matters of the World; yet I can comfortably part with them,
leaving them in the Arms, and in the Conjugal Embracement of this Covenant. I
would have your estimation of this comfortably to remain and continue with you,
notwithstanding the contempt, reproach and dirt that is cast upon it. Our
Adversury is behind but very few in pouring Odiums upon it. I shall at present
mention a very few of his opprobrious sayings, not being willing as yet, to
expose him very much, until he does necessarily oblige me unto it: Take a few
of his invidious and foul Speeches. He says, That those that Baptize Infants,
Baptize Heathens. Here he calls all the Infants of Believers; Heathens; he
cannot keep off from his Infant-damning Doctrine. I wonder in a common ordinary
way of Salvation, what assurance he can give us of the Salvation of Heathens? I
know not that there is Salvation in any but in Christ, nor that there is any
Name given us under Heaven, by which Men, Women or Children can be saved, but
the Name of Jesus. The Covenant was, and still is a distinction between the
Children of Believers and Heathens: Let such a one turn his own Children out of
Covenant, and Heathenize and Paganize them if he please: through Mercy we know
better things. It is worth while to consider his great Reason that he gives to
prove, that the Children that are Baptized be Heathens; because all are the
Children of Wrath before born again. If this be a Reason, then it stands in as
full strength against Baptizing Believers, as he calls it, because the very
best of them were Children of Wrath by Nature; so the Apostle says to the
Ephesians to whom he wrote. Thus I might argue with the same parity of Reason,
They that baptize: adult Believers, Baptize Heathens, for they were Children of
Wrath by Nature; and how can he know that all of them be born again? I am sure
many of those that he Baptizeth, both in their Knowledge and Conversation, give
but small proof of their being born again: But yet every one may see, here is a
vile suggestion, that Infants cannot be born again. This does agree with what
he says furthermore, Believers Baptism confirms unto them Justification,
Remission and Salvation; but Infants have none of them confirmed to them in
their Baptism; and that the Baptism of Infants cannot be a sign of Regeneration
to them. Did ever Man speak with more Confidence, and lesser Sense in this.
World? Is the Seal of the Covenant of no use or benefit to the Covenant Seed?
It is little matter what rash Mer. say: God has made it the Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, and seals up all Covenant Blessings by it. Ay, but he
says, Infant Baptism never was sealed by God. This is a sad doom upon Infants,
and upon all that are for their Baptism. By the Sealing of Baptism, I suppose
he must mean, the partaking of the Covenant Blessings that be sealed up by
Baptism: These Blessings are either conveyed when Baptism is administered, or
after; as John did baptize unto repentance, Matthew. 3.11. But who has made this
Author a Judge, to pass such a furious Sentence? The best of it is, we have but
his say so, without the smallest attempt of Proof. I doubt not but the
experience of many thousands of Infants in Heaven, and others, and many now
upon the Earth, will testify against such an abominable Assertion. He adds
further, That Infants weep when they are Baptized, as if they did dissent. What
a Childish Expression is this? What think you? had they not as much cause of
weeping when they were Circumcised? which put them to the greatest sense and
pain, and gave the greatest occasion of weeping. Oh that ever such stuff should
show its face in the World: Pray consider, is there not as great a sign of
dissent in many that he does Baptize, as a little weeping in some Infants? Do
they not go into the Water trembling and quaking, and overwhelmed with fears,
when they are plunged over Head and Ears? So that though he speaks of their
joy, a great number of them are otherwise possessed with dismal frights, and want
the best Cordial that he can administer unto them again. Again he says, That
Infants Baptism has not one Promise. Confidently said still, without any
Proof, I doubt not but my Text is a sufficient confutation of this; where it is
said, The promise is to you, and your children; and many more places that have
been mentioned. Now we shall come to a swinging piece of his Divinity. I think,
says he, Transubstantiation, Habitual Faith, and the Infant Seed of Believers
in Covenant, are terms equally allowable, and probably equally understood among
their various Professors. Now this is to speak through, and to disgorge his
Stomach at once. Pray consider what things or Doctrines he ranks together to be
equal with him; by this he gives us to understand, that the odious Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is as grateful to his Palate as Habitual Faith in Infants,
and their being in Covenant with their Parents. Papists breaden God, which (by
gross Idolatry) they adore, is of the same estimation with him as the two
others: Oh! let not my Soul enter into his secrets; what Malice and Envy does
this import? and if Infants are not capable of Habitual Faith, which is one
blessed branch of the New Creature; and if they are not in Covenant, I know not
how they can be saved. If it be so, I must confess, that I can discry no ground
of hope of the Salvation of my dear deceased Children; but blessed be God, I am
better acquainted with the Covenant, and precious Graces of the Spirit, than
that such froth and spittle should in the least degree affect my Hopes. I never
read or heard of any Man that professed any Sobriety in Principles and
Moderation (to those that in lesser matters were not of his size and measure)
to speak after this desperate rate; thus to rank us with Papists, and that in
one of their most detestable Principles, which have caused the effusion of
Rivers of the Blood of Martyrs, and to render our Children, as we cannot but
judge, incapable of being said, dying in their Infancy. There is something
follows close unto this, which is a new invented way of Saving of Infants,
though they be not in the Covenant, nor have any Habitual Faith; and that is,
to have their Sins done away by an imputed Righteousness: This would be
something, had he given us any Proof of his New Invention, but not a word of
this: Indeed I think he must have a New Gospel to prove this. I did say, when I
Preached these Sermons in my Congregations, That to talk of a Righteousness of
Imputation without a Covenant Interest and inherent Sanctification, was
Mountebank Divinity: And so I say still, not doubting, but in a short time, I
shall not only say, as he has, but prove what I say, as he has not: I am sure
the Scripture is abundantly on my side. I pass it by at present, because I
intend if the Lord please, suddenly to demonstrate this matter: I am a weary of
this pitiful trash, therefore shall say no more, till I shall Epitomize his
Books, provided I have a further Challenge and Provocation: Only I shall give
you one branch of his Charity to us, that sometimes pretendedly he calls
Brethren, the Wounds he gives us, and the Darts he would strike into our
Hearts, and the Hearts of our Children, discover him to be more like an
inveterate Enemy, than a kind Brother; for his Pen and Pulpit, as to us, are
filled with little less than Wormwood and Gall; yea, I may add (from what I
have here discovered) even with Poison: But pray take one touch of his Charity
to his Brethren, as he calls them: He says, without the least Proof, That not
only the Conformists, but also the Nonconformists, have lost the Door, and the
Subject that should enter the Door: So that we have lost the very Essence of
the Ordinance, viz. of Baptism; we have neither right Form nor right Subject;
and who are they that enter not in by the Door, but climb up, and come in some
other way? We know the Scripture you refer to, and apply unto us, John 10.7, 8,
9. It Is easy here to see your judgment of us, that we are the Thieves and
Robbers that come not in at the right Door. I shall say but little to this now,
for it is but the proud and empty sound of a Man that seems little to consider
what he says; only I do humbly, in the Name of the great Shepherd, Challenge
my bold Challenger, to answer this Censure he has put upon all his faithful
Servants, that are for Baptizing of Infants at the great Day: Here he does
discernably enough Unchurch us, Unminister us, and Inordinance us; the Lord lay
not this Sin to his door. We have little reason to wonder, that he should give
us such foul play, when he ventures at the same time to deal no more kindly
with the Church of England, that is guarded by the strong Walls and Fences of
the Laws of the Nation; for he says, That the Conformists also have lost the
Door, and the Subject that should enter the Door, and the very Essence of the
Ordinance, and they their Ministers enter not in at the Door. Here is a Man
that will not only tread over the low Hedge, but will venture upon the sharps
of the Piltes to vent his Unchristian and Censorious Opinion. Christians, I
hope such pitiful, raw, spurious and jejune Allegations as these I have
presented you withal, will rather turn your Stomachs against them, than open
your Throats to swallow them. Alas, I have given you but a little to what I
might have presented you withal; let not such empty Assertions, without the
least shadow of probation, lessen your esteem of this Blessed Doctrine I have
been upon. Truth is never the less precious because it is calumniated by
opprobrious and dirty Pens. Look upon this choice Truth by the Light of the
Word of God, and you cannot but see such a lustrious beauty in it, as to cause
an inconceivable estimation and value in you for it.

2. Word of Exhortation I would press upon you is, that you would improve this
Doctrine in the best ways, and unto the best advantages that you can. You and
your Children being in covenant ought to be made the best use of, that may be.
There be several ways by which you ought to improve this Doctrine; I shall
propound some of them unto you, begging you to put them into practice.

1. By giving up your Children to God, in the use of the Seal of the Covenant;
(I mean Baptism.) When God did make this Covenant with Abraham, and his Seed,
he did so, and so it was all along when there was opportunity for it; the
Covenant is the same still for the Substance of it, and the Seal ought to be
affixt to the Subjects; Let Men never so much vilify and reproach it, calling
it Baby-baptism, and Sprinkling of Infants, without the least soundness of Mind
or Judgment. That is a pretty Saying for Children to laugh at, which our
Neighbor in one of his Books brings in thus, That it may be very much
questioned, whether the Jailer we read of, Acts 16. (that was baptized and all
his House) had any Children, seeing it has been observed, some Years ago,
that for very many Years together, not one Child was born to all the
Jaylkeepers in all the County of Essex. This is a pretty Observation; it seems
it was some Years ago, I believe he knows not when, however he is not minded
to acquaint us of the Author of this Excellent Story. Let Men talk their fill,
pray do you mind your Duty God requires, that your Children that be his by
covenant, should be given up to him by the Seal of the Covenant. Christians
have many Inducements lying upon them, thus in this Ordinance to devote their
Children unto God: (1.) By this they do manifestly own, and set forth their
Belief of the Doctrine of the Covenant. It is Practice that is the best
Indication of the Belief of Divine Truth; we must not only be Knowers and
Professors of the Will of God, but must be Doers also; that Man discovers but a
slender Manifestation of his Knowledge of the Covenant, whose Actions are not
something comporting with the same. It Is observed by some, that the reason why
God met with Moses, and threatened to kill him, when he was sending him for the
deliverance of his Brethren into Egypt, was because he had not circumcised his
Son, Exodus 4.24, 25. (2.) By this means we do openly show forth the Grace and
Goodness of God unto us, in making such a Covenant, and the wonderful Love and
Kindness of Christ in dying for us, which Blood is the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant; as in the other Seal of the Covenant, the Lords Supper, Christians do
show forth the Death of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.26. (...), Ye do openly declare,
preach, and publish it; so by the affixing the Seal to your Children you do set
out and declare the Infinite Grace, Love, and Goodness of God in taking you,
and your Seed into the Covenant. (3.) By this you do enter your Children
visibly into the Church of God, or visibly declare and set them out to be such:
Christ has declared them to be of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is of his
Church, and Parents ought by this Ordinance to represent and openly to declare
them to be such. This is a visible incorporating of them into this body, and a
listing them under the Banner of Christ, to serve and to cleave unto him. They
must be put into Christ's List, and brought under his Banner, though they do
him at present but little service. Thus we find in the Scripture, when God has
called his People solemnly to enter into covenant with him, to love him, to
serve him, to obey him, they have appeared before the Lord with their Little
Ones with them, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. Children that are brought under the
Bonds of the Covenant, and Listed for the Lord, it is their Duty when they
attain to understanding to be very sensible of the same, and to do and manage
themselves accordingly; for God will require their dedication and Parental
obligation at their Hands. (4.) By this way Parents do show their right
understanding of, and do give a good testimony unto the covenant which the Lord
has been pleased to gratify them withal. Thus did Abraham by his immediate
complying with the Lord in the Seal of it; by this they do openly declare their
well liking of, and their great pleasure they take in the covenant, and how
joyful and ready they are, that their Children should obtain, and be made the
happy partakers of the Blessings and Privileges of it, and be the open and
visible Proprietors with them in it; methinks Parents should commend, and set
out the excellency of this covenant, and what sweetness and comfort they have
had in it, by being very willing and desirous, that their children should be
within the compass of it, and as they have done, partake of the rich and
eminent Blessings of it. Pious Parents do not know how to live in any condition
without the covenant, and the suitable and seasonable Promises of it; and how
can they choose then, but be very solicitous and desirous that their children
should succeed them in such an Enjoyment and Tenor? (5.) By this they do
testify their belief of the Truth, and of the Faithfulness of God, and the
Veracity of all the gracious Promises comprehended and lodged in the Covenant:
Indeed the Seal and Token is to assure and to confirm all; therefore when the
Lord was pleased to establish his Covenant with Abraham, and his Seed, there
was Circumcision as the Seal affixt, to be a great Encouragement unto the Faith
of Abraham to believe, and expect the Accomplishment of all the
Covenant-Promises that God had made with him and his Seed for ever. Now when
Parents that be in covenant, do suddenly by this Seal devote and give up their
Children to God, they do signify and declare their firm and unboubted Faith in
all that God has promised to them and their Children; and in this Matter they
put up their Requests to God, exercising Faith in the Promises for their
Children, and so also after in their frequent Requests for Covenant-Mercies for
them. (6.) By this means Parents do as they ought to do, lay great Obligations
upon themselves, unto the greatest care and diligence that may be, that their
Children may partake of the Internal Part and saving Blessings of the Covenant.
What a strict Tie and Bond must this be to Parents to be greatly concerned for
the Souls and Eternal Salvation of them? They have given them up unto God, as
his Children, in a Covenant-Obligation, and have engaged for them, now they
must look to their Charge and Trust, that the Souls of their Little Ones do not
perish through their default, by their carelessness and negligence in their
discharge of their weighty and incumbent Duty, that the Living God in this
gracious Covenant has imposed upon, and injoined them. Abraham had a great
respect unto this, which caused the Lord to give him this commendation, Genesis
18.19. For I know him that he will command his children, and his household after
him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. It
was but in the Chapter before this, that he did enter into covenant with the
Lord for himself and his: Oh! said God, I know that he has a sense of his
Covenant-Obligation upon him, that he has lately received from me, and he will
observe it, being careful of his Household that they may perform the Duties, and
enjoy the Blessings of the Covenant. What a close and strict Engagement is this
to Parents, that they bring up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord? How does this call upon us to prayer, to educate carefully, and to
instruct our Children in the knowledge and fear of the Lord?

3. Improve this great Blessing of the Covenant for the Encouragement of your
Hopes as to the Spiritual Birth of your Children. This is the great Concern of
pious Parents about their Children, so soon as they see that they be once born,
that they may be born again, that they may not only be born of the Flesh, but
also of the Spirit, that they may not only have a Natural but also a Spiritual
Birth: It is for this that godly Parents do groan and travail. You that are
thus concerned for your Children, it is the Covenant of Grace that must be your
great Encouragement in besieging the Throne of Grace for them, your Fangs for
the New Birth in your Children must be covenant Ones, it is the Covenant, and
the Mediator, and Blood of it, that must animate, quicken, and support your
Hopes in this great Affair; you must put the Promise in suit, and plead them
with that God of Infinite Grace, Love, and Faithfulness, that has put you and
yours into this Feederal Compact. You may humbly go to God, and tell him that
he has promised to be your God, and the God of your Seed, to teach you, and
your Children, and to circumcise your Heart, and the Heart of your Children, to
love, and to fear him, that he has promised to pour out his Spirit upon your
Offspring, and that your Children shall be taught of God, Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy.
30.6. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Isa. 44.3. and 59.21. and 54.13. And many such Golden
Promises of rich Grace comprehended in the Covenant, as Food for the Faith of
Parents that make conscience daily to pursue and wrestle with God, for the
renewing and sanctifying of their Children. Wherefore go to God, and plead his
Covenant after this manner, Have thou not promised to be a God to me and mine?
Is not the Promise to me, and my Children? Thou have shown abundance of Mercy
in giving them all Natural Parts of the Body, and Endowments of Mind; Ay, but,
Blessed Lord, thou have conferred greater Mercy than this upon them, Thou have
put them in thy Covenant, and have planted them in thy House and Family, they
have a Standing in thy Church: Lord be pleased to bedew them with all those
Heavenly Blessings thou have promised those whom thou have placed and planted
in such a capacity so near unto thee: These Natural Endowments be great
Mercies, but have thou not promised a New Heart, a New Spirit, also to write
thy Law, and to put thy fear into their Hearts? Oh! be a God to me and mine in
the communication of all Covenant precious Blessings, in the greatest Latitude
of them. When God had said, he will be a God, why may not we hope for the
accomplishment of the fullest Sense thereof? Say to God, Have thou not made
with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, and this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. We ought to understand,
believe, and plead the Covenant in the greatest Latitude of it for our selves
and ours.

4. Improve the Covenant to Duty and Obedience; let the Promises of the
Covenant strictly, and for ever bind us to Obedience; where there is the
greatest Grace dispensed, there is the greatest Inducement and Obligation to
Duty and Obedience. The Covenant that says, God will be our God, requires us,
and ours, to be his People; there is a Covenant-engagement upon us, and ours,
to be the Lords. But alas! how little is this thought upon? Most covet to have
their Children to be baptized, and glory in their Baptism, but seldom make this
to be any part of their care, and endeavor, that their Children be the Lords.
How little care have many Parents about the holy Education of their Children?
How they bring them up in the Fear, Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord? How
few command their Children, and Household to walk in the ways of the Lord? What
Falsehood and Breach of Covenant is here? That Charge may be drawn up, and
Exhibited against such careless and treacherous Parents, Psalm. 78.36, 37.
Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto them
with their tongues. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his covenant. How many Parents do flatter God, and his Ministers?
Promising great Things at the baptizing of their Children, but soon forget all,
never taking any care according to their Covenant, of the Souls of their
Children, that they may partake of the Blessings of the Covenant; they are very
earnest for the Outward Seal, but little concerned for the Inward Grace. What
will Baptism avail for you, and your Children, if you are contented only with
the outward Badge and Mark of the Disciples and Followers of Christ? Romans 2.28,
29. For he is not a Jow, that is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision,
which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, that is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God. Outward Privileges and Ordinances will never
prove you to be good Christians; you and yours must have the Inward
Circumcision of the Heart, Regeneration, the New Birth, and Sanctification,
short of which nothing will avail to Salvation, Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. We are
said to be baptized into Christ, and to put on Christ; we must see that we have
an Union with Christ, and are renewed by the Spirit of Christ, if ever we hope
or desire to be enriched with the Saving Benefits of Baptism.

3. Exhortation is to those that are the happy Possessors of the Incomparable
Mercy of the Covenant, admire and magnify the Grace of God herein, that he
should not be content to engage his Grace to, and for you, but to yours with
you. You and yours were all Rebels and Traitors to God, and he has received
both into Favor and Grace with himself; God might have taken you into
covenant, and have left out your Children, and that would have been an high
Expression of his Grace and Favor unto you, but this is conferred upon you and
your Seed too, this gives you the fullest occasion and obligation to magnify
him above the Heavens, and to cause his Praise to be continually in your Hearts
and Mouths. How should this always affect and ravish your Hearts? To consider
many of you, that the Lord should be pleased to pass by you, when you were
polluted in your Blood, and should say unto you, Live; that when you were in
your Blood and Filth, (through your pollution and contamination) fit for
nothing, but to be abhorred by God, that that should be a Time of Love to you;
that he should then spread a Skirt of Grace and Favor over you, and cover your
Nakedness, and swear unto you, and enter into Covenant with you, and not only
you, but also yours, should be taken into the Bonds of the same, and become
his, Ezekiel. 16.6, 8, 9, 10, etc. What Grace is this, that we should be taken
(poor Gentiles) and cut off the Wild Olive Tree, and graffed into the Good
Olive Tree, which is contrary to Nature? That some of the natural branches
should be broken off, and we should be taken and grafted in in their place, and
partake of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree? What matter of perpetual
Thanksgiving to God is here administered to us? Romans 11.17. etc. Remember
oftentimes what you were by Nature, into what a miserable plunge of all
infelicity you were cast? how remote and distant from God, many of you before
Conversion were without the Covenant, having no Promise? This might be the
condition of sundry of you, born out of the Covenant, and every way in a
desperate condition as to the concerns of your Souls, and Eternal Life. I
cannot present you with a fuller and a clearer description of your former
state, before the Lord brought you under the means of Grace, and effectually
called you, then you have in Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. Wherefore remember, that being
in times past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision, by that
which is called the circumcision in the flesh made by hands: That at that time
ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world: But now in Christ Jesus, ye who some times were far off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ. The poor Gentiles, of whom we were part, were afar off,
because not within the pale of the Covenant. This was the opposition that was
between the Jew and the Gentile; the former was nigh, being in Covenant; but
the other afar off, not being taken into that enclosure, ver. 17. Oh! magnify
God that thou that were afar off, art brought nigh by the Blood of Christ: The
Blessing of Abraham is come to the Gentiles, and come unto thee, and thy
Family, through Christ, Gal. 3.14. What cause have thou to wonder that art yet
within the bonds of the Covenant? and thy Little Ones, the Children that the
Lord has graciously given thee to be with thee? That thou and thine are become
the Children of the Covenant and of the Promise, magnify God for so
inestimable an enjoyment, and improve it to the utmost advantage of thy self
and thine, but be not ignorantly gulled and trapan'd out of it, as many are in
this day.

4. Exhortation. Teach and instruct your Children, so soon as they be capable
of it, in the right knowledge and understanding of the Covenant. As the Lord
has honored you, in taking you and your Children into Covenant, you ought to
be much in explaining and unfolding the Privileges and Duties of it to your
Children. This is one of (the Magnalia) the great things that God has written
in his Word, viz. that we our selves and offspring should be well versed in,
and acquainted with. This is one great way to discover the high esteem that you
have of the Covenant, for your selves and Children, when you take delight to
study to arrive unto a good understanding of it, and carefully to instruct and
teach your Children the knowledge of it. Timothy had Conscientious Parents, or
Parent that did so teach and instruct him, that when he was very little, he was
well acquainted with the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. Many there be that are very
desirous to have their Children to be Baptized, and to partake of the Seal of
the Covenant; but little make it their work and business to admonish and
instruct their Children, suitable to that Relative Duty, which they stand under
the obligation of to their poor Children. One great reason why many (as I find)
do renounce and reject the Seal of the Covenant, is, because they were never
well instructed into the knowledge of it, nor the Duties they were bound unto
the performance of, by the Seal of it. Few Parents (no not some that have the
root of the matter in them) do take that care, as they are bound to do, to
inform their Children into the Gospel-administration of the Covenant, since the
time of the Incarnation and Ascension of the Messiah, and to show the parallel
that there is between the Covenant first openly established with the Jews and
their Seed, and now with the Gentiles and their Seed. Wheresoever the Gospel is
sent (by Divine Conduct) unto any place, and Preached, that never had the Beams
of its Glorious Light shining before; there those that believe and repent must
be Baptized, and their Children with them, and enter into the Covenant
together; for says the Apostle, The promise is to you and your children, and
to those that are afar off, and even to as many as the Lord shall cast. The
promise, viz. the Covenant, is to you and your children; ay, and so it shall be
with those that are afar off, even the poor Children of the Gentiles, so many
as the Lord shall call, they with their believing Parents shall be received
into Covenant with the Lord; Acts 2.38, 39.

I shall conclude all with one word of Exhortation, unto ungodly and
unconverted Sinners: It is to exhort them in the name and fear of the Lord,
that they would convert, repent and turn unto the Lord. To Repent is one of the
great Doctrines that is charged upon us in our Commissions to Preach to, and
urge severely upon Men. John the Baptist did much fill up his Ministry, in
calling upon those that did at any time attend upon it, to repent. Our blessed
Lord began his Ministry in sounding out the same Doctrine. This is a Doctrine,
that we that Preach the Gospel, ought to be solemn and instant in. How happy
would it be, if there were no other contention among Ministers than this, for
every one to strive to bring most Souls to Faith and Repentance? It may be
matter of lamentation, to see how many take upon them the Work of the Ministry;
such that I fear, though they make nothing to condemn and disannul the Ministry
of others, are scarce able to prove their own Call thereunto; how they labor
abundantly more to proselyte their followers to their Opinions, than to obtain
Converts to Christ. But to close all; I do here entreat and beg all that hear
me, that be yet out of Christ, impenitent Sinners, to repent and turn to God,
and take hold upon the Covenant, and the rare Blessings and Promises of it; and
for your encouragement, The promise shall be unto you, and your children. You
and yours will be taken into this Covenant: If you are not in it already, what
will you stand, and stout it out against God, under the precious means of
Grace, and the rich tenders of the Gospel proposed unto you? and to labor to
ruin your selves and Children for ever ^o far as you can? After all the
terrible threatenings of the Word that have been defeated by you, oh let not
this be rejected, but let it melt your Hearts into Repentance: This (I say of
my Text) The promise is to you, and your children. Amen.

FINIS.

