Anglorum Gesta; Or, A Brief HISTORY OF England.

BEING An Exact Account of the most remarkable Revolutions, and most memorable
Occurrences, and Transactions in PEACE and WAR; as, Battles, Sieges, Sea Fights
Invasions, Leagues, Interviews, Treaties, Solemnities, etc. that have happened in
the several Kings Reigns since the first Attempt by Julius Caesar upon this
Island, to the Coronation day of his present Majesty King Charles the Second.

WITH Several useful Catalogues of the Bishoprics, Cities, Shires, Colleges
and Halls in both Universities: and Tables of the Kings Reigns, and of the
Dimensions of England, Scotland and Ireland.

By GEORGE MERITON, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. Dawks, for Tho: Basset, at the George, near Cliffords
Inn, in Fleetstreet. 1675.

portrait of Charles the Second CAROL SECVN.D.^ MAG. BRI. FRAET HIB. REX



PRAESTANTISSIMO ET HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, NON SOLUM NOBILITATE GENERIS, VERUM
ETIAM AMPLITUDINE DIGNITATIS, DOMINO CONYERS DARCY BARONI DARCY MEYVILL ET
CONYERS: HOC COMPENDIUM DE MEMORIALIBUS ANGLIAE; (EX GRATITUDINE PRAEFATO
PRENOBILI DOMINO E SINGULARIBUS CAUSIS) HUMILIME DEDICAT

GEORGIUS MERITONUS.

TO THE Reader,
Courteous Reader,
I Am not so conceited of my self, or my own endeavors, as not to think that
this Brief History of England, will fall under very many hard and sharp
censures; especially from those who sit in Cathedra Derisionis, and lavish so
much time away in carping at other Men's Endeavors, that they cannot allow
themselves so much Liberty as to gratify the World with any thing of their own.
I am afraid also the Virtuofi of our days will object and say, What need was
there to obtrude this useless Pamphlet into the World? when so many persons,
such as Beda, Giraldus, Geoffry of Monmouth, Higden, Ranulph of Chester,
Malmsbury, Simon Dunelm, Caxton, Matthew Westminster, Gyldas, Henry Huntington,
Hollinshed, Matthew Paris, Daniel, Martin, Sir Thomas Moor, Pollidore Virgil,
Speed, Hist. Brit. Sir Fran. Bacon, Sir Richard Baker, and several others have
so learnedly and volluminously bestowed their pains herein already; so that
this small Taper among so many bright Torches were as good out, as seeming to
give no light at all. I confess to such as make this Objection, this small
Treatise at first sight may seem useless; yet, if they consider that none of
the persons before named have begun so high in point of time, and continued the
some so low as our own time, even till the Coronation day of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, Anno 1661, and Perhaps they may then
partly be of another mind. However with the generality of People, for whom this
Collection is principally intended) I hope it will receive a more Candid
Acceptance; considering that several of the Authors before mentioned have
written in Latin, and so every man not capacitated to read them, or understand
them being read; and besides some of them have only collected the affairs of an
hundred or two hundred years* and some more, and some less, o^h^rs of them have
only writ the L^fe, perhaps of one particular King, etc. so that none of them
can give the Reader such a general account of Englands Memorable Accidents, for
such a long continued course of time (with so little expense of time to the
Reader in the perusal) as this small Treatise will: and in case any of them
could, yet, as rare and curious stamps upon Coins, for their variety and
strangeness, are daily enquired after, and bought though the Silver be all one
with ours; even so it fares with Books, which (as Meddals) bear the Pictures
and Devices of our various Invention, though the matter be the same, yet for
variety sake, they are often read: and it is often found that the same Dishes
of Meat, dressed after a new fashion, do beget a fresh Appetite, and gratify the
tastes of many better; nay, there is no Book so bad, even Sir Bevise himself,
Friar Bacon, or Tom Thumb, but some Advantage may be gotten by it: for* as in
the same Field, the Ox finds Fodder, the Hound a Hare, the Stork a Lizard,
the Hawk a Partridg, the fair maid Flowers; so we cannot, except we list our
selves (says Seneca) but depart the better from any Book whatsoever. So I
hope, Reader, Thou may find something here to Content, at least nothing to
Distaste thee, and them I shall think my time well bestowed: if neither, but
out of a Malignant humor, thou disdainest what I have done, I care not, I have
pleased my self: and learned long since that Envy, with her Sister Ignorance,
do harbor only in the basest and most degenerate Breast.

Vale George Meriton.

A Brief HISTORY OF England.
CHAP. I.
Of the Situation of Britain, with its Lymits, together with some of the old
Customs practiced amongst the Britains, the several names of the Island, and
when first Inhabited, etc.

THIS Island of Britain is bounded on the East with Germany and Denmark; on the
West with Ireland, and the Atlantic Occan; on the North with the Deucalidon
Seas, and on the South with Normandy and France.

It contains in length from the Strathyhead in Scotland, to the Lisard-point in
Cornwall 624 miles; and in breadth from the Lands end in Cornwall, to the Island
Tennet in the East of Kent, 340 miles; and is in the eight Clymate for
Latitude, and for Longitude, placed between the paralells 14 and 16. The Limits
of it in times past, was from the Orcades, to the Pyrean Mountains.

And in former times this noble Island of Britain sustained Eleven Kings, all
commanding great powers: several other Islands belong to it, amongst which the
Isle of Man, is not of the least account, for to it belongs a King with a
Leaden Crown, whose King is now the Noble Earl of Darby, whose Ancestors have
been Lords of Man about two hundred and seventy years.

The Division of this Island is into three Kingdoms.

1. Scotland, whose Partition Southward was from Carlisle to Newcastle.

2. Cambria or Wales, whose Partition was from Basiagwark to Wye: and

3. England, which was coasted with the French and Germain Seas, on the one
side, and with the other two Kingdoms on the other side.

It is verily supposed that this Island was Peopled before the Flood. Jeffery
of Monmouth affirms that this Island was Peopled by Brute with his Trojans,
in the 2887 year of the World's Creation; and after the universal Deluge 1231
years. And in the year of Elie's Priesthood. But several ancient Historians
writing before his time, make no mention of King Brute: and some have affirmed
that there was never any such Man.

The Inhabitants were called Britains from the word Brith, which signifies
painting or staining of the Skin, which they had formerly in use amongst them.

Some Authors have affirmed that the English did proceed from Cimbria
Chersonesus, which came from Italy; but others assure us that they came from
the ancient Gauls in France.

But certain it is, that the first Inhabitants of this Island being merely
barbarous, they never troubled themselves to transmit their Original to
Posterity. And if they had writ any thing of their Original, yet the opinion of
Guildas is, that it must needs have perished: our own Historiographers afford
us nothing of the first affairs of our Island, all we can gather is from foreign
Writers.

The Druides were accounted among the first Inhabitants, for their only wise
Men: in ancient times the Britains used to die themselves blew with Woad, to
make themselves seem more terrible to their Enemies; and about their Wastes and
Necks they used to wear chains of Iron, supposing them a brave Ornament; on
their middle Fingers they wore their Rings, and used no Garments that their
painted Skins might be seen; yet some of them, but very few, were clad in
Leather:

The Pickts also a branch of the British race, were so called of the Romans,
from their painted Skins.

The ancient Britains are reported by Plutarch to have lived long, as 120
years; and those of Kent in former times were accounted for the most civil
persons among them, their fortified Woods they called Towns; their custom was
to have ten or twelve Wives apiece, which were in common amongst Brothers and
Parents; yet the Issue was always reputed his, who first married the Mother
when she was a Maid: their Diet was very spare: They would neither eat Hen,
Hare, Goose, Fish, nor milk; They manured their grounds with marl instead of
dung, and their usual drink was made of Barley.

In their sacrifices they used Man's Flesh, and their Idols exceeded in number
those of Egypt: Art-Magick was had in great esteem amongst them: but most of
their controversies were determined by the Druides: These had no Primate or
Chief amongst them: and Excommunication was amongst them of great force: Their
Theology was, that the Soul dies not, but passes from one to another; And
their Traffic or Merchandise was of very small use or profit to them; For
Caesar reports that the Ribs and Keels of their Ships, were of light wood, and
covered over with Leather, and they did not eat during the time they sailed at
Sea.

Their Coins at first were either of Brass, or Iron Rings, sized at a certain
weight, which they used instead of Money; but afterward they stamped Silver
and Gold, Julius Caesar was the first that stamped his own Image on the Roman
Coin: but the British Coin is easily known from other; for they commonly
imbossed their Coin outward and Shield like, whereon the Inscription or Face is
seen; and the Reverse hollow wherein the Device is placed: They used not to
fight in great Companies, for they had ever fresh Men to come in to supply the
vacancies of those that retired and were weary; and their usual fightings was
in Chariots, as the use was in the world's first Age; but their chiefest
Strength consisted in Foot men, who were very swift, whose Armor was Shields
and short Spears; in the nether end whereof was fastened a round Bell of Brass,
with the sound whereof they were wont to affright their Enemies: And it was
usual with them to Fight under the conduct of their Women, who were second
Amazons.

Caesar (the first Roman Discoverer of Britain) when he first made Discovery
thereof, thought verily that he had found another World: It is called the great
Island by some, it was formerly called Samothea, from Samothes, sixth Son of
Japheth, the first Inhabiter 252 years after the Flood: it was also called
Albion; some say, from Albion a Giant the Son of Neptune, who conquered the
Samotheans, and seated himself here about 335 years after the Flood; but others
say it was called Albion, ab Albis Rupibus, from the white Rocks, appearing on
the South Coast next to France, and this is the more likely to Truth: But by
the Grecians this Island was called Britain, but why so called, several Authors
have given several Reasons; some will have it from King Brute the Son of
Silvius; others will have it derived from the Greek word (...), which does
signify Mettalls; for the Grecians finding the Island full of Brass, Tin, Iron,
Gold, Silver and Lead, gave name to it accordingly, and called it Pritania.

It was called England from a place in Denmark called Engloen. And this Name
was not changed either by the Danish or Norman Conquerors. It has the fifth
place in all general Counsels, and retained the name of England 873 years: But
since King James came to the English Crown, in the year 1602: Scotland and
England were both united under one Crown; it is sometimes called Great Britain.

Britain has been taken for the fortunate Island, as is reported by some
Authors: And Pope Innocent was so in love with it, that he made suit to Henry
the Third King of England, to come and see it, but could not prevail. It is
observed that the nights in the furthest part North of Britain are so short in
Summer, as the space between the days going and coming is not desernable. And
Caesar did observe that France was colder than Britain. Such plenty of all kind
of Grain abounds in it, That by Charles the Great, it was called the Granary or
Storehouse of the western World; here the Romans used yearly to lade 800
Vessels bigger than Barges with Corn, for the Releif of their Armies elsewhere.

This Island is thought to have received the Christian Faith in or about the
midst of Nero's Reign, in the year of Christ's Incarnation 63: and that Joseph
of Arimathea was one of the Disciples sent hither by Philip the Apostle out of
France, and that this Joseph lies Buried at the Abbey of Glastenbury, if we
believe Guildas and Malmesbury, who have written so: It is thought that Saint
Paul did Preach here in Britain, and some affirin that Simon Zelotes was here
in Britain: but these things being but conjectural, I shall conclude this
Chapter, and proceed to the next.

CHAP. II.
Of the ancient Inhabitants of Britain, and the Cities of their possessions, as
they were called by Ptolomy, and often since mentioned in the Roman Writers,
together with the names of such British Princes as opposed the Romans Conquest.

THese seventeen sorts of People hereafter mentioned were the Inhabitants of
England and Wales, and were branched up and down in the Country, as follows.

1. Cantii; These had only Kent in possession.

2. Regni; To these People was allotted the Counties of Sussex and Surry.

3. Durotriges; These had Dorcetshire.

4. Damnonii; These possessed Devonshire and Cornwall.

5. Belgae; Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and Southamptonshire was their parts.

6. Atrebatii; To them belonged Berkshire only.

7. Dobuni; These enjoyed Oxfordshire, and Gloucester-shire.

8. Catieuclani; Their Possessions were Warwickshire, Buckingham-shire, and
Bedford-shire.

9. Trinobantes; To them was Hartford-shire, Essex, and Middlesex assigned.

10. Iceni; These were Masters of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridg-shire, and
Huntington-shire.

11. Coritani; These men claimed Rutlandshire, Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire,
Leichestershire, Darby-shire, and Nottinghamshire.

12. Cornabii; Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Cheshire, and Shropshire, was
theirs.

13. Ordovices; They challenged Flintshire, Denby-shire, Caenervon-shire,
Mountgomery-shire, and Merionethshire.

14. Brigantes Parisi; Amongst them was distributed Lancashire, Yorkshire,
Richmond-shire, Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland.

15. Silures; Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Brecknock-shire, Monmouth-shire, and
Glamorgan-shire, was their part or share.

16. Dimetae; These Inhabitants were Lords of Caermeraen-shire, Pembrokshire,
and Cardigan-shire.

17. Ottodini; They kept Northumberland, Teifidale, Twedale, March, and
Louthien.

These 14 sorts of People following were dispersed up and down in Scotland,
namely; 1. Selgovae. 2. Novantes. 3. Damnii. 4. Calledonii Gadini. 5. Epidii.
6. Vicemagi. 7. Vennicones, 8. Tezali. 9. Cantae. 10. Creones Cerontes. 11.
Carnonacae. 12. Carini. 13. Cornabii. 14. Simertaae Logi. Now I shall proceed
to give a brief hint at some Remarkable Passages, which happened within the
times of these thirteen British Princes following, who opposed the Romans
Conquest, and so conclude this Chapter.

1. Cassibelan. This Prince was Governor of the Trinobants, and was Brother to
King Lud, who at his Death had left behind two Sons, Andragius and Temantius,
and they being young, this Man took upon him the Government of the Britains;
and when his Nephews came at Age, he gave to Andragius, Trinovant, (now called
London) and the Dukedom of Kent; and to Temantius he gave the Dukedom of
Cornwall.

But Andragius and his Uncle falling at odds, he thereupon sent for Julius
Caesar, and begged his Assistance against his Uncle, who fought Cassibelan and
overcame him, and caused the Island for his Rebellion to pay three hundred
pounds yearly by way of Tribute to Rome.

Andragius went along at this time with Julius Caesar to Rome, and after
Cassibelan's Death at York, Temantius was King: Their Father King Lud built the
West-Gate of the City Trinovant, and called it Ludgate, and the City after his
own Name Caerlud, which is now the famous City of London.

2. Cingitorix, Carvil, Taximagul, and Segonax; These were Kings of Kent, and
withstanding Julius Caesar at the same time Cassibelan stood out, they were
totally routed, their Men slain, Cingitorix taken, and the other three forced
to fly and shift for themselves.

3. Senimagues, Cegontians, Ancalits, Bibroses, and Cassians, These were the
States of the Icenians; who seeing Cesars Valor and Progress in the Wars
against their Neighboring Princes, they thereupon grew faint hearted, laid
down their Arms and submitted.

4. Cunobeline, he was King of the Britains, and the first man that stamped his
Image on his Coin; he was Knighted by Caesar, and had his Princely seat at
Malden in Essex, then a famous City: in the twenty third year of his Reign, our
Savior Christ was born; Augustus Caesar in this King's time was three times
prepared for War against the Britains, but was every time diverted by other
business, and came not.

5. Guiderus, This man was Son to Cunobeline, and being of an haughty Spirit,
he denied the Tribute to the Romans, at which Caligula the Emperor was much
enraged, and made a great show of coming into Britain; but took up at the
Belgieve-Shore, and there causes his Army to gather Cockle-shells, and
rediculously returned Triumphantly with the Spoils (as he accounted it) of the
Ocean: but Claudius Drusius, the succeding Emperor by his Deputy here in
Britain, fought Guiderus, and overthrew his Britains* the King being slain by
Hamo, as the Story goes (who siding with the Romans, put on British
formalities, and by that means got near to the King and slew him; whereupon
Hamo was pursued by Auviragus the King's Brother to the Sea side, and there was
slain, whence the place took the name of Hamo's haven, which is now called
Southampton.

6. Catacratus, Second Son to Cunobeline, standing in opposition to Aulus
Plautinus Deputy to Drusius the Emperor, he was at length overcome with a
great slaughter of his Men, himself taken and bound and carried to Rome, and
there led through the City in honor of Plautinus.

7. Togodumnus, This was Third Son to Cunobeline, he was slain in Battle
against the Romans, but had put them into such Fear, That Plautius sent for
Drusius the Emperor to come over, who accordingly came here into Britain.

8. Arviragus, he was King of the Britains, and so stoutly withstood Drusius
the Emperor in several Conflicts, till at length Drusius concluded a Marriage
between Arviragus and Genissa, Drusius his Daughter.

9. Cogidunus, This Man was Ruler over certain Cities, bestowed upon him by the
Romans.

10. Caractacus. He was Prince of the Silures, and after several Conflicts with
the Rom^^us, he was at length brought to shelter himself under the Wings of
Cartismandua, the faithless Queen of the Britains, who delivered him to the
Romans, and being conveyed to Rome, when he beheld the Riches and Glory of the
City; he reproved the Romans, that being Masters of such glorious things, they
should nevertheless be greedy after the Possessions of the poor Britains.

11. Prasutagus. This Man being King of the Icenians, made the Emperor Nero his
Heir, leaving his noble Queen Boduo and his two Daughters to the Emperor's
Protection, who abusing his Trust, had 80000 of his Romans slain by the valor
of Queen Boduo.

12. Venutius, King of the Brigantes, he was Ruined and overthrown by reason of
his Adulterous Queen Cartismandua joining with the Romans.

13. Galgacus, He was Prince of the Calledonians, and was the last that held
out against the Romans, for with him the whole Island became subject to the
Romans, about a hundred thirty six years after Cesars first entrance into
Britain: And so many years it was before the Romans came to understand that
Britain was an Island.

CHAP. III.
Of the Roman Emperors, and their Deputies who ruled over, and continued the
Britains under their Subjection.

1. JVlius Caesar, first Emperor of Rome, after he had made himself Lord of
Germany, came from thence into England: his first Entrance was at Barhamdown,
in the year of the World 3873. He made the Britains submit three times before
his Departure. He made Comius his Deputy, and at his next coming into Britain
he laid on the Tribute of 300 l. per annum on them.

II. Augustus Caesar. This Emperor perpared three times for Britain, and still
upon their Submission deferred his intended Voyage. In the 42 year of his Reign
our Savior JESUS CHRIST was born, Anno Mundi 3970* according to some Authors.
In (...) ^mperor's time, and in the two succeeding Emperor's Reigns, Cunobeline
was Deputy here in Brita^^*

III. Tiberius Caesar. He began his Reign in the year of CHRIST, the Sixteenth,
and in the Eighteenth year of his Reign CHRIST was crucified at Jerusalem: And
Dionisius Areopagita, who lived at this time, seeing the strange Eclipse of the
Sun and Moon at the instant hour of our Savior's Passion, said, Aut Deus
naturae patitur, aut Mundi machina dissolvitur.

IV. Caius Caligula. This Emperor banished Pontius Pilate, who was CHRIST's
Judge, who afterward in Despair slew himself, Anno Domini 41. in the 39 year
of CHRIST this Emperor began his Reign, and reigned three years and about 10
months: he playned Mountains, made Valleys of Hills, and built Towers in the
deep Sea: and all this he did with such Impurity and Cruelty, that many would
rather Murder themselves than come or stay for the Rigor of his Sentence.

V. Claudius Drusius began his Reign Anno Domini 43. and reigned about 14
years; in the sixth year of his Reign the Virgin Mary departed this life at her
age of (...). This Emperor sent Aulus Pla^tius Deputy into Britain to subdue
those that had denied the Tribute to Rome: but he after many ^kirmishes with
Caractacus, and after he had taken him, was still in such fear of the Britains,
that he sent for the Emperor Drusius, who was the second after Julius Caesar
that came hither in person.

VI. Nero. This Emperor appointed Suetonius Deputy in Britain, in whose time
the Britains, under the Command of Queen Boduo Wife to Patrusagus, rebelled and
slew 80000 Romans before they could be quieted again: And she, when she saw her
Party fail (rather than fall into the hands of her Enemies) poisoned herself:
This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini 57. and reigned about 14 years. He put
the Apostle St. Peter and St. Paul to death: and raised great Persecutions
against the Christians. He caused his own Mother's Belly to be ripp'd open,
that he might see where he lay: and he slew his wife Poppaea with a spurn or
kick.

VII. Sergius Galba, He began his Reign An. Do. 70. reigned 7 months, following
the wickedness of his Predecessor Nero: he had his head struck off by a
Soldier: in his time (...) no War with Britain, M^xim^^^ Deputy both in this
and the succeeding Emperors time.

VIII. Marcus Silvius Otho. This Emperor's Reign being very short, he had no
War with the Britains. He began his Reign An. Dom. 70. and reigned 3 months,
and 5. days.

IX. Aulus Vitellius. This Emperor had Peace with Britain, and appointed
Vectius Bolanus his Deputy. This Emperor was a great Glutton. He began his
Reign Anno Domini 71. and after 8 Months Reign, he was slain by Vespasian's
Soldiers, and thrown into the River Tiber.

X. Flavius Vespasian. In his time the Brigants and Sileurs rebelled here in
Britain, but were quickly quieted again by Julius Frontius, and several of them
slain, Petilius being Deputy: The famous City of Jerusalem was utterly
destroyed by this Emperor. He began his Reign Anno Domini 72. and reigned about
9 years.

XI. Titus Vespasian. He had peace with Britain; and in the Second year of his
Reign, being forty years after our Savior's Passion, this Emperor after a
straight and hard Siege, won the City of Jerusalem, and destroyed it, leaving
not one stone upon a stone unthrown down: he began his Reign Anno (...) 1* and
reigned 2 years and about 3 months: in his time Frontius was Deputy in Britain.

XII. Domitian. This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini, 83. and reigned about
15 years. In his time began the second cruel Persecution against the
Christians: Julius Agricola the Deputy in Britain slew in Battle about 10 000
Britains, who had rebelled and slain 340 Romans. This Agricola was the first of
the Romans that found out the Limits of Britain 136 years after Julius Cesar's
first coming into Britain.

XIII. Cocceius Nerva. The Britains were quiet during this Emperor's time,
which was of no long continuance, for he began his Reign Anno Domini 99. and
reigned about 10 months: he was so charitably disposed, That he was called
Pauperum Patronus.

XIV. Trajanus; In his time was the third Persecution against the poor
Christians: The Britains, rebelling in his time, were quickly overthrown by
Spartianus: This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini 100. he reigned 21 years,
and about 6 months.

XV. Adrianus. He began his Reign Anno Domini 121. and Reigned 22 years: He had
no War with the Britains, Trebellius being then Deputy, but he continued the
Persecution against the Christians.

XVI. Antonius Pius. In his time the Brigants rebelling in Britain; (they were
overthrown by Lollius Vrbicus the Deputy: This Emperor by special Edict
restrained the Persecution against the Christians: he was a good man, and is
reported to be called Pater Virtutum; he began his Reign Anno Domini 139. and
reigned 23 years.

XVII. Marcus Aurelius. Now began another Persecution against the Christians,
but he had no War with Britain. Agricola was his Deputy. This Emperor began his
Reign Anno Domini. 162. and reigned 19 years.

XVIII. Comodus. In this Emperor's time reigned King Lucius in Britain, who is
the first King, that out Histories makes mention of, that embraced
Christainity: he was tributary to the Romans, and was Son to King Coilus who
built Colchester, and was great grand Child to King Arviragus, who married the
Emperor Drusius's Daughter. This King Lucius sent to Elutherus, then Bishop of
Rome, Elvanus and Medvinus, learned men of his own, to receive some further
Instrustructions from him in his Religion. The Bishop sent him Faganus and
Damianus with his Letter, in these words:

YOu have received in the Kingdom of Britain, by GOD's Mercy, both the Law and
Faith of CHRIST, ye have both the Old and New TESTAMENT, out of the same
through GOD's Grace, by the Advice of your Realm, take a Law, and by the same
through GOD's Sufferance, Rule you your Kingdom of Britain, for in that Kingdom
you are GOD's Vicar.

What could be more full than this? where was then the Popes Supremacy? but the
Title was afterward altered in this Sea; but how, the World both felt and
lamented. Upon Receipt of these Instructions the King altered the three
Arch-Flamins, and twenty eight Flamins, into so many Arch-Bishopricks and
Bishoprics, the Arch-Bishopricks were London, York and Gloucester; and now
Idol Temples were destroyed, and Privileges and means were granted for
honoring of sacred places then errected: This Emperor began his Reign Anno
Domini 182: and reigned thirteen years, he had no War with Britain.

XIX. Helvius Pertinax, his Reign began Anno Domini 194, and he Reigned about
eight Months, he had Peace with the Britains, Albinus being then Deputy.

XX. Didius Julianus, This Emperors Reign being but of small continuance, he
had no War with Britain; his Reign began Anno Domini 194. and continued about
two Months, his Deputy in Britain was Julius Severus.

XXI. Septimus Severus, In this Emperor's time the Calledonians Rebelled in
Britain, Heraclianus being Deputy: so the Emperor came over in Person to quiet
them, and with cutting down of Woods building of Bridges, and draining of Moors
to follow the Enemy, he lost about fifty thousand of his Romans,
notwithstanding he gave not over until he had conquered his Enemies: and coming
a second time into Britain, Death Conquered him at York, after he had Reigned
eighteen years: he began his Reign Anno Domini one hundred ninety five, in his
time the fifth Persecution against the Church did begin.

XXII. Bassianus Caracalla; This Emperor slew his Brother Geta, who was
coemperor with him; he began his Reign Anno Domini 212, and reigned about six
years, he had no War with Britain.

XXIII. Opilius Macrinus; he had peace with Britain, and began his reign Anno
Domini 218, and reigned about one year and two Months.

XXIV. Heliogabilus; This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini 219, and reigned
about four years, he had no Wars with Britain, but he was a great Whoremaster,
and incestuoussy lay with his own Mother.

XXV. Alexander Severus, he tolerated the Christians to live peaceably, had no
War with Britain; he was slain by the Almain Soldiers, having his eyes put
out, after he had Reigned about thirteen years and six Months and seven days.

XXVI. Maximinus; This Emperor's Reign began Anno Domini 237. and continued
three years; he had no Wars with Britain: The sixth Persecution of the Church
of Chirst began in his time.

XXVII. Julius Verus Maximus; This Emperor was slain at the same time his
Father was slain; he was a beautiful person, and his Company much desired by
the Ladies, whose suits he easily condescended to, he had peace with the
Britains.

XXVIII. Gordianus, This Emperor's Reign was short, not exceeding forty days
as some Authors affirm; No War with Britain in his time.

XXIX. Claudius Puppienus, and Celius Balbinus; These Emperors Reigned about a
year: They began their Reign Anno Domini 239. And had no Wars with Britain.

XXX. Antonius Gordianus; He had Peace with Britain: he began his Reign Anno
Domini 240, and reigned four years.

XXXI. Julius Philippus; In his time there was no War with Britain; he reigned
five years; and begun his Reign Anno Domini 245, he was a Christian, and the
first Emperor that received Baptism, as some Authors do affirm: in his time
the famous Cyprian flourished.

XXXII. Decius; The seventh Persecution of the Church began in this Emperor's
time: he began his Reign Anno Domini 250, and reigned about two years; he had
no war with Britain.

XXXIII. Trebonianus and Volusianus, These Emperors had Peace with Britain;
They begun their Reigns Anno Domini 252: and reigned two years.

XXXIV. Aemelianus; This Emperor Reigned but about three months: he began his
Reign Anno Domini 254. he had no War with Britain.

XXXV. Valerianus; His Reign was but short, lasting about a year, yet much
Christian blood spilt in that time, for now begun the ninth Persecution of the
Church, under him Lawrence and Cyprian suffered Martyrdom; but Britain had
Peace with him.

XXXVI. Galienus; This Emperor Reigned fifteen years: he began his Reign Anno
Domini 254. and had no War with Britain.

XXXVII. Flavius Claudius, he began his Reign Anno Domini 269. and reigned two
years; he had peace with Britain, and was a great Hater of the Christians, but
had not time to put in Execution his intended Torments against them.

XXXVIII. Quintilius, This Emperor shortly after he had taken the Government
upon him, opened his own Veins and so died: he had no War with Britain; he
began his Reign Anno Domini two hundred seventy one.

XXXIX. Aurelianus; he began his Reign Anno Domini 271. and reigned five years,
he had no War with Britain, but was a great Persecutor of the Christians.

XL. Tacitus, He had no War with Britain, Reigning about six Months only: he
began his Reign Anno Domini two hundred seventy and six.

XLI. Florianus, He began his Reign Anno Domini 278: and Reigned about three
months: he had Peace with Britain.

XLII. Probus; He was a lover of the Christians, and had no War with Britain,
his Reign began Anno Domini 278. and he reigned about five years.

XLIII. Marcus Aurelius Carus; The Britains in his time fell afresh into
Rebellion, after they had been quiet above 80 years, and Carancius, being sent
Deputy, he fell also in Rebellion with them, but after the Emperor's Death
Carancius was slain by Alectus, the succeeding Deputy. This Emperor began his
Reign Anno Domini 282: and Reigned something more than a year.

XLIV. Dioclesian; This Emperor sent Alectus to quiet the Britains, who then
Rebelled under Carancius, and pursuing the Rebels with a continued hatred, he
himself was at length slain in London, by Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornwall, and
many thousand Romans with him; and among the rest one Gallus who was Alectus's
Companion, was slain in London, at a certain Brook, which was afterward called
by his Name, Gallbrook, or Walbrook; but at long-run Asclepiodotus himself was
slain by Coilus Duke of Colchester: This Emperor Dioclesian was a great
Persecutor of the Christians: he began his Reign Anno Domini 284. and reigned
about three years, and Maximinianus who was co-emperour with him about 4 years.

XLV. Constantius Clorus; This Emperor coming into Britain to subdue the
Calledonians, and Picts, under the command of Coilus, who had made himself
King, at his coming found Coilus dead, he married his fair Daughter the
Princess Helena, and begot on her Constantine, the Great: This Emperor was a
favorer of the Christians, though his Predecessor Dioclesian had much oppressed
them, for in his time was Albine the Protomartyr of England beheaded at
Holmehurst, now St. Albans: and Aaron and Julius suffered at Leicester, and
about a thousand Christians suffered at Litchfield; This Constantius began his
Reign Anno Domini 291, and reigned about thirteen years* he died at York.

XLVI. Constantius* Galerius, Maximianus, Severus, Maxentius, Licinius, and
Martinianus, for the space of eight years the Empire was Ruled by these Men,
sometimes one, sometimes another, and sometimes all of them ruling, till at
length they were all vanquished by Constantine the great; in these Emperors
times were very cruel Torments put in practice against the Christians;
Maxentius used to join the living bodies of the Christians with other dead
Carcases, and being chained Mouth to Mouth, he caused them to be tumbled up and
down: Some think this was the reason why St. Paul used that expression in his
Epistle to the Romans, 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? In these Emperors times were some petty Wars with
Britain; These Emperors began their Rule Anno Domini three hundred and four,
and Reigned about eight years.

XLVII. Constantinus Magnus, This Emperor was a Britain by Nation, his Father
was Constantius Florus, and his Mother Hellena the Daughter of Coilus, he did
associate with him in the Empire his Sons Crispus, Constantinus, Constantius,
and Constance, each of them ruling in some part of the Empire: The Government
continued under these Emperors from the year 312, to the year 350. Some petty
Wars they had with Britain; some Authors affirm that this Constantine the
Great, beginning to persecute the Christians, he was smitten with a Leprosy
that the Physicians left him as incurable; and being asleep one Night he saw a
Vision, telling him that if he desired to recover his health, he should recall
from Exile Silvester the Bishop, and all the Clergy; which things he performed;
and being Converted and Baptized, he was immediately cured; and increasing in
Devotion, he built many Churches, and among the rest that of St. Peter's in
Rome, himself digging the Foundation, and carrying away twelve Baskets full of
Earth, in honor of the twelve Apostles: he built also the City Constantin^ple,
and made a Decree for celebrating the Lord's day instead of the Jewish Sabbath:
in his time was the first famous general Council of Nice, against Arius the
Heretic: This Emperor was wont to say, That Age appeared best in four things;
Old Wood best to burn; Old Wine to Drink; Old Friends to trust; Old Authors to
Read: also he said, There was but this difference between the Death of old Men
and young Men, for old Men go to Death, and Death comes to young Men: he
appointed Silvester the Bishop of Rome to wear a Crown of Gold, but he
contented himself with a Phrygian Miter; now a tripple Diadem, is thought
scarce stately enough for his Successors: This Constantine is said to be the
first Christian Emperor, as Lucius was the first Christian King: the honor of
both whose Birthrights England does glory in.

XLVIII. Julius Apostata; he began his Reign Anno Domini 356: and reigned about
seven years; he had no War with Britain, he denied the Faith of Christ and
turned Apostate; and Writ a Book against Christianity: being wounded in the
Wars with a poisoned Dart in his left Arm, he took a handful of his Blood, and
throwing it into the Air, he blasphemously said, Vicisti Galilaee.

XLIX. Jovinianus, This Emperor had Peace with Britain, he began his Reign
Anno Domini 363: and Reigned about a year; he became a Christian, was Baptized,
and caused his whole Army to follow his Example; his common speech was this, O
that I might govern wise Men, and wise Men govern me.

L. Valentinianus; In his time the Picts began to invade Britain, but were
vanquished by Theodosius the Deputy; This Emperor was highly esteemed of all
the Christians; being a great favourer of them, he forbad Idolatrous Sacrifices
by Night, and restored to the Churches their former Privileges, Liberties and
Possessions which the other Emperors had sold: his usual saying was, That Gold
was tried with the Touchstone, and Men with Gold.

LI. Gratianus and Vallens, This Vallens was Uncle to Gracianus and Ruled with
him four years: beginning his Reign Anno Domini 365: he at first recalled
Nazianzen and Basil from Banishment, and was Baptized by Eudoxius, but turned
Arrian afterward, and persecuted the Orthodox Bishops of the East, as
Eusebius, Pelagius, Gregorius, Nissenus, etc. he caused also 80 of the
Christian Ambassadors that were then in Constantinople, to be all sent to Sea
in one ship, and then the ship to be set on Fire: But as the Emperor Vallens
was very impious, so on the contrary Gratianus was very good, for he expelled
out of Italy all sorts of Heretics, and all the People being reduced to the
Faith of JESUS CHRIST, he caused all the ruined Churches to be repaired: he
began his Reign Anno Domini 367: and reigned 6 years. These Emperors had no
War with Britain.

LII. Maximus, and Valentinianus junior, These Emperors Ruled about six years,
and began to Reign Anno Domini ^73: as some Authors affirm, but Maximus his
Reign was so short, that some Historians take no notice of him: They had no War
with Britain.

LIII. Theodosius, This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini 379: and Reigned
about four years, according to some Authors, he had no War with Britain, Fla.
Stillicoe being the Deputy: in this Emperors time, Damasus being Pope, was the
second general Council, and the first at Constantinople: in his time also were
great losses by Earthquakes in several places both by Sea and Land, which
continued about six Months.

LIVE. Arcadius and Honorius, The Reign of these two Copartners began in the
year 384: and ended Anno Domini 402. They had no War with Britain: in their
time, at noonday a strange Fire from Heaven, penetrating the great Church of
Constantinople, fastened upon the Bishops seat in the Church, and consumed it,
afterward growing up like a Tree, fastened upon the Roof and devoured it; and
lastly passing the midst of the people without hurting any, to the great
amazement of all, seized upon the Senate House and burnt it to ashes.

LV. Theodosius junior, and Valentinianus* The Reign of these two Emperors
began Anno Domini 402. They reigned till the year 450. of which time Theodosius
Reigned only twenty two years: in their time was the third general Council held
at Ephesus, which was the first held at that place, Caelestinus being Pope: in
these Emperors time the Romans left Britain of their own accord, after they
had possessed the same about 597 years, and then shortly after, the Saxons made
themselves Sovereign Lords and Masters thereof.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Conquest of Britain by the Saxons, as also of the Commencement and
Continuance of their several Kingdoms therein during the Heptarchy, with the
Names of the Kings Ruling in each Kingdom.

THE Pickts and Scots after the Romans had left Britain, did much annoy the
poor Britains, and the Romans sent them aid against them several times, and at
their last coming, helped them to build a Wall from Sea to Sea between England
and Scotland, and bidding them farewell, desired them to look to themselves,
for they would no more undertake such long and hazardous journeys for their
sakes. And now the Saxons (after the Romans had quit left the Island) under the
Command of Hengist and Horsa, landed at Ebsfleet in the Island of Thanet in
Kent, about the year of Christ 448: as some Authors affirm, for they differ
amongst themselves in this point. These Saxons were sent for by the Britains
(the Romans refusing to come) to aid them against the Pickts and Scots who were
got into their Land as far as Stanford: and the Britains intending them the
Isle of Thanet to live in, that they might be near at hand to afford them help
as often as occasion required: but the Saxons not contented with the Island of
Thanet which the Britains had assigned them for their good service: they having
now got good footing in the Land, they began to display themselves in their
colors, and made it appear that they intended the best part for themselves,
and that the Britains should be at their Disposals.

Whereupon the Britains Petitioned them, and had good Answers: but afterward
had all their goods spoiled and plundered by them. And Hengist, at a certain
time, causing the British Nobles to meet him on Salisbury-Plain, under pretense
of a Treaty, did there treacherously cause them to be slain, giving this Watch
word to his Soldiers; New cout Seaxes, that is, Take your Swords: at which
words, They fell on the Nobles and slew them.

It is not certainly known from whence these Saxons originally descended; but
it is probably thought from Sacae a People in Asia; and it is said by so some
Authors, That Hengist and Horsa were Nephews to Woden and Fria, the Saxon
Dieties: in Honor of Woden they called the Fourth day of the Week Wodensday,
and the Sixth day Friday, in Honor of his wife Fria.

The Saxons used to go singing to the Wars, and their Manner was to kill every
Tenth Captain, and to accept of no Ransom: Their Garments were only a Cassock
clasped or (for want thereof) fastened with a Thorn, and their Weapons were long
Swords and Battle Axes, and they are reported to be the first that used to try
by single Combat: great Punishers they were of Adultery, and their Maids were
married but once; the men also were restrained from plurality of Wives, except
it were the greater sort, for Procreation sake; for it was accounted a great
Disgrace among them to have no Children.

Three of the strongest people of Germany were said to come into Britain, to
wit, Saxons, Angles and Jutes: of the Jutes came the Kentish men, and the men
of the Isle of Wight, and those over against it: of the Saxons came the East,
West, and South Saxons; and of the Angles came the East and middle Angles, that
is, the Marches, and had Middle- England, that stretches Westward toward the
River Dee besides Chester; and to Severn besides Shrewsbury, and so to Bristow:
and Eastward, toward the Sea; and Southward, to Thames, and so forth to
London: and Northward, to Humber, and so down Westward to the River Mercee, and
so to the West-Sea: also of the Angles come the men of Northumberland, and
Hengist and Horsa were Leaders of them all.

This Hengist got Possession of Kent, by the gift of Vortigern King of the
Britains: The Saxons were driven by the Britains, after several Skirmishes with
them, back to their Ships again in the Isle of Thanet; but through Treacherous
fair words, Hengist got footing again amongst the Britains; and by Degrees the
Saxons erected an Heptarchy here in Britain; and divided it into Seven
Kingdoms; as follows; viz.

1 Kent, 2 South Saxons, 3 West Saxons, 4 East Saxons, 5 Northumberland, 6
Mercia, 7 East Angles.
Each of which Kingdoms had a continued Succession of several KINGS: but
Authors do somewhat differ in their Names, and in the Commencement and
Continuance of their Reigns: as also in the Commencement and Continuance of the
said KINGDOMS, some making them to begin at one time, and some at another: but
that which is most commonly received as the truest Relation, is as follows:
but notwithstanding, this is with Submission to those who are better able to
discover the Truth with more certainty.

And now of the KINGDOMS in order: and

First, of the Kingdom of KENT; this contained only Kent: it began Anno 455,
continued 372 years, and ended 827. whose Succession of Kings take as
follows; they be accounted Seventeen in number.

1. Hengist; This was the first Saxon Invader, as is before declared: and he
made himself first King of Kent; he began his Reign over it, Anno 455. and
reined 34 years.

2. Eske or Osca, After him the Inhabitants were called Eskins: his Reign began
the year 490: he reigned twenty four years.

3. Octa; He began his Reign Anno 513. and reigned 20 years.

4. Imerick; his Reign over this Kingdom began Anno 533. and ended 562. in his
time was the second General Council held at Constantinople, Anno 553.

5. Ethelbert; This was the first Christian King of this Kingdom of Kent: see
for his Remarkable Actions amongst the petty Monarks, Chap. VI. This King began
his Reign in the year 562. and reigned 56 years King.

6. Edbald; This King was converted by Laurence Archbishop of Canterbury: he
had married his Mother in Law, after his Fathers Death: after his Conversion he
sent again for Melitus and Justus to their Bishoprics, who had fled out of the
Land during his Idolatry. He began his Reign 618. and reigned 24 years.

7. Ercombert, his Reign began Anno 642. and he reigned 24 years: he suppressed
the Temples of Idols, and Commanded the Feast of Lent to be kept.

8. Egbert, He murdered his two Nephews, Ethelred and Ethelbert, casting their
Bodies into a River; he began Anno 666. and reigned 9 years.

9. Lothaire, This King was shot through with a Dart in the bloody Battle which
Ethelred the Mercian, and Edrick the South-Saxon fought against him; his Reign
began the year 675. and lasted 11 years: in his time was the third General
Council held at Constantinople; being the Sixth General Council for all
Christendom, Agatho being then Bishop of Rome.

10. Edrick, He being slain in the Civil War against the Subjects, left the
Kingdom so torn with Dissentions, that after his Death, it was 6 years without
a King: He began his Reign Anno 686. and reigned 2 years.

11. Withred. Six years after his Brother's Death, Anno 694. this man was made
King; paying a great sum of Money to Iuas for it: he reigned thirty three years.

12. Edbert; He began his Reign 727. and reigned 23 years, in the fourth year
whereof there appeared two fearful Comets.

13. Ethelbert. This King's Reign began in the year 750. and continued eleven
years.

14. Alrick, He was slain in the Battle again Offa, at Otteford; his Reign
began Anno 761. and he reigned 34 years; in his time was the second General
Council held at Nice, being the seventh General Council of Christendom.

15. Ethelbert; This man usurped the Kingdom, but was afterward taken Prisoner
by Kenwolf, and carried captive into Mercia, where afterward Kenwolf at the
Dedication of his Church founded at Winchcomb, at the High Altar, in the
presence of 10 Dukes and 13 Bishops, cleared him: his Reign began 795. and he
reigned 3 years.

16. Cuthred; He was made King by Kenwolf, Anno 798. and reigned three years.

17. Baldred; This man began his Reign in the year 806. and after 18 years
space was forced to fly his Kingdom, and leave it to Kenwolf King of Mercia,
who about the year 827. annexed it to his Kingdom of Mercia.

Now come I to the Second Kingdom, which was the Kingdom of South Saxons. And
this contained Sussex and Surry: and had the Successions of 4 Kings: the
Kingdom began Ann. 488. continued 133 years, and ended Anno Domini 621. the
Kings follow.

1. Ella; This man brought a fresh Supply of Germans to the Relief of his
Countrymen, and landed at Shoreham in Sussex, about 34 years after the first
coming of the Saxons; and brought his three Sons, Cymen, Plettinger and Cissa
with him, but at length was enforced to send for more Aid, to fight the
Britains; and then he totally routed them, forcing them into a Wood on the
South of Kent, called Andresleger, near the Haven-Lyme, which was 40 miles in
length, and 30 in breadth: and so he made himself first King of the South-Saxon
Kingdom: He began his Reign Anno 488. and reigned thirty two years.

2. Cissa; He founded Chichester and Chisbury, and yielded a certain Tribute to
Cherdick King of the West Saxons for the maintenance of his Wars against the
Britains: his Reign began 520, and he reigned, as some account, 76 years.

3. Ethelwolf; This Prince began his Reign Anno 596. and reigned 25 years, he
was slain in Battle by Ceadwell, a banished Prince of the West Saxons: his
Conversion was by Bishop Wilfride, if we give credit to Bid: but the History
of Saint Swithin says, it was by Berinus Bishop of Dorchester.

4. Barthun and Authun: These two Dukes banishing Ceadwell after Ethelwolf's
death, were afterward overcome by him, and Barthun slain, with whom died the
Kingdom.

And now we proceed to the West Saxon Kingdom: within whose Limits were
reckoned Cornwall, Devon-shire, Dorcet-shire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire,
Southampton-shire and Barkshire. It began about the year 501, continued about
515 years, and ended Anno 116. and boasted in the Succession of Seventeen
Kings, as follows: to wit,

1. Cherdick; This man was a valiant Captain of the Low Country- Germans; and
entered this Island about the year 495. he fought a great Battle against the
Britains, and slew Natauleon one of their great Princes: This Cherdick was the
first West Saxon King: and began his Reign over that Kingdom, Anno 501. and
reigned 33 years.

2. Kenrick; He began to Reign Anno 534. and reigned 26 years: he gave the
Britains two great Overthrows, the one at Sheresbury in Wiltshire, and the
other at Banbury in Oxfordshire: he was with his Father Cherdick also in
several of the Battles against the Britains.

3. Chewlin; See for what memorable Accidents happened in his time, in the VI.
Chapter among the Petty Monarcks; He began his Reign Anno 560. and reigned 33
years.

4. Cearlick; He overthrew his Uncle Chewlin at Wannes-Ditch in Wilt-shire, and
so obtained the Kingdom, Anno 593. and reigned 6 years.

5. Chelwolf; He began his Reign the year 598: and being assaulted by the
Britains, Scots and Pickts, after 14 years Reign he died in the Wars.

6. Kingills; This Prince at Beandune fought the Britains, and slew 1046 of
them: he made Peace with Penda King of Mercia: and was the first Christian King
of the West Saxons: he was Converted by Berinus, to whom he gave Dorchester;
his Reign began Anno 612. and continued about 31 years.

7. Kenwald; He conquered the Britains at Pennum, but was afterward driven out
of his Kingdom by Penda King of Mercia, whose Sister he had married and turned
her away, but being Baptized by Bishop Felix, and receiving his wife again, he
received with her his Kingdom also: he began his Reign 643. and reigned 31
years.

8. Eskwin; His Reign began Anno 675. and continued about 2 years: He fought a
great Battle with Wolfere King of Mercia at Bidamheaford, where many Saxons
were slain on both sides.

9. Kentwin; This King was a great Sc^urge to the poor Britains causing them to
fly into R^cks and Mountains for Safeguard: he began his Reign Anno 677. and
reigned 9 years.

10. Ceadwald; He slew Ethelwolf King of the South Saxons in Battle, and after
him Barthun another Prince thereof: he spilt much Christian blood in Kent also;
but at length was baptized by Pope Sergius at Rome, and was named Peter: he
began his Reign Anno 686: and reigned about two years.

11. Ine. This King began his Reign Anno 688. and reigned 37 years: he gave a
great overthrow to the Britains, and fought Cheolred King of Mercia, bringing
the South Saxons Kingdom also into a Province, and annexing it to the
West Saxons Kingdom. He made several good Laws, translated by Mr. Lambert out
of the Saxon Language: he founded the Abbey of Glastenbury and after went to
Rome on Pilgrimage where he died: He caused every householder that had goods of
one kind in his house to the value of twenty pence, to pay the Pope yearly a
penny, on Lammas-day, which afterward was called Peter Pence.

12. Ethellard; In this Kings time appeared two blasing-Stars; he was much
emulated by Oswald a Norman; his Reign began Anno Domini 726: and continued
fourteen years.

13. Cuthred, He began his Reign Anno 740: and Reigned fourteen years: he made
Peace with Ethelbald King of Mercia, and they both joined in War against the
Britains, and gave them a great overthrow: at length Earl Adelm one of his
Subjects Rebelled against him.

14. Sigesbert; He caused Earl Cumbra to be slain, for telling him of his Vices
and Cruelties toward his Subjects, upon which occasion his Subjects Rebelled
against him, and drove him into the Woods, where he was slain by a Swineheard,
Servant to Earl Cumbra; he Reigned about one year, and began his Rule 754.

15. Kenwolf, He began his Government 755, and Ruled twenty nine years, he
several times overthrew the Britains, but was at length overthrown himself by
Offa King of Mercia as he was going to Merton to visit his Paramour; by one
Clyto, who for his pains, the next day was rewarded with Death by one Osricus
the King's Captain, and all Clyto's followers being 80 men, received the same
Doom, and then Osricus took the King's body and buried it at Winchester.

16. Brithrick, This King was unwittingly poisoned by the Queen, he taking the
Poison which she had prepared for one of his Minions, whereupon she fled into
France, and there died miserably: several strange Prodigies appeared in this
King's Reign; he began his Reign Anno 784. and reigned 16 years.

17. Egbert; He was the first sole Monarch of England: See more of him in the
Seventh Chapter: his Reign began Anno 800. over this Kingdom, and continued 36
years: after which he reigned 17 years as sole Monarch, having reduced England
into a Monarchy, Anno 827.

The next Kingdom we come unto, is the East Saxons, which contained Essex and
Middlesex; whose beginning was Anno 522. Continuance 305 years: and its
Expiration An. Dom. 827. The Succession of Kings were 14. as follows.

1. Erchenwine; He began to Rule over this Kingdom Anno 527. and reigned sixty
years.

2. Sledda; This King reigned nine years.

3. Sebert; He was converted by Miletus, the first Bishop of Saint Paul's in
London, which Church was founded by Sebert, and Ethelbert King of Kent: here
formerly had stood a Temple dedicated to Diana: This King began his Reign Anno
596. and reigned 21 years: he was the first Christian King, of this Kingdom.

4. Sered; He began his Reign Anno 617. and reigned 6 years: he banished
Miletus for prohibiting his Profanation of the Lord's Table: and was
afterward slain by Kingills the West Saxon King.

5. Sigesbert; This King began his Reign Anno 623. and reigned 23 years.

6. Sigebert; He was Baptized by Bishop Finnan, through the Persuasion of Oswye
King of Northumberland: and having too much Clemency, two of his Brethren
murdered him, after he had reigned 15 years: he began his Reign Anno 646.

7. Swithelm; He began his Reign Anno 661. and reigned 3 years: he was baptized
by Bishop Cedda; Edelwald King of the East Angles being his Godfather.

8. Sighere; He turned Apostate, but being brought to the Faith again by the
Industry of Wolfere King of the Mercia^s, he afterward caused Idolatrous
Temples and Altars to be demoloshed: in his time was a great Plague: he began
his Reign Anno 664: and reigned 5 years.

9. Sebba; He changed his Princely Robes into a Religious Habit in the
Monastery of St. Paul's in London; leaving his Kingdom to Sigherd, after he had
reigned thirty years: his Reign began Anno 669.

10. Sigherd; he began his Reign Anno 699. and reigned 7 years.

11. Seofrid; his Reign began 706. and he reigned 7 years.

12. Offa; he abandoned his Kingdom, and went to Rome, and was there shorn a
Monk, and died: he began his Reign 714. and reigned 8. years.

13. Selred; He began his Reign Anno 722. and reigned 38 years.

14. Suthred; This King was expulsed from the Kingdom, when he had reigned
about 5 years, by Egbert King of the West Saxons, who made it a Province
substitute to his own Kingdom, about the year 827.

The Kingdom of Northumberland comes next in order, whose Limits were
Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland and Northumberland: It
began 547. continued 379. and ended 926. as it is reckoned by some, though it
does not challenge a Succession of Kings so long: for I find only the 25 Kings
following.

1. Ida and Ella; Their Reign began Anno 547. and continued 42 years; but after
the first 15 years thereof were past, then were these five Copartners following
all admitted to reign with Ella. They all 5 began their Reigns Anno 562. and
reigned as follows.

2. Adda, 7 years.

3. Elappea, 5 years.

4. Theodwald, 1 year.

5. Frethulf, 7 years.

6. Theodrick, 7 years.

7. Ethelrick, He began his Reign Anno 589. and reigned 4 years.

8. Ethelfride; He miserably oppressed the Britains, and conquered Edanaden
King of the Scots at Degsaston: and the same year Saint Augustine in the midst
of Winter, after he had Christened ten thousand English men in the River Swale
in Yorkshire, perceiving his Death to approach, he thereupon named one
Laurence for his Successor. And now Ethelfride marching to West-chester slew
there both the British Soldiers, and harmless Monks, and at the Monastery of
Bangor he slew between eleven and twelve hundred Monks, and overthrew the
British Host: he banished Prince Edwin, who flying to Redwald King of the
East Angles: They two joined against Ethelfride, and slew him, when he had
reigned 33 years. He began his Reign Anno 593.

9. Edwine; After Ethelfride's Death Anno 626. began his Reign, and Reigned
about seven years; In his banishment a Vision appeared to him, and he was
assured of the Kingdom, if he would turn Christian, which he promised to do; so
the Vision left him, laying his hand on Edwines head, bid him remember that
sign; but Edwine after he had obtained the Kingdom, forgot his Promise, and
could not be drawn to turn Christian, insomuch that Paulinus, who had much
solicited him to it, began to despair of it: so the Vision appeared to
Paulinus, and bid him lay his hand on the King's head, and ask him, if he
remembered that sign; as soon as Paulinus did this to the King; he was ready to
fall down at his Feet; and was presently Baptized by Paulinus at York* with
many of his Nobles. He caused Brazen-Dishes to be chained at every Fountain,
for Passengers to serve themselves with Water.

10. Osrick; He began his Reign Anno 633: and Reigned one year: he was slain by
Cadwal a King of the Britains.

11. Oswald; See for the Actions of this King and the next, chap. the sixth: he
began his Reign Anno Domini 634, and reigned 9 years.

12. Oswye; He Reigned 28 years, and began his Reign Anno 643.

13. Egfride; He warred against Ethelred King of Mercia, but not without great
loss to himself; and invading the Irish also, his fortune being worse there, he
was slain in the Mountains, when he had Reigned fifteen years, beginning his
Rule from the year 671.

14. Alfrid; He began his Reign six hundred eighty six, and Reigned twenty
years.

15. Osred; He being a great Whoremaster, not forbearing veiled Nuns, no person
being secure from his Lust, he was at length Murdered by his two kinsmen
Kenred and Oswick the two succeeding Kings; his Reign began Anno 706, and
lasted 9 years.

16. Kenred; his Reign began 716, he reigned two years.

17. Oswick, he began his Reign Anno 718, and reigned 11 years.

18. Ceolnulfe, he, after he had Reigned eight years, became a Monk in Holly
Island: in his time, the last year of his Reign, appeared two great blazing
Stars, one before Sunset, and the other after Sunrising, which continued a
Fortnight.

19. Egbert; He began his Reign Anno 738, and after twenty years Reign turned
Monk.

20. Osxulph; He began his Reign 758, and was Murdered by his Servants at
Micklewoughton, when he had Reigned 1 year.

21. Edilwald; He was slain by Alured his Successor: in the sixth year of his
Reign: he began his Reign Anno seven hundred fifty nine.

22. Alured; He began his Reign 765, and when he had reigned nine years was
expulsed the Kingdom by his Subjects.

23. Ethelred, He was banished the Kingdom by two of his Nobles Edilbald and
Herebert, about the fifth year of his Reign: and about sixteen years after
returning again, his Government being misliked, he was after seven years second
reign slain by his Subjects, after whose Death the Inhabitants for thirty years
were ruled by Usurpers; He began his Reign Anno 774.

24. Alfwald; He began his Reign 778, and was murdered by the Conspiracy of
Siga, in the 11 year of his Reign.

25. Osred, He began his Reign Anno 789, and when he had reigned 1 year, he was
expulsed the Kingdom by his Subjects.

And now we come to Mercia, which large Kingdom contained the Counties of
Huntington, Rutland, Lincoln, Northampton, Leicester, Derby, Nottingham,
Oxford, Cheshire, Shropshire, Gloucester-shire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire,
Warwickshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hartfordshire; It began in
the year 582: it continued about 292 years, and ended 874. the Succession of
Kings, were these 20 following.

1. Crida, This King began his Reign Anno 582, and reigned 12 years: he first
framed this large Kingdom.

2. Wibba, He began his Reign 594, and reigned twenty years, he thinking the
Kingdom too little, enlarged it, incroaching upon his Neighbors the Britains.

3. Ceorle, His Reign Commenced Anno 614, and continued ten years.

4. Penda, He fe^ in Battle Edwine and Oswald Kings of Northumberland,
Sigesbert, Egfrid, and Anna Kings of the East Angles, and forced Redwald King
of the West Saxons out of his Country, but at length he was slain in Battle by
Oswye King of Northumberland, after he had reigned about thirty two years: he
began his Reign Anno 624.

5. Peada or Wedda; He was the first Christian King of Mercia, and about the
third year of his Reign he was Murdered either by the Treachery of his Wife or
Mother: his Reign began Anno six hundred fifty six.

6. Wolfere: See the Actions of this King and the seven succeding Kings, among
the petty Monarchs, chap. 6. He began his Reign Anno 659, and Reigned seventeen
years.

7. Ethelred, Began 675, reigned 29 years.

8. Kenred, Began 704, and reigned 4 years.

9. Chelred, Began 709, reigned 7 years.

10. Ethelbald, Began 716, reigned 42 years.

11. Offa, Began 758, reigned 39 years.

12. Egfrid, Began 797, reigned 4* Months.

13. Kenwolfe, Began 797, reigned 22 years.

14. Kenelm; He was Murdered by Askbert this Teacher, through the instigation
of Quendride the Kings own Sister; he began his Reign Anno 819, and reigned
about 5 months.

15. Ceolwolfe; By the Instigation of Bernulfe, after one year's Rule, he was
expulsed by his Subjects.

16. Bernulfe, Having gotten the Kingdom, had but little comfort in the
enjoyment, first fighting Egbert the West Saxon, and afterward the
East Angles, by whom he was slain in the third year of his Reign; he began to
Rule Anno 821.

17. Ludecan; He began his Reign 824, and in his second year was slain by
Egbert and the East Angles.

18. Witlafe; He was also overcome by King Egbert the West Saxon in the
thirteenth year of his Reign, which began Anno 826.

19. Berthulf; He began his Reign Anno 839, and reigned 13 years; And then was
forced to leave his Country by the cruel usage of the Danes.

20. Burdred; He, after several fights with the Danes, at length became Victor,
but fresh supplies landing again, he was then forced to fly out of the Land: he
began to Reign 852, and reigned about twenty two years.

Now we come to the last of the seven Kingdoms, which was called the
East Angles: This contained Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge and Ely Island: It
began Anno 575, continued 353 years, and ended Anno 914, and had a Succession
of 15 Kings as follows.

1. Vffa; He began to Rule 575, and reigned 7 years.

2. Titulus; He began his Reign, Anno five hundred eighty three, and reigned
about thirty two years.

3. Redwald; See his Actions among the petty Monarchs, chap. 6. his Reign began
in the year 616, and he reigned 8 years.

4. Erpenwald, He began his Reign 624, and Reigned twelve years, he was brought
to the Faith of Christ, through the persuasions of Edwine King of
Northumberland, for which cause he was murdered by one Richebert: he was the
second Christian King of this Kingdom, and Redwald the first.

5. Sigebert; He began his Rule 636, and Reigned two years, he abandoned the
Court and Country during his Father Redwald's Reign; and afterward returning
out of France, he brought the light of the Gospel into his Dominions, and after
two years Reign, shore himself a Monck, and resigned his Kingdom; he was
afterward slain in Battle by wicked Penda.

6. Egrick; He began to Reign 638, and reigned four years: he was slain by
Penda, and so was his Successor Anna.

7. Anna, Begun 642, Reigned 12 years.

8. Ethelbert, He was slain in Battle, by Oswine King of Northumberland, for
siding with Penda: he began his Reign 654, and reigned about two years.

9. Edelwald, Began 656, reigned 8 years.

10. Aldulfe, Began 664, reigned 19 years.

11. Elswolfe, Began 683, reigned 7 years.

12. Beorne, Began 690, reigned 24 years.

13. Ethelred, Began 714, reigned 35 years.

14. Ethelbert, He was sent for by Offa the Mercian King, who promised him his
Daughter, but instead thereof he gave him Death to Embrace: he being murdered
at the instigation of Quindride the Queen: He began his Reign 749, and reigned
45 years.

15. Edmund, He was besieged in Framingham Castle by the Danes, and being taken
Prisoner by them, he was beaten with cudgels and scourged, but Edmund still
calling on the name of the Lord Jesus, it so enraged them, that they took him
and tied him to a stake and shot him to Death with their Arrows, and afterward
they cut off his head, and threw it in a Bush: he began his Reign Anno 794. And
though Authors agree not how long he Reigned, yet I shall agree with the ending
of him to end this 4 Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Of the British Princes, who withstood the Saxons Conquest, being accounted 13,
as follows.

1. VOrtigern, This man being chosen King of the Britains (after he had first
treacheroufly made away Constantius his Predecessor) he intended the like to
Aurelius, Ambrosius, Vter Pendragon, who were the Brother of Constantius,
whereupon they were conveyed to their Friends in Little-Britain for their
safety against his Tyranny: And now Vortigern being sadly pestered with the
Picts and Scots, he sends for the Saxons to his Aid, and having through their
assistance overcome his Enemies: Hengist the Saxon Leader, getting into favor
with the King, begged of him so much ground as an Ox-hide would compass which
was easily granted: so the same being cut into thongs; it incircled so much
ground that a Fort was built upon it called Thong-Castle, where Hengist settled
himself.

And now Hengist has more of his Friends waiting upon him, and amongst the
rest comes Rowena his Daughter, with whom Vortigern was much taken, turns away
his lawful Christian Wife, and takes Rowena; and afterward his own Daughter
begotten on her, becomes his Bedfellow, on whom he begot a Son called Faustus,
who is said, did weep himself blind for the Abomination of his Parents: for
those things, and his too much kindness to the Saxons, after sixteen years
Reign he was deposed by his Subjects, and his Son Vortigern made King: after
whose Death, he was restored again, but falling again into his wicked courses
after six years second Reign, he with his incestuous Wife were both consumed
to* Ashes in a Castle of his own founding in Wales, which was set on fire by
Aurelius Ambrosius his Successor: This King began his Reign Anno 438, and
reigned in all 22 years.

2. Vortimer; He reigned prudently 4 years, and won four Set-Battels against
the Saxons, and put them to such a strait, that they were forced to betake
themselves into the Isle of Thanet, the place of their first landing, and then
petitioned to return into their own Country, leaving their Families and
Possessions behind them: but least this King should prove the utter vanquisher
of the Saxons, he was by Rowena their favorite poisoned: And now Vortigern
enters upon his second government; and Hengist now returning again, the King
with his British Nobles makes head against him, and a Treaty being agreed upon,
and Salisbury plain the place appointed, there the British Nobles were
treacherously slain by Hengist's Soldiers. And now the King with his
incestuous Wife are taken and immured up in a Castle in Wales, as is showed
before.

3. Aurelius Ambrosius; This Man overcame Hengist the Saxon in Yorkshire, and
cut of his head, and took his Son Octa Prisoner; but afterward falling sick at
Winchster, Passentius the youngest Son of Vortigern, sent one Eopa in show of a
Physician, who gave him Poison instead of Physic, of which he died, and was
buried in Coria Gigantum, or Stone-henge in Salisbury-plain, which he by the
help of Merlin's enchantment (as it is said) brought out of Ireland and placed
here in memory of the British Nobles here slain; Vter-Pendragon was here buried
also: Aurelius Ambrosius gave name to the adjacent Town calling it Ambrose-bury
now Amesbury. This King began his Reign Anno 466, and reigned thirty two years.

4. Vter Pendragon, He was Brother to Aurelius Ambrosius, and encountered the
Saxons, taking Ebusa and Octa two of Hengest's Sons Prisoners, but afterward
falling into unlawful Love with Lady Igren the Duke of Cornwall's Wife, in the
mean time the two Prisoners escaped from their Keepers, and advanced into the
Field again, where they were met again by the King, and Ebusa, and Octa slain,
and their Saxons put to the Rout; and shortly after Vter died of Poison put
into a Well of which he used to drink, having reigned 18 years: his Reign began
Anno 498.

5. Arthur; He was Son to Vter Pendragon begotten on Lady Igren; this is him of
whom so many Incredible things are reported in the Monkish Legendaries, that
they make his true Achievements questionable: He warred against the Saxons and
chased Colgerne their Captain, from his Camp in Northumberland, to York, from
whence he escaped into Germany: and returned with 70 Sail of Ships into
Scotland: Whereupon Arthur sent for his Nephew Howel, King of Little Britain,
who came in person to his Aid.

He fought twelve Battles with the Saxons: the 1. at the Mouth of the River
Gleyn, the 2, 3, 4, and 5, on Dougla's Banks: the 6, on the River Bassus; the
7, in the Wood Callidon or Celidon near Lincoln: the 8, near the Castle
Guinion: the 9, in Wales: the 10, at Rithowood: the 11, on the Hill Agned
Castergonion: and 12, at Baden-hills, where he slew 140 Saxons with his own
hands, some say 800.

The Relics of this Arthur's Round Table are shown at Winchester: and of the
twenty four Seats thereof amongst the Welsh, Lancelot, Tristram and Gawen, were
of his chiefest Knights; which Names are commonly still given with us in
Baptism: he began his Reign Anno 516, and reigned 26 years: he was buried, as
some Authors affirm, in the Vale of Avelon, besides Glastenbury; and about 600
years after, in King Henry the II. time, his body was taken up and translated
into the Church.

6. Constantine; He was son to Cador Duke of Cornwall, and Cousin to Arthur: He
slew the two Sons of Mordred King of the Picts, the one at the Altar in St.
Paul's London; the other at Winchester, to which places they were fled for
Sanctuary: but himself was afterward slain by Aurelius Conatus his Successor:
he began his Reign Anno 542. and reigned 3 years.

7. Aurelius Conatus; This man put several of his Subjects to death, imprisoned
his Uncle, and slew his two Sons; for no cause at all, but because they were
lawful Heirs between him and the Crown: he began his Reign Anno 545. and
reigned 33 years.

8. Vortiporus; He is recorded by some to have fought several Battles with the
Saxons, and to be a Valiant Defender of his Country: but Guildas accuses him of
Murders on his own Kin, and Adulteries; He began his Reign Anno 578. and
reigned 3 years.

9. Malgo Canonus, Nephew to the last King: he is branded with the sin of
Sodomy, and the murder of his Uncle: And Guildas calls him a Tawny Butcher, a
Bear, a Contemner of Religion, and an Oppressor of the Clergy: words as unfit
for a Clergyman to give, as a King to bear. Some say, That hereupon he out of
Remorse of Conscience betook himself to a Monastery; but quickly threw off his
Cowl again, and ended his life in his former desperate Courses: He was a comely
person, and began his Reign Anno 581. and reigned 5 years.

10. Careticus; He was forced to fly into Chichester for his safety, to which
place the Saxons and one Gurmund a great Pirate followed him, and by a
Stratagem of tying fire to the feet of Sparrows (they lighting amongst some dry
Straw) set the City on fire and consumed it: But Careticus escaping hence,
ended his Life in the Mountains in Wales, whither he was fled: He began his
Reign Anno 586. and reigned 3 years.

11. Cadwan; This Man, after 24 years Civil Dissension, was made King: during
which Stirs, Augustine the Monk sent hither by Pope Gregory, to convert the
Saxons, carrying himself too high at a Meeting with the British Bishops, at a
place thereupon called Austin's-Oak in Worcestershire, no Agreement could be
made amongst them; upon which Account (through Austin's means, as is thought) a
Massacre was executed upon the harmless Monks at Bangor, 2000 of them being
slain by the wicked Ethelfride King of Northumberland: Whereupon Cadwan and
Ethelfride met in the Field for Battle, but a Peace was concluded on, and Amity
continued during these King's lives: This King began his Reign Anno 613. and
reigned 22 years.

12. Cadwallo; He was Son to Cadwan, he warred strongly against the Saxons, and
joined with Penda the Pagan King of the Mercians, who together slew good King
Edwine of Northumberland, and his Son Prince Offride: the two Apostates also
Osrick and Eaufride Kings of Deira and Bernicia were slain by Cadwallo: He
began his Reign Anno 635. and reigned 48 years.

13. Cadwallader, Son to Cadwallo: In his time there was such a Famine and
Pestilence, that the Living were scarce able to bury the Dead, which continued
the space of 11 years, so that the Land became desolate: and the King left the
Land, and went to his Cousin Allan King of Little Britain in France. The Saxons
taking Advantage of these Miseries, lamentably oppressed the poor Britains; to
whose Aid Cadwallader was intended once to return, but afterward being
over-swayed by contrary thoughts, and diverted by a Dream, he went on
Pilgrimage to Rome, and receiving the Habit of Religion from Pope Sergius, he
there died and was interred: with whom died all the Hopes of the Britains: and
so the Saxons became Sovereign Lords and Masters of this Island: This King
began his Reign Anno 685. and reigned about 4 years.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Saxon Princes who incroached upon one another Territories, and so
became Petty Monarcks of some certain Countries only in Britain: They are
accounted to be about 14, as follows.

1. CHeuline; He fought against Ethelbert King of Kent: and at Wimbledon
defeated his Army: and flew two of his Dukes, and this is said to be the first
Battle that was among the Saxons themselves: he gave a great Overthrow also to
the Britains shortly after at Bedford, and surprised four of their Towns,
Liganburgh, Ailsbury, Bensington and Evesham. And about six years after he
fought the Britains again at Deorham, and slew Coinmagil, Candigan and
Farmnagil three of the British Kings, surprising also three of their Cities,
Gloucester, Bath, and Cirencester. And not long after this, encountering the
Britains again at Wodnesbeoth, he was there put to flight, and his Son Prince
Cuth slain: this Victory was obtained aagaist him by the help of the Saxons
under the Command of Cealrick, Chewline's Nephew.

This King began his Reign Anno 561, reigned 33 years, to whom we give the
place of the first petty Monarch.

2. Ethelbert; In this King's time it was that Gregory Archdeacon of Rome, did
see some Youths of this Island there to be sold, and seeing them very fair, he
demanded from whence they came? it was told him from Britain, out of the
Province De Ira; Ah! said he, It is great pity but their Country should be
delivered de Ira Dei, from the wrath of God: And afterward, Gregory being made
Pope, he sent Augustine the Monk, and forty others in his company to this
Island, about the year 596. And their first Address was to this King Ethelbert,
who allowed them Canterbury for their part, with Liberty to convert as many of
his Subjects as they could; so here they Preached, and it is reported that ten
thousand were Baptized by them in one day. And the King seeing their holy Lives
and Doctrine, was also converted and Baptized, Anno 596, and about the 36 year
of his Age and fourth year of his Reign, and afterward he bestowed Canterbury
on Austine.

After this Austine calls a Synod, and 7 British Bishops came to the Synod, bu^
refused to associate themselves with Austine, they disgusting his Pride; so
shortly after this a great contention arose between Augustine and these British
Bishops, about the Feast of Easter, but at length they were reconciled, and it
was agreed that the Feast should be kept the first Sabbath after the first full
Moon in the first month, which was afterward Ratified by the Nicene Council:
This King was the only means of the Conversion of Sebert King of the
East Angles, and assisted him in the building of St. Paul's Church in London;
this Ethelbert built also the Church of St. Andrews in Rochester. And, at his
instigation, a Citizen of London built the Church of St. Peter on the West Side
of London, in a place called the Island of Thorns, now called Westminster: and
it was so called, because this Minster stood Westward of St. Paul's: some say
this St. Peter's was built by King Sebert, and being grown ruinous in tract of
time, Edward the Confessor Rebuilt it, and liberally endowed it.

This Ethelbert, was the fifth King of Kent, and second petty Monarch, he began
his Reign Anno 595, as Monarch, and reigned 23 years, having reigned thirty
three years before this, King of Kent.

3. Redwald, This King turned an Apostate after he had received Baptism; and
Edwine King of Northumberland flying to him for succor, he intended to Murder
him, but was withheld by his Wife; And afterward giving his Assistance to
Edwine against Ethelfride of Northumberland, they gave him Battle and slew him;
and Edwine gained thereby the Kingdom and Crown.

This Redwald was third King of the East Angles, and 3 Monarch, he began his
Reign Anno 616, and reigned eight years.

4. Edwine, This King subdued all the Costs of Britain, and added the Islands
of the Hebrides to his Dominions, but the then West Saxons King envying
Edwine's success sent one Eumerus to murder him, who being with the King on
Easter day, and intending to run him through, he was prevented by one Lilla, who
interposing his body was there slain; this gave occasion to Edwine afterward
to march against the West Saxons, and to destroy all those who had a hand in
this Conspiracy.

And now the King causes all the Idol Temples to be destroyed, and received
Baptism from Paulinus, at York, in the Cathedral there, which was then of Wood,
but he caused it to be built of fair stone Anno Domini 627, and made Paulinus
Bishop thereof: but at length this King was slain in Battle by Penda King of
Mercia, and Cadwallo King of the Britains; at which time Prince Ofride, Edwin's
Son, was also slain.

This Edwine was 9 King of Northumberland, and the fourth petty Monarch; he
began his Reign Anno 626, and reigned 7 years.

5. Oswald, He slew Cadwallo King of the Britains, and the greatest part of his
Army at Deniseburn. And through this King's means, and Adian a Scotch Bishop,
abundance of his Subjects received Baptism in Landisfarn or Holly-Island, where
the Bishop Preached in Scotch, and the King did interpret to the People. But
the King afterward going against Penda the Mercian King, he was slain in
Battle at Oswaltree in Shrop-shire, and Penda, after he was slain, (malice
raging after Death) caused him to be torn in pieces.

This Oswald was the eleventh King of Northumberland, and fifth petty Monarch,
he began his Reign Anno 634, and reigned nine years.

6. Oswye, He fought with Oswine of Deira, at Wilfairs-Down, and made him fly
the Field, and repairing to one Earl Hundwald for safety, he was by him
betrayed into the hands of Oswye, who flew him: he also joined Battle with
Ethelbald Son of Oswald, and Egbert King of the East Angles, who had united
their forces with Penda King of Mercia, and all these he encountered near Leeds
in Yorkshire, where he gave them a great Overthrow, slaying Penda and
Ethelbert, and thirty Dukes and Leaders, causing also Ethelbald to make use of
his heels for his safety, being put to flight. It was this King that decided
the long Controversy for the celebration of Easter, and founded the Cathedral
Church in Litchfield for a Bishop's Sea.

This Oswye was the twelfth King of Northumberland, and sixth petty Monarch; he
began his Reign Anno 643, and reigned 28 years.

7. Wolfere, he conquered the West Saxons and won the Isle of Wight from King
Remald, and gave it to Edilwach King of the South Saxons, whose Godfather he
was when he was Baptized. Some say, He gave it to Sigesbert King of the
East Angles, upon Condition that he should be Baptized, This Wolfere before his
Conversion slew his own two Sons, because they were Baptized contrary to his
knowledge; but repenting afterward, he caused all Heathenish Temples to be
converted into Churches for the true Worship of God. It is said that he first
founded the Abby-Church in Peterburgh.

This Wolfere was the sixth King of Mercia, and seventh petty Monarch, he began
his Reign as Monarch Anno 671, and reigned 4 years.

8. Ethelred; Much Blood was spilt in his Wars against Kent, and neither
Churches nor Abbeys escaped his Fury, for he destroyed that Kingdom. In his
time were two blazing Stars seen for three Months together; at that time, he,
at the instance of his Wife, put Wilfridus out of his Bishopric of
Northumberland; and at last resigned his Crown to his Nephew Kenred being
lawful heir to it, from whom he had usurped it: and being stricken with remorse
of Conscience for the Blood he had spilt, he turned Monk, and died. This
Ethelred was the 7 King of Mercia, and 8 petty Monarch: He began his Reign Anno
675, and reigned twenty nine years.

9. Kenred, After four years peaceable Reign, he assigned his Crown to his
Cousin Ethelred, and took his journey to Rome, with Offa King of the East Saxons,
and Edwine Bishop of Winchester, where he was shorn Monk, and died.

This Kenred was the eight King of Mercia, and ninth petty Monarch, his Reign
began Anno 704, and he reigned four years.

10. Chelred, He had a troublesome Reign, being constantly in War against Inas
the West Saxon, who was a great emulator of his Glory.

This Chelred was 9 King of Mercia, and tenth petty Monarch. He began his Reign
Anno 709, and reigned 7 years.

11. Ethelbald, He besieged Somerton, and won it, and invading the Northumbers,
brought away great spoil, which gave occasion to Cuthred the West Saxon to
fight him, giving him the foyl at Burford; and afterward encountering Cuthred a
second time, he was treacherously slain by his own Subjects near Tanworth in
Warwickshire, at the procurement of one Bernred one of their Leaders, who
thought thereby to gain the Crown to himself. This King founded the Monastery
of Crowland, as some Authors affirm.

This Ethelbald was the tenth King of Mercia, and eleventh petty Monarch: he
began to Reign Anno 716, and reigned 42 years.

12. Offa, His first War was with Alrick King of Kent, whom he slew at
Otteford; and afterward marching from South to North, he made Havoc of all
before him to Humber, and at his return overthrew Kenwolf and his West Saxons,
near Merton, whither he was going to visit his Paramour: he caused a great
Ditch to be cast between England and Wales, which is still called Offa's ditch,
and the Welsh presuming to throw down some part thereof, he thereupon entered
their Territories with an Army, and slew Marmodius their King, and all his
Associates.

His last Wars were against the Danes, who had invaded England, and were by him
with their no small loss forced back to their Ships: to this King was sent a
Book of the Decrees of the Second Council of Nice, for a present, from Charles
King of France; And now growing weary of his Government, he made his Son
Egfride King, and gave the Pope Peter Pence out of his Dominions, after the
example of Inas: And so going to Rome, he gave Pope Hadrian the first ample and
Rich Gifts for canonizing Albane the Protomartyr of England for a Saint. At his
return he built the Monastery of St. Abane, and in Testimony of Repentance for
the Blood he had spilt, he gave the tenth part of his goods to Churchmen and
the poor.

This Offa was the eleventh Mercian King, and twelfth petty Monarch; his Reign
began Anno 758. and he ruled 39 years.

13. Egfride, He restored the Church to all her ancient Privileges, which his
Father had deprived her of.

This Egfride was twelfth King of Mercia, and 13 petty Monarch: his Reign was
short, about four Months, only he began his Reign Anno Domini 797.

14. Kenwolfe, He warred against Kent, and took Ethelbert (the third King of
Kent of that name) Prisoner, giving the Kingdom to Cuthred: but afterward
building a goodly Church at Winchcomb in Glucestershire, upon the day of the
Dedication, he led Pren to the high Altar, and there in the presence of 13
Bishops, and ten Dukes, and many other Nobles, he released him, and set him at
liberty. And now each of these petty Monarchs having striven which of them
could extend and enlarge his Limits furthest, at length this succeeding Egbert
brought the seven headed Fountain of their Heptarchy, to run in one Channel of
an entire Monarchy.

This Kenwolf was the thirteenth King of Mercia, and last of the petty
Monarchs. He began his Reign Anno Domini seven hundred ninety seven, and
reigned twenty two years.

CHAP. VII.
Of those 15 Saxon Princes, who were accounted sole Monarchs of this Kingdom of
ENGLAND.

1. EGbert, He gained Rule over all the seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, and so
became sole Monarch of England, which none of them before him ever was: he had
fourteen years War with the Cornish and Welsh, and took West-Chester their
chief Hold from them, making a strict Law against all those should dare to
enter over Offa's Ditch, or set one Foot within his English Dominions; He slew
Bernulf King of Mercia in Battle, and drove the King of Kent out of his
Kingdom, the Eastangles, and East Saxons also submitted to him, with the
South Saxons also, whereupon he caused himself to be Crowned absolute Monarch
at Winchester. And this Monarchy continued in the Saxons, till the Danes first
got, and then lost it again, and the Saxon's issue upon the next entrance
thereof failing, it then fell to the Normans.

This Egbert first gave the name of ENGLAND to this Country, and named the
Inhabitants English. In the fourteenth year of his Monarchy, the Danes with 33
Ships landed in England, to whom he gave Battle but had the worst of the day,
loosing two of his chief Captains and two Bishops, hardly escaping himself. And
the second year after they landed in Wales, with whom joined the Welsh, but at
this time (fortune not always frowning) he overcame both parties; and in the
last of his Reign, the Danes sacked the Island of Shippy near Kent, and with
much ado were expelled.

This Egbert was the 17 King of the West Saxons, and first sole Monarch of
England; He began his Reign as Monarch Anno 819, and reigned 17 years.

2. Ethelwolf; This King was made Bishop of Winchester before his Father
Egbert's Death, and was in a manner constrained by his Clergy to take upon him
the Government. And so he bestowed his Bishopric on Swithin his Tutor: after
several Bickerings with the Danes, at length, he gave them a great overthrow at
Ocley; he freed Church Lands from all Tribute, and regal Services. And going to
Rome, he there confirmed Peter Pence, and at his return he gave yearly to Rome
300 Marks, for a requital of his kind reception there.

This Ethelwolf was eldest Son to Egbert, and the 2 sole Monarch of England. He
began his Reign Anno 837, and reigned about 20 years.

3. Ethelbald, He was eldest Son to Ethelwolf, by his first Wife Osburga his
Butler's Daughter: he was with his Father in several of the Battles against the
Danes; but all his good and valiant Actions were blasted by his taking of
Judith his Stepmother (the King of France his Daughter, and his Fathers second
Wife) to his Embraces; for he was suddenly snatch away by the hand of
Providence, for this incestuous Marriage: after whose Death, Lady Judith
returning to her Father, was intercepted by the way, and forced by Baldwine
Forrester of Ardema, who at length appeasing her Father, was by him made Earl
of Flanders: from whom, and this Judith descended Maud the Wife of our William
the Conqueror.

This Ethelbald was the third sole Monarch of England. He began his Reign Anno
Domini 857, and reigned two years.

4. Ethelbert, He was never out of Wars, but constantly pestered with those
devouring Locusts the Danes. And landing one time they destroyed Winchester,
but a great part of them were slain before they could recover their Ships again.

This Ethelbert was second Son of Ethelwolf, and fourth sole Monarch of
England: he began to Rule Anno 860, and Ruled 5 years.

5. Ethelred; The Danes in his time began to overrun the whole Country, and
being Pagans spoiled all before them, pulling down Monasteries and Abbyes, and
defiling the Virgins, to evade which Disgrace the Virgins of Coldingham cut off
their own Noses and upper lips, to make themselves appear distastful to these
leacherous Pagans. These cruel Fellows under the Command of Hungar and Hubba
their two Dukes, in their savage Rage fired the City of York, and martyred St.
Edmund King of the East Angles: but Ethelred at length gave them a great
overthrow, slaying one of their Kings, nine Earls, and an infinite number of
common Soldiers: but about fourteen days after the Danes put the King to Flight
at Basing; and giving him Battle again at Merton, about 2 Months after, they
obtained the Victory, wounding the King also, of which afterward he died. In
the third year of this Kings Rule was the fourth general Council of
Constantinople, under Pope Hadrian the Second. This was the eighth general
Council of Christendom.

This Ethelred was the Third Son of Ethelwolf, and fifth Sole Monarch of
England: and began his Reign Anno 866. and reigned 6 years.

6. Elfride; He fought 7 Battles with the Danes in one year, and his
Predecessor 9: These Danes so sore oppressed the King, that he was forced to
fle into the Woods and Desert Places, where righting of his Bow and Arrows in a
poor Cottage, he was sharply blamed by the House-wife for letting a Cake burn
on the Hearth for want of turning: But after this putting himself into the
habit of a Musician, he went playing up and down in the Danes Tents, and taking
notice of their sluggish Security; he returned and gathered together his
scattered forces; and entering the Danes Tents before they were aware, he made a
great slaughter of them, and took Rafan their Danish Banner, which had a Raven
of Needle Work in it, that had good Fortune ever attendant. And now Halden a
Danish Commander landing in Wales was by the Devonshire Men slain, at a place
near Exeter bearing his name, and 818 of his followers: after this the Danes
sued to the King for Peace, which was granted, but not long continued.

This King caused all thieves to be banished, and divided his Kingdom into
Shires, Hundreds, and Tythings: It is said, That Gold-Bracelets were fastened to
the Posts in Cross-wayes, and that none were so bold as to take them away: He
is reported to have divided the Natural Day into three parts: Eight hours
whereof he spent in Prayers and Contemplation; Eight hours in the Affairs of
the Kingdom; and Eight hours in Provision for himself. He founded the first
Common School in Oxford, as Authors affirm, which is now called University
College.

This Elfride was fourth Son of Ethelwolf, and the Sixth Sole Monarch of
England. He began his Reign Anno 872. and reigned 29 years.

7. Edward; A Rebellion was raised against this King by his Nephew Ethelwald:
in this King's time, one John Patrick Erigena, a Britain, writ a Book about the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which was afterward condemned by the Pope, and
he received Martyrdom for his Reward. This King built the Castle of Hartford,
and at St. Edmund's Ditch he fought the Danes, and was overcome: but they lost
two of their Kings Ethelwald and Crochricus: and encountering again at
Wodnesfield, there the fortune of the day fell to the King, and he slew the two
Pagan Kings Cowilfus and Healadin^^ and the two Earls Vter and Scurfa, and many
thousands of the Danes besides: Edrick King of the East Angles was also slain
by his own Subjects, after this King had vanquished his Army.

This Edward was the eldest Son of Elfride, and the Seventh Sole Monarch of
England: He began to rule Anno 901. and ruled 24 years.

8. Ethelstane: He is said to be the first anointed King (...) this Island:
Elfred a Norman rebelling (...) and sent to Rome to (...) Edwin the King's
Brother was slain, the King through some Jealousies consenting thereunto, but
afterward Repenting the Fact, caused the Procurer thereof to suffer Death. And
now Anlafe the Dane disguising himself like an Harper, entered the King's Tent,
and returning, thought to have surprised the King, but getting Intellihence
hereof, he removed his Tent: and a Bishop, new come to the Camp, pitched there:
so Anlafe coming at night to surprise the Tent, the Bishop hearing, started up,
and so manfully laid about him, that he slew five Petty Kings, twelve Dukes,
and a great number of Soldiers: but at last (pity it was so) was slain himself:
And the King afterward passing into Scotland, he Offers his Knife, for good
Luck's sake, to John of Beverlye: Subdues the whole Kingdom of Scotland, makes
a miraculous Dint in a Stone at Dun-bar, with one stroke of his Sword, of an
Ell deep, to testify his Right to that Kingdom: Near Winchester, as the Story
goes, The King was challenged, by the insulting Danes, to provide a Champion to
encounter one COLBRON a Danish Giant, whom they held invincible: and none of
the King's men daring to fight him; he got a Pilgrim from among the Beggars (as
he was directed in his Sleep) that entered the Lists, and slew the Giant: and
this proved to be Guy of Warwick, of whose Valor, and the Faithfulness of his
Wife Felice, Tradition has been very prodigal.

At Long-run the King became Victor of his Enemies, and several Kings sent him
Presents, Hugh, King of France, sent him the Sword of Constantine the Great,
which had in the Hilt thereof one of the Nails that fastened CHRIST to the
Cross; he sent also Constantine's Spear, being the same that Longinus pierced
CHRIST's side with, when he hung on the Cross; and with it, a piece of the
Thorny Crown also: And Otho the Emperor sent the King a Lanskip richly set with
precious Stones: The King of Norway sent him a great Ship richly gilt, with
purple Sails: This King caused the BIBLE to be turned into English.

This Ethelstane was the eldest Son to Edward, and the Eighth sole Monarch of
England: He began his Reign anno 925. and reigned 15 years.

9. Edmund; He was much employed in warring against the Danes, and fought
several Battles with them: He caused the Eyes of the two Sons of Dunmail to be
put out for their Rebellion: He was Author of several of those Laws translated
by Master Lambert: he was Crowned at Kingstone near London, and made King
thereof, and so were Edwye, Edred and Ethelred his Successors. But on a time,
unhappily interposing his Body between two Duellists, he was run through: He
bestowed Northumberland on Malcom King of Scotland.

This Edmund was fifth Son to King Edward, and ninth Sole Monarch of England:
He began his Reign Anno 940, and reigned 6 years.

10. Edred; In his time Anlafe began to invade England again (being animated
under hand by Wolstan Archbishop of York) and was made King of Northumberland
by the Subjects there: but after several Skirmishes between Edred and him, at
length he grew distasteful to the People, and so they dis-robed him of his
borrowed Honor, and left him in statu quo prius. The King in his March to
Northumberland against Anlafe, spoiled all with Fire and Sword, and burnt the
Abbey of Rippon: But at his Return, he was basely set upon in the Rear of his
Army, and several of his Men slain before the rest could face-about; which Plot
was devised against him by Wolstan Archbishop of York. This King made St.
Germans in Cornwall a Bishop's Sea, which was afterward translated to
Cridington, by Canutus the Dane, and at last settled at Exceter by Edward the
Confessor.

This Edred was the 10 Sole Monarch of England: his Reign began Anno 946. and
he reigned 9 years.

11. Edwye; He is reported to have abused a Lady's Chastity in the face of his
Council: Monks were expelled from their places by him, and married Priests put
in their Rooms. He also banished Dunstan into Flanders.

This Edwye was eldest Son of Edmund, and eleventh Sole Monarch of England: He
began to rule Anno 955. and ruled 4 4 years.

12. Edgar; He had Peace with the Danes: and in his time some Divines in Oxford
were branded in the face and banished, for affirming That the Church of Rome
was the whore of Babylon: Monkery a stinking Carrion, their Vows Nurses of
Sodomy, and c. Dunstan was recalled from Banishment by the King. And the sin of
Drunkenness being very rife in his time, he thereupon caused Cups to be made
with certain Pins or Marks, with a Penalty to such as should drink deeper than
the Mark: He also caused the Princes of Wales to render him yearly, by way of
Tribute 300 Wolves heads; by which means Wolves were destroyed in this Nation.
And every year he rid his Circuit, to take Notice of the Abuses and Corruption
of his Judges, if any were in the Administration of his Laws.

He is said to be very lascivious, not forbearing the very Nuns, for he begot
St. Edith on Wolfchild the Nun; and at Andover plotting to lie with a Western
Duke's Daughter, he was fitted by the Mother with a Substituted
waiting-Creature, whom he afterward retained for his Concubine. And now the
Fame of the Incomparable Features and Beauty of Duke Orgarus's fair Daughter
being spread as far as the Court, and ringing in the King's Ears, he forthwith
longs for the Enjoyment of her Company; and so Ethelwold a principal Courtier
was sent for her; but he overcome in Love with her, concealed the King's
Message, and marries her himself. And then returning told the King, Fame was a
Liar, for the Lady was far Inferior in every respect to that which she was
reported to be: But the King going to hunt afterward in that part of the
Country, and going to Ethelwold's house, and seeing the Lady's Beauty, he
perciev'd the Cheat, so he slew Ethelwold her Husband with a Javeline, as they
were hunting, and married her himself: For these and the like prancks, he was
enjoined by Bishop Dunstan not to wear his Crown for seven years, which he
patiently submitted unto, but held on his lascivious courses still. Upon the
River Dee he had 7 Petty Kings to row his Barge, to show his Greatness.

This Edgar was the Second Son of Edmund, and the 12 sole Monarch of England:
he began his Reign Anno 959. and reigned 16 years.

13. Edward; At his Entrance to the Crown was a great Famine, and a blasing
Star, and great Contentions were in his time between the Monks and Married
Priests, Dunstan being for the Monks, and Duke Alfarus for the Priests; and the
meeting for disputation in an high Room, the Prease was so great that the
Chamber fell, and several were slain and hurt: but Dunstan's chair being seated
on a post, fell not, but he continued in his Seat: which being taken for a
Miracle, manifested in behalf of the Monks, they thereupon carried the day, and
the Priests were left to enjoy their Wives, and lose their places.

And afterward, the King going a hunting not far from the Castle where his
Mother in Law was, being dry with pursuing his Game, he calls here to take a
Glass of Wine, she dissembling her Malice with outward Joy to see him, caused
the Wine to brought, which was no sooner at his Mouth, but a two-edged Dagger
was struck into Back, by a Servant appointed for that purpose by her: He
feeling himself wounded, put spurs to his horse and rid away, but presently
fell from his Horse, and was dragged about the Fields till he died.

This Edward was the Eldest Son of Edgar, and the 13 Sole Monarch of England;
he began to reign Anno 975. and reigned 4 years.

14. Ethelred; When he was about 10 years old, being informed how his Brother
Edward was slain by his Mother's means; he wept and took on so heavily, that
his Mother beat him, almost to Death, with wax Candles, nothing else being near
at hand: This so distasted the King, that he could never after endure Wax
Candles to be burnt before him. He was grievously pestered with the Danes,
compounding for his quiet with them at 10000 pounds first; then they raised him
afterward from 10, to 16, and so to 20, 24, 30, and lastly to 40000 pounds,
the Danes never giving over digging in this Golden Mine till they had quite
exhausted it: Elfrick Earl of Mercia turning Traitor, he and his Son Algarus
had both their Eyes put out by the King's Command.

And now the King considering the misery of his People, and seeing himself not
able to withstand the Danes by force, he sought to vanquish them by policy; and
so gave notice to all his Cities every where, on St. Brices day, to fall upon
the Danes and murder them, which was accordingly put in Execution; but this
News flying into Denmark (for all the King's Council was betrayed at all times
by Edricus one of his own Counselors) there came again fresh Supplies: and
Swanus the Dane so grievously oppressed the Country, burning and destroying
all before them, that he gave them thirty thousand pounds for Peace: Not long
after they slew 900 Monks and Men of Religion in Canterbury, and having wrested
a great sum of Money from the Arch Bishop Alphegus, they then stoned him to
Death at Greenwich. The King seeing those proceedings, sends his Wife Emma, and
her two Sons into Normandy, to her Brother Richard Duke thereof, and shortly
after followed himself: But at length Swanus the Dane being stabbed by his own
Men, they make Canutus his Son their King: so not long after King Ethelred
returns again into England, and perceiving the several Treasons against him,
and seeing himself not able to withstand their Fury; he shortly after died. In
his time was St. Dunstan very famous amongst the Saxons: he did use to exercise
several Mysteries and Trades, at several times, to avoid Idleness: and one time
being working in the Goldsmiths Trade in a Cell near Glastenbury, and making
of a Gold Chalice: The Devil (as the Story goes) did there appear unto him in
the likeness of a handsome Woman, intending to tempt him to lewdness: but he by
inspiration understood the cheat, and so immediately he got the Devil by the
nose with the hot Tongs he had in his hands, which made the Devil cry out and
roar so terribly that People came to see what the matter was: who will may
believe.

This Ethelred was third Son of Edgar, and the fourteenth sole Monarch of
England: He began his Reign Anno 979, and reigned 37 years.

15. Edmund, He was Surnamed Ironside: He gave the Danes several Battle,
overthrew them and raised the Siege at London; he worsted Canutus 4 times at
least in the plain Field, and had in all likelihood rid England of him, if the
Traitor Edrick and others of the Perfidious Clergy and Nobility, had not
secretly assisted him. Edmund fought a single Duel with Canutus the Dane, and
dangerously wounded him, whereupon Canutus desisted, and cried out to King
Edmund, saying, What need is there for us thus to endanger our Lives? if thou
consent to divide the Kingdom between us, we shall then be at peace, and like
two Brothers: which thing Edmund consented unto, and did accept of Canute for
his Co-partner in the Kingdom.

But not long after Edmund being easing of himself, he was by Duke Edrick (that
Grand Traitor) thrust into the Fundament with a sharp Spear, and his head cut
off and presented to Canute, as an acceptable Sacrifice, as was hoped; but he
detesting such Traitorous Villainy, caused Edricks head to be chopped off, and to
be advanced upon a Pole above the rest of his Fellows, as it was promised him,
an advancement fit for the betrayers of their King and Country. And now the
Saxons Monarchy, by the Death of Edmund, being drawn to a Period, and the
Standard of their Government overthrown; The Danes began to Advance the Banner
of their Conquest, and after King Edmund's Death displayed it in open Field,
none being able to withstand them, so they made themselves sole Masters of the
Island, after it had been in Possession of the Saxons about 566 years, it was a
long time after the Danes first entrance before they became sole Monarchs
thereof.

This Edmund was third Son of Ethelfrid, and the fifteenth sole Monarch of
England; his Reign began Anno 1016, and he reigned about 1 year.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Danes and their Conquest of Britain, with the memorable Accidents
happening during the time of those three Danish Monarchs who ruled here.

THE Original of these Danes is thought by some to be from the Scythians, but
others rather think to come from Scandia an Island situate Northward, not far
from the Continent of Denmark. As to their Religion it was much alike to that
of the Saxons: Their first Invasion was about the year 787, and about 230 years
after they became sole Masters of England, which Sovereignty continued but
about twenty four years, which they had struggled for above two hundred years:
Their Succession of Monarchs were these three following.

1. Canutus, He was Son to Swanus, and was Crowned at London, by Livingus
Archbishop of Canterbury: he sent Edward and Edmund, the two Sons of Edmund
Ironside, the last Saxon Monarch, to his Brother the King of Sweeden, to be
made away, but he abhorring the Fact, transferred them to the King of Hungary:
And now he marries Emma King Ethelreds Widow, by whose Counsel he wrested
82000 Pounds out of his Subjects, to give those lazy Danes, that were sent
packing to Denmark, there being then no more need for them here, He called a
Parliament at Oxford, and enacted several good Laws, which are to be seen in
several old Chronicles, and too large here to be incerted.

He is said to be an Enemy to Dissemblers, Traitors and Flatterers: for on a
time he caused himself to be placed in a Chair, where the Sea ebbs and flows at
Southampton, and commanded the Sea, that it should not swell so as to wet his
Feet; but the disobedient Sea (the Tide then coming out) presently dashed up to
his Thighs; whereupon he started up, and said to the Flatterers (who had
extolled his greatness to be unmatchable,) You see all the might and power of
Kings is but vanity, for none is worthy to have the name of King, but he that
has all^ things subject to his Laws. And so after that time (as some Authors
affirm) he would never suffer the Crown to come on his head, but set it on the
Crucifix head at Winchester: In the third year of his Reign he went into
Denmark, and chased from thence the Vandalls who had invaded that Kingdom: And
at length he went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and is Recorded for a very good Man,
setting aside his intention to have murdered King Edmunds two Sons.

This Canutus was the 16 sole Monarch of England: He began his Reign Anno 1017.
and reigned eighteen years. he was buried in the old Monastery at Winchester.

2. Harrold, He was so swift, that he was called Harefoot: Earl Goodwine was
against his coming to the Crown, but the Londoners, and Lords on the North side
of Thames were for him* and prevailed; he, by Treachery of Goodwine, afterward
got the two Sons of Emma, Edward and Alfride, the last of which had his eyes
put out, and his Belly opened, and one end of his Bowels drawn out and fastened
to a Stake, and then he was pricked with sharp poiniards and forced round about
the Stake, till all his Intralls were wound out: He caused also Queen Emma to
be banished and her goods to be confiscate, but the Earl of Fland^rs received
her honorably.

This Harrold was the Second Son of Canutus, and the seventeen sole Monarch of
England: he began his Reign Anno 1036, he reigned four years, and was buried at
Westminster, as Mr. Stow affirms.

3. Hardicanute, He was Crowned at London by Elnothus Archbishop of
Canterbury; He caused the body of his half Brother Harrold to be dug out of
his Grave, and thrown into the Thames, after he had first cut off his Head; but
some Fishers finding the body buried it decently in St. Clements without Temple
Bar: this Hardicanute was a great Epicure, and had his Tables spread four time
daily, and furnished with Dainties, for the satisfying of his greedy Appetite;
through the Persuasions of Earl Goodwine he raised the Sum of 32147 pounds in
England for the payment of his Fleet, which greatly distasted his Subjects; the
thing desired by Earl Goodwine; two of the Collectors of this Money were slain
at Worcester, for which offense their City was set on Fire.

The King Drinking freely at a Wedding in Lambeth, got a Surfeit and died; some
say, he was choked at Dinner there; but certain it is he died, and with him
dyed the Danes Monarchy over England; and it fell again to the Saxons, for
Edward the Seventh Son of Ethelred by Emma his Queen, was sent for out of
Normandy by the English, and was made King, which thing was brought about by
Earl Goodwines means, and Leofrick Earl of Chester.

This Hardicanute was third Son of Canutus, and eighteenth sole Monarch of
England. He began to Reign Anno 1040, And reigned about two years: he was
buried at Winchester.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Saxons Re-entry again to the Monarchy of England, after the Danes
Conquest.

THis new Possession of the Saxons was but of short Continuance, till William
the Norman Duke came and made a Forceable Entry upon them: and though his Entry
were unlawful, yet all the force and Law they then had could never obtain a
Writ of Restitution: the continuance of this new Saxon Monarchy was but during
the times of these two Kings following.

1. Edward the Confessor, He was Crowned at Winchester by Edsine Archbishop
of Canterbury; in the beginning of his Reign, the Danes, Irish and Welsh
entered England, and destroyed all in their passage with Fire and Sword; but
they were withstood in their proceeding by Alfred the Warlike Bishop of
Worcester. In the fifth year of the King's Reign there fell so great a Snow in
January, that covered the Ground till the middle of March; and much Cattle and
Fowl died; and in January after happened such an Earthquake, that it seemed to
rend the ground in sunder and withal such fearful Lightnings were then, that
the Corn in the F^elds was burnt up, which caused a great Dearth. And now
Goodwine Earl of Kent, who was the main Instrument in setting up King Edward,
for his Favor to the Burgesses of Canterbury, falls into dislike with the
King, and after several thwartings he and his five were banished: but about two
years after was received again into favor: and being one day at the King's
Table at Dinner, the Cup Bearer, coming in, got a slip, and had like to have
spilt the Wine, but as one Foot* slipped, the other recovered it, whereupon the
Earl said, I see one Brother has helped the other. Yes, said the King, and so
would my Brother Alured have helpen me, if Goodwine had not been. The Earl,
perceiving the King's Anger, he took a piece of Bread, and wished it might
choke him, if he were guilty of betraying the King's Brother, so putting the
Bread into his Mouth, he was choked therewith, and fell down dead.

After this, the King caused his Mother Emma to be tried, whether she were
guilty of Adultery or no, by causing her to go blindfold over the place where
nine Plowshares lay glowing hot, and she being clear of the Accusation laid to
her charge, went over the place where they lay, and mist them every one,
stepping betwixt still all the way as she went: when she was past them, she not
knowing so much, cried out, saying, Oh Lord, When shall I come to the place of
my Purgation? And having her eyes opened, and seeing herself past the Danger,
she fell on her knees and gave Thanks to her Deliverer; this kind of Trial was
called Ordalium. It is reported also that his Dealings with his own Beautiful
Queen Edith, a Daughter to Earl Goodwine, were little better; she being
likewise accused of Adultery, and kept in Prison during her Father's
Banishment: In this King's time was a blasing Star seen for sev'n days space
all the World over.

The Abbey of St. Peter's at Westminster was enlarged by this King, and he built
the Church of St. Margarets at Westminster, and removed the Bishop's Sea from
Cridington in Devon-shire to Exeter, and made Leofrick first Bishop thereof:
and he was the first of our Kings that cured the Disease called Struma, now the
King's Evil: and that first used to Seal his Patents with the Stately Seal, now
called The KING'S Great Seal: and he remitted the Tax of Dane-Guilt, so
grievous to his Subjects, and Collected all the Laws of his Predecessors into
one Body, which some say, is the Ground or Foundation of our Common Law.

This King Edward was seventh Son to King Ethelred, and first, by his Second
wife Queen Emma: he was born at I slip in Oxfordshire: and was the 19 Sole
Monarch of England: he began his Reign Anno. Dom. 1042. and reigned 20 years, 6
months and 27 days. He died the 4 of January, and was buried at Westminster.

2. Harrold; This King at his Entrance freed his Subjects from those grievous
Tributes, his Predecessors had afflicted them withal; he was crowned by
Aldredus Archbishop of York: Now there were three several Reports of Edward's
disposing of the Crown, some said, to the Norman Duke, who made that the
Anchor-hold of his Claims: others, to young Edgar to whom he was great Uncle:
and lastly, to this Harrold; who, in King Edwards days, being at Sea in a
Fisher-boat upon Pleasure, was driven into Normandy, where Duke William caused
him to swear, that if Edward died without Issue, the Crown of England should be
reserved for the Normans. And hereupon after Edward's Death, and Harrold's
assuming of the Crown: Duke William sent his Ambassadors to him, to put him in
mind of his Oath: but he returned Answer, That it was extorted from him in his
Imprisonment, and so not obliging: At this Answer the Duke was much enraged:
and prepared for an Invasion: and at Harrold's Preparation to Encounter the
Duke, a fearful Comet appeared, which was looked upon (as after it proved) a
bad Omen.

And now Harrold's Misery approaching, Tosto Brother to Harrold, and Harrold
Harfagar King of Denmark; invaded England, and landed at Richal upon Owse, in
Yorkshire, and spoiling the Country round about, marched straitway to York:
News being brought to the King, he with his Army marched Northwards to suppress
these Danish Forces; and at Stamford Bridge built over the River Derwent, he was
stopped by a single Dane, who slew 40 of his men, but at length the valiant Dane
was slain by a Soldier who got a Boat and rowed under the Bridge, and thrust
his Spear up through a hole in the Bridge, and so slew the famous valiant Dane:
Some say, He was slain with a Dart thrown at him: And the King now getting the
Bridge, he fell upon the Norwegians, and made great slaughter of them, and
among the rest he slew Harfagar the King of Denmark and Tosto his own Brother;
and Olave the Son of Harfagar, and Paul Earl of Orkny were taken Prisoners, who
begging their Lives of the King were suffered to depart with the rest of the
Prisoners, having 20 small Vessels of their great Fleet of three hundred Ships,
wherewith they invaded the Realm, allowed them to carry away their slain and
hurt, with the heavy news to Denmark of the loss of their King, and overthrow
of their whole Army.

These Troubles were no sooner over, but William Duke of Normandy landed at
Pevensey in Sussex, upon the eighth day of September, Anno Domini 1066, who
after his landing set his own Fleet on Fire, that his Soldiers might have no
hopes of flying back thither for succor. When he first came on shore his Foot
stuck fast in the Sand, and the Knight that was next to him said, Now, Sir
Earl, England sticks fast to thee, Doubt not but presently to be King thereof:
after some small stirs he sent a Messenger to the King at London, to demand the
Kingdom, but the Messenger was dismissed with Threats, and Harrold now seeing
no way but one, either to fight or yield the Kingdom, which was too sweet a
Morsel to part with without Blows, He therefore advances with his Army into
Sussex, and pitched his Tents in a fair plain within seven miles of the Enemy,
and sending forth his spies they were taken and presented to the Duke, who
caused them to be sent from Tent to Tent and Feasted, and then released them.

And now the Duke entering the plain where the King was, sent a Monk to him, to
demand the Kingdom; or otherwise for the avoiding the effusion of much blood,
to try it by single Combat, or else to hold the Kingdom under him: Harrold's
Answer was, It should be tried by more Swords than one; So the next day being
the 14 of October 1066, on a Saturday, They marshalled their Armies, and
Trumpets sounding to Battle, at the first encounter the Normans had the worst
of it, and the English thinking they had run, dis-ranked themselves for
persuit; which as soon as the Duke perceived he rallied his men, and sell in
desperately again, and then slew the dis-ranked English on heaps; among which
King Harrold paid his last Breath to the fury of the Conqueror, having an Arrow
shot into his Brains; and with him died Girth and Leofine his two Brothers, and
most of the English Nobles, and 97974 Soldiers; the Duke had three Horses slain
under him, yet received no harm himself. In this same place the Conqueror
afterward built an Abbey and called it Battel-Abby. And now Aldrede Archbishop
of York* counseled the People to choose young Edgar Atheling King, being the
true lawful Heir to the Crown, but it came to nothing; for with the
determination of Harrold's Reign, ceased the Royal blood of the Saxons, whose
Kings made England an Heptarchy, and afterward had reduced it to a glorious
Monarchy: and had been Kings and Monarchs thereof from Hengists first
Possession of the Kingdom of Kent, till Harrold's Deaths, about 587 years; but
Authors agree not in the Computation, some accounting more and some less.

This King Harrold was the Son of Goodwine Earl of Kent, by his Wife Sitha
Sister to Swain the younger, King of Denmark, he was the 20 sole Monarch of
England; And began his Reign Anno 1065, and Reigned about 9 Months and nine
days; he was slain the 14 of October 1066, at Battel-Field in Sussex, and was
buried at Waltham in Essex.

CHAP. X.
Of England's Conquest by the Normans; and first of William the Conqueror.

THese Normans, who by the Sword gained the Diadem of England, and were the
last Conquerors thereof, in whose Line the Monarchy of England is still
continued, were anciently a mixed Nation with the Warlike Norwegians, Swedens,
and Danes; and took their Name from that Northern Climate, anciently called
Cimbrica Chersonesus, and Norway: but the Country being thought to be too
little for these People: Rollo, a Famous Noble Norman, with many others in his
Company, betook themselves to Sea, to seek Fortunes Court: and having practiced
some Piracies upon the Coasts of Belgia, Frizia, England and Ireland, at length
they became so fearful to the French, that Charles the Simple, King of France,
gave to Rollo his Daughter Gilla in Marriage with the Duchy of Normandy: And
this Duke Rollo was Proavus or Great Grandfather to Richard the Fifth Duke of
Normandy, which Richard was Elder Brother to Robert, Father to this WILLIAM the
Famous Conqueror of England, whose Famous Actions and Memorable Things we shall
now proceed to Treat of.

After the Fight at Battle-Field, Duke William hasted toward London, wasting
as he went the Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surry, Hampshire, and Bark-shire; he
crossed Thames at Wallingford, and so marched through the Counties of Oxford,
Buckingham, and Hartford. And at Barkhampstead, he made a Stop: to which place
repaired Aldred Archbishop of York* Wolstan Bishop of Winchester, Walter Bishop
of Hereford, the Earls Edwin and Morcar, and Edgar Atheling the Heir to the
Crown; and here did their Allegiance to the Duke. And so marching for London,
he was stopped at St. Albans by Fredrick Abbot thereof: On Christmas Day
following he was Crowned at Westminster by Aldred Archbishop of York: And now
considering how to secure the Realm from Invasions, he thought it expedient
first to fortify the Cinque Ports, and so taking his March toward Dover, at
the Instigation of Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, and Eglesine Abbot of
Saint Austines, he was surprised by the Kentish men, who carrying Boughs and
Branches of Trees in their hands, they seemed like a Walking Wood, which sight
so afrighted the Conqueror, that he granted their Requests, to have all their
Ancient Customs: whereupon they yielded up to him their Earldom of Kent, and
Castle of Dover. The Conqueror was kind also to the Londoners, suffering them
to enjoy their Privileges they had in Edward the Confessor's time.

Shortly after this the Conqueror sailed to Normandy to settle his Affairs
there, taking with him several English Nobles (whose greatness he feared in his
Absence) for Pledges, and making his half Brother Otho, Bishop of Bayeux, Earl
of Kent, and William Fitz-Osburne Earl of Hereford, to whose Trust he left the
Government of the Kingdom till his Return: In whose Absence the Welsh rebelled
and wasted all to the Mouth of Wye* these Stirs called the Conqueror back
again, who at his Return gave the Lands of the English to his Normans; And the
English thus turned out of their Estates, fell so to Rob and Pillage that the
Highways between one Town and another lay unfrequented: The Earls Edwin and
Morcar, and Edgar Atheling with his Mother and Sister and several other English
Nobles fled into Scotland to King Malcolm, to whom the Conqueror sent, desiring
him to send back for England Edgar Atheling, but Malcolm having married his
Sister, denied him, and kept him notwithstanding all King William's Threats.
And now the Conqueror still going on in his Oppressions of the English, he
caused every House-houlder to put out both Fire and Candle at eight a Clock at
Night, to which purpose there was a Bell rung in every City, Town or Village,
by the French called Cover few, that is, Cover Fire.

In the Second year of his Reign, Goodwine and Edmund two of King Harrold's
Sons invaded the Realm out of Ireland: and took away great Bootys. And the year
after, the English in the North slew 700 Normans, but some of the Authors of
the Rebellion, being taken, had some of them their Heads cut off, and other
their hands: And now Swain, King of Denmark, assisted the English with 300 Sail
of Ships fraught with Soldiers, who under Command of Osburne, Swaine's Brother,
and his own two Sons Harrold and Canute, arrived in Humber and marched for
York: at whose Approach the Yorkists were so dismayed that they set their own
City on fire, and the Minster of St. Peter's being then consumed, Aldred their
Archbishop died with grief.

At his time were 3000 Normans slain, but the King hearing of these Stirs, took
his March into the North, and after he had overthrown the Enemy, he was so
enraged at the Northern Disturbers that he spoiled their Country, lying all
level with the ground for Threescore miles, between York and Durham, which
lying untilled for nine years space, caused such a Famine among them, That the
People there eat Horses, Dogs, Cats, yea and Man's Flesh. Not long after this,
there was a Decree made by him, That no English Scholar should come to any
Promotion, depriving Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, Eglewine Bishop of the
East Angles, and several other Bishops, for no evident Cause, but only to give
Place to his Normans. He also abrogated the English Laws, and set up his own in
the Norman Tongue, to the great Damage of the English: Hereupon the Earls
Edwine and Morcar with Frederick Abbot of St. Albans, set up Edgar Atheling
again for their General, and rebelled against the Conqueror, who, seeing their
daily increase of Forces, concluded a Peace with them, and Swore To keep
inviolable the Ancient LAWS of the Land, and those of St. Edward.

But not long after he took from the Abbey of St. Albans, all the Lands between
Barnet and London-Stone, and bereaved all the Abbeys and Monasteries of England
of all their Treasure, sparing neither Challices nor Shrines.

And now Malcolm King of Scots, who sided with the English, and King William
made a League, and reared a Stone-Cross on Stain-Moor in Westmerland, called
the Roy-Cross, for a Mere Mark to the Bounds of both Kingdoms. And shortly
after this, the King took his Voyage for Normandy again, the People being there
in Rebellion, but by the Prowess of the English they were quickly brought again
to their Obedience. Now, during this Stay in Normandy, the Nobles in England
rebel again, but at his Return were quickly dismayed. So he caused the Eyes of
some of them to be put out, the hands of others tope cut off, and some were
hanged upon Gibbets, and those who esceped the best, were Banished.

No sooner were these Troubles over, but Swain King of Denmark had manned 200
Sail of Ships for England's Invasion, but hearing of the Nobles Overthrow, they
turned Sail for Flanders.

In the Year 1075. Walcher Bishop of Durham purchased the Earldom of
Northumberland of the King, but being an usurping cruel Fellow, the Inhabitants
slew him: the year ensuing the Earth was hard Frozen from the midst of November
to the midst of April. And the next year after, upon Palm Sunday a blazing
Star was seen near the Sun: and this year Robert King William's Son, seized on
the Dukedom of Normandy by force. And his Father Sailing for Normandy again, at
Archenbray in Normandy, entered Battle with his Son, who ran his Father through
the Arm, bearing him off his Horse, and so the King was forced to leave the
Honor of the Field with the loss of many men to his Son. And returning for
England, he built the Tower of London, Anno 1078. And this year Thurstan Abbot
of Glastenbury caused 3 Monks to be slain in his Church, and 18 Men to be
wounded, so that their Blood run down from the Altar to the Steps. And this
very year also he caused a Survey to be taken of England, which is still to be
seen in the Book called Dooms day Book, kept in the King's Exchecquer, of every
Hide of Land he exacted the sum of six shillings, upon this occasion the
English incited Malcolm the Scotch King to invade England, who wasted all as
far as Monk-chester upon Tine; The King sent his Son Robert with an Army
against him, who at that time laid the Foundation of a Castle at Monkchester,
calling it New Castle, and from this the Town there took its Name.

The King now perceiving himself well Seated in his Throne, began to provide
for his Pastime, and caused, in the South from Salisbury to the Sea, Towns and
Villages and 36 Parish Churches to be pulled down and laid level with the
Ground, and here he laid the Bounds of his New Forest for hunting in: But
this Offense escaped not unpunished, for in this Forest Richard, the Kings
second Son, was goared by a Dear and died: and William Rufus his Third Son was
slain by Sir Walter Tyrrel by accident, and his Grand Child Robert Curtoyse,
being in pursuit of the Game, was stricken by a Bough into the Jaws, and died.

After this Paul's Church was set on Fire, and many strange Judgments happened
in the Realm; In the Twentieth year of the King's Reign, such a great Flood
happened, that the Hills were hereby made soft, and consumed, and with their
fall overwhelmed many Villages to the great amazement of all the people: And
not long after this, some displeasure arising between the King and Phillip King
of France, he took ship for Normandy; and falling sick there, hearing of some
scoffs put upon him by the French King; at his recovery he was so enraged, that
he spoiled all the West parts of France, and set the City Meux, or Nauntz on
fire. By his last will he gave great Riches to the Church of St. Stephens in
Normandy, which was of his own Founding, and among other things, he bequeathed
his Crown and Regal Ornaments to it: He put the distinction between the two
Archbishops of Canterbury and York; making York Primate of England, and
Canterbury Primate of all England; also he made the Churches of Scotland, to be
under the Primate of York, as the Churches of England were under the Primate of
Canterbury. At the performance of his Funeral Rights in the Church of St.
Stephens, in Cane in Normandy, being of his own Foundation; his Body was denied
Burial, by a Gentleman called Ascelinus Fitz-Arther, who said that it was the
very place of his Fathers house Floor, which the Duke in his lifetime violently
took from him, and upon his Inheritance Founded the said Church: Therefore,
says he, I Challeng this Ground, and in God's behalf, forbid that the Body of
any Dispoiler be covered in my Earth, neither shall it be interred in the
Precincts of my Right; Hereupon Henry the Dukes 4th Son; gave the Gentleman a
hundred pounds weight of Silver to suffer his Fathers Body to be interred.

Though the Art of Conveyance be much improved since the Conquerors time, yet
there was then more honesty comprised, in a small Charter of an hand breadth
than there is now in a Deed of a whole Skin of Parchment; This following was
one of the Kings Charters.

I William, the third year of my Reign, give to thee Norman Hunter, to me that
art both Leef and Dear,

The Hop, and the Hopton,
And all the bounds up and down,
Under the Earth to Hell, above the Earth to Heaven;
From me and mine,
To thee and thine,
As Good and as fair,
As ever they were,
To witness that this is South,
I bite the white Max with my Touth,
Before Jug, Maud, and Margery,
And my youngest Son Henry,
For a Bow and a broad Arrow,
When I come to Hunt upon Yarrow.
In the last year of the King's Reign, there was found in Wales, in the
Province called Rose, the Sepulcher of Gawen on the Seashore, who was Sisters
Son of Arthur the Great, King of the Britains, it was in length 14 Foot.

This William was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, He was Son to Robert
the Sixth Duke of Normandy, begotten on a Beautiful Damosel, called Arlet, the
Daughter to a Tanner, as some report: He began his Reign on Saturday the 14 day
of October Anno 1066, he reigned twenty years, ten Months, and twenty six
days, and was the twenty one sole Monarch of England: he got his Sickness by
an overheat, and died on Thursday the 9 day of September in the 56 year of his
Duchy, 21 of his Kingdom, and sixty fourth year of his Age, Anno Domini 1087.

CHAP. XI.
Of King William the second, commonly called Rufus.

WILLIAM Posting to London, after the Death of his Father, he carried with him
Earl Morcar, and Wilnoth Son to Harrold, being both released from their
Imprisonment in Normanay; but most of the States stood for Robert his elder
Brother, and had tried their Titles by the Sword, had not Lanfranck and Wolstan
two Learned Prelates stayed their hands. On Sunday the twenty six of September,
Anno 1087, William was Crowned at Westminster by Lanfranck Archbishop of
Canterbury. And now Odo the King's Uncle having been roughly dealt withal by
William the Father, for Revenge thereof begins to draw the Nobles into sedition
against William the Son, and further to accomplish his desires, he sent Letters
to Robert Curtoise the King's elder Brother and Duke of Normandy, to invade
England, to which Request Robert sent answer according to Odoe's expectation:
so Odo and the Nobles expecting daily Robert's assistance fell into open
Rebellion, and made a great spoil in several parts of the Kingdom; but Robert,
not so hasty as was expected: in the mean time Bishop Odo is taken and
banished: not long after Duke Robert enters England with his Normans, whereupon
the King agreed with him to depart again, paying him three thousand marks
yearly: about this time Langfranck Archbishop of Canterbury dying, the King
kept the Bishopric in his hands four years. And the year after the King
invaded Normandy and forced his Brother Robert to composition with him; after
the Peace concluded between these two Brothers, they both took part against
their younger Brother Henry, but at length were all reconciled.

And now Malcolm King of Scots entered England, doing much harm: and the King
marching to oppose him, at their meeting a Peace was concluded, and he gave
Malcolm twelve Villages, which he had formerly held under William the querour,
for twelve marks yearly in Gold. At that time the King built Carlisle in
Cumberland, having been demolished two hundred years before by the Danes. And
now he makes Anselm, a Norman Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 1093.
About this time King Malcolm came to Gloucester, to treat with the King again
about the Peace of the Nations, and taking some distaste at his Reception, he
returned in a Rage, and raising an Army, he spoiled all before him as far as
Alnewick; presently after this Robert Mowbray and William of Ancho with some
others conspired to take the King's Life and Crown, and to set up Stephen de
Albemarle, but they were prevented. This same year, viz. 1093, the King
Conquered Wales, since which time the English Monarchs have been accounted the
chief Governors thereof. The next year the King and his Brother Robert fell at
odds again, but were quickly reconciled. And Robert intending for the Holy War,
did Mortgage his Dukedom to William for 6666 pound of Silver, to furnish him
with necessaries for the War. And now to raise this Sum of Money, the King
laid heavy Taxes on his Subjects, and neither Churches nor Monasteries were
Privileged from this payment. This Voyage for the Holy War was taken in the
year of our Lord 1099. And the same year the King built new Walls about the
Tower, and likewise built Westminsterhall being ninety yards long, twenty four
yards and two Foot broad; and yet when he first see it, he said, It was too
little by half, and so he would reserve it for a Chamber. About this time began
the Cestersian Order in Burgandy, as some old Authors affirm; and it was
brought into England about the year 1135, and an Abbey built for the Monks of
that Order at Rivaulx.

Now the King going for Normandy to relieve his Subjects there, the Winds
proving very cross, the Pilate desired the King to stay a while for a better
Gale, but the King, no whit daunted, commanded to hoise up Sails with these
words, Have thou ever heard that any King was drowned? He denied that the Pope
had any Authority over any Bishop within his Realm, and also denied the Popes
power of binding and loosing, but paid him Peter Pence granted by his Father:
he also held it bootless to invocate Saints, curbed Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Taxed the swelling Clergy, for their Pride, Luxury, Idleness,
and Avarice. In the Second year of his Reign a great Earthquake happened, and
in the fourth year a great Lightning which burnt the Steeple of the Abbey of
Winchester, and rent the Beams of the Roof, casting down the Image of our Lady
and Crucifix, breaking one of the Legs thereof. And not long after, so great a
Wind happened at London that it blew down 60, some say 606 houses, and took off
the Roof of Bow-Church, bearing it a great height into the Air, and six of the
Beams being twenty seven foot long, with the fall ran twenty three foot into
the Ground, the Streets being then unpaved: in the sixth year of the King's
Reign was so great a Famine and Mortality, that the Quick were scarce able to
bury the Dead: and in the ninth year of his Reign two blasing Stars with two
Bushes appeared, and other Stars seemed to shoot Darts one at the other. And
the last year of his Reign the Sea overflowed its Banks, and drowned a great
number of People in Kent, and overwhelmed a great deal of Lands which had been
Earl Goodwins, whose Name they retain to this day, being called Goodwin's
Sands. There was also a Well of Blood, which rose up out of the ground for the
space of 15 days, at Finchamstead near Abbington in Bark-shire.

This William Rufus was King of England, but not Duke of Normandy: he was Third
Son of William the Conqueror, by Maud his Wife, Daughter to Baldwine, the
fifth Earl of Flanders. He began his Reign on Thursday the ninth of September,
Anno Dom. one thousand eighty seven, and reigned twelve years, ten months and
twenty three days: he was the twenty second sole Monarch of England. He was
shot by Accident in New Forest, by Sir Walter Tyrrel, on Wednesday the first
day of August, Anno Domini, 1100. being the thirteenth year of his Reign, and
the Forty fourth year of his Age: he was buried in the Quire of Saint Swythine,
being the Cathedral Church of Winchester.

CHAP. XII.
Of King Henry the first, commonly called Beauclark, for his Learning.

KING Henry was Crowned at Westminster by Maurice Bishop of London, in the
absence of Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, on Sunday the fifth day of August
Anno 1100; But before his Coronation the Nobles constrained him to swear, To
ease the People of their Taxes, and many other Oppressions, which he afterward
performed: And he restored to the English the use of Lights again, which his
Father forbad by ringing of a Bell, and had continued about the space of 33
years.

He also ordained several good Laws, and annexed his Great Seal to them, and
his Name, with the subscription of several Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
caused Copies of them to be sent into every County to be safely kept, the heads
of them take as follows in these Seven Branches.

I. That the Church should be free from Oppressions, and Reservation of their
Possessions upon vacancy.

II. That the Heirs of the Nobilty should possess the Lands of their Fathers
without Redemption from the King; which Favor also should be granted by the
Nobles to their Tenants.

III. That the Gentry might give in Marriage, their Daughters and Kinswomen,
without the King's License, so it were not to the King's Enemies.

IV. That the Widow should have her Jointure, and not be compelled to marry
against her own Will.

V. That the Mother, or next of kindred, should be Guardian of the Lands of
their Children.

VI. That Coiners of False Money should be punished: and a Measure to the
length of the KING'S Arm, to be a Standard for Commerce among the People: And

VII. That all Debts to the Crown before his own Time should be forgiven, and
all Murders before the Day of his Coronation to be pardoned.

With other such like Indulgencies: And he also at this time confirmed King
Edward's Laws.

And now he made Suit to Edgar King of Scotland, to have Maud his Sister to
Wise. This Year 1100, his Brother Robert Duke of Normandy, was elected King of
Jerusalem, but he hearing of his Brother Rufus's Death, refused it, in hopes of
getting England's Crown. And at his return from Jerusalem invaded England,
landed at Portsmouth: Henry to be quit of him, and to keep the Crown, granted
him 3000 Marks yearly, and gave him royal Entertainment for six Months at
Court.

After this Belasm Earl of Shrewsbury, and Roger Mountgomery rebelled, but they
were overthrown by the King, and forced to abjure the Realm for ever. And now,
the Pope's Imp, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury begins to stir, and calling a
Council at London, Excommunicated all Married Priests, and deprived many
learned Prelates, because they were invested by the King, and not by the Pope.
And now Duke Robert returned for England again, to congratulate his Brother's
Fortune, and was so royally entertained, that at the Request of his Sister
Queen Maud, he remitted the Annual payment of 3000* marks. But afterward Henry
picking a Quarrel with him, he sailed into Normandy, and made himself Master
thereof. Afterward Robert seeking to regain his own, the King took another
Voyage for Normandy, where a bloody Battle was fought between them, and Duke
Robert and William Earl of Mortmain were taken Prisoners, and the rest flying,
Henry returned Conqueror, having made Normandy subject to England, just that
day 40 years that England became subdued to Normandy: And the Duke seeking to
escape his Imprisonment, had both his Eyes put out by the King's Order. And now
the King, begins to show himself in his Colors, making no Bones of breaking his
Oath made to his Peers; he banished the Flemmings out of England. And about
this time, to wit, Anno* 1109. the Emperor Henry the IV. took to Wife Maud King
Henry's Daughter. And, now the Affairs of Normandy being disturbed, the King
hasted thither, and after the Suppression of the Rebels, he created his Eldest
Son Duke thereof, by which a Custom grew that thenceforth the Kings eldest Sons
were Dukes of Normandy: after this Anselm Bishop of Canterbury died Anno Domini
1114.

The High Court of Parliament, as some Authors affirm, was first ordained in
this King's Reign, Anno 1116. in which year was exceeding great Lightning in
March, and Thunder and Hail in December, and the Moon at both times seemed to
be turned into Blood. And in October the same year, the River of Thames was so
dried up, that one might have gone between London Bridge and the Tower, on
foot: This year also King Lewis of France, and the Earls of Flanders and Anjou
sought to restore William, Duke Robert's eldest Son, to the Dukedom of
Normandy; but were frustrated of their hopes by Henry: about this time Maud
King Henry's Queen died.

After this Anno 1119. King Lewis enters Normandy again, and between him and
the King was a bloody Battle fought, and Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and many
thousands besides were slain, and the honor of the day fell to King Henry, who
returned Victoriously into Roan: And shortly after the Earl of Anjou, to curry
the King's Favor, gave his Daughter to William, the King's eldest Son, in
Marriage; of which Marriage the King conceived no little Comfort, but the
budding Hopes of the conceived future Happiness were quickly cropped by the
hand of Fate, for at the King's Return for England, this new married couple,
with Richard and Mary other two of the King's Children, and Richard Earl of
Chester, his Lady, and other Lords and Ladies were all cast away at Sea.

The King after this, Anno 1121. took to his Second Wife Adilicia, Daughter of
Jeffery first Duke of Lovain. And now Pope Calixtus the II. met the King in
Normandy, to see if his Threats would work the King's Submission to him, that
he might have the Packing and Dealing of the Cards for the Game of Spiritual
Promotions in England: but neither Flatterings nor Threats would work upon him:
At this Meeting, two Youths, Sons to the Earl of Mellent, and Servants to the
King, disputing with two of the Popes Cardinals, with Logical Syllogisms put
the two Rabbis to the Nonplus. In this Pope's time Anno 1122. was the first
Lateran Council held, being the ninth General Council.

About 3 years after this, Anno 1125. Pope Honorius the second, sent Cardinal
Cremensis to certify the Abuses of the Married Clergy; and to that purpose he
made a Set Oration in Praise of CHA-STITY, and Dispraise of VNLAW-FVLL LUST,
for so he termed the Priests Marriage: and yet himself was taken that Night
with a WHORE, and so he returned to his Master the Pope without Success.

Anno 1126. The King's Son in Law, the Emperor died, and his Wife returned into
England, whereupon the King called a Parliament, and caused them to swear
Fealty to the Empress his only Heir.

This same year one, Arnold an English Preacher of Oxford was cruelly
Butchered, for preaching against the Pride of Prelates, and Priest's wicked
Lives.

The next year after the King married his Daughter the Empress again to Jeffery
Plant aginet, Son to Foulk Earl of Anjou. And about six years after, in the 33
year of this King, happened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that at Noonday
one might have seen the Stars in the Firmament, and about two days after this,
there was a terrible Earthquake. And the same year happened such a Raging Fire
in London, that it consumed a great part of the City from West-Cheap to Algate.

The next year after, being the 34 of the King, Duke Robert the King's Brother
after 26 years Imprisonment and the putting out of his Eyes, died in Prison.
And this year Worcester and Rochester were burnt.

This Henry the First was King of England, and Duke of Normandy; he was the 4th
Son of William the Conqueror, by Maud his Wife Daughter to Baldwine the Fifth
Earl of Flanders. He began his Reign on Wednesday the first day of August, Anno
1100. and reigned 35 years 4 months, and 1 day: and was 23 Sole Monarch of
England. He died of a Surfeit with eating Lampreys at the Town of St. Dennis in
Normandy, on Monday the Second day of December, Anno 1135. being the 36 of his
Reign, 21 of his Dukedom, and 65 of his Age. His Body was buried at Redding in
Bark-shire, in an Abbey of his own Founding.

CHAP. XIII.
Of King Stephen, sometimes called Stephen of Bloyce.

THis Stephen at his first coming for England landed at Whitsand-Bay, with whom
came a wonderful Tempest of Thunder: His endeavors for the Crown were aided by
Henry his younger Brotherthen Bishop of Winchester, William Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and Hugh Biggot late Steward to King
Henry; all which swore him Fealty; although they had sworn it before to the
Empress, King Henry's Daughter, who is now by them rejected: And crowned
Stephen King at Westminster, on the 26 day of December, Anno 1135 by William
Corbell Archbishop of Canterbury; After which he granted his Subjects a
Charter of some Immuities, Dated under his hand at Oxford, Anno Domini 1136,
whose Tenor was, as follows,

That all Liberties, Customs and Possessions granted to the Church should
stand firm.

That all Persons and causes Ecclesiastical should appertain only to
Ecclesiastical Judges.

That none but Clergy men should meddle with the vacancies of Churches or any
Church men's goods.

That all bad usages in the Land touching Forests, Exactions, and c. should be
utterly extirpated.

And lastly, That the ancient Laws should be restored.

This year a Fire began at London Stone in the City of London, and consumed all
before it, from thence Eastward to Aldgate, and Westward to St. Paul's Church.
Not long after this the King caused several Castles to be built in England, but
by the advice of Henry Fitz Empress shortly after 1115 of them were demolished
again. And now Baldwine de Redvers Rebelling again, the King was taken and
banished, and a great Battle was shortly after fought against the Welsh; but
the English lost the day, and many of them were led away Captives by the Welsh
Women, and such a number of them drowned by the fall of a Bridge over Temd,
that a passage was made over the Water with their dead Carcasses: in the year
eleven hundred thirty seven Rochester was destroyed with Fire.

After this David King of Scots invaded England, and took Carlisle and
New Castle, and the King marching to oppose his further Progress, a Peace was
concluded between them. Afterward the King, in the Third year of his Reign,
Created Eustance his eldest Son Duke of Normandy; This year the Archbishop's
Seat in York, St. Martyns Church without the Walls, and the Hospital with
thirty nine Houses, and much Riches were burnt. The King now paid his elder
Brother Theobald two thousand marks yearly for his Right of Normandy and
England, and to Jeffery Plantaginet, Husband to Maud the Empress, he paid five
thousand Marks yearly for his Right to the Crown. Whilst he was in Normandy
settling his affairs: the Scots again invaded England; committing most barbarous
Cruelties, as ripping up Women with Child, and tossing their Infants on their
Spear points: several of the Peers likewise Revolted, and did Fortify most of
the strong Castles in the Realm against the King, intending to bring Maud the
Empress to the Crown: But the King, being no sluggard, did so hotly pursue his
Barrons, that he won most of the Castles from them, and put them to a stand:
And with like success did Ralph Bishop of Durham (appointed General by Thurstan
Archbishop of York the King's Lieutenant of the North) go against the Scots,
who were come as far as Northumberland, and manfully forced them to fly the
Country. And shortly after, the King in Person marched into Scotland, and a
Peace was again concluded between the two Kings. And Stephen brought with him
into England Henry, David's eldest Son, and made him Earl of Huntington.

And now the King began to quarrel with several of his Prelates, as Salisbury,
Lincoln, and Ely, and demanding the keys of their Castles, exacting likewise
great sums of money from them.

About this time Maud the Empress landed in England, and was carried into
Arrundel-castle by William de Albeny who married the Queen Dowager King Henry's
Widow, the King having intelligence thereof hasted to Arundel, at whose coming
(a Woman's Wit being best at a pinch) she persuaded him, That none, to her
knowledge or with her consent, were come with her, but those who did and would
owe him Allegiance: Hereupon he honorably conveyed her to Bristol, from which
place she got to Wallingford-Castle, and in the mean while Earl Robert, her
Brother divulged the News of her Arrivage, whereupon he got such a number of
People together for her cause, that they were hard to be numbered.

The King hereupon forthwith besieges Wallingford-Castle, but not able to
accomplish his desires, he removed his Siege to Malmesbury, and in the mean
time the Empress got to Lincoln, and stored the City with Provision and other
Necessaries: Hereupon the King withdrew to Lincoln, and so straightly begirt the
City with his Siege, that if the Empress had not made a shift to escape, she
had been here taken.

The King possessing himself of Lincoln, Earl Robert, and Ranulph Earl of
Chester went against him with a mighty Army, and making over the River pitched
their Tents in the King's sight; the King ordering his Army, Trumpets sounded
to Battle, and the Armies joined in Fight; but the Kings party being
overpowred, they began to faint and run away, leaving the King almost alone,
who behaved himself so Champion-like, that he drove down whole Troops before
him, until his Battel-Ax broke, and his Sword flew into pieces in his hand; and
then being Weaponless he was struck down with a Stone which was thrown at him,
and so was seized on, but preserved from Violence by Earl Robert's Command, and
from thence he was carried Prisoner to the Empress to Gloucester, from which
place he was sent bound to Bristoll.

And now the Empress Triumphed as sole Sovereign of England; all the People,
save those of Kent, doing her Allegiance; to Winchester she marched in State,
and there received the Regal Crown, from thence she went to London, where she
was received with Royal procession.

And now the reports of Stephen's Imprisonment being got into Normandy, his
Subjects there began to incline to Jeffery the Husband of the Empress: shortly
after this, Earl Robert the Empress Brother was taken Prisoner, by some of the
King's party, who had escaped from Lincoln, who carrying him to Gloucester
there imprisoned him, and growing at length weary of his Irons, and hard
Lodging, he and the King were released one in Liew of the other: The Earl after
his Releasment went for Normandy to raise more aid, but in the mean while King
Stephen besieged the Empress in Oxford, where she was brought to such a
straight, that she was forced to fly by Night, with some of her Company,
Disguised, getting over the Thames on the Ice, it being then Winter, from which
place they ran on Foot through Snow and Ditches to Abbington, being about five
miles; and here they took Horse, and got to Wallingford-Castle. And by this
time Earl Robert and Prince Henry the Empress Son, were landed at Warran-haven
from whence they got to the Empress; but she at length being wearied with the
various success of War and never out of Troubles, left England, and returned to
her Husband into Normandy, having sent her Son Henry thither before her.

At Lincoln the King (after the Empress Departure) caused all the Barrons to
swear Allegiance to Prince Eustace, Stephen's Son; And Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury, refusing to consecrate Eustace King, was forced to fly into
Normandy for his safety, and the King seized all his Possessions, no King
before Stephen's time durst enter Lincoln, being frighted with the Foolish
Prophesies of some Wizards.

After this Henry the Empress's Son entered England again, and was met by the
King, whose Armies had joined in Battle, but that the Winter Storms prevented
them, and so a Truce was concluded, which thing was very displeasing to Prince
Eustace, who not long after died of a Frenzy.

After his Death, a Peace was concluded, and the King adopted Prince Henry the
Empress's Son for his Heir and Successor: In the last year of the King's Reign,
a little before his Death, was seen the Sign of the Cross in the Moon.

This Stephen was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, he was the Third Son
of Stephen Earl of Bloyce by his Wife Adilicia or Alice, third Daughter to
William the Conqueror; His Reign began on Monday the second day of December,
Anno Domini eleven hundred thirty five, and he reigned eighteen years, ten
months, and twenty days: and was the twenty fourth sole Monarch of England:
He died of the Illiack-Passion mixed with his old Disease the Emmeroyds, in the
Monastery of the Monks at Dover, on Monday the twenty fifth day of October,
Anno Domini eleven hundred fifty four: his Body was buried at Feaversham in
Kent, in an Abbey of his own founding. In the fourth year of this King's Reign
was the second Lateran Council, Innocent the II. Pope.

CHAP. XIV.
Of King Henry the Second, sometimes called Henry Fitz-Empress.

THis Henry was three times crowned: first, by Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury, at Westminster: then at Lincoln: and lastly, at Worcester. His
Privy Council he chose of the gravest Peers, and Thomas Becket his Chancellor.
About the 5 of his Reign, 30 Waldenses, or thereabouts, being come into
England; were persecuted by a Council of Bishops held at Oxford, and by the
King's Command all persons were prohibited to give them any Food, whereby they
miserably perished: And now the King, and Malcolm King of Scots entered Amity
upon the same Conditions as were agreed upon in Henry the first's time. And in
Token of his Subjection, the King of Scots, offered his Hat and Saddle upon St.
Peter's Altar in York, and there left them.

About this time the Jews crucified a Child at Gloucester. And now Theobald
dying, Becket the Chancellor was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and he denied
to take the Oath, for observation of the Articles, administered to the Clergy,
which the rest of the Bishops had taken, and were clearly against the Pope's
Authority.

Hereupon the Contention between the King and Becket grew so hot, that the Pope
sent Philip his Almoner to persuade the Bishop to swear, who, at his Request,
took the Oath, Anno 1163. London Bridge was made a new of Timber, by one Peter
the Priest of Cole-church. And now Becket standing several times in Opposition
against the King, at length was condemned of Perjury, and being called to hear
his Sentence as a Traitor, he made shift to escape in Disguise into Flanders by
the Name of Deerman.

Now the King sends his Ambassadors to the Pope, requesting him to send two of
his Cardinals to judge the Case, the Pope returned Answer, That he would Judge
him himself, when he saw Cause: upon the Receipt of this Answer, the King made
an Order that all the Clergy that were with the Pope, or did Appeal to Rome,
should have their Livings sequestered; and banished all the Kindred of Becket,
Man, Woman, Child and Suckling.

And now the King stoutly withstood all the Popes Threats, Edicts and Bulls,
denying also the payment of Peter Pence. And Roger Archbishop of York, at the
King's Command, in Contempt of Becket, crowned Henry the King's Son. But Becket
after 7 years Banishment, was again reconciled to the King, and restored to his
former Dignity.

During these Stirs, there was one Gilbert Foliott, Doctor of Divinity in
Oxford, who persuaded the King to curb the Pride of the Clergy, and this Doctor
often reprooved proud Becket to his Face, for which he was much hated and
persecuted: Now Becket, at his second Entrance on his Bishopric,
excommunicated several Prelates: And King Henry, being in Normandy, and hearing
hereof, chanced to speak some words against the Bishop; which moved four of his
Courtiers to sale for England, where in the Church of Canterbury they murdered
Bishop Becket, Anno 1170. He was afterward canonized by the Pope, and is
reputed amongst those of the Romish persuasion, for a great Saint^. He was, by
Birth, a Londoner, his Mother a Sarazen, and by Profession he was a Civilian.

After the King returned for England, Robert Fitz-Stephen a valliant man
(without the King's Knowledge) sailed for Ireland, where he became Conqueror of
several Strongholds. But the King himself, who had it in his Thoughts long
before to make a Conquest thereof, sailed thither, and imprisoned Fitz-Stephen,
who had made way for the King's Conquest. After some Skirmishes, the King
conquered Ireland, and established Religion there; and built also a Magnificent
Castle at Dublin, and so returned for England. About this time it was ordained,

That Men should make their Testaments in presence of their Neighbors: And if
the Man that died had Wife and Children, he was to cast up what he owed to
other men, and to Servants for their Wages: And then the rest of his Goods were
to be divided into Three Parts, one part to his Children, another part to his
Wife, and the third part, for his Burial, and to Pious Uses.

After this the King sailed to Normandy, whither the Pope had sent two
Cardinals to take the King's Purgation for Becket's Death: His Penance was,

I. That he should, at his own proper Charges, maintain 200 Soldiers one year,
for Defense of the Holy Land. II. That he should freely suffer Appeals to Rome.
III. That he should revoke all Customs against the Churches Liberties. IV. That
he should restore the Possessions of Canterbury. And V. Receive all the
banished Friends of Becket into England again.
About this time Silvester Girald a learned Man, wrote a Book against the
Wickedness of the Monks, whereby he stirred up those Hornets against him. And
now the young King, by the Instigation of his Mother, sought to depose his
Father. But after several Battles, fought between them, and much Blood spilt,
for the space of Three years, at length they were reconciled.

And after this the King called a Parliment at Northampton, and divided England
into six C^rcuits. And appointed three Justices itinerants for every Circuit.
To this Parliament came the King of Scotland and his Peers. Shortly after the
calling of this Pa^iament the young King Henry died: And H^raclius, the
Patriarch of J^r^salem, came to the King to desire his Aid in the Holy Land:
but was denied.

In the 20 of the King's Reign, the City of Leicester was burnt, by the King's
Command, the Walls and Castle rased, and the Inhabitants dispersed into other
Cities, for their Disobedience to the King. And this year Christ's Church in
Canterbury was burnt: and about six years after the City of York was burned:
and in the year 1185. The King bestowed Ireland upon his Son John: And this
year the Abbey of Glastenbury was consumed with fire: and the next year after
was a great Earthquake that threw down many Buildings, and rent in Pieces the
Cathedral Church of Lincoln: Chichester also was burnt.

After this Richard the King's Son, by the help of Philip King of France,
rebelled against his Father, and drove him out of the City Mentz in Main, which
he dearly loved, being his Birthplace.

In the 33 of the King, near Oxf^rd, in Saffolk, was taken a Fish, having the
shape of a Man: which Fish was kept by the Governor of Orford-castle six
months and above, for a Wonder; but was never heard to speak a word: he would
eat all manner of meat gladly, but was most gready after raw Flesh or Fish: at
length he stole away from his Keeper, and ran to the Sea again.

The King had a fair Concubine, called Rosamond, whom Elianor the Queen
poisoned, for which Cause, and for stirring up his Son against him, the King
imprisoned her: and caused Rosamond to be burien at Godstow, near Oxford, with
this Epitaph over her;

Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa Mundi, non Rosa munda,
Non Redolet, sed Olet, quae Redolere solot.
Within this Tomb lies the World's chiefest Rose,
She who was sweet, will now offend your Nose.
Anno 1188. The Town of Beverly with the Church of St. John's there was burnt.

This Henry the Second was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, Guyen and
Aquitain. He was the eldest Son to J^ffery Plantaginet Earl of Anjou (son to
Fulk King of Jerusalem) by Maud his Wife, eldest Daughter to Henry the first:
He began his Reign on Monday the 25 of October, Anno 1154. and reigned 34
years, 8 months, and 11 days: and was the 25 sole Monarch of England. He died
at Chinon, on Thursday the 6 of July, Anno 1189. and was buried at Font-Everad
in Normandy, the 25 of the King's Reign. Anno 1179. was the third Lateran
Council, Alexander the III was Pope: this was the Eleventh General Council.

CHAP. XV.
Of King Richard the first, commonly called Richard Courdelion.

KING Richard at his Coronation by Balwine Archbishop of Canterbury, swore to
keep several Articles Administered to him by the Peers, which were for the
benefit of the Realm, in his time were those famous Robbers and Outlaws called
Robin-Hood and Little-John. The King's first attempts were for the Holy War,
for performance of which Voyage he sold and mortgaged several parcells of his
Revenue, scarce sparing his City of London from Sale, and scruzed eleven
hundred pounds Sterling out of Stephen de Turnham, his late Fathers Treasurer;
but before his Expedition, William King of Scots came into England, and made a
League with the King; and s^nt his Brother David and ten thousand Scots with
him for the holy War. The King before he took his Journey; gave his Brother
John six Earldoms, Cornwall, Dorset, Somerset, Nottingham, Derby, and Lancaster,
he also made William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, Governor of the Realm till his
return, joining with him Hugh Bishop of Durham for his Assistance in the North
parts.

And now having settled his affairs, he, with several of his Nobles took
Shipping for France, where he and Philip King of France became sworn Brothers,
and both set forwards for the holy War: King Richard coming to Sicilia,
assalted the King thereof, (who had usurped the Kingdom, after the Death of
William who was Husband to Lady Jane. King Richard's Sister) making an
Agreement with him, and gave him twenty thousand ounces of Gold for his Sisters
Dowry, and twenty thousand ounces more for the Love he bore to the English
Nation: yet, for all this show of Love, he and Philip of France took Council
against King Richard. Joachin the Abbot, expounding the Apocalypse to King
Richard at Calabria near Sicily, told him that Antichrist was born, and then in
the City of Rome, viz. the Pope.

The King in his Passage Conquered the Isle of Cyprus, and left in it Richard
de Camvile and Robert de Tarnham Vice-Royes. And the English and French
besieged the City Ptolomais, and won it: shortly after this, the French King
returned (not without great shame) to his own Kingdom.

Whilst King Richard was employed in the Holy War, his Brother John and some
others of the Peers deprived William Longchamp of his Command, for several
Outrages by him committed, especially upon Jeffery Archbishop of York, the
King's Brother. The King at his approach to Jerusalem took three thousand
Camels, and four thousand Horses and Mules of the Salladines coming from
Babylon, and all the Carriages with their Rich Spoil.

And now the Duke of Burgandy and his Regiment forsaking King Richard, he made
a Peace with Saladine for three years, and so returned very Pensive that he had
neither conquered Jerusalem nor Saladine. And intending to have gone through
Germany, he was taken in Disguise in Vienna, and the Duke seized him for his
Prisoner: The News of the King's Imprisonment coming to England, his Mother
with other of his fast Friends, Swore the Realm to be true to the King: and
made all the Strong Holds sure for him. But the Subjects of Normandy, in his
Captivity, were set upon by the French.

After this the King regained his Liberty, paying to the Emperor 100000 Marks
sterling, and half so much to the Duke for his Ransom: the Emperor afterward,
to gratify the King, made him King of Province. Philip of France having notice
of the King's Releasement, sent word to Earl John, the King's Brother (who had
endeavored to gain the Crown in his Brothers Captivity) that the Devil was let
loose again. After his Releasement he came for England, and was joyfully
received by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and shortly after Earl John was
adjudged by his Peers to loose all his Estate. And now the King caused himself
to be Crowned again at Winchester; and had a new Great Seal made, by which
Device he got great Sums of money out of his Subjects, causing them to have
all their Evidences new Sealed: after this, being at Dinner at Westminster,
and, hearing of the Siege of Nerville, he swore he would not turn his Face till
he had got thither with his Army: and so caused the Wall to be cut down where
he was, that he might pass through, which Breach was to be perceived two
hundred years after. And now he forgave his Brother, Earl John, and getting a
great Victory over the French at Gysors; He thus spoke, Not we, says he, but
DIEVET MONDROIT, that is, God and our Right* has obtained this Victory: after
this the Kings of England made it their Motto. Afterward, by the interceeding
of Pope Innocent the Third, a Peace was concluded between England and France.
And not long after this, the King lying a Garrison against the Castle of
Chalne, was there shot in the left Arm by an Arballaster, standing on the Wall,
with a sqare Arrow out of a Steel Bow, of which Wound he shortly after died.

He banished all the Jews of Norwich St. Edmund Bury, Lyncoln, Stanford, Lyn
and York, at which last place above five hundred of them, besides Women and
Children, entered a Tower of the Castle, and when the Christians came to Besiege
them, the Jews cut the Throats of their Wives and Children, and cast them on
the Besiegers heads, and then burnt both the House and themselves, so
desperately Wicked were they.

This Richard the first, was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, Guyen and
Aquitain: He was the third Son of King Henry the Second, by Elianor his Queen,
eldest Daughter and Heir to William Duke of Aquitain: His Reign began on
Thursday the sixth of July 1189, he reigned nine years and nine Months, and was
the twenty sixth sole Monarch of England. He died of the before named Wound in
his Arm, on Tuesday the sixth of April, Anno Domini 1199, being in the tenth
year of his Reign, and 42 of his Age, His body was buried at Font-Everad.

CHAP. XVI.
Of King John, commonly termed, by his Father, John Lackland.

HE was Crowned at Westminster by Hub^^ Archbishop of Canterbury, and had much
ado before he got the Crown, and more ado before the People would swear him
Fealty; which when they did it, was with a Reservation. Arthur, King John's
Nephew, by his Elder Brother Jeffery, with whom sided Philip King of France,
did mightily oppose King John's proceedings, but he was backed by Otho the
Emperor. And Hubert the Archbishop, in a great Assembly, made an Oration,
wherein he Declared that the Crown of England was merely Arbitrary and
Elective. Now the King after several Out-fals between Philip King of France and
him, at length a Peace was concluded, wherein it was agreed that Lewis, Heir of
France, should marry King John's Niece.

After the Peace concluded the King returned for England, and ordered a
collection of 3s, on every Carucata of Land, for the Marriage of his Niece, and
his Martial uses: But Jeffery Archbishop of York* (Son to King John's Father
by Rosamond his Father's Concubine) denied the Payment hereof within his
Precincts: and likewise refused to accompany the King his Brother into France
to solemnize the Marriage, and conclude the Peace: for which Contemps the King
caused all his Temporalties to be Seized on.

After this, the King and William King of Scotland meeting at Lincoln, they
there swore Amity and Faithful Love, upon the Crosier-staff of Archbishop
Hubert. But now the French King breaking the Peace concluded on, several
Battles were fought between him and King John, and Prince Arthur was taken
Prisoner and died. The Pope sought a Reconciliation between the two Kings, but
it took no effect. After this the King returned, and called a Parliament at
Oxford, at which time they granted him 33 s. 4 d. for every Knights Fee.

In the year 1204, Normandy fell from England to the French, after it had been
disbranched from France about 319 years, the next year after the Archbishop
died, whose Wealth and Possessions were Seized on by the King, in Regard of his
haughty carriage in his life time, and John Gray, Bishop of Norwich, was
translated to Canterbury.

And now the King bethinks himself again on Revenge upon the French; and with a
great Army landed at Rochel, and presently won the Castle Mount Auban, which
was reputed invincible, after this the City Angiers was also subjected by him.
And at length the two Kings met, but, by the interceeding of Foreign Prelates, a
two years Peace was concluded.

About this time the King sent one Alexander a Divine of Oxford, to the Pope to
defend his Authority against that of Rome, which he very well performed and
made out both by Scripture and Reason: and writing against the Pope's
Authority, he was afterward persecuted and banished by Langton Archbishop of
Canterbury, and died in Exile: shortly after this the Emperor Otho arived in
England, and was Royally received by the King, who after some days of
Banqueting returned again. And now the Pope begins to play his Prancks,
depriving Archbishop Gray, and setting up Stephen Langton in his place,
writing to the King in his behalf: and now began the King's miseries to
approach, for upon this Account the King wrote to Pope Innocentius the Third,
threatening him for intruding upon his Prerogative: the Pope returned him a
thundering Answer, and presently after sent his Apostolical command to the
Prelates, London, Ely, and Worcester to interdict the Kingdom, if the King
continued in his Obstinacy. This Commission was put in Execution, and the
Church Doors shut up for several years: some Authors say 6 years, so that the
People lived more like Infidels than Christians; for which affront several of
the Clergy were banished by the King, and sent to the Pope their Master.

And now the Irish, being in Rebellion, the King hasted thither, at whose
arrival more then twenty petty Kings came to him to Dublin, doing their
Allegiance. About this time Gualter Maxes, Archdeacon of Oxford, preached
vehemently against the Pride of the Pope, and wrote a Book called the
Revelation of the Romish Goliath, for which he was much persecuted and hated.
Shortly after this Philip King of France, by commission from the Pope, took
Ship for England, to depose King John, the Pope promising him the Crown of
England: but the King prepared against his coming, yet fearing the French
Power, he, unwillingly, swore to Pandulphus, the Pope's Nuncio, to submit, in
all things, to the judgment of the Church: hereupon Pandulphus swore him,
touching all things in his Excommunication, that he should stand to the Popes
Judgment, and that he should restore to their former Dignities the Archbishop,
Bishops and Monks: he was also forced to surrender his Crown, Scepter, Sword,
Robes and King into Pandulphus's, the Popes Attorneys, hands; laying them at
his feet: And lastly, to hold his Crown in Fee-Farm of the Pope, at the yearly
Rent of 1000 Marks. And now the Pope got the Prey which he so long hunted
after: But the King was continually after pestered with the Pope, between whom
and the Archbishop of Canterbury he was banded like a Tennice-Ball.

The Barrons also proved several times disloyal to him, and at last betrayed
the Crown of England to Lewis of France, sending him their Letter of
Allegiance, hereupon Lewis (against the Popes Command) set forwards for
England, with 600 Ships, and 80 Boats, and landed in the Island of Tha^net in
Kent, to whom all the Treacherous Barrons F^ed: from thence he marched to
London, and at St. Paul's Church he took the Oath of the Citizens, and the Oath
of the Barons at Westminster, The King seeing these proceedings spoiled the
Castles of the Barrons, which caused them to Repent of their Disloyalty,
forthwith returning to the King again who then lay sick at Newark and shortly
after died.

In this King's Reign London Bridge was built of Stone, being but of Wood at
first, and several Prodigies were seen in his Reign, and also terrible Storms
of Thunder and Lightning with Hail Stones as big as Goose-Egs, which destroyed
Men and Women, besides Cattle and Corn Fields.

In the 15 of the King, a Fire happening in London, near the Bridge, People
thronging to make some help, the Fire by the Violence of the Wind took hold on
both ends of the Bridge, so that the People could not pass either backwards or
forwards, and and so Barges, Boats, and c. coming to their Assistance, the
People thronged so indiscreetly into them, that the Boats sunk, and above three
thousand Persons were drowned in the Thames.

It is said that this King John was immoderate in blasphemies and execrations,
and that he was so Luxurious that he destroyed Matilda a Beautiful Maid,
causing her to drink Poison, because she would not yield to his entreaty to be
corrupted by him: he is also thought to have sought aid from Mirammula King of
Africa, whilst he was in his Troubles, promising him the Kingdom of England,
if he Conquered, and to renounce his Christian Faith. Anno 1215. being the 16
of the King was held the IV Lateran Council, Innocentius the Third being Pope:
this was the 12 general Council, in which Auricular Confession was established,
and the Cup taken from the Laity in the Communion.

This John was King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Normandy, Guyen
and Aquitain, he was sixth Son of King Henry the Second by his Queen Elianor
eldest Daughter and Heir to William Duke of Aquitain: his Reign began on
Tuesday the 6 day of April, Anno 1199, and continued 17 years, 6 months, and 13
days. He was the 27 sole Monarch of England, and was Poisoned by one Simon a
Monk of Swinested Abbey in Lincolnshire, which was upon this occasion, as it is
said, viz. That the King being there at Dinner, and having an half penny loaf
in his hand, he swore, if he lived, it should be at twelve pence before that
time twelve Months; and the Monk over-hearing these words poisoned him. He died
on Wednesday the nineteenth day of October, Anno 1216. in the eighteenth year
of his Reign, and 50 year of his Age, his body was buried at Worcester.

CHAP. XVII.
Of King Henry the Third, commonly called Henry of Winchester.

THis Henry about the Age of 9 years was Crowned at Gloucester, in the presence
of the Popes Legate Wallo, and other Nobles, and the Earl of Pembrook, by
consent of the Peers, was made Guardian of his Person and Kingdom. Shortly
after a Truce was concluded between Lewis of France and the King, Lewis then
returning for France, but stayed not long 'ere he came for England again with
fresh supplies taking his march to Lincoln. In the mean while the Earl of
Pembrook, by the Advice of Wallo and the Bishop of Winchester, raised an Army,
and gave the French Battle at Lincoln, where they received a great Overthrow,
so that Lewis hasted to France for more Aid; after Lewis returned from France,
he was besieged in London, and forced, at length, to make Peace, and depart the
Realm.

And now the Nobles falling into Rebellion, they were fought by the Earl of
Pembrook, who shortly after died: after whose Death, Peter de Rupibus, Bishop
of Winchester, and some others were made Guardians to the King; and upon this
change the King was Crowned again at Westminster, by Stephen Archbishop of
Canterbury, the King having the Saturday before laid the first Stone of the new
work of the Abbey Church at Westminster. After this the King made Hubert de
Burgo chief Justice of England. And now the Barrons and Welsh being in
Rebellion again, and hearing of the King's march toward them, durst not stay
his coming. Anno 1222, Alexander King of Scotland was married to the King's
Sister at York.

And this year was granted to the King the Ward-ship of Heirs and their Lands:
about this time an Imposture at the Provincial Synod at Oxford suffered himself
to be wounded in the Hands, Feet and Side, calling himself Christ, who together
with a Woman, that took upon her to be the Mother of God, were immured between
two Walls, where they ended their Lives miserably; And shortly after one
Constantine Fitz-Arnulf, raising a Tumult in London, was taken and hanged by
Hubert de Burgoe's Order, and the common sort had their Hands and Feet cut off.

Now the Barrons being earnest for Confirmation of Liberties, and denied by
William Briwere, one of the King's Council, the King to please all parties
Answered; All of us have sworn to those Liberties, and must keep them. And
hereupon Writs were issued out to inquire upon Oath, what Liberties were
current in or from the time of Henry his Grandfather. Not long after this, the
King sent Ambassadors to the King of France, to demand Normandy and other his
Transmaritain places, but they were denied him: and now the King, upon some
Distaste taken against one Falcasius, Commanded all Strangers to depart the
Realm: after this a Parliament being called, the King confirmed MAGNA CHARTA
under his Seal, before they would yield to grant him a Subsidy. And now the
King, having gotten Money, sent his Brother Robert and other Nobles into
France, for the Regaining his Dominions there, who in spite of Fate got and
held Aquitain: after this, more aid being sent, they endeavored the gaining of
Normandy also.

The King having now gotten a Fifteenth of all Degrees in his Realm, and
wrested 5000 marks out of London besides. At the next Parliament at Oxford, by
the advice Hubert de Burgo, he revoked the great Charter by Plea of Infra
Etatem: hereupon the Barrons Rebelled threatening to drive him out of his
Kingdom: and the Welsh being then in Rebellion too, the King was necessitated
to conclude a dishonorable Peace. After this Ambassadors came from Gascoign,
Poictu and Normandy, promising their assistance, if the King would go in Person
with an Army thither: whereupon he prepared, and the concourse of Nobles and
others for the Voyage was so numerous, that there was not Shipping for half the
Company: whereat the King was so enraged, that he called Hubert de Burgo Rank
old Traitor, because no more Ships were prepared, and ran at him with his
Sword, and being that time prevented of his Voyage, he took Shipping the next
year, but returned without his expectation, after he had spent all his Treasure.

Anno the 15 of the King, upon St Paul's day such an horrible Thunder lighted on
the Cathedral of St. Paul's Church in London, when Roger Niger the Bishop was at
Mass there, that the Church thereby was so shaken as if it would have fallen,
and after that came such a flash of Lightning, that all the People thought they
should have been burnt; and so all the People (save the Bishop and one Deacon)
run out of the Church, and being astonished fell on the Ground, void of
understanding.

The next year after, the Monks of Canterbury and the King chose Ralph Nevil
for Archbishop there, and after him a second, third and fourth; calling Edmund
of Abbington, before they could please the Pope, all being distastful to him,
till this Edmund was chosen. Upon the 7 of April, Anno 1233. there appeared 4
Suns, as it were, besides the natural Sun, of a red color, and a great Circle
of Crystal color; and the morrow after St. Martins day, began Thunder very
horrib^e, which lasted 15 days. The King now wanting M^ney caused ^ll Sheriffs,
Baylifss, and other Officers to clear up their Accounts in the Exchecquer: he
removed also Hubert de Burgo from his place of chief Justice, through the
Bishop of Winchester's Suggestions, and Art^^^es being preferred against the
chief Justice, the King's heart was so alienated from him, that Hubert, fearing
the Event fled to Sanctuary, in Merton in Surry; hereupon Sir Godfrey de
Cranchcome, with 300 men, were sent to seek him, where finding him at Merton,
they took him from the Sanctuary, and brought him Prisoner to the Tower at
London; and at length he was forced to yield up all his Treasure (being of an
incredible value) into the King's hands, but all would not do, for he was sent
to the Castle of Devises, there to remain as free Prisoner, and 4 Knights
appointed for his Keepers there.

After this the King displacing English Officers from about him, put in
Poictovines and Brittons in their Rooms: and Summoning a Parliament to Oxford,
the Bairons refused to come, because of this distaste of the Strange Officers,
and being again summoned to London, refused to be present; and sent the King
word, If he would not drive the Strangers from Court, they would drive both him
and them from it: and upon this account Earl Marshal and Lord Bass^t, with
other Nobles Rebelled, and took Hubert de Burgo out of Prison, carrying him
along with them into Wales and the Bishops of Canterbury, Chister and
R^chester, were sent into Wales to take up the business: but before they got
thither the Earl Marshal was gone into Ireland and there died; and Leoline
Prince in Wales would condescend to nothing, till the King would grant to him
and those Nobles with him their Pardon, which accordingly was done, and Hubert
de Burgo received again into favor.

Shortly after this, Isabel the King's Sister was married to the Emperor, there
being at the Marriage 3 Kings, 11 Dukes, and 30 Marquesses and Earls. Anno
1235, the Jews of Norwich stole a Boy and Circumcised him and had an Intention
to have crucified him at Easter; for which Fact they were Convicted. And the
year after being the 20 of the King, the Thames overflowed the Banks, so that
men did Row in Boats in the great Palace at Westminster, in the midst of the
Hall there.

Now the King's Treasures being exhausted with the payment of his Sister's
Portion, he calls a Parliament at London, desiring a new supply of Money, but
was denied, unless he would confirm MAGNA CHARTA again, and Rely wholly upon
his natural Subjects for Advice and Council: all which he granted unto. After
this, the Popes Legate called a National Council, but was commanded by the King
to act nothing against his Crown or Dignity.

Shortly after, the King and Queen being gone to Woodstock, a Traitor was sent
thither by William, Son to Jeffery de Marisco, out of Ireland to murder the
King in his Bed, but being taken and prevented of his purpose, he was pulled in
pieces with Wild-Horses.

Afterward, Anno 1238, the Pope's Legate going to Oxford, he was encountered by
the Students, and his Brother slain, himself hardly escaping, whereupon he
interdicted the University, and made all the Bishops (who interceeded in the
Universities behalf) and the Students go un-gowned and barefooted, from St.
Paul's Church to his House, being about a Mile, before he would revoke the
Sentence again.

And now Hubert de Burgo having gained the Honor and Title of Earl of Kent, is
again accused, and 4 of his Chiefest Castles given to the King, and he deprived
of his Title.

After this, the King Commanded Ottobon the Popes Legate to depart the Kingdom,
and committing the Government of the Realm to the Bishop of York, took Ship for
Po^ctue, carrying with him thirty Barrels of Sterling Money for that Service,
but the King's Fortune in this Journey proved very averse to him. The Nobles at
the Kings return, all his Money being gone, granted him a Subsidy of 20 shillings
upon every Knights Fee held in chief* for aid of the Marriage of his Daughter:
and Anno 26 of the King, the Jews were constrained to pay 20000 Marks, or else
be kept in perpetual Imprisonment: about the year 1241. Pope Gregory the 9,
writ to the King, desiring to see England, but was denied. And shortly after
the King commanded that none of his Subjects should dare to contribute any
Money to the Pope.

Anno 1245, was the first Council held at Lovain, being the 13 general Council,
Innocent the 4 being Pope, who was the only Patron of the 3 Orders of
Dominican^, Carmelites, and Augustines. About this time the Thames overflowed
the Banks about Lambeth, and drowned the Houses and Fields the space of 6
Miles, and Men rode on Horseback in the great Hall at Westminster. Anno the 32
of the King was a great Plague in England, and the Town of New Castle upon Tyne
was burnt, Bridge and all: and about two years after in October the Sea flowed
twice without any Ebb, which made such an horrible noise, that it was heard
into England a great way; and in a dark night the Sea seemed to be on a Fire,
and the Waves to fight one against another, which put the Mariners in great
Fear, and overthrew a great number of Houses at Winchelsey.

The King wanting more Money, called a Parliament to supply him, but was
denied, whereupon he sold his Jewels, Plate, and other precious Stuff,
shortning the allowance also of his House, and inviting himself sometimes to
one Nobleman's Table, and sometimes to another. And Alexander King of Scotland,
coming to York, there Married Margaret the Kings Daughter, to whose
Marriage Feast the Archbishop of York gave 600 fat Oxen, which were all spent
at the first Service.

Not long after this Prince, Edward the Kings eldest Son went into Spain, and
married the Kings Sister, whereupon the Spanish King quitted all his claim to
Gascoign to King Henry, who gave his Son Edward upon his Marriage Gascoin,
Wales, Bristow, Stanford and Grantham; the year after the Prince with his Wife
and Royal Retinue landed at Dover: And now also Edmund the King's Son was
honored by the Pope with the empty Title of King of Sicily.

Anno 1225, Seabald Arch Bishop of York, was prosecuted by the Pope, for
Preaching and writing against his Holiness's Pride. And this year, 142 Jews
were brought to Westminster who were accused, and 18 of them hanged, for
Crucifying a Child at Lincoln, and the rest kept Prisoners.

And now the King again, (perceiving his Coffers to be empty) caused sharp
Orders to be made against Sheriffs, for the passing their Accounts in the
Exchequer. And about this time came the Germain Ambassadors, with an Embassy to
Richard Earl of Cornwall the King's Brother; wherein they declared, That their
Masters, the Princes Electors of the Roman Empire, had made choice of him for
King; which he, after much Consultation, accepted on.

And now the Barrons fall into Rebellion again, and a Parliament being called
at Oxford, thither they repaired and behaved themselves very Insolently toward
their Sovereign: hereupon the King sailed into France, and there compounded
with the French King, that he should hold the Dukedom of Normandy, and Earldom
of Anjou, Main, Touraign, and Poictue, for 300000 pounds of Touraigne; and on
promise to receive other Lands of the value of 20000 l. per annum. Anno 43, of
the King, a Jew at Teukesbury fell into a Privy upon Saturday, and refused to
be helped out, because it was their Sabbath, whereupon the Earl of Gloucester
kept him in all Sunday too, and on Monday he was dead. About this time Dr.
Strenham wrote that Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures were only necessary to
Salvation.

Now the King of France being Umpire between Henry and his Barrons, he gave
Judgment for the King, and the Barrons denying to stand to his Sentence, the
King gave them Battle near Nottingham; where they received a great Overthrow,
and Simon Mountforth Son to the Earl of Leicester (the chief Rebel) and many
other Barrons, Knights and Esquires were taken. After this Overthrow the
Barrons sent Letters twice to the King, desiring to be reconciled, but could
not be heard, which provoked them to fight the King's Army again; at which time
the Fortune of the day fell to the Barrons, for they took the King and his
Brother Richard King of the Romans, and some other great Peers, and the next
day their two eldest Sons yielded themselves Prisoners.

And now Earl Mountforth Joyful of the Victory, proceeded to the Imprisonment
of the King of the Romans, his Son and the Prince, in Dover: but this budding
happiness of the Earl's was quickly cropped, for the Earl of Gloucester and he
differing about parting of the Prey, the Earl of Gloucester thereupon opposed
the current of Leicester's Fortune, with whom joined the Prince (escaped out of
Prison) and several other Nobles, and at Everssham in Worcestershire they
overthrew Leicesters Army, and he being there slain, had his Head cut off, and
sent to Worcester, and his Hands and Feet were chopped off, and all those on his
party disinherited: and London is threatened to be burnt by the King for taking
the Barrons part.

Shortly after this, John de Warren Earl of Surrey killed Allan de Zouch, in
Westminster Hall, upon some distaste taken.

Anno 1264, there were 700 Jews slain in London, because one of them would have
forced a Christian Man to have paid more than two pence for the Usury of 20
shillings the week: and the year 1269, the Thames was so hard frozen, that Men
and Cattle passed over from Lambeth to Westminster upon the Ice.

About this time it was that Prince Edward took his Voyage for the Holy-War:
and Roger-Bacon a famous Divine of Oxford was Imprisoned by the Pope, for
Preaching against the Absurdities in the Church of Rome.

Anno 1271, the Steeple of Bow-Church in Cheap Side fell down and flew many
People Men and Women, and the year after was a great Riot in Norwich, through
which the Monastery of the Trinity was burned, whereupon the King rode down
thither, and after enquiry made of the chief Actors, caused 50 of them to be
Hanged, Drawn and Quartered, and their Quarters to be burnt.

And now the King, perceiving his Death to approach, swore the Earl of
Gloucester to keep the Realm for Prince Edward his Son.

This Henry III. was King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Guyain and
Aquitain; He was eldest Son to King John by Isabel his Queen, Daughter and Heir
of Aimery Earl of Angolisme; his Reign began on wednesday the 19 of October. Anno
1216, and he reigned 56 years and 28 days, and was the 28 sole Monarch of
England: he died at the Abbey of St. Edmunds in Suffolk, on Wednesday the 16 day
of November, Anno 1272, being in the 57 year of his Reign, and 65 of his Age:
his body was buried at Westminster.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of King Edward the First, commonly called Long-Shanks.

KING Edward was gone for the Holy Land when the Crown fell to him, Elianor his
Queen being with him, who, at Acon in their Voyage, was delivered of a
Daughter: and at that place her Husband was Wounded by a Traiterous Villain, in
three places of his Arm with a Poisoned knife; all which Wounds (after the
Chyrurgions were wearied) the Queen cured by licking out the Venom with her
Tongue, yet she thereby receiving no prejudice. The news of his Father's Death
coming to his Ear, he forthwith returned, and after his Arrival, himself and
Queen were Crowned by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury: and after
this, the King called a Parliament at Westminster, which as some affirm, were
the first Statutes there made: and Luellin Prince of Wales refusing to come to
the Parliament, King Edward thereupon went into Wales, and built the Castle of
Flint, and Luellin made his Submission, and gave the King 50000 pounds for
Agreement, and 10000 marks per Annum for the Island of Man. But afterward he
had several Bickerings with the Welsh, but at length reduced them to perfect
Subjection, and beheaded Luellin their Prince, and his Brother David, and set
up their Heads upon the Tower at London: He appointed Sheriffs for Wales, and
established the English Laws amongst them.

Anno 1274, was the Second Council of Lugdunence, Gregory the X being Pope,
which is accounted the fourteenth general Council.

In the III of the King's Reign upon St. Nicholas day were very Terrible
Thunders, Earthquakes, and Lightning, and a great Draggon and blazing Star,
which put many People in great fear: and in the year 1288, the Summer was so
hot, that many Persons died with the extremity thereof, and yet Wheat that year
was sold for two shillings eight pence the Quarter, and all other Corn at very
low-prices: but the year following, Wheat was raised to Twenty shillings the
quarter, by reason of the great Rains that fell that year; which dearth of Corn
continued about 40 years, to the end of King Edward the Second's Reign, says
my Author; so that in process of time a Bushel of Wheat was at Ten shillings.

The King, the 19 of his Reign, banished all the Jews out of England, making
all their Goods Confiscate, the number of them that were Banished is reckoned
to be 15000 and 9 persons. The King also inflicted great Fines upon his Judges
and other Officers for their Corruption; the sum imposed upon Eleven of them
was 236000 Marks.

About this time Dr. Scotus (called Dr. Subtilis by some) preached against the
abuse of the Keys, and that Transubstantiation could neither be proved by
Scripture, nor sound Reason.

Not long after this, Alexander King of Scotland dying without Issue, great
Contentions arose between the Lords Bruise and Baliol about the Crown, but King
Edward, being Umpire between them, gave Judgment for Lord Balioll, who was
Crowned King, and did Homage to Edward for his whole Kingdom.

After this the Scotch King, seeking to shake off his Homage again, he and his
Kingdom were all Conquered by King Edward, and all the Scotch Nobles swore to
be true to Edward ever after, acknowledging him for the King.

Baliol, late King was sent Prisoner to London to the Tower, and John de Warren
Earl of Surry and Sussex was left Vice Roy in Scotland: and at this time the
King brought the Chair out of Scotland which is now in Westminster Abbey, in
which our Kings are Crowned, and with it was also brought the Crown, Scepter
and Cloth of Estate.

The Scots not long after, falling into a fresh Rebellion, were again subdued
by the King, with the slaughter of 60000 of their men.

Shortly after this the King took to Wife the King of France his Sister, by
which means there was a firm Peace concluded between England and France. And
now Edward the King's eldest Son was by his Father made Prince of Wales and
Earl of Chester: and now the Scots, desirous still of Liberty, revolted again
under the Command of the Lord Bruise, but they were quickly reduced to their
former Obedence: after this, getting Heart again, they stood for the regaining
of their Kingdom, and King Edward, marching to give them Battle, died in his
march: and commanded in his last Will that his Son should carry his Bones with
him till he had marched through all Scotland: in his lifetime he utterly
renounced Pope Beniface's Supreme Authority, and on his Deathbed charged his
Son to continue the Banishment of Pearce of Gaveston; and to convey his Heart
to be buried in the Holy Land. The year 1299, the King's Palace at Westminster,
with the Buildings of the Monastery adjoining to it were all burnt.

This Edward the First was King of England Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain,
etc. He was eldest Son to Henry the III, by Ellianor his Queen, Second Daughter
to Raymond Earl of Province: He began his Reign on Wednesday the 16 of
November, Anno 1272, and reigned 34 years, 7 months, and 21 days: and was the
29 sole Monarch of England. He died of a Dissenterie at Burgh upon Sands, in
his March to Scotland, on a Friday the 7 of July, Anno 1307. in the 35 year of
his Reign, and 69 of his Age, he was buried at Westminster.

CHAP. XIX.
Of King Edward the Second, commonly called Edward of Carnarvan.

AT his first entrance he recalled Pearce of Gaveston Earl of Cornwall out of
Banishment, although he were forbidden it by his Father's last Will. Shortly
after, he married Isabel Daughter to the King of France; after this, calling a
Parliament, they sadly complained of Gavestons Insolence; and so far prevailed
with the King, that he yielded to his Banishment, whereupon they granted to the
King a Subsidy of the 20 part of their goods: but Gaveston, not long after, was
recalled again by the King, and was married to the Earl of Gloucesters Sister,
and received into greater favor than ever: the King not at all regarding his
Father's Command, nor his own Oath to his Nobles. This Gaveston now grew so
high and was so lavishing of the Kings Treasure, alienating him also from the
Queens Bed, that she complained hereof to her Father the King of France.
Hereupon the Nobles again complain of Gaveston to the King, and prevailed for
his Banishment, with a Proviso, that if he returned again to suffer Death.

About this time Anno 1311. the Order of the Templers was expelled Christendom,
and this year, Clement the V. being Pope, was the Council at Vienna, being the
15 general Council. The next year after, Gaveston being returned for England,
he was taken by the Earl of Warwick at the Castle of Scarborough, and, with the
consent of the Earls of Lancaster and Hereford, was carried to Warwick Castle,
and there Beheaded: hereupon the King was greatly enraged, but upon Condition
that all things belonging to Gaveston should be rendered to him, He Pardoned the
Lords.

Anno 1314, the King caused his Writs to be published for Victuals, That no Ox
stalled or corn-fed should be sold for more than 24 shillings, no Grass-fed Ox
for more than 16 shillings, a fat stalled Cow at 12 shillings, another Cow at
ten shillings, a fat Mutton, Corn-fed, at 20 pence, another fat Mutton at 14
pence, a Fat Hog of two years old at ten groats, a Fat Goose at two pence
halfpenny, and in the City three pence, a Fat Capon at two pence, in the City
two pence halfpenny, a Fat Hen a penny, in the City three halfpence, 4
Pigeons for a Penny, 24 Eggs a penny, in the City twenty Eggs a penny.

After this a Tanners Son of Exceter called himself the Son of Edward the
first, and would needs prove the King a Changling, but his claim was quickly
strangled with a halter at Northampton.

And now the Queen was delivered of Prince Edward, and the Parliament shortly
after granted the King a Fifteenth: and the King going against Scotland, the
Earls Lancaster, Surry, Warwick, and Arundel, refused to attend him: at this
time he received a great overthrow from the Scots, he and Lord Spencer being
both forced to fly, and several Lords with seven hundred Knights and Esquires
were slain.

Anno 1318, The Famine in England was so Raging, that Horses, Dogs and Children
were stolen for Food: and the Thieves that were in Prison, did pluck in pieces
those that were newly brought in amongst them, and greedily devoured them half
alive: by reason of this Famine the Mortality was so great amongst the People,
that the quick could hardly bury the dead. And not long after a great Murrain
of kine happened, so that the Dogs and Ravens eating thereof were Poisoned, and
did swell to Death, so that no man durst eat any Beef.

And the next year after this the King calling a Council at Clarendon, the
Lords refused to appear, but they were made Friends again by the Mediation of
certain Cardinals: and now the Scots, not satisfied with the Honor of their
last Victory, their King saled into Ireland, and there caused himself to be
Crowned King: but the English there, under the Conduct of the Arh-Bishop of
Armagh and the Lord Binningham, encountr'd the new King who there lost his new
Honor with his life to boot: and, not long after, a Truce for two years was
concluded between England and Scotland.

About this time Hugh Spencer, upon the Commendation of the Lords, was made
Lord-Chamberlain, and his Father Earl of Winchester, and now Dr. Barrenthorp of
Oxford, taught against the Pope, and inveighed against the Deceits and
impostures of Antichrist; after a while the two new Lords Spencers, Father and
Son, grew so insolent, that they far exceeded Gaveston, alienating the Hearts
of the Barrons from the King, which caused them to take up Arms against him:
but not long after the Earl of Lancaster, and other 90 Nobles at Borrowbrigs
were taken Prisoners, and at Pontefract the Earl of Lancaster was Beheaded, and
other five Barrons hanged, and the next day at York, the Lords Clifford,
Mowbray, and Deywill, were hanged in iron Chains: and now the King went against
Scotland with an Army, but was forced there to escape by night, leaving his
Treasure and rich Furniture for Pillage: and the young Lord Mortimer, escaping
out of the Tower, fled into France: and not long after, the Queen again sent
her complaint to her Father of her ill usage.

There being now some Troubles in Gascoin, the King not going himself, sent his
Queen into France to Negotiate his Affairs, who drew all to agreement upon
Condition that her Husband should give Prince Edward, his and her Son, the
Duchy of Aquitain, and Earldom of Pontine, for which places the young Prince
did Homage to his Uncle the King of France: after this, the King sending for
his Son and Queen home, and they refusing to come, they were thereupon
proclaimed Enemies to the Crown: the Queen hereupon, without consent either of
King or Peers, Married the Prince to Philippa the Earl of Hanalt's Daughter;
and being now fitted for her purpose, she raised an Army in Henalt and Germany,
consisting of 2700 Soldiers, and many Foreign and English Nobles; and sailing
for England, landed at Orwel in Suffolk: the King having notice hereof, fled
into the West to raise Forces; promising a thousand pounds to those who would
bring him Lord Mortimers head: but the Queen, not sleeping in her design,
pursued her Husband from place to place, and at length she got Hugh Spencer the
Father, whom she caused to be cut-up alive and quartered; and the King lying
now hid in the Abbey of Neath in Wales, was there surprised by his Cosen, the
Earl of Lancaster, and Imprisoned in the Castle of Kenelworth; young Lord
Spencer, and the Lords Baldock and Reading being also taken at that time, and
carried to Hereford, where Spencer was hanged 50 foot high, and then beheaded
and quartered, and the Queen gave the bringer of his head to her 1000 pound.

And now, a Parliament being called, several Peers, to wit, 3 Bishops, three
Earls, 2 Barrons, 2 Abbots, and 2 Justices, were sent in the name of the
Parliament, to the King at Kenelworth to Command his resignation of the Crown
to his Son Prince Edward, at which message, the King fell into a swown amongst
the Peers at Kenelworth, and afterward (coming to himself, seeing no other
way) resigned his Diadem: Whereupon Sir William Trussel one of the messengers,
in the name of the whole Realm, renounced Homage to the King, in these words,

I William Trussel, in the name of all men of the Land of England, and of all
the Parliament Procurator, do Ressign to Thee Edward the Homage that was made
to Thee sometimes, and from this time forward now following, I defy Thee, and
deprive Thee of all Royal Power, and I shall never be tendant to Thee, as for
King, after this time.

Not long after this the King was taken from Kenelworth, and delivered by
Indenture, to the custody of Thomas Gourny and Sir John Mattravers, who shortly
after Murdered him, by thrusting an hot spit up his Fundament, into his
Bowels, at Barclay Castle, for which fact they were forced to fly the Country.

This Edward the Second, was King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Aquitain, etc. He was the 4 Son of Edward the I. by Ellianor his Queen, Sister
to Alfonsus King of Castile: His Reign began on Friday the seventh of July,
Anno Domini 1307: he reigned 19 years, 6 Months, and 18 days, and was the 30
sole Monarch of England; he was murdered, as is before declared, Anno 1327,
being the 20 year of his Reign, and 41 of his Age, his body was buried at
Gloucester.

CHAP. XX.
Of King Edward the Third, commonly called Edward of Windsor

ABout the beginning of this King's Reign, one Nycholas Lyrian a Divine of
Oxford, wrote a Book, de Visione Dei, against the Pope: now, by Advice of the
Lord Mortimer, the King acquitted the Scots of all his claim and Superiority to
their Kingdom: and shortly after this, the King of France died without Issue,
and King Edward laid claim to the Crown, and now the Queen Mother being
reported to be with Child by the Lord Mortimer (who was too familiar with her)
he was thereupon taken at Nottingham, and sent Prisoner to London, where he was
hanged at Tyburn, remaining on the Gallows the space of two days, for an
Ignomenious Spectacle: and presently after the King abridged his Mother of her
too large Dowry, bringing her to one thousand pounds per Annum.

Anno 1339. a Sudden Inundation of Water at New Castle upon Tine did bear down
part of the Town-Wall, where 120 Men and Women were drowned.

And, the year after, near Chippingnorton in Oxfordshire, was found a Serpent
having two Heads and two Faces like Women, one Face attired after the New
Fashion of Women's Attire, and the other Face like the old Attire, and Wings
like a Batt: And Fiends and Devils, and strange Apparitions were seen by Men,
and spoke unto them, as they traveled.

About this time Dr. Ockham of Oxford wrote against the Popes, John and
Clement, affirming them to have no Power over Civil Magistrates.

And now the King assisted Baliol against David Bruise King of Scotland, who was
forced to fly into France; and Baliol procured the Crown, and was made King,
and did Homage to King Edward, as his Father had done to King Edward the First.
The King went four times into Scotland to the Relief of King Baliol, for which
he was very liberally gratified, and at length had the Interest of the whole
Kingdom of Scotland granted to him by King Baliol, he reserving only a yearly
Pension to himself.

About the year 1340. the Isle of Man was conquered by William Montacute Earl
of Salisbury, who thereupon was honored with the Title of King of Man. Not
long after this the King created his eldest Son Edward (surnamed the Black
Prince) Earl of Chester and Duke of Cornwall: and being now wholly intent upon
his French War, the Scots daily revolted from King Baliol, and David the
banished King and his Queen returned again into Scotland.

And now the King, having taken his Voyage for France, took upon him the Title
of King of France, causing the Flower de Luces of France to be quartered with
the Lions of England: and at this time burnt and spoiled the North parts of
France, as far as Turwin; and so returned for England, and confirmed MAGNA
CHARTA, having received liberal Aides from his Subjects for the maintenance of
the French War: Now the French, hearing of the King's Second Preparation, had a
Fleet of 400 Ships ready in the Sluse in Flanders to intercept, which the King
having notice of, set sail thither and fought their Fleet, killing about 30000
of their Men, and sinking about 200 of their Vessels. And after this good
Fortune at Sea, the King entered France, and, at the Siege of Turney, sent to
the French King a Challenge, who refused to fight. About this time Dr.
Bradwardine of Oxford wrote 3 Books in Defense of God's Grace against
Free Will. Now after the Siege of Turnye the Armies of England and France
intending to fight it; but by the Mediation of Lady Jane (Mother in Law to King
Edward, and Sister to the King of France) a Truce was concluded for a short
time: and being afterward drawn out for Fight again, a new Truce, by the
Intercession of two Cardinals, was concluded for the space of three years. And
the King returning into England, shortly after made it High Treason for any
Strangers to enter upon any place spiritual in England by the Pope's Authority.

This King it was that ordained the most Noble Order of the Knights of the
GARTER, upon the occasion of the Countess of Salisbury loosing her Garter
before the King, as she was Dancing, says Mr. Camden: which the King taking
up, and seeing some of the Nobles smile, he looked on them, and said, HONI SOIT
QUI MAL Y PENSE: The number of this Order is to be XXVI. whereof the King is to
be one.

After this, the King, returning again for France, he mustered there twenty
five hundred Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, his Son Edward the Black-Prince
being with him, who in the French Wars merrited Immortal Glory: near Cressy the
King pitched for Battle, marshalling his Army into 3 Battalions, and
barracading them up behind to prevent their flying, causing them all to put
away their Horses, so that they thereby all became Foot Soldiers: Philip the
French King came to the Field, bravely appointed with a gallant Army, and
joining Battle, after a sore Fight, the French were Vanquished, and the Honor
of the day fell to the English, the French King and his Soldiers flying the
Field; the gallantry of this day was solely attributed to the Prince, King
Edward never coming in with his Forces, there being no necessity for it: in
this Battle the French lost 2 Kings, 2 Dukes, 7 Earls, and 1500 Barrons,
Knights, and men of Arms, and about 30000 Soldiers, and the next day were
several Prisoners taken. From hence the King went to lay Siege against Callice,
and after a strait Siege for a time, the Town at last yielded, and the King
placed there Collonics of English in the Town.

Now during these Stirs in France, David King of Scotland (by the French King's
procurement) entered England, supposing all the Nobles to be in France, and
that none but Priests and Sheppards were left in England, but, to his no small
Damage he found the contrary, the greatest part of his Army being slain near
Durham, and himself also taken Prisoner, by one Copland, to whom the King gave
500 pounds per annum, at Vlverston in Lancashire; and David the Scotch King was
carried Prisoner to the Tower in London.

At the King's return from France there happened so cruel a Plague, that in one
year there was buried in one Churchyard in London 50000: about this time Dr.
Orum of Oxford, Preached before Pope Urban at Rome, condemning the Papacy, and
writ the Epistle from Lucifer to the Clergy, thanking them for sending so many
Souls to Hell.

After this Henry Earl of Lancaster was Created the First Duke thereof, by King
Edward: and now the Prince of Wales took Ship for France, there to defend his
Right to the Duchy of Aquitain, and taking great Store of Towns and Prisoners,
he returned with the spoil to Bordeaux: But John the French King, promising
himself letter fortune than his Father, made bold to encounter Prince Edward,
who (though the French were 3 to one) by his great valor obtained a great
Victory, killing 52 Lords, and 1700 Knights and Esquires, besides 6000 common
Soldiers; and taking the King of France, and Philip his Son, one Archbishop,
10 Earls, and about 200 Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen Prisoners: after this
the Prince having well refreshed himself and Soldiers, he hoised Sail for
England, where he was Joyfully received, and the Prisoners courteously used,
the French King and his Son being kept in the Savoy under a safe Guard, and
others secured in other places.

And now David the Scotch King, after eleven years Imprisonment, at the
incessant Suit of Joan, David's Queen, and King Edwards Sister, was set at
Liberty, paying 100000 marks stirling: and after him, John King of France,
after four years imprisonment, (through the interceeding of Simon Langres the
Pope's Legate) was also set at liberty, paying for the same 3000000 of suits of
Gold, which amounts to 500000 pounds Sterling.

About this time Dr. Killington of Oxford wrote several Books against the Monks
and Friars, and some 5 years before Richard Fitz-Ralph Archbishop of Armagh,
and Chancelour of Oxford, wrote against begging Friars: and about the year
1362, Anno 37 of the King, it was ordained that Lawyers should plead in their
Mother Tongue.

Now after the Releasing of the King of France, as is before showed, the King
created Prince Edward Duke of Aquitain, where he and his Wife went, and
remained at Bordeaux.

And now Anno 1366, Peter Pence was ordained to be paid no more; MAGNA CHARTA
was 12 times confirmed during this King's Reign; who calling a Parliament in
the 50 year of his Reign, they laid several complaints and Accusations to the
charge of Alice Peers the King's Concubine, and against Lord Latimer, the
King's Chamberlain: and during the sitting of this Parliament the Mirror of
Princes, Edward the Black-Prince of Wales died, whereupon the King made Richard
(Prince Edward's Son) Earl of Chester and Prince of Wales, and caused the
Nobles to swear him Fealty: about this time the famous Dr. John Wickliff of
Oxford, maintained sundry learned points against the Church of Rome.

This Edward the Third, was King of England and France, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain, etc. he was eldest Son of King Edward the second, by Isabel
his Queen Daughter to Philip the Fair, King of France: he began his Reign on
Saturday the 25 day of January, Anno 1329, and reigned 50 years, 4 months, and
26 days: and was the 31 sole Monarch of England: He died on Sunday the 21 day
of June, Anno 1377, being the 51 year of his Reign, and about the 65 of his
Age: his Body was buried at Westminster.

CHAP. XXI.
Of King Richard the Second, commonly called Richard of Bourdeaux.

IN the beginning of this King's Reign the French invaded England, and burnt
the Town of Rye, the Scots the Town of Rocksbrough. And after this the French
took the Isle of Wight, and forced the Inhabitants to pay them a hundred marks:
not long after they burnt the Town of Hastings. All these Advantages being
taken by reason of the King's tender years; upon the Occasion of these daily
Rapines one Sir John Philpot of London, (seeing the remissness of the Lords) at
his own proper costs and charges manned out a Fleet to scour the Seas, which
Fleet shortly after took 15 Rich Spanish Ships, which well recompensed Sir John
for his charges. About this time Barwick was surprised by the Scots, who killed
Sir Robert Boynton the Governor; and about nine days after it was regained by
the Earl of Northumberland, the Scots being all put to the Sword.

And now a Parliament being called at London for Manning of those Services, a
Subsidy was granted to the King by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal: the
Commons, at that time, being exempted from it.

Shortly after this Sir John Arundel, and several other valiant Knights and
Esquires (being sent to the Duke of Britain for his aid against the French)
were all drowned, But the King sending more Forces after these, as the Duke of
Lancaster, Buckingham, Warwick and Stafford, with others of the chief of the
Nobility; they landed safely at Callis, and went through France to Britain,
spoiling Countries, burning Towns, and killing People; the French not daring to
oppose them.

About this time Vtred Bolton, John Ashwerby, Walter Brute, John Ashton and
Peter Pateshall were persecuted, some by perpetual Imprisonment, and some by
Banishment, for Preaching and maintaining Dr. Wickliffs Doctrine.

After this the King calling another Parliament at Northampton, they granted
him Poll-money, of Twelve pence per head, of every one above such an Age.

The next year after this, the Commons of Kent, Essex, Surry, Suffolk, Norfolk
and Cambridge rebelled, and under the Conduct of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw
marched suriously to London, burning the Priory of St. John's without East
Smithfield, and turning also the Savoy, and the Bishop of Canterbury's House in
Lambeth into Ashes; Beheading Simon Tybald the Archbishop, Sir John Hales Lord
Prior, with others. And now they sent a malicious arrogant Petition to the
King, whose Tenor the King durst not deny, his Person being then in manifest
Danger of them. But Wat Tyler cavelled at the conditions of Peace (Suggesting
strange Hopes of high matters to himself) hereupon he was desired to ride to
the King, which accordingly he did, and there behaved himself so insolently
that he offered to kill Sir John Newton one of the King's Attendants, for the
omission of some Punctilio of respect to him. But the insolent Traitor for this
affront received his Death's Wound from the hand of Sir William Walworth Lord
Mayor of London. And the Lord Mayor presently raising a thousand Citizens,
surprised the headless Monster, and caused them to beg their Lives of the King.
John Lister the Dyar, who headed the Rabble in Suffolk was also taken by Henry
Spencer Bishop of Norwich, and there was executed, of this rebellious Rabble,
in London and elsewhere, about 1500.

Now these Plebean Furies being over, the King took to Wife Anne Daughter to
the Emperor Charles the IV; and shortly after John Duke of Lancaster was
accused of Treason, touching the King's Person, but the Accusers Reward was
Death, which he hoped and intended for the Duke's Lot.

After this, the Duke sailing into France, concluded a Truce for about two
years space; and then a Parliament being called at London, the Laity sought to
depose the Clergy of their Estates, but the King answered their Request in
these words,

I will (says he) maintain the English Church in the quality of the same
Estate, or better, than I found it when I came to the Crown.

At this Parliament was Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford Created the first
Marquess of Dublin. This year also the Duke of Lancaster set Sail for Spain, to
regain the Kingdom of Castile, to which by Right of his Wife he laid claim to.

Within a while after several Lords rebeled against the King, and were all
pardoned before they came to their Trials, yet notwithstanding the King's
Clemency, they still kept together, and raising great Forces, they did not
stick to charge the King with several misdemeanors: and now the Duke of
Lancaster returning for England again, Peace was concluded between him and
Spain, and the King thereof gave him 200000 Nobles, toward the defraying of
this charges he had been at; at whose return the King made him Duke of Aquitain.

After this, the King desiring of the Londoners the Loan of a thousand pounds,
it was denied him; whereupon he seized on their Liberties, and dissolved their
proper Magistracy, turning out their Mayor John Hind, and John Shadworth and
Henry Wanner their Sheriffs, and appointed Sir Edward Dallingredge Warden of
the City.

And about two years after the King having a desire to go for Ireland had a
Subsidy granted him: four years Truce being then concluded with France; but
after this he with the Company of the Duke of Lancaster and Earl of Gloucester
sailed into France, where he espoused the Lady Isabel Daughter to Charles King
of France: this Journey besides Losses at Sea cost him 4000 marks. At his
return from France certain Peers revolted from him, making Forces, removing
such Officers from the King as they thought fit: whereupon the Earl of Arundel
one of the Rebels had his Head lopt off, and the Earl of Gloucester was
smothered with Pillows and Feather Beds at Callis: and shortly afterward the
King made himself Earl of Chester, and created several Dukes and Earls at that
time.

And not long after this, the River between Swelston and Harleswood near
Bedford stood still, and divided it self, so that the Bottom remained dry about
three miles space.

And now the King extorting Money, and taking up Carriages and other
Necessaries intending for Ireland, to suppress the Rebels there, who had slain
Lord Mortimer Lord Lieutenant there. And the Duke of Lancaster dying about this
time, the King seized his Goods, in the absence of his Banished Son, which was
but pro tempore, intending to banish him in perpetuum* which proceedings
shortly after proved his Ruin, for the King now sailing for Ireland, did little
good there, but himself great harm here. For by this means he gave Henry the
Banished Son of the Duke of Lancaster, opportunity to land in England for the
gaining of his Right. At whose Arrival several Lords flocked to him. Their
first attempt, was against the Castle of Bristol, where they took Bussy the
Treasurer, and Green, who the next day were made shorter by the heads.

The King hearing of these Stirs returned, and thought to have nipt them in the
Bud, but at his coming he found them fully Blown: whereupon he betook himself
to Conworth Castle in Wales, and afterward delivered himself into the hands of
the Earl of Northumberland, conditionally that if he and eight more, whom he
would name, might have honorable Allowance, with the assurance of a quiet
private Life, that then he would resign his Crown: from hence he was carried to
the Tower of London, and a Parliament was called at Westminster in his name,
who all agreed to the resignation: and Messengers were sent to the Tower to him
with the said Instrument (the manner and form whereof is showed before in
Edward the Seconds time) to this Instrument the King set his hand and Seal,
desiring that his Cosen Henry Duke of Lancaster might succeed him, and
thereupon put his Signet Ring on the Dukes hand.

After this the Definitive Sentence being given in open Parliament, Duke Henry
rising from his Seat, made his challenge to the Crown, as follows,

In the name of God, Amen. I Henry of Lancaster Claim the Realm of England and
the Crown, withal the Appurtinances, as coming by the Blood Royal from King
Henry the III: and that Justice which God of his Grace has send to me, by the
help of my Friends, for the Recovery of the said Realm, which was in point of
Perdition through default of Government and breach of Laws.

These words said he was by all the States acknowledged for King, and placed in
the Royal Throne.

This Richard the Second, was King of England and France, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain, etc. he was the Second Son to Edward the Black-Prince, by
Joan his Wife, Daughter to Edmund Earl of Kent: his Reign began on Sunday the
one and twenty day of June, Anno 1377, and he reigned twenty two years, three
months and eight days, and was the the thirty two sole Monarch of England. He
was assassinated in Pontefrack Castle by Sir Pierce of Exton and other seven
Assassinates, he having first valiantly defended himself, and slain four of the
Assassinates. Some affirm that he was starved to Death, Anno 1400: His body was
brought to London, and carried through the City to St. Paul's Church, and there
left barefaced by the space of three days, for People to gaze at, and was
afterward buried at Westminster, some say at Langley.

CHAP. XXII.
Of King Henry the Fourth, commonly called Henry of Bullingbrook.

THis King Henry was crowned at Westminster by Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury, and shortly after his Coronation he created his Eldest Son Henry,
Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain and Cornwall, and Earl of Chester: and caused
the Crown to be entailed upon the Heirs of his Body. And then took from the
Lords Awmarl, Surry, and Exeter (the late King's Friends) the Titles of Dukes.

And not long after he sent Ambassadors to Rome, France, Spain and Germany, to
give them the Reasons of his assuming the Crown.

But the People of Aquitain hearing of those Carriages in England, (...)
favoring King Richard's Cause, beg^^ (...) Revolt, but Henry sending the Earl
of Worc^^ter thither with some Forces, they quickly fell to their Obedience
again. And now the Scots, upon some Distates entered the North-parts of England,
doing much harm.

And shortly after several Lords; as, John Holland, late Duke of Exceter,
Thomas Holland late Duke of Surry, Edward Plantaginet late Duke of Aumarl, John
Montacute Earl of Salisbury, Lord Spencer, Sir Ralf Lumly, Sir Thomas Blunt,
and Sir Benedict Celye, with others; conspired against Henry, either out of
Pity to Richard's cause, or Emulation to Henry's greatness; but the Plot being
discovered, before it came to any Perfection, by some of their own party. The
two late Dukes of Exceter and Surry, having notice thereof hasted to Cicester,
pretending, as they passed along, that King Richard was at liberty, and that
Henry was fled, which was all false: for at this time he had got 6000 men in
Readiness to oppose them: and Exceter seeking to escape by Sea, was taken, and,
at the Countess of Hereford's instigation, was beheaded by the common People,
at Pleshie; the Lord Spencer receiving the like doom at Bristol, and others in
other places, in all nineteen: whereof two had been Dukes in King Richard's
time, to wit, John Holland and Thomas Holland.

Presently after this, the King entered Scotland, and spoiled the Country, but
before his Return, Wales was in Rebellion, under the Command of Owen Glendour:
of which the King having Intelligence, he turned his March thither, and burnt,
killed, and took such Revenge as that time would permit, and so returned with
such spoil as he had got, Glendour being gotten into the inexpugnable Snowden
hills.

But the King's Danger was not less at home than abroad, for in his Bed there
was hidden a Calthrope or Engine with three very sharp Teeth or Spikes, all of
them set upward for his Destruction, but he discovered it before he lay down,
but the Traitor was never found out.

Now Glendour still proceeding in his Outrages, Edmund Lord Mortimer went
against him, but with the loss of about a thousand of his men in the Attempt,
and his own Liberty to boot, being taken Prisoner: and afterward, either for
love or fear, did marry Glendour's Daughter, and was privy and consenting to
Piercy's Rebellion, which followed afterward.

About this time were several Libels dispersed up and down in Defamation of the
King, but the Authors being taken, suffered death, amongst whom were several
Grey-Fryers: after the Execution of these offenders, the King again entered
Wales, but the cruel Storms there at that time forced his return. And the Earl
of Northumberland the King's Lieutenant of the North, and Piercy Hot-Spur the
Earls Son, had better success against the Scots, who had entered England, but
returned by weeping Cross, being overthrown in two Battles by the Earl and his
Son, and several taken Prisoners.

After this, the King took to Wife Lady Jane of Navar, Widow of John de
Mountforth Duke of Britain* and shortly after several Prodigies appeared
Prognosticating the Piercys Rebellion, which followed not long after; the first
of them, discovering himself in open Arms, was Lord Piercy Hot-Spurr, who made
head about Chester, to whom repaired the Earl of Worcester, their intentions
being to enter the Town of Shrewsbury. The King sent for them, promising under
his hand their safe conduct; but they refused to go, which caused the King with
the Prince and other Nobles to march toward them: as soon as Piercy Hot-spur
discovered the Royal Standard, he drew out his Army, consisting of about 14000,
to try the Fortune of War, which at that time proved very averse to him, for he
and the Earls of Worcester, Douglas, Sir Richard Vernon Barron of Kinlaton, and
several others, with 200 Esquires and Gentlemen of Cheshire that day, or the
next, loss their Lives, with an Incredible number of common Soldiers: and on
the King's party were slain the Earl of Stafford, and ten new Knights, all made
that morning, and many Esquires and Gentlemen, and about 500 common Soldiers*
the Battle ended, the King marched to York, whither he commanded the Earl of
Northumberland to come, who obeyed his Command and had pardon of Life, but was
abridged in Estate.

Whiles things were thus settling in the North, news came that Wales was still
in Rebellion: so the Clergy, at the motion of their Metropolitan, granted the
King a Subsidy for Maintenance of his Army: and William de Wilford, also being
in the King's Service on the narrow Seas, brought some assistance to his
Indigencies, by taking 40 Prizes laden with Iron, Oil, Soap and Rochel Wines,
to the number of one thousand Tuns.

And not long after, a Parliament being called, another Subsidy was granted,
and the Earl of Northumberland was again restored to his Possessions: presently
after this, came a Troop of Western men, who brought to the King three foreign
Lords and 20 Knights of note, Prisoners from Dartmouth, where they also slew
the Lord of Castile and several of his men, which Lord formerly had burnt
Plymouth, and thinking to have done so here, was by these Plebeans put by his
purpose; for which good Service the King gave them store of Gold.

And now the King calling Three Parliaments, one after another, for Money,
could get none: the chief Opposer was Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshal, who drew
Richard Scroop Archbishop of York into a Conspiracy against the King, and the
Earl of Westmerland, pretending to side with them, ensnared them both in his
Gin, and presented them to the King, who caused both their Heads to be struck
off, although Westmerland had promised them their Lives. And now the King began
again to pursue the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf (who were supposed
privy to Earl Marshals Conspiracy) with an Army of 37000 Men, whereupon they
fled into Scotland: the King seeing this, took Barwick by battering down a
Tower in the Wall, with a great Gun, the first that was used in England, and
took Alnwick, and all other Castles belonging to the Earl of Northumberland.
And from hence marching to Wales, he expected the like good Fortune there, but
such a sudded Rage of Waters in Wales came so fast down upon his Army, that he
was forced to return, 50 Waynes laden with Treasure, and other Carriages being
destroyed by the Rage thereof.

After this, another Parliament being called, they granted a Subsidy, being
rather wearied with the King's Importunity than out of any good Will to him.
Anno 1407. being the next year after, there was so great a Plague in England,
that in short space it destroyed 30000 in London, and multitudes elsewhere in
the Realm: and the year after was a great Frost that held 15 Weeks.

All this while Glendour continuing his Rebellion in Wales. The Earl of
Northumberland and Lord Bardolf leaving Wales (into which they had escaped) and
coming to raise Forces in the North, were met and encountered by Sir Thomas
Rookby the Sheriff of Yorkshire, who flew the Earl, and gave the Lord Bardolf
a wound, of which he died.

After this, the Duke of Burgundy sending to the King for Aid against the Duke
of Orleance, had his Request answered: and presently after Orleance sending for
Aid against Burgandy, and promising greater matters than the other, it was
granted to him also, to the great wonder of many: and now the Lord Hail,
Marshal of France, laying a Siege to a certain strong place in Gascoign, with
other Lords, and about 4000 Men of Arms, were driven from thence by Sir John
Blunt with 300 Soldiers, and 12 of the Principallest, and about 120 Gentlemen
were then taken Prisoners; but the King lived not to see the Fortune and
Carriage of these Wars. In this King's Reign (through Archbishop Arundells
Procurement) William Sawtree, William Swinderby, and William Thorp suffered
Martyrdom for their Faith, being all worthy Divines.

This Henry the Fourth was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland: he
was the eldest Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by Blaunch his Wife,
Daughter and Heir to Henry Plantaginet Duke of Lancaster (Son to Edmund
Sir-named Crouch-back) he began his Reign on Monday the 29 day of September,
Anno 1399, and reigned 13 years, 5 months and 19 days, and was the 33 sole
Monarch of England: He died at London of an Apoplexy on Sunday, the 20 day of
March, Anno 1412. and was buried at Canterbury.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of King Henry the Fifth, commonly called Henry of Monmouth.

HE was Crowned at Westminster by Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury: and
at his first entrance, dismissed all his youthful Companions, and made choice
of grave men for his Counselors. He was wont every day after dinner, for the
space of an hour, to receive Petitions of the oppressed, who with great equity
he relieved; he was so zealous toward the Clergy (hating Lollards or
Wickliffians) that he caused Sir John Old-Castle, Lord Cobham (who was the
chief that held that opinion then) to be Imprisoned; but he afterward escaping
for Wales, 37 of his Faction (as it was then thought to be) being taken, were
all condemned, and seven of them, viz. Lawrence Redman, David Sawtree, William
James, Thomas Brightwell, William Haulam, Ralph Greenburst, and John Schut were
burnt and strangled in St. Gyles's Fields: after this the King restored the Son
of Lord Piercy Hot-Spur to his Blood and Grandfather's Honor of Earl of
Northumberland: and presently after sent Ambassadors to France, to demand the
Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitain, Guyen and Anjou, but in derision to his
Demands; the Dauphin of France sent him a Tun of Tennice Balls, as Bullets most
fit for his tender hands. The King disgusted hereat, preparing for Wars, the
French made the Scots, their Friends, to invade Englands marches, which
accordingly they did in such a violent manner, that the King scarce knew which
Kingdom to begin with first, but at length it was concluded for France: the
Clergy giving a Tenth, and the Temporal Lords their Aid of 346 Men at arms, and
552 Archers, and about some 10 Ships, and to keep back the Scots, Sir
RobertVmsreivil was sent against them, who in a Skirmish took 360 of them
Prisoners, and great spoil.

The news of the proceedings here in England flying into France, Charles the
French King sent his Ambassadors to England, with offer of money, and some
Territories of France (but none of the best) and the Princess Catherine in
Marriage to King Henry; but these proffers found no Acceptance, for Antelope,
the Pursevant at Arms, was sent to the French King with Letters of Defiance.

Hereupon Charles sent a million of Gold out of France to the Lords Scroop,
Gray and Cambridge (all three in especial favor with King Henry) to betray or
murder him, before he arrived in Normandy; which they (O the prevalency of
Gold) intended to have put in execution, but being discovered the Night before
the King intended to have put to Sea, they were all three beheaded.

And so the King embarked for France, and landed near Harflew, commanding his
Army that they should do no violence to Churches, Churchmen, Women or
Children; and so advanced toward the Town, and laid Siege to it, which shortly
after was yielded to him, and he turned out the French, and Peopled the Town
with English Artizans; from hence he marched with 2000 Horse and 13000 Foot,
through the Countries of Caux and Ewe toward Callis* but finding so many
Obstacles in his way (the French having plased shed Woods, pulled down Bridges,
and carried all Victuals out of the Country where he intended to pass) and his
Soldiers growing sick and faint for want of Victuals, he therefore resolved to
march back to Callis.

The French upon this Advantage thinking to surprise the King, near Azin Court
pitched their Banner Royal, their Host consisting of 150000 Horse, and 10000
Men at Arms, Princes, Noblemen and Knights. King Henry considering the
faintness of his Soldiers through want of Victuals, (and that the French were
six to one) desired a Peace, but was denied: the French making themselves so
sure of the Victory, as that they had disposed of Court-places and other
preferments in England among themselves, each knowing his place: but this day
proved more fatal to them than they expected, for King Henry seeing no way but
one, encouraged his Men, and entered Battle, obtaining a most glorious Victory,
with the loss of Edward Duke of York* the Earl of Worcester, and some few
others: but of the French fell that day 4000 Princes, Nobles, Knights and
Esquires, besides 10000 Common Soldiers; and so many Prisoners taken that they
far exceeded the Conquerors, wherefore the King* Commanded to kill them all,
least they should rise up against them. From thence the King marched to Callis,
and so took Ship for England, landing at Dover, where he was received with
great Triumph, and at his entrance into London, was presented with 1000 pounds
in Gold, and two Gold Basins worth 500 pounds.

Not long after, Sigismond the Emperor arrived in England, desiring a Peace
between England and France, which would not be granted; and so concluded a
Peace between himself and England (and received the honorable Order of
Knighthood of the Garter from King Henry) he returned. And now the King of
France having a Navy wasting on the Seas with many Bravadoes; the English Fleet
under the Command of John Duke of Bedford, battered, sunk and took the most of
them, and sent the three great Carracks of Genoa to England.

But Burgundy now siding with France against England, the King thereupon called
a Parliament, and a Subsidy and tenth was granted him for the maintenance of
the Wars against France: but all not being sufficient for defraying so vast a
charge, he was forced to pawn his Crown, and sell his Jewels for raising more
moneys. And being now well prepared, he made his Brother John Duke of Bedford
Protector of England, and so made his second Expedition for France, and arrived
in Normandy, whose Terror was such that 25000 Families fled out of the Country
upon his Arrival. His first Attempt was against Conquest (the strongest Castle
in Normandy) which he presently took and bestowed it on his Brother Thomas Duke
of Clarence and the Castle of Aumbelliers on the Earl of Salisbury, with that
of Lovers on the Earl Marshal, and presently after Cane was also taken by him.

About this time the Scots laying Siege against Barwick and Ro^ksborough, they
were all scared away with fear, when they heard that the Lord Protector and
Arch Bishop of York with other Nobles were drawing near them with an Army.

Presently after a Parliament was called by the Protector's Authority, for
raising Money for the Wars: in which Parliament Sir John Old-Castle, Lord
Cobham (who held the opinion of Dr. Wickliff) was condemned, and hanged in St.
Giles's Fields, being burnt also whilst he was hanging.

The King at this time laid against the Town and Castle of Fallais, which after
a while was surrendered upon certain Conditions: and after this he divided his
Army into several parts, under the Command of Himself and Nobles, who wan
several Castles here and there; he with his party laid Siege to Roan, which
after six months Siege was forced to Surrender, there being famished in the
Town during the Siege 50000, and 12000 Starvelings turned out of the Town who
died in Ditches. He caused the Burgesses there to pay him 356000 Crowns toward
his Expenses in the Siege, and likewise to swear Fealty to him and his
Successors. This place had been about 215 years in the possession of the
French, from the time that King John of England lost it.

Presently after the Surrender of this place, about 40 other Towns and places
of note did yield themselves to the King: and now the Duke of Burgundy sought
to make Peace, but it was denied, King Henry following on now to make an
absolute and entire Conquest, which shortly after he effected, a Flood-Gate
being opened unto him for accomplishing of the same, by reason of some affronts
offered by the Dauphin to his Mother the Queen, who impatient of wrongs, raised
Forces, and with the help of the Duke of Burgundy, became Regent of France,
which civil Broils made well for King Henry, for Peace being sought with him it
was granted with these Conditions, that the Crown of France and all its Rights
after the Death of the French King Charles and his Queen, should remain to King
Henry and his Heirs for ever; whereupon he married Lady Catherine Daughter to
King Charles; and so the Sallique Law of France at this time was made void, but
the Pope being solicited to confirm Henry King of France, would not condescend
to it.

Upon the Sealing and Swearing the above mentioned Articles, Philip Duke of
Burgundy did Homage to King Henry, who was then Styled and Proclaimed Regent of
France; and kept his Court at Paris for a time, Parliaments being then called
which confirmed all things, the Nobles all swearing to be true to King Henry,
except the Dauphin and his party who were in Rebellion, and in the last
Parliament had Sentence of Disinheritance pronounced against him, and, in the
Court of Chancery in Paris, all things were sealed with the Seal of King Henry.

And now all things thus confirmed, the King with his Queen came for England,
who was no sooner out of France, but the Scots hasted thither to the Aid of the
Dauphin, and in a Skirmish several of the English were slain, amongst whom the
King's Brother the Duke of Clarence was one, and the Earls of Somerset and
Suffolk, with other Lords were taken Prisoners: the King having notice hereof
embarked again for France and landed at Callis, and chased the Dauphin from
place to place, he not daring to Fight; during these proceedings the Queen was
brought to Bed at Windsor of a young Prince Henry, which news coming to the
King's Ears, he in a Prophetical way thus spoke,

Good God (says he) I Henry of Monmouth shall have but a short Reign, and win
much, but Henry of Windsor shall Reign long and loose all, but the Will of God
be done.

Which words of his afterward proved true. And now the King after several
brave exploits by him performed, in this his last expedition into France, died;
appointing, by his last Will, his younger Brother Humfry Duke of Gloucester
Protector of England, his Brother John Duke of Bedford Regent of France, and
Thomas Beaufort Duke of Exceter Guardian of his Son's Body.

This Henry the V. was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland; he was
the eldest Son of King Henry the Fourth by Mary his Queen, Daughter to Humfry
de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton. He began his Reign on Sunday
the 20 day of March, Anno Do. 1412, and reigned nine years, five months, and
10 days, and was the thirty fourth sole Monarch of England. He died of a
Burning Feavor and Flux at Boice de Vincennois in France, on Monday the the one
and thirty day of August, Anno Domini 1422, and was buried at Westminster.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of King Henry the Sixth, commonly called Henry of Windsor.

THis King was Crowned at Westminster, being but about 8 months old, and a
Parliament being called and a Subsidy granted; that the regal Chair in the
House might not stand empty, thither the Queen did carry the young Prince, and
sat with him in her Lap, he speaking to the House in another Tongue. And now
the affairs in France were various, Fortune sometimes smiling on the French,
and other sometimes on the English: whereupon the Duke of Bedford Regent of
France desired to enter Battle with the French, which accordingly was performed
near the Vernoil where the French were beaten, and about 5000 of them slain,
besides many taken Prisoners.

During these proceedings in France, James the young King of Scots, (who had
casually been taken Prisoner at Sea in Henry the Fifths time) was set at
Liberty in England thereby to draw the Scots off from Aiding the French, not
long after Duke Humphry the Protector was married to Jaqueline of Bavaria, her
Husband being then living, which caused the Duke of Burgundy to forsake the
Regent in France: and now Factions breeding in the Court of England, the Regent
left France to appease the dangers at home, which he happily performed, and
then with the Lord Talbot and fresh Forces returned again to France.

From the beginning of April 1428* unto All-Hallon-Tide after, fell such
abundance of Rain, that not only Hay but Corn also was distroyed. About this
time, at the Regent's Return into France, Siege was laid unto Orleance, where
the Earl of Salisbury was slain, yet notwithstanding the Siege continued. And
Charles the young French King being very pensive not knowing how to remedy this
Mischief likely to ensue. At Chinon a young Maid called Joane of Loraine, a
sheeperdess, appeared to him, bidding him be of good Courage, for God had sent
her to deliver the Realm, and so going to Bl^yce, with the Marshal of France;
and there getting Forces, by her Valor the Siege was raised at Orleance, the
English loosing 600, men at that Brunt: and for some short space after this,
the loosing and taking of Towns was interchangeable: but Joan and the Duke of
Alanzon still proceeding in their good fortunes, near Jergeaux they fought the
Lord Talbot, taking him and several Nobles Prisoners, and killing about 1000 of
the English, they not loosing above 600. Hereupon several Towns Revolted from
the English, and Charles himself (who before had kept in) now Issued out in
Arms, thinking to have recovered Paris, but he was disapointed of his hopes by
the Regent: and now the English lying Siege to Champaign, Joan the Martial Maid
coming to it is Rescue, was taken and sent to Roan, and there Burnt for a Witch,
which did not a little dismay the French: but success proving still various, it
was thought that King Henry's presence in France would be a great
discouragement to the Carrolines: hereupon the King with the Company of the two
English Cardinals, York and Winchester, and other Nobles sailed into France
Anno. 1432, and at Paris by the Cardinal of Winchester he was Crowned King of
France: yet Charles esteemed himself not the less a King for all this: the King
having thus taken possession of France, not long after took his farewell of it,
his Return was by Roan and so over Land to Callis, and thence to England again:
and now the Soldiers beginning to be weary of their Employment, and
discontented with their Wages, fell to Mutiny at Paris, for which the Regent
cashiered 110, and chopped of the heads of four of the Principallest of them.

Anno 1435, the Theames was so frozen, that the Merchants which came to the
Thames Mouth, were forced to be carried to London by Land.

And now after several Changeable Successes in France, at length the Regent
dyed, the news of whose death coming to England, Richard Duke of York was sent
Regent, but Paris was lost before his Arrival in France: and after several
Skirmishes with the English, the French proceeded to besiege Callis, to which
place the new Regent drew his Army, but King Henry hearing hereof, and fearing
the worst, sent the Protector with a great Fleet against the French; at whose
approach they all ran away, and so the Protector Settling the State of Callis,
returned with great honor. But this new Regent, performing little or nothing
in France, he Returned for England; and Richard Earl of Warwick went in his
place: but, he after a short space dying, the Duke of York went again, and, at
his Return into France, prossered several times to fight the French King, who
never durst undertake to join Battle with him. Not long after this the Duke of
Orleance was set at Liberty who had been Prisoner ever since the Battle at Azin
Court, which was above 26 years before, his Ransom was 300000 Crowns, the
Protector was much against his Releasment.

Anno 1438. All the Lions in the Tower of London dyed: and this same year was
held the Council at Florence, being the 16 General Council, Eugenius the fourth
being Pope.

Julythe 18. Anno 1440. The Postern of London by East Smith-field against the
Tower of London sunk by Night: and about 2 years after a Contest fell between
the Duke of Gloucester and the Cardinal his Uncle, and the Duke's Lady was
accused by the Cardinal Henry Chicely Archbishop of Canterbury for
Witchcraft, as if by Art Magic she went about to take away the King's Life:
and she was forced to satisfy publicly for that wickedness she had not
attempted, though others that were guilty, in their very Sufferings excused the
Duchess of it. Yet notwithstanding she did Penance, going, the first day from
Temple Bar down Fleetstret, with a wax Taper in her hand, to Paul's, where she
offered her Taper to the Altar: the next day but one, she went through
Bridgestreet and Grace Church Street to Leaden Hall, and so to Christ-Church by
Allgate, and two days after she went through Cheapside to St. Michaels in
Cornhil, in form aforesaid.

Now the Affairs still various in France, at length a Truce was concluded for
18 Months, and hopes of perpetual Amity, grounded upon a Match Contracted by
William de la Pole Earl of Suffolk for the King with Margaret Daughter to
Renate Duke of Angiers, and Titular King of Sicily, Naples and Jerusalem: but
this Match proved inauspicious to the King, for by it he lost his Friends in
England, and Revenues in France: and not long after all was Ruled by the Queen
and Suffolk and their Accomplices; and a Parliament being called the Duke of
Yorks Commission was revoked, and Henery Beaufort Duke of Somerset was sent
Regent into France: And now began the King's Miserys to approach, for in the
Parliament at St. Edmundsbury, the Protector through the Queen's means (unknown
to the King,) was Arrested of high Treason, and before he came to any Trial he
was Murdered in his Bed, with Pillowes, as it was thought: and the Cardinal of
Winchester the other Prop of the Kingdom lived not long after him, after whose
death, the Affairs both of England and France were carried on very
unfortunately.

And now Suffolk, the Queens chief Favorite, is made Duke, which passages
displeasing the people, Richard Plantaginet begun to think how these distempers
might work well on his side for the obtaining the Crown: whereupon hetook
shipping for Ireland, to still the Irish Commotions there, which he quickly
effected, and there laid the foundation of his first plots. In mean time
Somerset Regent in France lost all, which unhappy News coming to England, it
caused several to look slightly at the Queen, but especially at Suffolk,
against whom several Articles were exhibited by the Lower House of Parliament,
whereupon he was Imprisoned in the Tower, but shortly after was again restored
to his Liberty.

The 23 of the King, on Candlemas Eve, in diverse places of England, were heard
Terrible Thunder, with Lightning whereby the Church of Baldock in
Hartfordshire, and the Church of Walden in Essex, and diverse others were sore
shaken, and the Steeple of St. Paul's Church in London about three of the Clock
in the afternoon was set on fire, but was happily quenched again.

And now the Duke of York shortly after procured Adam Mollins the Bishop of
Chichester Keeper of the Privy Seal, (another Pillar of the Kingdom) to be
Murdered by the Seamen at Portsmouth.

Not long after one Thane alias Blewbeard, a Fuller of Canterbury, attempting
to raise some forces in the Duke of York's behalf, miscarried in his
Enterprise, and was taken, hanged and quartered. And another Parliament being
called (and the Commons wishing well to the Duke of York, they again accuse the
Duke of Suffolk, and now obtained of the King Sentence of his Banishment for
five years, who being upon the Seas, intending his banished Voyage, was taken,
and in Dover Road had his Head Chopped off on the side of a Cock Boat.

After this the Bishop of Salisbury was Murdered by his own Tenants, and Lord
Say Treasure of England, and his Son in Law with some other were slain by the
Common People, such footing had the Duke of York's cause gotten amongst them,
and now in his behalf (though he was still in Ireland) rose the Commons of
Kent, under Jack Cade's Command, and pitched on Black Heath near Greenwich in
Kent: the King perceiving it no time to be idle, raised an Army; in the mean
time Cade retired to Sevenock in Kent. And the King supposing he had fled, sent
Sir Humphry Stafford and other Gentlemen with some forces to pursue him; to
whom Cade gave Battle and slew Sir Humphry, with some others; of which the King
having notice, he left the Tower to the Custody of the Lord Scales, and fled to
Kenelworth Castle; and so Cade marched to London, causing the head of Master
Cr^mer high Sheriff of Kent to be lopt of: and falling to the plundering of
some of the Wealthiest Citizens; the Lord Mayor then, considering the danger
they were in, sent forthwith to the Lord Scales for Aid, who sent the Renowned
Esquire Matthew Gough to their Relief: and now the Citizens took heart and
began to bar up London Bridge; the Kentish Plebeans quartering in Southwork,
and hearing hereof ran furiously to their Arms, and with their Leader Cade
sought to open the passage by force, but was not able, the Contention was very
hot and continued all Night, Gough and several others being slain; to appease
these Furies by Policy which could not be conquered by Force, the Archbishop
of Canterbury sent a Pardon under the King's great Seal, whereupon the Plebeans
threw down their Arms, and gave their leader Cade leave to shift for himself:
who afterward attempting new Troubles, a 1000 marks was promised to them that
could take or kill him: whereupon one Mr. Eden a Gentleman of Kent slew him,
and 26 more of his crew suffered Death at Canterbury and elsewhere.

These Stirs were no sooner over but the Duke of York arrived in England,
leaving Ireland, who at his first approach imprisoned several Nobles in Ludlow
Castle, but many of the Peers sided with him; now the King (as it was time)
began to rouse up his Spirits, marching toward the Duke then in Wales, who
hearing of the King's march fled into Kent, and at Brent-Heath encamped: of
which the King having intelligence he steared his Course that way, and sending
Messengers to the Duke to demand the Reasons of these Tumults, he perceiving
the King too powerful for him, did thereupon submit, and was received again
into favor.

And now some hopes arising of the recovering of Gascoin again, the Lord Talbot
and some others were thereupon sent into France, who at first were very
successful in their Designs; but the Lord Talbot being slain, the French
regained all again, and the English lost all Aquitain: after they had possessed
it about three hundred years. And about this time, the Queen was delivered of
her First born Edward: by this time the Duke of York had arrested the Earl of
Somerset of high Treason, who being sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, was
from thence Released by the King and made Captain of Callis; whereupon York and
his Adherents fell into open force, levying an Army about the Marches of Wales,
from whence they intended their march to London, but were stopped at St. Albans
by the King and his Forces: the Duke at his coming hither sent to the King,
desiring him to deliver up to him such persons as he would name, to which the
King returned Answer that he and his adherents were all Traitors: so the
Yorkists assailed the Town, and flew 48 Nobles, Knights and Esquires, amongst
whom were the Earls of Somerset, Northumberland and Stafford, and 5000 Common
Soldiers, and wounded the King in the neck with an Arrow, so he was taken
Prisoner.

The next day the Duke of York and Earls of Salisbury and Warwick marched to
London with the King, and in his name summoned a Parliament, by whose Authority
the Duke of York was established Protector of England, Salisbury Lord
Chancellor, and Warwick Captain of Callis: but it was not long before they were
again displaced.

The French by reason of these intestine Broils took their Advantage, making
several inroads on the Coasts of England, killing the Mayor Bailiffs and
several other Officers of Sandwich, and burnt Foway, and several other Towns in
Devonshire.

Anno 1458, there was a Fray in Fleetstreet, between the men of the Court and
the inhabitants of the said Street; in which Fray the Queens Attorney was slain,
for which Fact the King committed the Governors of Cliffords, Furnivals and
Barnards-Inn to Prison; and William Tailor Alderman of the Ward, and several
others were sent to Windsor Castle.

The year after being 1459, the Science of PRINTING was found out in Germany at
Magunce, by a Soldier; and was brought into England about 12 years after, by
one William Caxton a Mercer, who practiced it at St. Peter's Abbey in
Westminster for a pretty while.

And now a seeming reconcilement was concluded on between the King with his
Lancastrians and the Yorkists, but it had not long continuance: for the
Yorkists, under the pretense of some Afronts offered to the Earl of Warwick, by
some of the King's Servants, drew to an head again; but their Intentions being
discovered by one Andrew Trollop, they all thereupon disperced themselves.

And shortly after a Parliament being called, in it were the Duke of York Earl
of March, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Rutland, and Earl of Salisbury, with certain
others, all attainted of High Treason, and their whole Estates consiscared; but
they neither fearing nor regarding their attainder, drew out again from the
several places whither they were fled, and uniting their forces together,
consisting of about 25000 men, they fought the King at Northampton, slaying
about ten thousand men with several Nobles; as Humfry Duke of Buckingham, the
Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Egremont and others, and taking the King himself
Prisoner; whereupon the Tower was surrendered, and the Lord Scales, Lieutenant
thereof seeking to escape, was murdered by Whirry men on the Thames.

Now a Parliament again being called, the Duke of York, coming out of Ireland,
made his Claim to the Crown, deriving his pedigree from Lyonell the 3 Son of
Edward the III, elder Brother of John of Gaunt, Father of King Henry the IV:
and after great debate in the Parliament, at length it was concluded, that King
Henry should possess it during his life, and after his Death, then the Crown to
remain to Richard Duke of York, and his Heirs in general tail.

During these proceedings, the Queen with her Son were in the North raising of
Forces, whither the Duke of York marched to encounter them, reposing himself at
Sandal Castle expecting more force to come to his aid: but the Queen in the
mean time coming before the Castle with a small force, laying Ambushes on
either side of the Hill before the Castle, which the Duke not suspecting,
rushed out upon the Queen's men, whom he had no sooner encountered, but the
Ambushes presently coming out surrounded him; by which means the Duke with
several of his Accomplices and Friends, as the Earl of Salisbury, and the Earl of
Rutland a Child of 12 years old (who though begging his life on his knees with
tears) were slain, and about 3000 Soldiers; Edward Plantaginet Earl of March,
Son and Heir to the Duke of York hearing of his Father's Death, with an Army of
23000 men intended to Fight the Queen's Army, but he found employment by the
way; for at Mortimer's Cross, near Ludlow, he was encountered by the Earl of
Pembrook and Earl of Ormond, to whom he gave a great Overthrow, slaying 3800 of
them, and taking several Prisoners, amongst whom was Owen Tuder, who had
married Catherine Mother to Henry the VI. whose Head was chopped off: in the
mean time the Queen was gotten as far as St. Albans where the Londoners fearing
their Plunder by her Army, together with the King, and several Nobles gave her
Army Battle, she giving them the overthrow, and slaying two thousand of their
men: but Edward Earl of March drawing nigh, the King and Queen retired into
Scotland, leaving the Kingdom to Edward, whereupon he entered London, giving a
Period to Henry's Reign: which accounted is but till this time, although he
lived eleven years after.

This Henry the Sixth was King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland; he was
the only Child of King Henry the Fifth by his Queen Catherine, Daughter to
Charles the VI. King of France. His Reign began on Monday the 31 day of August,
Anno 1422. he reigned 38 years, 6 months, and 3 days, and was the 35 sole
Monarch of England: he was stabbed to the Heart in the Tower, by Crook-back
Richard, Duke of York, afterward King of England, on Monday the twenty day of
May, Anno Domini 1471, being the 49 of his Age: his body was first buried in
the Abbey of Chartsy in Surry, and afterward removed to Winsor by King Henry
the Seventh, and after that again removed none knows to what place.

CHAP. XXV.
Of King Edward the Fourth.

KING Edward was Crowned at Westminster, but his Carriages toward the Citizens
at his first entrance, made them repent their forwardness in his behalf against
King Henry: and hearing of Henry's preparations in the North, he marched toward
Pontefrack in Yorkshire, giving the Lord Fitzwalter charge of the passage at
Ferry Bridge nigh Pontefract, where the said Lord and several of his men were
slain: shortly after the Armies drew into a plain between the Towns of Towton
and Saxton, the King's Army consisting of 48660, and Henry's of 60000 men, the
Fight was bloody and continued 10 hours, but at last the Lancastrians not able
to gain-stand Edward's Forces, they betook themselves to their Heels, leaving
the glory of the day to King Edward, there was slain that day being Palm Sunday
the 29 of March, several Nobles, as Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, John
Lord Clifford, John Lord Nevil, and Leonard Lord Wells, and several other
persons of Quality, to the Number of 357, and in all there was slain about
35091.

This doleful News coming to Henry, he with his Queen and Son fled into
Scotland, where they were honorably received by King James, to whose Sister
not long after the Prince was married, and now after these passages in Scotland
the Queen sailed into France to seek Aid, where she got more men then her
Coffers would discharge.

Edward in the mean time road Victoriously to London, and was again Proclaimed
King, and a Parliament shortly after being called, They disinherited Henry, his
Queen and Son, and about 43 Nobles, and others; and now the Queen returning
into Scotland with her French Fleet, and afterward making for England her
Fleet was Scattered by a Tempest, so that her Husband and She were left solely
to the Aid of the Scots, who marching into England as far as the Bishopric of
Durham, King Edward prepared to meet them, but making an halt at York, he sent
the Lord Montacute with forces to oppose them; who was encountered on Hedgley
Moore by the Lords Hungerford, Ro^'s, and Sir Ralph Peircy, to whom the Lord
Montacute gave the foyl, taking Sir Ralph Percy, and several others being
slain; and growing proud of this Victory he assailed King Henry's Camp at
Hexham, where, after great slaughter, he took the Duke of Somerset, and other
three Lords, and one Knight, which were all beheaded: whereupon Henry fled into
Scotland, and afterward coming into England in disguise, he was taken, and
having his feet tied to the stirrups, and his guilt spurs taken off his heels,
he was then committed Prisoner to the Tower of London.

Shortly after King Edward called a Parliament and Enacted several good Laws,
especially against pride in Apparel; and now he begins to think of a wife,
whereupon the Earl of Warwick was sent to solicit a Marriage between the King
and Lady Bona Daughter to Jews Duke of Savoy: and all things being well
approved of by the Lady and her Friends, the Earl Returned; before whose Return
the King had set his Affections on the Lady Elizabeth Gray here in England,
whose Mother was Jaquelline Daughter to Peter Earl of St. Paul's, to whom
shortly after he was Married.

The Earl of Warwick took great distaste thereat, thinking himself hereby
abused, and endeavored afterward to uphold King Henry's Cause, drawing to his
Assistance some Nobles and Foreign Princes; and upon these discontents, some of
the Commons rose under the Command of one Robert Hildern, intending to gave
seized on York, from which place they were beaten back by the Lord Montacute
president thereof, and their Leader beheaded.

Yet the Commons not dismayed hereat, chose Henry Lord Fitzhughs Son, and Sir
Henery Nevil Son to the Lord Latimer, but they being but young, made choice of
Sir John Coniers a valliant Knight, and intended their march for London: of
which the King having notice, he made William Lord Herbert Earl of Pembrook
General, and Sir Richard Herbert his Brother assistant to him.

And now the Northern forces drawing near Northampton, the Lord Stafford and
Sir Richard Herbert with 2000 Horse fell in the Rear of them, but were repulsed
and lost most of their Men: afterward the Armies meeting near Banbury, some
distaste being then taken by the Lord Stafford at the Earl of Pembrook the Kings
General, he thereupon withdrew his Archers upon which occasion Pembrook lost
the field and had 5000 men slain, and the Earl with his Brother and other ten
Gentlemen were taken and carried to Banbury, and there beheaded.

After this Victory some Commons, under the Leading of Robin of Ridsdale,
hasten to Grafton the King's Manor house, and there surprised Earl Rivers,
the Queens Father, and his Son John, and at Northamton beheaded then: and now
the King set forth with an Army himself, and pitched at Wolny four Miles from
Warwick* whose Guards were not so vigilant as they should have been (the King
being at that time animated with some hopes of peace) of which the Earl of
Warwick taking advantage, he entered the King's Camp Treacherously by night,
and took him prisoner when he never dreamt upon it; from whence they conveyed
him with easy journys by night, to the Castle of Midleham in Yorkshire, and
there left him to the keeping of George Nevil Archbishop of York* Warwicks
Brother: from whom the King not long after escaped and came to York* where the
Citizens received him lovingly, and so, raising an army, he past from thence to
London: not long after this Sir Robert Wells, Son to the Lord Wells, raised
30000 plebeans in Lincolnshire, and pitched near Stanford, whereupon the King
caused the Lord Wells, Sir Roberts Father, and Sir Thomas Dimmo^k his Kinsman
to be beheaded (which was against the King's Oath and promise to them) and then
marched to fight Sir Robert, who, with Sir Thomas Deland were taken Prisoners,
and Lincolnshire men cast of their Coats, and run away, whereupon that Battle
was called Loss-Coat field, there were slain that day about 10000. this News
made the Duke of Clarence and Earl of Warwick fly to sea, and casting Anchor
before the Town of Callis they were there denied Entrance by the Lord Vanclere,
who was the Earl of Warwicks Deputy there; for which good service he was by
King Edward made Captain of Callis, and Warwick discharged, as a Traitor: yet
nevertheless he was welcome to the French, where the Queen of King Henry at
that time was, with whom Warwick joined, whose Daughter at that time was
betrothed to Prince Edward King Henrys Son, and they all solicited for Forces,
which was granted; and the Earl, landing in England with a great Army,
proclaimed King Henry, to whose Aid great store of People flocked: the Lord
Fawconberge in the West, and the Earl of Pembrook in the North, doing the like.

And the Earl of Warwick now taking his March toward London, King Edward
Commanded his Lords to attend him in the War, but several of them disowned his
Mandates, which he perceiving, with some few Nobles in his Company, hasted
toward Nottingham, there to determine what was best to be done: but his Foes
greatly increasing, Bon-fires burning, Bells ringing, and all the people crying
up King Henry: for very fear King Edward with his Brother the Duke of
Gloucester took shipping at Lyn, and sailed into Flanders to Charles Duke of
Burgundy: and his Queen took Asylum at Westminster, where she was delivered of
Prince Edward, afterward King of England: and at this time several of the
Kings Friends took Sanctuary: Edward being fled, Warwick took King Henry out of
the Tower where he was prisoner, and Riding in Triumph through the Streets of
London, great were the Acclamations of the People, crying, God save King Henry.

And now a Parliament being called, Edward was declared Traitor, and his with
all his Adherent's Goods confiscated, and the Crown Intayled to the Heirs Males
of Henry's body, and for default thereof to the Heirs Males of George Duke of
Clarence, and finally all the Statutes made by King Edward were Abrogated.

But King Edward having gotten some small Forces, of about 12000 men of his
Brother in Law the Duke of Burgundy, he returned for England as a Subject* and
proclaimed King Henry, deluding the People, and so got to York, which he
(making them believe that he came but to look for his own Inheritance)
surprised and assumed to himself, leaving a Garrison in it; and from hence he
marched to Nothingham, and so to Leicester, and from thence to Coventry, where
Warwick lay but durst not Fight him, and so to Warwick* whither the Duke of
Clarence being come, he and Edward became Friends, and they marching to London
where the Geates were set open, every one crying, King Edward.

Here Henry was again taken and sent Prisoner to the Tower; the Earl of
Warwick* perceiving how things went, found it was no time to be idle, and
therefore resolved to win or loose all by Battle, and so marched toward
London, as far as Barnet, King Edward pitching his Tents at Gladmore near
Barnet to oppose him, having at this time King Henry with him, on Easter day
they joined Battle, and Fortune sided with King Edward, the Earl of Warwick and
Lord Montacute his Brother were slain, and three Lords on King Edward's side,
and in all on both sides about 10000, besides several Nobles, as the Duke of
Somerset: the Earls of Oxford and Exceter, etc. fled and took Sanctuary, and
afterward proved Broachers of new Plots.

And now King Edward rid Triumphantly to London, having King Henry still with
him: and about this very time landed Queen Margaret Henry's Wife, and her Son
Edward in England, but hearing of the loss at Barnet field, they took Asylum at
the Abbey of Ceerne, to which place the Lords that fled from Barnet repaired,
who comforted the Queens heart with future hopes: here forces repairing to them
they fly from place to place, and at length fought King Edward at Teuxsbury
where three or four of the Chief of them, as the Earl of Devonshire and
Somersets Brother were slain, and 3000 men besides: and Prince Edward heir to
Henry was taken, and several Lords taking Sanctuary at Tewxsbury, were
nevertheless haled thence and beheaded: and it is reported Prince Edward was
basely murdered by the Duke of Gloucester, and some of King Edwards Servants,
for speaking somewhat to boldly in the Kings Presence.

After this Queen Margaret was taken from Sanctuary, and carried Prisoner to
Worcester, and shortly after from thence to London; after this the Lord
Fawconberge, Son to the Earl of Kent, raised a confused Army of 17000 men, for
the Aid of King Henry, but he was quickly curbed and fled to Sea.

And shortly after King Henry was stabbed to the heart by Crookt-back Richard
Duke of Gloucester who, as is showed before was a main Instrument in Prince
Edward's Murder; it is recorded of King Henry that he had an honest mind, a
comely personage, and was more like a Saint than a King: now Queen Margaret
being ransomed by her Father, went beyond Seas to him and there languished away
her days.

And after this all Henrys Friends being either banished or put to Death,
Edward was then at quiet, and calling a Parliament, all King Henry's Laws were
Abrogated. And about this time the Duke of Burgandy sent to desire King
Edward's Assistance against King Lewis of France; so the King went in Person
with as great an Army as ever went out of England; but he did Burgundy little
good, for he concluded a Peace with France on condition that Jews should pay
King Edward 70000 Ducats for his Charges, and 50000 to be paid him yearly, and
that the Dauphin should marry Elizabeth his eldest Daughter, and so returned
for England.

About this time one John Huss suffered the flames, on Tower hill; for the
profession of a good Faith: and now, all things being settled, King Edward
followed his pleasure, and being on his Progress in Warwickshire, he chanced to
hunt in the Park of one Thomas Burdet Esquire and killing store of Deer, among the
rest a white Buck was killed, which Mr. Burdet hearing of, he wished the horns
in his belly that Councelled the King to kill him; for which words he was
beheaded at Tiburn.

And in those catching times a Jest of a Mercer in Cheapside, telling his Son
if he would ply his Book, he should be Heir to the Crown, (meaning his own
house that had that sign) cost him his Life.

After this the Duke of Clarence being falsely Attainted and Condemned by
Parliament, he was shortly after drowned in a Butt of Malmsy in the Tower.

And James King of Scots about this time sent into England to dare King Edward
to Fight, who sent an Army under the Command of his Brother the Duke of
Gloucester, whereupon the Scots fainted, and concluded Peace upon certain
conditions and yielded up Barwick into the hands of the English, out of whose
possession it had been about 21 years.

After this the French breaking the Articles of Peace, by the Dauphin's
Marriage to Lady Margaret of Austrich, Grand Child to the Emperor Frederick:
the King hereupon intended War against them, but was prevented by Death. Of
those four Concubines King Edward delighted in, Jane Shore was not the least
beloved by him.

This Edward the Fourth was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, he
was Son to Richard Plantaginet Duke of York by his Wife, Daughter to Richard
Nevil Earl of Salisbury. He began his Reign on Monday the fourth day of March,
Anno 1460. and Reigned 22 years 1, Month and 5 days, and was the 36 Sole
Monarch of England. He dyed of a Surfeit at Westminster on Friday the 9 day of
April Anno 1483, being the 40. year of his Age, and 23, of his Reign. His body
buried at Winsor, in the new Chapel, whose was foundation himself laid.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of King Edward the Fifth.

THis King was never Crowned, for at the very first, his Uncle, the Duke of
Gloucester, began to think of deposing him, drawing to his side the Duke of
Buckingham and Lord Hastings, they resolve forthwith to remove all the Queen's
Friends from the King, and to compass their Design, they persuade the Queen
that her son the King might come to London to his Coronation, accompanied only
with some few of his friends, which she (little suspecting what they aimed at)
easily condiscended unto: and now they proceed to the taking of their Prey,
imprisoning the Lord Rivers, the Queens Brother, at Northampton, they then
hasted after the King to Story-Stratford, whither he was gone on his way for
London: and here they made bold, in the King's presence, to arrest the Lord
Richard Woodvile, Sir Richard Gray, and Sir Thomas Wagham; and carried the King
and all his company back to Northampton, there displacing such of his Servants
as they thought fit; and putting others (whom they pleased) in their places.

Having thus far proceeded in their Design, the perfidious Duke of Gloucester
took upon himself the Order and Governance of the young King, and sent Lord
Richard Woodvile, and the other two Knights to Pontefract Castle in Yorkshire,
where in Conclusion they were beheaded. The Queen, having notice of these
proceedings, betook her self with her Children to Sanctuary in Westminster,
where shortly after the Archbishop of York then Lord Chancelour, delivered her
the Great Seal; but afterward considering of the Danger he might incur hereby,
sent for it again.

And now the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham coming to London with the King,
his Majesty was received with great Joy, and lodged in the Bishop's Palace,
where all the Lords were sworn to him, and there the subtle Duke of Gloucester
behaved himself so reverently toward the King, that the next Council he was
chosen Protector. At this Council the Archbishop of York was reproved for his
forwardness in giving up the great Seal to the Queen, and was deprived of the
Chancellorship, and Dr. Russel Bishop of Lincoln put in his place.

All things thus proceeding, according to the Protector's mind, he proceeds
further in his wicked Plot, making such a cunning Apology to the Council, for
getting the young Duke of York (the King's Brother) out of Sanctuary, that they
all (suspecting no harm) consented to him, and agreed that the Archbishop of
York should repair to the Queen to desire her delivery of the young Prince; and
if denied, then to bring him away by force: and after a long conference between
the Queen and Bishop, at length, with tears, she delivered the Child into their
hands, from whence he was carried into the Star Chamber to Gloucester, who took
him in his Arms with much seeming Joy, and gave him a Judas kiss.

So having got what he desired, he and Buckingham made Covenants between
themselves, that Gloucester should be King, and that Buckingham should have the
Earldom of Hartford, and great part of the King's Treasure; and to blind the
People of their intentions, several Lords from several parts of the Realm were
called, to devise things for Edward's Coronation, at whose appearance the
Protector and Buckingham withdrew into Bishops-gate Street, to contrive the
contrary.

Soon after several Lords repaired to the Tower, to consider further of the
Coronation, and the time drew so near that all things were in readiness for it,
but not the Protector comes in amongst them, seeming to be very merry, excusing
himself that he had been so long from them, and desired to withdraw a little:
and about 2 hours after he came in with a sower and frowning Countenance, and
took his place, and after a while he thus spoke:

What are they worthy of (says he) that compass and imagine my Destruction? to
whom Lord Hastings made Answer, That they were worthy to be punished as
Traitors: That is (quoth the Duke) yonder Sorceress my Brother's Wife (meaning
the Queen) and that other Witch of her Council Shoar's Wife: At these words the
Lords of the Council were much dismayed; and hereupon the Lord Hastings said,
Surely they would not do so; but the Protector answered, and said, I tell thee,
they have done so, and that I will make good on thy Body, Traitor: and so
giving a clap on the Table with his hand, in came as many men in Harness as the
Room would hold, and all the Lords were conveyed some to one Room and some to
another, and the Lord Hastings within three hours after was beheaded on a Log
before the Chapel Door in the Tower.

And now sending for several able Citizens into the Tower after Dinner, he
pretended to them that the Lord Hastings would have destroyed him and the Duke
of Buckingham, and so dismissed the Citizens, and caused Proclamation to be
made of the Lord Hastings Treason.

And not long after the Sheriffs of London were sent to seize of Jane Shoars
goods, which amounted to 300 marks, and she afterward was forced to do Penance
to her great shame: and now the Protector fought to strike whilst the Iron was
hot, and so sent for the Lord Mayor Edmund Shaw, and made him acquainted with
the Design, who in hopes of Honor promised to draw the Citizens that way: and
means, how to accomplish this Design, was to get some able Ministers to Preach
that King Edward the IV was a Bastard, and that all his Children were Bastards,
and so to set up the praises of the wicked Protector; thereby to seduce the
People who are naturally apt to listen to Novelties: and for this purpose Dr.
Shaw the Mayors Brother, and Dr. Pincker were the Men pitched upon, who
performed the Task very dexterously, and it is wonderful to think what
waverings and doubtings this caused amongst the People: but the two Doctors
felt God's Judgments for this Offense afterward.

These things being thus bruited abroad the Duke of Buckingham shortly after
repaired to Guild Hall in London, to which place the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commons of the City were come, where he made a Learned Apology to them for the
Election of Richard Protector to be King: the People here at were all mute and
answered not one word, but being asked thrice of their Opinions herein, and in
a manner threatened to it, at length they drew down into the Hall, and began to
whisper among themselves, at which instant a great Company of Apprentices and
the Dukes Servants prepared for the purpose, rushed in at their Backs, Crying
King Richard: and hereupon it was concluded to be the Cry of the whispering
Citizens, and so the Assembly being dismissed for this time, they were all
required to meet Buckingham the next day at Baynards Castle in Thames Street,
at which place the Protector then Lodged: and after the Assembly was come the
Duke of Buckingham made the Protector, with their (as he said) Election of him,
to be King: at which words Richard (as though he had been ignorant) looked very
strangely on them, and denied to accept of that (he so much coveted) the Crown:
but Buckingham, making himself the Mouth of the Assembly, told him, If he would
not accept of it, they would make choice of some other Noble man: whereupon the
Protector (seeming as it were to have that forced upon him he most desired)
accepted of it; promising more to the People then, in a quarter of an hour,
than he performed in all his Life. And so at this time Edward was deposed, and
he and his Brother, about two months after, were murdered in the Tower.

This Edward the V. (though never Crowned) was accounted King of England and
France, and Lord of Ireland: he was the eldest Son of King Edward the IV, by
Elizabeth his Queen, Daughter to Sir Richard Woodvile Earl of Rivers, by
Jaquilana his Wife, Duchess of Bedford. He began his Reign on Friday the 9 day
of April, Anno 1483, and reigned two months and thirteen days, and was the 37
sole Monarch of England. He with his younger Brother the Duke of York, were
smothered to Death in their Beds, in the Tower with Pillows, about the lattter
end of July, Anno 1483, being the first and last year of his Reign, and the 12
of his Age: Their Murderers were Miles Forest and John Deighton, Servants to
Sir James Tirrel, who was employed for this purpose by the Duke of Gloucester
their Uncle, then King of England: their Bodies were buried deep in the Ground
under a Stare-case in the Tower, and being afterward taken up again, none
knows where they were laid.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of King Richard the Third.

PResently after his Election, as is showed before, a Parliament was called,
and he thereby confirmed King, and the Crown intailed upon him and his Heirs,
and Prince Edward his Son made Heir apparent; but against his Coronation
(guilty Consciences accusing themselves) he being still in Fear, he sent for
five thousand Soldiers out of the North, under the Command of Robert of
Ridsdale, to come up to London: and before his Coronation (which was very
glorious) he set at Liberty the Archbishop of York and the Lord Stanly, but
continued Bishop Morton's Imprisonment, whereupon the University of Oxford
sending a Letter to the King in Bishop Mortons behalf, he was thereupon
delivered to the Duke of Buckingham, who sent him to his Castle of Brecknock in
Wales; and after the Coronation was over, the King took his Progress to
Gloucester: and from thence sent a Letter by one John Green to Sir Robert
Brackenbury Lieutenant of the Tower to destroy the two young Princes, who
detesting so foul a Murder, Sir James Tirrel a Man of small estate, (for what
will not Wealth and Honor prompt a man to) being promised great things by the
King, undertook the Murder, and for execution thereof, he employed two Bloody
Varlets who about Midnight smothered the two Innocent Princes with pillows and
the feather-bed. But God's Judgments attended these murderers: and the King's
mind ever after was filled with Horror and Fear, having his hand constantly on
his Dagger.

And now the Duke of Buckingham began to dislike the King, for he had denied
the Duke the Earldom of Hartford, which was promised by Richard before he got
the Crown: whereupon the Duke (of whose Intentions Bishop Morton was privy)
never came to the Court, but seeking how to depose him (whose main Instrument
he was in exalting) to bring this business to effect, a Marriage was propounded
by him, and solicited afterward by others, to the Queen and the Countess of
Richmond, between Henry Earl of Richmond, Heir to the House of Lancaster, and
Elizabeth the Queens eldest Daughter, Heir to the House of York, which match
was well resented by all parties, for hereby the Houses of Lancaster and York
being United, the Quarrel in which so much Blood had been spilt would be ended.

Upon this Account Bishop Morton went over into Flanders, and did the Earl of
Richmond (then in Banishment) very good Service; now the Earl having
intelligence of these Proceedings, forthwith disclosed it to the Duke of
Britain, who promised him his Assistance: whereupon he sent into England to the
Duke of Buckingham to make him acquainted with his preparation for England; but
in the mean time, the King heard some whisperings of this Plot, and therefore
sent for Buckingham to repair to the Court, who refused to go, immediately
preparing for War, against the King: at which news the Marquess of Dorset left
his Sanctuary and raised an Army in Yorkshire, Sir Edward Courtny another in
Devonshire and Cornwall, and Sir Richard Guilford one in Kent. The King roused
up at this news, took his march toward Shrewsbury from London, intending to
encounter the Duke of Buckingham (the head first,) who hearing hereof made out
to meet the King accompanied with a great number of Wild- Welshmen, and
intending to pass Severn to join with the Courtnies, he was prevented by the
River, it being then without the Bancks, so not being able to get to them, nor
they to him; his Welsh-men hereupon forsook him: whereupon the Duke fled to the
House of one Humphry Banister, formerly his Servant, and there in disguise
thought to have stayed, till he could either have raised new Forces or gotten
into Britain to the Earl of Richmond.

As soon as the other Nobles heard of the misfortune of the Duke, they all left
their Armies, and most of them fled beyond Sea to Henry; and the rest took
Sanctuary; and a Proclamation being made, with promise of a thousand pounds to
those that could take Buckingham; this Judas Banister (who had gotten his
Estate under the Duke) was taken with the Golden Bait, and preferring, with
Judas, the money before his Master's Life, went and discovered him to the
Sheriff of Shrewsbury, who took the Duke disguised, like a poor Countryman,
digging in a Grove near Banister's House, and carried him to Salisbury, where
the King then was; at which place without Arraignment or Judgment he was
beheaded; and several Nobles of the Duke's Faction received the like Doom at
London and elsewhere: But this greedy Banister missing the promised Reward of
the King, was rewarded with the Judgments of God, for not long after his
Children came to unfortunate Ends, and he himself had got his deserts in a
Halter, but that he escaped by his Clergy.

And now the King hearing of Earl Henry's preparation for England, he thereupon
called a Parliament, in which the Earl and all those that had fled to him were
Attainted, and their Goods Confiscated, and the King also to make himself more
secure at home, made Peace with the Scots, and sent great Store of Gold to the
Duke of Britain to betray Henry into his hands; but the Duke, at the Arrival of
the Ambassadors, being so sick that he could not be spoke withal, his Treasurer
allured with the Gold thought (though unknown to his Master) to have done the
Feat; but Earl Henry, having notice hereof by Bishop Morton then in Flanders,
he escaped into France, to whom repaired the Earl of Oxford out of the Castle
of Hammes, with Captain Blunt his Keeper and Sir John Fortescue Captain of
Callis, being all resolved to take their Fortune with Earl Henry.

And now the King seeing the Duke of Britain would not be taken with his Bait,
he begins to solicit the Queen for the delivery of her Daughters to his Custody
(thinking thereby to prevent the Match of the Earl Henry with the Lady
Elizabeth the eldest Daughter) and after many sugared and fair flattering
Speeches to the Queen, she at length resigned them up to him, and Queen Ann his
Wife, being purposely made away, as was supposed, he now begins to Court his
Neese Elizabeth (his own Brothers Daughter) intending to marry her; and to
lessen his expenses, he discharged his Navy, commanding the Welsh to keep the
shore, where he supposed Earl Henry intended to land; yet notwithstanding
shortly after he landed at Milford-Haven in Wales, with 2000 Britains, and
marching into England as far as Litchfield, several worthy men joined Forces
with him on his March, and the King then at Nottingham, receiving Intelligence
hereof, commanded all his Nobles to wait upon him with their Forces, and so
took his March to Leicester; and the next morning pitched his Tents in a plain,
called Reddmoor, near Bosworth, in Leicestershire, where he was encountered by
the Earl of Richmond, where after much Courage and Manhood shown, he was slain
with some of his Nobles, and about 4000 Soldiers, and after he was slain: he,
was taken and hung over an horse, all naked and besmeared with blood and dirt,
and so was carried to Leicester, and there lay two days without Burial, for a
spectacle to the people: and was afterward interred with great solemnity in
the Grey-Fryers in Leicester, and at the dissolution thereof, the stone-trough
wherein his Corpse were laid, was taken up, and is now a drinking trough for
Horses at a Common Inn in Leicester.

After the Fight was over, the Lord Stanly found the Crown among the spoils of
the field, and set it upon the Earl of Richmond's head in the field, at which
instant began the Reign of this new King; and so an End was put to the bloody
Contentions, between the Yorkists and Lancastrians: there were fought here in
England eleven Set-Battels, five in Henry the Sixth days, as St. Albans,
Blackheath, Northampton, Wakefield, and Towton: and five in Edward the Fourths
time; as, Hexham, Banbury, Lose-Coat-Field, Barnet field: and Tewxsbury, and
lastly Bosworth field, which put a period to the to the Reign of the
Plantaginets, and opened away for the Tewdors to succeed them: in these Civil
Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York were slain above one Hundred and
Sixteen Thousand Men.

This Richard the Third was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, he
was a younger Brother to King Edward the Fourth, and Son to Richard Duke of
York, who was Son to Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was Son to Edmund Duke of
York, who was Fifth Son to King Edward the Third: his Reign began on Friday the
22 day of June, Anno 1483. He reigned two years and two months, and was the 38
Sole Monarch of England, he was slain in the Battle at Bosworth field, as is
before showed, on Monday 22 day of August Anno 1885. and his Body was buried in
the Grey-Fryers at Leicester.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of King Henry the Seventh.

AFter the Battle at Bosworth field was over, the King hasted to London, where
with great Joy he was received, and shortly after Crowned; and Edward
Plantaginet Earl of Warwick imprisoned in the Tower. And now a Parliament being
called King Richard was attainted, and the Crown intayled on Henry and his
heirs for ever.

About this time was the Sweating-Sickness, of which Disease a world of people
dyed, a new Disease never known in England before.

And now the King dissolving the Parliament, in January after he married the
Lady Elizabeth eldest Daughter to King Edward the Fourth, who in September
after was brought to Bed of Prince Arthur; and not long before the King's
Marriage was Wheat sold for three shillings per Bushel, and Bay Salt the same
price: and the Cross in Cheapside was new builded.

And now the King taking his Progress to York, to gain the Love of his Northern
Subjects, the Lord Lovel with some others that had taken Sanctuary after
Bosworth Field, raised forces, thinking to surprise the King, but he with 3000
men, under the Conduct of the Duke of Bedford, sent either to pardon or Fight
them: and, the Duke proffering pardon, the Lord Lovel fled by night, and the
multitude yielded without stroke: and shortly after Sir Humphry Stafford
another Rebel suffered at Tyburn.

And not long after a new Tumult began upon the Report of one Richard Simon a
Priest, who broached abroad, that one Lambert Symnell Scholar of his, was heir
to Edward Duke of Clarence (who was cast into Prison a little before by Henry)
and so sailing with him into Ireland, he there prevailed so much among the
Peers, (especialy with Thomas Fitz-Girald Lord Chancellor) that at Dublin he was
Proclaimed and Crowned King: and there obtaining some help, he returned for
England, to whom those Lords that favored the Cause of the Plant aginets
joined themselves, although they knew the Fraud, among whom the Earl of Lincoln
was chief, who with the Lord Lovel, Sir Thomas Broughton, Colonel Swart and
Mawrice Fitz Thomas, near a little Village, about three Miles for Newark called
Stoak, were all slain by the Kings Army, and 4000 Common Soldiers besides: and
the Counterfeit Symnel, with the lewd Contriver of this wicked Stratagem, Simon
the Priest, were both taken; and Symnel (confessing the business to be forced
on him) was made one of the King's Falkoners, and the Priest Simon was committed
to a dungeon and perpetual shackles.

And shortly after this Battle the King sent Richard Fox Bishop of Exceter, and
Sir Richard Edgecomb Ambassadors to the King of Scots, where they, to the
King's great Satisfaction, concluded a seven years Truce.

About this time the Duke of Britain sent to the King for his Assistance
against France, but he unwilling to disoblige either party, having been
formerly beholden to both) sought a reconciliation, making himself Umpire
between them, to which the French seemed to listen; but in the mean time
prepared for War; and at St. Albans gave the Britains a great Overthrow, and
slew the Lord Woodvile, and all or most of his men, who was gone to the Duke's
aid, without King Henry's knowledge; hereupon the King prepared to lend his
Assisting hand to the Britains, but their Duke in the mean time died, which put
an end to the business.

And now began some stirs in Yorkshire, where the Earl of Northumberland was
slain by the Commons, at a place called Cock-Leg near Thirske, at the
inticement of one John Chambers, for demanding the Subsidy granted by
Parliament to the King: and the Plebeans afterward made head under the Command
of Sir John Egrimont, but the King sending an Army against them, under the
Command of Thomas Lord Howard Earl of Surry, they were quickly dissipated, and
the Ringleadears shortly after received death, the due Reward for such Rebels:
but Sr. John Egrimont escaped to Margaret Duchess of Britain, the common
Encorager and Receiver of all King Henry's Enemies.

About this time the Scots rose in Rebellion against James the Third their
King, and fought the Army at Bannocks-Burn, where, in a Mill in the same field,
he was murdered.

After this, King Henry began to prepare for War against France, at the Request
of Maximilian the Emperor, whom they had basely abused, in not only divorsing
his Daughter Margaret from the French King, but also in making Ann, the Heir of
the Dukedom of Britain, his Wife, who had been betrothed to the said Emperor by
his Ambassadors; and the King taking his Voyage for France, landed at Callis,
and marched on as far as Bulloigne, and finding the Emperor unprepared, upon
whose Accounts he had undertaken that War; he thereupon made Peace with France,
and had the sum of 186250 li. granted yearly, which was duly pay d during his
time and his Son's, until the debt was run out.

After this Voyage, Margaret the Duchess of Burgumdy, the King's grand Enemy,
obtruded upon the English one Peterkin or Parkin Walbeck, by the name of
Richard Plant aginet, Second Son of Edward the Fourth, and many of the Nobility
out of Innovation rather than Love (knowing it to be a Deceit of the Duchess,)
sided with him, and the Lord Stanly amongst the rest did supply him with Money,
for which Cause shortly after he lost his Head, although formerly he had been a
main Instrument in advancing the King to the Crown.

About this time Wheat was sold for six pence per Bushel, and Bay Salt at three
pence half penny, Nantwich salt six pence per Bushel, white Herring six shilling
per Barrel, red Herring three shilling per Cade, Sprats six pence per Cade, and
Gascoign wine six pound per Tun.

And now this Psendo- Richard was discovered to the King to be but Perkin
Warbeck, by one Sir Robert Clifford a great actor for Perkin beyound Sea; but
afterward won to the King with Gold: for Perkin's sake all the Flemmings were
banished the Realm, and several of his Accomplices here, discovered by the said
Sir Robert Clifford, were put to death: And now Perkin coming on Shore in Kent,
expecting a great Relief, receiving in lieu thereof great distress, for being
encountered by the Mayor of Sandwich and the Kentish men, five of his Chief
Captains, and 164 of others were taken, and shortly after executed, whereupon
he fled back into Flanders, and from thence fled into Ireland, but expecting,
little help from so poor a Nation, at last he betook himself into Scotland, and
the King of Scots being taken with Courtly carriage believed his Reports, and
Married him to Catharine Gourden the Earl of Huntly's Daughter, and then the
King in Person, with a great number of Scots came with him against the Marches
of England, doing great harm, and Proclaiming much favor and immunity to such
as would join with Perkin, and ^ 1000 pounds to such as could take King Henry:
but all this working no Impression upon the Peoples minds: the Scottish King
thereupon returned into Scotland, esteeming the less of his new Cozen, because
none would rise in his behalf.

Upon this Account a Subsidy of 120 thousand pound was granted to the King for
maintenance of the War against Scotland, and the Lord Dawbnye sent General, but
on his March was called back to suppress some Cornish Rebels, who withstood
the Collectors* of the Subsidy, under the Command of one Thomas Flemmock a
Lawyer, and Michael Joseph a Blacksmith; these marching for Kent, expecting
more Aid, at Well the Lord Awdly joined with them, who, together with the other
two Leaders, were taken at Black Heath, in Kent, and their Forces Routed, three
hundred being slain and 1500 taken Prisoners, and afterward the Lord Awdly was
beheaded, at the other two hanged and quartered at Tyburn for their Rebellion.

During these Stirs the King sent the Lord Howard, Earl of Surry to defend the
parts in the North aganst the Scots, who were then doing great Damage in the
Borders, but before he got thither the Scots withdrew; yet notwithstanding he
marched into Scotland, and after some Booty taken, he returned again for a time.

And now Hialus the Spanish Ambassador coming into Scotland he concluded a
Peace between the two Kings.

And about this time Anno 1497, fell Hailstones at St. Needs in Bedfordshire
of eighteen Inches about; now (upon the Conclusion of the Peace aforesaid)
Perkin's main Hope being gone, his last Refuge were the Cornish men, of whom he
had a great Army, but the King marching against him, and he not daring to trust
to his Cornish followers, he thereupon fled by night and took Asylum at Bewdly,
which when his Followers perceived, they all yielded themselves to the King's
Mercy.

And not long after Perkin their Leader did the like, and was carried to
London, and conveved through the Streets on horseback for People to gaze at;
and afterward, attempting to escape from his Guard, he was pursued and
retaken, and set in the Stocks upon a Scaflold a whole day before
Westminster Hall, and another day in Cheap Side in London, and after sent
Prisoner to the Tower.

About this time one Ralph Wilford, a Shoo-makers Son of London was hanged for
assuming unto himself the name of Edward Earl of Warwick, who was then close
Prisoner in the Tower; and not long after Perkin was hanged at Tyburn, and
Edward Plantaginet the Earl of Warwick beheaded for seeking to make their
escape out of the Tower: this Earl was Son to George Duke of Clarence, who was
Brother to King Edward the Fourth, and was the last Heir of the Plantaginets.

Shortly after this there happened such a devouring Plague, that the King and
Queen left London and fled to Callis in France: and after the Plague abated
they returned again; about which time the Lady Catherine of Spain arrived in
England, and was presently after married to Prince Arthur, who enjoyed her Bed
not long, for about five months after, being then in Wales he was cut off by
Death; an and the next year after, James the IV King of Scotland married the
Lady Margaret the King's eldest Daughter; and not long after the Queen died,
and Henry the King's second Son, was made Prince of Wales, and by the Pope's
Indulgence, took to Wife the Lady Catherine of Spain, his Brother Arthur's
Widow.

And now the Earl of Suffolk being fled, and intending a Rebellion, certain of
his Adherents being discovered, were thereupon taken, and suffered Death; as
Courtney Earl of Devonshire the King's Brother in Law, William de la Pool
Brother to the Earl of Suffolk, Sir James Tirrel (King Richard's Wicked
Instrument in the Murder of Edward the V. and his Brother) and Sir John
Windham and others; all these with the Earl and the rest of his Faction, were
by Authority of the Pope's Bull, Proclaimed at Paul's Cross to be accursed.

After this the Earl fled to Philip Duke of Austria, who afterward by the
Right of his Wife coming to be King of Spain, as he was on his Voyage thither
was by Tempest driven into England, where he was Royally entertained by King
Henry: and at their parting it was agreed between them, that the Earl of
Suffolk should be delivered up to King Henry, upon Condition that no Violence
should be offered to his Person, and so he was only imprisoned; but in Henry
the Eighth's time lost his Head.

Now the King having dissipated all his Enemies, he began to extort Money from
his Subjects, two Lawyers Empson and Dudly being the chief Instrument herein,
by calling People in question for the breach of old moth-eaten Penal Statutes;
but the King's Death shortly after ensuing. These beginning Oppressions were
thereby also brought to a Period, before they attained to that maturity, which
was feared by some, but wished for by others, especially by Empson and Dudly.

During this King's Reign, there were about some nine Persons, Men and Women
that suffered the Flames, for the Profession of a good Faith; besides several
others that did Penance, with a Faggot on their Backs, and some were burnt in
the Cheek with a hot Iron.

This Henry the Seventh was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland: he
was son to Edmund Tewdor Earl of Richmond, by Margaret his Wife, Daughter and
Heir to John Beaufort Duke of Sommerset, Grand Child to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster: he began his Reign on Monday, the 22 day of August, Anno 1485, and
reigned 23 years and 8 months: He was the 39 Sole Monarch of England, he dyed
on Sunday the 22 day of April Anno 1508, being in the 24 year of his Reign, and
about the 52 of his Age; and was buried at Weminster, in that famous Chapel of
his own founding.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of King Henry the Eight.

THis King Henry was Crowned at Westminster by William Warham Archbishop of
Canterbury, and shortly after Empson and Dudly were attainted by Parliament,
for their Oppressions in Henry the Seventh's time, and were beheaded on Tower
hill: and now the King, at the Instigation of Pope Julius the Second, sent into
France to demand the Duchess Normandy, Guyen, Anjou, and Main, and being
denied them, he hereupon joined Amity with Maximilian the Emperor, Ferdinand
King of Spain, and some other Princes, and then sailed for France, where he
took Terwin ane Tournay by Siege, and then, Winter approaching, he returned for
England, first making Thomas Wolsey Bishop of Tournay, and afterward of
Lincoln, York, Winchester, Bath, Worcester, Hereford.

Now during the Siege at Terwin the Scots under the Command of their King James
the Fourth ( Henry's Brother in Law) entered the Borders of England, pretending
Truce broken (by the killing of Andrew Barton the Scotch Pirate) against whom
the Lord Howard Earl of Sury Lord Lieutenant of the North went with an Army, to
whom joined his Son, the Lord Admiral, and these at Flodden Field fought the
Scots, and gave them a great Overthrow, killing the King, three Bishops, two
Abbots, twelve Earls, and seventeen Lords and Knights, besides a great number
of Gentlemen, and about 8000 Soldiers, and almost as many taken prisoners.

About this time a peace was concluded on between the English and French, and
Lewis the King of France was to marry Lady Mary King Henry's Sister, which
shortly after he did, and within a quarter of a year after dyed: and she was
married afterward at Callis to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, upon her
return for England; her Dowry in France was 30000, Crowns yearly for her Life,
and 120000 Crowns yearly for five years to the King her Brother.

About this time Wolsey had a Cardinals Cap sent from Pope Leo, and was
preferred by the King to the place of Lord Chancellor.

Anno 1517. The Thames was so hard frozen that Men with Horses and Carts might
pass betwixt Lambeth and Westminster: and this same year was the fifth Lattern
Council held, being the seventeenth General Council, Julius the second, and Leo
the ten being Popes.

And now Strangers growing insolent in London, a great Tumult thereupon, under
the Conduct of one John Lincoln did rise on May Eve, for which Uproar he was
hanged, and 400 Boys and 11 Women were led through the City to Westminster
with halters about their Necks in their Shirts, but were pardoned by the King.
And the new King of France paying to King Henry 600000 Crowns in twelve years,
and under some other certain Conditions, had Tournay redelivered to him, and
Peace was Concluded, although Charles the Emperor came in person into England
to diswade the King from it; but this peace continued not long; for the French
breaking Truce, as was pretended, the King thereupon procured several Princes
to take the Emperor's part against France, and prepared himself for the War,
causing a general Muster to be made of all able men from 16 years and upwards,
in every Hamlet, Villiage, Borough, City and Shire in England, and in the mean
time the Emperor coming into England again, he then agreed to stay for and to
take Lady Mary King Henry's Daughter, to Wife, and then he returned, having for
his Conduct the Earl of Surry Lord Admiral, who at that time wan Morlois; and
shortly after Returning to France again, won and burnt several Towns, and then
returned to England with great Booty: and during these proceedings, the Earl of
Shrewsbury went against the Duke of Albany, who was then made Governor of
Scotland, and a Truce was concluded on, but the Lord Admiral after his Return
from France, being made Lord Lieutenant of the North, notwithstanding the said
Truce, entered Scotland doing great harm, and returned with great Booty.

Upon the Account of these Wars a Parliament being called, by Wolsey's
procurement, the half of all Spiritual Livings were granted to the King for
five years, and the Tenth part of temporal Substance: and about this time
Christian King of Denmark landed in England with his Queen, and after 22 days
Royal Entertainment, he Returned to Flanders, where he remained as a banished
man.

And now the King sent an Army under the Command of Charles Brandon Duke
Suffolk into France: who after severral places won, and Winter approaching,
returned honorably for England, but the Duke of Albany and the Lord Lieutenant
of the North being still at variance, at the Mediation of Margaret Queen of
Scotland King Henrys Sister, together with Wolseys working with the King, at
length Peace was concluded for a time both with Scotland and France: after this
several Commotions rose amongst the Commons about the payment of the Subside,
which when the King heard, he pardoned the Offenders, and remitted the payment
of the Subsidy: and now Wolsey began to alienate the King's heart from the
Emperor, and caused him to withold Pay from the Duke of Burbon, which was
the cause of the French King's Captivity, of Burbon's March to Rome, where he
entered the City in one day, and caused Pope Clement, and 23 Cardinals to take
the Castle of Angelo for their Refuge, where they were (maugre all the pushes
of the Pope's Leaden Bulls, and Curses with Bell Book and Candlelight)
besieged six Months: for which offense the Duke of Burbon, in the Parliament
of France, was condemned of Treason.

And during these Broils at Rome, there arose great Troubles in Ireland, but
they were quickly laid again by Thomas Lord Howard Earl of Surry Lord
Lieutennant of that Kingdom, who being recalled into England upon some other
Service, the Earl of Oss^ry was made Deputy: and shortly after, being
displaced, Kilder succeeded him, against whom Wolsey was a strong Enemy, he
thereby gained the King's displeasure for his malepartness therein.

The year 1527 fell such abundance of Rain in November, December and January
that the Corn fields, Pastures, and Cattle were thereby destroyed: then was it
dry till the 12 of April, and then Rain again every day and night till the 3 of
June following, which caused such a Famine in London and all England over, that
many dyed for want of Succor.

And now the King begins to charge the Emperor with a promise of Marriage to
Lady Mary (afterward our Queen Mary) but her Legitimation was by him much
questioned, as being begotten on his Brother Arthur's Wife: hereupon the King
grew into dislike of his Marriage, and disclaimed his Contract, it being the
Opinion of some six Foreign Universities to be an unlawful Marriage; and for
this cause Cardinal Campius came into England, with whom was joined Cardinal
Wolsey in Commission, with power to erect a Court to hear the King's Cause
pleaded, which accordingly was done; and when Sentence of Divorcement should
have been (according to the King's expectation) pronounced, Campius then caused
Proclamation to be made, and adjourned the Court, and referred the Sentence to
the Pope.

The King highly displeased hereat sent Dr. Cranmer and some others to the Pope
to dispute the unlawfulness of the Marriage, who gave Cornelius Agrippa (the
grand Rabbi in those days) such Satisfaction in this point, so that none of the
Pope's Disputants durst encounter the Doctor about it, whereupon, a Parliament
being called by the King, all persons were forbidden to appeal, or make payment
to Rome: and further, the King's Marriage with the Lady Catherine of Spain, by
the said Parliament was Dissolved.

Upon these proceedings in England, the Pope caused his Curse to be set up at
Dunkirk in Flanders against the King, and pronounced the Marriage Lawful, but
the King regarded it not; for hereby the Pope lost his Supremancy in England,
and Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas Moore their Heads for standing for it.

And now the King married the Lady Ann Bullin Daughter to Viscount Rochford,
which Lady was accounted a Lutheran; and Cardinal Wolsey for his dislike of
this Marriage, and Adjourning of the Court, as is before showed; fell into the
Kings Displeasure; and several Articles being exhibited against him in
Parliament, as that he used to write in his Letters, I and my King, and had
caused the Cardinals Cap to be stamped on the Kings Coin, and several other
grand Offenses. hereupon he lost all his Dignities; and his House and Furniture
were seized, and the Earl of Northumberland was sent to bring him up to answer
his Charge, who took him at Cawood Castle, about seven miles from York; and as
he was on his Journey to London, at Leicester Abbey, he ended his days, by
taking an over much quantity of an Italian Confection, for breaking Wind from
his Stomach, as Report went: He is said to have suppressed 40 Monasterys for
the raising his two Colleges in Oxford and Ipswich, and to have laid by 12
Barrels full of Gold and Silver to serve the Pope in his Wars.

About this time Elizabeth Barton, called the holy Maid of Kent, was reported
by those who feared the Downfall of Babel, to have Revelations from Heaven;
among which one was, That if the King proceeded in his Second Marriage, he
should not Reign a Month to an end, but the Mouth of this Oracle was quickly
stopped, for herself with seven of her Disciples were all execued at Tyburn for
Treason.

And now the Pope seeing his Revenue here in England likely to go to wrack*
began to write and stir up James the Fifth King of Scots against King Henry his
Uncle, promising the Crown of England to those that could win it.

About this time Queen Ann was delivered of the Princess Elizabeth, afterward
Queen of England, and the next year after of a Dead Child: and not long after
she was sent to the Tower, and falsely accused of Adultery and Incest, for
which she with her Brother the Lord Rochford, and Norris, Weston, and Brierton,
gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, together with one Marks* all lost their Heads:
and the next day after Queen Ann's Death, the King married the Lady Jane Seymer.

And now began the Lord Cromwells rising, who by birth was a Black Smyth's Son,
and had been Cardinal Wolsey's Soliciter, he was first made Master of the
King's Jewel-house, Baron of Oakham in Rutlandshire, then Knight of the Garter,
after that Earl of Essex, and then Lord high Chamberlain, and lastly the King's
Vicar general: he was the Sole cause of the demolishing of Monasteryes, and the
pulling down of Images, Idols and Shrines, in the Churches of England: but this
Pillar of the Church was undermined by Stephen Gardener (that Murderer of
Protestants in Queen Mary's days) and so by his means being brought into
Dislike with the King, at length he was beheaded.

Now several Commotions arose in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, occasioned by the
demolishing of Abbys; the Commons being incited thereto by the Monks who had
lost their Roast-meat and took ill with Courser Fair: but after several
propositions made by the Commons to the King, and Answers thereunto, having
Pardon granted, they threw down their Arms, but several of the Monks rising
again with several persons of Quality; as the Lord Darcy, Lord Hussye, Sir
Robert Constable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Francis Biggot, Sir Stephen Hambleton,
Sir John Bulmer the Abbot of Fountains, Abbot of Gervaulx, Abbot of Rivax, and
Prior of Burlington, were afterward taken and suffered Death: and now the King
having been two years a Widower, since the death of Queen Jane (who dyed in
Childbed of Edward the Sixth, afterward King) he was married to the Lady Ann
of Cleve, but about half a year after, through Gardiner's false Suguestions,
was by Parliament divorsed from her; and not long after he Married Catherine
Howard Daughter to Edward Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk: but about 6
Months after her Marriage, she was condemned of Adultery and lost her Head at
Tower Hill, and with her the Lady Jane Rochford and several others that year,
as Margaret the Countess of Salisbury, Lord Gray, Lord Dacres, Francis Dereham
and Thomas Culpeper; and now the King married the Lady Katherin Parr Wife to
the Lord Lattimer.

And about this time it was enacted by Parliament to be high Treason, either to
deny the Oath of the King's Supremacy, or to acknowledge the Pope, and though by
this the Discipline of the Church was altered, yet little of Doctrine was
changed, for it was made heresy and death to deny any of the Six Articles
following: as,

1. That after the speaking of the words of Consecration by the Priest, the
Real and Natural Body and Blood of Christ, as he was Conceived and Crucified,
was in the Sacrament and no other substance. 2. That the Communion in both
kinds is not necessary to Salvation. 3. That Priests may not marry. 4. That
Vows of Chastity ought to be observed, by the Laws of God. 5. That private
Masses ought to be continued, and 6. That Auricular Confession is necessary and
expedient to be retained in the Church of God.
Upon the denial of these six Articles several People suffered the Flames.

Anno 1541. The King took upon him the Title of King of Ireland: and the same
year sent an Army against the Scots, under the Command of the Duke of Norfolk,
who when he came to Fight the Scots they willingly lost the day, and suffered
themselves to be taken Prisoners, out of disdain to their Leader Oliver St.
Clear; for grief whereof their King James the fifth dyed, there was at this
time 21 men of Account taken Prisoners and committed to the Tower of London,
but shortly after these Prisoners were released again, and a Peace for 10 years
concluded, upon the promise of a Marriage with the Lady Mary King James his
only Child, and Prince Edward, Henry's Son and Heir, afterward King, by the
name of Edward the sixth: but the Pope and the French diswading the Scots from
this Marriage, King Henry thereupon made War against both Nations, and took
Bulloyn in France, for the Redemption whereof and conclution of Peace, the
French were to pay him in Eight years space 800000 Crowns: and during these
proceedings in France, the King's Army did much harm to the Scots by burning
Edenbrough, and wasting the Country for 7 Miles round about; but all these
stirs were ended by King Henry's Death which not long after ensued.

The year 1545. The 27 of April, one William Foxly Pot-maker for the Mint, fell
a sleep in the Tower of London, and slept 14 days and 15 nights, and could not
by any means be awakned, and when he did awake, seemed in all things as if he
had slept but one Night.

And this same year began the Council of Trent, which was continued till Anno
1563. Paul the III. Julius the III. and Pio the IV. being Popes: this was the
18 General Council.

The King, about the 13 of his Reign, writ a Book against Martin Luther, and
sent it to the Pope, for which he had the Tittle given of Defender of the Faith
(which his Successors retain to this day.) But not long after falling to
variance with the Pope (as is showed before) he writ another Book against the
Pope: during this Kings Reign several persons, to the number of 81, suffered
the Flames for the Profession of their Faith: and before Luthers time several
persons did the like: for in Henry the IV time suffered 3: in Henry V time
about 40 suffered: besides several others grivously persecuted. 8 in Henry VI
time, and above 100 whipped and persecuted: one in Edward the fourth's time:
and about some 9 in Henry the VII. time.

Her after follows a true and perfect Cattalogue of the number of all the
Religigious houses, as Monasterys, Prioryes Fryorys Nunnerys, Colleges and
Hospitals in every County of England, which were demolished in this Kings
Reign, with their valluation, as they were presented to the King by the
Commissioners at the time of their Suppression.

Counties Monasteries Priories Friories Nunneries Colleges Hospitals Pounds
Shillings Pence Halfpence Bark-shire 05 02 01 03 03 02 06368 12 08 00
Bedfordshire 01 06 03 04 03 03 03054 10 03 00 Buckinghamshire 01 01 01 02 01 00
00730 01 11 01 Cambridg-shire 09 14 04 07 01 04 05002 11 10 01 Cheshire 05 01
03 02 03 01 01447 02 00 01 Cornwall 11 03 01 00 02 00 01287 00 06 01 Cumberland
04 04 01 02 22 00 02549 12 09 00 Derbyshire 08 02 00 03 03 01 01055 12 11 01
Devonshire 14 10 01 02 01 01 05394 02 06 00 Dorcetshire 07 02 02 03 03 01 04520
06 09 90 Durham 04 00 00 01 10 04 02696 15 00 00 Essex 13 14 03 02 02 04 07013
08 06 00 Gloucestershire 11 03 01 02 01 05 07302 05 10 01 Hamshire 08 10 06 03
03 04 07218 17 05 00 Herefordshire 02 06 01 02 00 01 00522 04 05 00
Hartfordshire 02 12 03 05 02 03 04076 03 10 00 Huntingtonshire 02 04 00 02 08
01 02743 05 06 01 Kent 09 13 06 09 01 13 08840 18 07 01 Lancashire 05 05 00 00
06 00 02288 19 08 01 Leicestershire 09 06 00 03 04 05 04833 11 09 01
Lincolnshire 32 24 05 06 05 03 11664 12 00 01 London 03 03 00 04 02 11 12595 08
00 00 Middlesex 03 03 05 02 09 05 03550 00 08 00 Norfolk 12 20 16 05 09 04
06128 07 03 00 Northampton 06 06 04 07 07 03 04731 15 06 00 Nottinghamshire 03
06 02 01 04 03 02763 07 07 01 Northumberland 02 02 04 03 03 01 01252 15 10 00
Oxfordshire 07 07 05 04 01 03 03078 01 06 00 Rutlandshire 00 01 00 00 00 01
00043 13 04 00 Shropshire 08 05 06 00 03 02 02757 14 06 01 Staffordshire 04 10
02 05 08 03 01902 17 03 01 Somersetshire 10 08 02 03 05 06 09324 17 02 00
Suffolk 13 15 03 03 04 01 05390 07 09 00 Surry 03 04 03 00 01 01 04883 14 00 01
Sussex 08 09 03 05 03 04 03355 10 07 00 Warwickshire 04 10 03 06 06 04 03839
03 00 00 Wiltshire 03 13 04 04 04 08 04044 17 01 01 Westmerland 01 00 01 00 00
00 00166 10 06 00 Worcestershire 07 04 02 02 02 02 04896 01 08 00 Yorkshire 33
10 11 23 15 10 14611 03 05 00 Asaph Diocese 04 00 00 01 00 01 00808 05 05 00
Banger Diocese 05 01 03 00 02 00 00298 18 02 00 David Diocese 06 05 02 00 07 00
01548 03 07 00 Landaff Diocese 06 06 03 01 01 00 00925 12 00 00 Total 183707 13
00 00

Now although the Revenues of these Religious places, at the Dissolutions
thereof did amount to one hundred eighty three thousand seven hundred and seven
pounds and thirteen shillings per annum, yet the King was not much enriched
thereby, most of the said Lands being either given away by the King, or sold
off at small Rates, and made to hold of some of the King's Mannours (most of
them of East-Greenwich) by small and inconsiderable Rents. The number of
Monasteries suppressed in England and Wales were 313, Priories 290, Frieries
122, Nunneries 142, Colleges 152, and Hospitals, 129: in all 1148.

This Henry the Eight was King of England, France and Ireland: he was Second
Son of King Henry the Seventh by Elizabeth his Queen, eldest Daughter to King
Edward the Fourth: His Reign began on Sunday the 22 day of April, Anno 1509, He
reigned 37 years, 9 months and 6 days, and was the 40 sole Monarch of England.
He died on Thursday the 28 day of January, Anno 1546, being in the 38 year of
his Reign, and 56 of his Age, his body was buried in the Chapel at Windsor.

CHAP. XXX.
Of King Edward the Sixth.

HE was Crowned at Westminster, being about nine years old, and at his first
entrance took Care to settle Soul-saving Ministers among his Subjects; and as
He took care for the Church, so the Lord Seymer Duke of Somerset (the King's
Uncle) was as busy in managing the State Affairs of the Realm; and thereupon
went into Scotland to prosecute the Marriage with the Lady Mary Queen of
Scotland, and at Barwick declaring his Intentions, the Governor of Scotland
thereupon sent the Fire-Cross through the Realm, requiring all Persons of
ability of body to meet at Muskelbrough, where they were fought by the English,
and received a great Overthrow, 9 of their Nobles and about 10000 of their
Soldiers being slain: and whilst these things were in Action the Lady Mary was
conveyed into France, there to be married to the Dauphin.

And now the Duke of Somerset, Protector of England during his Nephews
Minority, returning from Scotland, a Parliament was then called, wherein it was
Enacted that the Statute of the 6 Articles in Henry the Eights time, and those
of Richard the Second, and Henry the Fifth for suppression of the Scriptures in
English should be all repealed; and Images all thrown out of the Churches
throughout the Realm, and the Church Service to be read in English, and the
Sacrament exhibited in both kinds; and the other old Ceremonies were abolished;
and all those that made opposition were either imprisoned, or deprived of their
places. Hereupon Tumults arose in Devonshire and Cornwall doing much harm,
especially to the City of Exceter, which City for its Loyalty had the Manor
of Exilond, not after, bestowed upon it by the King, and Pardon was granted to
the Rebels; yet notwithstanding they persisted in their Rebellion; and 4 times
being fought by the Lord Russel, and each time worsted, yet they still made
head again, till at length their Ringleaders were taken and Executed.

At this time also the Mayor of Bodmyn was Hanged, and a Millers Man who took
upon him his Master's name and cause, when seeing himself likely to suffer for
it, thencryedout, That he was but the Miller's Man: well, said Sir Anthony
Kingston, Thou can never do thy Master better Service than to hang for him.

No sooner were these Troubles quelled, but one Robert Ket moved about 20000
Commons in Norfolk to a Rebellion, taking the City of Norwich, in which place
the Lord Dudly shortly after caused 60 of them to be executed, and afterward
overthrew their Army, and took Ket their Leader, who was hanged up in Chains
upon the Top of the Castle of Norwich, and 9 of his Companions hanged in the
Oak of Reformation, a Tree in which Ket used to sit as Judge to determine of
their intended Reformation and Proceedings: the great occasion of these
Commotions in several Counties in England was against Enclosures, and taking up
of wast Grounds, which was then coming into Fashion, for they disparked a great
many Parks and other enclosed Grounds, whereupon several of them were slain in
the Quarrel, the Plebeans also at Seymer near Scarborough in Yorkshire, rose
also under the Conduct one William Ombler a Yeoman there, Thomas Dale a Parish
Clerk, and one Stephenson the Post, but the King sending down his Pardon, the
Commons left their Leader, to be led to York where they were Executed.

But now began greater Sorrows, for the King's two Uncles the Lord Protector
and Lord Admiral falling at Variance about their Wives, who should take place,
it proved unlucky to them both, for the Lord Admiral was afterward attainted
of some Treasonable Articles (as was supposed by his Brother the Protector's
procurement) and was beheaded at Tower Hill; and not many years after the
Protector himself (being fallen into dislike among the Lords) at the same place
received the same Doom: and during these unhappy proceedings, the English were
quite driven out of Scotland, and the French had sought to recover Bulloin, but
they were so bravely withstood by valor of one Carter an English Soldier, that
15 Wagons went loaded away with their slain: and they afterward, attempting
the Islands of Gernsie and Jersie, they were there also forced to desist, with
the loss of a thousand men.

And now the King's Death began to approach, he having taken the Death of the
Protector his Uncle to Heart; and before he died he ordained the Lady Jane,
Daughter to Henry Duke of Suffolk lately married to Guilford Lord Dudly to
succeed him in the Kingdom, Notwithstanding the Statute made for the Succession
of his Fathers Children.

Anno 1552, about 7 miles from Oxford at a Town called Middleton, a Woman
brought forth a Child which had two perfect Bodies from the Navel upwards,
which were so conjoined together at the Navel, that when they were laid out at
length, one Head and Body was East, and the other West, and the Legs of both
the Bodies were joined together in the midst, they were Female Children and
lived 18 days.

This Edward the Sixth was King of England, France and Ireland: he was the only
Son of King Henry the Eight, by Jane his Queen, Daughter to John Seimer Knight:
He began his Reign on Thursday the 28 day of January, Anno 1546: he reigned 6
years, 5 months, and 8 days: and was the 41 sole Monarch of England. He died of
a Consumption of the Lungs on Thursday the 6 day of July, Anno 1553, being in
the 7 year of his Reign, and about the 16 of his Age, his Body was buried at
Westminster.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Queen Mary.

AFter the Death of King Edward, the Lords of the Council caused Lady Jane
Guilford to be Proclaimed Queen: Lady Mary hearing of these proceedings writ to
the Lords to acquaint them with her Title to the Crown; but they regarded it
not, alleging the divorce of her Mother; hereupon she betook her self to
Fremingham Castle, to which place the Suffolk men repaired, and promised their
Aid; Provided, she would not alter the Religion Established in her Brother's
days, to which Request she willingly condescended, but afterward upon their
Petition to her (after she had got the power in her own hands) for performance
of her Promise, she dismissed them with rough Answers.

And now several men of Account repaired to her, and Proclaimed her Queen at
Norwich; the Lords at London, having notice hereof, sent the Earl of
Northumberland with an Army against her; but Queen Mary's Forces still
increasing, she was Proclaimed Queen in Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire,
Northamptonshire: and the Lords now began to grow fearful, procured Dr. Ridly
Bishop of London, to maintain Lady Jane's cause in his Sermon at Paul's Cross:
but, this working no effect, they forthwith Proclaimed Queen Mary: and so the
poor distressed Earl of Northumberland being forsaken by his Soldiers, for want
of an Harrold at Cambridge proclaimed Queen Mary himself: but notwithstanding
shortly after lost his head, although he had renounced his Religion in hope of
Pardon: with him suffered Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer, and not long
after them the Lord Guilford and Lady Jane his Wife, a Princess, for her Wisdom
and Learning, worthy of Immortal Fame. It is reported that Morgan who gave
Sentence of Death upon her, fell afterward into Madness, always crying out,
Take away the Lady JANE from him.

Now the Queen released the Duke of Suffolk from his Imprisonment, but he
afterward seeking to withstand the Queen's Marriage, was betrayed by one
Underwood his Servant, and himself with his Brother Thomas Lord Gray were
Beheaded; and several worthy Bishops, as Cranmer, Ridly, Story, Coverdale,
Hooper, etc. and all married Priests were displaced, and Romanists, such as
Bonner, Gardener, Day, Wesie, Heath, etc. were put in their places.

Sir Thomas Wyat now with a great Power in Kent, sought to withstand the
Queen's Marriage, and to have placed better Counselors about her, and thinking
to have entered over at London-Bridg, was there stopped, so spoiling Gardiner's,
the Bishopof Winchester's House, he returned and got over the River of Thames
at Kingston, and intended to have entered the City of London at Ludgate; but
being there withstood, upon his return at Temple Bar (dispairing of his
purpose) he yielded himself Prisoner, and was shortly after beheaded, and 50
Persons more of his Accomplices were hanged in London, and 23 in Kent: and the
Lord Courtny, and Lady Elizabeth (afterward our Queen) were clapped up in the
Tower, upon suspicion of favoring Sir Thomas Wyat's proceedings, and this
Innocent Lady, without respect to her Person, being extreme Sick at her Manor
of Asbridge, was nevertheless brought away Prisoner to London; and was so
straightly kept in the Tower, that a little Boy, about 4 years of Age, who was
wont every day to carry her some Flowers, and prattle and talk to her: Command
was given to his Father, that the Boy should go no more; and the next day the
Child going, and the Door being shut, he peeped in at a hole, Crying unto her;
Mistress, I can bring you no more Flowers now.

From hence this pious Princess was removed to Woodstock; where, one day
sitting sollitary at her Prison window, she espied a Maid singing merrily over
her milking Pale, whose condition she esteemed to be better than hers.

A little before Arrival of King Philip, two Suns were seen at one time, and a
Rainbow reversed the Bow turning downwards, before the Marriage certain
Honorable Conditions were propounded to King Philip, and agreed to by him. And
now the Protestants began to be hated, Mr. Bourn a godly Minister having a
Dagger thrown at him, as he was Preaching at Paul's Cross; and Bishop Bonner
caused all Scriptures painted on the Church-walls to be blotted out; and
Cardinal Pool coming into England, Images, Holy Water, Pax, Censures, Oil and
Cream were brought into the Church again.

And about this time fell such abundance of Rain that for the space of six
days, men might row with Boats in Saint George's Feilds, and the Water was half
a yard deep in Westminster Hall.

Now the Queens cruel Bishops with her consent, partly through their
persuasions, consumed in the Flames (during her Reign for the Profession of
their Faith, 5 Bishops, 21 Divines, 18 Gentlemen, 84 Artificers, 100
Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows, 9 Virgins, 2 Boys,
and 2 Infants, in all 287: besides 16 other Persons that perished in Prison,
and 7 scourged, and several Condemned, which were released upon the happy
entrance of Queen Elizabeth.

Many also in these perilous times fled, amongst whom the Duchess of Suffolk
and her Husband Mr. Berty were two, who suffered both Hunger and Cold, and were
often in Danger of their Lives, till at length they got into Poland; where they
were Honorably treated till Queen Mary's Death.

And now nothing being Talked of, but the Queens being with Child, Prayers were
made for her safe Deliverance, Midwives, Rockers, and Cradles, and all things
else prepared, but when it come to the point indeed, it proved nothing but a
Tympany, and King Philip seeing himself so frustrated of his Expectation, took
Shipping for Spain, and stayed at that time 19 months from the Queen; in whose
absence her Exchequer was intended to have been Robbed, but some of the
Plotters Vdal, Throgmorton, Peacham, Daniel and Stanton, were taken and
suffered Death, and others fled; and the same year that Coaches were first used
in England, viz. Anno, 1555, began the hot burning Fevers, whereof died many
old Persons; so that in London died 7 Aldermen in less than 10 months time;
about 2 years after this Thomas Stafford, Son to the Lord Stafford, rose in
Rebellion but was taken and beheaded.

And now the King (being instigated by his Queen) prepared an Army against
France, and several Nobles went thither, where their greatest exploit was the
winning of St. Quintins, which was repayed by the French winning Callis from
the English, after it had been in their Possession about 211 years: This loss
so grieved the Queen that shortly after she died of a Burning Fever, telling
her Physicians, That they would find Callis written in her Heart, if they
dissected her Body, after her Death.

That year Queen Mary died, the Quartaine Agues continned very sharp, so that
many old Folk died, especially Parsons and Priests, so that a great number of
Churches were unfurnished: and a little before the Queen's Death, dyed two of
her Physicians, besides many Bishops and Noble men. And in July, the same year,
a Tempest of Thunder as it went through two Towns near Nottingham, beat down
the Churches and all the Houses in the Towns, the Bells were thrown out of the
Steeples, and some of the Webs of Lead thrown 400 Foot into the Field, and
wreathen up together like a glove, Trees were plucked up by the roots and cast
12 score foot off, and a Child was taken out of a man's hand, and carried an
100 foot, and then let fall and died, five or six men were killed, and
Hailstones fell 15 Inches about.

This Mary was Queen of England, France and Ireland; She was the eldest
Daughter of King Henry the Eight, by Catherine his first Queen, Daughter to
Ferdinando the VI, King of Spain: and Widow Dowager to Prince Arthur King
Henry's Elder Brother: She began her Reign on Thursday the sixth day of July,
Anno 1553, and reigned five years, four months, and 11 days, and was the 42
sole Monarch of England; She died of a Burning Fever on Thursday the 17 day of
November, Anno 1558, being in the Sixth year of her Reign, and 40 of her Age:
Her Body was buried at Westminster.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Queen Elizabeth.

THis Queen was Crowned at Westminster by Owen Ogilthorp Bishop of Carlisle,
Pool Archbishop of Canterbury dying the same day that Queen Mary dyed. At her
Entrance the Title of Supremacy was again restored by Parliament, and all Queen
Mary's Statutes in favor of Rome repealed; and she being desired by Parliament
to marry, said, That she intended a Virgins Life, which accordingly she
performed: for being Courted by Maximilian the Emperor, Ericus Son to the King
of Sweden, and by the Arch Duke of Austria, and Duke of Anjou, she denied them
all: and now Divine Service being celebrated in English, and Images thrown out
of the Churches again. The Scots also began to seek Reformation too: whereupon
there arose great Tumults among them, and the King of France sending the
Romanists Aid there, the Reformers were forced to crave help from Queen
Elizabeth, which she sent them under the Command of the Lord Gray: and the
Queen Mother Regent of Scotland dying, the French thereupon concluded Peace for
Scotland and left it.

The year 1561, In June a Terrible Tempest of Thunder and Lightning happenned
about London, which set Paul's Steeple on fire, and burnt it down to the Roof
of the Church, consuming all the Bells, Lead, and c.

And in March the year after, a Mare brought forth a Fool with one Body and two
Heads, and a long tail growing out between them: a Sow also Farrowed a Pig with
four legs, like to the arms of a Child, with Hands and Fingers; and in April
after, another Sow Farrowed a Pig with two Bodies eight Feet and but one Head;
and many Calves and Lambs were Monstrous; some with Collors of Skins about
their Necks like to the double Cuffs of Shirts then used.

About this time Francis King of France dying, Charles his Brother succeeded
him, and great Dissentions arising, Queen Elizabeth sought a Reconciliation,
but it could not be obtained: whereupon, for supportation of Religion, she sent
an Army into France, under the Command of Lord Ambrose Dudly, Earl of Warwick,
who landed at Newhaven in Normandy, and after eleven months possession
thereof, were then constrained to render it to the French, through Famine and
Plague which they brought into England, Anno 1563, whereof there dyed in 8
months space 23660.

The year after the Thames was so hard frozen that Markets were kept on the
Ice, and all manner of Exercise performed thereon without Danger, which Frost
going away with a five days thaw, caused great Floods, and drowned many people
especially in Yorkshire; and this year also was such a Terrible Tempest of Hail
Lighting and Thunder in June, that at Chelmesford in Essex, 500 Acres of Corn
was destroyed with it, and the Windows on the East side of the Town, all the
Tyles of their houses were beaten down with it, besides diverse Barns, Chimneys
and the Battlements of the Church; and the like harm was done in diverse other
places, as at Leeds, Crainbrook, and Dover.

And now Shan O Neale Rebelling in Ireland, and after several Submissions and
Pardons, still bursting out again into Arms, at length he was slain by his
Brother in a Tent.

And about this time Anno 1566. The Royal Exchange in London was first built at
the Charges of Sir Thomas Gresham: the Merchants in former times using to meet
in Lumbard-Street.

And two years after, to wit, Anno 1568, The Scots murdered their King: and
Mary Queen of Scotland fled into England, where she was honorably received,
but at length lost her Head.

Now after these Commotions in Scotland, the Earls in the North, Westmerland,
and Cumberland, Dacres, Nevil, Norton, Tempest, Danby, and others in the year
1569 rebelled against the Queen: but they were quickly dismayed at the Approach
of the Earl of Sussex who was sent against them, and surprised them; and at
Durham caused an Alderman, a Priest, called Plumtree, and 66 Constables to be
hanged, and Sir George Bows Knight Marshal did see them Executed in every Town
betwixt Newcastle and Weatherby: whereupon the Earls fled, Westmerland into
Flanders, and Northumberland into Scotland, from whence he was sent into
England, and lost his head.

Anno 1570, And the year after, at Kingston, in the County of Hereford, on the
17 of February was the ground seen to open, and certain Rocks with a piece of
ground removed, and went forwards four days together, carried with it great
Trees, and Sheep-Coats, some with 60 sheep in them, and overthrew Rimnalstone
Chapel: the depth of the hole where it first broke out is 30 Foot, and the
breadth of the Breach was 160 yards; also two high ways were removed near 100
yards with trees and hedg-rowes, etc.

And now Peace being concluded with France, and the Queen of Navar a Protestant
coming to Paris in France, to solemnize her Sons Marriage with the Kings
Sister, was there secretly poisoned; and after her, the Admiral of France
cruelly murdered, and such a Massacre made as neither Sex nor Age escaped the
Fury of these Romanists: this was about the year 1572. and the time being now
elapsed, for the delivery of Callis to Queen Elizabeth, according to
conditions, when the Peace was concluded, she therefore sent to demand it, and
after much Dispute and Debate it was at length absolutely denied.

And not long after this, the Queen was deprived of all Princely Authority, at
the fained suit of one Morton at Rome, and the Pope sent his Bull into England
to that purpose, which Bull being hung up at the Bishop of London's gate, the
bringer thereof John Felton was for his pains hanged and quartered in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

After this, Anno. 1576. In March, near Richmond in Yorkshire, a strange
Tempest happened, which overthrew Cottages, Trees, Barnes, and Hay-stacks, and
great part of the Church called Patrick Brunton, and most strange sights were
seen in the Air both terrible and fearful. And about this time the Regent of
Scotland was murdered, and after him, the Earl of Lenox the new Regent; so
powerful were the Popes persuasions with these Idolizers of his holiness; the
Duke of Norfolk also lost his head on Tower Hill, for being (as was supposed)
too favorable toward these Scotch Proceedings; and now another new Regent
being chosen in Scotland, he desired the help of Queen Elizabeth for the
defense of the young King, which was granted; and 1500 Men were sent under the
Command of Sir William Drury, who presently caused the Surrender of Edenbrough
Castle.

Anno 1580. that renowned English Navigator Sir Francis Drake, finished his
Voyage of compassing the Earth: and now our Merchants began to Trade with the
Muscovites and Turks: This year there happned a great Earthquake; and a Blasing
Starr was seen Nightly in October and November: a strange and Terrible Tempest
also of Lightining and Thunder happened, which seized on the Churches of
Blybrough in Suffolk, and Bongey nine miles from Norwich, and rent the Churches
and steeples, killing four Persons, and several others thrown down grovelling on
the ground: and the same year also in the Parish of Blandsdon in Yorkshire, a
women of 80 years of Age, named Alice Perim was delivered of an hideous
Monster, whose head was like unto a sallet, the fore part of him like a Man,
with eight Legs of several shapes, and a Tail of half a yard long.

An. 1583, Tobacco came first into England.

The Pop's Envy now burning still against the Queen, he procured the King of
Spain to send 600 men for Irelands Rebellion, who were all slain by the Lord
Gray Deputy of Ireland.

Anno 1585, Virginia was made an English Colony; and about this time all the
Assizes kept at the City of Exceter in Devonshire, before Sir Henry Anderson
Lord Justice of the Common Pleas, there dyed Sergeant Floriday, Sir John
Chichester, Sir Arthur Blasset, and Sir Barnard Drake Knights, Thomas Carry,
Richard Carry, John Fortiscue, William Waldrum and Thomas Risden Esquires, and
Justices of the Peace: and of the Common People, dyed very many Constables,
Reeves, Tythingmen, and Jurors: especially of one Jury died eleven of the
twelve: this Sickness began amongst the Prisoners, and fastened on the rest by
degrees: and about ten years before at the Assizes at Oxford, before Sir Robert
Bell Lord Chief Barron, there dyed abundance of Persons also suddenly by the
rising of a damp among them: Now, as is said before, the Pope still seeking all
occasions against the Reformed Religion, it made several fly, and some sued to
Queen Elizabeth for Aid, amongst whom the States of the Netherlands became her
Petitioners for their Defender: which Request She thrice denied; but at length
condescended (which kindness has been badly retaliated) and sent 5000 Foot,
and 1000 Horse under the Command of Sir John Norrice: and shortly after went
the Earl of Leicester as Deputy, but no great matters being performed, he was
again recalled, and Commanded to resign up his Government to the Netherlands
again: and the King of Spain now under the false proffers of Peace prepared his
Invincible Navy (as it was called) against England: of which the Queen had
notice by the French King, so that she caused the general Forces of her Realm
to be mustred, and fifteen hundred horsemen and two and twenty thousand Foot
were Commanded to repair to Tilbury in Essex, whither She also went attended
with her own Guard, consisting of two thousand three hundred fifty two
horsemen, and thirty four thousand and fifty foot: her Admiral at Sea was Lord
Charles Howard, and Vice Admiral Sir Francis Drake. This Armado consisted (as
some of our Chronologers reckon) of Seventy two Gallisers and Gallions, forty
seven Ships and Hulks, eleven Pinaces and Carvals, two thousand eight hundred
forty and three great Ordinance, eight thousand ninety and four Sailors,
eighteen thousand six hundred fifty and eight Soldiers, two thousand eighty and
eight Gally-Slaves, two hundred and twenty thousand great Shot, four hundred
and seventy thousand and four hundred pounds of Powder, one hundred and twelve
thousand pounds of Lead for Bullets, one hundred thirty four thousand and four
hundred pounds of Match, seven thousand Muskets and Callivers, ten thousand
Partisans and Halberts, with Biskets, Flesh, Cheese, Rice, and other
Necessarys, for six months: but this Terror of the World was terrified and
vanquished by the gallantry of the renouned Lord Howard, and Sir Francis Drake,
who destroyed fourscore and one of the Spaniards Vessels, and seventeen
thousand of their Men, besides many Noble persons taken Prisoners: nay, there
was scarce a worthy Family in all Spain, that in this expedition lost not
either a Son, Brother, or Kins-man: the Pope's Contribution toward this
Expedition was a Million of Gold: it was in the year 1588. And now the Queens
Enemies being Dissipated, She caused public Thanks to be given to God through
the Realm: and there were Executed for Treason against her Majesty here in
England, at several times, before and after this Invasion, about one hundred
Persons, whereof threescore and seven were Jesuires.

And now to requite the Spaniars, the Queen, the year after, assisted Don
Antonio King of Portugal with eleven thousand Soldiers, and five and twenty
hundred Mariners, under the Command of Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Drake:
these English Soldiers, won the Groyne, and it being intended to be rescued,
they so valliantly behaved themselves, that they took the Spanish King's
standard, and made great slaughter of their Enemies: and burning both the said
Town and the Country for three miles round about, they then betook themselves
to Sea again: and shortly after the Earl of Essex joined with them: and then
they Sailed for Portugal, and took Penish, from whence they went to Attempt
Lisbone the Metropolis of Portugal, but not being able to overcome it, they
returned, and had the Castle of Cassais rendered to them, and they took 60
Spanish Hulks Laden with Corn, Masts, Cables Copper, and Wax, and so retuned
for England with great Honor.

After this, Supplys were sent by the Queen to Henry King of Navarr, (a
Protestant) for the gaining the French Crown, but he, finding many Rubs in his
way, changed his Religion, and then easily obtained it.

About this time Anno 1591, one William Harket was executed in Cheapside for
Blasphemy and Treason: and about three years after Doctor Lopez suffered.

And now the Spanish Practices still in the Queens thoughts, at length she set
out a Brave Navy against the Spaniards, Anno 1596. their first Assault was on
Cadez which Place they won, and forced the Citizens to pay them twenty
thousand Duccats for their Ransom; and the Ships of the Spaniards, which the
English ran ashore there, proffered five and twenty hundred thousand Duccats
for their ransom, which being denied Acceptance, at the Command of the Duke of
Medina Sidonia they were all set on fire, they being estimated to be worth
twelve Millions of Duccats.

After this another Fleet went again, and the Spaniards every where being
worsted, the Fleet again returned for England with three Prizes worth four
hundred thousand Duccats, and Sigismond King of Pollonia and the King of
Denmark, about this time sought to the Queen to conclude a Peace with France,
but prevailed not.

And now Tirr Owen in Ireland breaking into Rebellion, after some Expeditions
thither, at length the Earl of Essex was sent Deputy, who concluded a Peace
with Tirr Owen, from six weeks to six weeks, for which he was much condemned by
the Lords, and recalled into England again by the Queen, and afterward lost
his head, the Queen being neither privy nor consenting to it: for whose Death
she sore lamented dureing her Life (which lasted not long after) and bid the
Plague of God light upon them for their act, which Curse shortly after took
effect, for in one year there dyed of the Plague in London, and the Suburbs
thirty thousand five hundred seventy eight, besides all those that dyed of
other Diseases.

After Essex, the Lord Mountjoy went Deputy for Ireland, by whose vigilance and
Courage Tirr Owen at length with all his Adherents (from the Pope and the King
of Spain) were Totally routed, and he forced to fly into Spain; and now the
Spaniards, all hopes of prevailing against England being gone, began to sue for
Peace, which upon certain Conditions was granted them: and the Queen afterthis
perceiving the time of her dissolution to draw nigh, named King James of
Scotland for her Successor, and not long after dyed: she was a Queen endowed
with all the benefits of Nature, a comely person for her Body, but more comely
in her Soul, and an excellent Scholar; as may appear by these following Verses
made in praise of her;

None like Elizabeth was found in Learning so divine,
She had the perfect skilful art, of all the Muses nine:
In Latin, Greek and Hebrew, She most excellent was known
To Foreign Kings Ambassadors, the same was daily shown,
The Italian, French, and Spanish Tongue, she well could speak and read,
The Turkish and Arabian Speech grew perfect at her need.
This Elizabeth was Queen of England, France and Ireland, she was the only
Daughter of King Henry the Eight, by his Second Queen Ann of Bulloin; she began
her Reign on Thursday the 17 day of November Anno, 1558. and reigned 44 years,
4 months and 7 days, and was the 43 Sole Monarch of England. She dyed on
Wednesday, the 24 day of March Anno 1602, being in the 45 year of her Reign,
and 69 of her Age. She was buried at Westminster, with this Queen expired the
Sovereignty of the Tewdors, yielding place to the Stuarts to Succeed, in which
Name it still does (and long and prosperously may it so) continue.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of King James.

HE was Crowned at Westminster by Dr. Whiteguift, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, at
which time all people of the City of London were forbidden to repair thither,
by reason of the then raging Plague among them; there dying that year in London
and the out-Libertys 30578 persons of the same disease: he continued Religion
as it was begun in Queen Elizabeth's days, and caused the Bible to be truly
Translated according to the Original: at his Entrance to the Kingdom, Plots
were contrived for the destroying of his person, and his Eldest Son Prince
Henry; to change Religion, to raise Tumults and let in Strangers, but they were
happily discovered, and some of the Ringleaders apprehended, and put to death:
some adjudged to perpetual Imprisonment, and some pardoned.

An. 1603. one John Lepton of Repwick Esquire in the County of York, undertook
to Ride 5 several times betwixt London and York in six days, to be taken in one
week, between Monday morning and Saturday night: and began his Journey Monday
Morning the 20 of May, and finished his Journey on Friday after, to the great
Admiration of all men.

Two years after, to wit, Anno 1605. one William Calverly of Calverly in the
County of York Esquire, murdered two of his own Children at home at his own
house, then Stabbed his Wife into the Body, with full Intent to have killed
her, and then went out with Intention to have killed his Child at nurse, but
was prevented: he was Pressed to death at York for this murder, because he
stood Mute and would not plead. And now although the King had made Peace with
the Popes Champion the King of Spain, yet his Holiness Sons thought to have
brought the Ruin of the King and all the Kingdom to Light.

Anno 1605. by a treacherous Plot of blowing up the King and whole Nobility,
Root and Branch at one Blow when they were Assembled in Parliament; to which
end they had laid in several Barrels of Gunpowder, Bars of Iron, Faggots, and
and other things for doing Execution under the Parliament house: but this
Hellish Design was hapily discovered by a Letter sent to the Lord Mounteagle
son to the Lord Morley, by some of the Conspirators, wherein they wished him to
stay his Appearance from the House the first day of the sitting: this Letter
being Communicated and shown to several of the Nobility, they could not sathom
the depth of the dark meaning thereof, but at length being shown to the King,
he presently conjectured that the Plot was to blow up the House with Gunpowder;
and so, narrow Search being made, it was happyly found out, and the
Conspirators discovered: who were some of them shot to death (to wit, Percy and
Catesby) for disdaining to be taken, others of them were slain by Gunpowder
which they had drying by the Fire, and Sir Everard Digby, the two Wrights, John
and Christopher, Fawkes, Grant, Winter, Boits, and Keys, were Hanged, Drawn
and Quartered for being chief Actors in this Plot.

After this storm was over, the Faces of more troubles appeared through the
Insurrections of Fines and Rainolds, in Northamptonshire and Warwickshire, but
this flame quickly vanished into Smoke.

About this time the Lady Elizabeth the King's Daughter was married to
Frederick Count Elector Palatine. The Joys of their Nuptial were shortly after
overshadowed with clouds of sorrow, which ensued upon the death of Prince
Henry, which happned Anno 1611, his death was supposed to be something
untimely, but his Docters gave Satisfaction herein, that it was by Course of
Nature, and not by Poison as was suspected.

And now Charles the King's Second Son (afterward King) succeeded his Brother
in the Principallity of Wales: about this time Sir Walter Rawleigh was
released, intending to visit the new found World, and many Gentlemen took their
fortunes with him: but unhappily in his Voyage burning St. Thomes, it shortly
after cost him his Life, for Intelligence being given to Condibert then
Ambassador in England, he never left pressing the King for Reparation: hereupon
Sir Walter as soon as he came to Plymouth was apprehended by Sir Lewis Stuckly,
and was brought tried and condemned in the Kings Bench, and the next Morning
after his Trial was Beheaded.

And about this time the King being very Sick, he happily Recovered again, but
his Loving and virtuous Queen Ann dyed Anno 1618.

After this the King made a Motion of Marriage for his Son Charles Prince of
Wales with the King of Spains Daughter; thinking thereby to gain opportunity of
helping his Son in Law, who having been lately chosen by some of the German
Princes King of Bohemia, was afterward upon some distaste driven out of Bohemia
by the Emperor, and afterward out of all Germany, and remained at this time in
Holland, being a Refuge for all distressed people.

To effect this marriage, the Prince with the Duke of Buckingham went for
Spain, where seeing the Marriage with himself and the Lady Maria the Infanta of
Spain procrastinated and delaid, left the Court and Returned for England.

Anno 1623. The Plantations in the Indies were settled in this Kings time; he
was a very learned King, as appears by his Works now in print: he was an honest
Father to his Childern, worthy of his wife; and good to his subjects, and a
great desirer of Peace, whose Motto was Beati Pacifici, and as he desired Peace
so he dyed in Peace.

This James was King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; he was Son to
Henry Stuart Lord Darly, who was Grand Child to Lady Margaret eldest Daughter
to King Henry the VII of England, by her Second Husband: and his Mother was
Mary Queen of Scotland, who was Grand Child also to Lady Margaret by her first
Husband James the fourth King of Scotland; so that the said Lady Margaret was
great Grandmother to King James both by Father and Mothers side. He began his
Reign on Wednesday the 24 day of March, Anno 1602. Reigned 22 years and 3 days,
and was the 44 Sole Monarch of England. He dyed of the Spleen on Saturday the
27 day of March, Anno 1625 being in the 23 year of his Reign, and nine and
fiftieth year of his Age: his Body was buried at Westminster.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of King Charles the first.

SHortly after his Coronation at Westminster, he proceeded to a Marriage with
Henrietta Maria, Daughter to Charles the Fourth King of France, whom he had
formerly seen in his journey through that Country into Spain: his first
Complement to her, when he went to meet her at Dover was, That he desired to be
no longer Master of himself, then he was Servant to her: and indeed this Love
he continued to the last hour of his Life: for on the day before his
unfortunate end, he desired his Daughter the Lady Elizabeth, to assure her
Mother, if ever She see her again, That his Thoughts had never Strayed from
her, and that his Affections should be the same to the Last.

After the King's Marriage was over, his dislike against the Spaniards, at his
Departure from that Court, was still fresh in his memory: whereupon a Fleet was
set to Sea, who spoiling all the Spanish Vessels they met withal, for that time
returned; and after this, the King called a Parliament, and desired a Subsidy,
but was denied, notwithstanding his Treasures were Exhausted, and the War Just
and Honorable.

But although the Parliament denied the King a Supply, he made use of some
other means for pocurement of Money, and joining Amity and Forces with the
United Provinces, once again he set a mighty Navy to Sea, which did mightily
annoy the Spanish Coast, and spoiled their Ships: and among the rest some of
France became Preys to them; which caused the Seizure of some English Merchants
Goods: whereupon several French were commanded to leave England; but Monsieur
Bassompiere, coming Ambassador, prevailed so far that several French were again
recalled: but nevertheless all Commerce between the two Kingdoms was prohibited
on both sides. And the French grievously oppressed the Rochellers, to whose
Assistance several men were sent out of England: but doing little good, they
returned again, for which Cause some were Imprisoned.

And now several Complaints being exhibited upon this Account by the
Parliament, the King dissolved them, and intended new Supplies under the Duke's
Command for Rochell; but he being ready to Embarque was Stabbed by one Felton,
who got the Gallows for his Reward.

And now the King called another Parliament, desiring a Grant of Tunnage, but
was denied: whereupon they were Dissolved, upon which Account great Contentions
arose, the King Commanding the Merchants to pay their Customs, and the
Parliament forbidding them: whereupon several Members were Imprisoned: and
among the rest Sir John Elliot was one, but the Merchants ready enough to
Embrace those Commands, were most for their Advantage, did thereupon obey the
Parliaments Mandates, and slighted the King's: they remembering that about 100
years before, there was a Penalty imposed upon the Merchants, for paying their
Customs, the Parliament being then against it: and in Memory thereof there was
a Chapel built called Alderman-Bury; Anno 1630, May the 29, the Queen was
brought to Bed of Prince Charles, now King of England: and about 6 years after,
Mr. Hambden refusing to pay Ship Money, Sentence passed against him by 12 of
the Judges, who absolutely declared for the Legality of it, only Judge Hutton
and Judge Crook dissented; and new Stirs now arising about the Book of
Common Prayer in Scotland (which occasioned the sad War that afterward ensued,
the King marched thitherward with an Army, and the Scots meeting him, laid down
their Arms: whereupon Peace was concluded, but at the King's return he was
again Pricked forward by some, who rather sought their own Advantage than his:
hereupon he went again for Scotland, but nothing was done: and now they had
taken their Covenant (as it was called) against the King, who called a
Parliament to relieve his wants: but they treading in their Predecessors Steps
denied him a Supply.

And now the Irish being afresh in Rebellion, the Long Parliament (for so it
was called) by Reason of its long Continuance, for the King had Signed a Bill
for them to Sit as long as they pleased) sought means to suppress them: and all
Ceremonies were forbidden in the Church of England; but only such as were usen
in Queen Elizabeth's time: the Earl of Strafford, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Bishop Wren were Impeached of High Treason, and sent to the Tower; and most of
the Judges who had declared for Ship-mony were Voted Delinquents; Judge Berkly
was Arrested by the Usher of the Black Rod for High Treason, as he sat on the
King's Bench. Seven Romish Priests were also Imprisoned, whose Pardon was
granted by the Parliament, at the Request of the French Ambassador, and the
King to Ingratiate himself released them; at which the Parliament took Snuff,
because they were not first made acquainted before their Releasement: and to
thwart the King in his Proceedings, they changed their former Decree, and
caused two of the Priests to be put to Death, which Act of theirs took mainly
with the People: but this (as good Reason) displeased the King, who complained
of the Insolences of the Lower house to his Peers, and so proceeded to
displace some Officers of State, putting in another Lieutenant of the Tower,
whereupon the Lower house did Article against the new Lieutenant to the Peers,
who refused to meddle in the Business, it being the King's Prerogative to put
in whom he pleased: but not long after a multitude of Apprentices and other
People came Thundering to the Hall-Door, crying to have the new Lieutenant
either removed, or else they would turn All upside down. This giddy headed
Rabble of Plebeans demanded also that Bishops should be Excluded the
Parliament House; and, to satisfy their blind folly, they ran into Westminster
Abbey, and spoiled the Vestments, Organs and Sepulchers, and all else that was
comely or decent: and from thence they ran confusedly to Whitehall, and there
Thundered out the same Languages; but least they should proceed to some further
Insolences, the King the next day fortified himself with a strong Guard.

And now things beginning to work for the Parliament, they thought it good
policy to make Hay whilst the Sun shone, and to strike whilst the Iron was
hot; and hereupon they (under the pretense of some Fear) assumed to themselves
a Guard also, for their Defense, and constituted the Earl of Essex Captain
thereof: and further they (without the King's Consent or Knowledge) appointed
an Extraordinary Assembly in the City of London: and further to ingratiate
themselves with the Novelty-mongers, they cast 12 Bishops into Prison, which
Business much troubled the King: and the year before, Anno 1641, the Lord
Strafford was Beheaded, and about two years after the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who died as Sacrifices for the Popular Fury, and Martyrs for the
Government.

Now the King grieved at these Insolences, proceeded to accuse one Member of
the House of Peers, and five of the House of Commons of High Treason: and
demanding the Members, they were denied to be delivered to him; whereupon he
with 500 Armed men went to the Hall, he alone entering the Parliament House, and
not seeing any of the Accused Members there, he then declared his Good
Intentions to the Parliament, and so returned: and the next day went again, but
found them not: the Parliament hereupon put the City in Arms; and Adjourned
their Sitting for five days, forbidding the Citizens to help the King to find
out any of the said Members; whose Commands they so far obeyed as that in
Despite of the King they carried the said Members, and placed them in the
House again, in their several places; and the Parliament still proceeding to
lessen the King's Power, sent Letters to the adjacent Counties, commanding them
to draw up in Arms, upon which Account there was ready upon occasion above
twenty Thousand men: the King seeing these Proceedings hasted to Hampton Court.

And now the Parliament daily increased in their Power, and went and sat in
the City, to endear themselves the more to the Citizens: and forthwith sent
their Mandates to the respective Governors of the Seaport Towns, Prohibiting
them to obey any of the King's Orders, unless they were confirmed by them:
hereby they weakened the King's Authority, more than all their former
Proceedings had done; which the King might easily have prevented in time, if he
had put Soldiers into the said Towns to have kept them for himself.

And not long after this, they took into their hands most Seaport Towns of
Concernment, among which Hull was one: which denied to the King, and delivered
to them. And now the King seeing the harsh proceedings of the Parliament, he
writ to them from Windsor, protesting his Innocence: whereupon they sent
Messengers to him to desire his return to London, but he refused: upon which
occasion the Lower House drew up an Humble Remonstrance (as they called it)
whose Propositions were so unreasonable, that the House of Peers would not
consent to them, till they saw the Commons uniting themselves against them: and
then Messengers were sent to the King with the Remonstrance, who with some
Reservation yielded to part of it, and denied the other part: yet this would
not satisfy them, but they proceeded further to Petition the King, That the
accused Members might be free and clear from all Guilt, which was granted them:
but now those who favored the King's Cause, fearing the event of these
proceedings, part of them left England, and part repaired home, leaving the
Parliament; so that there were not above 25 in the Upper-House, and scarce 80
in the Lower House; and shortly after hardly 16 in the upper House, and the
Queen about this time left England, accompanying her Daughter to her Husband
the Prince of Orange, to whom she was Espoused: and the King caused all Priests
to be banished out of the Realm, and severe Statutes to be published against
the Papists.

And now all things growing worse and worse, the Parliament began to take the
boldness upon them to accuse the King of harkning to a Change in Religion: and
that he had given Cause to the Uproars in Ireland: but especially those that
were most powerful with him, secretly bespotting the Queen: the King to remove
these Aspertions, Published his Declarations to the People of his Innocence;
but they taking no effect, he with his Son Prince Charles, the Palsgrave, and
Duke of Richmon took their Journey for York* Resolveing to oppose Force against
Force.

And now the King, after several Passages between him and the Parliament,
called all the Knights of the Garter, and all others that held of the Crown, to
Repair to York* the Parliament on the contrary, made it death for any to go,
yet notwithstanding several Members went over to the King upon this Account.

And now people fearing the worst, the Men of Kent Petitioned the Parliament on
the behalf* of the King: That nothing might be done without the King's Consent;
that the Liturgy might not be altered; That the Bishops might be restored,
(whom they had Excluded the Lords House) That they would not suffer the
Fundamental Laws of the Land to be Antiquated without the Kings permission; Nor
Arms to be raised without his Command; That some good means might be found out
to make a Reconcilement, and c.

This Petition was ill taken, and the bringer, thereof together with the Earl of
Bristol the Receivers of it, were both Imprisoned for their Pains: and
Somersetshire men afterward preferring a Petition to the Parliament, they
Commanded it to be burnt by the Common Hangman.

And now, after Thwartings and Discontents between the King and Parliament, he
at last Commanded all the Yorkshire men to meet him at a certain place called
Howard Moor, near York* who accordingly appeared, being about Threescore
Thousand men: and the King with the Prince, and some Lords, about six hundred
horse met them there, and with about twenty thousand men went back to York: and
Commanded them all to repair to their Houses: in the mean time the Parliment
borrowed a great Sum of money of the Londoners, on the Public Faith (as they
called it;) and Raising an Army of ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse,
they sent them toward York; in the Interim the King assailed Hull, but was
withstood by Sir John Hotham: and having this bad Success at first, he
thereupon sent to the Parliament to Conclude a Peace, and promised forthwith to
repair to them, if they would leave London, and make choice of some other place
to Sit in: but they Refused it; whereupon the King proclaimed all men guilty of
Treason, that should Assist the Houses either with Money or other Supplies, and
also threatened to deprive the Londoners of their Privileges, if they offended
herein; and the King having fortified Newark and Barwick, sought again to
obtain Hull, but in vain: and now the Parliament Proclaimed open War, making
the Earl of Essex General: and the King set up his Standard at Nottingham: and
now it being come to open War, the Victory was doubtful, sometimes one Side,
sometimes the other geting the better, with no small loss of blood, and the
Life of many a gallant man: and the Prince, when he saw his Fathers Affairs in
a desperate Condition, took Shipping for the Scillyes, from whence he was
Invited by the Parliament to return to London; but he thought it not safe for
his Person to do so, and so sailed to the Hague, to his Sister the Princess of
Orange, where he remained till the Sad News of his Father's Murder was brought
to him.

Now although there be several Book in print, treating at large of the several
Skirmisses, Battles, Sieges, etc. which happned between the King and
Parliament during the seven years unhappy Dissentions between them; yet partly
to Satisfy the Reader (whose Purse affords him not Money to buy them, or,
multitude of business time to peruse them) I have here Incerted a brief
Catalogue of the most considerable of them, as follows.

1642.
Apr. Sir John Hotham denied the King Entrance into Hull, for which he was
proclaimed Traitor. Aug. The King's Standard set up at Nottingham, and a little
before 20 of his men slain, and a Color taken by a Sally out of Hull. Sept.
Portsmouth Besieged by Sir John Merrick* and yielded to him: Lord Byron set
upon, near Bracklye, got off again with some loss, marched to Worcester,
secured it for the King: and the Parliament Forces attempting the Town, were
set upon in the Rear at Wickfield near Worcester by Prince Rupert and Routed:
but the Earl of Essex afterward advancing thither, Worcester was then yielded
to the Parliamentarians. October. The signal great Fight at Edgehill, about 5000
slain. Banbury and Broughton-House surrendered to the King, after which he
entered Tryumphantly into Oxford with an 150 Colors taken in Fight. November.
Brantford Fight, about 200 of the Parliament party slain, besides several
drowned, and some 15 pieces of Ordnance sunk in the Thames. December. Marborough
taken for the King by Lieutenant General Wilmot: and Tadcaster by the Earl of
New Castle: and Winchester and Chichester delivered to the Parliament. Januar.
Bodmyn Fight, and Liscard taken by Sir Ralph Hopton: Belvoire Castle surprised
by Colonel Lucas. Leeds stormed and taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
afterward Doncaster and Wakefield were quitted by the Royallists, and
Garrisoned by the Parliament: A party of 700 Horse and Foot, under the Command
of Colonel Slingsby defeated at Gisborough: and Brill assaulted by Collonell
Hambden, but bravely repulsed by Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Febr. The Fight at Hutton
Field, better known by the name of Yarm Fight, where the Parliaments Forces
were routed, Cyrencester or Cycester in Gloucester-shire taken by Prince
Rupert. Shudly Castle stormed by Collonell Massy, and yielded to the
Parliament: and the Queen landed at Bridlington-Key in Yorkshire. March.
Litchfield won by the Parliament, and the Lord Brook killed there by a Shot in
the Eye. The Fight at Hopton-Heath in Staffordshire. Gell, and Brereton
defeated there by his Majesty's forces, Earl of Northampton who Commanded them
slain. Malmsbery surrender to the Parliament. Grantham taken by Colonel
Charles Cavandish, Scarborough delivered up to his Majesty by Brown Bushel:
and Sir Thomas Fairfax routed at Bramham-Moor.
1643.
Apr. Burmingham taken by Prince Rupert. Young Hotham routed near Ancaster in
Lincolnshire by Collonell Cavendish. Litchfield after three weeks Siege
surrendered to his Highness Prince Rupert: And Redding after a Fortnights Siege,
surrendered to the Earl of Essex. May. The Parliament Forces routed near
Banbury, by the young Earl of Northampton. Warder Castle and Monmouth
surrendered to the Parliament. The Parliament Forces defeated at Stratton in
Devonshire by the Lord Hopton. And the King's Forces defeated at Wakefield.
June. Taunton and Bridg-water delivered to the Parliament. The Parliament
Forces routed by Collonell Cavendish at Dunnington in Lincolnshire, and by
Prince Rupert also at Chalgrove-Field in Oxfordshire. Howly house taken by the
Earl of Newcastle. Thamworth Castle yielded, and Fairfax defeated by the Earl
of Newcastle on Adderton-Heath. July. Middletons Horse and Dragoons routed at
Padbury near Buckingham by Sir Charles Lucas: Bradford taken. Hallifax and
Denton house quitted by the Parliament. Burton upon Trent taken for the King by
the Lord Germin. Landsdown Fight, Lord Dencourt's eldest Son slain. Lord Gray
of Wark, Sir William Armin, and Mr. Darly sent by the Parliament to Invite the
Scots to their Assistance. Runaway-down Fight, the Parliament Forces routed
there by Prince Mawrice: Earl of Carnarvan, Lord Wilmot, and about a thousand
slain and 4000 taken, and 28 Colors of Foot. Bristow surrendered to Prince
Rupert: and not long after Gainsborough rendered. Aug. Dorchester yielded to
the Earl of Carnarvan, Portland Reduced: Weymouth and Melcombe submitted, and
Beaverly taken by the Earl of Newcastle. Sept. Biddford, Appleford, and
Barnstable surrendered to the King. Exceter taken by Prince Mawrice. Gloucester
besieged and relieved by the Earl of Essex. Lin yielded to the Earl of
Manchester. Awborne Fight in Wiltshire Marquess De La Vien Ville slaint here.
Newbery Fight, Earls of Carnarvan and Sunderland with the Lord Viscount
Faulkland slain, and about six thousand men on both sides. October. Redding
garrisoned by the King, and Dartmouth surrendered to Prince Maurice. December.
Hawarden Castle yielded to the King. Arundel Castle taken by the Parliament
Forces. Beeston Castle and Laply house taken for the King; and after that
Grafton house in Northamtonshire, and Grew house in Cheshire. January. Scots
invaded England. March. Sir Thomas Fairfax and Mitton beaten from Drayton in
Shropshire by Prince Rupert. Hopton Castle and Warder Castle taken for the
King* Newark relieved by his Highness Prince Rupert, and Sir John Meldrum and
his Forces there defeated, their Arms, Cannon and Ammunition all taken from
them, and they permitted to go away with their Lives; after this Gainsborough
Lincoln, and Sleeford were all quitted by the Parliament, and Sturton Castle
surrendered to the King.
1644.
Apr. Longford house in Shropshire surrendered to Prince Rupert. Cheritondown
fight, about a thousand slain* Winchester retaken by Sir William Waller, Tongue
Castle surrendered to Prince Rupert, and Studcombe in Dorcetshire taken by him.
May. Bewdly in Worcestershire taken by Colonel Fox. Stopford in Cheshire by
Prince Rupert. Latham house after 18, weeks Siege relieved by his Highness's
Approach: and Bolton in Lancashire taken by him, and about 800 Men slain. June.
Borstall house taken by Sir Henry Gage. Collonell Shuttleworth defeated by
Prince Rupert at Blackburn in Lancashire. Waller at Crappedy-Bridge loosing
about three hundred Men. And the Skirmish at North-Allerton where the
Royallists under the Command of Colonel Errington (who thought to have blown
up the Toll-Bouth there with about 90 Scots in it Commanded by Master Rymer)
were defeated, one Salvine, and some three more slain. July. York relieved by
Prince Rupert, after which followed that bloody Fight on Marston-Moore, about
9000 men slain, shortly after which York was yielded up by Sir Thomas Glenham.
Aug. Lestithiel taken by the King. Sept. Bassing relieved by Sir Henry Gage and
Sir George Bunckly. October. Banbury Siege raised by the Earl of Northamton, and
Colonel Gage: and Newbery Second Fight, where was slain four or five thousand
men. November. Dennington Siege raised by the King, and the siege at Bassing
house; against which place Sir William Waller had lost about a thousand Men:
and Monmouth retaken by the King's party. December. Earl of Essex cashiered of
his Command, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, Voted General of the Parliament Forces.
Jan. Sir John Hothan Father and Son beheaded, and the Skirmish at Cutham
Bridge, Sir Henry Gage slain. Feb. Vxbridge Treaty. Shrewsbury surprised by the
Parliament, and Rossiter Defeated near Melton Mowbray. March. Pomfret relieved,
and the Parliaments Army deseated by Sir Marmaduke Langdale. 1645. Apr.
Colonel Massy defeated by Prince Rupert at Ledbury: and Blechington-House
delivered to the Parliament. May. Oxford the first time besieged. Godstowe
house quitted. Eversham taken by the Parliament: and Leicester by the King.
June. Leicester regained by the Parliament. Carlisle after 41 weeks Siege
delivered up by Sir Thomas Glenham to the Scots. July. The Kings Forces
defeated at Langport, about 200 slain, and 1400 taken: Pomfret Castle,
Bridgwater, Scarborough and Bath delivered to the Parliament. Aug. The
Parliament Quarters beaten up at Tame. Sherburn Castle taken by the Parliament.
And the Scots defeated at Kilsieth in Scotland by Montross. Sept. Bristol
surrendered to the Parliament. Montross defeated at Philliphaugh in Scotland,
and the Kings Forces were worsted at Routon-heath near Chster. Oct. Bassing
house taken by Cromwell, and in it the Marquess of Winchester, and the Lord
Digby defeated at Sherborn in Yorkshire. November. The King returned to Oxford.
Bolton and Beeston Castles yielded. December. Latham house delivered by the Kings
order, after a second siege of above two years; and Hereford surprised by the
Parliamentarians, before which place the Scots in August before had lost about
a thousand men. Jan. Wormleighton house burnt, and Dartmouth itormed and taken
by the Parliament. Febr. Belvoire Castle, and Westchester delivered to the
Parliament. Torrington stormed by them: and Lanceston, Saltash, and Lize
quitted by the King, with Foy and Mount Edgecombe. March. Lord Ashly defeated
near Stow, and Denning surrendered to the Parliament.
1646.
April. Ruthen Castle, Exceter, St. Michael's Mount, Dunster Castle and
Woodsteck yielded. Corfe Castle taken by Stratagem; and the King quits Oxford
in Disguise. May. Oxfords second siege, the King repairs to the Scots at
Southwel, and thence to Newcastle: Banbury and Radnor surrendered. June.
Carnarvan Town and Castle, Ludlow, Borstal, Oxford, and Farringdon all yielded
to the Parliament. July. Litchfield, Worcester, Wallinford Castle, Gothridge,
and Pendennis the like: and Conway taken by Storm. Aug. Ragland house
surrendered by the Marquess of Worcester. Sept. Scilly Island and Castle, also
yielded. Octo. Denbigh Castle also yielded. Novem. General Fairfax marched
Tryumphantly to London. Febr. The Scotch Army (having first sold the King for
two hundred thousand pounds) marched into Scotland: and the King sent Prisoner
to Holmby by the Parliament.
And now the King's Enemies having gotten him in their Power, remove him from
place to place, and at length into the Isle of Wight, there to be guarded by
Collonell Hammon and the Merciless Waves of the Sea; and here he writ that
excellent Book called Icon Basilicon, and afterward coming to a Treaty of
Peace, the King so far condescended, as that it was then Voted Satisfactory;
after which the Army and those of the Parliament, who had all this time aimed
at self Interests, began to display themselves in their Colors; turning out
all such Members of the House of Parliament as they suspected: and conveyed the
King to Hurst Castle, and afterward to Windsor; during which proceedings
several Bickerings and Engagements had happened between the Royallists and
Parliamentarians; the Royal party every where to going wrack, especially at
Maidstone, Pontefract, Bow, Stratford, Kingston and Preston, where the Scotch
Army received a great Overthrow, loosing a world of men. And lastly, at
Colchester where those two gallant Gentlemen, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George
Lisle were shot to Death after Quarter given, contrary to the Law of Arms.

And now the Army, and those Members then left in the House (after the others
were Secluded) devised and erected a new unheard of Tribunal, called a
High-Court of Justice, to take Cognizance of the King's Cause: one Bradshaw a
Sergeant at Law: being made President thereof: and the King being called before
this new Erected Authority, was there accused of several Crimes, as, That he
gave Cause of the Cruel Bloodshed in England and Ireland: That he had born
Arms against the Parliament: That he had given Commission to his Son and others
to Wage War; and, Therefore he was pronounced a Traitor, a Tyrant, and an Enemy
to the Commonwealth of England: The King refused to answer to the Charge, or to
acknowledge the Court, being several times brought before them; and urged
thereunto; at length upon the 27 day of January, Anno 1648. They pronounced
Sentence against him; That he, the said Charles Stewart was fallen from all
Dignity, was guilty of High Treason, and was to be put to Death, by severing
his Head from his Body, for being a Tyrant, a Murderer, and an Enemy to the
Commonwealth; the Sentence being read, the Court stood up in Confirmation of
it, as the Act and Resolution of the whole Court; and the King offering to
speak something, the President would not permit him, but Commanded him to be
carried away, and conveyed to Whitehall.

And now this Wicked Sentence thus Pronounced, they shortly after proceeded to
Execution, although the Holland Ambassadors Adrian Paw and Albertus Joachimus,
with the Scots also sought to diswade them from it: but all would take no place
with them, they thirsting after the Blood of this Pious Prince; and so on
Tuesday the 30 day of January, Anno 1648, was the Scaffold erected, just before
White Hall the King's Banqueting House, from which Scaffold the King made his
last Speech, professing his Innoceney: and after by a disguised Executioner had
his Head chopped off at one Blow; and even his Enemies wept in private for that
they had done in public: It being an Insolence without President; and a
Murder in the highest degree detestable, in regard both of the quality, and of
the Person, being acted by Rebellious Subjects upon the Person of their lawful
Prince, and moreover a Prince in himself of a most exemplary Tenderness and
Virtue. His Body was put in a Coffin of Black Velvet, and carried to his House
at St. James's, and there put in Lead, and, about the seventh day of February
after, it was delivered to two of his Servants to Bury: where at Windsor in St.
George's Chapel it was Interred in the presence of the Duke of Richmond, the
Marquess of Hartford, and the Earls Lindsy and Southampton, and Dr. Juxon with
several others: on the Breast of the Corpse was sawdered a small piece of Lead,
about two foot long, and two inches broad, in which was inscribed KING CHARLES
1648.

This Charles the First was King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland: he
was the Second Son of King James by Ann his Queen, who was Daughter to
Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and Norwigia: He began his Reign on
Saturday the 27 day of March, Anno 16^2 reigned 23 years, 10 months, and 3
days, and was the 45 sole Monarch of England: He was beheaded on Tuesday the 30
day of January (as is showed before) Anno 1648, being in the 24 year of his
Reign, and 49 year of his Age. His Body was buried at Windsor.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of King Charles the Second.

KING Charles the First being Barbarously Murdered, the Parliament now began
to lop of several Nobles heads, and other of the late King's Favorites, as
Duke Hamelton, Lord Capell, and the Earl of Holland; and now they thought to
have intailed their Sitting from Generation to Generation, never intending to
rife again by a Dissolution: and to this intent they put out an Act, whereby
they took all (as they thought, either Right or Hope of Succession from Charles
the Second: and likewise disinabled all the rest of his Brothers and Sisters
from Inheriting any thing in England: and they caused the King's Arms to be
pulled down every where; and in their places were set up the Cross and Harp,
which they called the States Arms; the King's Picture also in the old Exchange
they caused to be defaced, and the following Inscription set behind the head of
it in Gold Letters.

Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis Angliae Restitutae Primo, Anno
1648. January 30.

They likewise caused the Titles of all Process at Law to be altered, and in
stead of Carolus Dei Gratia, etc. they put in Custodes Libertatis Angliae, etc.
and caused the Court of King's Bench to be called by the name of the
Vpper-Bench: They made also a new Stamp for Money, with the Cross on one side
thereof, and the Cross and Harp on the other side, and the Circumscription on
the one side was The Commonwealth of England, and on the other side God with
us. And there was also a new great Seal made.

And now the Lord Fairfax having laid down his Commission, the Parliament made
Oliver Cromwell their General, who was so Fortunate in all his Enterprises,
that in a few years time he brought England, Scotland and Ireland into
Subjection: truth is, if his Cause had been Honorable and Just, he would have
been as much Honored by Posterity for his Valor, as he is hated by all good
Subjects for his Disloyalty and Inhumanity to his Sovereign Lord and Master the
King.

And now his Majesty being in France, he hoped to get Aid there, but found
none; yet his Friends here in England Proclaimed him King, the Earl of Ormond
and Lord Inchequin caused him also to be Proclaimed King in Ireland.

And now the Parliament proceeded to make Sale of the King and Queen's Lands,
not sparing their Houses; whose Purchasers gained no small Sums by them,
making Money of the Leads, Glass, Iron, Timber and Stones of the same Houses:
the Bishops with the Deans and Chapters Lands also received the same Doom, and
most of the Castles in England were by the Parliament's Order demolished and
thrown down: and all Persons were expelled from places of Trust either in
Church or State, which would not Subscribe to the present Government then
Established by them.

And now his Majesty was Proclaimed in Scotland, and after great Debate had
among them there, at length they agree on some Propositions to be sent to the
King, who was then at the Isle of Jersie, and Mr. Windram Lord of Libberton
was appointed Messenger: The Heads of which Propositions were,

1. That his Majesty should sign the Solemn League and Covenant.

2. That he should pass diverse Acts of Parliament, which were concluded on in
their two last Sessions of Parliament in Scotland.

3. That he should be pleased to recall the late Commissions, given to
Mounttross.

4. That he should put away all Papists from him.

5. That he would appoint some place about Holland to Treat with their
Comissioners.

And 6. That he would be graciously pleased to give a speedy Answer to their
Desires.

These Propositions coming to the King, they were very stiffly debated Pro and
Con, and after much Consultation, at last Sir William Flemming was sent Agent
to the Committee of the Estates in Scotland, till such as the Lord Libberton
could be dispatched: who shortly after followed with a Letter and Instructions
by word of Mouth to the Committee of Estates, and Breda in Holland was
appointed for the place of a solemn Treaty; and after great debates by the
Committee of Estates and Kirk in Scotland, at long run it was concluded, that
the Earl of Castles, the Lord Lothian, Burly and Libberton, Sir John Smith, and
Mr. Jeoffries, should go Commissioners for the Estates; and Mr. Broady, Lauson
and Wood for the Kirk: and these having received their Commissions, met the
King at Breda, where, after their Speeches made to his Majesty, they then
delivered their Propositions, much to the same effect of those already
mentioned.

Now, during this Treaty, the Marquess of Montross was seized in Scotland,
where he was with a most barbarous inhumanity, exposed to all the severness
imaginable: a Gibbet set up for him, of a height extraordinary, where he was
hanged, and then quartered; with all the circumstances of a solemn and a
deliberate cruelty and malice, to the eternal infamy of that Faction, which
would, in the very instance of an overture, and Treaty of accord, proceed to so
unheard of an outrage upon the Person of so loyal a Subject to his and their
Sovereign. This was the fatal and Tragical Event of his Majesty's Affairs in
Scotland.

Upon the Report of this News at Breda, the King was much Troubled, and all the
Treaty had like to have broken off upon it; but yet the King at length, through
the necessity of his Affairs, concluded the Treaty by condescending to most of
the Propositions and this Conclusion being carried to Edenborough, after much
Debate, it was Resolved another Message should be sent to invite the King over,
but the Parliament here in England, having notice of all those proceedings in
Scotland, prepared an Army thereupon to Invade Scotland, under the Command of
their General Oliver Cromwell, and they had also about this time put out an Act
for the bringing all Proceedings at Law into the English Tongue, and Secretary
hand; which continued so for about some ten years.

And about this time also their Admiral General Blake took, sunck and burnt
most of Prince Ruperts Fleet, which was a great hurt to the Kings Affairs. And
now the King being arived at Spey in the North of Scotland, some Lords were
sent down to accompany him to Edenborough; as he came along he was entertained
with the general Joy of all the People, and at Abberden he was presented with
1500 pounds, which thing was ill taken by the Commitee of Estates and Kirk; and
therefore they sent their Injunction to prohibit other places from doing the
like: and the King being now come to Edenborough, he was again proclaimed King
on the 15 of July Anno 1650, but his Coronation was deferred by reason of the
then Troubles, for the English Army was upon their Borders; so the Scots now
began to think how they might defend themselves, and therefore they marched
under the Command of Montgomery, and set upon the English at Musclebrough, but
were worsted, and at Dunbarr the English wholly routed them and gained the Pass
there: this news was brought to the King at St. Johnstons, much about the same
time when the death of his Sister the Princess Elizabeth was brought to him: so
shortly after this he left the States of Scotland and repaired into the North
of that Kingdom, being no longer able to endure the Affronts put upon him.

And now, besides the danger of the English Army then in the Bowels of
Scotland, they themselves were yet divided into three Partys, so that nothing
but ruin could be expected among them: but the King returning with Montgomery
to St. Johnstons again, they were then all reconciled among themselves, and the
King on the first day of January Anno 1650, was Crowned at Scoon.

And now the King set up his Standard at Abberdeen, and resolved himself to be
Generalissimo of the Scoth Army: and about this time was Sir Henry Hyde
beheaded at London for his Loyalty; and not long after Captain Brown Bushel
received the like Doom, for performing some signal Services for the King.

And the King now began to Fortify Sterling, to which place he afterward
removed his Court, and the English drew nigher and nigher every day, and had
surprised the Earl of Eglington, and one of his Sons: but whilst things were
thus in Agitation in Scotland, a Plot was discovered in England against the
Parliament, most of which Plotters were Presbyterians, and two of them, being
Ministers, viz. Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Love were beheaded for their Treason as the
Parliament called it: now Cromwell perceiving that he could not draw the Scots
to a Field Battle, presently transported over the Fife 1600 Foot, and 4 Troops
of Horse, who with the help of Lambert and Okey routed Sir John Brown's Forces,
took him, and several other persons of Quality, Prisoners, and slew two
thousand upon the place, and took near 120 Prisoners.

Now the King, seeing the English preval so fast, thought it best to acquit
Scotland, and so marched for England, beginning his march the last day of July,
Anno 1651, Cromwell seeing this, sent Lambert after them with a select party of
Horse to fall upon their Rear, and himself with the rest that could be spared
followed, and the Parliament also hearing of the King's March, interdicted all
Aid and Assistance either of men or money to be given to his Majesty, under the
penalty of High Treason, and they also caused numerous Forces to be raised in
most Counties in England.

The King's Army now in England carried themselves very civilly, yet for all
that, the People were so besorted, that they came very slowly into his
Assistance, for few or none came during this tedious march; saving the Lore
Howard's Son of Estrich with a Troop of Horse; and now Lambert with his Men
having been guided over the Dales and Moors in Yorkshire got the Advantage of
the King's Army in their March, and instead of following them, got before them,
and thought to have stopped the King's Army at Warrington-Bridg, but after an hot
Dispute and the loss of some men the King at length gained the passage over the
Bridge, and coming to Tongue Norton, he sent a Trumpeter with his Summons to
Collonell Humphry Mackworth, Governor of Shrewsbury, to render up the Town;
but he sent the King a flat denial, giving him the Title only of Commander in
chief of the Scottish Army, in the Superscription of his Letter he sent back:
from hence the King marched on to Worcester, where he entered the Town, the
Earl of Derby a little before had brought him a supply of 250 Foot and 60 Horse
out of the Isle of Man, and was gone into Lancashire in hopes to have gotten
more Forces there, but was routed there by Lilborn: and most of his chief
Commanders slain, as the Lord Withrington, Sir Thomas Tilsly, Colonel Trollop,
and Colonel Bointon; and some others taken: This misfortune was imputed to the
disappointment his Lordship received in Lancashire, to which place his Majesty
had ordered him to repair, with assurance that the Presbyterians would freely
join with him, in order to his Majesty's Restoration; but, coming thither, he
found it otherwise, and that they did all they could to hinder any Conjunction,
unless he would take the Covenant; which refusing to do, he was forced upon
that Engagement before mentioned (in Wiggon-lane) where he behaved himself with
all possible bravery, and Col. Massy also had his part in the Honor of this
occasion.

His Majesty all this time was busy in fortifying of Worcester, in the mean
time Major General Lambert, gained the Pass at Vpton, where the Bridge was cut
down, by causing the Troopers to swim the River upon their Horse-backs, taking
their Pistols out of the Holsters and carrying them in their hands to save them
from wet: and this Attempt was principally undertaken for saving the Lives of
40 or 50 desperate Fellows who had got over the Bridge upon a pole of Wood, and
were forced into the Church close nigh the Bridge, by Major General Massy's men,
where they had all been cut off, if the Troopers had not swum the River, who
thereby not only saved the said men, but also put Major General Massy and his
men to the Retreat, and so the Royallists were forced to quit the Town, and
leave the pass to the Parliamentarians, who quickly made a Bridge of Boats over
the River: and now Cromwell joining with the rest of the Forces against the
King, after some Sallies out of the Town against them, at length the King, in
the Front of his men sallied out of the Town, on the third day of September,
Anno 1651, and so valiantly charged Cromwell's Life Guard, that they were
forced to retire, till seconded by fresh Forces, and then they put the Royal
party to the Retreat; and the King had his Horse twice shot under him, and not
able to rally again, they were forced to fly into the Town; where the
Cromwellian party entered pell mell with them, and then the Cry went, Save the
King, Save the King: And now the King, seeing all gone, with some Nobles and
Servants, with much difficulty, got away; and coming to a Farmers House in the
Borders of Staffordshire, there he disrobed himself, and for want of a pair of
Scissars had his Hair cut off with a Knife; and so he, with the Company of one
Friend (who brought him Provision toward Night) betook himself into a Wood,
about 4 miles from Woolverhampton, where he made an Oak his Palace, and the
Soldiers all this while were hunting about, like Bloodhounds for the King, a
Thousand pound being the promised Reward of those that could take him. But some
few days after he was conveyed to the House of one Mris Jane Lane, who proved
a faithful and loyal Subject to him, and was a chief Instrument in his
conveyance beyond Seas; which after many Dangers past, he at length attained,
landing at New Haven in France. In the Battle at Worcester it is supposed there
was about 3000 slain, and 700 taken Prisoners. The Parliament, to manifest
their joy for this Victory, caused days of Public Thanksgiving to be made,
and hung up all the Scotch Colors in Westminster Hall: and not long after this
the Earl of Derby was beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire.

And now the King being safely gotten to Paris; from thence after a while the
King removed to St. Germains and did confer* with the Duke of Lorrain for the
recovery of his Kingdom of Ireland, but it came to nothing; so the King
returning again to Paris: during his abode there, his Brother the Duke of
Gloucester (who had a long time been detained by the Parliament of England in
the Isle of Wight) came to visit him, accompanied from the Hague with Sir
Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Richard Greenvile.

And not long after, his Quandam Preserver Mris Jane Lane being escaped out of
England arrived in France, and sent Letters to his Majesty, certifying him of
her Arrival, who presently sent Coaches to conduct her to Paris, where his
Majesty gave her a large demonstration of his Princely Favor and Bounty.

Now whilst the King was passing away his time thus in France; in the mean
time Oliver Cromwell the 20 of April 1653 dissolved the long-lived Parliament,
which had sat twelve years, six months and seventeen days, and in derision,
they were cried about the Streets, Parliament men Four a penny.

And in this year, and the year preceding, were five bloody Engagements at Sea
between the English and the Dutch: after the long Parliament dissolved, Oliver
called another Juncto, who after they had sat some small time to little
purpose, they resigned up their Power again into his hand from whom they
received it.

And now, about the 16 of December, Anno 1653. Oliver Cromwell was sworn Lord
Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. and so the Government was now
again in a single Person, against which they had all sworn; and in April after
the Protector concluded a Peace with the Dutch, whose Aid and Assistance the
King had strongly solicited against him.

The King seeing this, he sought a Reconciliation between France and Spain,
hoping thereby to further his own Interest; he left France, and departed for
Germany, accompanied with his Cousin Prince Rupert, taking his first Residence
at the Spaw, whither his Royal Sister the Princess of Orange came to visit him;
now during these passages Oliver Protector had discovered a Plot in England
against his Authority: and some of the Plotters were taken, and two of them*
viz. Colonel Gerrard and Mr. Vowel suffered Death: Indeed the Protector had a
cunning way in discovering of Plots, for he had his Inveaglers in several parts
of England, who feigned themselves great Favorers of the King's Cause, pricked
Gentlemen on into Conspiracies against the Protector, and when they were come
to any head, and that the chief were enrolled, and sworn, and the day appointed
for putting their Intentions in Execution, then forthwith were they discovered
to the Usurper; and so their Estates became Preys to his Coffers, and their
Persons to his Mercy, which was but small, their heads being usually their
ransoms to this man of Might: upon which account several worthy Gentlemen lost
their Lives, for no man could say, his Life was his own, if once Oliver did but
frown upon him, for his Will was his Law, and this his Rule,

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro Ratione voluntas:

This is my Will, and this I do Command;
What man is he that dare the same withstand.
Great indeed was the Awe the People stood in during his Usurped Authority, for
he carried MAGNA CHARTA in his Sword-Hilt, and the Peoples Liberty in his well
tempered Blade: and now they began to stir in Scotland again, and the Earl of
Glencarn, Menro and Middleton having gotten some Forces together, intended
again to have prosecuted the King's Cause, but they were routed by General Monk
and Colonel Morgan.

During these Stirs his Majesty in the Company of his Royal Sister had left the
Spaw, and taken his Journey to Collen, where he and his Sister were Royally
entertained: and shortly after they were Invited by the Duke of Newburgh to his
Palace at Dunsel Dorf, where they were Nobly Feasted; and here the King and
his Sister parted, she returning for Holland, and his Majesty to Collen.

During these passages the Protector discovered another plot, which should have
been a general Rising all over England, whereupon several were taken and
executed and abundance transported beyond Seas, and sold for Slaves.

And now the King, with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and his Royal
Sister the Princess of Orange, with several other Lords and Ladys took their
Progress to see the Fair at Franckford, and at Conningstein near Franckford,
Christina Queen of Sweeden, and the King, gave one the other a Visit: and his
Majesty having made his Abode at Franckford during so long time as he thought
good; he then returned again for C^llen: from whence he was shortly after
invited into the Low Countries by Don John de Austria Governor thereof; whither
his Brother the Duke of York came to him.

Cromwell now, according to conditions, sent over 6000 foot Soldiers to aid the
French King in his Wars against Flanders: and the English were to have Dunkirk
in consideration thereof, which afterward was delivered to them, after some
difficulty passed. But during these Stirs beyond Seas, Oliver, by an Assembly,
whereof Sir Thomas Witherington was Speaker, was invested with Purple Robes,
and installed in Westminster Hall: after which he Established a Pageant house
of Lords, most of them of his own Creation, such as John Lord Hewson, and the
like: and not long after this, he discovered another Plot, and Sir Henry
Slingby, Dr. Hewit, Mr. Aston, Mr. Stacy, and Mr. Betly suffered death, the two
first beheaded, and the other three hanged, drawn and quartered for being in
the said Plot, as Oliver pretended.

Now great was the Pomp and State this Protector of England assumed to himself,
and as great the state of his Son Henry, whom he had made Lord Deputy of
Ireland: he had also appointed Commissioners in most Eminent places in England,
for Approbation of Ministers, and given them power to eject Ignorant,
Scandalous and Insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters, under which notion of
Ignorance, many worthy Divines were thrown out of their livings, when the Truth
was, Loyalty on their sides and Covetousness on the Adverse side was the
principal cause of their Ejectment: Hugh Peter's the Minister was in great
favor with the Protector, and served him in place of his Jester; among those
Parliaments that were called by this Protector, one of them, consisting most of
Mechanics, Enacted that no persons should be Married but by the Justices of
Peace, and first to be asked in the Church, or else proclaimed in the Market.

And now the Usurped Power and Authority of Oliver drawing to a Period, his
Glass being run, at length this Conqueror of Three Kingdoms, on the Third day
of September, Anno 1658. was forced to yield himself Prisoner to death, who
following his own example) admitted neither of bail nor ransom, but made him
pay his last breath to his Will; and so in a great Wind he was hurried away
into another World.

After his death, he was laid in State at Somerset house in the Strand, till
the 23 of November after, and then his Funeral was celebrated at a vaster
Charge then has formerly been used for the best Kings in the best of times: he
was Inhumed in the Abbey at Westminster, but his Resurrection followednot
longafter, for he with Bradshaw who condemned King Charles the First, were both
of them dug out of their Graves, and hanged in Chains at Tiburn that year
the King was restored to his Kingdoms, Anno 1660.

Oliver being now gone, Richard his eldest Son succeed him, whose head being
thought to light, and his shoulders to weak for the Supportation of so weighty
a Government, he was quickly thrust out again from his Protectorship: and now
Fletwood and Lambert (the chief Instruments in outing of Richard) with the rest
of the Army, called the old Parliament (turned out by Oliver) to their Places
again, who willingly assumed them: whilst these proceedings were in hand, the
Gentlemen in Lancashire and Cheshire, about harvest time 1659, rose under the
Conduct of Sir George Booth in defense of their Privileges, and cause of the
King; but Lambert being sent against them by the Parliament, he routed them,
and Sir George Booth was shortly after taken and sent Prisoner to the Tower,
and Lambert was gratified by the Parliament for this good Service with a
thousand pounds.

At this time the King, with his Brother the Duke of York were at Callis, ready
to have wasted over, if this business of Sir George Booths had taken effect.

And now Lambert began to harbor some conceptions of assuming to himself the
Government ( Oliver having chalked him out the way) and so turned out the Rump
Parliament again (for so the people called this Fragment of the old Parliament)
and then erected a New-nothing, of his own called a Committee of Safety; all
this made well still for the King's Cause: and now Lambert takes his March into
the North as far as Newcastle, intending to Fight General Monk, and so become
sole Lord and Master of all: but when he came there his men were unwilling to
Engage, and in the mean time the Rump had gotten together again (seven times a
worse Devil then before) and dissolved his Committee of Safety, and within a
short space, they enticed all his Soldiers to desert and leave him, so that he
was left to shift for himself.

And the Rump now invited General Monk to March with his Army to London, which
accordingly he did, and was received with much joy, but he was no sooner come,
but the Rump set him on work, to put some Violences upon the City, which he
with great danger and peril performed, this gave the Citizens great occasion to
think, That he from whom they expected so much good, would prove their Ruin:
but he soon gave them proofs of the contrary, by drawing his Troops into the
City, in the quality of a Friend, and declaring himself for a free Parliament,
which revived their hearts. His first business was to restore the secluded
Members to their places in the House of Commons, upon which the Assembly
dissolved it self: and Writs were Issued out for a new Parliament, but with
such reservation that people were doubtful what the Event would prove: for no
Recusant, Cavallier, nor Cavalleir's Son was to sit in the Parliament.

This healing Parliament (for so it was called) presently after they were set,
began to vote for the King, and great Debates there were about it, but at
length it was carried for the King: and so the States Arms were pulled down
every where, and the Kings Arms set up, and his Majesty on Tuesday the 8 day of
May, Anno 1660. was proclaimed King at Whitehall-gate, and in the City with
great Pomp, Bells ringing, Bonefires burning, and the Conduits flowing with
wine as the Peoples hearts did with gladness.

And now News was carried, and Commissioners were sent to the King to desire
his return to his Kingdoms and Crown, he being then at Breda in Holland:
shortly after which he prepared for England, and on the 29 day of May 1660.
landed at Dover, accompanied with his two Brothers James Duke of York, and
Henry Duke of Gloucester, and some Lords and Gentlemen of his Attendance: he
was met by General Monk and other Nobles, and the General kneeling down upon
the ground, the King took him up, and dignified him with the George and Garter;
himself putting the George about the Generals Neck, and the Dukes of York and
Gloucester tying on the Garter; and so marching to Black Heath in Kent, his
Majesty was attended on from thence by the Lord Monk's Army, all armed, and
Swords drawn, and the Nobles and Gentry in Cloth of Silver, and other rich
Apparel, and the Lord Mayor of London and Aldermen, and a great Number of
Citizens in Velvet Coats, and Gold Chains about their Necks; and so in a most
glorious manner he was conducted through London to Whitehall; and that night
several Bonfires were made, which made the night shine like another day, but
that at Westminster was most remarkable, where the Effigies of Oliver Cromwell
was set up upon a Pole with the Common Wealth's Arms, an hour or two, and then
cast down into the fire and burnt.

And now the Parliament being infinitely Satisfied with the King's happy
Arrival, did order that a Bill should be prepared, for keeping a perpetual
Aniversary for a day of Thanksgiving to God, for his great Mercy and Blessing
to these Nations in the happy Resturation of his Majesty, and that the 29 day
of May should be set appart every year for that purpose.

And now began the Judgments of God to overtake many of those Capital Traitors
whose hands had been deeply Imbrewed in the late King's blood: and in October
following 26 of the them were found guily of high Treason, and nine of them
were executed the same Month, (to wit) Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroope, John
Carew, John Jones, Gregory Clement, Thomas Scot, John Cook, Hugh Peter's, and
Daniel Axtell; so that though divine Vengeance has, many times Leaden feet,
yet when it comes it has Iron hands: no sooner scarce was the King restored to
his Crown, but his chiefest care was to restore the Church to its purity of
worship, and so Bishops were again settled in every Diocese, and the Common
Prayer restored. And now Mary Princess of Orange, being come over to visit the
King her Brother, fell sick of the small pox and dyed, which was no little
grief to the King.

In January after the King was restored to his Kingdoms, one Venner a wine
Cooper with his Phanatick Proselytes Rebelled, and with a desperate Intention
sought to destroy all those that were not of their Opinion, killing a man in
Paul's Churchyard, and an Head-borough in Beach Lane; and after other Mischiefs
done, they marched into Cane-wood, and about 3 days after returned, and fell
desperately upon the City; and being opposed 22 of the Kings Liege People were
slain, and 22 of them, and the rest with much ado were taken and dispersed; and
Venner their Leader with 11 more of them were executed in several places in the
City.

And upon the 30 day of this same Month, the Carcasses of Oliver Cromwell,
John Bradshaw and Henry Ireton, were dug up out of their Graves, and were
drawn on Hurdles to Tyburn, and there hanged, and their Carkases being buried
under the Gallows, their heads were choped off, and were fixed upon Poles, and
set up upon Westminster Hall: not long after this dyed the most prudent Prince
Henry Duke of Gloucester the King's Brother, to the great grief of all true
English men: and upon the 23 day of April, Anno 1661 being St. George's day,
his Majesty King Charles the Second was Crowned at Westminster, with great
Splendour and Solemnity, having the day before made a Magnificent passage from
the Tower through the City of London to Whitehall.

And now by God's blessing having proceeded so far as the Title of this Epitomy
makes mention, I shall here Conclude with Saint Peter, Fear God, and Honor the
King. And so God grant King Charles the Second a long and happy Reign.

And he that will not say Amen with me,
Lord, let Hugh Peter's Lot his portion be.
FINIS.
A Table of the Kings.
A Catalogue of the British Kings and Princes that opposed the Conquest and
Government of the Romans.
Kings People. Cassibelan Trinobants. Cingitorix Kent. Carvil Kent. Taximagul
Kent. Segonax Kent. Senimagues Norfolk Cegontians Norfolk Ancalits, Norfolk
Bibroses Norfolk Cassians Norfolk Cunobeline Britains Guiderus Britains
Catacratus Britains Togadumnus Britains Arviragus Britains Cogidunus Some
Cities Caractacus Silures Prasutagus Icenians Venutius Brigantes Galgacus
Calledonians

A Catalogue of the several Roman Emperors who had Rule in Britain.
Julius Caesar Augustus Caesar Tiberius Caesar Caius Caligula Claud. Drusius
Nero Sergius Galba Marcus Silvius Aulus Vitellius Flav. Vespasian Titus
Vespasian Domitian Cocceius Nerva Trajanus Adrianus Antonius Pius Marcus
Aurelius Comodus Helvius Pertinax Septimus Severus Bassian. Caracal. Opilius
Macrinus Heliogabilus Alexander Sever. Maximinus Jul. Ver. Maximus Gordianus
Claudius Puppien. Jul. Philippus Anton. Gordian. Decius Trebonianus Emilianus
Valerianus Galienus Flav. Claudius Quintilius Aurelianus Tacitus Florianus
Marcus Aurelius Dioclesian Constan. Clorus Constan. Galer. Constan. Magnus
Julius Apostata Jovinianus Valentinianus Gracianus Maximus Valen. Theodosius I.
Arcadius Theodosius II.
A Catalogue of the Saxon Kings, during the Heptarchy: and first of the Kingdom
of Kent.
I. Kent Kingdom.
Hengist Eske Imerick Ethelbert Edbald Ercombert Egbert Lothaire Edrick Withred
Edbert Elthelbert Alrick Octa Ethelbert Cuthred Baldred
II. South Saxons Kingdom.
Ella Cissa Ethelwolf Barthun
III. West Saxons Kingdom.
Cherdick Kenrick Chewlin Chearlick Chelwolfe Kingils Kenwald Eskin Kentwin
Ceadwald Ine Ethellard Cuthred Sigesbert Kenwolfe Brithrick Egbert.
IV. East Saxons Kingdom.
Erchenwine Sledda Sebert Sered Sigesbert Sigebert Swithelm Sighere Sebba
Sigherd Seoffrid Offa Sellerd Suthred
V. Northumberland Kingdom.
Ida and Ella Adda Elappea Theodwald Frethulfe Theodrick Ethelrick Ethelfride
Edwine Osricke Oswald Oswye Egfride Alfride Osredd Kenred Oswick Ce^lnulf
Egbert Oswolf Edilwald Alured Ethelred Alfwald Osrod
VI. Mercia Kingdom.
Crida Wibba Ceorle Penda Peada Wolfere Ethelred Kenred Chelred Ethelbald Offa
Egfride Kenwolfe Kenelme C^olwolfe B^rnulfe Ludecan Withlafe Barthulf Burdred.
VII. East Angles Kingdom.
Vsfa Titulus Redwald Erpenwald Sigebert Egrick Anna Ethelbert Edelwald Aldulf
Elswolf Beorne Ethelred Ethelbert Edmund
A Catalogue of the British Kings that withstood the Saxons Conquest.
Vortigern Vortimer Aurelius A. Vter Pend. Arthur Constantine Conatus
Vortiporus Canonus Careticus Cadwan Cadwallo Cadwallader.
A Catalogue of those Saxon Kings who were accounted Petty Monarchs.
Chewline Ethelbert Redwald Edwine Oswald Oswye Wolfere Ethelred Kenred Chelred
Ethelbald Offa, Egfride Kenwolfe
The Kings Reigns.
A Table showing the years of the Kings Reigns, beginning at Egbert the West
Saxon, the first Sole Monarch, and ending with Edward the Confessors: together
with the years of Christ answering to every years of their Reigns: but Note
that upon the death of some of these Kings following, there was a kind of
Inter-Regum sometimes before the Successor began fully to Rule.
Egbert began his Reign Anno 819.
Anno Reg. An. Dom 1 820 2 821 3 822 4 823 5 824 6 825 7 826 8 827 9 828 10 829
11 830 12 831 13 832 14 833 15 834 16 835 17 836 Ethelwolf began his Reign Anno
837.
A. R. A. D. 1 838 2 839 3 840 4 841 5 842 6 843 7 844 8 845 9 846 10 847 11
848 12 849 13 850 14 851 15 852 16 853 17 854 18 855 19 856 20 857 Ethelbald
began his Reign Anno 857.
A. R. A. D. 1 858 2 859 Ethlebert began his Reign Annoo. 86.
A. R. A. D. 1 861 2 862 3 863 4 864 5 865 Etheldred, began his Reign, Anno.
866.
A. Reg. An. Dom. 1 867 2 868 3 869 4 870 5 871 6 872 Elfred began his Reign
Anno 872.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 873 2 874 3 875 4 876 5 877 6 178 7 879 8 880 9 881 10 882
11 883 12 884 13 885 14 886 15 887 16 888 17 889 18 890 19 891 20 892 21 893 22
894 23 895 24 896 25 897 26 898 27 899 28 900 29 901 Edward began his Reign
Anno 901.
A. R. A. D. 1 902 2 903 3 904 4 905 5 906 6 907 7 908 8 909 9 910 10 911 11
912 12 913 13 914 14 915 15 916 16 917 17 918 18 919 19 920 20 921 21 922 22
923 23 924 24 925 Ethelstan began his Reign Anno. 925.
AR. A. D. 1 926 2 927 3 928 4 929 5 930 6 931 7 932 8 933 9 934 10 935 11 936
12 937 13 938 14 939 15 940 Edmund began his Reign Anno 940.
A. R. A. D. 1 941 2 942 3 943 4 944 5 945 6 946 Edred began his Reign Anno 946.
A. R. A. D. 1 947 2 948 3 949 4 950 5 951 6 952 7 953 8 954 9 955 Edwy began
his Reign Anno 955.
A R. A D. 1 956 2 957 3 958 4 959 Edgar began his Reign, Anno 959.
A. R. A. D. 1 960 2 961 3 962 4 963 5 964 6 965 7 966 8 967 9 968 10 969 11
970 12 971 13 972 14 973 15 974 16 975 Edward began his Reign, Anno 975.
A R. A. D. 1 976 2 977 3 978 4 979 Ethelred began his Reign, Anno 979.
1 980 2 981 3 982 4 983 5 984 6 985 7 986 8 987 9 988 10 989 11 990 12 991 13
992 14 993 15 994 16 995 17 996 18 997 19 998 20 999 21 1000 22 1001 13 1002 24
1003 25 1004 26 1005 27 1006 28 1007 29 1008 30 1009 31 1010 32 1011 33 1012 34
1013 35 1014 36 1015 37 1016 Edmund Ironside began his Reign, Anno 1316.
A. R. A. D. 1 1017 Canutus, the Dane began his Reign Anno 1017.
A. R. A. D. 1 1018 2 1019 3 1020 4 1021 5 1022 6 1023 7 1024 8 1025 9 1026 10
1027 11 1028 12 1029 13 1030 14 1031 15 1032 16 1033 17 1034 18 1035 Harrold I.
began his Reign, Anno 1036.
A. R. A. D. 1 1037 2 1038 3 1039 4 1040 Hardicanute, began his Reign Anno.
1040.
A. R. A. D. 1 1041 2 1042 Edward Confessor began his Reign Anno 1042
A. R. A. D. 1 1043 2 1044 3 1045 4 1046 5 1047 6 1048 7 1049 8 1050 9 1051 10
1052 11 1053 12 1054 13 1055 14 1056 15 1057 16 1058 17 1059 18 1060 19 1061 20
1062

6 mon. 27 days.

Harrold II. began his Reign, Anno 1065.

This King Reigned but some 9 months, and nine days, and then yielded up both
his Life and Kingdom to William the Conqueror.

A TABLE showing the beginning and ending of every Kings Reign from the Norman
Conquest to this present year 1675. Together with the years of Christ answering
to every year of their Reigns, the year beginning the 25 of March: but Note
that the Months and odd days of every Kings Reign, are acconnted according to
the Callender, and not according to 28. days to the Month, which has so often
occasioned the variance between one Table and another, scarcely two of them
agreeing, in their Computati^n, as to the odd Months and days of every Kings
Reigns.
William the Conqueror began his Reign October 14. Anno 1066.
A. R. A. D. 1 1067 2 1068 3 1069 4 1070 5 1071 6 1072 7 1073 8 1074 9 1075 10
1076 11 1077 12 1078 13 1079 14 1080 15 1081 16 1082 17 1083 18 1084 19 1085 20
1086

10. mon. 26. days.

William Rufus began his Reign 9 September, Anno 1087.
A. R. A. D. 1 1088 2 1089 3 1090 4 1091 5 1092 6 1093 7 1094 8 1095 9 1096 10
1097 11 1098 12 1099 Henry the first began his Reign, Aug. 1. Anno 1100.
A. R. A. D. 1 1101 2 1102 3 1103 4 1104 5 1105 6 1106 7 1107 8 1108 9 1109 10
1110 11 1111 12 1112 13 1113 14 1114 15 1115 16 1116 17 1117 18 1118 19 1119 20
1120 21 1121 22 1122 23 1123 24 1124 25 1125 26 1126 27 1127 28 1128 29 1129 30
1130 31 1131 32 1132 33 1133 34 1134 35 1135

4. mon. 1. day.

Stephen began his Reign 2. December, Anno 1135.
A R. A. D. 1 1136 2 1137 3 1138 4 1139 5 1140 6 1141 7 1142 8 1143 9 1144 10
1145 11 1146 12 1147 13 1148 14 1149 15 1150 16 1151 17 1152 18 1153

10 mar. 23 days.

Henry the Second began h^s Reign 25. October, Anno 1154.
A. R. A. D. 1 1155 2 1156 3 1157 4 1158 5 1159 6 1160 7 1161 8 1162 9 1163 10
1164 11 1165 12 1166 13 1167 14 1168 15 1169 16 1170 17 1171 18 1172 19 1173 20
1174 21 1175 22 1176 23 1177 24 1178 25 1179 26 1180 27 1181 28 1182 29 1183 30
1184 31 1185 32 1186 33 1187 34 1188

8. mon. 11. days.

Richard the First began his Reign July 6, Anno 1189.
A. R. A. D. 1 1190 2 1191 3 1192 4 1193 5 1194 6 1195 7 1196 8 1197 9 1198

9. mon 0 days.

John began his Reign April 6. Anno 1199.
A. R. A. D. 1 1200 2 1201 3 1202 4 1203 5 1204 6 1205 7 1206 8 1207 9 1208 10
1209 11 1210 12 1211 13 1212 14 1213 15 1214 16 1215 17 1216

6 mon. 13. days.

Henry the Third, began his Reign 19. October Anno 1216.
A. R. A. D. 1 1217 2 1218 3 1219 4 1220 5 1221 6 1222 7 1223 8 1224 9 1225 10
1226 11 1227 12 1228 13 1229 14 1230 15 1231 16 1232 17 1233 18 1234 19 1235 20
1236 21 1237 22 1238 23 1239 24 1240 25 1241 26 1242 27 1243 28 1244 29 1245 30
1246 31 1247 32 1248 33 1249 34 1250 35 1251 36 1252 37 1253 38 1254 39 1255 40
1256 41 1257 42 1258 43 1259 44 1260 45 1261 46 1262 47 1263 48 1264 49 1265 50
1266 51 1267 52 1268 53 1269 54 1270 55 1271 56 1272

0. mon. 28 days.

Edward the First began his Reign 16 November, Anno 1272.
A. R. A. D. 1 1273 2 1274 3 1275 4 1276 5 1277 6 1278 7 1279 8 1280 9 1281 10
1282 11 1283 12 1284 13 1285 14 1286 15 1287 16 1288 17 1289 18 1290 19 1291 20
1292 21 1293 22 1294 23 1295 24 1296 25 1297 26 1298 27 1299 28 1300 29 1301 30
1302 31 1303 32 1304 33 1305 34 1306

7. mon. 21 days.

Edward the Second began his Reign July, the 7 Anno 1037.
A. R. A. D. 1 1308 2 1309 3 1310 4 1311 5 1312 6 1313 7 1314 8 1315 9 1316 10
1317 11 1318 12 1319 13 1320 14 1321 15 1322 16 1323 17 1324 18 1325 19 1326

6. mon. 18. days.

Edward the Third began his Reign 25 January Anno 1325.
A. R. A. D. 1 1327 2 1328 3 1329 4 1330 5 1331 6 1332 7 1333 8 1334 9 1335 10
1336 11 1337 12 1338 13 1339 14 1340 15 1341 16 1342 17 1343 18 1344 19 1345 20
1346 21 1347 22 1348 23 1349 24 1350 25 1351 26 1352 27 1353 28 1354 29 1355 30
1356 31 1357 32 1358 33 1359 34 1360 35 1361 36 1362 37 1363 38 1364 39 1365 40
1366 41 1367 42 1368 43 1369 44 1370 45 1371 46 1372 47 1373 48 1374 49 1375 50
1376

4 mon. 26 days.

Richard the Second began his Reign June 21. An. 1377.
A. R. A. D. 1 1378 2 1379 3 1380 4 1381 5 1382 6 1383 7 1384 8 1385 9 1386 10
1387 11 1388 12 1389 13 1390 14 1391 15 1392 16 1393 17 1394 18 1395 19 1396 20
1397 21 1398 22 1399

3. mon. 8. days.

Henry the Forth began his Reign, 29 September, Anno 1399.
A. R. A. D. 1 1400 2 1401 3 1402 4 1403 5 1404 6 1405 7 1406 8 1407 9 1408 10
1409 11 1410 12 1411 13 1412

5. mon. 19. days

Henry the Fifth began his Reign, 20 March Anno 1412.
A. R. A. D. 1 1413 2 1414 3 1415 4 1416 5 1417 6 1418 7 1419 8 1420 9 1421

5. mon. 11. days

Henry the Six beganhis Reign 31 August Anno 1422.
A. R. A. D. 1 1423 2 1424 3 1425 4 1426 5 1427 6 1428 7 1429 8 1420 9 1431 10
1432 11 1433 12 1434 13 1435 14 1436 15 1437 16 1438 17 1439 18 1440 19 1441 20
1442 21 1443 22 1444 23 1445 24 1446 25 1447 26 1448 27 1449 28 1450 29 1451 30
1452 31 1453 32 1454 33 1455 34 1456 35 1457 36 1458 37 1459 38 1460

6. mon 3 days

Edward the Fourthbegan his Reign 4 March, Anno 1460.
A. R. A. D. 1 1461 2 1462 3 1463 4 1464 5 1465 6 1466 7 1467 8 1468 9 1469 10
1470 11 1471 12 1472 13 1473 14 1474 15 1475 16 1476 17 1477 18 1478 19 1479 20
1480 21 1481 22 1482

1. mon. 5 days.

Edward the Fifth began his Reign 9 April, Anno 1483.
A. R. A. D.

2 mon. 13 days.

Richard the Third began his Reign June 22, Anno 1483.
A. R. A. D. 1 1485 2 1486

2. mon. 0. days.

Henry the Seventh began his Reign 22. August Anno 1485.
A. R. A. D. 1 1487 2 1488 3 1489 4 1490 5 1491 6 1492 7 1493 8 1494 9 1495 10
1495 11 1496 12 1497 13 1498 14 1499 15 1500 16 1501 17 1502 18 1503 19 1504 20
1505 21 1506 22 1507 23 1508

8. mon. 0. days.

Henry the Eight began his Reign 22 April, Anno 1546.
A. R. A. D. 1 1510 2 1511 3 1512 4 1513 5 1514 6 1515 7 1516 8 1517 9 1518 10
1519 11 1520 12 1521 13 1522 14 1523 15 1524 16 1525 17 1526 18 1427 19 1428 20
1429 21 1430 22 1431 23 1532 24 1533 25 1534 26 1535 27 1536 28 1537 29 1538 30
1539 31 1540 32 1541 33 1542 34 1543 35 1544 36 1545 37 1546

9. mon. 6 days

Edward the Sixth began his Reign January 28 Anno 1546.
A. R. A. D. 1 1547 2 1548 3 1549 4 1550 5 1551 6 1552

5. mon. 8. days.

Q. Mary, began her Reign July 6 Anno 1558.
A. R. A. D. 1 1553 2 1555 3 1556 4 1557 5 1558

9. mon. 11. days.

Q. Elizabeth began her Reign, Nov. 17. An 1558.
A. R. A. D. 1 1559 2 1560 3 1561 4 1562 5 1563 6 1564 7 1565 8 1566 9 1567 10
1568 11 1569 12 1570 13 1571 14 1572 15 1573 16 1574 17 1575 18 1576 19 1577 20
1578 21 1579 22 1580 23 1581 24 1582 25 1583 26 2584 27 1585 28 1586 29 1587 30
1588 31 1589 32 1590 33 1591 34 1592 35 1593 36 1594 37 1595 38 1596 39 1597 40
1598 41 1599 42 1600 43 1601 44 1602 4. mon. 7. days. James began his Reign 24.
March Anno 1602.
A. R. A. D. 1 1603 2 1604 3 1605 4 1606 5 1607 6 1608 7 1609 8 1610 9 1611 10
1612 11 1613 12 1164 13 1615 14 1616 15 1617 16 1618 17 1619 18 1620 19 1621 20
1622 21 1623 22 1624 0. mon. 3. days Charles the First began his Reign 27
March, Anno 1625.
A R. A D 1 1626 2 1627 3 1628 4 1629 5 1630 6 1631 7 1632 8 1633 9 1634 10
1635 11 1636 12 1637 13 1638 14 1639 15 1640 16 1641 17 1642 18 1643 19 1644 20
1645 21 1646 22 1647 23 1648 10. mon. 3. days. Charles the Second began his
Reign January 30 Anno 1648.
A. R. A. D. 1 1649 2 1650 3 1651 4 1652 5 1653 6 1654 7 1655 8 1656 9 1657 10
1658 11 1659 12 1660 13 1661 14 1662 15 1663 16 1664 17 1665 18 1666 19 1667 20
1668 21 1669 22 1670 23 1671 24 1672 25 1673 26 1674 27 1675

A Table of Dimensions.
The Dimension of England, Scotland and Ireland with the Island of Man
Anglesey, Wight, Garnesey, Jersie, and Farn are most commonly reckoned and taken
to be as follows:
England Miles Is accounted to be in Length about 0386 And in Breadth it is
reckoned 0279 The Circumference is reckoned 1532 Scotland Miles The Length
thereof is accounted 0480 And it is said to be in Breadth 0165 The Circumference
is reckoned 1100 Ireland Miles Is accounted to be in Length about 0303 And in
Breadth it is reckoned 0112 The Circumference thereof is 0948 Man Island Miles
The Length thereof is accounted 0029 And it is said to be in in Breadth 0009 The
Circumference is reckoned 0082 Anglefey Miles Is accounted to in Length about
0020 And in Breadth it is reckoned 0017 The circumference thereof is 0070 Wight
Island Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0020 And it is said to be in
Breadth 0012 The Circumference is reckoned 0060 Garnsey Miles Is accounted to be
in Length about 0013 And in Breadth it is reckoned 0009 The Circumference
thereof is 0036 Jersie Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0010 And it is
said to be in Breadth 0006 The Circumference is reckoned 0038 Farn Island Miles
The Length thereof is accounted 0005 And in Breadth it is reckoned 0005 The
Circumference thereof is 0015

A Catalogue of Bishoprics.
An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Bishoprics in England and Wales, with
the Counties, and number of Parishes in each Diocese; and how many of them are
Impropriate: likewise the valuation of each Bishopric in the King's Books, and
how the Clergies Tenths are rated for each of them.
Province of Canterbury.
Bish. and Count Par. Imp. 257. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Canterbury has Kent
part. l. s. d. q. 2816. 17. 09. 01. 0651. 18. 02. 01 Saint Asaph has Denby
part Flint part Montgom. p. Merioneth. p Shropsh. part
Par. Imp. 121. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0187. 11. 06. 00. 0186. 19.
07. 03. Bangor has Carnarvon Anglesey Denbigh part Montgom. p. Merioneth p.
Par. Imp. 107. 036. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0131. 16. 04. 00.
0151. 14. 03. 01 Bish. Count. Par. Imp. 388. 160. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Bath
and Wells has Somerset-sh. l. s. d. q. 0533. 01. 03. 00. 0353. 18. 00. 03.
Bristol has Bristol City Dorset shire
Par. Imp. 236. 064. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0338. 08. 04. 00.
0353. 18. 00. 03. Chichester has Sussex. Par. Imp. 250. 112. Cler. Tenth. Val.
Bish. l. s. d. q. 0677. 01. 00. 03. 0287. 02. 00. 03. Coventry and Litchfield
has Derbyshire Staffordsh. Warwick-p. Shrops. part.
Par. Imp. 557. 250. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0559. 18. 02. 03.
0590. 16. 11. 01. Ely has Cambridg-s. Elye-Isle.
Par. Imp. 141. 075. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 2134. 18 05. 03.
0384. 14. 09. 01. Bish. and Coun. Par. Imp. 308. 120. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish.
St. David's has Pembrook sh. Cardigan sh. Carermarth. Radnorshire Brecknock s.
Monmouth p Hereford p. Montgom. p. Glamorg. p.
l. s. d. q. 0457. 01. 10. 13. 0336. 14. 10. 00. Exceter has Devonshire Cornwall
Par. Imp. 604. 239. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0500. 00. 00. 00.
1200. 15. 02. 00. Gloucester has Gloucestersh. Par. Imp. 267. 125. Cler.
Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0315. 17. 02. 00. 0358. 15. 00. 00. Bis. and
Count. Par. Imp. 313. 136. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Hereford has Herefordsh.
Shropsh. p.
l. s. d. q. 0768. 10. 06. 03. 0340. 02. 02. 02. Landaffe has Glamorgan p
Monmoth p.
Par. Imp. 107. 098. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0154. 14. 01. 00.
0155. 05. 04. 00. Lincoln has Lincolnshire Leicestersh. Bedfordshire Buckingh.
sh. Huntington Hartford p.
Par. Impr. 1255. 577. Cler. Tenth Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0894. 10. 01. 02.
1751. 14. 06. 00. London has Middlesex Essex Hartford p.
Par. Imp. 622. 189. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 1119. 08. 04. 00.
0821. 15. 01. 00. Bish. and Count Par. Imp. 1181. 385. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish.
Norwich has Norfolk Suffolk
l. s. d. q. 0899. 18. 07. 02 1117. 13. 00. 02 Oxford has Oxfordsh. Par. Imp.
195. 088. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0354. 16. 04. 02. 0255. 08. 00.
00. Peterborough has Northampt. Rutlandshire
Par. Imp. 293. 091. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0414. 19. 11. 00.
0520. 16. 08. 00. Rochester has Kent part Par. Imp. 098. 036. Cler. Tenth.
Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0358. 03. 02. 01. 0222. 14. 06. 03. Bish. and Coun. Par.
Imp. 544. 109. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Salisbury has Bark-shire Wilsthire
l. s. d. q. 1367. 11. 08. 00. 901. 08. 01. 00. Worcester. has VVorcester-sh
Warwick p.
Par. Imp. 241. 071. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 1049. 17. 03. 03.
0228. 00. 0^. 00. Winchester has Surry Southampton Isle of Wight Isle of
Jersy Isle of Garnsy Sark and Ald.
Par. Imp. 362. 131. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 2793. 04. 02. 03.
0846. 01. 00. 00. Province of York.
Bis. and Count. Par. Impr. 581. 336. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. York has
York-sh. part Nottinghsh.
l. s. d. q. 1609. 19. 02. 00. 1113. 17. 09. 03. Carlisle has Cumberlan. p
Westmerl.
Par. Imp. 093. 018. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 530. 04. 11. 02. 0161.
01. 07. 02. Chester has Cheshire Lancashire Yorkshire p. Cumberl. p.
Par. Imp. 256. 101. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0420. 01. 08. 00.
0435. 12. 00. 00. Durham has Durham Northumb. p Yorkshire p.
Par. Imp. 135. 087. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 1821. 01. 05. 01.
0385. 05. 06. 02. Man has Isle of Man Par. 017

An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Cities in England, and the Counties in which
they are placed, with the Elevation of the Pole for each City.
Cities Counties Ele. of the Pole Bathe Somersetshire Bristol Somersetshire 51.
D 32 M Carlisle Cumberland 55. D 01 M Chester Cheshire 53. D 58 M Canterbury
Kent 51. D 25 M Chichester Sussex 50. D 56 M Colchester Essex 52. D 14 M
Coventry Warwick-sh. 52. D 30 M Durham Durham 54. D 48 M Exeter Devonshire 50.
D 01 M Gloucester Gloucestersh. 52. D 14 M Hereford Herefordsh. 52. D 27 M
Lincoln Lincolnshire 53. D 15 M London Middlesex 51. D 45 M Litchfield
Staffordshire 53. D 00 M Norwich Norfolk 52. D 55 M Oxford Oxfordshire 51. D 54
M Rochester Kent 51. D 24 M Salisbury Wiltshire 51. D 10 M Wells Somersetshire
51. D 20 M Westminster Middlesex 51. D 45 M Winchester Hampshire 51. D 10 M
Worcester Wocestershir 52. D 20 M Peterburou Northampt. 52. D 35 M York
Yorkshire, 54. D 00 M

A Catalogue of Shires.
An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Shires in England and Wales, with the Number
of Cities, Bishoprics, Parishes, Hundreds, Market Towns and Riers in each
Shire.
Shires Cit. By. Par. hum. M. R. Anglesey 00 00 074 06 02 08 Bark-shire 00 00
140 20 12 03 Bedfordshire 00 00 116 09 10 01 Breknock-sh. 00 00 061 06 03 27
Buckinghams. 00 00 185 08 11 02 Caernervonsh 00 01 068 07 05 17 Cambridgsh. 00
01 163 17 08 01 Cardiganshire 00 01 064 05 04 26 Carmarthens. 00 00 087 06 06
28 Cheshire 01 01 086 07 13 09 Cornwall 00 00 161 09 22 07 Cumberland 01 01 058
00 09 20 Darbyshire 00 00 106 06 08 13 Denbighshire 00 00 057 12 03 24
Devonshire 01 01 394 33 37 23 Dorcetshire 00 00 248 34 18 04 Durham 01 01 118
00 06 11 Essex 01 00 415 20 21 07 Flintshire 00 01 028 05 01 04 Glamorgings. 00
01 118 10 06 16 Gloucestersh. 01 01 208 30 20 12 Hampshire 01 01 253 37 18 04
Hartfordsh 00 00 120 08 18 01 Herefordsh. 01 01 176 11 08 13 Huntingtons. 00 00
079 04 06 02 Kent 02 02 398 66 17 06 Lancashire 00 00 036 06 15 33
Leicestershire 00 00 200 06 12 01 Lincolnshire 01 01 630 31 30 09 Merionethsh.
00 00 037 06 03 26 Middelsex 02 01 073 07 04 01 Mongomerysh 00 00 047 07 06 28
Monmouthsh. 00 00 127 06 06 15 Norfolk 01 01 660 00 26 03 Nothmaptons. 01 01
326 20 10 05 Nottinghams. 00 0^ 168 08 08 21 Nortumberl. 00 00 046 00 05 21
Oxfordshire 01 01 280 14 10 03 Radnorshire 00 00 052 06 04 13 Rutlandshire 00
00 048 05 02 00 Shropshire 00 00 170 15 14 18 Somersetshire 03 02 385 42 33 09
Stafordshire 01 01 130 05 13 13 Suffolk 00 00 575 22 28 02 Surry 00 00 140 13
08 01 Sussex 01 01 312 65 18 02 Warwickshire 01 00 158 09 15 07 Westmorland 00
00 026 00 04 08 Wiltshire 01 01 304 29 19 05 Worcester-sh. 01 01 152 07 10 05
Pembrooksh. 00 00 145 07 05 06 Yorkshire. 01 01 563 31 46 36 Isle of Man. 01
01 017 00 05

A Catalogue of Colleges and Halls.
An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Colleges and Halls in the Two
Universitys of England, Cambridge and Oxford, with the names of the Founders
thereof, and years wherein they were Founded.
Col. and H. Uni. Founders Names. A. D. Albane, H. Ox. All Souls, C. Ox. Henry
Chichely Arch. B. Cant. 1437 Bayliol, C. Ox. John Bayliol King of Scots, 1263
Brasen-Nose, C. Ox. Will. Smith B. of Lincoln 1513 Broadgate, H. Ox. Caius, C.
Came. John Caius Doctor in Physic, 1557 Christ's Church. Ox. Tho. Woolsey Arch.
B. of York, 1526 Christ's, C. Came. Q. Margaret Grand Mo. to K. H. eight, 1506
Clare, H. Came. Eliz. daughter to Gil. Clare Earl of Leicester. 1326 Cor.
Christi, C. Came. Jo. of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, 1344 Cor. Christi, C. Ox.
Rich. Fox B. of Winchester, 1516 Edmund, H. Ox. Emanuel, C. Came. Sir Walter
Mildmay, 1588 Exceter, H. Ox. Walt. Stapleton B. of Exceter, 1316 Gloucester,
H. Ox. Heart, H. Ox. Walt. Stapleton B. of Exceter, 1316 Jesus, C. Came. John
Alcock B. of Elye, 1501 Jesus, C. Ox. Hugh Price Doctor of Laws. St. John's, C.
Came. Q. Margaret Grand Mother to K. H. eight, 1506 St. John's C. Ox. Sir Tho.
White, Lord Major of London, 1557 Katharine, H. Came. Dr. Woodlack Provost of
Kings Col. 1459 King's C. Came. King Henry the sixth, 1441 Lincoln, C. Ox.
Richard Fleming B. of Lincoln, 1420 Magdalen, C. (...) Lord Awa^ey 1509
Magdalen, C. Ox. Will. Wainfleet B. of Winchester 1456 Magdalen, H. Ox. Will.
Wainfleet B. of Winchester 1456 Martin, C. Ox. Walt. Martin B. of Rochester
1276 St. Marys, H. Ox. New, C. Ox. Will. Wickham B. of Winchester 1375 New Inn,
Ox. Oriell, C. Ox. Adam Brown 1323 Pembrook. H. Came. Mary, Countess of
Pembrook, 1343 Peter House, Came. Hugh Balsam B. of Ely. 1280 Queens, C. Came.
Margaret, K. Henry the sixt's Queen, 1448 Queens, C. Ox. Robert Egglesfield
1349 Sigebert, C. Came. Sigebert King of the East Angels 0637 Trinity, C. Came.
King Henry the eight 1546 Trinity, C. Ox. Sir Thomas Pope Knight. 1556 Trinity,
H. Came. William Bateman, 1354 University, C. Ox. Elfred, sixth Monarch of Saxon*
0872 Wadham, C. Ox. 1613 White, H* Ox.

A Catalogue of the Inns and Court.
A Catalogue of the several Houses and Inns of Court and Chancery, in London
and Westminster.
Na. of the Inns. The use of the several Inns. Serjeant's Inn in Fleetstreet,
and Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane. In these 2 Inns the Reverend Judges of the
Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, with the Barons of the Exchequer, and
Sergeants at Law have here there several Lodgings. Inner Temple Middle Temple
Lincolns Inn Grayes Inn These four are Inns of Court, and herein do reside the
learned Counselors and Pleaders of the Common Law of England, with the
Students of the same. Cliffords Inn Davies Inn Barnards Inn These eight are
called Inns of Chancery, and in them are Resident Furnifalls Inn Staples Inn
Clements Inn New Inn Lions Inn the Attornys, and Practitioners of the Law, and
some Students are admitted also in these Inns, for 2 or 3 years sometimes,
before they be admitted into the Inns of Court abovementioned. Six
Clerks-Office. This Office properly belongs to the Six Clarks in Chancery, and
their Clerks. Cursiters Office, This Office belongs to the 24 Cursiters, who
make out Original Writs in all the Countys in England.

A Catalogue of Buroughs.
An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Citys and Borough Towns in England and
Wales, with the Countys in which each of them are situated, and how many
Burgesses they send to the Parliament.
Buroughs Countys N. B. Abingdon Berks 01 Admonsham Bucks 02 St. Albons
Hartford 02 Alborough Suffolk 02 Alborough York 02 Alesbury Bucks 02 Andover
Hants 02 Appleby Westmer. 02 Arrundel Sussex. 02 Ashberton Devon. 02 Banbury
Oxford 01 Barnestable Devon. 02 Barwick Tweed. Northum. 02 Bathe City Summers.
02 Bedford Bedford. 02 Berealston Devon. 02 Bewdlye Worc. 01 Beverlye Yorksh.
02 Bewmoris Anglesey 01 Bishopps Castle Salops 02 Blechinley Surry 02 Bodmin
Cornwall 02 Bodwin Wilts. 02 Bossiney Cornwall 02 Boston Lincoln 02 Brackley
Northamp. 02 Branber Sussex 02 Brecknock Brecon. 02 Brideport Dorcets. 02
Bridgenorth Salops. 02 Bridgewater Summers. 02 Bristol City Summers. 02
Buckingham Bucks. 02 Borough bridge Yorks. 02 Calne Wills. 02 Cambridge Cambr.
04 Canterbury C. Kent 02 Cardigan Cardig. 01 Cardiff Glamor. 01 Caermarthen
Gaermer. 01 Caernervon Caerner. 01 Carlisle City Cumbl. 02 Castlerising Norfolk
02 Chichester City Sussex 02 Chipenham Wilts. 02 Chipenwicomb Bucks. 02 Chester
City Cheshire 02 Christ's Church Hants 02 Cirencester Glouc. 02 Clifton Devon 02
Clitherow Lancast. 02 Cockermouth Cumbl. 02 Colchester City Essex 02 Comelford
Cornwall 02 Corfe Castle Dorcet. 02 Coventry City Warwick. 02 Cricklade Wilts.
02 Denbigh. Denbigh. 01 Derby Derbysh. 02 Devizes Wilts. 02 Dorchester Dorcet.
02 Dowton Wilts. 02 Droitwich Worc. 02 Dunhivid Cornwall 02 Dunwich Suffolk 02
Durham City Durham 02 East Grinstead Sussex 02 East Low Cornwall 02 East
Retford Nonting. 02 St. Edmundsbury Suffolk 02 Evesham Wore. 02 Exeter City
Devon. 02 Flint Flints. 01 Fowey Cornwall 02 Gatton Surry 02 Gloucester C.
Glouc. 02 Grantham Lincol. 02 Grawpound Cornwall 02 Grimsby Lincoln. 02
Guilford Surry 02 Haslemore Surry 02 Harwich Essex 02 Haverford West Pembrooke.
01 Heitsbury Wilts. 02 Helston Cornwall 02 Hereford City Herefordsh. 02
Hertford Hertfordsh. 02 Hiddon Yorksh. 02 Higham Ferries Northamp. 01 Hindon
Wilts. 02 Honyton Devon. 02 Horesham Sussex 02 Hull Yorksh. 02 Huntington Hunt.
02 St. Jermins Cornwall 02 St. Ives Cornwall 02 Ilchester Summers. 02 Ipswich
Suffolk 02 Kellington Cornwall 02 Kings Lynn Norfolk 02 Knarseborough Yorksh.
02 Lancaster Lanc. 02 Leicester Leic. 02 Lempster Hereford 02 Leskard Cornwall
02 Jews Sussex. 02 Lincoln City Lincoln. 02 Litchfield City. Stafford. 02
Liverpoole Lanc. 02 London City Mids. 04 Loswithall Cornwall 02 Ludlowe Sallop.
02 Lugarsall Wiltsh. 02 Lymington Hants. 02 Lym Regis Dorcet. 02 Maidston Kent
02 Maldon Essex 02 Malmsbury Wiltsh. 02 Malton Yorksh. 02 Marborough Wil^s. 02
Marlow Bucks. 02 Mawes Cornwall 02 Melcome Regis Dorcet. 02 Midhurst Sussex 02
Michaell Cornwall 02 Milborne Port Summers. 02 Minehead Summers. 02 Montgomery
Montgom. 01 Morpeth Northumb. 02 Munmouth Munmouth. 01 Newcastle Tine Northumb.
02 Newcast. un. Lin. Stafford. 02 Newport Cornwall 02 Newport Hants. 02 New
sarum Wilts. 02 Newark Not. 02 New shoreham Sussex 02 Newton Lanc. 02 New Town
Hants. 02 New Windsor Berks. 02 New Woodstock Oxford. 02 North Allerton Yorks.
02 Norwich City Norfolk 02 North-hampton Northam. 02 Nortingham N^ttingh. 02
Okehampton Devon. 02 Old Sarum Wilts. 02 Oxford Suffolk 02 Oxford C. U. Ox^ord
04 Pembroke Pembro. 01 Pemyn Cornwall 02 Peterborough Northam. 01 Peterfield
Hants. 02 Plymouth Devon. 02 Plympton Devon. 02 Pomfreit Yorksh. 02 Poole
Dorcet 02 Port Pigham Cornwall 02 Portsmouth Hant. 02 Preston Lanc. 02
Queenborough Kent 02 Radnor Radnor. 01 Reading Berks. 02 Richmond Yorksh. 01
Rippon Yorksh. 02 Rochester City Kent 02 Rygate Surry 02 Salop Salopps. 02
Saltash Cornwall 02 Scarborough Yorksh. 02 Shaston Dorcet. 02 Southampton
Hants. 02 Southwark Surry. 02 Stafford Staffordsh. 02 Stockbridge Hants. 02
Stamford Lincol. 02 Sudbury Suffolk 02 Steyning Sussex 02 Tamworth Stafford 02
Taunton Summers. 02 Tarestock Devon. 02 Tewkesbury Glouster. 02 Thetford Norfolk
02 Thirske Yorksh. 02 Tiverton Devon 02 Totnes Devon. 02 Tregonye Cornwall 02
Truro Cornwall 02 Wallingford Berks. 02 Wareham Dorcet 02 Warwick Warwicksh. 02
Wells City Summers. 02 Wendover Bucks. 02 Wenlock Salop. 02 Weoblye Hereford. 02
Westbury Wilts. 02 Westminster C. Midds. 02 Weymouth Dorcet. 02 Whit-Church
Hants. 02 Wigam Lanc. 02 Wilton Wilts. 02 Whinchester C. Hants. 02 Wootonbasset
Wilts. 02 Yarmouth Hants. 02 Yarmouth Norfolk 02 Worcester C. Worc. 02 York
City Yorksh. 02

These eight Buroughs following are called Cinque ports.
Dover Kent 02 Hasting Sussex 02 Heythe 02 Rumnye. Kent 02 Rye Sussex 02
Sandwich Kent 02 Seaford Sussex 02 Winchelsey. Sussex 02

Note that the Citizens and Burgesses for the Citys and Buroughs before
mentioned, in the whole amount unto 417. over and above which number, there are
also for the 39 shires in England 78 Knights of the shires, and 14 for the 13
shires in Wales, which added to the former number, do amount unto 509 being the
complete and full Number of the House of Commons in Parliament.

A Catalogue of the Peers.
A Catalogue of the Peers of England, according to their Precedence.
Dukes.
JAmes Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Vlster, Lord High-Admiral of England,
the Kings only Brother. Rupert Duke of Cumberland, and Earl of Holderness. The
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; the Lord Treasurer, and the
Lord Privy Seal, take place before all the other Dukes. Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk. Francis Seymour Duke of Somerset. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham.
Christopher Monk Duke of Albemarle. James Scot Duke of Monmouth. William
Cavendish Duke of Newcastle.
Marquesses.
Charles Pawlet Marquess of Winchester. Henry Somerset Marquess of Worcester.
Henry Pierre-point Marquess of Dorchester.
Earls.
These three take place in respect of their Offices. The Lord High Chamberlain
of England. The Lord Steward of the Kings Household. The Lord Chamberlain of the
Kings Household.
Aubry de Vere Earl of Oxford Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury Anthony Gray
Earl of Kent William Stanly Earl of Derby John Manours Earl of Rutland
Theopilus Hastings Earl of Huntingdon William Russel Earl of Bedford Philip
Herbert Earl of Pembrook Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln Charles Howard Earl of
Nottingham James Howard Earl of Suffolk Richard Sackville Earl of Dorset James
Cecil Earl of Salisbury John Cecil Earl of Exceter John Egerton Earl of
Bridgwater Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester James Compton Earl of Northampton
Robert Rich Earl of Warwick and Holland William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire
Basil Fielding Earl of Denbigh George Digby Earl of Bristol Charles Sackvill
Earl of Middlesex Robert Rich Earl of Holland and Warwick Gilbert Holles Earl
of Clare Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbrook Charles Fane Earl of Westmerland
Robert Montague Earl of Manchester Charles Howard Earl of Bark-shire John
Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave William Ley Earl of Marlborough Thomas Savage Earl
of Rivers Robert Berty Earl of Lindsey John Carry Earl of Dover Charles Knollys
Earl of Banbury Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough Henry Gray Earl of Stamford
Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarven Mountjoy
Blount Earl of Newport Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield Nicholas Tufton Earl
of Thanet Thomas Weston Earl of Portland William Wentworth Earl of Strafford
Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland Nicholas Leak Earl of Scarsdale John Wilmot
Earl of Rochester Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans Edward Montague Earl of
Sandwich James Butler Earl of Brecknock Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon Arthur
Capell Earl of Essex Robert Brudenel Earl of Cardigan Arthur Annesly Earl of
Anglesey John Greenvil Earl of Bath Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle William
Craven Earl of Craven Robert Bruce Earl of Alesbury Richard Boil Earl of
Burlington Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington Anthony Ashly-Cooper Earl of
Shaftsbury Charles Fitz-roy Earl of Southampton Henry Fitz-roy Earl of Euston
George Fitz-roy Earl of Northumberland Henry Howard Earl of Norwich William
Herbert Earl of Powys Henry Francis Lee Earl of Lichfield Charles Fitz Charles
Earl of Plymouth Thomas Leonard Earl of Sussex Thomas Osborn Earl of Danby John
Maitland Earl of Guilford.
Viscounts
Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. Francis Brown Viscount Montague. James
Fiennes Viscount Say and Seal. Edward Conway Viscount Conway. Baptist Noel
Viscount Campden. William Howard Viscount Stafford. Thomas Bellafis Viscount
Faulconbridg. John Mordant Viscount Mordant. George Savil Viscount Hallifax.
Robert Paston Viscount Yarmouth. Francis Newport Viscount Newport of Bradley
Barrons.
George Nevil Lord Abergavenny. James Touchet Lord Audly. Charles West Lord de
la Ware. George Berkley Lord Berkley. Thomas Parker Lord Morley and Montegle
Cogniers Darcy Lord Darcy and Meynell William Stourton Lord Stourton Henry Lord
Sandys de la Vine. Benjamin Mildmay Lord Fitzwater Thomas Windsor Lord Winsor.
Win^fi^ld Cromwell Lord Cromwell Ralph Eure Lord Eure. Philip Wharton Lord Warton
William Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parham William Pagett Lord Pagett Dudley
North Lord North. William Bruges Lord Shandois James Berty Lord Norris William
Petre Lord Petre Digby Gerrard Lord Gerrard of Gerrard Bromley Charles Stanhop
Lord Stanhop Henry Arundel Lord Arundel of Wardour Christopher Roper Lord
Tenham Robert Grevill Lord Brook Edward Montague Lord Montague of Boughton.
William Gray Lord Gray of Wark. John Roberts Lord Roberts John Lovelace Lord
Lovelace John Pawlett Lord Pawlett William Maynard Lord Maynard George Coventry
Lord Coventry James Lord Howard of Esrick Charles Mohun Lord Mohun William
Boteler Lord Boteler Edward Herbert Lord Herbert of Cherbury Francis Seymour
Lord Seymour Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of Stonely Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton
Richard Byron Lord Byron Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan Charles Smith Lord
Carington William Widdrington Lord Widdrington Humble Ward Lord Ward Thomas
Culpeper Lord Culpeper Isaac Astley Lord Astley John Lucas Lord Lucas John
Bellasis Lord Bellasis Edward Watson Lord Rokingham Charles Gerard Lord Gerard
of Brandon Gilbert Sutton Lord Lexinton Charles Kirkhoven Lord Wotton Marmaduke
Langdale Lord Langdale William Croft Lord Croft John Berkly Lord Berkly of
Stratton Denzil Holles Lord Holles Charles Cornwalis Lord Cornwalis George
Booth, Lord de la Mere Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend John Crew Lord Crew John
Freschevile Lord Freschevile Richard Arundel Lord Arundel of Trerice Thomas
Butler Lord Butler of More Park Thomas Clifford Lord Clifford of Chudleigh
Lewis de Duras Baron Duras of Holdenly Richard Butler Baron of Weston Charles
North Baron Gray of Rollston Heneage Finch Baron of Daventry.
A Catalogue of the Lords Spiritual
ARch-Bis. of Canterb. Gilbert Sheldon Archbishop of York Richard Stern. St.
Asaph Isaac Barrow. Bangor Humphry Lloyd. Bath and Wells Peter Mew. Bristol Guy
Carleton. Carlisle Edward Rainbow. Chester John Pearson. Chichester Dr. Bredyoke
Coventry and Litchfi. Thomas Wood. St. David's William Lucy. Durham Nathaniel
Crew. Ely Peter Gunning. Exeter Anthony Sparrow Gloucester John Prichard.
Hereford Herbert Croft Llandaff William Lloyd Lincoln Thomas Barlow London
Hump. Hinchman Norwhich Edward Reynolds. Oxford Henry Compton. Peterburrogh
Joseph Henshaw. Rochester John Dolben Salisbury Seth Ward. Winchester George
Morley. Worcester Walter Blandford.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the Situation of Britain, with its Lymits, together with some of
the old Customs practiced amongst the Britains, and the several names of the
Island, when first Inhabited, etc. page 1 CHAP. II. Of the ancient Inhabitants
of Britain, and the Cities of their possessions, as they were called by
Ptolomy, and often since mentioned in the Roman Writers, together with the
names of such British Princes as opposed the Romans Conquest. 9 CHAP. III. Of
the Roman Emperors, and their Deputies who ruled over, and continued the
Britains under their Subjection. 16 CHAP. IV. Of the Conquest of Britain by the
Saxons, as also of the Commencement and Continuance of their several Kingdoms
therein during the Heptarchy, with the Names of the Kings Ruling in each
Kingdom. 35 CHAP. V. Of the British Princes, who withstood the Saxons Conquest,
being accounted 13* 61 CHAP. VI. Of the Saxon Princes who incroached upon one
another Territories, and so became petty Monarchs of some certain Countries
only in Britain, They being accounted 14 in number. 70 CHAP. VII. Of those 15
Saxon Princes, who were accounted sole Monarchs of this Kingdom of ENGLAND. 80
CHAP. VIII. Of the Danes and their Conquest of England, with the memorable
Accidents happening during the times of those three Danish Monarchs who ruled
here. 97 CHAP. IX. Of the Saxons Re-entry again to the Monarchy of England,
after the Danes Conquest. 102 CHAP. X. Of England's Conquest by the Normans;
and first of William the Conqueror. 110 CHAP. XI. Of King William the Second
commonly called Rufus. 121 CHAP, XII. Of King Henry the first, commonly called
Beauclark, for his Learning. 126 CHAP. XIII. Of King Stephen, sometimes called
Stephen of Bloyce. 134 CHAP. XIV. Of King Henry the Second, sometimes called
Henry Fitz-Empress. 142 CHAP. XV. Of King Richard the first, commonly called
Richard Courdelion. 149 CHAP. XVI. Of King John, commonly termed by his Father,
John Lackland. 155 CHAP. XVII. Of King Henry the Third, commonly called Henry
of Winchester. 162 CHAP. XVIII. Of King Edward the First, commonly called
Long-Shanks. 176 CHAP. XIX. Of King Edward the Second, commonly called Edward
of Carnarvan. 181 CHAP. XX. Of King Edward the Third, common called Edward of
Windsor. 188 Of King Richard the Second commonly called Richard of Bourdeaux.
197 CHAP. XXII. Of King Henry the Fourth, commonly called Henry of
Bullingbrook. 206 CHAP. XXIII. Of King Henry the Fifth, commonly called Henry
of Monmouth. 214 CHAP. XXIV. Of King Henry the Sixth, commonly called Henry of
Windsor. 200 CHAP. XXV. Of King Edward the Fourth. 216 CHAP. XXVI. Of Edward
the Fifth. 252 CHAP. XXVII. Of King Richard the Third. 258 CHAP. XXVIII. Of
King Henry the Seventh. 267 CHAP. XXIX. Of King Henry the Eight. 278 CHAP. XXX.
Of King Edward the Sixth. 298 CHAP. XXXI. Of Queen Mary. 303 CHAP. XXXII. Of
Queen Elizabeth. 311 CHAP. XXXIII. Of King James. 324 CHAP. XXXIV. Of King
Charles the First. 330 CHAP. XXXV. Of King Charles the Second. 356
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, lately Printed and to be sold by Thomas Basset, at
the George near Cliffords-Inn in Fleet street.
1. A Treatise of Money, or a Discourse of Coin and Coinage the first
Invention, Use, Matter, Forms, Proportions and Differences Ancient and Modern:
with the Advantages and Disadvantages, of the Rise or Fall thereof in our own
or neighboring Nations, and the Reasons: with a short account of our Common Law
therein, also Tables of the value of all sorts of Pearls, Diamonds, Gold,
Silver and other Metals. by R. Vaughan, Esquire price bound 18 pence, Printed 1675.

2. A help to English History, containing a succession of all the Kings of
England, the English, Saxons and Britains; the Kings and Princes of Wales, the
Kings and Lords of Man, the Isle of Wight: as also of all the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls and Bishops thereof, with the Description of the places from
whence they had their Titles; together with the names and ranks of the
Viscounts, Barons and Baronets of England, By Peter Heylin, D. D. and since his
Death continued to this present year 1675, with the Coats of Arms of the
Nobility Blazoned in twelves, price bound 4 s. Printed 1675.

3. The Egyptian History, treating of the Pyramids, the Inundation of the Nile,
and other Prodigies of Egypt, according to the opinions and traditions of the
Arabians: written originally in the ARABIAN Tongue by Murtadi, the Son of
Gaphiphus; Rendered into French by Mounsier Vattier, Arabic Professor to the
King of France, and thence Faithfully done into English by J. D. of Kidwell^*
in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

4. A Rational Method for proving the truth of the Christian Religion* as it is
professed in the Church of England; by Gelbert Burnet, price bound 1 s. Printed
1675.

5. The practical Christian consisting of Meditations and Psalms, illustrated
with Notes, or Paraphrased, relating to the House of Prayer, the ordinary
actions of day and night, and several dispositions of men, by R. Sherlock price
2 s. Printed 1675.

6. The Modern Pleas for Comprehension, Tolleration, and the taking away the
Obligation to the renouncing of the Covenant, considered and discussed. By Dr.
Tomkins, in octavo, Price 2 s. Printed 1675.

7. The Russian Impostor, or the History of Muscovy under the Usurpation of of
Boris, And the Imposture of Demetrius, in octavo, Price 2 s.

8. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, wherein that
charge is justified; and the Pretended Refutation of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Discourse is answered by Daniel Whitby, D. D. in octavo, price 3 s. 6d.

9. Liber Placitandi, a Book of special Pleading's, by W. Thomson Esquire in
Folio.

10. The Reports of Sir William Jones in folio, Price 16 s. printed 1675.

11. The Reports of Henry Roll Serjant at Law* in folio, Price 12 s. printed
1675.

12. Formulae been Placitandi. A book of Entries, containing variety of choice
Presidents of Counts, Declarations, Informations, etc. in two parts, in folio;
the second Edition corrected, by W. B. Price 22 s. reprinted 1575.


